 
 
 
   
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I
 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
DAE HAN MOON, 
Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCAP-19-0000714 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-19-0000714; CASE NO. 1PC161002007) 
 
FEBRUARY 10, 2023 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND EDDINS, JJ., 
AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 This case considers the application of Hawai‘ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 327C-1 (2010),  which defines the process for 
making “death determinations in the State” in all “civil and criminal actions.”  HRS § 327C-1(d).   Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-19-0000714
10-FEB-2023
08:52 AM
Dkt. 15 OP 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 
  
On December 25, 2016, Dae Han Moon allegedly shot 
Steve Feliciano in the head during an altercation.  During a 
grand jury proceeding on December 29, 2016, the Chief Medical 
Examiner of the City and County of Honolulu testified that the day prior, a doctor had pronounced Feliciano brain dead, and 
that the cause of his death was a gunshot wound to the head.  
Because Feliciano was an organ donor, he was “being kept alive 
artificially.”  The grand jury indicted Moon on four counts, 
including Murder in the Second Degree.   
Subsequently, Feliciano’s organs and tissues were 
removed, and an autopsy was performed.  The case proceeded to a 
jury trial in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, where 
several witnesses testified to seeing Moon shoot Feliciano.  The First Deputy Med
ical Examiner, who performed Feliciano’s autopsy, 
testified that the cause of Feliciano’s death was a gunshot wound to the head.  The jury found Moon guilty on all counts. 
 Moon argues that the requirements of HRS § 327C-1 
apply to all criminal cases involving death, including his case.  Thus, the State needed to fulfill these requirements to prove 
the element of “death.”  We disagree.  Based on its plain language and legislative history, this statute applies in cases 
where a “death determination” – that is, where a “generally 
medically recognized criteria of determining the occurrence of  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 
 death” – is required or implicated.  Christine Mukai et al., 
Legis. Reference Bureau, Towards a Definition of Death 14 (1977) 
[hereinafter LRB Report], 
https://lrb.hawaii.gov/wp-
content/uploads/1977TowardsADefinitionOfDeath.pdf.  In contrast, there was ample evidence introduced at trial that Feliciano died 
as a result of a gunshot wound to the head.  As such, there was 
no need for a “determination of death” within the meaning of HRS 
§ 327C-1.  Accordingly, we affirm the circuit court’s Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
1  
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background 
The following facts are undisputed on appeal.  On 
December 25, 2016, Moon shot Feliciano once in the back of the 
head at close range with a pistol.  The shooting occurred in the 
Ala Moana Shopping Center parking structure.  Following the 
shooting, paramedics transported Feliciano to Queen’s Medical 
Center (QMC) in critical condition.  There, Dr. Kazuma Nakagawa pronounced Feliciano brain dead at 5:49 p.m. on December 28, 
2016.  The next day, a grand jury indicted Moon on four counts: 
Murder in the Second Degree in violation of HRS §§ 707-701.5 
(2014)
2 and 706-656 (2014)3 (Count 1); Place to Keep Pistol or 
 
1  Moon also asks that we reverse his convictions on five other 
grounds.  As discussed below, these arguments lack merit. 
 
2  HRS § 707- 701.5 states: 
(. . . continued)  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 
 Revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25 (2011) (Count 2); Carrying 
or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony in 
violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011) (Count 3); and Ownership or 
Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person 
Bound Over to Circuit Court for Certain Crimes in violation of 
HRS § 134-7(b) and (h) (2011) (Count 4).  Feliciano’s organs and 
tissues were removed on December 30, 2016.  On January 3, 2017, 
an autopsy was performed.  The case subsequently proceeded to a  
 
(. . . continued) 
 
(1) Except as provided in section 707-701, a person 
commits the offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the 
death of another person. 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which the 
defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in section 706- 656. 
 
3  HRS § 706- 656(2) states: 
 
Except as provided in secti on 706-657, pertaining to 
enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons convicted of second degree murder and attempted second 
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with 
possibility of parole.  The minimum length of imprisonment 
shall be determined by the Hawai͑i paroling authority; 
provided that persons who are repeat offenders under 
section 706
-606.5 shall serve at least the applicable 
mandatory minimum term of imprisonment. 
If the court imposes a sentence of life imprisonment 
without possibility of parole pursuant to section 706- 657, 
as part of that sentence, the court shall order the director of public safety and the Hawai͑i paroling 
authority to prepare an application for the governor to 
commute the sentence to life imprisonment with parole at 
the end of twenty years of imprisonment; provided that 
persons who are repeat offenders under section 706- 606.5 
shall serve at least the applicable mandatory minimum term 
of imprisonment.
 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 
  
jury trial, and the jury found Moon guilty as charged on all 
four counts. 
B. Grand Jury Proceedings   
At the grand jury proceedings four days after the 
shooting, the State called Dr. Christopher Happy, the Chief Medical Examiner for the City and County of Honolulu, to testify 
before the grand jury.  Dr. Happy testified that he reviewed 
Feliciano’s medical records and photographs of Feliciano in the 
hospital; he also spoke to investigating officers about the 
events surrounding Feliciano’s death.  In examining this 
information, Dr. Happy observed “a gunshot wound in the back of 
[Feliciano’s] head with fragments of a bullet lodged in the 
head.”  He testified that the gunshot wound to the head was the cause of Feliciano’s death, and the manner of death, a homicide.  
According to Dr. Happy, the date of Feliciano’s death was 
December 28, 2016 at 5:49 p.m.  Dr. Happy explained that 
Feliciano had “been declared brain dead” at that time based on 
an “evaluation by a neurologist who has found that he has no 
function left in his brain.”  Since Feliciano was an organ donor, 
he was being kept alive artificially so that his organs could be donated.  Consequently, an autopsy had yet to be conducted.  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 
 C.   Circuit Court Proceedings4 
1. Trial Proceedings  
 
At trial, various witnesses testified that Moon and 
Feliciano were involved in an altercation at the Ala Moana 
Center parking structure on December 25, 2016.  During this 
altercation, Moon shot Feliciano in the head.5  After the 
incident, police and paramedics arrived at the scene.  Ruddy Hernandez, a paramedic for the City and County of Honolulu, testified that, upon their arrival, Feliciano was “pulseless and 
apneic, unresponsive,” meaning that he “had no activity of his 
heart and he wasn’t breathing.”  The paramedics performed CPR, 
and Feliciano was able to regain a “return of spontaneous 
circulation” or “ROSC,” such that “his blood pressure, his heart 
rate and his heart started to conduct a pulse.”  At that point, 
Feliciano was “in a critical state”; he was “hypotensive,” 
meaning that “his blood pressure was really low.”  Paramedics 
were able to maintain ROSC, but Feliciano remained in critical condition when he arrived at QMC.   
Christopher Inoue, a medical-legal investigator for 
the Department of the Medical Examiner for the City and County 
 
4  The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
 
5  Several witnesses also testified that, prior to shooting 
Feliciano, Moon hit Feliciano on the head with a gun.  After Moon shot 
Feliciano, Feliciano fell to the ground. 
    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 
 of Honolulu, testified that Dr. Nakagawa pronounced Feliciano 
dead on December 28, 2016 at 5:49 p.m.6  At 7:35 p.m. that same 
day, Inoue saw Feliciano’s body on a hospital gurney.  Inoue observed various signs of “medical intervention”:  
He was intubated and connected to a ventilator.  There were 
EKG leads on his chest and abdomen.  There was a cervical 
collar and a Foley catheter.  There was also a pulse oximeter and a blood pressure cuff and he had intravascular 
lines on his bilateral arms and left femoral area.   
 
  Charlotte Carter, another medical-legal investigator, 
testified that Feliciano was subsequently kept on a ventilator 
for the tissue and organ transplantation.  The ventilator “kept 
his heart beating and his circulation going[;]” without it, his 
tissues would have started to die.  At 9:50 p.m. on December 30, 
2016, Carter received a notification from Legacy of Life, an 
organ procurement organization, that they were close to 
completing the organ and tissue recovery from Feliciano.  When 
she arrived, Feliciano was “well removed from the ventilator” as his organ recovery had been “[e]ffectively” completed.  
Afterwards, Feliciano’s remains were transported to the Honolulu 
Medical Examiner Facility.   
  Dr. Masahiko Kobayashi, the First Deputy Medical 
Examiner, testified as an expert in the field of forensic 
 
6  Moon objected, arguing that Inoue’s testimony was hearsay.  In 
response, the court gave a limiting instruction to the jury that Inoue’s out-
of-court statements “must not be considered for the truth . . . of those 
statements but, rather, for the limited purpose of showing the steps in the 
investigation.”  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 
  pathology.  Before conducting an autopsy, Dr. Kobayashi reviewed 
the report prepared by Inoue and some of Feliciano’s medical 
records.  Dr. Kobayashi testified that Feliciano was pronounced 
dead at QMC on December 28, 2016 at 5:49 p.m.  Since he was an 
organ donor, he was kept on a ventilator to ensure that “his 
heart was beating and his blood was circulating” so that his 
tissues would not die.   
On January 3, 2017, Dr. Kobayashi performed an autopsy 
on Feliciano.  In addition to other injuries, he testified that Feliciano had a gunshot wound on the back-left side of his head.
7  
This wound caused “widespread . . . bleeding inside the scalp tissue over the skull” and was a “[c]ontact gunshot wound,” 
meaning that “a muzzle of the gun [was] in contact with the skin 
or nearly in contact.”  Based on his findings and training and 
experience, Dr. Kobayashi testified that the cause of 
Feliciano’s death was “a gunshot wound of the head.”  “[T]he 
bullet entered from the back area of the head and then travelled towards the front, towards the forehead or brow area.”  The 
bullet itself did not hit the brain stem; the latter “was 
subsequently injured but not at the time of [the] gunshot 
wound.”   
 
7  Dr. Kobayashi also testified that Feliciano had a skin lesion and 
bruise on the left side of his head consistent with being struck with a hard 
object and a skull fracture consistent with falling unabated to a concrete 
surface.  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 
 (. . . continued)   
After the State rested, Moon made a motion for 
judgment of acquittal, arguing that the State needed to comply 
with the requirements of HRS § 327C-18 to prove that Feliciano 
was dead as a matter of law – specifically, that he was brain dead before his organs were removed.  The State contended that 
HRS § 327C-1 was inapplicable and that, based on the evidence 
presented, there was no question that Feliciano was dead.  The 
circuit court denied the motion, stating, 
For the reasons set forth in the prosecution’ s written 
memorandum and the evidence in the record, judgment of 
acquittal, the court views the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the State.  I don’t agree with the defendant’s 
characterization of [HRS § 327C- 1] and the requirement that 
is in that statute would sort of trump all the evidence in 
this case which is undisputed that Mr. Feliciano was -- he 
-- that the death in this case was undisputed looking at 
the totality of the evidence.   
 
  Moon renewed the motion after the defense rested and 
after the jury’s verdict was rendered; the circuit court denied both renewed motions.
9   
 
8  For the text of HRS § 327C-1, see infra note 19. 
  
9  Moon also requested the following jury instruction on brain death, 
which tracks the language of HRS § 327C- 1: 
 
Before you can find that the defendant caused the death of 
Steve Feliciano, you must first determine that Steve 
Feliciano was pronounced brain dead.   Brain death will have 
occurred if all four of the following facts have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt . . . : Number 1.  In the 
opinion of an attending physician or osteopathic physician 
licensed in the state of Hawai͑i, . . . or [excepted] from 
licensure by State law, . . . based on ordinary standards of current medical practice . . . ; and, Number 2, [i] 
n the 
opinion of a consulting physician or osteopathic physician 
licensed in the state of Hawai͑i, . . . or [excepted] from 
licensure by State law, . . . based on ordinary standards of current medical practice . . . ; and, 3, [t]hese doctors  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 
 2.
 Verdict and Sentence 
 
The jury found Moon guilty as charged on all four 
counts.  At sentencing, the circuit court dismissed Count 4.10  
Moon was then sentenced as follows: for Count 1, life 
imprisonment with the possibility of parole and a fifteen-year 
mandatory minimum term of imprisonment under HRS § 706-660.1 
(2014); for Count 2, ten years of imprisonment; and for Count 3, 
twenty years of imprisonment.  All terms of imprisonment were to run concurrently, with credit for time served.     
3. Motion for Arrest of Judgment 
 
Nine days after the verdict was rendered, Moon filed a 
motion for arrest of judgment and dismissal of Count 1 (Murder in the Second Degree) and Count 3 (Carrying or Use of Firearm in 
the Commission of a Separate Felony) pursuant to Hawai‘ i Rules of  
 
(. . . continued) 
 
or osteopathic physicians have determined that Steve Feliciano had experienced irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, . . . including the brain 
stem . . . ; and, Number 4, [t]hese opinions are made in 
signed statements.  
The circuit court denied the instruction over Moon’s objection.   
 
10  The State initially requested to dismiss Count 2 under the 
doctrine of merger and based on the State’s decision to only proceed with 
sentencing on Count 4 , but based on a correction to Moon’s Presentence 
Investigation and Report, the State changed its request, asking to dismiss 
Count 4 and proceed with Count 2 .  The circuit court granted this request and 
issued an Amended Judgment of Conviction a nd Sentence.   
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 
 Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 34 (effective January 1, 
1977).11  Moon argued that the circuit court “lack[ed] 
jurisdiction” over his case because, inter alia,12 “the State 
failed to show at the grand jury proceeding that Feliciano had 
been determined to be brain dead.”  According to Moon, the plain 
language, stated purpose, and legislative history13 of HRS § 
327C-1 “mandate[]” its application to “[a]ll death determinations in the State” for “all purposes, including . . . criminal actions.”  (Second alteration in original.)  A grand 
jury indicting a defendant for Murder in the Second Degree, of which death is an element, was such a criminal action.     
 
11  HRPP Rule 34 states: 
 
The court on motion of a defendant shall arrest judgment if 
the charge does not allege an offense or if the court was 
without jurisdiction of the offense alleged.  The motion in arrest of judgment shall be made within 10 days after verdict or finding of guilty, or after plea of guilty or 
nolo contendere, or within such further time as the court 
may fix during the 10- day period.  The finding of guilty or 
nolo contendere may be entered in writing or orally on the 
record.  
12  In his motion for arrest of judgment, Moon also contended that 
the circuit court lacked jurisdiction over his case because Dr. Happy’s 
testimony before the grand jury was “inaccurate”; the State “deliberate[ly] 
and intentional[ly]” used hearsay during the proceedings; and Moon’s right to a fair and impartial grand jury proceeding had been violated, thus 
prejudicing Moon.   
 
13  Specifically, Moon pointed to the LRB Report on changing 
definitions of death, to assert that the legislature enacted HRS § 327C- 1 in 
1978 with the intent of “codify[ing] the emerging concept of brain death . . . in order to avoid confusion and inconsistencies between the practice of 
medicine and the practice of law.”  Moon argued, accordingly, that “this case 
presents the exact situation that lead [sic] to the passage of HRS § 327C- 1 
because Feliciano hovered between life and death for several days”: the State 
convened a grand jury after Feliciano was declared brain dead but before the 
removal of his organs, at which point “it was most critical to determine 
whether Feliciano was legally ‘brain dead.’”    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 
 Moon argued that the State failed to meet the 
statute’s requirements to prove Feliciano’s death in the grand 
jury by neglecting to present “direct testimony of two doctors 
who had signed statements declaring that Feliciano was brain 
dead because he experienced the cessation of all brain activity, 
including the brain stem.”  Moon contended that “Feliciano was 
still alive on December 29, 2016 – a fact that would have 
precluded a murder indictment,” and thus, the State failed to establish probable cause.  Since a defective indictment “negates 
the Court’s jurisdiction,” Moon contended that the court must 
dismiss Counts 1 and 3 against Moon.   
The circuit court disagreed, concluding that “[a]n 
analysis of the plain . . . language of the relevant statutes 
and examination of the pertinent legislative history compel the 
conclusion that the definition of death in HRS Chapter 327C does 
not apply to criminal prosecutions brought under the [Hawai‘ i 
Penal Code (HPC)].”  As relevant here, the circuit court found 
in its findings of fact that “[n]o evidence has been presented 
to contradict Dr. Kobayashi’s opinion concerning the cause of Feliciano’s death.  There has been no suggestion that the 
withdrawal of life support or organ donation was an intervening 
cause of Feliciano’s death.”    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 
 In its conclusions of law, the circuit court explained 
that HRS § 327C-1, in its original and amended forms, does not 
reference the HPC or indicate a legislative intent to import HRS 
§ 327C-1’s determination of death requirements to prosecutions 
of criminal offenses codified in the HPC.  Likewise, the HPC 
neither defines death nor references the determination of death 
requirements in HRS § 327C-1.  Of particular relevance, HRS § 
707-700 (2014), which defines terms for offenses including Murder in the Second Degree, in its original and amended forms, 
does not define death or reference HRS § 327C-1.  
 
The circuit court noted that had the legislature 
intended to incorporate HRS § 327C-1’s requirements into the HPC, 
it could have done so, citing various HPC provisions that explicitly reference the definition of terms in other statutes.
14  
Based on the “legislature’s inaction,” the circuit court concluded that the legislature did not intend that HRS § 327C-1 
apply to all “criminal actions brought under the [HPC] where ‘death’ constitutes the result element of the offense.”   
Since the HPC does not define “death,” the circuit 
court gave the term its “ordinary meaning.”  Quoting Black’s Law 
 
14  The circuit court cited H RS § 707- 700 (“‘Street’ shall have the 
same meaning as in section 291C-1. ”; “‘Vehicle’ has the same meaning as in 
section 291E-1.”); and HRS § 706- 660.1 (“‘ Automatic firearm’ has the same 
meaning defined in section 134-1. ”; “‘Firearm’ has the same meaning defined 
in section 134- 1 except that it does not include ‘ semiautomatic firearm’ or 
‘automatic firearm. ’”).    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 
 Dictionary, the circuit court defined death as “[t]he ending of 
life; the cessation of all vital functions and signs.”  Death, 
Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014); Death, Black’s Law 
Dictionary (7th ed. 1999).  Under this ordinary meaning of death,
Dr. Happy’s expert testimony before the grand jury provided a sufficient evidentiary basis for death.    
Furthermore, the circuit court noted that Moon’s 
interpretation of HRS § 327C-1 would lead to absurd results as it “would effectively prevent the prosecution of murders in this 
jurisdiction” where a dead body was not recovered.  Without a 
body, it would be impossible to show that a person “experienced 
irreversible cessation of spontaneous respiratory and 
circulatory functions” as required in HRS § 327C-1(a).  
 
The circuit court also concluded that it had 
jurisdiction over this case.  It explained that Count 1 alleges 
a violation of HRS § 707-701.5, which is a cognizable criminal 
offense under the HPC.  Additionally, the Indictment properly alleged that Moon’s offense occurred in the City and County of 
Honolulu, which is within the jurisdiction of the circuit court. 
In any event, the circuit court held that Moon’s 
motion “falls within the definition of a pretrial motion as set 
forth in HRPP Rule 12(b)(2).”  “Such motions must be brought   
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 
 prior to trial,” and Moon’s failure to file such a motion before 
trial “waive[d] . . . that defense or objection.”  (Quoting 
State v. Markowski, 88 Hawai‘ i 477, 485, 967 P.2d 674, 682 (App. 
1998)).  In the alternative, pursuant to In re Doe, 102 Hawai‘ i 
75, 78, 73 P.3d 29, 32 (2003), the jury verdict rendered Moon’s 
argument regarding the grand jury’s probable-cause determination 
moot.   D. Appellate Proceedings 
Moon appealed the circuit court’s Amended Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA), and we later accepted transfer of this case.     
On appeal, Moon first argues that the circuit court 
erred in holding that HRS § 327C-1 does not apply to criminal 
actions involving death, including his case and contends that arguments regarding defects in his indictment were not waived.  
Citing State v. Przeradski, 5 Haw. App. 29, 32, 677 P.2d 471, 
474 (1984), Moon argues that by addressing the merits of his motion for arrest of judgment on the merits, the circuit court 
“impliedly granted relief from the waiver.”  Moon moreover 
argues that he did not file an untimely motion to dismiss the 
Indictment pursuant to HRPP Rule 12(b) (2018) (last amended in 
2007), but rather, a timely motion to arrest judgment pursuant  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 
 to HRPP Rule 34 (1977).   
Moon argues that because HRPP Rule 34 
states that the circuit court “shall arrest judgment if the 
charge does not allege an offense” (emphasis omitted), and 
because Counts 1 and 3 of the Indictment did not properly allege 
offenses, the circuit court had “no discretion” and was required 
to arrest his judgment.  
 15
Second, Moon argues that “the Circuit Court erred in 
denying Moon’s motion to strike the testimony of Dr. Kobayashi for failure to produce the medical records upon which he relied 
in forming his opinion”
16  Moon argues that under HRE Rule 705,17  
Dr. Kobayashi should have disclosed the facts or data underlying his opinion in discovery or at trial, and the circuit court 
abused its discretion by denying Moon’s motion to strike on that 
ground.     
 
15  HRPP Rule 34 provides that a “motion in arrest of judgment shall 
be made within 10 days after verdict or finding of guilty.”  Moon’s verdict 
was rendered on September 19, 2018, and he filed his motion nine days later 
on September 28, 2018. 
 
16  At trial, Moon objected to testimony by Dr. Kobayashi “regarding 
anything that happened at the QMC” on the ground that Feliciano’s medical 
records from QMC were never provided in discovery, in violation of Hawai͑i 
Rules of Evidence (HR
E) Rule 705 (2018) (last amended in 1984) and HRPP Rule 
16 (2012).  The circuit court overruled the objection.   
 
17  HRE Rule 705 provides: 
 
Rule 705. Disclosure of facts or data underlying expert opinion  
The expert may testify in terms of opinion or inference and give 
the expert’ s reasons therefor without disclosing the underlying 
facts or data if the underlying facts or data have been disclosed 
in discovery proceedings.  The expert may in any event be 
required to disclose the underlying facts or data on cross-examination.    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 
 Third, Moon argues that the circuit court committed 
plain error by failing to instruct the jury on the issue of 
causation, specifically “regarding intermediate intervening 
cause of death as set forth in HRS §§ 702-214, 215 and 216.”  
“[E]ven though Dr. Kobayashi testified that the cause of death 
was the gunshot wound, it was still a jury question as to 
whether the removal of Decedent’s organs was an independent 
intervening cause of death.  The jury should have been instructed accordingly.”   
Fourth, Moon argues that he was denied his 
constitutional right to trial by jury when four potential jurors 
of Korean ancestry were excused.   
Fifth, Moon argues that the circuit court’s Tachibana 
colloquy18 was deficient because the court failed to ascertain 
whether the defendant’s waiver was voluntary.   
Finally, Moon argues that “[d]efense counsel provided 
ineffective assistance of counsel by conceding in opening 
statement that Moon was the shooter” and waiving the potential 
defense “that Moon was not the person who shot [Feliciano].” 
For the foregoing reasons, Moon requests his 
convictions on Counts 1 and 3 be reversed, or in the alternative, 
 
18  Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai‘ i 226, 236, 900 P.2d 1293, 1303 
(1995), established the requirement that when a defendant in a criminal case 
indicates an intention not to testify, the trial court “ must advise criminal 
defendants of their right to testify and must obtain an on- the-record waiver 
of that right.”   
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 
 that his conviction on these counts be vacated and the case 
remanded
 for a new trial.     
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A.   Statutory Interpretation 
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions 
of law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  
Nakamoto v. Kawauchi, 142 Hawaiʻ i 259, 268, 418 P.3d 600, 609 
(2018) (quoting Lingle v. Haw. Gov’t Emps. Ass’n, AFSCME, Loc. 
152, AFL-CIO, 107 Hawaiʻ i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005)). 
B. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal 
When reviewing a motion for judgment of acquittal, we 
employ the same standard that a trial court applies to such 
a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full 
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the 
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so 
that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  State v. Pone, 78 Hawaiʻ i 262, 265, 892 
P.2d 455, 458 (1995); State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 528, 
865 P.2d 157, 164 (1994); State v. Rocker, 52 Haw. 336, 346, 
475 P.2d 684, 690 (1970).  Sufficient evidence to support a 
prima facie case requires “substantial evidence” as to 
every material element of the offense charged.  State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawaiʻ i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996).  
“Substantial evidence” as to every material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  Id.  Under 
such a review, we give “full play to the right of the fact 
finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and 
draw justifiable inferences of fact.”  State v. Yabusaki, 
58 Haw. 404, 410 , 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977). 
 
State v. Jhun, 83 Hawaiʻ i 472, 481, 927 P.2d 1355, 1364 (1996). 
 
C. Motion for Arrest of Judgment 
“A motion in arrest of judgment must be made before 
the judgment is entered.”  Kerr v. Martin, 7 Haw. 645, 650 (Haw.  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 
 Kingdom 1889). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A.   HRS § 327C-1 Does Not Apply to All Criminal Cases Involving 
     Death 
 
We first consider whether HRS § 327C-1 applies to this 
case, a matter of statutory interpretation.  We conclude that it 
does not. 
“[T]he fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.”  State v. 
Wheeler, 121  383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) Hawai‘i
(quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals 
of Honolulu, 114 Hawai‘ i 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)).  
When interpreting a statute, “our foremost obligation is to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, 
which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in 
the statute itself.”  Nakamoto, 142 Hawai‘ i at 268, 418 P.3d at 
609 (quoting Lingle, 107 Hawai‘ i at 183, 111 P.3d at 592).  
“Nevertheless, statutory language is read ‘in the context of the 
entire statute’ and interpreted ‘in a manner consistent with its 
purpose.’”  State v. Abella, 145 Hawai‘ i 541, 552, 454 P.3d 482, 
493 (2019) (quoting State v. Haugen, 104 Hawai‘ i 71, 76, 85 P.3d 
178, 183 (2004)).  To determine this purpose, “we are not 
limited to the words of the statute to discern the underlying policy which the legislature seeks to promulgate but may look to  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 
 [the] relevant legislative history.”  State v. Wells, 78 Hawai‘ i 
373, 376, 894 P.2d 70, 73 (1995) (brackets and ellipsis omitted) 
(quoting Sol v. AIG Haw. Ins. Co., 76 Hawai
‘i 304, 307, 875 P.2d 
921, 924 (1994)). 
Moon argues that the circuit court erred in ruling 
that HRS § 327C-1 does not apply to criminal actions in which 
death constitutes the result element of the offense, like the grand jury proceeding in his case.  Moon bases his argument on 
the language of HRS § 327C-1(d), which he argues, “plain[ly] and 
unambiguous[ly]” states that the statute applies to “[a]ll death 
determinations” for “all purposes, including . . . criminal 
actions, any laws to the contrary notwithstanding.”  (Emphasis 
omitted.)  Since this case is a “criminal action” involving 
death, he argues that the requirements of HRS § 327C-1 apply, and these requirements were not met here.   
We disagree.  Under the plain language of HRS § 327C-1, 
specifically the title and subsection (d), this statute applies 
to “[d]etermination[s] of death” or “death determinations.”  
While these terms, viewed in isolation, could apply to all 
criminal cases involving death, when viewed in context, it is 
clear they are terms of art intended to apply to more limited 
circumstances where the exact time or occurrence of death is 
necessarily at issue or undetermined.    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 
 (. . . continued) HRS § 327C-1,19 titled “Determination of death,” sets 
 
19  Quoted in full, HRS § 327C-1 provides: 
 
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a person shall be 
considered dead if, in the announced opinion of a 
physician or osteopathic physician licensed under part 
I of chapter 453, physician or osteopathic physician 
excepted from licensure by section 453- 2(b)(3), 
physician assistant licensed under chapter 453, or registered nurse licensed under chapter 457, based on ordinary standards of current medical practice, the 
person has experienced irreversible cessation of 
spontaneous respiratory and circulatory functions.  
Death will have occurred at the time when the 
irreversible cessation of the functions first coincided. 
(b) In the event that artificial means of support preclude a determination that respiratory and circulatory 
functions have ceased, a person shall be considered 
dead if, in the opinion of an attending physician or 
osteopathic physician licensed under part I of chapter 453, or attending physician or osteopathic physician 
excepted from licensure by section 453- 2(b)(3), and of 
a consulting physician or osteopathic physician 
licensed under part I of chapter 453, or consulting 
physician or osteopathic physician excepted from licensure by section 453- 2(b)(3), based on ordinary 
standards of current medical practice, the person has experienced irreversible cessation of all functions of 
the entire brain, including the brain stem.  The 
opinions of the physicians or osteopathic physicians shall be evidenced by signed statements.  Death will 
have occurred at the time when the irreversible 
cessation of all functions of the entire brain, 
including the brain stem, first occurred.  Death shall 
be pronounced before artificial means of support are withdrawn and before any vital organ is removed for 
purposes of transplantation. 
(c) When a part of a donor is used for direct organ transplantation under chapter 327, and the donor’s 
death is established by determining that the donor experienced irreversible cessation of all functions of 
the entire brain, including the brain stem, the 
determination shall only be made under subsection (b).  
The determination of death in all other cases shall be 
made under subsection (a).  The physicians or 
osteopathic physicians making the determination of 
death shall not participate in the procedures for removing or transplanting a part, or in the care of any 
recipient. 
(d) All death determinations in the State shall be made 
pursuant to this section and shall apply to all 
purposes, including but not limited to civil and 
criminal actions, any laws to the contrary  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 
 forth the procedural requirements to be followed by physicians 
and other medical providers in making “death determinations,” 
particularly in cases where the patient is on life support or 
the patient’s organs are being prepared for transplantation.  
See HRS §§ 327C-1(b)-(d).  While subsection (a) provides the 
procedure applicable in most situations where a “death 
determination” is required, see HRS § 327C-1(a), subsection (b) 
sets forth a more detailed process that applies in cases where “artificial means of support preclude a determination that 
respiratory and circulatory functions have ceased,” HRS  
§ 327C-1(b).   Notably, HRS § 327C-1 makes no reference to the 
HPC, which was enacted six years earlier in 1972.  Neither does  20
 
(. . . continued) 
 
notwithstanding; provided that presumptive deaths under 
the Uniform Probate Code shall not be affected by this 
section. 
(e) The director of health may convene in every odd-numbered year, a committee which shall be composed of representatives of appropriate general and specialized 
medical professional organizations, licensed attorneys, 
and members of the public.  The committee shall review 
medical practice, legal developments, and other 
appropriate matters to determine the continuing 
viability of this section, and shall submit a report of 
its findings and recommendations to the legislature, 
prior to the convening of the regular session held in 
each even- numbered year. 
 
(Emphasis added.)  
20  The latter requires written opinions by two physicians or 
osteopathic physicians that the person at issue “has experienced irreversible 
cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem.”    HRS § 327C- 1(b).  And, it provides that “[d] eath shall be pronounced before 
artificial means of support are withdrawn and before any vital organ is removed for purposes of transplantation.”  Id.    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 
 the HPC cross-reference HRS § 327C-1.  Since the HPC does not 
include a definition of death, death should be given its 
commonly understood meaning.  See State v. Guess, 715 A.2d 643, 
647-48 (Conn. 1998) (interpreting the definition of death “in accordance with its commonly approved usage,” rather than 
applying the state’s determination-of-death statute, “[b]ecause 
the legislature did not provide a definition of death in the 
Penal Code”).   
Moon nevertheless relies on subsection (d) of the 
statute, which provides that “[a]ll death determinations in the State shall be made pursuant to this section and shall apply to 
all purposes, including but not limited to civil and criminal 
actions, any laws to the contrary notwithstanding.”  HRS § 327C-
1(d).  Moon suggests that this means the procedure set forth in 
the statute applies whenever the fact of death needs to be 
established.  But this interpretation ignores that the plain 
language of the statute, while defining the process for “death determinations,” does not define death itself for all purposes.  
Indeed, neither subsections (a) nor (b) define the circumstances 
under which a person “is” dead; rather, they state the 
conditions under which a person “shall be considered” dead.  HRS 
§§ 327C-1(a) and (b).  Thus, while HRS § 327C-1 provides a way 
in which death can be established, it does not provide 
the only way in which the fact of death must be established.    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 
 This interpretation is supported by the legislature’s 
use of the phrase “determination of death” in other statutes.  
For instance, “determination of death” is mentioned in HRS  
§ 560:1-107 (1993),21 which provides the “rules relating to a 
 
21  HRS § 560:1- 107 is entitled “Evidence of death or status” and 
states: 
 
In addition to the rules of evidence, the following rules 
relating to a determination of death and status apply: 
(1) Death occurs when an individual has sustained either: 
(A) Irreversible cessation of circulatory and 
respiratory functions; or 
(B) Irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem. A determination of death must be made in 
accordance with accepted medical standards; 
(2) A certified or authenticated copy of a death 
certificate purporting to be issued by an official or 
agency of the place where the death purportedly occurred is prima facie evidence of the fact, place, 
date, and time of death and the identity of the 
decedent; 
(3) A certified or authenticated copy of any record or report of a governmental agency, domestic or foreign, that an individual is missing, detained, dead, or alive 
is prima facie evidence of the status and of the dates, 
circumstances, and places disclosed by the record or 
report; 
(4) In the absence of prima facie evidence of death under 
paragraph (2) or (3), the fact of death may be 
established by clear and convincing evidence, including 
circumstantial evidence; 
(5) An individual whose death is not established under the preceding paragraphs who is absent for a continuous period of five years, during which the individual has 
not been heard from, and whose absence is not 
satisfactorily explained after diligent search or 
inquiry, is presumed to be dead. The individual's death 
is presumed to have occurred at the end of the period unless there is sufficient evidence for determining 
that death occurred earlier; 
(6) In the absence of evidence disputing the time of death stated on a document described in paragraph (2) or (3), 
a document described in paragraph (2) or (3) that states a time of death one hundred twenty hours or more 
after the time of death of another individual, however 
the time of death of the other individual is determined,  
(. . . continued)  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 
 determination of death and status” for probate matters under 
Hawai
‘i’s Uniform Probate Code.  Relatedly, the Hawai‘ i Probate 
Rules (HPR) use the term “determination of death,” when 
referring to “determination of death proceedings,” which are 
conducted for missing persons.  See, e.g., HPR Rules 150-152, 
154 (describing the commencement of action, notice, and order 
requirements for “Determination of Death Proceedings” for 
missing persons).  
The term “determination of death” is also mentioned in 
HRS Chapter 327, entitled “Medical and Research Use of Bodies.”  
HRS § 327-38 (2010) describes prohibitions and penalties for the 
disposition of dead human bodies, stating, 
“Dead human body” means: 
(1) An individual who has sustained either 
irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory 
functions or irreversible cessation of all functions 
of the entire brain, including the brain stem; 
provided that the determination of death be made in 
accordance with accepted medical standards[.] 
 
HRS § 327-38(e) (emphasis added). 
 
The statute regarding “Requests for anatomical gifts” 
similarly states, 
Any person in charge of a hospital, or the designated 
representative of the person in charge of the hospital, 
 
(. . . continued)  
establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the individual survived the other individual by one hundred twenty hours. 
 (Emphases added.)  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 
 other than a person connected with the determination of 
death, may request any of the persons in section [327- 9], 
in the order of priority stated, to give consent to the gift of all or any part of the decedent’s body to any 
potential donee for any purpose provided in section [327-
11]. 
 
HRS § 327-52 (2010) (emphasis added). 
These examples, as well as HRS § 327C-1’s placement 
under “Title 19. Health,”22 demonstrate that the terms 
“determination of death” and “death determination” are not 
synonymous with the mere fact of death.  Rather, they hold a specific meaning that is applicable when the precise medical 
establishment of death is required.
23  
The legislative history and purpose of HRS § 327C-1 
not only supports the foregoing interpretation, but also 
suggests that the statute was drafted to guide and protect 
health-care providers from civil or criminal liability.  The 
 
22  Title 19 (“Health”) ranges from HRS C hapter 321 (“Department of 
Health”) to HRS Chapter 344 (“State Environmental Policy”).  HRS Chapter 327C 
(“Death”), which houses HRS § 327C- 1, follows HRS C hapter 327 (“Medical and 
Research Use of Bodies”).  The latter includes the Revised Unif orm Anatomical 
Gift Act, which regulates the responsibilities of health- care providers, 
medical examiners, and coroners in the acceptance and disposition of donated 
body parts.  HRS C hapter 327C is followed by HRS Chapters 327E (“Uniform 
Health-Care Decisi ons Act”), 327F (“Medical Treatment Decisions for Psychotic 
Disorders”), 327G (“Advance Mental Health Care Directives”), 327H (“Pain Patient’s Bill of Rights”), 327K (“Provider Orders for Life- Sustaining 
Treatment”), and 327L (“Our Care, Our Choice Act”).  HRS § 327C- 1 thus 
appears within a series of health- related chapters that address the rights 
and duties of patients, decedents, and medical professionals; notably absent 
are provisions relating to criminal process or the rights of criminal 
defendants.   
 
23   A precise medical determination of death may be required, for 
example, in certain probate cases, when using a body for medicine and 
research, or when an action is commenced while a person is still on life support. 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 
 Senate Judiciary Committee Report recommending the bill’s 
passage notes that “there is no State statute which defines when 
a human being shall be pronounced dead,” suggesting that the 
legislature intended to provide a procedure for the 
“determination of death” rather than a universally applicable 
means of proving death.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 617, in 1978 
Senate Journal, at 1026 (emphasis added).  The same report 
states that the purpose of the bill is “to establish and provide a definition of the medical death of a human being,” noting: 
 Historically, there was no alternative to the 
traditional method of determining death.24  However, the 
increased sophistication and extension of medical knowledge 
in resuscitation, artificial life support techniques, and 
organ transplants now require a different means of 
measuring death.  The traditional criteria are no longer 
reliable in certain circumstances.  
 
Id. (emphasis added). 
HRS 327C-1 was thus directed at health care providers 
- particularly those involved in the process of determining 
whether organs may be removed from an individual for transplantation.  The specific procedure outlined in the statute 
was designed to be a safe harbor from civil or criminal 
liability.   
Two years before the enactment of HRS § 327C-1 in 1978, 
the Senate passed S.R. No. 432, S.D. 1, calling on the 
 
24  The LRB Report characterizes the “ traditional” method of death 
determination as the “measure of circulatory- respiratory death.”  LRB Report, 
supra p.3, at 5.   
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 
 Legislative Reference Bureau (LRB) to study “statutorily 
defining and timing the death of a human being.”  S. Stand. Comm. 
Rep. No. 1029, in 1976 Senate Journal, at 1272.  This request 
was made in recognition of “an impressive number of cases and an 
unprecedented amount of litigation” concerning “a legal 
definition of death.”  The resulting report, entitled “Towards a 
Definition of Death,” recognized that “the advent of modern 
medicine and development of extraordinary life sustaining techniques” created the need for a definition of death, “a 
previously non-existent problem.”  LRB Report, supra p.3, at 1.  
After reviewing the legal and medical implications of a 
definition of death and surveying other states’ statutes 
defining death, the report “recommend[ed] that the State of 
Hawai͑
i enact a statutory definition of death.”   Id. at 1-3.25   
There are several indications that the definition of 
death proposed by the LRB Report was meant to apply to a set of 
limited circumstances in which a determination of death is required.  The report began by discussing cases where the 
absence of a legal-death standard created uncertainty, noting 
that “[t]he current lack of agreement between medical practice 
and law has resulted in some legal entanglements, some of which 
 
25  The report proposed statutory text to that end.  LRB Report, 
supra p.3, at 116-18.  The proposed text was adopted almost word fo r word.  
See HRS § 327C-1 (1978). 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 
 resulted in judicial recognition of and acquiescence in the 
brain death standard.”   Id. at 2.  After explaining that “[t]he 
relevance of a definition of death, or any need for such a 
definition is perhaps made most understandable when viewed in 
the light of well-publicized death issues,” the report discussed 
two cases  - one involving a patient on life support, the other 
involving an organ donor  - “to clarify the definition of death 
as an issue.”  Id. at 4.  Both cases highlighted the need for a statute that “determin[ed] at as nearly accurate a point in time 
as possible, the moment of death, or more precisely . . . the 
point at which a human body has progressed in the process of 
death when realistic medical assessment of condition is a 
finding of death.”  See id. at 4.   2726
 
 
26  The first case discussed in the LRB Report was the Quinlan case, 
in which New Jersey courts considered a petition from Karen Ann Quinlan’s 
parents to remove her artificial respirator.  LRB Report, supra p.3, at 3-10, 
119 n.1.  For over a year, Quinlan was in a vegetative state with her 
breathing artificially maintained after she allegedly took a lethal 
combination of tranquilizers and alcohol.  Id. at 4-5.  Medical test results, 
however, showed some brain rhythm, so she never met the requirements for 
brain-function death.  Id. at 5.  This court in Abella cited the Quinlan case, 
and described its influence on the development of the law in Hawai͑i and 
nationally regarding a patient’s “right to refuse further life- sustaini
ng 
medical treatment.”   Abella, 145 Hawai‘ i at 553, 454 P.3d at 494 (citing In re 
Quinlan, 355 A.2d 647 (N.J. 1976).  
The Cameron case took place in Hawai‘ i and concerned court 
proceedings regarding the removal of Alice Cameron’s organs for donation.  
LRB Report, supra p.3, at 10-14 .  After an alleged drug overdose, Cameron 
“could not breathe without the assistance of the respirator” and was declared brain dead by her treating physician, despite disagreement among other 
physicians as to whether she was in fac t dead.  Id. at 11-12.   
 
27  These are precisely the circumstances discussed in HRS § 327C-1.  
See HRS §§ 327C-1(b) and (c). 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 
 (. . . continued) The LRB Report also identified specific areas in which 
the need for a statute defining death was particularly evident.  
The report listed three categories of legal cases where 
determinations of death previously arose: (1) property, 
inheritance, and insurance rights;28 (2) missing persons;29 and (3) 
homicide and wrongful death.  Id. at 52-56.  As to the latter, 
the report focused on issues of liability, discussing cases in 
which physicians who removed brain-dead patients from artificial life-support systems “exposed [themselves] to criminal liability 
for homicide, or civil liability for wrongful death, or both.”
30  
 
28  The LRB explained that litigation often arises in simultaneous 
death cases where the primary issue is the “question of survivor ship” (e.g., 
determining whether a spouse died at the scene when her brain ceased to 
function or when she was removed from the respirator).  LRB Report, supra p.3, 
at 52.  Likewise, issues arise regarding insurance benefits when insurance 
companies set tim e limits for accidental death benefits (e.g., determining 
whether a spouse, who was kept alive on a respirator for more than ninety 
days after an accident, had “died” within an insurance policy’s ninety- day 
time limit).  I d. at 53.  In such cases, “timing bears crucially on 
inheritance rights. ”  Id. 
 
29  In missing persons cases, the LRB explained that the law 
determines “the period of time which must elapse” for a “presumptive 
determination[] of death,” specifically for “distributing the person’s 
property o r freeing a spouse to remarry . . . .”  LRB Report, supra p.3, at 
53-54.  The LRB noted that in Hawai‘ i this period of time is five years per 
the Uniform Probate Code.
  Id. at 54. 
 
30  The LRB Report describes Tucker’s Administrator v. Lower, in 
which the b rother of a transplant donor sued the surgeons who removed his 
brother’s organs for the wrongful death of the donor.  LRB Report, supra p.3, 
at 54, 124 n.12.  The report noted that, in this case, “the primary issue was the determination of the time of deat h,” specifically, whether the donor was 
dead at the time the surgeons removed his organs.  Id. at 54.  The LRB Report 
also describes Regina v. Potter, in which a court reduced a defendant’s 
charge from murder to assault, finding that the “intervening acts of the 
physicians” – specifically, terminating the artificial life support of the 
brain-dead patient - “mitigated the original charge.”  I d. at 30-31, 55; cf. 
Abella, 145 Hawai‘ i at 559, 454 P.3d at 500 (rejecting the argument that 
“removal of life support cannot constitute an intervening cause that may  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 
 Id. at 54.  Where a person accuses a doctor of homicide or 
wrongful death for the removal of life support, the LRB noted, 
both timing and causation are at issue.  Id. at 55.  In such 
cases, the report implied, a medical determination of death may 
be warranted. 
Other jurisdictions have similarly held that death-
determination statutes are not applicable to every case 
involving death.  In State v. Edwards, 767 N.W.2d 784, 800 (Neb. 
2009), the Nebraska Supreme Court held that their determination-
of-death statute did not apply to homicide cases where the body 
of the decedent was missing.  There, following a jury trial, the 
defendant was convicted of Murder in the Second Degree and Use 
of a Deadly Weapon to Commit a Felony.  Id. at 795.  The 
decedent was last seen leaving her apartment for the defendant’s apartment.  Id. at 792.  While her body was never recovered, the 
decedent’s blood was found in the defendant’s bedroom, on the mattress and walls, on a weapon in his closet, and in the trunk of his car.  Id. at 793-94.  The defendant argued that, inter 
alia, the State failed to prove the decedent’s death under 
 
(. . . continued) 
 
absolve a defendant from liability for causing death”).  The LRB noted, in addition to the issue of causation, that “[t]he question of timing of death 
in view of physician intervention” was necessarily at is sue in Regina.  LRB 
Report, supra p.3, at 55.  Thus, both Tucker’s Administrator and Regina 
illustrated that, in certain cases, the precise timing of a person’s death could have legal implications and could be determined using the procedures 
set forth in H RS § 327C- 1.  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 
 Nebraska’s determination-of-death statute  and the court should 
have instructed the jury on this statute.  Id. at 798-99.   31
The Nebraska Supreme Court rejected both arguments, 
finding the statute inapplicable.  Id. at 798, 800.  The court 
explained, “We do not read the [statute] as establishing a rule 
of evidence requiring that in all cases involving an alleged 
decedent, the fact of death must be medically established.”  Id. 
at 800.  Rather, the statute applies to certain cases involving 
death determinations: “[T]here may be cases in which the 
[statute’s] medical standards are implicated, when there is a 
question as to the cause or time of an alleged death, or where 
there is conflicting medical evidence about the alleged 
decedent’s condition.”  Id.  As there were no such questions or 
evidence in this case, the court applied the standard of death recognized under Nebraska’s common law – proof of death by 
circumstantial evidence – and concluded that the evidence at 
trial was sufficient to prove the decedent’s death.  Id. 
 
 
31  Nebraska’s statute, entitled “Determination of death,” falls 
under “Chapter 71.  Public Health & Welfare” and states the following: 
 
Only an individual who has sustained either (1) 
irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory 
functions, or (2) irreversible cessation of all functions 
of the entire brain, including the brain stem, is dead.  A determination of death must be made in accordance with accepted medical standards. 
 
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71- 7202 (1992).    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 
 We likewise hold that HRS § 327C-1 applies only in 
certain criminal cases that involve “death determinations.”  
Most notably, in cases where a physician is charged with a crime 
for removing a patient from life support, the physician can 
fulfill the requirements of this statute to prove the patient 
was dead before the removal of such support.  But not all 
criminal cases involving death require such death determinations.  
In most criminal cases, the fact and time of death are not contested – in those cases, all would agree the decedent died, 
so HRS § 327C-1 does not apply. 
To hold otherwise would be to disregard well-accepted 
canons of statutory construction.  Generally, statutes should be 
construed “to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, 
and illogicality.”  Abella, 145 Hawai
‘i at 552, 454 P.3d at 493 
(quoting Haugen, 104 Hawai‘ i at 76, 85 P.3d at 183).  “If a 
literal construction of statutory language would produce an 
absurd result, we presume that result was not intended and 
construe the statute in accord with its underlying legislative 
intent.”  Id. (citing Haugen, 104 Hawai‘ i at 77, 85 P.3d at 184).  
The interpretation of HRS § 327C-1 advanced by Moon here would 
produce absurd results.  Most notably, in cases in which someone 
is abducted, murdered, and the body is disposed of, there would 
be no way for a health care provider to make the required 
determination, and the State could never make the required  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 
 showing that the defendant had caused the death of another.32   
With these principles in mind, we turn to the facts of 
this case. 
B.   The State Was Not Required to Meet the Requirements of HRS 
§ 327C-1 to Prove Feliciano’s Death 
 
At trial, various witnesses testified that Moon shot 
Feliciano in the head during an altercation.  Inoue testified 
that Dr. Nakagawa pronounced Fel iciano dead on December 28, 2016.  
Feliciano’s organs and tissues were subsequently removed on December 30, 2016.  Dr. Kobayashi then performed an autopsy on 
Feliciano on January 3, 2017 and determined that the cause of 
Feliciano’s death was a gunshot wound to the head.  No evidence 
was presented to contradict this testimony.  Thus, at the time 
of Moon’s trial, there was no need for a “determination of death” within the meaning of HRS § 327C-1.  There was no 
disagreement that Feliciano was dead at that point, and HRS § 
327C-1 did not apply.  Viewing the evidence at trial “in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition 
of the province of the trier of fact,” there was substantial 
evidence to support the material element of death in this case.  
See Jhun, 83 Hawaiʻ i at 481, 927 P.2d at 1364.   
 
32  HRS § 327C- 1(c) speci fically provides that “[t]he determination 
of death in all other cases shall be made under subsection (a).”  (Emphasis 
added.)  Read literally, this would mean that there could be no determination 
of death in cases in which there is no body – an absurd res ult.  
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 
 Moon additionally argues that HRS § 327C-1 applied to 
the grand jury proceeding, since Feliciano was “being kept alive 
by artificial means” at that time.  However, Moon did not 
challenge the indictment before trial.  Rather, he challenged it 
through a motion for arrest of judgment, arguing that the “one 
physician who declared [Feliciano] ‘brain dead’ . . . [was] not 
sufficient to prove that [Feliciano] was legally dead as 
required by the statute.”33  According to Moon, “[w]ithout 
sufficient evidence to support the murder charge, the indictment 
is defective on that count.”  He also argues that the indictment 
failed to allege an offense and/or the circuit court lacked 
jurisdiction of the offense, and his motion therefore should 
have been granted. 
Moon essentially challenges the sufficiency of the 
evidence to support his indictment, specifically the grand 
jury’s probable-cause determination for the element of death.  
 
33  A motion for arrest of judgment was not an appropriate motion for 
this argument.  A motion for arrest of judgment is meant “to give the trial 
judge another chance to invalidate a judgment due to a fundamental error 
appearing on the face of the re cord.”  3 Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal 
Practice & Procedure § 601 (5th ed. 2022) (emphasis added) (examining Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 34, which is the federal equivalent of HRPP Rule 34).  The “record” 
includes the indictment itself but not evidence; thus, “[a]n attack on the 
sufficiency of the evidence” is not appropriate for a motion for arrest of 
judgment.  Id.; see also Territory v. Anderson, 23 Haw. 347, 348 (Haw. Terr. 
1916) (per curiam) (“The motion in arrest [of judgment] reaches substantial errors which are patent on the record, and which vitiate the 
proceedings . . . .  The objection that the verdict is contrary to the 
evidence or based on insufficient evidence . . . cannot be urged in arrest of judgment.”  (quoting 12 Cyclopedia of Law & Procedure 756, 759 (William Mack 
ed., 12th ed. 1904))).    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 
 However, under HRPP Rule 12(b)(2), “objections based on defects 
in the charge” “must be raised prior to trial[.]”  A party’s 
failure to raise such objections “shall constitute waiver 
thereof, but the court for cause shown may grant relief from the 
waiver.”34  HRPP Rule 12(f).  Moon argues that the circuit court 
“impliedly granted relief from the waiver” by “address[ing] the merits of the motion and den[ying] it,” citing Przeradski, 5 Haw. 
App. at 32, 677 P.2d at 474.  In Przeradski, the defendant 
failed to raise a HRPP Rule 12(b)(3) motion to suppress evidence before trial as required under HRPP Rule 12(f).  Id. at 31-32, 
667 P.3d at 474.  “[W]ithout comment, the trial court heard argument on the merits from both sides, and, thereafter, denied 
the motion.”  Id. at 32, 667 P.3d at 474.  Based on these 
actions, the ICA held that “the trial court impliedly 
 
34  We have allowed parties to challenge indictments for the first 
time on appeal, but such parties have argued that their indictments failed to 
charge an offense; they did not solely challenge the sufficiency of the 
evidence supporting probable cause.  See, e.g., State v. Tominiko, 126 Hawai‘ i 
68, 75, 266 P.3d 1122, 1129 (2011) (addressing defendant’s argument that “the 
charge cannot be construed to charge an offense”); State v. Merino, 81 Hawai‘ i 
198, 211, 915 P.2d 672, 685 (1996) (addressing defendant’s argument that “the 
charging complaint was fatally defective in that it ‘fail[ed] to sufficiently allege the elements of conspiracy’” (alteration in original)).  We have 
permitted such challenges because, pursuant to HRPP Rule 12(b)(2), “defenses 
and objections based on defects in the charge” “must be raised prior to 
trial” unless the challenge is “that it fails to show jurisdiction in the 
court or to charge an offense.”  (Emphasis added.)  HRPP Rule 12(b)(2) states 
that such challenges regarding jurisdiction or charging an offense “shall be noticed by the court at any time during the pendency of the proceedings .”  
HRPP Rule 12(b)(2) (emphasis added); Merino, 81 Hawai‘ i at 211, 915 P.2d at 
685.  Although framed as a challenge that the indictment failed to allege an 
offense (or that the court lacked jurisdiction) , as noted above, Moon is 
challenging the sufficiency of the evidence to establish probable cause. 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 
 granted . . . relief [from the waiver]” under HRPP Rule 12(f) 
and that the motion was properly before the ICA.  Id. at 32, 667 
P.3d at 474.   
In contrast, the circuit court here specifically found 
that the motion was untimely and that Moon had failed to 
establish good cause.  Thus, notwithstanding this court’s 
discretion to review a defendant’s untimely motion, here, we 
decline to do so.35  As mentioned above, the State in this case 
developed evidence at trial that supported a finding beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Moon committed Murder in the Second Degree; 
this included evidence of death.  On these facts, Moon’s 
objection to the sufficiency of evidence supporting the 
indictment, made in a post-judgment motion for arrest of 
judgment, was untimely and thus waived. 
Relatedly, Moon, citing In re Doe, 102 Hawai‘ i at 78, 
73 P.3d at 32, argues that his case is not moot because it 
concerns “unusual circumstances.36  Moon argues that if he had 
moved to dismiss the indictment before trial, the State would 
 
35  Contrary to Moon’s contention, Przeradski does not hold that 
appellate courts must review untimely motions.  See Schutter v. Soong, 76 
Hawaiʻi 187, 204, 873 P.2d 66, 83 (1994) (citing Przeradski for the 
proposition that the defendant’s “failure to file a timely motion will not be 
deemed a waiver of his right to seek disqualification, and [this court] may 
review the decision of the lower court” (emphasis added)).   
 
36 In In re Doe, the court held that “absent unusual circumstances, 
any defects in a pretrial determination of probable cause are rendered moot, or are without any effective remedy, which is much the same thing, by a 
subsequent conviction[.] ”  102 Hawai‘ i at 78, 73 P.3d at 32 (footnote omitted). 
  
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 
 not have been able to present evidence that Feliciano had 
experienced “irreversible cessation of all functions of the 
entire brain, including the brain stem,” at the grand jury 
proceeding because HRS § 327C-1(b) requires that determination 
to be made by two physicians independently.  HRS § 327C-1(b).  
According to Moon, the State would not have been able 
to present evidence of brain death even if a second grand jury 
was convened after the organ-donation procedure because “by that time, Feliciano’s organs had all been removed.  He was dead but, 
because the statutory procedure had not been followed, there was 
no way to legally prove that he might have recovered from his 
loss of brain function.”  Moon’s arguments are unavailing.  If 
Moon had succeeded in moving to dismiss pretrial based on the 
State’s failure to establish probable cause on the element of 
death as he suggests, the State could have returned to the grand 
jury several days later, after Feliciano’s organs had been 
removed.37  At that point, no one would have disagreed that 
Feliciano was dead, and the State would not have needed to present evidence that Feliciano had experienced irreversible 
cessation of brain function. 
 
37  Feliciano’s organs and tissues were removed two days after the 
grand jury indictment. 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 
  C.   Moon’s Other Arguments Lack Merit 
 
Moon’s remaining arguments on appeal are unavailing.  
First, the circuit court did not err in denying Moon’s motion to 
strike Dr. Kobayashi’s testimony at trial.  HRE Rule 705 
provides as follows:  
 Rule 705 Disclosure of facts or data underlying 
expert opinion.  The expert may test ify in terms of opinion 
or inferen ce and give the expert’ s reasons therefor without 
disclosing the underlying facts or data if the underlying 
facts or data have been disclosed in discovery proceedings.  
The expert may in any event be required to disclose t he 
underlying facts or data on cro ss-examination.  
 
In this case, the “underlying facts or data” 
supporting Dr. Kobayashi’s testimony were disclosed in discovery 
in the form of an autopsy report that was provided to the 
defense.38  HRE Rule 705.  This autopsy report satisfied the 
disclosure requirement because, as the circuit court found in its order denying Moon’s motion to dismiss with prejudice based 
on the State’s failure to disclose medical records from QMC, it 
“included . . . all relevant information that he gleaned from the [QMC] medical records.”  Therefore, the QMC records did not 
need to be separately produced.
39  Since there was no violation 
 
38  The autopsy report referenced the QMC medical records as a 
component of Moon’s “[r]ecent medical history.”   
 
39  To obtain the QMC medical records, Moon could have sought to 
subpoena them from QMC.  As noted by the circuit court, “[n]othing precluded 
the defense from issuing [a subpoena duces tecum] on August 6, 2018 [when 
Moon first requested the QMC medical records from the State], or soon 
thereafter, requesting the production of Mr. Feliciano’s records from the 
QMC.”    
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
40 
 of HRE Rule 705 here, the circuit court did not err in denying 
Moon’s motion to strike Dr. Kobayashi’s testimony.  40    
Second, the circuit court did not commit plain error 
by failing to instruct the jury on the issue of causation.  
Citing Abella, 145 Hawai‘ i at 560-61, 454 P.3d at 501-02, Moon 
argues that the circuit court should have instructed the jury on 
whether the removal of Feliciano’s organs was an independent 
intervening cause of death.  Abella is inapplicable to the facts 
of this case.  Unlike in Abella, where the defendant could point 
to several volitional acts, including surgery and the removal of 
medical support, as potential intervening causes, 145 Hawai‘ i at 
558, 454 P.3d at 499, here, Moon neither identifies any medical 
procedures that could have contributed to Feliciano’s death, nor 
argues that Feliciano’s death was related to the removal of medical support.  Rather, Moon contends that removal of 
Feliciano’s organs, which occurred after Feliciano’s death, 
could have been considered an intervening cause of death.  We find this argument unavailing and hold that the circuit court 
did not err by not instructing the jury on the issue of 
 
40  Even if a violation of HRE Rule 705 occurred, the circuit court’s 
refusal to strike Dr. Kobayashi’s testimony appears harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  Moon presents no evidence on appeal of a “reasonable 
possibility that the error contributed to [Moon’s] conviction.”  State v. 
Nichols, 111 Hawai‘ i 327, 329, 141 P.3d 974, 976 (2006). 
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
41 
 causation pursuant to HRS §§ 702-214 (2014), 215 (2014), and 216 
(2014).  
Third, Moon’s constitutional right to trial by jury 
was not violated by the excusal of four potential jurors of 
Korean ancestry.  The circuit court properly considered the 
State’s race-neutral justifications for its peremptory 
challenges and found “no evidence that the State exercised its 
peremptory challenges to exclude Korean jurors on the basis of the juror’s [sic] race.”
41  Upon reviewing the record, we agree 
that the defendant failed, upon hearing the State’s race-neutral explanations, to prove the State had committed purposeful 
discrimination.  See State v. Daniels, 109 Hawai‘ i 1, 6, 122 P.3d 
796, 801 (2005) (holding that “if a category-neutral explanation 
[for a peremptory challenge] is tendered, the trial court must 
then decide whether the opponent of the strike has proved 
purposeful discrimination”).  In this regard, the circuit court 
did not err.  
Fourth, the circuit court’s Tachibana colloquy was not 
deficient.  The record establishes that the court engaged in a true colloquy with Moon, demonstrating that he understood that 
he had a constitutional right to testify, that no one could 
 
41  Although listed under the heading “Conclusions of Law,” the 
circuit court’s statement regarding the absence of evidence of the State’s 
racial motive was a finding of fact, not a conclusion of law.   
  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
42 
 pr
event him from testifying, that if he chose to testify, the 
prosecutor would be allowed to cross-examine him, and that the 
decision to testify was his.  Under these circumstances, the 
circuit court did not err in concluding that Moon’s waiver of 
the right to testify was voluntary.   
Finally, Moon’s ineffective assistance of counsel 
claim lacks merit.  Given the strength and amount of evidence 
supporting that Moon shot Feliciano, defense counsel’s concession in opening statement that Moon was the shooter was 
plausibly tactical.  See Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 444, 848 
P.2d 966, 969 (1993) (“Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting 
the defendant’s case will not be subject to further scrutiny.”); 
cf. Florida v. Nixon, 543 U.S. 175, 176, (2004) (holding defense 
counsel’s failure to obtain defendant’s express consent to a strategy of conceding guilt did not automatically render 
counsel’s performance deficient).   We therefore reject Moon’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim.  
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
43 
 V. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court’s October 3, 2019 Amended Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence. 
Emmanuel G. Guerrero 
for appellant   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
     
 
  
       /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins  
  
   
Chad M. Kumagai for appellee    
               
  
 