          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-15-0000599 16-OCT-2017 09:19 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---O0O--­
DOUGLAS LEONE and PATRICIA A. PERKINS-LEONE,
as Trustees under that certain unrecorded Leone-Perkins
 
Family Trust Dated August 26, 1999, as amended,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
 
vs.
 
COUNTY OF MAUI, a political subdivision of the
State of Hawai' i; WILLIAM SPENCE, in his capacity as
Director of the Department of Planning of the County of Maui,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants.
 
SCAP-15-0000599
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-15-0000599; CIVIL NO. 07-1-0496(2))
 
OCTOBER 16, 2017
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
I. INTRODUCTION
 
Over seventeen years ago, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-
Appellees Douglas Leone and Patricia A. Perkins-Leone
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(collectively, the Leones) bought a beachfront lot in Makena,
 
Maui with the expressed intent of building a family house on it. 
Today the house has not yet been built, and the Leones contend
 that the County of Maui’s land use regulations and restrictions
 prevented them from doing so. In 2007, the Leones filed suit
 against Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants County of Maui and
 William Spence, in his capacity as Director of the Department of
 Planning of the County of Maui (collectively, the County),
 asserting, among other counts, that the County’s actions
 constituted a regulatory taking for which the Leones were
 entitled just compensation. On May 5, 2015, a jury delivered a
 verdict in favor of the County. 
This case requires this court to decide, inter alia,
 
whether the County’s land use regulations constituted a
 regulatory taking of the Leones’ property. 
But we do not decide
 
on a blank slate. The jury determined that the County did not
 deprive the Leones of economically beneficial use of their
 property. We conclude that there was evidence to support the
 jury’s verdict in favor of the County. As such, we affirm the
 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit’s (circuit court): 1) June
 1, 2015 judgment in favor of the County and against the Leones,
 2) August 5, 2015 order denying the Leones’ renewed motion for
 judgment as a matter of law or, in the alternative, motion for a
 new trial, and 3) August 5, 2015 order granting in part and
 
2
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
denying in part the County’s motion for costs. 
II. BACKGROUND
 
In 1996, the Maui County Council (county council) 
adopted Resolution No. 96-121, authorizing the Mayor to acquire 
nine beach lots at Palau' ea Beach in Makena, Maui for the 
creation of a public park. The county council noted that Palau'ea Beach was “one of the last undeveloped leeward beaches 
on Maui” and that the community supported the creation of a beach park. Because of budgetary constraints, the County was able to buy only two of the nine lots (Lots 18 and 19), and the seven remaining lots were sold to private individuals. 
The beach lots were subject to the following
 
regulations and designations:
 
1) The 1998 Kihei-Makena Community Plan (the community
 
plan), which designated the lots as “park” land. Maui Cty.,
 Kihei-Makena Community Plan 59 (1998). This designation “applies
 to lands developed or to be developed for recreational use.” Id. 
2) 
A Special Management Area (SMA) designation 
pursuant to the Hawai' i Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA). Any 
development within an SMA is prohibited unless the developer applies for and receives an SMA permit.
1 Hawai'i Revised 
1
 More  specifically,  under  the  CZMA,  “development”  does  not  include
 
the  “[c]onstruction  of  a  single-family  residence  that  is  not  part  of  a  larger
development.”   HRS  §  205A-22  (2001).   However,  if  the  “authority  finds  that
any  excluded  use  .  .  .  may  have  a  cumulative  impact,  or  a  significant
(continued...)
 
3
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 205A-21 and 205A-26 (2001). 
3) A “Hotel-Multifamily” zoning designation, which
 
permits, inter alia, the building of single-family residences. 
4) A Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions (the
declaration), which states, “[a] lot shall be used only for
 
single family residential purposes regardless of whether the
 applicable zoning would permit a more intensive or different
 use.”
  
In February 2000, the Leones bought one of the lots
 
(“Lot 15" or “the property”) for $3.7 million. The Leones
 initially relisted the property for $7 million and, in 2002, they
 received two offers for its purchase,
2
 which the Leones refused.  
Four years after buying Lot 15, the Leones hired a land
 
use planning firm, Munekiyo & Hiraga, Inc. (Munekiyo), to prepare
 a draft environmental assessment (DEA) of Lot 15 so that they
 could eventually apply for SMA and development permits to build a
 single-family residence. As part of the environmental assessment
 process, Munekiyo sent out an early consultation letter, seeking
 comments from governmental agencies and non-profits on the
 Leones’ proposed development of Lot 15. In this letter, Munekiyo
 
1(...continued)
environmental  or  ecological  effect  on  a  special  management  area,”  then  the
 
excluded  use,  including  the  construction  of  a  single-family  residence,  “shall
 
be  defined  as  ‘development’  for  the  purpose  of  this  part.”   HRS  §  205A-22.
 
2
 The  offers  were  for  $4.5  million  and  $4.6  million.
 
4
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
described the property and the development plan as follows:
 
The  parcel  is  located  within  the  “Urban”  district,  is
 
zoned  Hotel  “H-M”  by  the  County  of  Maui  and  is  designated  as
 
“Park”  under  the  Kihei-Makena  Community  Plan.   The  owner
 
intends  to  file  a  community  plan  amendment  and  change  in
zoning  application  with  the  County  of  Maui,  Department  of
Planning  for  review  by  the  Maui  Planning  Commission,  and
final  action  by  the  Maui  County  Council  to  achieve  land  use
consistency  for  the  parcel.   Since  a  community  plan
amendment  will  be  sought,  the  applicant  will  submit  a  Draft
Environmental  Assessment  (DEA)  in  accordance  with  Chapter
343,  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS).
 
On May 20, 2004, the County of Maui’s Department of
 
Planning (the Department) sent Munekiyo comments in response to
 
the early consultation letter. The Department initially noted
 that “the proposed action requires a Community Plan Amendment
 which therefore triggers Chapter 343, HRS.” The Department then
 provided the following comments:
 
1.   Provide  a  view  analysis  from  Makena-Keoneolo  Road.   The
 
analysis  should  assume  a  60%  buildable  area  and  40%  open
view  corridor  for  the  property  and  address  impacts  of  the
structure’s  massing.
2.   The  Erosion  Rate  for  the  Property  is  approximately  one
foot  per  year.   As  such,  the  shoreline  setback  area  is
calculated  as  60  feet  from  the  certified  shoreline.
 
3.   Lateral  access  along  the  shoreline  shall  be  provided.
 
4.   In  addition  to  the  applications  for  a  Community  Plan
Amendment  and  Change  in  Zoning,  the  proposed  action  requires
a  Special  Management  Area  assessment.
 
On June 3, 2004, the Leones directed Munekiyo to stop
 
work on the project. In an intra-office email, Munekiyo
 explained why the Leones instructed the firm to halt work on the
 project:
 
I  received  a  call  from  Doug  Leone  this  morning.   He
 
asked  that  we  stop  work  and  close  the  project.   He  felt  that
 
the  political  climate  is  much  too  difficult  to  be  seeking
any  land  use  entitlements  for  the  property.   He  was  not
 
willing  to  accommodate  a  40%  road  frontage  view  corridor  and
felt  that  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  just  hold  on  to  the
 
5
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
property  for  now.
 
In 2007, the Leones restarted the permitting process
 
and Munekiyo submitted the SMA assessment application to the
 
Department on September 28, 2007. One month later, the
 Department sent a letter declining to process the SMA application
 
with the following explanation:
 
The  subject  property  is  designated  “Park”  on  the
 
Kihei-Makena  Community  Plan  (Community  Plan).   The  proposed
Single-Family  dwelling  is  inconsistent  with  the  Community
Plan.   An  application  for  a  Community  Plan  Amendment  was  not
submitted  concurrent  with  the  subject  application.
 
Section  12-202-12(f)(5)  states  that  an  application
“cannot  be  processed  because  the  proposed  action  is  not
consistent  with  the  County  General  Plan,  Community  Plan,  or
Zoning,  unless  a  General  Plan,  Community  Plan,  or  Zoning
Application  for  an  appropriate  amendment  is  processed
concurrently  with  the  SMA  Permit  Application.”
 
The letter further explained that, in order for the Leones to
 
proceed, they would have to file a new application consistent
 with the community plan and with the appropriate submittals. 
A. Initial Circuit Court Proceedings
3
 
On November 19, 2007, the Leones filed a lawsuit 
against the County, alleging that, because of the County’s 
actions, the Leones were left with no economically viable use of their property. The Leones brought five counts against the County: 1) inverse condemnation pursuant to article I, section 20 of the Hawai' i Constitution, 2) inverse condemnation pursuant 
to the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States 
3
 The  Honorable  Joseph  E.  Cardoza  presided  over  the  initial  circuit
court  proceedings.
  
6
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Constitution, 3) equal protection violation pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
 
§ 1983, 4) substantive due process violation pursuant to 42
 U.S.C. § 1983, and 5) punitive damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. 
The Leones asserted that the County was required to provide the
 Leones with just compensation for their property, and that they
 were also entitled to punitive damages in the amount of $50
 million. 
The County filed a motion to dismiss, which the circuit
 
court granted on March 2, 2009. The circuit court determined
 that “there [were] effective remedies still available” to the
 Leones, such as proceeding with a new application with
 appropriate submissions, seeking an amendment to the community
 plan, or applying for a special management use permit pursuant to
 the provisions of HRS §§ 12-202-13 and 12-202-15. Because
 “effective remedies” were still available to the Leones, the
 circuit court concluded that the Leones had “failed to exhaust
 their administrative remedies.” As such, the circuit court ruled
 that the case was “not ripe for adjudication” and that the
 circuit court lacked jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
 case.
 
B. Initial ICA Proceedings
 
The Leones appealed this decision and on June 22, 2012,
 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) published an opinion
 
which vacated the circuit court’s judgment and remanded the case
 
7
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for further proceedings. See Leone v. Cty. of Maui, 128 Hawai' i 
183, 284 P.3d 956 (App. 2012)
 (Leone I). The ICA concluded that
 
the circuit court erred in determining that it lacked subject
 
matter jurisdiction because the Leones’ claims were not ripe for
 adjudication. Id. at 196, 284 P.3d at 969. The ICA specifically
 
determined that the Department’s letter, which declined to
 process the Leones’ SMA assessment application, satisfied the
 finality requirement for ripeness, and that the Leones were not
 required to seek a change in the community plan, which amounted
 to seeking a change in the existing law, before they could bring
 their inverse condemnation claims. Id. at 193-96, 284 P.3d at
 
966-69. 
Of import to the proceedings on remand, the ICA
 
commented in a footnote on the inconsistencies of the Maui County
 permitting process:
 
[T]he  proposed  use  - the  construction  of  single-family
 
residences  - is  not  considered  a  “development”  under  the
 
CZMA  unless  the  authority  finds  a  cumulative  impact  or
significant  environmental  effects.   HRS  §  205A-22.   Although
the  CZMA  does  not  expressly  require  consistency  for  proposed
land  uses  that  are  not  considered  “developments,”  the  Maui
 
County  Code  (MCC)  renders  the  Community  Plan  binding  on  all
county  officials.   MCC  2.80B.030(B)(2006).   Under  the
 
express  language  of  the  code,  neither  the  director  nor  the
Planning  Commission  may  approve  land  uses  that  are
inconsistent  with  the  Kihei-Makena  Community  Plan.   The
 
language  of  the  SMA  Rules  comports  with  this  outcome,
stating  in  mandatory  terms  that  “the  director  shall  make  a
 
determination  .  .  .  that  the  proposed  action  either:  .  .  .
(5)  Cannot  be  processed  because  the  proposed  action  is  not
consistent  with  the  county  general  plan,  community  plan,  and
zoning[.]”  SMA  Rule  12-202-12(f)  (emphasis  added).   In  any
 
case,  the  Director’s  decision  that  Appellants’  assessment
 
applications  could  not  be  processed  had  the  same  effect  as  a
determination  that  it  was  a  development.   If,  because  of  a
“cumulative  impact  or  a  significant  environmental  or
 
8
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ecological  effect,”  a  single-family  residence  is  considered
a  development,  then  an  SMA  permit  would  be  required.   If  a
 
permit  were  required,  it  could  not  be  approved  because  it
would  be  inconsistent  with  the  Community  Plan.   Thus,
 
regardless  of  the  denomination  of  the  assessment
application,  the  Director’s  determination  of  inconsistency
with  the  Community  Plan  precludes  further  processing  under
applicable  law.
 
Id. at 194 n.8, 284 P.3d at 967 n.8 (alterations in original)
 
(citations omitted). Accordingly, the ICA vacated and remanded
 the case to the circuit court for further proceedings. Id. at
 
196, 284 P.3d at 969.
4
 
C. Circuit Court Proceedings on Remand5
 
A jury trial was held from March 30 through May 5, 2015
 
on the same five counts.6   During opening statements, the Leones
 
showed the jury a tax map that depicted the Palau' ea Beach 
properties and explained who owned them and how they were
 developed:
 
And  these  are  the  present  owners  of  properties.   The
 
north  end  of  the  beach  you  have  Mr.  Sweeney  and  Mr.
Lambert’s  properties.   They  have  homes  on  them  today,  and
the  reason  why  they  have  homes  on  them,  we’ll  explore  in
more  detail.
 
This  is  the  Leones’  property.   It  has  a  path  on  it
leading  from  Old  Makena  Road  to  the  beach  that  is  used  every
day  by  members  of  the  public.
This  is  the  Larsons’  properties.   These  two  lots  are
 
owned  by  Bill  and  Nancy  Larson.   This  parcel,  Lot  52,  is  now
being  built  upon,  and  the  reasons  why  Mr.  Larson  got
 
4
 On  October  29,  2012,  the  County  applied  for  a  writ  of  certiorari
 
to  this  court,  which  was  denied  on  December  12,  2012.   Leone  v.  Ct y.  of  Maui,
No.  S
CWC-29696,  2012  WL  6200401  (Haw.  Dec.  12,  2012).
 
5
 The  Honorable  Peter  T.  Cahill  presided.
 
6
 Prior  to  the  start  of  the  jury  trial,  the  circuit  court  entered  an
 
order  granting  the  County’s  motion  for  summary  judgment  as  to  Count  V  of  the
Leones’  complaint,  which  asserted  a  claim  for  punitive  damages  pursuant  to  42
U.S.C.  §  1983.   As  such,  only  counts  I-IV  proceeded  to  the  jury  trial.
 
9
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
approval  to  build  on  his  property  we’ll  go  in  to  also.
These  two  lots  in  the  middle  of  the  beach  are  owned  by
the  County.   The  County  bought  them  for  beach-park  purposes
back  in  the  end  of  1999,  but  never  improved  the  property.  .
 
. .
 
This  property  is  owned  by  Mr.  Altman.   This  next
 
property  is  owned  by  an  associate  of  Mr.  Leone’s  named  Dan
Warmhoven,  Galando,  and  Luzco,  and  these  three  properties
are  on  the  rocky  point  at  the  south  end  of  the  beach,  and
they’re  improved  with  homes  on  them  today.
   
According to the Leones, the shifting political climate
 
on Maui was the reason why some landowners at Palau' ea Beach were 
allowed to build homes on their properties, while the Leones were
 
denied that same right:
 
Under  Mayor  Apana’s  administration,  some  of  the  other
lot  owners  were  able  to  get  those  approvals.   They  got  SMA
 
Assessment  Applications  filed.   The  exemptions  were  granted
by  Planning  Director  Min,  building  permits  were  issued,  and
they  went  forward  and  started  building  their  homes;  Lambert
and  Sweeney  among  others.
After  Mayor  Arakawa  took  office,  during  his  first
administration,  he  appointed  a  new  Planning  Director  named
Michael  Foley,  and  within  eight  days  after  taking  office,
Planning  Director  Foley  announced  there  would  be  no  more
approvals  for  homes  at  Palauea  Beach  and  stopped  granting
extensions  at  Palauea.
 
The Leones contended that it was at that time that they sought to
 obtain permits for building a single-family residence on their
 property, after Mayor Arakawa took office and the new Planning
 Director decided to stop development at Palau' ea Beach. The 
Leones further explained that after Mayor Arakawa took office for
 the second time, the policy shifted again, but it was too late
 for the Leones to build at that point:
 
Now,  after  Mayor  Arakawa  takes  office  for  the  second
time,  the  political  winds  shift  again,  and  beginning  in
2012,  the  current  Arakawa  administration  begins  granting
approvals  to  some  of  the  other  lot  owners  to  build.
The  problem  from  the  Leones’  perspective  is  that  in
September  of  2011,  there  was  a  40-year  storm  off  of  New
 
10
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Zealand,  w hich  came  up  over  the  coastal  dunes  and  into  their
property  and  left  debris  much  further  inland  than  it  had
been  before.   The  debris  line  creates  a  shoreline,  and  since
the  debris  line  came  so  much  farther  inland  than  it  had
 
before,  the  Leones  were  unable  to  build.7
 
As such, the Leones contended that the “effect of the County’s
 
actions was to deprive the Leones of all economically viable use
 of their land.” 
For its part, the County presented the following
 
opening argument:
 
The  County  submits  that  the  evidence  in  this  case  is
not  going  to  show  that  the  Leones  were  denied  the  right  to
build  on  their  lot.   The  evidence  in  this  case  is  going  to
show  that  they  did  not  want  to  go  through  the  same  process,
the  difficult  process  that  each  of  the  other  seven  lot
owners  out  here  who  have  single  family  residences  on  their
lot  went  through.   That’s  why  we’re  here  today.
 
. . . .
 
Regulations  are  not  inflexible.  We’ve  got  seven  other
lot  owners  out  there  who  are,  again,  living  in  very
luxurious  single  family  homes.   They  dealt  with  these
 
regulations.   They  built  on  the  lot.   There’s  a  guy  out
 
there  building  now.
 
The testimony during trial focused almost exclusively
 
on two distinct but interrelated inquiries: 1) whether the
 County’s regulations prevented the Leones from building a single-
family residence, and 2) if so, whether this deprived the Leones
 of economically beneficial use of their property. As to the
 
7
 The  Leones  contended  that  they  applied  for  a  shoreline 
certification  on  January  10,  2014,  but  that  they  were  informed  by  the
Department  of  Land  and  Natural  Resources  (DLNR)  of  this  court’s  recent  opinion
in  Diamond  v .  Dobbin,  1 32  Hawai'i  9,  29,  319  P.3d  1017,  1037  (2014),  which 
required  DLNR  to  “consider  historical  evidence”  in  making  its  shoreline 
determination.   The  Leones  contended  that,  because  of  the  2011  storm  and  this
court’s  decision  in  Diamond ,  the  shoreline  setback  on  the  property  would  have
overlapped  the  front  yard  setback,  leaving  no  buildable  area  on  the  property.  
At  this  point,  the  Leones  withdrew  their  shoreline  certification  application.   
11
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
first query, the circuit court ultimately instructed the jury
 
that the County’s actions had prevented the Leones from buildinga house on their property:
 
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  an  earlier  point  during  the
trial,  I  read  to  you  the  law  as  you  must  apply  in  this  case.
 
I’m  going  to  read  three  additional  portions  of  the  law  that
you  must  apply  to  the  facts  of  this  case.
The  first  instruction  to  you  is  as  follows:   Following
an  appeal  at  an  earlier  stage  of  this  case,  the  Hawaii
Intermediate  Court  of  Appeals  issued  an  opinion  entitled
Leone,  e t  al.,  vs.  County  of  Maui,  et  al.   That  opinion  is
the  law  of  this  case  and  is  binding  on  the  parties  and  this
Court.
 
Second  instruction.   In  the  Leone  opinion,  the
Intermediate  Court  of  Appeals  stated  as  follows:   The
 
language  of  the  SMA  Rules  state  in  mandatory  terms  that  the
Director  shall  make  a  determination  that  the  proposed  action
either  cannot  be  processed  -- actually  that’s  either,  five,
cannot  be  processed  because  the  proposed  action  is  not
consistent  with  the  County  General  Plan,  Community  Plan,  and
Zoning.   That’s  SMA  Rule  12-202-12,  subparagraph  F.
In  any  case,  the  Director’s  decision  that  the  Leones’
Assessment  Applications  could  not  be  processed  has  the  same
effect  as  a  determination  that  it  was  a  development.   If,
 
because  of  a  cumulative  impact  or  a  significant
environmental  or  ecological  effect,  a  single  family
residence  is  considered  a  development  then  an  SMA  permit
would  be  required.
If  a  permit  were  required,  it  could  not  be  approved
because  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  Community  Plan.
 
Thus,  regardless  of  the  denomination  of  the  Assessment
Application,  the  Director’s  determination  of  the
inconsistency  with  the  Community  Plan  precludes  further
processing  under  applicable  law.
The  final  instruction  at  this  point  of  the  case  is  as
follows:   Under  the  Maui  SMA  Rules,  the  Planning  Director
may  not  legally  process  an  application  for  an  SMA  exemption
for  a  land  use  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  Kihei-Makena
 
Community  Plan.
 
(Formatting altered.) These rulings shifted the parties’ focus
 to the second inquiry: whether the County’s regulations deprived
 the Leones of economically beneficial use of their property.
 
Both parties called expert witnesses to testify as to
 
the use and value of the Leones’ property. The County called Ted
 Yamamura (Yamamura), a real estate appraiser with over thirty­
12
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
five years of experience appraising Maui real property, to
 
testify on the value and use of the Leones’ property.8 At the
 
outset, Yamamura testified that he has done thousands of real
 estate appraisals on Maui over decades and that he determines the
 “best uses” for the real estate in doing an appraisal. Yamamura
 explained the test that he uses for determining highest and best
 use: “There’s a four-item test; that use must be legally
 permissible, physically possible, financially feasible, and
 maximally productive, which means that use will yield the highest
 value for that land.”
 
Counsel for the County then asked Yamamura about
 
investment use:
 
[COUNTY:]  Mr.  Yamamura,  let  me  start  by  asking,  what  is
meant  by  investment  in  land?
[YAMAMURA:]  It’s  the  use  of  land  as  an  investment  tool.   In
 
other  words,  people  would  buy  land,  hold  it  for  a  period  of
time,  and  as  it  increases  in  value  and  depending  on  the
buyer’s  strategy  and  financial  objectives,  sell  it  for
profit.
 
. . . .
  
[COUNTY:]  Do  you  have  an  opinion  as  to  whether  investment  is
a  use  of  land?
 
. . . .
 
[YAMAMURA:]  I  consider  investment  as  a  bona  fide  use  of
land.   It  happens  all  the  time.   People  by  [sic]  land,  hold
on  to  it;  after  it  appreciates  over  time,  people  sell  it  for
profit.   I  think  that’s  a  bona  fide  land  use.
 
. . . .
  
8
  Prior  to  trial,  the  Leones  filed  a  motion  to  exclude  or  limit
 
Yamamura’s  testimony  on  the  basis  that  he  was  not  qualified  to  opine  on
“economically  viable  use.”   The  circuit  court  granted  in  part  and  denied  in
part  this  motion,  explaining  that  Yamamura  could  not  testify  on  the  current
value  of  the  property.
 
13
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[COUNTY:]  In  your  opinion,  Lot  15  at  Palauea  –- based  on
 
your  analysis  of  Lot  15  at  Palauea,  does  it  have  potential
use  as  an  investment?
 
. . . .
 
[YAMAMURA:]  Absolutely,  yes.
[COUNTY:]  And  looking  at  the  first  factor  of  your  analysis,
which  is  legally  permissible,  why  do  you  draw  that
conclusion  based  on  that  particular  factor?
 
. . . .
 
[YAMAMURA:]  Legally  permissible.   It’s  –- the  underlying
 
Zoning  of  that  lot  is  HM.
[COUNTY:]  Meaning?
[YAMAMURA:]  Hotel.
[COUNTY:]  Hotel.
[YAMAMURA:]  But  there’s  a  conflict  in  the  Community  Plan,
but  if  –- under  the  context  of  legally  permissible,  if  the
issue  of  that  conflict  can  be  mitigated,  then  we  can  look  at
it  as  being  a  legally  permissible  use  in  the  context  of
highest  and  best  use  because  that  issue  or  that  conflict  can
be  mitigated.
 
The circuit court overruled the Leones’ objections to this
 
testimony. 
Rick Tsujimura (Tsujimura), a real estate attorney,
 
testified as an expert witness for the Leones. Tsujimura opined
 that the inconsistences between the community plan and the zoning
 requirements left the Leones “deprived of all economically
 beneficial use for that lot.” Tsujimura explained:
 
The  Community  Plan  is  designated  park.   On  the  Zoning  it’s
 
hotel,  multi-family.   So  as  you  can  see,  there’s  an
inconsistency  between  those  two.   They  don’t  line  up.
The  original  intent  of  the  State  Plan,  the  State  land
use,  the  General  Plan,  the  Community  Plan  was  for  all  of
this  to  line  up  and,  consequently,  what  has  happened  is
we’re  in  a  situation,  because  of  this  inconsistency,  when
the  Leones  come  in  for  an  SMA  permit  –- Assessment
 
Application,  part  of  the  law,  both  at  the  State  level  and
Chapter  205A  and  the  County  SMA  law  in  Chapter  12-202-12,  it
requires  that  these  pieces  align.   And  when  they  don’t,  when
they’re  not  the  same,  these  all  end  up  causing  the
Assessment  Application  to  be  denied.
And  this  is  the  problem  for  the  landowner  right  now.
 
Because  of  this  inconsistency,  this  prevents  the  Leones  from
 
14
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
doing  anything  to  start  the  process  to  do  anything  with  the
lot,  no  matter  what  they  wanted  to  do  because  they  can’t  get
past  this  inconsistency.
So  what  happens  is  you’re  basically  left  with  a  piece
of  property  that’s  zoned  for  hotel  family  -- multi-family,
Community  Plan  park,  and  because  of  that,  you  can’t  do
anything.   And  so  there’s  no  economically  beneficial  use
that  they  can  use  on  that  lot  because  of  this.
 
On cross-examination, Tsujimura explained why he did
 
not consider the property to have any investment value:
 
[TSUJIMURA:]  Investment  value  is  premised  upon  an  ability  to
use  the  property,  and  my  opinion,  as  I’ve  articulated,  is
that  because  of  the  inconsistency  between  the  Community  Plan
and  the  Zoning,  there  is  no  ability  to  use  the  property.
So  if  you’re  asking  me  from  an  investment  perspective,
I  would  say  in  this  particular  case,  it  would  be  zero
because  you  could  never  harvest  that  value  given  the  current
situation.
 
[COUNTY:]  So  would  you  disagree  with  me,  then,  that  there’s
potential  economic  benefit  in  the  ownership  and  possession
of  a  piece  of  real  estate?
[TSUJIMURA:]  In  a  general  sense,  yes.   But  specifically  to
 
this  particular  property,  no.
[COUNTY:]  So  are  you  saying  there’s  no  economic  benefit  in
the  Leones’  lot  as  a  vehicle  for  an  –- as  an  investment?
 
[TSUJIMURA:]  Not  in  the  current  situation  because  of  the
inconsistency.
[COUNTY:]  Really?  Are  you  familiar  with  the  Doug  Schatz’  lot
 
at  Palauea?
 
[TSUJIMURA:]  No.
[COUNTY:]  Are  you  aware  that  after  Doug  Schatz  got  the  very
same  return  –- the  same  letter  returning  his  application
with  the  same  language  as  the  Leones’  lot,  that  he  turned
around  and  sold  that  property  to  somebody  named  Altman  who’s
got  a  house  on  it  today?
[COUNSEL  FOR  LEONES]  Objection;  relevance  and  beyond  the
 
scope.
[THE  COURT:]  Sustained.
 
Also on cross-examination, the County examined
 
Tsujimura about whether the Leones’ property could be used for
 
other purposes, to which Tsujimura conceded that the property
 could potentially be used for commercial purposes:
 
[COUNTY:]  Mr.  Tsujimura,  you  were  asked  whether  the  Leones
could  engage  in  commercial  sales  of  concessions  on  their
lot,  and  I  believe  you  acknowledged  that  under  the  hotel
district  zoning,  that  they  could,  in  fact,  operate  a  park;
 
15
           
 
          
         
         
  
 
    uses in Residential Districts,”     
     
     
        
         
         
       
       
     
         
        
           
        
          
   
          
           
          
             
         
 
           
          
          
         
 
        
   
 
           
       
  
   
            
      
         
         
          
           
         
        
         
          
          
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
correct?
 [TSUJIMURA:] Yes.
[COUNTY:] And then you said that they can only engage in
noncommercial uses under the hotel zoning, but I’m going to
read to you what the hotel zoning ordinance actually says.
And  it  says, “Permitted  u
 ses:” –- this  is  19.14.020  –­
“Within  Hotel  Districts,  the  following  uses  shall  be
permitted:   Any  use  permitted  in  residential  and  apartment
 
districts.”
 
Then  when  you  go  to  19.08.020,  which  says, “Permitted
 
wh
at it actually says, Mr.
 
Tsujimura, is, “Parks and playgrounds, noncommercial:
Certain commercial, amusement, and refreshment sale
activities may be permitted when under the supervision of
the government agency in charge of the park or playground.”
Which means a private land owner can engage in these
commercial activities, but it’s just subject to permitting
requirements and regulations under the agency, in this
instance, the County; isn’t that correct?
[TSUJIMURA:] I agree with you, Mr. Corporation Counsel. It
 should have been under the supervision of the County.
[COUNTY:] All right. And so, in fact, the answer to the
question, which you said, as to whether commercial uses
would be allowed and to which you answered no, your answer
is actually incorrect; right?
[TSUJIMURA:] Well, my answer was that it would be subject to
operation by the County.
[COUNTY:] And that’s where your answer was incorrect.
Because the ordinance which I actually just read to you said
under the –- wait. You got to let me finish –- says under
the supervision of the County, not the operation. That’s
 different; right?
[TSUJIMURA:] Except if you –- as you read it –- it went
 further to say that the agency would have control over the
park, which suggests that it’s who controls the park. If
 the Leones control the park, it’s not controlled by the
Parks Department.
[COUNTY:] The word “control” didn’t appear anywhere in what
 I just read –­[TSUJIMURA:] Supervise.
[COUNTY:] –- so I’m going to read it again. There’s a
 difference between the word “supervise” and the word
 “control.” Correct?
 [TSUJIMURA:] There could be.
[COUNTY:] . . . Isn’t what that says, is that the Leones can
engage in refreshment sales and certain commercial
activities as long as they get the proper permitting from
the Department of Planning? Isn’t that what that says?
[TSUJIMURA:] If you can get the proper permitting. If they
intentionally try to put any sort of hard scape [sic] on it,
it would lead to, again, this problem with the SMA.
[COUNTY:] So your answer to the question originally was
incorrect because a private land owner can, in fact, engage
in commercial sale activities on their lot as long as they
get the correct permits from the County of Maui; isn’t that
correct?
 [TSUJIMURA:] If it’s supervised by the County.
 
16
           
   
       
  
         
           
          
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . . .
 
[COUNTY:] So subject to permitting and supervision, it’s
allowed, isn’t it?
[TSUJIMURA:] Yes, if you can get an SMA assessment through.
 
Dr. William H. Whitney (Dr. Whitney), a real estate
 
economist, also testified as an expert witness for the Leones. 
As part of his evaluation of the property’s economically
 beneficial use, Dr. Whitney created a speculative real estate
 investment model for Lot 15, which allowed him to predict the
 profit value the Leones lost because they were not allowed to
 develop their property. Dr. Whitney summarized his findings to
 the jury, and estimated that, if the Leones had been allowed to
 develop their property, they would have realized a value upwards
 of $19 million by 2017. 
On cross-examination, counsel for the County examined
 
Dr. Whitney about the possibility of using the Leones’ property
 for commercial park uses. Dr. Whitney testified that one of the
 main factors in determining whether the Leones’ property retained
 economically beneficial use in a commercial context is whether
 commercial activity is economically feasible. Dr. Whitney
 explained that he did not fully study whether commercial
 activities were economically feasible, because he was operating
 under the assumption that commercial activities were not legally
 permitted on the Leones’ property:
 
[COUNTY:] Okay. Let’s assume –- and I’m sure you can do
 
this. Let’s assume that your opinion on whether parks and
playgrounds and certain commercial activities are
 
17
           
       
        
  
   
          
        
 
     
       
  
          
       
     
    [COUNTY:] Did you do any exploration on Maui to determine
how amusement and concession refreshment actually work on
the beaches and parks in Maui?
[WHITNEY:] No. No investigation.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I R
 EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
permissible at the Palauea lots are incorrect.
Let’s assume they are permitted as reflected in the
applicable Zoning Codes.
And  then  let’s  talk  about  the  second  component  of  your
analysis,  which  is  the  financial  feasibility.   And  I  handed
 
you  what  was  marked  as  -- what  is  marked  as  P-241,  which  is
in  evidence,  and  your  testimony  yesterday  was  that,  even  if
you  could  engage  in  these  activities,  they’re  not  going  to
cover  the  property  taxes,  and  you  said  that  in  2014  the
property  taxes  were  $68,103.63.
So  my  question  to  you  was,  did  you  do  any  sort  of
analysis  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  types  of  activities
we’re  talking  about,  recreational  or  amusement,  would,  in
fact,  be  able  to  generate  $68,103.63,  per  annum,  to  cover
the  property  tax?
 
. . . .
 
[WHITNEY:]  I  did  not  do  any  analysis.   I  relied  on  my
judgment,  as  one  who  has  provided  leasing  advisory  services
over  the  years  and  done  park  feasibility  studies,  and  I
would  say,  in  my  judgment,  it’s  very  unlikely  that  that  kind
of  activity  at  that  location,  on  my  judgement,  wouldn’t
cover  the  property  taxes  and  perhaps  the  other  costs  that
the  Leones  would  face;  the  provision  of  utilities,  security,
and  other  activities  that  might  be  necessary  to  keep  the
property  in  good  standing.
 
. . . .
  
. . . .
 
[COUNTY:] Did you ask anybody on Maui, running that type of
concession, how much they’re able to generate annually in
income?
 [WHITNEY:] No.
[COUNTY:] Renting surfboards, renting kayaks, selling
refreshments on crowded beaches; you didn’t ask anybody
that, did you?
[WHITNEY:] No.
 
Douglas and Patricia Leone also testified at trial. 
Both testified on direct examination that they bought the
 
property with the expectation of building a single-family home on
 it. Patricia testified that her family “love[d] Maui, and we
 thought it would just be great to build a home where our family
 
18
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
could come for years –- you know, for years and be together.” 
Douglas similarly testified that he bought the property because he “wanted a dream home for my wife, our four children, and eventually our grandchildren.” On cross-examination, Patricia testified that she and her husband, as trustees of the Leone Family Trust, owned eight residential properties in addition to Lot 15 at Palau' ea Beach. Patricia also acknowledged on cross-
examination that one of the purposes of the trust was to “invest and reinvest in real estate.” Neither of the Leones could recall at trial having relisted Lot 15 for $7 million soon after buying it or receiving and refusing offers for it. 
At the close of evidence, the Leones moved for judgment
 
as a matter of law on Counts I and II -- the inverse condemnation
 claims.
9 The circuit court denied this motion. 
On May 1, 2015, the parties appeared before the court
 
to settle jury instructions. 
Of relevance to the issues raised
 
on appeal, the Leones requested the following three jury
 instructions, which the circuit court either modified or refused.
 
First, the Leones requested a jury instruction
 
(proposed Jury Instruction No. 51) on economically beneficial
 use:
 
9
 During  the  trial,  the  Leones  voluntarily  dismissed  Count  IV,  the
 
substantive  due  process  claim,  and  Count  III  to  the  extent  that  it  alleged  a
denial  of  equal  protection.   As  such,  the  only  claims  remaining  for  the  jury
to  determine  were  the  inverse  condemnation  claims.
 
19
           
       
        
        
    
  
        
       
      
        
        
         
       
      
       
           
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Land has economically beneficial use, if, under the
applicable regulations, all three of the following are true:
(1) t
here is a permissible use for the land,   other  than
leaving  the  land  in  its  natural  state, 
(2) the land is
physically adaptable for such use and (3) there is a demand
for such use in the reasonably near future.
 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court modified this jury
 
instruction (Jury Instruction No. 22) over the Leones’ objection,
 deleting the underlined phrase “other than leaving the land in
 its natural state[.]” The circuit court explained that it was
 deleting that phrase because “this is a factual issue and better
 left for argument[.]”
 
Second, the Leones requested the following jury
 
instruction (proposed Jury Instruction No. 73) on the burden of
 production:
 
Plaintiffs initially bear the burden to produce
evidence that they lack economically beneficial use of their
property. Once Plaintiffs have produced such evidence, the
burden of production shifts to the Defendants. To meet
 their burden of production on a proposed economically
beneficial use, Defendants must produce evidence of
reasonable probability that the land is both physically
adaptable for such use and that there is a demand for such
use in the reasonably near future.
 
However, the circuit court refused that jury instruction. 
Instead, the circuit court issued the following jury instruction
 on burdens (Jury Instruction No. 9): “Plaintiffs have the burden
 of proving by a preponderance of the evidence every element of
 each claim that plaintiffs assert. Defendants have the burden of
 proving by a preponderance of the evidence every element of each
 
20
           
           
          
        
       
       
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
affirmative defense that defendants assert.”10 The circuit court
 
explained why it modified the Leones’ proposed jury instruction:
 
[T]his is an issue to be determined by the Court and has
been determined by the Court in terms of the motions for
directed verdict and judgment by the plaintiffs and [to]
instruct the jury on burdens of production would
unnecessarily and potentially confuse the jury and suggest
to them that the burden of proof has somehow shifted.
Even  though  the  words  burden  of  production,  this  is  a
very  complex  area  even  for  evidence  professors  at  law
school,  and  to  now  start  to  discuss  all  of  these  issues,  I
think,  would  be  unduly  confusing  to  the  jurors,  and  also  I
am  not  sure  that  it’s  –- while  it  may  be  an  accurate
reflection  of  what  the  law  is,  it’s  not  an  accurate
reflection  of  what  has  occurred  in  this  case,  based  on  my
rulings.
 
Lastly, the Leones requested the following jury 
instruction (proposed Jury Instruction No. 71) regarding the
 
effect of the declaration of covenants and restrictions:
 
Plaintiffs’  lot  is  subject  to  a  declaration  of
covenants  and  restrictions  (“DCR”)  that  restricts  what
Plaintiffs  may  do  with  their  land.   Under  the  DCR,
Plaintiffs  may  use  their  land  only  for  single-family
residential  purposes.   You  may  consider  the  DCR  when
determining  whether  Plaintiffs  have  any  economically
beneficial  use  of  their  land.
 
The circuit court refused this instruction. 
The circuit court also issued the following relevant
 
jury instruction:
 
• Jury Instruction No. 23: 
There  is  a  difference  between  economically  beneficial
use  and  value.   A  property  that  has  value  may  not  have
“economically  beneficial  use.”   To  determine  whether  a
 
defendant  denied  Plaintiffs  economically  beneficial  use  of
their  property,  you  may  consider  whether  Plaintiffs  were
able  to  use  their  property  in  an  economically  beneficial
 
way.
  
10
 Additionally,  Jury  Instruction  No.  10  explained  that  “[t]o  ‘prove
by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence’  means  to  prove  that  something  is  more
 
likely  so  than  not  so.   It  means  to  prove  by  evidence  which,  in  your  opinion,
convinces  you  that  something  is  more  probably  true  than  not  true.”
  
21
           
 
On May 5, 2015, the jury returned a verdict in favor of
 
the County, concluding that the County had not deprived the
 
Leones of economically beneficial use of their land. On June 1,
 2015, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of the County
 and against the Leones.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On August 5, 2015, the circuit court: 1) denied the
 
Leones’ June 10, 2015 renewed motion for judgment as a matter of
 law and, alternatively, motion for a new trial, and 2) granted in
 part and denied in part the County’s June 12, 2015 motion for
 taxation of costs, awarding the County $40,522.72 in costs. 
The Leones appealed and challenged the County’s expert
 
testimony, certain jury instructions, the circuit court’s denial
 of the Leones’ motion for judgment as a matter of law, and the
 award of costs to the County. The County cross-appealed and
 filed an application for transfer of the appeal to this court,
 which was granted on June 29, 2016. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Expert Witness Qualifications and Testimony
 
[I]t  is  not  necessary  that  the  expert  witness  have  the
highest  possible  qualifications  to  testify  about  a
particular  manner  [sic],  .  .  .  but  the  expert  witness  must
have  such  skill,  knowledge,  or  experience  in  the  field  in
question  as  to  make  it  appear  that  his  opinion  or
inference-drawing  would  probably  aid  the  trier  of  fact  in
arriving  at  the  truth.  .  .  .   Once  the  basic  requisite
qualifications  are  established,  the  extent  of  an  expert's
knowledge  of  subject  matter  goes  to  the  weight  rather  than
the  admissibility  of  the  testimony.
 
“‘Whether  expert  testimony  should  be  admitted  at  trial
rests  within  the  sound  discretion  of  the  trial  court  and
 
22
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
will  n ot  be  overturned  unless  there  is  a  clear  abuse  of
 
discretion.’”
 
Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai' i 332, 352, 152 
P.3d 504, 524 (2007) (alterations in original) (citations
 
omitted) (quoting 
Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai' i 336, 
351, 944 P.2d 1279, 1294 (1997)).
 
B. Jury Instructions
 
When  jury  instructions,  or  the  omission  thereof,  are
at  issue  on  appeal,  the  standard  of  review  is  whether,  when
read  and  considered  as  a  whole,  the  instructions  given  are
prejudicially  insufficient,  erroneous,  inconsistent,  or
misleading.   Erroneous  instructions  are  presumptively
harmful  and  are  a  ground  for  reversal  unless  it
affirmatively  appears  from  the  record  as  a  whole  that  the
error  was  not  prejudicial.
 
Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 Hawai' i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 
(2001) (quoting
 Hirahara v. Tanaka, 87 Hawai' i 460, 462-63, 959 
P.2d 830, 832-33 (1998)).
 C. Judgment as a Matter of Law
 
It  is  well  settled  that  a  trial  court's  rulings  on
motions  for  judgment  as  a  matter  of  law  are  reviewed  d e
 
novo.
 
W
hen  we  review  the  granting  of  a  [motion
for  judgment  as  a  matter  of  law],  we  apply  the
same  standard  as  the  trial  court.
 
A  [motion  for  judgment  as  a  matter  of  law]
may  be  granted  only  when  after  disregarding
conflicting  evidence,  giving  to  the  non-moving
party's  evidence  all  the  value  to  which  it  is
legally  entitled,  and  indulging  every  legitimate
inference  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  evidence
in  the  non-moving  party's  favor,  it  can  be  said
that  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  a  jury
verdict  in  his  or  her  favor.
 
Miyamoto  v.  Lum,  104  Hawai'i  1,  6-7,  84  P.3d  509,  514-15
(2004)  (internal  citations  omitted). 
Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu, 110 Hawai' i 248, 251, 
131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) (brackets in original).
 
23
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Before addressing the arguments, a brief summary of the 
relevant law on takings provides useful context.
 
A. The Takings Clause
  
The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
provides that private property shall not “be taken for public 
use, without just compensation.” This -- the Takings Clause -­is made applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Murr v. Wisconsin
, 137 S. Ct. 1933, 1942 (2017). 
Similarly, article 1, section 20 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides, “[p]rivate property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without just compensation.” 
The United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court) has 
established two discrete categories of government action as compensable: 
physical and regulatory takings. Lucas v. S.C. 
Coastal Council
, 505 U.S. 1003, 1015 (1992). The first are 
“regulations that compel the property owner to suffer a physical ‘invasion’ of his property.” 
Id. The second are “regulation[s 
that] den[y] all economically beneficial or productive use of land.” 
Id.
; see also Pub. Access Shoreline Haw. v. Haw. Cty. 
Planning Comm’n, 79 Hawai' i 425, 451-52, 903 P.2d 1246, 1272-73 
(1995) (“A regulatory taking occurs when the government’s application of the law to a particular landowner denies all economically beneficial use of his or her property without 
24
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
providing compensation.”). The relevant inquiry in the current
 
case is whether a regulatory taking occurred. 
The Supreme Court in Lucas explained that a 
regulatory taking occurs when the “regulation denies all
 economically beneficial or productive use of land.” 505 U.S. at
 1015 (emphasis added). 
The Supreme Court explained that
 
“regulations that leave the owner of land without economically
 beneficial or productive options for its use -- typically, as
 here, by requiring land to be left substantially in its natural
 state -- carry with them a heightened risk that private property
 is being pressed into some form of public service . . . .” Id.
 
at 1018. 
More recently, in Palazzolo v. Rhode Island, 533 U.S.
 
606 (2001), the Supreme Court considered whether a taking could
 still occur even though the regulation did not deprive a
 landowner of all beneficial use of land. Palazzolo owned a
 waterfront parcel of land in Rhode Island and almost all of it
 was designated as coastal wetlands under state law. 
Id. at 611.
 
Because of this designation, Palazzolo’s development proposals
 
for portions of his property were rejected by the Rhode Island
 Coastal Resources Management Council (the Council), and Palazzolo
 sued, claiming that the Council’s application of its wetland
 regulations constituted a taking without just compensation. Id.
 
In Palazzolo, the Supreme Court expanded the rule
 
25
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
established in Lucas when it stated:
 
Where  a  regulation  places  limitations  on  land  that  fall
short  of  eliminating  all  economically  beneficial  use,  a
taking  nonetheless  may  have  occurred,  depending  on  a  complex
of  factors  including  the  regulation’s  economic  effect  on  the
landowner,  the  extent  to  which  the  regulation  interferes
with  reasonable  investment-backed  expectations,  and  the
character  of  the  government  action.
 
Id. at 617 (citing Penn Cent. Transp. Co. v. City of New York,
 
438 U.S. 104, 124 (1978)). Utilizing this test, the Supreme
 Court concluded that Palazzolo was left with more than a “token
 interest” in his land because of the regulations. Id.
 at 631. 
The Supreme Court explained that, while some portions of
 Palazzolo’s property could not be developed because of the
 regulations, an upland portion of the property could be improved
 and actually retained $200,000 in development value even under
 the State’s wetlands regulations. Id. at 630-31. 
As such, the
 
Supreme Court concluded that a “regulation permitting a landowner
 to build a substantial residence on an 18-acre parcel does not
 leave the property ‘economically idle.’” Id. at 631 (quoting
 
Lucas, 505 U.S. at 1019).
 
As the Supreme Court most recently noted, adjudication
 
of regulatory takings cases “requires a careful inquiry informed
 by the specifics of the case.” Murr, 137 S. Ct. at 1943. 
However, “[i]n all instances, the analysis must be driven ‘by the
 purpose of the Takings Clause, which is to prevent the government
 from forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in
 all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a
 
26
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
whole.’” Id. (quoting Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 617-18).
 
With this framework in mind, we turn to the arguments
 
on appeal. 
B.	 The Leones’ Arguments on Appeal
 
The Leones present four points for our review. 
The
 
Leones contend that the circuit court erred in: 1) denying the
 
Leones’ motion for judgment as a matter of law, 2) allowing
 Yamamura to testify that “investment use” is an “economically
 beneficial use” of land, 3) modifying Jury Instruction No. 22,
 refusing proposed Jury Instruction No. 73 and replacing it with
 Jury Instruction No. 9, and refusing proposed Jury Instruction
 No. 71, and 4) awarding costs to the County.
 
We address the second and third points first, as their
 
resolution is helpful in considering the Leones’ renewed motion
 for judgment as a matter of law.
 
1.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
allowing Yamamura to testify.
 
The Leones take issue with the following testimony from
 
the County’s expert witness, real estate appraiser, Yamamura:
 
[COUNTY:]  Do  you  have  an  opinion  as  to  whether  investment  is
a  use  of  land?
 
. . . .
 
[YAMAMURA:]  I  consider  investment  as  a  bona  fide  use  of
land.   It  happens  all  the  time.   People  by  [sic]  land,  hold
on  to  it;  after  it  appreciates  over  time,  people  sell  it  for
profit.   I  think  that’s  a  bona  fide  land  use.
 
. . . .
  
[COUNTY:]  In  your  opinion,  Lot  15  at  Palauea  –- based  on
 
27
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
your  analysis  of  Lot  15  at  Palauea,  does  it  have  potential
use  as  an  investment?
 
. . . .
 
[YAMAMURA:]  Absolutely,  yes.
 
The Leones argue that the circuit court abused its discretion in
 
allowing Yamamura to testify on investment use for two reasons. 
First, the Leones argue that “investment use” is not an
 economically beneficial use as a matter of law. Second, the
 Leones argue that Yamamura was not qualified to opine on
 “economically beneficial use.” 
a. Testimony on investment use
 
The Leones contend that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in allowing the County to introduce evidence that
 
“investment use” is an economically beneficial use of land. 
While there is no Hawai' i legal authority on this 
point, there is case law from other jurisdictions that discusses this issue. 
For instance, in Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. 
v. City of Monterey
, 95 F.3d 1422, 1425 (9th Cir. 1996) (Del
 
Monte Dunes I), aff’d, 526 U.S. 687 (1999), the City of Monterey
 persistently denied Del Monte Dunes’ development permits for
 thirty-seven ocean-front acres in which Del Monte Dunes sought to
 build a residential complex. Del Monte Dunes sued the City, and
 the jury found that the City’s actions denied Del Monte Dunes
 equal protection and were an unconstitutional taking. Id. On
 
appeal before the Ninth Circuit, the City argued, inter alia,
 
28
           
our focus is primarily on
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that it was entitled to a judgment as a matter of law on both the
 
equal protection and inverse condemnation claims. Id. 
In arguing that the City had not denied Del Monte Dunes
 
of all economically viable use of its property, the City noted
 that Del Monte Dunes sold the property to the State of California
 for $800,000 more than it originally paid for it. Id. at 1432. 
The Ninth Circuit was not persuaded by this argument, noting that
 “[f]ocusing the economically viable use inquiry solely on market
 value or on the fact that a landowner sold his property for more
 than he paid could inappropriately allow external economic
 forces, such as inflation, to affect the takings inquiry.” Id.
 
at 1432-33 (emphasis added). 
Then, the Ninth Circuit explained
 
that “[a]lthough the value of the subject property is relevant to
 the economically viable use inquiry, use, not value” and that “the mere fact that there is one willing
 buyer of the subject property, especially where that buyer is the
 government, does not, as a matter of law, defeat a taking claim.” 
Id. at 1433 (emphases added). 
Thus, Del Monte Dunes I established that, while
 
property value should not be considered to the exclusion of other
 factors, it is still a relevant factor in the economically viable
 use analysis. See also MacLeod v. Santa Clara Cty.
, 749 F.2d
 
541, 547 n.7 (9th Cir. 1984) (“Holding property for investment
 purposes can be a ‘use’ of property.”); Fla. Rock Indus., Inc. v.
 
29
           
a “qualified real estate dealer” testified that the property had
 
“fair market value subject to the regulation” because there were
 “investors willing to forego immediate income in hope of long­term gain” and concluding that this was evidence of “sufficient
 remaining use of the property to forestall a determination that a
 taking had occurred”); City of San Antonio v. El Dorado Amusement
 Co., 195 S.W.3d 238, 245 (Tex. App. 2006) (“A restriction denies
 a landowner all economically viable use of the property or
 totally destroys the value of the property if the restriction
 renders the property valueless.”).
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
United States, 791 F.2d 893, 902-03 (Fed. Cir. 1986) (noting that
 
In the present case, Yamamura testified that the
 
Leones’ property had “investment use” or, in other words, that
 the property had value because the Leones could hold on to
 property, wait until it increased in value, and sell it for a
 profit. While 
Del Monte Dunes I established that property value
 
should not be the sole focus in an economically viable use
 inquiry, the Ninth Circuit did not foreclose the admissibility of
 such evidence. In fact, the Ninth Circuit noted that “the value
 of the subject property is relevant.” Del Monte Dunes I
, 95 F.3d
 
at 1433. Thus, guidance from other jurisdictions suggests that
 testimony on investment use is appropriate in takings cases.
 
Additionally, the circuit court took mitigating
 
measures in order to ensure that the jury did not improperly give
 
30
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the “value” evidence more weight than it was legally entitled. 
For example, Jury Instruction No. 23 instructed the jury that: 
There  is  a  difference  between  economically  beneficial
use  and  value.   A  p roperty  that  has  value  may  not  have
“economically  b eneficial  use.”   To  determine  whether  a
 
defendant  denied  Plaintiffs  economically  beneficial  use  of
their  property,  you  may  consider  whether  Plaintiffs  were
able  to  use  their  property  in  an  economically  beneficial
 
way.
  
(Emphasis added.) This instruction specifically explained to the
 jury that the determination of whether property has any
 economically beneficial use does not turn on whether the property
 has value. 
As such, we cannot conclude that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in allowing testimony on investment use.
 
b. Testimony on economically beneficial use
 
The Leones also argue that Yamamura was not qualified
 
to opine on “economically beneficial use” and that the trial
 
court abused its discretion in permitting him to testify on that
 topic. According to the Leones, Yamamura “is an appraiser, not
 an economist, and his testimony should have been limited to the
 field of real estate appraisal.” 
Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702 (1993) 
provides:
 
If  scientific,  technical,  or  other  specialized
knowledge  will  assist  the  trier  of  fact  to  understand  the
evidence  or  to  determine  a  fact  in  issue,  a  witness
qualified  as  an  expert  by  knowledge,  skill,  experience,
training,  or  education  may  testify  thereto  in  the  form  of  an
opinion  or  otherwise.   In  determining  the  issue  of
assistance  to  the  trier  of  fact,  the  court  may  consider  the
trustworthiness  and  validity  of  the  scientific  technique  or
mode  of  analysis  employed  by  the  proffered  expert.
 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRE Rule 702 commentary explains that “[t]he rule liberalizes the
 
traditional common law stricture limiting expert testimony to
 some science, profession, business or occupation . . . beyond the
 ken of the average layman” and that, now, “Rule 702 requires only
 that the testimony be of assistance to the trier of fact.” HRE
 Rule 702 cmt. (1993) (ellipsis in original) (quotations and
 
citations omitted).
  
In line with this rule, Hawai' i courts have noted that 
“[i]t is not necessary that the expert witness have the highest 
possible qualifications to testify about a particular [matter;]” instead, “the expert witness must have such skill, knowledge, or experience in the field in question as to make it appear that his opinion or inference-drawing would probably aid the trier of fact in arriving at the truth.” 
Klink, 113 Hawai' i at 352, 152 P.3d 
at 524 (quoting State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 382, 419 n.37, 910 
P.2d 695, 732 n.37 (1996)). Additionally, “the determination of whether or not a witness is qualified as an expert in a particular field is largely within the discretion of the trial judge and, as such, will not be upset absent a clear abuse of discretion.” State v. Torres, 60 Haw. 271, 277, 589 P.2d 83, 87 
(1978). 
Yamamura testified to the following: 
he has been a 
real estate appraiser for almost forty years, and that he has
 
32
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
been working for his current Maui-based firm, ACM Consultants, 
Inc., for approximately thirty-five years; he has been a licensed real estate appraiser in Hawai' i since 1991; as part of his job, 
he conducts real estate appraisals on “single-family residential properties, individual condominium units, improved and unimproved vacant land,” as well as on commercial and industrial properties, and open space and park uses; he conducts about 200 appraisals a year, and that he is “intimately familiar with real estate on Maui”; as part of his work, he has “to determine what the best uses for those lands would be every time [he does] an appraisal”; he determines the “highest and best use[es] of the property” by conducting a “four-item test[:] that use must be legally permissible, physically possible, financially feasible, and maximally productive”; he has used this highest and best use test “in connection with thousands of properties that [he] appraised on Maui in [his] 35 years of experience.” 
The Leones contend that “[a]s an appraiser, Mr.
 
Yamamura’s expertise is in opining as to the value, not the use,
 of real property” and that Yamamura was not familiar with the
 term “economically viable use.” However, Yamamura’s testimony
 establishes that he has extensive knowledge and experience in
 evaluating the “use” of real property. Yamamura testified that,
 for over thirty-five years, he has been a real-estate appraiser
 on Maui and that, as part of his work, he has to determine the
 
33
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“highest and best use” of the properties he evaluates. Yamamura 
estimated that he conducted this highest and best use test “in connection with thousands of properties . . . on Maui.” Under the parameters set by HRE Rule 702 and Hawai' i case law, this 
testimony is enough to qualify Yamamura as an expert witness in this area of expertise. 
As such, given Yamamura’s considerable experience and
 
expertise in appraising real property, and specifically Maui real
 property, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 allowing Yamamura to testify as an expert witness. 
2.	 The circuit court did not err in issuing the challenged
jury instructions.
 
The Leones also argue that the circuit court erred in
 
the issuance of three jury instructions. First, the Leones
 
contend that the circuit court erroneously defined “economically
 beneficial use” in Jury Instruction No. 22. Second, the Leones
 contend that the circuit court refused to instruct the jury, per
 the Leones’ request, on the burden-shifting paradigm in takings
 cases. Third, the Leones contend that the circuit court failed
 to instruct the jury on the effect of the declaration. Each of
 these arguments will be addressed in turn.
 
a.	 Jury Instruction No. 22: economically beneficial
use
 
First, the Leones assert that they requested the
 
following jury instruction on economically beneficial use:
 
34
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Land  h as  economically  beneficial  use,  if,  under  the
applicable  regulations,  all  three  of  the  following  are  true:
(1)  there  is  a  permissible  use  for  the  land,  o ther  than
leaving  the  land  in  its  natural  state ,  (2)  the  land  is
physically  adaptable  for  such  use  and  (3)  there  is  a  demand
for  such  use  in  the  reasonably  near  future.
 
(Emphasis added.) The Leones assert that the circuit court’s
 
Jury Instruction No. 22, which omitted the underlined text, was
 erroneous because “it failed to correctly state the law by
 omitting that such use cannot leave the land in its natural
 state.” 
The Leones’ interpretation of the law on this point is
 
too restrictive for a number of reasons. 
First, a regulation
 
could potentially require land to be left substantially in its
 natural state and still not be considered a taking. It is true
 that case law provides that regulations that require land to be
 left “substantially in its natural state” suggest that the owner
 of the land is being deprived of all economically beneficial use
 
of the land.   
See Lucas, 505 U.S. at 1018 (“[R]egulations that
 
leave the owner of land without economically beneficial or
 
productive options for its use –- typically, as here, by
 
requiring land to be left substantially in its natural state –­carry with them a heightened risk that private property is being
 pressed into some form of public service . . . .” (emphasis
 added)). However, this rule does not state that regulations that
 leave land in its natural state always constitute a taking. As
 such, Jury Instruction No. 22 is an accurate articulation of the
 
35
           
           
         
          
          
       
      
        
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
law. 
Second, as the circuit court noted when modifying the
 
language of the instruction, the issue of whether the government
 
has deprived the landowners of economically beneficial use of
 their land is a factual query better left for the jury to decide:
 
Okay. I’m familiar with the cases. I am deleting it,
principally, on the grounds that I do think that, although
the language is used, this is a factual issue and better
left for argument, but the balance of the instruction is an
accurate reflection of the law as we’ve discussed.
 
The circuit court’s reasoning is in line with well-established
 
case law. See City of Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey,
 
Ltd., 526 U.S. 687, 720 (1999) (Del Monte Dunes II) (“In actions
 at law predominantly factual issues are in most cases allocated
 to the jury.”). 
Specifically, regulatory takings cases are “ad
 
hoc, factual inquiries” that are “informed by the specifics of
 the case.” Murr, 137 S. Ct. at 1942, 1943. As such, “the issue
 
whether a landowner has been deprived of all economically viable
 use of his property is a predominantly factual question” and “is
 for the jury.” Del Monte Dunes II, 526 U.S. at 720-21.
 
Accordingly, the circuit court properly instructed the
 
jury on economically beneficial use.
 
b. Jury Instruction No. 9: burden of production
 
Second, the Leones assert that the circuit court erred
 
by refusing the following proposed jury instruction:
 
Plaintiffs initially bear the burden to produce
evidence that they lack economically beneficial use of their
property. Once Plaintiffs have produced such evidence, the
 
36
           
         
       
      
       
           
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
burden of production shifts to the Defendants. To meet
 
their burden of production on a proposed economically
beneficial use, Defendants must produce evidence of
reasonable probability that the land is both physically
adaptable for such use and that there is a demand for such
use in the reasonably near future.
 
Instead, the circuit court instructed the jury that “[p]laintiffs
 
have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
 every element of each claim that plaintiffs assert.” The Leones
 argue that the circuit court prejudiced the Leones by not giving
 the requested instruction because it relieved the County of
 meeting its burden of production. 
As support for their argument, the Leones ask us to 
rely on two cases from other jurisdictions: Bowles v. United 
States
, 31 Fed. Cl. 37 (1994) and Loveladies Harbor, Inc. v. 
United States
, 21 Cl. Ct. 153 (1990). These cases, while 
persuasive, are not binding on Hawai' i courts. Moreover, these 
cases were federal bench trials and, as such, are distinguishable from this case, which was tried by a jury. The circuit court implicitly acknowledged this distinction when it explained why it refused the proposed burden-shifting instruction: 
[To]  instruct  the  jury  on  burdens  of  production  would
unnecessarily  and  potentially  confuse  the  jury  and  suggest
to  them  that  the  burden  of  proof  has  somehow  shifted.
Even  though  the  words  burden  of  production,  this  is  a
very  complex  area  even  for  evidence  professors  at  law
school,  and  to  now  start  to  discuss  all  of  these  issues,  I
think,  would  be  unduly  confusing  to  the  jurors  .  .  .
 
Additionally, even if this court were to rely on the
 
cases cited by the Leones, the Leones’ proposed jury instruction
 regarding burden shifting is not an accurate articulation of the
 
37
           
             
             
      
       
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
law as reflected in Bowles and Loveladies. For instance, the
 
Leones requested that the court instruct the jury that
 “[p]laintiffs initially bear the burden to produce evidence that
 they lack economically beneficial use of their property. Once
 Plaintiffs have produced such evidence, the burden of production
 shifts to the Defendants.” This proposed instruction, as
 written, suggests that once the Leones have produced any evidence
 that their property lacks economically beneficial use, they have
 satisfied their burden on that issue. This is incorrect. 
Instead, a plaintiff in a takings case must produce sufficient
 evidence to persuade the court that “it is more likely true than
 not that there remains no economically viable use for their
 property” before the burden shifts to the defendant.
11
  
Loveladies, 21 Cl. Ct. at 158 (brackets omitted);  Bowles, 31 Fed.
 
Cl. at 47. Thus, the Leones’ proposed jury instruction on this
 topic is an inaccurate articulation of the law that they
 themselves rely upon. The circuit court did not err in refusing
 it.
 
c.	 Proposed Jury Instruction No. 71: effect of the
declaration
 
Third, the Leones argue that the circuit court erred
 
when it “failed to instruct the jury that the only permissible
 
11
 And, in fact, this is what the circuit court told the jury in Jury
 
Instruction No. 10: “To ‘prove by a preponderance of the evidence’ means to
 
prove  that  something  is  more  likely  so  than  not  so. It means to prove by
evidence which . . . convinces you that  something  is  more  probably  true  than
not  true.” (E mp
hases added.)
 
38
           
       
      
         
       
        
     
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
economically beneficial use of the Property is as a single-family
 
residence.” The Leones explain that they requested the following
 jury instruction, which was refused by the circuit court:
 
Plaintiffs’ lot is subject to a declaration of
covenants and restrictions (“DCR”) that restricts what
Plaintiffs may do with their land. Under the DCR,
Plaintiffs may use their land only for single-family
residential purposes. You may consider the DCR when
determining whether Plaintiffs have any economically
beneficial use of their land.
 
The Leones contend that “[t]he jury must consider restrictive
 
covenants when making takings determinations.” The Leones’
 argument here is unpersuasive for two reasons.
 
First, there is no authoritative legal support for the 
Leones’ contention that a jury must be instructed on the effect of a private restrictive covenant on a regulatory takings analysis. The circuit court, in giving jury instructions, is 
limited to instructing the jury on the applicable law. See 
Tittle v. Hurlbutt
, 53 Haw. 526, 530, 497 P.2d 1354, 1357 (1972) 
(“The function served by jury instructions is to inform the jury of the law applicable to the current case.”); Udac v. Takata 
Corp.
, 121 Hawai' i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 (App. 2009) 
(“The boundaries of the trial judge’s discretion in informing the jury of the law applicable to the current case are defined ‘by the obligation to give sufficient instructions and the opposing imperative against cumulative instructions.’” (quoting Tittle
, 53 
Haw. at 530, 497 P.2d at 1357)). The Leones cite to no Hawai' i 
or Supreme Court case for their contention that a jury  must
 be 
39
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
informed on the effect of private restrictive covenants. As
 
such, the circuit court acted well within its discretion when it
 refused a jury instruction not grounded in the law. 
Second, the two cases relied upon by the Leones for
 
their persuasive weight are inapposite to the issue before this
 court. In both Bowles v. United States and 
Knight v. City of
 
Billings, the government defendants argued that the restrictive
 
covenants -- not their own action -- were responsible for the
 taking. Bowles, 31 Fed. Cl. at 49 (“[T]he government also argues
 that the diminution in value of Lot 29 was somehow ‘caused’ by
 non-federal action.”); Knight, 642 P.2d 141, 146 (Mont. 1982)
 (“We turn now to consider whether the declaration of restrictions
 of Lillis Subdivision limiting the use of plaintiffs’ lots to
 residential purposes until the year 2000 prevents recovery
 through inverse condemnation.”). Both courts rejected this
 argument, determining that it was the government action, not the
 private restriction, that resulted in the elimination of the
 economically beneficial use of the property. Bowles, 31 Fed. Cl.
 
at 49 (“In this case it is only because of the federal
 government’s refusal to issue a fill permit that Lot 29 has no
 fair market value or economically viable use.”) (emphasis in
 original); Knight, 642 P.2d at 146 (“It is not the restrictions
 that are damaging plaintiffs’ properties; it is the action of the
 City in making the improvements that is making their properties
 
40
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
nearly unusable and unmarketable for residential purposes.”). 
Essentially, these cases assert that the existence of a
 restrictive covenant is irrelevant to a takings analysis. 
Here, the Leones argue the opposite -- that “[t]he jury
 
must consider restrictive covenants when making takings
 determinations.” (Emphasis added.) This is certainly not the
 holding of Bowles and Knight.
12 Additionally, such a reading of
 
the law contravenes takings jurisprudence, which contemplates,
 first and foremost, government action. Just as the Bowles and
 Knight courts determined that the existence of private
 restrictive agreements cannot be used as a defense for governmentactions, we similarly determine that the existence of such
 private agreements cannot saddle the government with liability ina takings analysis. 
At all times in a takings analysis, it is
 
solely the government action that must be evaluated. 

 

 
For these reasons, the circuit court did not err in
 
declining to instruct the jury on the effect of the declaration. 
3.	 The circuit court did not err in concluding that the
Leones were not entitled to judgment as a matter of
law.
 
Next, we must determine whether the trial court erred
 
in concluding that the Leones were not entitled to a judgment as
 
a matter of law. The Leones assert that the evidence presented
 
12
 Significantly,  Bowles  and  Knight  did  not  touch  on  the  issue  of
 
whether  jury  instructions  must  include  information  about  the  existence  of
restrictive  covenants.
 
41
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at trial permitted only one reasonable conclusion: the County’s 
regulation of the Leones’ property constituted a taking for which they are owed just compensation. We review a trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment as a matter of law de novo. Aluminum Shake Roofing
, 110 Hawai' i at 251, 131 P.3d at 1233. A 
motion for judgment as a matter of law can be granted only when “it can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury verdict in [the non-moving party’s] favor.” Id. Additionally, a 
court must give to the non-moving party’s evidence “all the value to which it is legally entitled,” and to indulge “every legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party’s favor.” Id. 
This point on appeal presents a two-part inquiry: 1)
 
whether the County’s regulations prohibited the Leones from
 building a single-family residence, and, if so, 2) whether the
 County’s regulations deprived the Leones of economically
 
beneficial use of their land.   Because the circuit court
 
instructed the jury that the County’s regulations prohibited the
 
Leones from building a single-family residence on their property,
 see supra Section II.C, we need only address the second inquiry: 
whether there is evidence to support the jury’s finding that the
 County did not deprive the Leones of economically beneficial use
 of their land. 
The parties offered conflicting testimony on whether
 
42
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Leones’ property retained economically beneficial use. The
 
Leones’ expert witnesses included Tsujimura and Dr. Whitney, who
 both testified unequivocally on direct examination that the
 County’s regulations deprived the Leones of all economically
 beneficial use of their property. Tsujimura testified that
 “[b]ecause of this [community plan] inconsistency, this prevents
 the Leones from doing anything to start the process to do
 anything with the lot” and that “there’s no economically
 beneficial use that they can use on that lot because of this.” 
Dr. Whitney similarly testified that the community plan
 prohibited the Leones from building a single-family home on their
 property, and that this regulation prevented the Leones from
 realizing upwards of $19 million in value for their property. 
On the other hand, the County introduced expert
 
testimony from Yamamura, who testified on direct examination that
 the Leones’ property had great “investment use.” Yamamura
 testified that “investment in land” means “the use of land as an
 investment tool” and further explained that this occurs when
 “people . . . buy land, hold it for a period of time, and as it
 increases in value and depending on the buyer’s strategy and
 financial objectives, sell it for profit.” When asked if the
 property had potential as an investment, Yamamura answered,
 “[a]bsolutely, yes.” Yamamura then explained that the property
 had “tremendous opportunities for increases in value[]” because
 
43
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it was “a very scarce commodity” and “an ocean front lot on one
 
of the best beaches in south Maui . . . .” 
Indeed, the Leones’ attempts at selling their property
 
soon after buying it support Yamamura’s investment use testimony. 
A year after purchasing the property, the Leones relisted it for
 $7 million, a $4 million increase in the price they paid for it,
 and received two offers, which the Leones eventually refused. 
The offers –- one for $4.5 million and the other for $4.6 million
 –- would have garnered the Leones, if accepted, close to $1
 million in profit. Also supporting Yamamura’s investment use
 theory is the fact that the property is included in the Leone
 Family Trust, which Patricia Leone conceded at trial was created,
 at least in part, for the purpose of “invest[ing] and
 reinvest[ing] in real estate.” Because we have already
 determined that investment use is a relevant consideration in a
 takings analysis, 
see supra  Section IV.B.1.a, we conclude here
 
that the record adduces some evidence that the property retained
 a reasonable, economically viable use, specifically in the form
 of an investment. 
In addition to Yamamura’s testimony about investment
 
use, there is also some evidence to support the County’s
 contention that the property had economically beneficial use in
 the commercial context. 
For instance, on cross-examination,
 
Tsujimura conceded that the Leones could potentially conduct
 
44
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
commercial activities on their property as a park. 
Additionally, on cross-examination, Dr. Whitney similarly
 conceded that point, and also conceded that he did not undertake
 any research to determine whether commercial activity on the
 Leones’ property was economically viable. 
As such, there is evidence to support the jury’s
 
finding that the property retained some economically beneficial
 use. Although the Leones were prevented from building a single-
family residence on the property, evidence was presented showing
 that the property had value as an investment property and could
 potentially be used in the commercial context as well. 
See Penn
  
Cent., 438 U.S. at 130 (“[T]he submission that appellants may
 establish a ‘taking’ simply by showing that they have been denied
 the ability to exploit a property interest that they heretofore
 had believed was available for development is quite simply
 untenable.”).
 
In sum, we conclude that there is evidence to support 
the jury’s verdict that the County’s regulations did not amount to a taking of the Leones’ property. 
See Aluminum Shake Roofing , 
110 Hawai' i at 251, 131 P.3d at 1233 (“A [motion for judgment as 
a matter of law] may be granted only when . . . it can be said there is no evidence to support a jury verdict in [the non-moving party’s] favor.” (first brackets in original) (emphasis added)). Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in denying the Leones’ 
45
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion for judgment as a matter of law.13
 
4.	 The circuit court did not err in awarding costs to the
County. 
The Leones argue that the circuit court erred in 
awarding costs to the County because the County is not the 
“prevailing party” under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 54(d). This argument is contingent on this court’s decision to vacate and remand this case on the grounds the Leones raised in the previous sections. Because we affirm the circuit court’s judgment, the Leones’ argument that the circuit court erred in awarding costs to the County is unavailing. 
C.	 The County’s Arguments on Cross-appeal
 
Because we rule in favor of the County, we may quickly
 
dispense with its cross-appeal. In its cross-appeal, the County
 
raises seven points for our review. The Leones argue that the
 County’s cross-appeal is not permitted by law because the County
 is not an aggrieved party.
 
“Generally, the requirements of standing are (1) the
 
person must first have been a party to the action; (2) the person
 seeking modification of the order of judgment must have had
 standing to oppose it in the trial court; and (3) such person
 
must be aggrieved by the ruling.
” Waikiki Malia Hotel, Inc. v.
 
13
 The  Leones  also  contend  that  they  are  entitled  to  a  judgment  as  a
 
matter  of  law  on  their  civil  rights  act  claim.   Because  we  affirm  the  circuit
 
court’s  judgment  that  a  taking  did  not  occur,  we  need  not  address  the  Leones’
civil  rights  argument  here.
 
46
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kinkai Props. Ltd. P’ship, 75 Haw. 370, 393, 862 P.2d 1048, 1061
 
(1993) (emphasis added). This court defines an aggrieved party
 in the civil context “as ‘one who is affected or prejudiced by
 the appealable order.’” Id. (quoting Montalvo v. Chang, 64 Haw.
 
345, 351, 641 P.2d 1321, 1326 (1982)). Thus, under the general
 rule, the County is not an aggrieved party and would not be able
 to appeal its case.
 
However, as this court noted in City Exp., Inc. v. 
Express Partners, 87 Hawai' i 466, 468 n.2, 959 P.2d 836, 838 n.2 
(1998), “[w]hile the general rule is that a prevailing party may not file a direct appeal, there is an exception for cross-
appeals.”   
This court specifically determined that “[i]f the 
appellate court reverses the ruling of the lower court, then it 
must address any relevant issues properly raised on cross-appeal.” Id. In Express Partners, because we affirmed the 
circuit court’s directed verdict in favor of the cross-appellants, we concluded that the cross-appeal was moot. Id. 
Similarly, because we affirm the circuit court’s
 
judgment in favor of the County, we find its cross-appeal moot. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit
 
court’s: 1) June 1, 2015 judgment in favor of the County and
 against the Leones, 2) August 5, 2015 order denying the Leones’
 renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law or, in the
 
47
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
alternative, motion for a new trial, and 3) August 5, 2015 order
 
granting in part and denying in part the County’s motion for
 costs. 
Andrew V. Beaman,
Leroy E. Colombe,and Daniel J. Chengfor plaintiffs-appellants/cross-appellees /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna /s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson Patrick K. Wong, Brian A.
Bilberry and Thomas Kolbefor defendants-appellees/cross-appellants 
48
 