***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-17-0000059 08-AUG-2018 08:01 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
E. KALANI FLORES,
Appellant-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES; DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND
NATURAL RESOURCES; SUZANNE D. CASE, in her official capacity as
Chairperson of the Board of Land and Natural Resources,
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Appellees-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
 
and
 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I,
Appellee-Appellee/Cross-Appellant.
 
SCAP-17-0000059
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
ENVIRONMENTAL COURT
 
(CAAP-17-0000059; CIV. NO. 14-1-324)
 
AUGUST 8, 2018
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
In May 2014, Appellee-Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
University of Hawai' i (the University) requested that Appellee­          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellant/Cross-Appellee Board of Land and Natural Resources
 
(BLNR) consent to a sublease that the University intended to
 enter into with TMT International Observatory LLC (TIO) for the
 construction of the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) on the Mauna Kea
 Science Reserve (Sublease). BLNR subsequently addressed the
 University’s request for its consent to the Sublease at two
 separate public meetings. At both meetings, Appellant-Appellee
 E. Kalani Flores (Flores) orally requested that BLNR hold a
 contested case hearing prior to making a decision on the matter. 
Following the second meeting, Flores filed a written petition for
 a contested case hearing. BLNR denied Flores’s request and
 consented to the Sublease. 
Flores appealed BLNR’s denial of his request for a 
contested case hearing to the Environmental Court of the Third Circuit (environmental court). 
The environmental court ruled 
that based upon this court’s opinion in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Board of Land and Natural Resources, 136 Hawai' i 376, 363 P.3d 
224 (2015), BLNR infringed upon Flores’s constitutional rights by rejecting his request for a contested case hearing. 
On secondary appeal, BLNR and the University argue that 
the environmental court erred in ruling that Flores was entitled to a contested case hearing because: (1) BLNR’s consent to the Sublease did not fall within the purview of Hawai' i Revised 
2
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 91, as BLNR was acting as a landlord
 
engaged in the custodial management of public property; and (2) a
 contested case hearing was not required by law because it was not
 mandated by statute, administrative rule, or due process. 
For the reasons stated below, we reject BLNR’s and the
 
University’s argument that HRS Chapter 91 does not apply in this
 
case. However, we agree with BLNR and the University that BLNR
 
was not required to hold a contested case hearing prior to
 
consenting to the Sublease because such a hearing was not
 required by statute, administrative rule, or due process under
 the circumstances of this case. Consequently, we hold that the
 environmental court erred in ruling that BLNR violated Flores’s
 constitutional rights when it denied his request for a contested
 case hearing in this case.
 
Accordingly, we reverse the environmental court’s 
January 6, 2017 Final Judgment and “Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Appellees State of Hawai' i, Board of Land and 
Natural Resources, Department of Land and Natural Resources, and Chairperson Suzanne D. Case’s Motion for Stay of Proceedings, or in the Alternative for the Court to Issue its Decision on Appeal, Filed October 25, 2016; Vacating Consent to Sublease and Non-Exclusive Easement Agreement Between TMT International Observatory LLC and the University of Hawaii Under General Lease 
3
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
No. S-4191; and Remanding Matter to the Board of Land and Natural
 
Resources” (Order). 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 21, 1968, BLNR leased the land within the Mauna
 
Kea Science Reserve to the University for a term of sixty-five
 years (Master Lease). The Master Lease is set to expire on
 December 31, 2033, and permits the University to use the leased
 premises “as a scientific complex, including without limitation
 thereof an observatory, and as a scientific reserve being more
 specifically a buffer zone to prevent the intrusion of activities
 inimical to said scientific complex.” Pursuant to paragraph five
 of the Master Lease, the University “shall not sublease . . . any
 rights thereunder without the prior written approval of [BLNR].” 
On May 22, 2014, Donald O. Straney (Straney), the 
Chancellor of the University of Hawai' i at Hilo, sent BLNR a 
written request for BLNR’s approval and consent to the Sublease. Straney stated that the University intended to sublease an 8.7­acre portion of the Mauna Kea Science Reserve, which was covered by the Master Lease, to TIO for the construction and operation of the TMT. 
The Sublease is set to expire on December 31, 2033, the
 
same date that the Master Lease is set to terminate. With
 respect to the use of the subleased premises, the Sublease
 
4
           
       
       
      
       
      
      
      
        
      
      
       
        
      
      
      
       
         
     
       
         
      
      
        
     
       
         
     
      
        
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
provides, in relevant part: 
Sublessee shall use the Subleased Premises solely to
construct and operate the TMT Facilities in accordance
with this Sublease and the Scientific Cooperation
Agreement. The construction and operation of the
Subleased Premises shall be conducted in strict
 compliance with the terms and conditions of
Conservation District Use Permit HA-3568 approved by
the Lessor on April 12, 2013 (the “TMT CDUP”),
including performance of all mitigation conditions set
forth therein, and any amended or subsequent
Conservation District Use Permit. Sublessee shall not
 at any time during the term of this Sublease
construct, place, maintain, or install on the
Subleased Premises any other building, structure, or
improvement without the prior written approval of
Sublessor and Lessor and upon such conditions as
Sublessor or Lessor may impose. For purposes of the
 foregoing sentence, any other “improvement” means
 improvements that are not specified in or contemplated
by the TMT CDUP and not contained within the building
envelop of TMT observatory plans approved in
accordance with Section 37 below.
 
Concerning the rights of Native Hawaiians with respect
 
to the subleased premises, the Sublease provides: 
The Constitution of the State of Hawaii mandates the
 protection of recognized customary and traditional
native Hawaiian rights subject to State regulation.
This Sublease shall be subject to the right of Native
Hawaiians to exercise protected traditional and
customary practices as provided in the [Comprehensive
Management Plan] and consistent with the laws of the
State of Hawaii.
 
A. BLNR Administrative Proceedings
 
On June 13, 2014, BLNR held a public meeting
 
addressing, inter alia, the University’s request for BLNR’s
 
consent to the Sublease (first public meeting). At the first
 public meeting, Flores provided oral and written testimony on the
 numerous reasons underlying his position that BLNR should not
 consent to the Sublease, and orally requested that BLNR hold a
 
5
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contested case hearing before rendering a decision on the
 
University’s request. No action was taken on Flores’s request
 for a contested case hearing at the first public meeting. 
Ultimately, BLNR did not rule on the University’s
 
request for BLNR’s consent to the Sublease at the first public
 meeting. Instead, BLNR deferred the issue for consideration at a
 later date to allow the University to address the questions and
 issues raised during the public testimony on the matter. 
BLNR revisited the University’s request for BLNR’s
 
consent to the Sublease at a public meeting held on June 27, 2014
 (second public meeting). At the second public meeting, Flores
 provided further oral testimony and submitted additional written
 testimony explaining the reasons why, in his view, BLNR should
 not consent to the Sublease. Flores also orally renewed his
 request for a contested case hearing and submitted a written
 petition for a contested case hearing. 
Following the completion of public testimony at the
 
second public meeting, BLNR approved the University’s request for
 its consent to the Sublease. However, BLNR provided that the
 effect of its consent was “stayed . . . until administrative
 proceedings on any contested case requests are concluded.” No
 action was taken regarding Flores’s request for a contested case
 hearing at the second public meeting. 
6
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On July 3, 2014, Flores filed his written petition for
 
a contested case hearing. Flores stated that his interest in
 
BLNR’s consent to the Sublease, which entitled him to a contested
 case hearing, stemmed from, inter alia, his interest in
 participating in “traditional and customary practices” on the
 subleased premises. 
Following the receipt of Flores’s request, the Acting 
Administrator of BLNR completed a staff report recommending that Flores’s request be denied. According to the staff report, no statute or administrative rule required BLNR to hold a contested case hearing prior to consenting to a sublease of public lands. The staff report also concluded that the due process clause of the Hawai' i Constitution did not mandate BLNR to hold a contested 
case hearing, as Flores did not demonstrate that he had a property interest in BLNR’s consent to the Sublease. Lastly, the staff report stated that BLNR was not required to hold a contested case hearing before consenting to the Sublease because such action “is a matter of internal land management, and not subject to a contested case.” 
BLNR addressed Flores’s request for a contested case
 
hearing at a public meeting held on July 25, 2014 (third public
 meeting). At the third public meeting, Flores orally testified
 that BLNR’s approval of the Sublease at the second public meeting
 
7
           
           
            
   
           
            
            
           
            
           
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was invalid, and submitted further written testimony on the
 
matter. After hearing all of the public testimony on the matter,
 BLNR approved the staff report’s recommendation, and denied
 Flores’s request for a contested case hearing. 
BLNR issued its formal written consent to the Sublease
 
on April, 9, 2015 (Consent). 
B. Appellate Proceedings at the Environmental Court
 
On August 25, 2014, Flores appealed the denial of his
 
request for a contested case hearing to the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit. The case was transferred to the environmental
 court on October 2, 2015.
1
 
In his pro se opening brief, Flores argued, inter
 
2
alia,  that BLNR erred in denying his request for a contested
case hearing because, among other reasons, Flores “is a
 traditional and customary practitioner whose rights this Court
 should acknowledge by allowing his participation in the requested
 contested case hearing.” Additionally, Flores argued that BLNR
 
1 The case remained with the same presiding judge, as the Honorable
 
Greg K. Nakamura sits as a circuit court judge and an environmental court
judge.
 
2 Flores also argued that BLNR should not have consented to the Sublease 
for numerous other unrelated reasons. However, because he does not raise orrenew these arguments in his answering brief on secondary appeal, we do notaddress them. See Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rules 28(b)(7)
(“Points not argued [in the opening brief] many be deemed waived”) and 28(c)(providing that the answering brief “shall be of like character as that required for an opening brief”). 
8
           
     
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
infringed upon his constitutional right to due process by
 
consenting to the Sublease before resolving his request for a
 contested case hearing. 
In their answering briefs, BLNR and the University
 
countered that BLNR properly denied Flores’s request for a
 contested case hearing because his request was not supported by
 statute or any administrative rules, and because Flores did not
 have a due process right to a contested case hearing insofar as
 he did not demonstrate that he had a constitutionally cognizable
 property interest in the Sublease. Further, BLNR and the
 University argued that Flores was not entitled to a contested
 case hearing because BLNR’s consent to the Sublease was a matter
 of internal agency management, and fell outside the purview of
 HRS Chapter 91. 
After the answering briefs were filed, this court 
issued its opinion in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou. At issue in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou was whether BLNR violated the appellants’ due process rights by issuing a Conservation District Use Permit (CDUP) authorizing the TMT’s construction before holding a contested case hearing on the matter. 136 Hawai' i at 380, 363 
P.3d at 228. This court first held that the appellants were entitled to a contested case hearing, reasoning: 
Given the substantial interests of Native
 
Hawaiians in pursuing their cultural practices on
 
9
           
        
       
         
      
      
         
         
   
         
       
        
       
       
         
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mauna Kea, the risk of an erroneous deprivation absent
the protections provided by a contested case hearing,
and the lack of undue burden on the government in
affording Appellants a contested case hearing, a
contested case hearing was “required by law”
regardless of whether BLNR had voted to approve one on
its own motion at the February 25, 2011 meeting.
 
Id. at 390, 363 P.3d at 238 (quoting Sandy Beach Def. Fund v.
 
City & Cty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261
 (1989)). The Mauna Kea Anaina Hou court then concluded:
 
In sum, BLNR put the cart before the horse when
it approved the permit before the contested case
hearing was held. Once the permit was granted,
Appellants were denied the most basic element of
procedural due process--an opportunity to be heard at
a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner. Our
 Constitution demands more.
 
Id. at 391, 363 P.3d at 239. Accordingly, this court vacated the
 
circuit court’s decision affirming BLNR’s order granting a CDUP
 for the TMT project. Id. at 399, 363 P.3d at 247. The case was
 
remanded to the circuit court to further remand the case to BLNR,
 so that another contested case hearing could be conducted before
 BLNR or a new hearing officer. Id. 
On January 13, 2016, Flores filed his reply brief. 
Flores requested that the environmental court take judicial
 notice of this court’s decision in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, which,
 he argued, further supported that BLNR should have held a
 contested case hearing before consenting to the Sublease.
 
At the oral argument regarding Flores’s appeal, the
 
environmental court took judicial notice of this court’s opinion
 
10
           
  
     
        
        
          
        
       
        
        
       
         
        
        
         
     
      3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou and the order of remand that was filed in
 
that case. Subsequently, the environmental court orally ordered
 that the case be remanded to BLNR so that BLNR may consider the
 opinion and the order. 
On April 5, 2016, the environmental court filed an
 
order remanding the case to BLNR pursuant to HRS § 91-14(e).
3
 
The environmental court ruled that the fact that the CDUP had
 been vacated was “material because the Sublease and Consent are
 premised upon the existence of the TMT CDUP,” and noted that
 “[t]his fact could not have been presented to [BLNR] when it
 considered the application for the consent to the Sublease
 because the fact did not exist at that time.” Therefore, the
 environmental court remanded the case to BLNR to reconsider its
 decision to consent to the Sublease in light of Mauna Kea Anaina
 Hou.
 
On October 25, 2016, BLNR filed a motion to stay the
 
HRS § 91-14(e) (2012) provides:
 
If, before the date set for hearing, application is
made to the court for leave to present additional
evidence material to the issue in the case, and it is
shown to the satisfaction of the court that the
 additional evidence is material and that there were
 good reasons for failure to present it in the
proceeding before the agency, the court may order that
the additional evidence be taken before the agency
upon such conditions as the court deems proper. The
 agency may modify its findings, decision, and order by
reason of the additional evidence and shall file with
 the reviewing court, to become a part of the record,
the additional evidence, together with any
modifications or new findings or decision.
 
11
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceedings in Flores’s appeal until, pursuant to this court’s
 
mandate in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, BLNR determined whether to issue
 the CDUP after holding another contested case hearing on the
 matter. Alternatively, BLNR requested that the environmental
 court “issue its decision on appeal at this time.” 
Flores, now represented by counsel, objected to BLNR’s
 
request for a stay, but joined in BLNR’s request for an immediate
 decision. Flores argued that “[a]s there is no just reason to
 delay a decision at this time, this Court should go ahead and
 rule” on whether Flores “has a right to a contested case hearing”
 and “whether [BLNR’s] Consent to [the] sublease entered into
 between [the University] and [TIO] is valid.” 
In reply, BLNR asserted that if the environmental court
 
issued a ruling on the appeal, the ruling should be limited to
 whether Flores was entitled to a contested case hearing because
 “[t]he sole issue in this administrative appeal is whether a
 contested case should have been held. The merits of the consent
 are not at issue.” 
On January 6, 2017, the environmental court filed the
 
Order. The Order denied BLNR’s request for a stay of
 proceedings, but granted BLNR’s alternative request for a
 decision on appeal. In rendering its decision, the environmental
 court took judicial notice of Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, and concluded
 
12
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that “Flores was denied the right to a contested case hearing on 
the subject Consent to Sublease in violation of his constitutional right to a hearing under Article 12, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution and Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, and 
specifically section IV of the concurring opinion therein.” 
Accordingly, the Order vacated the environmental
 
court’s April 5, 2016 order remanding the case to BLNR, vacated
 the Consent, and remanded the case to BLNR for further
 proceedings consistent with the Order. Final judgment was
 entered on January 6, 2017. 
C. Secondary Appeal and Transfer to this Court
 
On February 3, 2017, BLNR timely appealed the
 
environmental court’s final judgment and Order. The University
 
filed its cross-appeal from the environmental court’s final
 judgment and Order on February 21, 2017. The case was
 transferred to this court on June 5, 2017. 
D. Subsequent Administrative Proceedings
 
While Flores’s case on secondary appeal was pending, a
 
second contested case hearing was held on whether BLNR should
 
issue the CDUP that would authorize the construction of the TMT
 project. The parties do not appear to dispute that Flores
 participated in this contested case hearing by presenting
 
13
           
        
         
          
       
        
         
 
 
          
        
      
        
       
    
     
      
   
       
    
    
       
      
           
            
         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4
 evidence, including a copy of the Sublease,  and arguments
regarding how the TMT’s construction would affect Flores’s
 
interest in participating in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural
 practices on Mauna Kea.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A.	 Administrative Agency Decisions - Secondary Appeals
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court
upon its review of an agency’s decision is a secondary
appeal. The standard of review is one in which this
 court must determine whether the circuit court was
 right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards
set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) [1993] to the agency’s
decision.
 
Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 416, 91 
P.3d 494, 498 (2004) (brackets in original) (quoting Korean
 
Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai' i 217, 
229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 (1998)).
 
HRS § 91-14(g) (2012) provides: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or
 statutory provisions; or
 
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
 
At oral argument, Flores acknowledged that he submitted a copy of the
 
Sublease as an exhibit at this contested case hearing. Oral Argument at
27:34-27:39, Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , SCAP-17-0000059,
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/18/SCOA_031518_SCAP_17_59.mp3 .
 
14
 4           
     
  
    
      
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or
 
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
“[U]nder HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable under 
subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of discretion under subsection (6).” Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc., 104 Hawai' i at 416, 91 P.3d at 
498 (brackets in original) (quoting In re Hawaiian Elec. Co., 81 Hawai'i 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
BLNR and the University contend that the environmental
 
court erred in ruling that Flores was entitled to a contested
 case hearing concerning BLNR’s consent to the Sublease. In
 support of this position, they advance two arguments: (1) HRS
 Chapter 91 does not apply in this case pursuant to this court’s
 decisions in Sharma v. State, 66 Haw. 632, 673 P.2d 1030 (1983),
 and Big Island Small Ranchers Association v. State, 60 Haw. 228,
 588 P.2d 430 (1978); and (2) assuming that HRS Chapter 91
 applies, Flores has not demonstrated that a contested case
 hearing was required by law. 
We address each argument separately and in turn below. 
15
           
           
           
              
           
           
          
             
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A.	 Sharma and Big Island Small Ranchers do not render HRS 
Chapter 91 inapplicable in the present case.
 
Relying on Sharma and Big Island Small Ranchers, BLNR
 
and the University contend that when BLNR takes action in
 
relation to a lease as a landlord, BLNR is engaged in the
 custodial management of public property, which is a matter of
 internal agency management. Hence, BLNR and the University
 assert that because this court has recognized that agencies do
 not need to comply with HRS Chapter 91 when dealing with matters
 of internal agency management, BLNR was not required to hold a
 
5
 contested case hearing within the meaning of HRS § 91-1  before
consenting to the Sublease.
 
Flores counters that BLNR and the University read
 
Sharma and Big Island Small Ranchers too broadly. Flores
 contends that in these cases, this court did not “hold that
 whenever the BLNR makes a decision that affects the
 administration and control of public lands that no one has the
 right to a contested case hearing.” 
We agree with Flores that BLNR and the University read
 
HRS § 91-1(5) (2012) defines a “contested case” as “a proceeding in
 
which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required
by law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing.” Under HRS §
 91-1(6) (2012), an “agency hearing” is a “hearing held by an agency
immediately prior to judicial review of a contested case as provided in
section 91-14.” HRS §§ 91-9 through 91-12 delineate the procedural
requirements that apply in the context of a contested case hearing held by an
administrative agency.
 
16
 5           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sharma and Big Island Small Ranchers too broadly. In neither
 
case did this court announce the principle that whenever BLNR
 acts in relation to a lease as a landlord pursuant to HRS Chapter
 171, BLNR’s actions per se constitute the custodial management of
 public property and relate to matters of internal agency
 management, such that HRS Chapter 91 does not apply.
 
In Sharma, BLNR leased a tract of government land to
 
Sharma for a term of twenty-nine years. 66 Haw. at 634, 673 P.2d
 at 1032. Under the lease, Sharma was required to, inter alia,
 obtain and maintain a comprehensive public liability insurance
 policy, and to post an appropriate performance bond. Id. While
 
Sharma obtained a sufficient insurance policy, Sharma did not
 post the performance bond required under the lease. Id.
 
BLNR overlooked the issue until Sharma sought BLNR’s
 
approval to subdivide and sublease a portion of the land. Id. 
In reviewing Sharma’s lease while processing his request, BLNR
 discovered that his insurance policy had lapsed, and that Sharma
 still had not posted the bond required under the lease. Id. 
Approximately sixty days after Sharma was served notice of his
 default on the lease, but failed to take corrective action, BLNR
 terminated Sharma’s lease. Id. at 634-35, 673 P.2d at 1032. The
 
land was repossessed and the lease was resold by way of public
 auction. Id., 673 P.2d at 1033. 
17
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sharma brought suit against BLNR, arguing, inter alia,
 
that he had been denied due process because BLNR did not hold a
 
contested case hearing prior to terminating his lease. Id. at
 
635-36, 673 P.2d at 1033. The trial court granted summary
 judgment in favor of BLNR, determining that BLNR’s cancellation
 of Sharma’s lease was valid. Id. at 636, 673 P.2d at 1033. 
On appeal, this court considered whether HRS Chapter 91
 
applied when BLNR “acts to cancel a lease agreement covering a
 tract of public land.” Id. The Sharma court first observed that
 
HRS Chapter 91 “does not bind an agency in all of its actions or
 functions.” Id. This court explained that while HRS Chapter
 
91’s procedures attach when administrative agencies engage in
 rulemaking or adjudication, administrative agencies also perform
 other actions that are not subject to the panoply of procedures
 outlined in HRS Chapter 91. Id. at 637, 673 P.2d at 1033-34. 
To illustrate this principle, this court discussed how it has
 previously acknowledged that agencies must also “deal with
 matters related to its internal management,” id., 673 P.2d at
 1034, which “necessarily includes the custodial management of
 public property entrusted to the agency,” id. at 638, 673 P.2d at
 1034 (quoting Holdman v. Olim, 59 Haw. 346, 355, 581 P.2d 1164,
 1170 (1978)), and that “where no ‘private rights of or procedures
 available to the public’ are affected, decisions on these matters
 
18
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
are not subject to [HRS Chapter 91’s] restraints on the agency’s
 
rulemaking power.” Id. at 637, 673 P.2d at 1034 (quoting HRS §
 
91-1(4) (1976)).
 
After establishing that a contested case hearing is not
 
required whenever an individual is adversely affected by an
 agency action, this court concluded that BLNR was not required to
 hold a contested case hearing before terminating Sharma’s lease
 because, on the facts before it, a contested case hearing was not
 required by law. Id. at 639-41, 673 P.2d at 1035-36. The Sharma
 
court first looked to “the statutory provisions governing the
 leasing of public land, HRS Chapter 171, to determine whether the
 Board was obligated thereunder to afford Sharma an opportunity
 for agency hearing before cancelling his lease.” Id. at 639, 673
 
P.2d at 1035. On this point, this court concluded that a
 contested case hearing was not required under statute because HRS
 § 171-39 expressly empowered BLNR to “‘terminate the lease or
 tenancy and take possession of the leased land, without demand or
 previous entry and without legal process’ after the notice of a
 breach is delivered,” id. at 640, 673 P.2d at 1035 (quoting HRS §
 171-39), and did not suggest “that a hearing must be conducted”
 before BLNR may terminate a lease of public land. Id.
 
Next, the Sharma court held that a contested case
 
hearing was not required by constitutional due process. Id. at
 
19
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
641, 673 P.2d at 1036. This court noted that the lease was valid
 
and binding upon Sharma, and that Sharma “was afforded ample
 opportunity to demonstrate to the trial court that he was not
 actually in default or that the State had breached the
 agreement.” Id. Therefore, this court held that “[n]o due
 
process violation appears in the record.” Id. 
Put succinctly, the Sharma court’s analysis proceeded
 
in three steps. First, this court reaffirmed that HRS Chapter 91
 procedures are not universally required in all circumstances
 where an individual is negatively impacted by an agency action. 
Sharma, 66 Haw. at 636, 673 P.2d at 1033. The Sharma court
 referred to previous decisions demonstrating that this principle
 has been recognized and applied in the past, in cases where this
 court held that an agency is not required to follow HRS Chapter
 91’s rulemaking procedures when engaged in internal management
 matters by way of the custodial management of public property. 
Id. at 637-38, 673 P.2d at 1033-34. Second, this court
 determined that BLNR was not required to hold a contested case
 hearing before terminating Sharma’s lease because HRS § 171-39
 did not require BLNR to do so. Id. at 639-640, 673 P.2d at 1035­
36. Lastly, the Sharma court held that a contested case hearing
 
was not required by due process because the lease was valid and
 enforceable, and because Sharma had received sufficient notice
 
20
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and was afforded an adequate opportunity to be heard on whether
 
he had complied with the lease. Id. at 641, 673 P.2d at 1036. 
The foregoing illustrates that BLNR and the
 
University’s arguments premised upon Sharma are without merit for
 two reasons. First, this court did not, as BLNR and the
 University contend, announce a general rule providing that
 whenever BLNR acts in relation to a lease as a landlord, such
 actions fall outside the purview of HRS Chapter 91 because they
 constitute the custodial management of public property and relate
 to matters of internal agency management. Second, the University
 and BLNR incorrectly assert that this court held that Sharma was
 not entitled to a contested case hearing because BLNR engaged in
 the custodial management of public property by terminating his
 lease. Rather, the Sharma court held that BLNR did not have to
 hold a contested case before terminating Sharma’s lease because
 such a hearing was not required by statute or due process.
 
Likewise, Big Island Small Ranchers does not support
 
BLNR’s and the University’s contention that HRS Chapter 91 does
 not apply in this case. In that case, BLNR decided to auction
 leases of certain parcels and lots of public land to qualified
 bidders. Big Island Small Ranchers, 60 Haw. at 229, 588 P.2d at
 
433. Before the auction was held, the appellants filed a lawsuit
 
against BLNR, arguing, inter alia, that BLNR’s authorization of
 
21
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the public auction was null and void because BLNR engaged in
 
“rulemaking” when it took such action, but failed to comply with
 the formal rulemaking procedures prescribed in HRS Chapter 91. 
Id. at 230, 588 P.2d at 433. BLNR filed a motion to dismiss the
 complaint or, alternatively, for summary judgment. Id. at 231­
32, 588 P.2d at 434. The circuit court dismissed the complaint
 and entered judgment in favor of BLNR. Id. at 233-34, 588 P.2d
 
at 435. On appeal, this court affirmed, holding that BLNR was
 not required to comply with the rulemaking requirements in HRS
 Chapter 91 because “the conduct of the State in this case comes
 within the ‘custodial management of . . . property’ exception to
 Chapter 91.” Id. at 239, 588 P.2d at 438 (alteration in
 
original) (quoting HRS § 91-1(4)). 
BLNR and the University’s reliance upon Big Island
 
Small Ranchers is misplaced for two reasons. First, Big Island
 Small Ranchers is distinguishable from the present case insofar
 as there, the appellants specifically argued that BLNR, in
 deciding to auction the leases for the parcels of public land,
 had improperly engaged in rulemaking without complying with the
 requisite procedures under HRS Chapter 91. By contrast, here,
 Flores does not argue that BLNR engaged in rulemaking when it
 consented to the Sublease, such that BLNR was required to comply
 with the procedures related to rulemaking in HRS Chapter 91. 
22
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Second, BLNR and the University construe the holding in
 
Big Island Small Ranchers too broadly. In that case, this court
 
did not hold that whenever BLNR acts as a landlord in matters
 relating to leases of public lands, such actions categorically
 qualify as the custodial management of public property, and
 therefore, constitute matters of internal agency management,
 which fall outside the scope of HRS Chapter 91. Rather, this
 court rejected the appellants’ argument that BLNR had engaged in
 rulemaking and was thus required to comply with HRS Chapter 91’s
 rulemaking procedures, based on its conclusion that BLNR’s
 auctioning of leases for public lands amounted to the custodial
 management of public property. 
Therefore, we conclude BLNR and the University’s
 
arguments based upon Sharma and Big Island Small Ranchers are
 unavailing. These cases do not establish that BLNR’s actions in
 this case fall outside the scope of HRS Chapter 91. Accordingly,
 we consider whether BLNR was required to hold a contested case
 hearing under HRS Chapter 91 before consenting to the Sublease. 
B. A contested case hearing was not required by law. 
An administrative agency must hold a contested case 
hearing when such a hearing is required by law. See HRS § 91­
1(5) (2012); In re Maui Elec. Co., 141 Hawai' i 249, 258, 408 P.3d 
1, 10 (2017). A contested case hearing is required by law when 
23
           
         
        
        
         
         
       
         
        
        
       
         
        
       
      
      
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it is required by: (1) statute; (2) administrative rule; or (3)
 
constitutional due process. Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, 136 Hawai' i at 
390, 363 P.3d at 238.
 
1. A contested case hearing was not required by statute.
 
BLNR and the University argue that a contested case
 
hearing was not required by statute because HRS § 171-36(a)(6),
 
which governs BLNR’s authority to consent to a sublease, does not
 require such a hearing. HRS § 171-36(a)(6) (2011) establishes
 the restrictions that apply to subleases of public lands, and
 states: 
(6)	 The lessee shall not sublet the whole or any
part of the demised premises except with the
approval of the board; provided that prior to
the approval, the board shall have the right to
review and approve the rent to be charged to the
sublessee; provided further that in the case
where the lessee is required to pay rent based
on a percentage of its gross receipts, the
receipts of the sublessee shall be included as
part of the lessee’s gross receipts; provided
further that the board shall have the right to
review and, if necessary, revise the rent of the
demised premises based upon the rental rate
charged to the sublessee including the
percentage rent, if applicable, and provided
that the rent may not be revised downward[.]
 
In other words, HRS § 171-36(a)(6) provides that a
 
sublease of public lands is not valid unless BLNR approves of it. 
In deciding whether to consent to a sublease, BLNR may review and
 approve the rent that will be charged under the sublease, and may
 review and raise the rent on the primary lease based upon the
 rent to be charged under the sublease. HRS § 171-36(a)(6). 
24
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, HRS § 171-36(a)(6) does not contain any 
language that states or otherwise suggests that BLNR must hold a 
contested case hearing before consenting to a sublease. See HRS 
§ 171-36(a)(6). Thus, we hold that a contested case hearing was not mandated by statute in this case. See In re ' Îao Ground 
Water Mgmt. Area High-Level Source Water Use Permit Applications, 128 Hawai' i 228, 239, 287 P.3d 129, 140 (2012) [hereinafter In re 
'Îao] (determining that a hearing was not required before the 
Commission on Water Resource Management could establish an Interim Instream Flow Standard (IIFS) because “nothing in [the governing statute, HRS § 174C-71,] requires the Commission to hold a hearing before establishing or amending an IIFS”). 
2.	 A contested case hearing was not required by
administrative rule.
 
Although BLNR does not advance any arguments on this 
point, the University argues that a contested case hearing was 
not required by administrative rule. The University asserts that “there is nothing in the [Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR)] Rules, [Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR)] 
Title 13, that requires a public hearing for a consent to a sublease.” The University also notes that while several provisions of HAR Title 13 require BLNR to hold a hearing before taking other actions, “[t]here is no similar requirement for a 
25
           
       
      
        
       
     
      
      
       
       
      
      
       
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hearing in relation to the BLNR’s consent to a sublease.” Thus,
 
the University concludes that there was no rule-based mandate
 requiring BLNR to hold a contested case hearing before consenting
 to the Sublease. 
HAR Title 13 “governs practice and procedure before the
 
board of land and natural resources of the State of Hawaii under
 chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), the public land laws
 of the State and such other related acts as may now or hereafter
 be administered by the board.” HAR § 13-1-1 (2009). The
 University correctly observes that a few subsections in HAR Title
 13 expressly require BLNR to hold a contested case hearing in
 specific circumstances. For example, HAR § 13-184-11(1) requires
 BLNR to conduct a contested case hearing in matters concerning
 geothermal developmental activities within a geothermal resource
 subzone. HAR § 13-184-11(1) (2009) states: 
(1) The use of an area for geothermal development
activities within a geothermal resource subzone shall
be governed by the board, if such activities lie
within a conservation use district. If geothermal
development activities are proposed within a
conservation district, then, after receipt of a
properly filed and completed application, the board
shall conduct a public hearing and, upon appropriate
request, a contested case hearing pursuant to chapter
91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to determine whether,
pursuant to board regulations, a conservation district
use permit shall be granted to authorize the
geothermal development activities described in the
application
.
 
(Emphasis added.) Similarly, HAR § 13-300-38, which governs
 
determinations regarding the appropriate treatment of a
 
26
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
previously identified Native Hawaiian burial site, provides that
 
when a determination is made, BLNR must notify the applicant in
 writing “[t]hat an applicant who disagrees with the determination
 has the option to request reconsideration or appeal the decision
 as a contested case[.]” HAR § 13-300-38(b)(2). 
Thus, HAR §§ 13-184-11(1) and 13-300-38 illustrate that 
some subsections of HAR Title 13 contain language that explicitly requires BLNR to hold a contested case in certain circumstances, or entitles an aggrieved individual to a contested case hearing upon appropriate request. However, HAR Title 13 does not contain any provisions relating to BLNR’s authority to consent to a sublease of public lands, or the matter of whether BLNR is required to conduct a contested case hearing prior to consenting to a sublease. Therefore, we conclude “there is no rule-based requirement to hold a [contested case] hearing” in the case at bar. In re 'Îao, 128 Hawai' i at 239, 287 P.3d at 140. 
3. 	A contested case hearing was not required by
constitutional due process.
 
This court has set forth a two-step analysis for 
determining whether a person has a constitutional right to a 
hearing. Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Hawai' i at 376, 773 P.2d at 
260. First, this court considers whether “the particular
 
interest which claimant seeks to protect by a hearing [is]
 
27
           
     
       
        
        
      
      
       
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
‘property’ within the meaning of the due process clauses of the
 
federal and state constitutions.” Id. Second, if this court
 
concludes that the interest is “property,” this court analyzes
 “what specific procedures are required to protect it.” Id.
 
Therefore, in order to determine whether Flores was
 
entitled to a contested case hearing by constitutional due
 process, the following issues must be resolved: (1) whether
 Flores sought to protect an interest which qualifies as
 “property” in a constitutional sense, and (2) if so, whether a
 contested case hearing was required to protect such an interest. 
a. Constitutionally Cognizable Property Interest 
“To have a property interest in a benefit, a person
 
clearly must have more than an abstract need or desire for it. 
He must have more than a unilateral expectation of it. He must,
 instead, have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it.” Sandy
 
Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 377, 773 P.2d at 260 (quoting Bd. of
 Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 577 (1972)). 
Additionally, this court has explained that: 
The legitimate claims of entitlement that
constitute property interests are not created by the
due process clause itself. Instead, “they are created
and their dimensions are defined by existing rules or
understanding[s] that stem from an independent source
such as state law--rules or understanding[s] that
secure certain benefits and that support claims of
entitlement to those benefits.”
 
In re Maui Elec. Co., 141 Hawai' i at 260, 408 P.3d at 12 (quoting 
28
           
       
    
     
       
      
          
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In re 'Îao, 128 Hawai' i at 241, 287 P.3d at 142). 
On secondary appeal, Flores primarily argues that he 
has a property interest in engaging in traditional Native 
Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea, which is expressly protected by article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Article XII, section 7 provides: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,
customarily and traditionally exercised forsubsistence, cultural and religious purposes andpossessed by ahupua 'a tenants who are descendants of 
native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State toregulate such rights. 
In Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, this court effectively 
recognized that the interest of Native Hawaiians in pursing their 
traditional and customary cultural practices on Mauna Kea constitutes a property interest for the purposes of triggering due process protections. At issue in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou was whether BLNR violated the appellants’ due process rights by issuing a CDUP authorizing the TMT’s construction before holding a contested case hearing on the matter. 136 Hawai' i at 390, 363 
P.3d at 238. 
This court first held that “a contested case hearing 
was required as a matter of constitutional due process.” Id. 
The Mauna Kea Anaina Hou court acknowledged that “[t]he right to exercise Native Hawaiian customs and traditions is explicitly protected by article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution,” 
29
           
     
      
        
       
         
      
      
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and that the appellants argued that the TMT project would
 
significantly impair their ability to engage in Native Hawaiian
 cultural practices on Mauna Kea. Id. Based on the foregoing,
 
this court held: 
Given the substantial interests of Native
 
Hawaiians in pursuing their cultural practices on
Mauna Kea, the risk of an erroneous deprivation absent
the protections provided by a contested case hearing,
and the lack of undue burden on the government in
affording Appellants a contested case hearing, a
contested case hearing was “required by law”
regardless of whether BLNR had voted to approve one on
its own motion at the February 25, 2011 meeting.
 
Id. (quoting Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at
 
261). Having determined that a contested case hearing was
 mandated by due process, the Mauna Kea Anaina Hou court
 ultimately concluded that BLNR violated the appellants’ right to
 due process by granting the CDUP prior to holding a contested
 case hearing. Id. at 239, 363 P.3d at 239. 
Put differently, in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, this court 
applied the two-step framework articulated in Sandy Beach Defense Fund to ascertain whether BLNR was required to hold a contested case hearing before granting the CDUP. This court first analyzed whether the appellants sought to protect an interest that rose to the level of “property,” and then considered whether a contested case hearing was required to adequately protect that interest. See Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, 136 Hawai' i at 390, 363 P.3d at 238; 
Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 376-78, 773 P.2d at 260-61. In 
30
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
engaging in the foregoing analysis, this court effectively 
determined that the appellants’ interest in engaging in Native Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea qualified as “property” in the constitutional sense, due to the fact that the right to engage in such practices is expressly guaranteed by article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. See Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, 
136 Hawai' i at 390, 363 P.3d at 238. 
Akin to the appellants in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, here, 
Flores seeks to protect his interest in engaging in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea. Consequently, pursuant to article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution, 
as interpreted by this court in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, we conclude that Flores has shown that he seeks to protect a constitutionally cognizable property interest in this case. 
b. Whether a Contested Case Hearing was Required
 
Having determined that Flores has a property interest
 
in engaging in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural practices on
 Mauna Kea, we consider whether a contested case hearing was
 required to protect this interest. When determining the specific
 procedures required to comply with constitutional due process, we
 consider and balance three factors: “(1) the private interest
 which will be affected; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation
 of such interest through the procedures actually used, and the
 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
probable value, if any, of additional or alternative procedural
 
safeguards; and (3) the governmental interest, including the
 burden that additional procedural safeguards would entail.” 
Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261. 
Regarding the first factor, Flores asserts that the 
private interest that is affected by the Consent and the Sublease is his interest in engaging in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea. See section IV.B.3.a, supra. 
This court has previously recognized that this interest is “substantial,” as it is guaranteed by article XII, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, 136 Hawai' i at 
390, 363 P.3d at 238. 
With respect to the second factor, we acknowledge that,
 
as an initial matter, the parties largely dispute the extent to
 which the Sublease and the Consent adversely affected Flores’s
 interest in engaging in Native Hawaiian cultural practices on
 Mauna Kea, and whether there was a risk of erroneous deprivation
 on the basis that the Sublease and the Consent had no bearing
 upon this interest. However, assuming arguendo that the Sublease
 and the Consent had an impact on Flores’s interest under the
 specific circumstances of this case, we believe that there is no
 risk of erroneous deprivation, because Flores has already been
 afforded a full opportunity to participate in a contested case
 
32
           
     
         
          
         
            
              *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hearing and express his views and concerns on the matter, and he
 
has not persuaded us that the provision of an additional
 contested case hearing is necessary to adequately safeguard
 against erroneous deprivation in this case.
 
The parties do not dispute that Flores participated
 
extensively in the separate contested case hearing on the
 issuance of the CDUP that would authorize the TMT’s construction
 
6
 by presenting evidence, including a copy of the Sublease,  and
arguments concerning the effect that the TMT’s construction will
 have on his right to participate in traditional Native Hawaiian
 cultural practices on Mauna Kea. In this case, it appears that
 Flores seeks a distinct contested case hearing on the Consent in
 order to express the same concerns, and to vindicate the same
 interests, that he previously raised in the contested case
 hearing on the CDUP. Moreover, Flores does not clarify the
 extent to which, if BLNR held a contested case hearing on the
 Consent, he would put forth evidence and arguments materially
 different from that which he already proffered at the CDUP
 contested case hearing.
7 On this particular record, we are not
 
6 See note 4, supra.
 
7 Additionally, because the Sublease provides that TIO “shall use the
 
Subleased Premises solely to construct and operate the TMT Facilities” and
 
specifies that “[t]he construction and operation of the Subleased Premises
shall be conducted in strict compliance with the terms and conditions of [the
CDUP] . . . and any amended or subsequent [CDUP],” the potential impact of the
(continued...)
 
33
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
convinced that an additional contested case hearing would offer
 
any probable value in protecting against the erroneous
 deprivation of his interest in engaging in traditional Native
 Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea. 
Considering the third Sandy Beach factor in light of
 
the foregoing, it appears that BLNR has a strong interest in not
 having to hold a separate contested case hearing in this case. 
Put simply, to mandate BLNR to hold a full contested case hearing
 on whether it should consent to the Sublease would require BLNR
 to bear the duplicative administrative burden of providing
 procedural protections that would be of no additional value in
 safeguarding Flores’s interest in engaging in traditional Native
 Hawaiian cultural practices on Mauna Kea. See Briggs v.
 
Sullivan, 954 F.2d 534, 539-40 (9th Cir. 1992) (determining that,
 in applying the federal equivalent of the Sandy Beach Defense
 Fund balancing test, plaintiffs were not entitled to more
 detailed, thorough procedures because the government had a
 significant interest in not having to bear the substantial fiscal
 and administrative burdens of administering the enhanced
 procedures when such procedures would not substantially improve
 the risk of erroneous deprivation). 
7(...continued)
Sublease  o n  Flores’s  asserted  interests  would  appear  to  overlap  entirely  with
the  potential  impact  of  the  CDUP.
   
34
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In sum, Flores seeks to protect an interest that this
 
court has previously recognized as substantial--his interest in
 
participating in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural practices
 on Mauna Kea. Even assuming arguendo that the Sublease and
 Consent would impact this interest under the specific
 circumstances of this case, we believe that there is no risk of
 its erroneous deprivation absent an additional contested case
 hearing, because the record demonstrates that Flores has already
 participated in the separate contested case hearing on the CDUP,
 and was thereby afforded a full and fair opportunity to express
 his views and concerns as to the effect that the Sublease, the
 Consent, and the TMT’s construction would have on his interest in
 engaging in traditional Native Hawaiian cultural practices on
 Mauna Kea. To require BLNR to hold another contested case
 hearing in such circumstances would require BLNR to shoulder
 duplicative administrative burdens and comply with additional
 procedural requirements that would offer no further protective
 value. Based upon the foregoing consideration of the three Sandy
 Beach Defense Fund factors and the record currently before us, we
 hold that BLNR did not violate Flores’s constitutional right to
 due process by denying his request for a contested case hearing
 in the present case. 
To conclude, we hold that Flores was not entitled to a
 
35
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contested case hearing regarding whether BLNR should consent to 
the Sublease because, on the record in this case, such a hearing was not required by statute, administrative rule, or due process. Accordingly, the environmental court erred in ruling that “Flores was denied the right to a contested case hearing on the subject Consent to Sublease in violation of his constitutional right to a hearing under Article 12, Section 7 of the Hawai' i State 
Constitution and Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, and specifically section IV of the concurring opinion therein.” 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons stated above, we reverse the 
environmental court’s January 6, 2017 Final Judgment and “Order Granting In Part and Denying In Part Appellees State of Hawai' i, 
Board of Land and Natural Resources, Department of Land and Natural Resources, and Chairperson Suzanne D. Case’s Motion for Stay of Proceedings, or in the Alternative for the Court to Issue its Decision on Appeal, Filed October 25, 2016; Vacating Consent to Sublease and Non-Exclusive Easement Agreement Between TMT International Observatory LLC and the University of Hawaii Under 
36
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
General Lease No. S-4191; and Remanding Matter to the Board of
 
Land and Natural Resources.”
 Clyde J. Wadsworth and
Kaliko'onalani D. Fernandes,
(Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry,William. J. Wynhoff, JulieChina and David D. Day, withthem on the briefs) forAppellees-Appellants/Cross-Appellees State of Hawai' i,
Board of Land and Natural Resources, Department of Landand Natural Resources, andChairperson Suzanne D. Case 
David Kauila Kopper and
Camille Kaimâlie Kalama for 
Appellant-Appellee E. Kalani
Flores
 
John P. Manaut and Ian L. 
Sandison (Arsima A. Mullerwith them on the briefs) forAppellee-Appellee/Cross-Appellant University ofHawai'i /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
37
 