 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCCQ-23-0000515 07-OCT-2024 08:56 AM Dkt. 159 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
---o0o---
ALOHA PETROLEUM, LTD., 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
NATIONAL UNION FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY OF PITTSBURGH, PA, 
and AMERICAN HOME ASSURANCE COMPANY, 
Defendants-Appellees. 
SCCQ-23-0000515 
 
CERTIFIED QUESTIONS FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAIʻ I 
(CASE NO. 22-00372 JAO-WRP) 
 
OCTOBER 7, 2024 
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND DEVENS, JJ.; 
WITH GINOZA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The City and County of Honolulu and the County of Maui sued 
several fossil fuel companies, including Aloha Petroleum, Ltd., 
for climate change-related harms. 
Aloha demands a defense in  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
these suits from two insurance companies, National Union Fire 
Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA and American Home Assurance 
Company, both subsidiaries of American Insurance Group (AIG). 
We refer to the defendants collectively as AIG. 
The AIG subsidiaries issued several standard commercial 
general liability (CGL) insurance policies to Aloha’s parent 
company. This case is about whether those policies obligate AIG 
to defend Aloha in the counties’ lawsuits. 
We answer two certified questions from the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawaiʻi. The first asks 
whether an “accident” includes an insured’s reckless conduct. The second asks whether greenhouse gases (GHGs) are “pollutants” as defined in the policies’ pollution exclusions. 
We answer the first question Yes, in Aloha’s favor. 
An 
“accident” includes reckless conduct. 
AIG’s policies cover an “occurrence.” The policies define 
an “occurrence” as an “accident.” “Accident” is undefined. The 
counties’ lawsuits allege Aloha acted recklessly – it knew of 
climate risk, but emitted – and misled the public about the dangers of emitting - greenhouse gases anyway. We hold an 
“accident” includes reckless conduct for three reasons. 
First, this outcome fits our precedents. This court’s 
decision in Tri-S held that recklessness may be an “occurrence.” 
Tri-S Corp. v. Western World Ins. Co.
, 110 Hawaiʻi 473, 494, 135 
2  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.3d 82, 103 (2006). In contrast, this court held in Caraang
that an “occurrence” requires an injury that is not “the 
expected or reasonably foreseeable result of the insured’s own 
intentional acts or omissions.” AIG Haw. Ins. Co., Inc. v. Est.
of Caraang, 74 Haw. 620, 636, 851 P.2d 321, 329 (1993). When an insured acts recklessly, it knows the risk of a foreseeable 
injury. A reckless insured acts “accidentally” under Tri-S, but 
not under Caraang, it may seem. 
We clarify what Caraang meant by “reasonably foreseeable.” 
In that case’s context, Caraang referred to the reasonably foreseeable results of an insured’s intentionally harmful 
conduct. Caraang used “reasonably foreseeable” as another way 
of invoking the intentional conduct exception to coverage. 
Read this way, our cases are not in conflict. We follow 
Tri-S’ definition of intentional harm and expected injury. We hold that when an insured perceives a risk of harm, its conduct 
is an “accident” unless it intended to cause harm or expected 
harm with practical certainty. See Tri-S
, 110 Hawaiʻi at 494 
n.8, 135 P.3d at 103 n.8. 
Second, the plain meaning of “accident” supports the idea 
that an “accident” includes reckless conduct. 
Third, interpreting an “accident” to include reckless 
conduct honors the principle of fortuity. 
Thus, we answer the first question Yes. 
3  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We answer the second question Yes, in AIG’s favor. GHGs 
are “pollutants” under the insurance policies’ pollution 
exclusion clause. The exclusion bars coverage for emitting (or 
misleading the public about emitting) GHGs. 
Five reasons support our Yes answer. First, climate-
heating gases are an example of the “traditional environmental 
pollution” that the pollution exclusion was designed to exclude. 
Second, following the plain-language reading adopted by some courts, GHGs fit the exclusion’s definition of “pollutant.” 
Third, this court’s “legal uncertainty” rule does not prompt a 
duty to defend here, because uncertainty about the exclusion 
does not affect our outcome – GHGs are “pollutants” under any 
reasonable interpretation. Fourth, because there are not two 
plausible interpretations here, the exclusion is not ambiguous. 
Last, Aloha’s reasonable expectation of coverage does not 
stretch to encompass traditional pollution claims. 
II. BACKGROUND 
We summarize the underlying deceptive marketing suits, the 
specific language of the insurance policies, and the parties’ 
arguments. 
A. The Underlying Lawsuits 
Aloha demands a defense in two lawsuits: City and County of 
Honolulu v. Sunoco LP, and County of Maui v. Sunoco LP. Besides 
4  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Aloha, the suits name many major oil companies as defendants, 
including Exxon, Shell, Chevron, BP, and ConocoPhillips. 
The suits allege that the fossil fuel industry knew 
beginning in the 1960s that its products would cause 
catastrophic climate change. Rather than mitigate their 
emissions, defendants concealed their knowledge of climate 
change, promoted climate science denial, and increased their 
production of fossil fuels. Defendants’ actions, the complaint alleged, increased carbon emissions, which have caused and will 
cause significant damage to the counties. 
What did the industry know? In 1965, President Johnson’s 
Science Advisory Committee released a report documenting the 
basic science of climate change. In a message to Congress, 
President Johnson warned that “[t]his generation has altered the 
composition of the atmosphere on a global scale through . . . a 
steady increase in carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil 
fuels.” In the following years, the American Petroleum Institute (API), an oil industry group, commissioned additional 
studies confirming the science of climate change. API 
distributed these studies to its member companies. The studies 
predicted that climate change would noticeably increase 
temperatures around 2000 and cause catastrophic effects by the 
mid-21st century. 
5  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Privately, some defendants acted on these reports by 
climate-adapting their operations, like raising offshore oil 
platforms. But publicly, fossil fuel companies and their 
associations promoted denial campaigns to cast doubt on climate 
science. 
What did Aloha know? The complaints do not allege that 
Aloha had specific knowledge about climate change. Rather, they 
allege that Aloha’s former parent, Phillips 66, and current parent, Sunoco, received or should have received information 
from API, other industry groups, and publicly available 
scientific data. Thus, Aloha was allegedly on notice that its 
products cause catastrophic climate change. 
The complaints allege that “[d]efendants had actual 
knowledge that their products were defective and dangerous,” and 
“acted with conscious disregard for the probable dangerous 
consequences of their conduct’s and products’ foreseeable impact 
upon the rights of others.”  Therefore, the District Court concluded in its order to this court that the counties allege 
reckless conduct. 
Both lawsuits assert five causes of action. They allege 
trespass (primarily entry of ocean water onto county property) 
and public and private nuisance (unreasonable sale of fossil 
fuels interfering with counties’ and community’s property 
rights). They also allege negligent and strict liability 
6  
   
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
failure to warn. Defendants had a duty to warn the public about 
the dangers of their products, breached that duty by 
affirmatively promoting fossil fuels and misrepresenting climate 
change, and thus damaged the counties. 
The complaints catalogue the counties’ injuries: increased 
planning costs, erosion and beach loss, flooding, decreased 
fresh water, damage to water infrastructure, harm to endemic 
species, increased risk of extreme heat and storms, and damage to Native Hawaiian cultural resources. The counties requested 
an unspecified amount of compensatory and punitive damages, 
equitable relief, disgorgement of profits, attorney fees, and 
costs. 
B. The Insurance Policies 
Aloha alleges that AIG’s subsidiaries issued Aloha’s parent 
company a series of annual liability insurance policies from 1978-1981, 1984-1989, and 2004-2010. AIG can’t find copies of 
the 1978-1981 policies, so they are outside the scope of this case. 
The language in these policies evolved over the years as 
the insurance industry’s standard form changed. The 1984-1987 
policies defined an “occurrence” as “an accident, including 
continuous or repeated exposure to conditions, which results in 
bodily injury or property damage neither expected nor intended 
from the standpoint of the insured.” From 1988 on, the policies 
7  
  The policies’ pollution exclusions are more varied.   In 
their federal court briefing, the parties agreed these 
variations are immaterial to this case.   For our purposes, we 
quote the “total” pollution exclusion from the 2004-2010 policies: 
       
   
         
           
      
          
    
           
         
         
        
           
  
           
        
       
          
    
        
       
         
       
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
define an “occurrence” as “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful 
conditions.”  
This insurance does not apply to: 
f. Pollution 
(1) “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which would 
not have occurred in whole or part but for the actual, 
alleged, or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, 
migration, release or escape of “pollutants” at any time. 
. . . . 
(2) Any loss, cost or expense arising out of any: 
(a) Request, demand, order or statutory or regulatory 
requirement that any insured or others test for, monitor, 
clean up, remove, contain, treat, detoxify or neutralize, 
or in any way respond to, or assess the effects of “pollutants”; or 
(b) Claim or suit by or on behalf of a governmental 
authority for damages because of testing for, monitoring, 
cleaning up, removing, containing, treating, detoxifying or 
neutralizing, or in any way responding to, or assessing the 
effects of, “pollutants.” 
    . . . . 
“Pollutants” [mean
] “any solid, liquid, gaseous or 
thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled, reconditioned or 
reclaimed.” 
C. U.S. District Court Proceedings 
Aloha sued the AIG entities for breaching their duties to 
defend, indemnify, and act in good faith. Aloha seeks a 
declaratory judgment that AIG must defend and indemnify. 
8  
   
 
 
         
         
 
 
        
      
     
      
     
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
AIG denied Aloha’s allegations. AIG argued that Aloha’s 
conduct was intentional, therefore the counties’ lawsuits do not 
raise an “occurrence” under the policies. Aloha understood 
climate science, so climate-caused damage was expected, not 
fortuitous, AIG said. Plus, the policies’ pollution exclusions 
bar coverage for the lawsuits’ claims. 
The parties cross-moved for partial summary judgment on the 
duty to defend. 
The District Court certified two questions to this court: 
(1) For an insurance policy defining a covered “occurrence” 
in part as an “accident,” can an “accident” include 
recklessness? 
(2) For an “occurrence” insurance policy excluding coverage 
of “pollution” damages, are greenhouse gases 
“pollutants,” i.e., “gaseous” “irritant[s] or 
contaminant[s], including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste”? 
We accepted both questions and ordered briefing. 
D. Supreme Court Arguments 
1. Aloha’s Arguments 
9  To Aloha, Tri-S defines an “occurrence.” That case did 
three things, in Aloha’s view. By reaching the “expected or 
intended” exclusion, Tri-S necessarily interpreted the 
definition of an “occurrence.” 110 Hawaiʻ i at 494, 135 P.3d at 
103. It held that an “accident” includes recklessness. Id.
And it supplanted the earlier Caraang line of cases focused on  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the objectively foreseeable results of an insured’s intentional 
conduct. 
Aloha adds that Tri-S’ interpretation of the “expected or 
intended” exclusion informs the meaning of an “occurrence.” 
Aloha turns to the drafting history of the standard CGL policy. 
From the 1960s until 1986, the standard “occurrence” definition 
said it was not “expected nor intended from the standpoint of 
the insured.” In 1986, the “expected or intended” language moved from the definition of “occurrence” to a stand-alone 
exclusion. Thus, Aloha says, the meaning of the provisions are 
linked. Aloha argues Tri-S’ interpretation of the “expected or 
intended” language should inform an “occurrence” in both pre-
and post-1986 versions of the policies. 
Next, Aloha contends that Tri-S, not the Caraang line of 
cases, controls the meaning of an “occurrence.” Aloha gives two 
reasons. 
First, Hawaiian Ins. & Guar. Co., Ltd. v. Brooks, 67 Haw. 
285, 686 P.2d 23 (1984), Hawaiian Ins. & Guar. Co., Ltd. v. Blanco, 72 Haw. 9, 804 P.2d 876 (1990), and Caraang addressed a 
policyholder who commits or abets an obviously harmful violent 
tort. Those cases dealt with sexual assaults and shootings. 
Aloha says that makes them different than the counties’ products 
liability case. Aloha writes, “the Caraang definition reflects 
the fact that the resulting harms from the policyholders’ 
10  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
actions in those cases were so obvious – the act and certainty 
of injury were inseparable – that intent to injure a third party 
could be inferred.” 
Second, Aloha says that Caraang’s holding works for 
intentional conduct, but doesn’t make sense when the underlying 
suit alleges negligence. Caraang says an occurrence is not an 
“expected or reasonably foreseeable result of the insured’s own intentional acts”. Caraang, 74 Haw. at 636, 851 P.2d at 329 
(emphasis added). But to have a viable negligence claim, the 
plaintiff’s injury has to be foreseeable. No way can Caraang’s 
definition apply to negligence, Aloha grumbles, because it would 
exclude every negligence claim. 
Rather, Aloha explains that Tri-S supplies the negligence 
answer. That case defined an “expected” injury as one 
“practically certain” to occur. Tri-S
, 110 Hawaiʻi at 494 n.8, 
135 P.3d at 103 n.8. This definition harmonizes the law. In 
Aloha’s view, 
Caraang applies when we infer an intent to cause 
injury from the obviously harmful nature of the tort, and Tri-S applies otherwise. Aloha suggests that this court can reaffirm Tri-S without overruling Caraang. 
Aloha adds that Tri-S’ definition of “occurrence” fits the 
fortuity principle. It points to a recent Wisconsin Supreme 
Court decision, Dostal v. Strand, 984 N.W.2d 382 (Wis. 2023). 
That case held that conduct amounting to second degree reckless 
11  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
homicide (recklessly causing death) may constitute an 
“occurrence.” Id. at 393. The Wisconsin court reasoned that a 
person “may engage in behavior that involves a calculated risk 
without expecting — no less reasonably — that an accident will 
occur . . . . Such behavior, which may be reckless for criminal 
responsibility purposes, does not necessarily mean that the 
actor reasonably expected the accident to result.” Id. at 392 
(cleaned up). 
Next, Aloha turns to the pollution exclusion. Aloha first 
points to the 1986 and 1987 National Union policies, which don’t have a relevant pollution exclusion. No matter what the 
exclusion in other policies means, Aloha believes AIG owes it a 
defense under these policies. 
The U.S. District Court understood Aloha’s argument but 
certified the pollution question anyway. 
It said the counties’ 
lawsuits “sparsely allege damages occurring before 2000” making coverage under the 1986 and 1987 policies “apparently not possible.” Aloha disagrees with the District Court, noting that 
the duty to defend encompasses the mere possibility of coverage. 
It also points to allegations of damage during the 1980s, 
primarily sea level rise and erosion. 
In case we do reach the exclusion, Aloha makes four further 
arguments. First, it argues textually that the greenhouse gases 
at issue are not “pollutants.”  Aloha focuses on the words 
12  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“irritant” and “contaminant.”  “Irritant” means a substance 
causes irritation to humans, Aloha contends. Thus, “irritant” 
applies in personal injury claims, but not when the claim only 
alleges property damage. 
Nor are greenhouse gases “contaminants.”  The relevant 
“contaminant” here is carbon dioxide, not ocean water or rain, 
Aloha says. Those liquids may contaminate and damage the 
counties’ property, but carbon dioxide doesn’t directly contaminate it. 
Second, Aloha argues that the word “contaminant” must be 
read in the exclusion’s context, not literally. Any substance, 
even water, can become a “contaminant” if it causes bodily 
injury or property damage. Taken to a literal extreme, Aloha 
explains, ordinary chlorine in a pool is a “liquid” 
“contaminant” “dispersed” in the pool, and thus a “pollutant” 
under the policies. 
Aloha contends the policy should be read in the appropriate 
context: traditional environmental pollution by hazardous wastes. Aloha turns to the drafting history of the pollution 
exclusion in standard commercial liability policies. It argues 
the exclusion was meant to cover environmental clean-up costs 
resulting from the insured’s operations, not liability from its 
finished products. Aloha also relies on federal cases holding 
that the verbs in the exclusion - “discharge, dispersal, 
13  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
seepage, migration, release, or escape” - are environmental law 
terms of art referring to traditional environmental pollution. 
Here, there’s a difference between the counties’ suits and 
an environmental suit to remediate carbon dioxide, Aloha 
believes. An environmental remediation suit would be excluded, 
but the counties’ suits are not. 
Third, Aloha says the exclusion is ambiguous and so should 
be interpreted in its favor. SeeSt. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. 
Co. v. Bodell Constr. Co.
, 153 Hawaiʻi 381, 383, 538 P.3d 1049, 
1051 (2023) (this court reads insurance policy ambiguities in 
the insured’s favor). 
Fourth, a narrow view of the exclusion aligns with Aloha’s 
objectively reasonable expectation of coverage. 
The policies 
grant Aloha products liability coverage. If the pollution 
exclusion barred coverage for product liability claims related 
to selling gasoline - Aloha’s primary business – the coverage 
would be worthless, Aloha insists. Thus, Aloha reasonably 
expected coverage for damage arising out of the ordinary use of 
its products. 
2. AIG’s Arguments 
AIG maintains that Caraang sets the standard for an 
“occurrence.” Caraang holds that an “occurrence” policy does 
not cover “the expected or reasonably foreseeable result of the 
14  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
insured’s own intentional acts or omissions.” 74 Haw. at 636, 
851 P.2d at 329. 
Here, AIG argues that climate change is the foreseeable 
result of Aloha’s intentional emission of GHGs. AIG quotes this 
court’s characterization of Honolulu’s suit in City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu v. Sunoco LP
, 153 Hawaiʻi 326, 337, 537 P.3d 1173, 1184 
(2023). We described Honolulu’s theory of liability: 
“Defendants knew about the dangers of using their fossil fuel 
products, failed to warn consumers about those known dangers, 
and engaged in a sophisticated disinformation campaign to 
increase fossil fuel consumption.” Id.
AIG also turns to this court’s decisions in 
Brooks, Blanco, 
and Caraang, three cases dealing with insurance coverage for intentional torts. Brooks examined coverage for an insured 
truck driver. As he drove, a passenger raped a woman – this was no “accident” because the insured saw the rape happening and did 
nothing to stop it. Brooks, 67 Haw. at 291, 686 P.2d at 28. 
Similarly, Blanco held that an insured firing a rifle in Blanco’s direction was not an “accident,” because a reasonable person would expect injury to result. Blanco, 72 Haw. at 18, 
804 P.2d at 881. From these cases, AIG concludes that an “accident” depends on if a reasonable person would anticipate 
injury. A policyholder’s subjective intent to injure is 
irrelevant. 
15  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Caraang itself also involved violence, AIG says. A car 
passenger shot Caraang, killing him. Caraang, 74 Haw. at 624-
25, 851 P.2d. at 324. This court held that Caraang’s death was 
accidental from the driver’s perspective, but intentional from 
the shooter’s perspective. Id. at 637, 643, 851 P.2d at 329, 
332. Thus, the car’s insurer had a duty to defend the driver, 
but not the shooter. Id.
A year later, AIG continues, this court applied 
Caraang’s 
“expected or reasonably foreseeable result of the insured’s own intentional acts” standard in Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut 
Co., Inc. v. Indus. Indem. Co.
, 76 Hawaiʻi 166, 170, 872 P.2d 
230, 234 (1994). That case involved a breach of contract action 
between business partners. Id.This court held that the 
problematic underlying conduct – planting macadamia seedlings incorrectly and in breach of contract – was intentional and thus 
not an accident and not an “occurrence.” Id.
 at 170-71, 872 
P.2d at 234-35. 
AIG frames this case’s legal issue as whether Tri-S 
supplanted Caraang’s foreseeable result standard.  AIG gives 
several reasons why Tri-S did not replace Brooks, Blanco, 
Caraang, and Hawaiian Holiday. 
First, Tri-S did not intend to supplant Caraang, AIG says, 
because it never mentions Caraang, Brooks, Blanco, or Hawaiian 
Holiday. AIG notes that three former justices of this court 
16  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
joined Tri-S, but either wrote or joined combinations of 
Caraang, Brooks, Blanco, and Hawaiian Holiday. The former 
justices can’t have intended to silently overrule their own 
prior decisions. 
Second, AIG contends that Tri-S only interpreted the 
“expected or intended” exclusion, not the definition of 
“accident.” This view of Tri-S must be correct, AIG insists, 
because Tri-S’ putative conclusion that accidents include recklessness clashes with the bedrock principle that insurance 
only covers fortuitous accidents. The plain meaning of 
“accident” – something unforeseen that occurs by chance – is 
inconsistent with recklessness. 
AIG also points to the drafting history of the standard 
policy. Before 1986, when the “occurrence” definition included 
the “expected or intended” language, courts were split on the 
meaning of “occurrence.” Some courts held that the word 
“accident” and the expected or intended language meant the same thing: an occurrence must be an accident neither expected nor 
intended from the insured’s standpoint. 3 New Appleman
Insurance Law Practice Guide § 30.07[4]. Other courts 
disagreed, holding that “accident” means accidental in nature, 
and the expected or intended language confirms that those 
injuries are not accidental. Id.
17  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The 1986 revision moving “expected or intended” to a 
separate exclusion was meant to clarify the issue, AIG says. 
Splitting the language made “accident” stand alone. Thus, AIG 
argues, “accident” should be interpreted independently, without 
considering the insured’s subjective expectation or intent to 
injure. 
AIG says Caraang establishes a two-step test. First, we 
see if the insured acted with the intent to perform the act – like firing a gun. If the complaint alleges unintentional 
conduct – like a rifle’s inadvertent discharge, then there has 
been an occurrence. Tri-S is an unintentional conduct case, AIG 
says. 
If the conduct was intentional, AIG argues we proceed to 
step two. We examine if the resulting injuries were reasonably foreseeable. If so, then no occurrence, and no need to address 
any exclusions. Thus, AIG disagrees that the meaning of 
“occurrence” and the meaning of the expected or intended exclusion follow the same analysis. Rather, they are separate 
analyses that happen at difference stages. 
On the pollution exclusion, AIG disputes Aloha’s contention 
that the exclusion is irrelevant because two 1980s policies lack 
it. AIG’s policies only cover damage “which occurs during the 
policy period.” The District Court concluded that coverage 
under the 1980s policies was “apparently not possible,” 
18  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
signaling that it will dismiss Aloha’s claims under those 
policies. AIG notes that Aloha presented this argument to the 
District Court, which certified the question anyway. AIG 
contends the pollution exclusion issue is needed to determine 
AIG’s duty to defend under later policies, particularly the late 
2000s policies. 
Substantively, AIG argues that a layperson, Hawaiʻ i law, and 
the federal Clean Air Act all consider carbon dioxide a 
pollutant. AIG parses the plain meaning of the words in the 
pollution exclusion, arguing that greenhouse gases are 
“gaseous,” “thermal” “irritants” and “contaminants.”  The GHGs 
that result from burning gasoline are “smoke,” “vapor,” and “chemicals” under the exclusion. Carbon dioxide is an 
“irritant” and “contaminant” because it is causing planet-
altering climate change. 
Hawaiʻi’s Air Pollution Control law, Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 342B-71 (2022), 342B-72 (2022), 342B-73 
(2022), and Hawaiʻ i Administrative Rule (HAR) § 11-60.1-1 (2014) 
treat GHGs as pollutants. Twenty years ago, the District of Hawaiʻi relied on Hawaiʻ i pollution statutes to hold that 
concrete dust is a pollutant under an identical pollution 
exclusion. See Allen v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 307 F. Supp. 2d 
1170, 1178 (D. Haw. 2004). 
19  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Similarly, AIG says, federal law (42 United States Code 
§ 7602(g)) and federal caselaw (Massachusetts v. E.P.A., 549 
U.S. 497 (2007)), define GHGs as pollutants. International law, 
including the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, also considers GHGs pollutants. And, AIG says, 
it was widely understood long before AIG issued its policies 
that carbon dioxide causes global warming. 
AIG disputes Aloha’s distinction between climate change and 
“traditional environmental pollution.” 
It claims that there’s 
no basis for that distinction in the policy language. Climate 
change has similar effects to traditional environmental 
pollution, making Aloha’s distinction meaningless. Plus, Aloha 
cannot deny that GHGs are pollutants, because in Sunoco it 
claimed that the Clean Air Act regulates GHGs and thus preempts 
Honolulu’s suit. See Sunoco
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 339, 537 P.3d at 
1186. 
Last, AIG responds to Aloha’s argument that the exclusion 
does not bar coverage for products liability. 
AIG argues that 
Aloha’s misrepresentations, not its sale of gasoline, are on 
trial. 
III. DISCUSSION 
We answer the first question Yes.  An “occurrence” includes 
recklessness. 
20  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The District Court’s certified question asks us to 
reconcile Tri-S and Caraang. We clarify Caraang’s description 
of a “reasonably foreseeable” harm. Caraang’s “reasonably 
foreseeable” language referred to an insured’s intent, not expectation. Thus, there is no conflict between our cases. 
Tri-S’ definition of “expected” controls. The standard 
insurance policy’s drafting history, the plain meaning of 
“accident,” and the principle of fortuity each support this outcome. 
We answer the second question Yes. Aloha’s greenhouse gas 
emissions fit within the pollution exclusion. 
Courts interpret the pollution exclusion differently. 
There are two common divisions: (1) whether the exclusion’s 
language should be read literally or only applied to 
“traditional” environmental pollution and (2) whether the 
exclusion is ambiguous. These divisions do not render the 
exclusion ambiguous in this case. Ambiguity requires two plausible readings, but we conclude that here GHGs are 
pollutants under any plausible reading. 
Emitting GHGs is traditional environmental pollution. And, 
GHGs meet the exclusion’s literal definition of a pollutant; 
they are “gaseous” “contaminants” that are “released” causing 
“property damage.” Thus, there is no relevant legal uncertainty 
21  
  
  
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
here. And, Aloha could not reasonably expect coverage for the 
counties’ lawsuits, because GHGs are so clearly pollutants. 
A. Coverage for “Accidents” Includes Reckless Conduct 
The District Court asks whether recklessness can be an 
“accident” and thus a covered “occurrence.” The court 
identifies a conflict between our cases: “if Tri-S says 
recklessness can be an ‘accident,’ and if Caraang’s definition 
of ‘accident’ excludes risks of harms reasonably foreseeable 
from the perspective of the insured - i.e., recklessness - then 
there is a conflict.” 
Thus, the District Court wonders, if an insured is aware of 
the risk of harm and acts anyway, is that an “accident”? 
Yes. Awareness of risk differs from awareness of certain 
harm. Insurance covers risks. Per Tri-S, we hold that covered “accidents” differ from non-covered expected or intended 
injuries when the harm was intended or practically certain. 
First, we briefly recap the duty to defend in Hawaiʻi law. 
1. The Duty to Defend in Hawai
ʻi Law 
An insurance company owes two duties under its policy: the 
duty to defend its insured from lawsuits and the duty to 
indemnify its insured from liability. The duty to defend is 
broader than the duty to indemnify. St. Paul
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 
384, 538 P.3d at 1052. If there’s a possibility that an 
incident is covered under a policy – even a remote possibility – 
22  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the insurer owes a defense. Id.  at 383, 538 P.3d at 1051. This 
is Hawaiʻi’s “stout” duty to defend.  
Id.
The duty to defend includes “mixed” actions where some 
claims are covered and others are not. Id. at 384, 538 P.3d at 
1052. If one allegation in the complaint is potentially 
covered, the insurer must defend the whole lawsuit. Id.
This court interprets two documents to decide the scope of 
the duty to defend: the insurance policy and the underlying 
complaint. See Hawaiian Holiday
, 76 Hawaiʻi at 169, 872 P.2d at 
233. 
Insurance policies are contracts and are interpreted using 
the general rules of contract construction. St. Paul
, 153 
Hawaiʻi at 383, 538 P.3d at 1051.  The possibility of coverage 
depends on the policy’s words. Id.
But insurance policies are particularly one-sided 
contracts. 
Power dynamics shape this court’s interpretation. 
Insurance policies are considered contracts of adhesion. Dairy
Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. Co., Ltd.
, 92 Hawaiʻi 398, 411-12, 
992 P.2d 93, 106-07 (2000). They often (like here) use 
insurance industry standard forms. Id.Thus, we construe any 
ambiguity in the policy for the policyholder and against the 
insurer. St. Paul
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 383, 538 P.3d at 1051. We 
read the contract to the policyholder’s advantage. Id.
23  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The possibility of coverage also depends on the underlying 
complaint. Hawaiian Holiday
, 76 Hawaiʻi at 169, 872 P.2d at 233.  
We look at both the facts and the causes of action alleged in 
the complaint. See id.
 at 170–71, 872 P.2d at 234–35 (examining 
both); Allstate Ins. Co. v. Pruett
, 118 Hawaiʻi 174, 188, 186 
P.3d 609, 623 (2008) (same). But, legal allegations alone cannot create a possibility of coverage when the alleged facts 
exclude coverage. 
Dairy Rd. Partners
, 92 Hawaiʻi at 417, 992 
P.2d at 112. We apply the complaint’s allegations to the 
contract’s language to decide if there is a possibility of 
coverage. 
2. Tri-S
, not Caraang, Controls our Approach to an 
“Expected” Injury 
The District Court frames the issue as whether reckless 
conduct can be an “accident” and thus a covered “occurrence.” Caraang holds that if injuries are the “expected or reasonably 
foreseeable result of the insured’s own intentional acts or 
omissions,” they are not accidental. 74 Haw. at 636, 851 P.2d 
at 329. A reckless insured knows that its conduct carries a risk of injury but acts anyway. Recklessness, Black’s Law 
Dictionary (11th ed. 2019). So under Caraang, a reckless insured acts foreseeably and is not covered, the District Court 
reasons. 
24  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
By contrast, Tri-S plainly states that recklessness “does 
not involve intent or expectation of injury and is thus a 
covered occurrence under the policy.” Tri-S
, 110 Hawaiʻi at 494, 
135 P.3d at 103. An accident can include “harm that the insured 
should have anticipated.” Id.
 at 494 n.8, 135 P.3d at 103 n.8 
(cleaned up). Hence, the District Court sees a conflict. 
We see less conflict than the District Court. Caraang’s 
“reasonably foreseeable” language referred to intent, not expectation. Caraang and Tri-S both ruled that an “expected” 
injury is not an “accident.” Caraang didn’t define an 
“expected” result, but Tri-S did. So, Tri-S’ definition 
controls. 
Tri-S defined an “expected” injury as one “practically 
certain” to occur. Id. When an insured does not act with 
harmful intent, an “accident” hinges on the certainty of the 
risk. A policyholder’s awareness of a possible or probable risk 
can be an “accident.” When the risk crosses the line into 
“practical certainty,” it is no longer an “accident.” 
We clarify Caraang. When Caraang said that the injury 
cannot be “reasonably foreseeable,” it referred to cases where the insured acted with an intent to harm others. Our law infers 
from malicious intent or from especially dangerous activity the 
intent to cause the harm that actually happened. Tri-S
, 110 
Hawaiʻi at 494 n.8, 135 P.3d at 103 n.8; 3 
New Appleman on 
25  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Insurance Law Library Edition, §§ 18.01[6][c] (2023), 
18.03[2][f] (2016). Thus, from an insured’s perspective, the 
resulting harm was “reasonably foreseeable.” Caraang
essentially ruled that an “accident” is not an expected result or the result of an insured’s intentionally harmful conduct. 
Tri-S defines when a result is intended or expected. Tri-S
, 110 
Hawaiʻi at 494 n.8, 135 P.3d at 103 n.8.   
A review of insurance policy history, our cases, the plain 
meaning of “accident,” and the principle of fortuity each support this position. 
a. Insurance History 
The meaning of an “occurrence” in standard insurance 
policies is historically tied to the “expected or intended” 
exclusion that 
Tri-S interpreted. Before 1986, the standard 
policy defined “occurrence” as “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to conditions, which results in 
bodily injury or property damage neither expected nor intended 
from the standpoint of the insured.”  3 New Appleman on 
Insurance Law Library Edition § 18.03[2][b] (2023) (emphasis added). In that era, some courts treated the expected or 
intended language like an exclusion. Christopher C. French, 
Revisiting Construction Defects As “Occurrences” Under CGL 
Insurance Policies, 19 U. Pa. J. Bus. L. 101, 106 (2016). In 
1986, the Insurance Services Office moved the “expected or 
26  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intended” language from the definition of “occurrence” to a 
standalone exclusion, in line with that interpretation. Id. 
The “expected or intended” language, now bumped to its own 
exclusion, continues to inform our approach to an “accident.” 
We construe insurance policies according to their entire terms. 
Dairy Rd. Partners
, 92 Hawaiʻi at 411, 992 P.2d at 106. 
Functionally, “accident” and the “expected or intended” language 
continue to define the scope of coverage. Although the analysis 
now occurs in separate steps – first, determine an “accident,” 
then consider the exclusion – the standard policy continues to 
cover “accidents” that are not “expected or intended.” Thus, we 
believe that 
Tri-S’ interpretation of “expected” and “intended” 
is key to our analysis of an “accident.” 
b. Our Precedents 
The District Court believes this court’s precedents clash. 
We do not believe that either precedent controls over the other or that such a decision must be made. We decline to hold that 
Tri-S silently overruled earlier cases that it did not mention. 
We also reject the idea that Brooks, Blanco, Caraang, and Hawaiian Holiday control over Tri-S’ clear-cut holding. Rather, 
there is no conflict or inconsistency between Tri-S and Caraang, 
because Caraang’s “reasonably foreseeable” language refers to an 
insured’s intent, not an insured’s expectation. 
27  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
First, we examine Tri-S. A Tri-S employee drilled too 
close to power lines. He was electrocuted. Tri-S, 110 Hawaiʻ i 
at 493, 135 P.3d at 102. His estate alleged that Tri-S 
“wilfully and wantonly” - recklessly - failed to follow 
workplace safety standards, causing the employee’s wrongful 
death. Id. at 478, 135 P.3d at 87. Tri-S asserted that its 
insurer owed it a defense. Id. at 477, 135 P.3d at 86. 
This court concluded that the estate might prevail on a 
“‘wilful and wanton’ misconduct claim based upon evidence only of non-intentional misconduct.” Id. at 494, 135 P.3d at 103. 
This court examined an Indiana Court of Appeals case, PSI Energy, Inc. v. Home Ins. Co., 801 N.E.2d 705 (Ind. Ct. App. 2004). Relying on that decision, this court fleshed out 
definitions for both “expected” and “intended” as used in the 
policy. 
“Intentional” conduct encompasses the intent to cause 
injury, though “not necessarily the precise injury or severity 
of damage that in fact occurs.” Tri-S
, 110 Hawaiʻi at 494 n.8, 
135 P.3d at 103 n.8. Intentional conduct “is met either by 
showing an actual intent to injure, or by showing the nature and 
character of the act to be such that an intent to cause harm to 
the other party must be inferred as a matter of law.” Id.In 
this way, 
Tri-S accounts for the violence and fraud of Brooks, 
Blanco, Caraang, and Hawaiian Holiday type cases. 
28  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Tri-S held that “expected” injury is “practically certain” 
to occur from the insured’s subjective view. Id.Reckless 
conduct – awareness of risk of harm - falls short of practical 
certainty. Id.As applied to Tri-S, the employee’s death may 
have been possible or probable, but the complaint did not allege it was practically certain. Id.So Tri-S received coverage. 
Tri-S provides the tools to evaluate an “accident.” It 
creates a framework to assess the insured’s culpability. It draws a line between fault and mistake. If the insured intended 
to cause the harm that happened, a different harm, or acted so 
dangerously that the law must infer intent to harm, then the 
insured alone bears responsibility for its conduct. Likewise, 
if the insured acted with “practical certainty” of harm it is 
solely responsible. 
But insurance coverage does not require that the insured be 
blameless. Accidents that were preventable with better 
foresight still deserve coverage. Preventability is inherent in ordinary negligence. Defendants are not liable if the harm was 
unforeseeable. Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel
, 112 Hawaiʻi 3, 12, 
143 P.3d 1205, 1214 (2006). 
Both 
Tri-S and Caraang hold there is no insurance coverage 
for “expected” injuries. Tri-S defines “expected.” It draws a 
line based on the likelihood of the harm. “Expected” means 
29  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
practically certain, not somewhat likely. Tri-S , 110 Hawaiʻi at 
494 n.8, 135 P.3d at 103 n.8. On this, the cases do not differ. 
Caraang
 also holds that a “reasonably foreseeable” injury 
is not an “accident.” 74 Haw. at 636, 851 P.2d at 329. Here, 
we clarify Caraang. 
That case involved one person, Ilmar Godinez, driving a car 
while a second person fired a gun out the window, killing the 
shooter’s ex-girlfriend’s new boyfriend. Caraang, 74 Haw. at 
624-25, 851 P.2d at 324. This court held that from the driver’s 
perspective, the shooting was an “accident” because “(1) from 
Godinez’s perspective, the death was not the expected or 
anticipated result of any intentional act or omission on his part; (2) Godinez, being unaware the shooting was taking place, 
obviously made no decision to refrain from preventing Nelson’s 
death or otherwise mitigating the harm; and (3) Godinez did 
nothing to facilitate the shooting.” Id. at 636-37, 851 P.2d at 
329. Point (1) addressed Godinez’s expectation. Points (2) and 
(3) showed that Godinez had no harmful intent. Because Godinez 
neither expected nor intended the shooting, it was an “accident” as to him. Id. But because the shooter fired intentionally, 
his actions were not an “accident.” Id. at 643, 851 P.2d at 
332. 
Brooks and Blanco performed similar analyses. In Blanco, 
where the insured fired a rifle toward a neighbor intending to 
30  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
frighten him, the insured’s intent precluded insurance coverage. 
Blanco, 72 Haw. at 18, 804 P.2d at 881. In Brooks, a truck 
driver did nothing while a passenger raped a woman in the back 
of the truck. Brooks, 67 Haw. at 291, 686 P.2d at 27-28. 
Though the driver claimed he didn’t intend to facilitate the rape, this court ruled that both the driver and the passenger 
acted with harmful intent and an expectation that injury would 
result. Id.
In both cases, this court relied on the idea that an 
insured’s intent to cause one harm precludes coverage if a different harm results. Thus, Caraang, describing those cases, 
declared, “[t]he teaching of Blanco and Brooks, however, is 
that, in order for the insurer to owe a duty to defend or 
indemnify, the injury cannot be the expected or reasonably 
foreseeable result of the insured’s own intentional acts or 
omissions.” Caraang, 74 Haw. at 636, 851 P.2d at 329. Although 
perhaps worded inartfully, Caraang was referencing the 
reasonably foreseeable results of an insured’s harmful intent. 
This court did not aspire to define an “expected” injury as 
“reasonably foreseeable.” 
Thus, there is no conflict between Tri-S and Caraang. 
Caraang’s “reasonably foreseeable” language applies to the 
intent prong, not the expectation prong of this court’s 
31  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
analysis. Tri-S’ definition of an “expected” injury as 
“practically certain” is not in tension with Caraang. 
This approach best fits the logic of insurance coverage. 
If we apply a “reasonably foreseeable” test to expected 
injuries, we undermine a policyholder’s reasonable expectation 
that an insurance policy covering “accidents” covers negligence. 
See Guajardo v. AIG Hawaiʻi Ins. Co., Inc.
, 118 Hawaiʻi 196, 206, 
187 P.3d 580, 590 (2008) (protecting lay policyholder’s 
reasonable expectations). Overreading “reasonably foreseeable” 
risks creating a paradox where negligence is not insured. AES
Corp. v. Steadfast Ins. Co.
, 725 S.E.2d 532, 538 (Va. 2012) 
(Mims, J., concurring). Negligence requires foreseeability. A plaintiff has a viable negligence claim only if they allege the 
harm was foreseeable. Pulawa
, 112 Hawaiʻi at 12, 143 P.3d at 
1214. But if “accident” means an event where the harm was 
unforeseeable, then negligence and an “accident” become mutually 
exclusive. AES Corp.
, 725 S.E.2d at 538 (Mims, J., concurring). 
Applying this reading, an event can be foreseeable and therefore negligent, or unforeseeable and therefore an “accident.” But 
negligence can never be an “accident.” Id.So negligence is 
uninsured. 
If “reasonably foreseeable” just means foreseeable, Tri-S 
must come out differently. That case’s plaintiff alleged a 
failure to follow workplace safety standards resulting in 
32  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
wrongful death. Tri-S , 110 Hawaiʻi at 478–79, 135 P.3d at 87–88. 
If we apply 
Caraang’s “reasonably foreseeable” language broadly 
to expected injuries, all kinds of commonplace misfortunes – 
including workplace accidents – would not be “accidents,” thus 
negating coverage. 
Also, if we ruled that recklessness is not an “accident,” 
we risk inviting duty-to-defend litigation due to the possibly 
fine-grained distinction between a policyholder’s recklessness 
and negligence. 
Thus, Tri-S provides a logical and reasoned approach. 
“Accidents” are not intended or practically certain from the 
insured’s standpoint. This rule aligns with the risks that liability insurance is designed to cover. It also comports with 
the plain meaning of “accident,” the reasonable expectations of 
policyholders, and the principle of fortuity. 
3. The Plain Meaning of “Accident” 
AIG’s policies cover an “occurrence.” The policies define 
an “occurrence” as “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful conditions.” The policies don’t define an “accident.” 
“Accident” is the relevant term for our plain meaning 
analysis. An “occurrence” means an “accident.”  3 New Appleman 
Insurance Law Practice Guide § 30.07[2] (2024 ed.) (“under this 
definition, ‘occurrence’ and ‘accident’ are synonymous”); see 
33  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
also Taylor Morrison Servs., Inc. v. HDI-Gerling Am. Ins. Co., 
746 S.E.2d 587, 594 (Ga. 2013) (interpreting “occurrence” by 
looking to the “usual and common meaning of ‘accident’”); AES 
Corp., 725 S.E.2d at 536 (treating “occurrence” and “accident” 
as synonymous). 
This court interprets insurance policies using general 
rules of contract construction. Dairy Rd. Partners, 92 Hawaiʻ i 
at 411-12, 992 P.2d at 106–07. We interpret an undefined contractual term “according to its plain, ordinary, and accepted 
sense in common speech consistent with the reasonable 
expectations of a layperson.” Hart v. Ticor Title Ins. Co.
, 126 
Hawaiʻi 448, 457, 272 P.3d 1215, 1224 (2012). 
“Accident,” as ordinarily used, encompasses several shades 
of meaning. 
As the following dictionary definitions show, 
“accident” can mean unforeseen, unintended, by chance, with negative consequences, or a combination of those concepts. 
An “accident” can mean “an unforeseen and unplanned event 
or circumstance.” Accident, Merriam-Webster Dictionary 
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/accident [https://perma.cc/A5C7-XDTJ]. Or, “lack of intention or 
necessity: CHANCE,” as in “They met by accident rather than by 
design.” Id.Or, “an unfortunate event resulting especially 
from carelessness or ignorance.” Id.This last definition 
encompasses the results of recklessness. 
34  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Black’s Law Dictionary has similar definitions. An 
“accident” is an “unintended and unforeseen injurious 
occurrence; something that does not occur in the usual course of 
events or that could not be reasonably anticipated; any unwanted 
or harmful event occurring suddenly, as a collision, spill, 
fall, or the like, irrespective of cause or blame.” Accident, 
Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (emphasis added). This definition also includes unfortunate results of risky behaviors. 
A reasonable lay insured using ordinary language may read 
coverage for an “accident” to include unlikely, freak chance events, sudden mishaps, unexpected disasters, and unforeseen 
harms resulting from carelessness. This list of misfortunes 
includes the results of reckless behavior. “[U]nder a common 
understanding of ‘accident,’ it would seem that even if one 
engages in reckless conduct, a resulting injury can still be, in 
the common parlance of the word, ‘accidental.’” Dostal v.
Strand, 984 N.W.2d 382, 393 (Wis. 2023). There’s a difference 
between awareness of the risk of harm and awareness of certain 
harm. That difference defines an “accident.” 
This understanding is really just common sense. Imagine an 
on-duty taxi driver runs a red light while texting and hits a 
pedestrian. The driver is reckless. See Recklessness, Black’s 
Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (recklessness is when “the actor 
35  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
does not desire harmful consequence but nonetheless foresees the 
possibility and consciously takes the risk”). 
Is this an “accident” under the driver’s standard 
commercial liability policy? In ordinary language, the 
collision would be a “traffic accident.” So, it should be an 
“accident” under the driver’s policy. 
4. The Principle of Fortuity 
AIG invokes the principle of fortuity, the idea that 
insurance protects against risks, not certainties. This 
principle matters for the functioning of insurance in several 
ways. Fortuity allows insurers to spread the risk of unplanned 
incidents over a pool of customers at calculated rates. It also 
prevents policyholders from committing intentional torts but 
being immune to consequences because they purchased insurance. 
AIG argues that the counties’ complaints allege intentional 
conduct that is not fortuitous and thus not insurable. It 
contends that allowing an “accident” to include recklessness is inconsistent with fortuity. 
To the contrary, including recklessness in an “accident” 
honors fortuity. The reckless insured, by definition, takes 
risk. A reckless insured perceives the possibility of harm. 
For the purposes of insurance, recklessness is more like 
negligence than intent. To quote the amicus brief that the 
Complex Insurance Claims Litigation Association filed in this 
36  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
case, “in a garden variety negligence case, the plaintiff’s 
complaint alleges that the defendant unreasonably disregarded 
the risk that his conduct would cause the complained-of injury.” 
Replace the word “unreasonably” with “consciously” and amici 
have described recklessness. 
The principle of fortuity is more about the concept of 
chance than the insured’s culpability. After all, a negligent 
insured is also culpable. Insurance exists to cover incidents the insured didn’t see coming or otherwise think were 
practically certain to occur. Excluding recklessness unduly 
pinches fortuity. The appropriate dividing line is the 
certainty of the harm. Tri-S preserves insurance coverage for 
risks and draws the appropriate line. 
5.Because We Follow Tri-S, We Do Not Follow AES Corp.
Our opinion departs from the only other state supreme court 
case deciding if a climate damage lawsuit presents an 
“occurrence,” AES Corp. v. Steadfast Ins. Co.
, 725 S.E.2d 532 
(Va. 2012). Our decision differs because Virginia law and 
Hawaiʻi law differ.   
In 
AES Corp., the Virginia Supreme Court held that an 
insurer had no duty to defend against a lawsuit very similar to 
the one here. AES’ actions were not an “accident,” the court 
37  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concluded, because climate change was the “natural or probable 
consequence” of AES’ emissions. Id. at 537-38. 
In AES Corp., the Native Village and City of Kivalina, a 
community in Alaska, sued AES Corporation, an energy company. 
Id. at 533. Kivalina accused AES of “damaging the village by 
causing global warming through emission of greenhouse gases.” 
Id. Like the counties’ lawsuits, Kivalina’s suit alleged that 
AES “knew or should have known of the impacts of [its] emissions” yet “continued [its] substantial contributions to 
global warming.” Id.
AES’ commercial liability insurer, Steadfast Insurance, 
defended AES against the lawsuit under a reservation of rights. 
Id. at 533. Steadfast then filed a declaratory judgment action 
against AES. Steadfast said it owed no defense because there 
was no “property damage” caused by an “occurrence.” Id.Like 
AIG, Steadfast’s policies defined an “occurrence” as “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful condition.” Id. at 534. 
Also like AIG, Steadfast argued that (1) the alleged damage arose outside the policy periods, and (2) the pollution 
exclusion barred the claims. Id. at 533. 
The Virginia court found no “accident,” and thus no duty to 
defend. Id. at 538. Under Virginia law, an “accident” is 
“unexpected from the viewpoint of the insured.” Id. at 536. If 
38  
  
   
         
           
      
        
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
an injury was the “natural or probable consequence” of the 
insured’s voluntary act, it was not an “accident.” Id.
Objectively foreseeable natural or probable consequences do not constitute an “accident,” even if the insured acted negligently. 
Id. at 538. 
Because Virginia law and Hawaiʻi law differ, we decline to 
follow 
AES Corp. AES Corp.’s “natural or probable consequences” 
standard is inconsistent with Tri-S’ practically certain test. AES Corp.’s rule means that if the damage was foreseeable, there 
is no “accident.” This is so even if the insured was reckless – 
meaning they only perceived a risk of damage. 
For the reasons discussed above, we follow Tri-S’ 
“practically certain” standard instead. This standard covers the results of negligent or reckless conduct and excludes 
intentional or practically certain harm. Thus, AES Corp., 
although factually similar, is legally inapposite to our case. 
B. The Pollution Exclusion Encompasses GHGs 
The pollution exclusion’s exact language varies between 
AIG’s policies, but the differences are immaterial for our 
analysis. Here is the “total pollution exclusion” from AIG’s 
2004-2010 policies, which bars insurance coverage for: 
f. Pollution 
(1) “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which would not 
have occurred in whole or part but for the actual, alleged, 
or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, 
release or escape of “pollutants” at any time. 
39  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“Pollutants” are defined as “any solid, liquid, gaseous or 
thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, 
fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste.” 
As a threshold matter, we address Aloha’s argument that we 
should not interpret the pollution exclusion. The 1986 and 1987 
AIG policies lack a relevant pollution exclusion. So, Aloha 
says, if the counties’ lawsuits allege an “occurrence” under 
those policies, AIG must defend. The exclusion is immaterial. 
We address the exclusion and answer Question 2. Whether 
Aloha is ultimately entitled to a defense under the 1986 and 1987 policies is a question for the District Court. To award 
coverage under those policies, the District Court must find that 
the counties’ complaint alleges property damage during the 
policies’ coverage period. In certifying the question to us, 
the District Court wrote, “the underlying lawsuits sparsely 
allege damages occurring before 2000.”  Thus, “coverage under 
those two policies is apparently not possible, making their lack of a pollution exclusion immaterial.” We leave it to the 
District Court to find whether these “sparse” damage allegations 
create a possibility of coverage, something it so far said is 
“apparently” not possible. 
Nationally, interpretation of the pollution exclusion is 
disputed – some courts read the exclusion’s language literally, 
others confine the exclusion to only “traditional environmental 
40  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pollution.” Apana v. TIG Ins. Co., 574 F.3d 679, 682-83 (9th 
Cir. 2009) (collecting cases). 
We believe the “traditional environmental pollution” 
reading is the superior approach. We hold that what makes a 
substance a “contaminant” – and thus a “pollutant” - is whether 
it causes damage due to its presence in the environment. 
Aloha contends that national uncertainty about the 
exclusion’s meaning entitles it to coverage under this court’s legal uncertainty rule. See Sentinel Ins. Co., Ltd. v. First
Ins. Co. of Hawaiʻi, Ltd.
, 76 Hawaiʻi 277, 290, 875 P.2d 894, 907 
(1994). True, the pollution exclusion is nationally disputed and this court has yet to weigh in. 
Apana
, 574 F.3d at 682-83. 
But the dispute is not coverage determinative. Under a 
traditional pollution or plain language reading, emitting the 
greenhouse gases that cause climate change is pollution. By 
plain language, GHGs are “gaseous,” “contaminants” that are 
“released” causing “property damage.” Thus, the exclusion is 
not ambiguous in this case. 
Aloha also argues its reasonable expectation of coverage. 
Aloha reasonably expects products liability coverage. But the pollution exclusion limits that expectation. Aloha reasonably 
expects coverage for product hazards that are not pollution. 
Aloha’s professed expectation of coverage cannot reasonably 
encompass the allegations in the counties’ lawsuits. 
41  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1. Greenhouse Gases are “Traditional” Environmental 
Pollution 
We are convinced that the pollution exclusion is properly 
read to encompass only “traditional environmental pollution.” 
Four reasons convince us. 
First, the exclusion’s drafting history reveals its 
purpose: to eliminate insurer liability for classic 
environmental contamination. After the 1970 Clean Air Act 
amendments and many notorious environmental disasters, the 
insurance industry worried about pollution-related claims. Am. 
States Ins. Co. v. Koloms, 687 N.E.2d 72, 80 (Ill. 1997). In 1970, the first pollution exclusion entered the standard CGL 
policy. Id.
That first exclusion, the “qualified” exclusion, prompted 
significant litigation, with courts across the country reaching 
contradictory results. Id. at 80-81. From an insurer’s view, 
too many courts were finding coverage. MacKinnon v. Truck Ins.
Exch., 73 P.3d 1205, 1210 (Cal. 2003). Meanwhile, in 1980, Congress enacted the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act, expanding liability for 
hazardous substances. Id. at 1211. As a result, in 1985, the 
insurance industry revised the language, producing the “absolute” pollution exclusion. Id. at 1210. Later, insurers 
developed the “total” exclusion, the one included in the 2004-
42  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2010 AIG policies. 9 Jordan R. Plitt et al., Couch on Insurance
§ 127:13 (3d ed. June 2024). The revised exclusions deleted 
language in the “qualified” exclusion that courts had used to 
convey coverage. Koloms, 687 N.E.2d at 81. 
Based on this history, the “predominate motivation in 
drafting an exclusion for pollution-related injuries was the 
avoidance of the enormous expense and exposure resulting from 
the explosion of environmental litigation.” Id. (cleaned up). 
The exclusion serves to avoid “the yawning extent of potential 
liability arising from the gradual or repeated discharge of 
hazardous substances into the environment.” Id. (cleaned up). 
We find that purpose pertinent to the exclusion’s interpretation. 
Second, we agree with those courts who reason that the 
exclusion cannot be read literally, or else it sweeps too 
broadly. In a widely cited analysis, the Seventh Circuit 
stressed the importance of reading the pollution exclusion’s words in context. The court observed that the “terms ‘irritant’ 
and ‘contaminant,’ when viewed in isolation, are virtually 
boundless, for there is virtually no substance or chemical in 
existence that would not irritate or damage some person or 
property.” Pipefitters Welfare Educ. Fund v. Westchester Fire
Ins. Co., 976 F.2d 1037, 1043 (7th Cir. 1992) (cleaned up). The exclusion requires some limiting principle to avoid absurdity. 
43  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. It cannot be read literally. Am. States Ins. Co. v. Kiger, 
662 N.E.2d 945, 948 (Ind. 1996). 
The Seventh Circuit distinguished between substances that 
can irritate or contaminate, but cause harm in some other way, 
and substances that cause harm due to their irritating or 
contaminating nature. For instance, “reading the [exclusion] 
broadly would bar coverage for bodily injuries suffered by one 
who slips and falls on the spilled contents of a bottle of Drano,” even though the spill is not commonly understood as 
pollution. Pipefitters, 976 F.2d at 1043. Reading the 
exclusion literally cuts an “arbitrary swath” through insurance coverage. MacKinnon, 73 P.3d at 1217. 
To avoid these problems, courts take a “common sense 
approach.” Pipefitters, 976 F.2d at 1043. A plain language 
analysis doesn’t mean extreme literalism. Our inquiry depends “on the nature of the injury alleged in the underlying 
complaints, not exclusively on the nature of the substance released.” 14 Jordan R. Plitt et al., Couch on Insurance
§ 201:42 (3d ed. Nov. 2023). We believe the “nature of the 
injury” covered by the pollution exclusion is classic 
environmental pollution. 
Third, we focus on the exclusion’s two crucial nouns, 
“irritant” and “contaminant.” Irritant means “A source of 
irritation: [for example] tobacco smoke, a common eye irritant.” 
44  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Irritant, American Heritage Dictionary 
https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=irritant 
[https://perma.cc/F3CW-N3ES]. We agree with Aloha that 
“irritant” is relevant to a bodily injury case, but is not 
relevant to the counties’ property damage claim. We focus on 
“contaminant.” 
For our purpose, the pollution exclusion’s textual hinge is 
the word “contaminant.” A contaminant is a substance that contaminates(!) Contaminant, Merriam-Webster Dictionary 
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/contaminant [https://perma.cc/Z7B9-5GK4]. Contaminate means “to make 
inferior or impure by admixture,” or “to make unfit for use by 
the introduction of unwholesome or undesirable elements.” 
Contaminate, Merriam-Webster Dictionary https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/contaminate [https://perma.cc/CW4N-57AA]. 
In literal terms, a substance may contaminate on a very 
small scale. An unpleasant smell may contaminate a room. But that is not how “contaminant” is ordinarily used. Typically, a 
substance “contaminates” when its presence damages something – 
like soil, water, or air – making it impure or unclean. A 
substance is a “contaminant,” and therefore a “pollutant,” when 
it contaminates the environment. 
A policyholder’s reasonable expectations also come into 
play. Hawaiʻi law protects a policyholder’s objectively 
45  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable expectations. Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc.
v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 117 Hawaiʻ i 357, 368, 183 P.3d 734, 
745 (2007). 
A policyholder expects an exclusion titled “f. 
Pollution” to apply to pollution, as that word is ordinarily 
understood. Further, the total exclusion’s section (1) covers 
injury and damage caused by pollutants, while section (2) 
discusses costs to comply with environmental laws.   Section (2) 
largely refers to classic hazardous substance clean-up scenarios.  An objectively reasonable policyholder expects the 
exclusion to cover classic environmental pollution. Gainsco
Ins. Co. v. Amoco Prod. Co., 53 P.3d 1051, 1066 (Wyo. 2002). 
This court has long held that insurance policies “must be 
construed liberally in favor of the insured and any ambiguities 
must be resolved against the insurer.” St. Paul
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 
383, 538 P.3d at 1051. As part of this principle, basic 
insuring clauses should be “interpreted broadly so as to afford 
the greatest possible protection to the insured, whereas 
exclusionary clauses are interpreted narrowly against the 
insurer.” MacKinnon
, 73 P.3d at 1213 (cleaned up). This rule 
protects a policyholder’s expectations; it insists that exceptions to coverage be spelled out clearly. Id.Here, a 
traditional-pollution-only reading better protects a policyholder’s expectation. 
46  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
For these reasons, we join those courts limiting the 
pollution exclusion to traditional environmental pollution. See
Nav-Its, Inc. v. Selective Ins. Co. of Am., 869 A.2d 929, 938 
(N.J. 2005) (collecting cases). Traditional environmental 
pollution has three main features: (1) the release of a damaging 
substance, (2) into the environment, (3) that causes harm 
because of its presence in the environment. These attributes 
align with what insurance industry drafters intended, what “contaminant” means, and what a policyholder expects. Also, 
these features match the plain meaning of pollution. See
Pollution, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) (“The harmful 
addition of a substance or thing into an environment.”). 
Greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, produce 
“traditional” environmental pollution.  Aloha’s gasoline 
produces GHGs. These gases accumulate in the atmosphere and 
trap heat. Because they are released into the atmosphere and 
cause harm due to their presence in the atmosphere, GHGs are pollutants. 
Hawaiʻi
’s regulat
ion of GHG emissions confirms that GHGs are 
pollutants. Hawaiʻi’s Air Pollution Control law and 
administrative regulations consider GHGs “air pollutants.”  HRS 
§ 342B-1 (2022); HAR § 11-60.1-1. Hawaiʻi’s Public Utility 
Commission must consider GHG emissions and reducing fossil fuel 
use in its decisions. HRS § 269-6(b) (Supp. 2021). 
47  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court respects climate science. We have held that the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution’s right to a clean and healthful environment 
includes the right to a stable climate system. Matter of Maui
Elec. Co., Ltd., 150 Hawaiʻ i 528, 538 n.15, 506 P.3d 192, 202 
n.15 (2022). We warned that “[w]ith each year, the impacts of 
climate change amplify and the chances to mitigate dwindle.” 
Matter of Hawaiʻ i Elec. Light Co., Inc., 152 Hawaiʻ i 352, 359, 
526 P.3d 329, 336 (2023). 
This court understands that GHGs 
cause environmental damage because of their presence in the 
atmosphere. 
Hawaiʻi’s Legisla
ture has expressed the urgent need to 
reduce GHG emissions. Hawaiʻi aims to achieve net-zero GHG 
emissions by 2045. HRS § 225P-5 (Supp. 2022). In 2021, Hawaiʻ i 
declared a climate emergency. S.C.R. 44, S.D. 1, H.D. 1, 31st Leg., Reg. Sess. (2021). The Legislature declared that GHG 
emissions pose an existential threat to humanity and the natural 
world. 
Id.
Despite this, Aloha’s argues its gasoline does not produce 
“traditional” pollution, because the gasoline is combusted in engines in a legal, ordinary, and intended way. 
Aloha relies on 
one sentence from the Maryland Supreme Court, summarizing the holding of other cases: “Some courts have held that products, 
despite their toxic nature, are not ‘pollutants’ or 
‘contaminants’ when used intentionally and legally.”  Sullins v.
48  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Allstate Ins. Co., 667 A.2d 617, 621 (Md. 1995). In Aloha’s 
view, “traditional” environmental pollution essentially means 
only hazardous wastes. 
This argument misunderstands what makes a substance a 
pollutant. The legality, ordinariness, and intent of a 
product’s use is irrelevant. Because a “contaminant” makes the 
atmosphere impure, the operative question is whether a substance 
causes pollution to the environment. See Cont’l Cas. Co. v.
Rapid-Am. Corp., 609 N.E.2d 506, 513 (N.Y. 1993). 
Many products produce airborne pollution when used in their 
intended way. Consider coal. Like gasoline, the ordinary, 
legal, and intended purpose of coal is to burn it for energy. 
Burning coal produces sulfur dioxide. U.S. E.P.A., What is Acid 
Rain?, https://www.epa.gov/acidrain/what-acid-rain (May 7, 2024) 
[https://perma.cc/W26K-ASD3]. Sulfur dioxide accumulates in the 
atmosphere, reacts with other gases to form sulfuric acid, and 
precipitates with water as acid rain. Id. To stop the problem of acid rain, federal law regulates sulfur emissions from coal. 
U.S. E.P.A., Acid Rain Program, 
https://www.epa.gov/acidrain/acid-rain-program (Jan. 24, 2024) 
[https://perma.cc/7NPB-BQMF]. No one questions that sulfur 
dioxide from coal is a pollutant. 
Pollution doesn’t just refer to unintended spills of toxic 
substances. Many products – pesticides, aerosols, non-reef-safe 
49  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sunscreen, and fossil fuels – are inherently polluting when used 
in their intended way. What makes a product a pollutant is that 
it causes damage due to its presence in the environment. 
The distinction between widespread pollution and limited-
scale personal injury doesn’t help Aloha here. This is not a 
personal injury case. Rather, reducing GHG emissions is the 
most consequential environmental pollution issue our species has 
faced. 
The traditional pollution reading restricts “the 
exclusion’s otherwise potentially limitless application to only those hazards traditionally associated with environmental 
pollution.” Koloms, 687 N.E.2d at 79. Because greenhouse gases 
contaminate the atmosphere, they are clearly one of those hazards. And, the alleged deceptive marketing about GHG that 
forms the basis of the lawsuits falls within the scope of that 
exclusion. 
2. The Legal Uncertainty Rule Does Not Decide This Case 
This court recognizes a “legal uncertainty” rule when 
determining insurance coverage. Sentinel
, 76 Hawaiʻi at 290, 875 
P.2d at 907. When Hawaiʻ i courts have not answered a nationally-
disputed legal question, there is, per se, a possibility of coverage, and therefore a duty to defend. 
Id. 
Sentinel
’s logic implicitly requires one more step before 
an insured triumphs by the legal uncertainty rule. The legal 
50  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
uncertainty must be relevant to determining coverage. National 
disagreements about unrelated matters cannot form a possibility 
of coverage. For Sentinel’s rule to apply, the legal issue must 
be nationally disputed and coverage-determinative. 
Nationally, there are two schools of thought on how to 
interpret the pollution exclusion. Apana, 574 F.3d at 682. The 
first school reads the words literally. So, for instance, there is no coverage when a painter inhales paint fumes in a poorly-ventilated, indoor space. The fumes are “gaseous,” “irritants,” 
that are “released,” causing “bodily injury,” so they trigger 
the exclusion. See id. (collecting cases); see also, e.g., 
Toledo v. Van Waters & Rogers, Inc., 92 F. Supp. 2d 44, 51 (D.R.I. 2000) (personal injury from fumes fell within pollution 
exclusion, interpreted literally). 
The second school views a literal reading as too broad. It 
says the exclusion only applies to “traditional” environmental 
pollution. The hypothetical injured painter’s lawsuit involves a personal injury that is not “traditional” pollution.  See
Apana, 574 F.3d at 682-83 (collecting cases); see also, e.g., 
Nautilus Ins. Co. v. Jabar, 188 F.3d 27, 30 (1st Cir. 1999) 
(personal injury from fumes outside pollution exclusion). 
Apana
 establishes that the meaning of the pollution 
exclusion is legally uncertain in Hawaiʻi. In 
Apana, the Ninth 
Circuit certified a question to this court on the exclusion’s 
51  
          
       
         
           
          
          
       
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meaning. 574 F.3d at 684. The Ninth Circuit described what it 
called a “national debate” about the exclusion. Id. at 682. It 
reviewed this court’s precedents and was uncertain how this court would rule. Id. at 683-84. The certified question asked 
us: 
Does a total pollution exclusion provision in a standard 
commercial general liability insurance policy apply to 
localized uses of toxic substances in the ordinary course 
of business (such as when a plumber uses chemicals to open 
a clogged drain and an employee working nearby inhales the 
fumes and suffers injuries), or is it limited to situations 
that a reasonable layperson would consider traditional 
environmental pollution? 
Id. at 684. 
But this court never answered, because the case settled. 
Apana v. TIG Ins. Co., No. 29942, 2010 WL 1434763, at *1 (Haw. 
Apr. 7, 2010). 
Since Apana, none of our cases have ruled on the pollution 
exclusion. Until today, the exclusion’s meaning was legally uncertain. 
Here, though, this uncertainty is not coverage-
determinative. It is irrelevant to coverage. By both 
traditional pollution and plain language readings, GHGs are 
“pollutants.” 
To demonstrate, we perform a plain language analysis. This 
court interprets contract language according to its “plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech unless it appears 
52  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the policy that a different meaning is intended.” Dairy
Rd. Partners, 92 Hawaiʻi at 411, 992 P.2d at 106.  
The pollution exclusion in AIG’s policies has three 
elements. 
It precludes coverage when (1) “the actual, alleged, 
or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release 
or escape” of (2) “pollutants” (3) causes “property damage,” as 
that term is defined.  “Pollutants” means “any solid, liquid, 
gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, 
vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste.” 
The counties’ complaints allege that Aloha “released” 
“gaseous” GHGs and caused “property damage.” The focus is 
whether GHGs are a “contaminant.” 
Contaminate means “to make inferior or impure by 
admixture,” or “to make unfit for use by the introduction of unwholesome or undesirable elements.” Contaminate, Merriam-
Webster Dictionary https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/contaminate [https://perma.cc/CW4N-57AA]. 
Here, GHGs are contaminants. They enter the atmosphere. They 
increase the atmosphere’s heat-trapping properties. They spoil our planet’s climate system, destabilizing it for present and 
future generations. By plain language and common sense, 
greenhouse gases are “contaminants.” 
53  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Under any plausible interpretation, greenhouse gases are 
“pollutants.”  Sentinel’s legal uncertainty rule does not decide 
this case. 
3. The Exclusion is Not Ambiguous 
This court interprets ambiguities in the insured’s favor. 
Hart, 126 Hawaiʻ i at 456, 272 P.3d at 1223. But this court may 
not “create ambiguity where none exists.” Id.
Ambiguity only arises when there are two plausible 
interpretations. Sturla, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 67 
Haw. 203, 209-10, 684 P.2d 960, 964 (1984). What is ambiguous in one context may not be ambiguous in another. See Cont’l Cas.
Co., 609 N.E.2d at 512. Because we interpret contract language, we only consider if it is ambiguous here, not if it is ambiguous 
in the abstract. MacKinnon, 73 P.3d at 1213. 
Aloha makes two arguments that the exclusion is ambiguous: 
(1) other courts have held that it is ambiguous in their cases and (2) other courts have held that carbon dioxide or gasoline 
are not pollutants, making the exclusion ambiguous as applied 
here. Neither of these arguments are persuasive. GHGs are 
pollutants under any reasonable interpretation. 
Nationally, courts have found the pollution exclusion both 
ambiguous and unambiguous. Compare Scottsdale Ins. Co. v.
Morrow Land Valley Co., LLC, 411 S.W.3d 184, 193 (Ark. 2012) (finding pollution exclusion ambiguous) with Whittier Props.,
54  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Inc. v. Alaska Nat’l Ins. Co., 185 P.3d 84, 90-91 (Alaska 2008) 
(finding exclusion unambiguous). But, because the exclusion is 
contract language between individual parties, we do not consider 
it ambiguous or unambiguous as an abstract principle of law. 
Many courts recognize that the exclusion’s ambiguity 
depends on the context. Cont’l Cas. Co., 609 N.E.2d at 512; 
Crown Energy Co. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co., 511 P.3d 1064, 1073 (Okla. 2022) (“The fact that pollution exclusions have been held to be unambiguous in other settings does not mean that the 
Pollution Exclusion here is unambiguous as applied.”). 
The question here is whether the exclusion can reasonably 
be interpreted two ways as applied to the counties’ lawsuits. 
We believe the suits allege pollution under any plausible 
reading. 
The exclusion is also not ambiguous just because cases from 
other jurisdictions hold that carbon dioxide or gasoline are not 
pollutants. These cases do not create ambiguity here. For example, the Wisconsin Supreme Court held that carbon dioxide 
from exhaled breath that accumulated in a poorly-ventilated 
office building was not a “pollutant” under the exclusion. 
Donaldson v. Urban Land Interests, Inc., 564 N.W.2d 728, 732 
(Wis. 1997). The court concluded that the exclusion was 
ambiguous and an insured would reasonably expect coverage in 
that case’s context.  Id. at 732-33. But our case is different. 
55  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We don’t construe the exclusion on a molecule-by-molecule basis. 
Carbon dioxide may not be a pollutant in a single office 
building, but it is when billions of tons are added to the 
atmosphere every year. SeeRecord carbon dioxide emissions 
impeding progress on meeting climate goals, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Dec. 5, 2023), 
https://research.noaa.gov/2023/12/05/record-fossil-carbon-
dioxide-emissions-impeding-progress-on-meeting-climate-goals-report/ (estimating 36.8 billion metric tons of GHGs emitted in 
2023) [https://perma.cc/VDF8-5AT8]. 
The Alabama and Alaska Supreme Courts have held that 
gasoline is not a pollutant when used for ordinary purposes, but 
is a pollutant when it spills. Whittier Props., 185 P.3d at 87; 
Federated Mut. Ins. Co. v. Abston Petroleum, Inc., 967 So.2d 705, 713 (Ala. 2007). Aloha misinterprets these cases. It 
contends the difference between spilled and unspilled gasoline 
is that unspilled gasoline is being used for its ordinary purpose. This is the wrong distinction. The proper reasoning 
is that unspilled gasoline doesn’t damage the environment, but 
spilled gasoline does. SeeAbston Petroleum, 967 So.2d at 713. 
That’s what makes one pollution and not the other. 
The exclusion is not ambiguous as applied to GHGs. 
56  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4. Aloha Could Not Reasonably Expect Products Liability 
Coverage for Pollution 
This court construes an insurance policy to protect a 
policyholder’s objectively reasonable expectations. Del Monte
, 
117 Hawaiʻi at 368, 183 P.3d at 745.  Aloha argues that it 
reasonably expected coverage for the counties’ lawsuits, because 
AIG’s insurance policies cover products liability. Gasoline is 
Aloha’s product. So, Aloha contends, denying AIG’s duty to 
defend a products liability suit regarding Aloha’s gasoline 
would undercut its expectation of coverage. 
The problem with this argument is that it renders the 
pollution exclusion meaningless. 
Imagine Aloha negligently sold 
a customer defective gasoline and it destroyed the customer’s 
engine. No question, products liability insurance would cover 
that. But gasoline may create damage in other ways. It may 
cause environmental contamination, because it spills and needs 
to be cleaned up or because it is burned and contaminates the 
atmosphere. In these contexts, a reasonable insured would 
understand the spilled or burned gasoline as pollution. 
Aloha reasonably expects coverage for product hazards that 
are not pollution. If a business sells a product that is 
inherently polluting, that fact must be part of its reasonable 
expectation. To hold otherwise would write the pollution 
exclusion out of the policy. 
57  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. CONCLUSION 
We answer the first question Yes. An “accident” includes 
recklessness. 
We answer the second question Yes. Greenhouse gases are 
“pollutants.” 
John M. Sylvester  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
(C. Michael Heihre, Michi /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna Momose on the briefs) 
for appellant /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 /s/ Vladimir P. Devens Christopher St. Jeanos (Terence J. O’Toole, Kari K. 
Noborikawa, Joseph T. Baio, Amy J. Collins Cassidy, Elizabeth J. Bower on the briefs) 
for appellee 
 Wayne R. Wagner, Edmund K. Saffery, Deborah A. 
DiCristofaro, Laura A. Foggan 
for amici curiae Complex Insurance Claims 
Litigation Association and 
American Property Casualty Insurance Association  
Tred R. Eyerly, John N. Ellison, 
Luke E. Debevec, Rukesh A. Korde, Judy Baho 
for amicus curiae 
United Policyholders  
58 