                                                                 
     ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCCQ-12-0000977 13-FEB-2014 10:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
NAUTILUS INSURANCE COMPANY,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
LEXINGTON INSURANCE COMPANY, DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
                                                            
SCCQ-12-0000977
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
February 13, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
 
Circuit (Ninth Circuit) certified the following questions of law
 
to this court:
 
1. Whether  an  insurer  may  look  to  another  insurer’s
policy  in  order  to  disclaim  the  duty  to  defend,  where  the
complaint  in  the  underlying  lawsuit  alleges  facts  within
 
coverage.
         
       
          
         
        
        
        
          
          
 
         
             
            
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. Whether  an  “other  insurance”  clause  that  purports  to
release  an  otherwise  primary  insurer  of  the  duty  to  defend
if  the  insurer  becomes  excess  as  to  liability  is
enforceable.
 
3. Whether  the  irreconcilability  of  “other  insurance”
 
provisions  in  otherwise  primary  insurance  policies  should  be
determined  before  or  after  the  operation  of  the  “other
 
insurance”  provisions  is  determined.
 
4. Whether,  and  when,  an  excess  insurer,  or  an  otherwise
primary  insurer  who  becomes  an  excess  insurer  by  operation
of  an  “other  insurance”  clause,  has  a  duty  to  defend.
 
I.
 
A.
 
VP & PK (ML) LLC (VP & PK) is the owner and developer
 
of a tract of land in the Maui Lani Project District. 
VP & PK
 
purchased a Commercial General Liability insurance policy1
 for
its work on the Maui Lani site from Defendant-Appellee Lexington
 Insurance Company (Lexington). The policy’s Occurrence Form
 included the following “Other Insurance” provision: 
4.	 Other  Insurance
 
If other valid and collectible insurance is available
 
to the insured for a loss we cover under Coverages A
or B of this Policy, our obligations are limited as
follows :
 
a.	 Primary  Insurance
 
This insurance is primary except when b. Excess Insurance,
below, applies . If this insurance is primary, our
obligations are not affected unless any of the other
insurance is also primary. Then, we will share with all
that other insurance by the method described in c. Method of
Sharing, below.
 
1
 “Liability insurance” is defined as “[a]n agreement to cover a
 
loss resulting from the insured’s liability to a third party, such as a loss
incurred by a driver who injures a pedestrian.” Black’s Law Dictionary 873
 
(9th ed. 2009). “The insured’s claim under the policy arises once the
insured’s liability to a third party has been asserted.” Id.
 
2
         
 
    
   
   
   
   
    
   
  
     
    
   
        
        
       
        
        
         
      
  
        
         
       
         
       
        
       
        
        
       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
b.	 Excess Insurance
 
This insurance is excess over :
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Any other primary insurance
available to you covering
liability for damages arising
out of the premises or
operations of the “products­completed operations” hazard
 for which you have been added
as an additional insured by
attachment of an endorsement .
 
When this insurance is excess, we will have no
duty under Coverages A or B to defend the
insured against any “suit” if any other insurer
has a duty to defend the insured against that
“suit”. If no other insurer defends, we will
undertake to do so, but we will be entitled to
the insured’s rights against all those other
insurers.
 
. . . .
 
c.	 Method of sharing
 
If all of the other insurance permits contribution by
equal shares, we will follow this method also. Under
 this approach each insurer contributes an equal amount
until it has paid its applicable limit of insurance or
none of the loss remains, whichever comes first.
 
If any of the other insurance does not permit
contribution by equal shares, we will contribute by
limits. Under this method, each insurer’s share is
based on the ratio of its applicable limit of
insurance to the total applicable limits of insurance
of all insurers.
 
(Emphases added.) Lexington did not include Kila Kila
 
Construction (Kila Kila) as an additional insured.
 
Kila Kila was one of VP & PK’s subcontractors for the
 
Maui Lani development. Kila Kila purchased a Commercial General
 Liability Coverage insurance policy for its work on the Maui Lani
 site from Plaintiff-Appellant Nautilus Insurance Company
 
3
         
 
       
          
        
  
 
       
       
       
        
       
    
 
    
   
   
    
     
     
     
   
            
        
         
        
       
    
        
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Nautilus). The Commercial General Liability Coverage form
 
contained an “Other Insurance” provision, which stated as
 follows:
 
4.	 Other Insurance
 
If other valid and collectible insurance is available
 
to the insured for a loss we cover under Coverages A
or B of this Coverage Part, our obligations are
limited as follows :
 
a.	 Primary Insurance
 
This insurance is primary except when b. below
 
applies . If this insurance is primary, our
obligations are not affected unless any of the
other insurance is also primary. Then, we will
share with all that other insurance by the
method described in c. below.
 
b.	 Excess Insurance
 
This insurance is excess over :
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Any other primary insurance
available to you covering liability
arising out of the premises or
operations for which you have been
added as an additional insured by
attachment of an endorsement .
 
(Emphases added.) Nautilus’s policy also contained an
 
“Additional Insured Endorsement” modifying the Commercial General
 Liability Coverage and adding VP & PK as an additional insured:
 
SECTION II - WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include as an
 
insured the person or organization shown in the Schedule
below, but only for liability arising out of your negligence
and only for occurrences or coverage not otherwise excluded
in the policy to which this endorsement applies.
 
SCHEDULE
 
Name of Person or Organization:
 
VP & PK (ML) LLC and Central Pacific Bank
98-880 Iwaena St
 
Aiea, HI 96701
 
4
         
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Project: The Fairways at Maui Lani Cost $1.7
 
Million
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Both parties’ General Commercial Liability policies
 
include duties to both defend and indemnify. 
B.
 
On June 3, 2008, Karen Goo and a number of Maui
 
residents sued VP & PK, Kila Kila, and other VP & PK
 
subcontractors for damages resulting from construction in Maui
 Lani. The complaint alleged facts falling within the coverage of
 both policies. Nautilus funded the defense of both Kila Kila and
 VP & PK during the entirety of the Goo lawsuit. Ultimately, VP &
 PK was found solely liable on some claims and ordered to pay
 damages totaling $232,700. Kila Kila was not found liable on any
 claims. 
C.
 
Lexington acknowledged that it would indemnify VP & PK
 
for the jury verdict, and satisfied the entirety of the judgment
 against VP & PK. It does not appear to dispute its obligation to
 pay the full amount of damages. However, Lexington denies any
 obligation to contribute to Nautilus’s costs in funding the
 defense.
 
D.
 
On September 14, 2009, Nautilus filed a Complaint in 
the Hawai' i Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, seeking, inter 
5
         
     
        
          
           
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
alia, a declaration that Lexington owed VP & PK a duty to defend
 
and that it breached that duty, and (2) equitable contribution
 from Lexington for defense costs. On November 10, 2009,
 
2
Lexington removed the case to the District Court,  pursuant to 28
U.S.C. 1332(a)(1).
3 On November 17, 2010, the District Court
 
granted summary judgment to Lexington on all of Nautilus’s
 claims. 
The District Court found that (1) Lexington was
 
permitted to look beyond the face of the complaint and its policy
 -- and, specifically, to Nautilus’s policy -- to determine
 whether it had a duty to defend; (2) Lexington’s policy was in
 excess to Nautilus’s policy; (3) as a result, Lexington’s duty to
 defend had never been triggered; and (4) Nautilus was entitled to
 neither a declaratory judgment nor any contribution for the
 defense costs. Nautilus Ins. Co. v. Lexington Ins. Co., Cv. No.
 
90-00537 DAE-LEK, 2010 WL 4812742, at *12-16 (D. Haw. Nov. 17,
 2010).
 
Nautilus appealed to the Ninth Circuit on December 14,
 
2010, and on October 9, 2012, the Ninth Circuit sua sponte
 requested that the parties file supplemental briefing addressing
 
2
 The Honorable David A. Ezra presided.
 
3
 28 U.S.C. 1332(a)(1) provides that “[t]he district courts shall
 
have original jurisdiction of all civil actions where the matter in
controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000, exclusive of interest and
costs, and is between (1) citizens of different States[.]”
 
6
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether questions in the case should be certified to this court, 
and inviting them to comment on four proposed questions for certification. Neither party objected to certification in their briefs, and both concede that Hawai' i law governs this 
controversy. 
On November 2, 2012, the Ninth Circuit filed a request 
with this court to answer four certified questions. Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 13(a) provides that “[w]hen a federal district or appellate court certifies to the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court that there is involved in any proceeding before it a question concerning the law of Hawai' i that is determinative of 
the cause and that there is no clear controlling precedent in the Hawai'i judicial decisions, the Hawai' i Supreme Court may answer 
the certified question by written opinion.” On January 10, 2013, this court accepted the certified questions. Nautilus filed its Opening Brief on August 5, 2013, Lexington filed its Answering Brief on September 12, 2013, and Nautilus filed a Reply Brief on September 26, 2013. 
II. 
Question 1:  Whether an insurer may look to another
 
insurer’s policy in order to disclaim the duty to defend, where
 the complaint in the underlying lawsuit alleges facts within
 coverage. 
7
         
         
           
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
1.
 
Both parties’ arguments on this question focus on this 
court’s 2000 opinion in Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawai' i 398, 992 P.2d 93 (2000). However, we hold that Dairy 
Road Partners does not clearly resolve the scenario presented by this certified question. 
In Dairy Road Partners, the insurer, Island Insurance, 
disclaimed its duty to defend insureds Dairy Road Partners (DRP) and Shell in a pending action. 92 Hawai
'i at 408, 992 P.2d at 
103. The complaints against the insureds alleged facts that
 would fall within Island Insurance’s coverage, thereby requiring
 that Island Insurance defend the claims.
4 Id. at 414, 992 P.2d
 
at 109. However, Island Insurance conducted its own
 investigation and disclaimed the defense based on the facts
 uncovered in that investigation, which would apparently put the
 underlying events outside the scope of Island Insurance’s
 coverage. Id. at 409, 992 P.2d at 104.
 
In reaching its conclusion as to whether Island 
Insurance had a duty to defend under these circumstances, this court relied on Hawai' i insurance law principles with respect to 
the duty to defend. Id. at 411-13, 992 P.2d at 106-08. The 
4
 The opinion noted that “Island [Insurance] does not dispute that
 
the complaints in both of the underlying lawsuits allege claims that, if
proven, would be covered by the policy.” Id. at 414, 992 P.2d at 109.
 
8
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
operative question was whether, “for the purposes of overcoming
 
the duty to defend, Island [Insurance] was permitted to conduct a
 factual investigation despite the allegations of the underlying
 complaints.” Id. at 415, 992 P.2d at 110 (emphases in original). 
Prior case law in Hawai' i had indicated that “insurers 
may generally overcome their duty to defend by relying on ‘factual’ sources beyond the pleadings[,]” and Dairy Road Partners expressed concern about this holding, because of the potential for adverse consequences to insureds. Id. at 417, 992 
P.2d at 112. First, the insured could “be saddled with the Procrustean dilemma of being forced to adduce facts proving his or her own liability in the underlying lawsuit in order to satisfy the insurer that there may be merit to the underlying covered claim.” Id. For example, in Dairy Road Partners, DRP 
would have had to prove that its employee was acting within the scope of his employment in order to demonstrate to Island Insurance that DRP had coverage under its policy and thus Island Insurance was required to defend. Id. However, DRP would be 
liable in the underlying litigation if its employee was found to be acting within the scope of his employment. Id. Thus, DRP 
would be compelled to take inconsistent positions. Id. 
Second, this court was also concerned with the
 
inconsistent judgments that could result if an insurer could look
 to facts outside the complaint in disclaiming its duty to defend. 
9
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id. Dairy Road Partners explained that “[a] circuit court
 
presiding over a declaratory judgment action might rule, based on
 an insurer’s superior production of evidence concerning material
 facts that will be directly in dispute in the underlying lawsuit,
 that there is no possibility of coverage[,]” and “[s]ubsequently,
 the trier of fact in the underlying lawsuit . . . might find that
 the insured is liable on a claim covered by the policy.” Id.
 
(emphasis in original).
 
This court noted that “the majority of jurisdictions
 
addressing the issue forbade insurers from relying upon extrinsic
 evidence for the purposes of disclaiming the duty to defend.” 
Id. at 418, 992 P.2d at 113. Dairy Road Partners ultimately
 
adopted the majority rule, with a limited exception, wherein an
 insurer “may only disclaim its duty to defend by showing that
 none of the facts upon which it relies might be resolved
 differently in the underlying lawsuit.” Id. at 422, 992 P.2d at
 
117 (emphasis in original). In other words, the decision held an
 insurer who relied on extrinsic facts in disclaiming its duty to
 defend would have to show that those facts could not be disputed
 in the underlying lawsuit. Id. Otherwise, the insurer would not
 
be allowed to disclaim its duty to defend based on those
 extrinsic facts. Id. To illustrate, where an insurer argues
 
that an occurrence was outside of the effective period of the
 policy, an insurer would likely be able to rely on that extrinsic
 
10
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
fact, because “the parameters of the effective period of the
 
policy would not normally be subject to dispute in the underlying
 action.” Id. at 422 n.14, 992 P.2d at 117 n.14. 
Holding thus, Dairy Road Partners concluded that Island
 
Insurance was required to defend DRP and Shell, because the
 additional facts it uncovered through its own investigation were
 “inextricably intertwined in the factual matters at issue in the
 underlying lawsuits and [could not], therefore, serve as a basis
 for disclaiming the duty to defend.” Id. at 423, 992 P.2d at 118
 
(emphasis added).
 
2.
 
Nautilus interprets the Dairy Road Partners decision as
 
dispositive on the issue of whether an insurer may look to “other
 insurance” to disclaim its duty to defend. Under Dairy Road
 Partners, Nautilus asserts, “an insurer that issues a general
 liability policy to an insured is obligated to defend a claim
 whenever there is a ‘mere potential for coverage’ under the
 policy.” (Emphasis in original.) (Quoting id. at 413, 992 P.2d
 at 108.) According to Nautilus, Dairy Road Partners completely
 excluded the possibility for an insurer to look to any extrinsic
 evidence beyond the allegations in the complaint in determining
 whether it had the duty to defend, unless such evidence would not
 bear any relation to the question of liability in the underlying
 suit. 
11
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Nautilus avers that the provision in its policy, adding
 
VP & PK as additional insureds, would constitute extrinsic
 
evidence bearing a relation to the question of liability in the
 underlying suit, and thus cannot be considered by Lexington in
 disclaiming its duty to defend. In Nautilus’s view, the “facts”
 this court referred to in Dairy Road Partners “(1) must be
 relevant to the underlying lawsuit, and (2) cannot be open to a
 different resolution than what the insurer believes them to be.” 
Lexington, on the other hand, responds that “[t]o find 
that insurers may not consider other policies covering their insured would deprive them of essential information in ascertaining whether there is a duty to defend.” Lexington argues that to hold otherwise “would render ‘other insurance’ clauses meaningless, in contravention of this court’s case law holding that contract provisions should not be interpreted such that they are rendered meaningless. (Citing Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 297, 141 P.3d 459, 
470 (2006).) (Other citations omitted.) 
As to the import of Dairy Road Partners, Lexington
 
avers that that decision does not preclude an insurer from
 looking at the available insurance policies in order to determine
 whether or not it has a duty to defend an insured. According to
 Lexington, this court “focused on the unintended consequences of 
12
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
permitting insurers to rely on factual sources beyond the
 
pleadings.” (Emphasis added.) 
Lexington emphasizes that the two concerns articulated
 
by this court in Dairy Road Partners, first, that an insured
 would have to prove his or her own liability in the underlying
 lawsuit in order to satisfy the insurer that it has the duty to
 defend, and second, that allowing insurers to rely on factual
 sources behind the pleadings that may result in inconsistent
 judgments, are not present in this case. Instead, it argues, “VP
 
& PK was not forced to allege facts proving its own liability in
 
order to trigger the duty to defend because Nautilus had already
 
agreed to provide a defense; and [] there was no risk of
 inconsistent judgments because the Nautilus and Lexington
 policies were not before the jury in the [u]nderlying [a]ction.” 
3.
 
Dairy Road Partners clearly established the principles 
that the duty to defend is broader than the duty to indemnify, and that “[a]ll doubts as to whether a duty to defend exists are resolved against the insurer and in favor of the insured[.]” 92 Hawai'i at 412, 992 P.2d at 107 (citations and internal quotation 
marks omitted). In the same vein, this court has held that “the duty to defend ‘rests primarily on the possibility that coverage exists. This possibility may be remote but if it exists, the insurer owes the insured a defense.’” Id. (emphasis in original) 
13
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(quoting Standard Oil Co. of California v. Hawaiian Ins. & Guar.
 
Co., Ltd., 65 Haw. 521, 527, 654 P.2d 403, 407 (1973)) (other
 citation and internal quotation marks omitted). These precepts
 are ultimately relevant to our answers to the certified questions
 presented to this court. 
However, the specific holding in Dairy Road Partners
 
does not appear dispositive of the outcome of the first certified
 question. The extrinsic evidence considered in Dairy Road
 Partners included factual matters relevant to the outcome of the
 underlying litigation. Here, in contrast, the question is
 whether an insurer may take into account the operation of its
 policy in conjunction with other insurance policies, to determine
 if it must defend a particular suit. Thus, the insurer would be
 looking at the construction and operation of other insurance
 policies in disclaiming a duty to defend, which presents some
 different considerations than the “extrinsic evidence” that was
 at issue in Dairy Road Partners. 
The clearest signal that Dairy Road Partners does not
 
control in this case is the rationale expressed in Dairy Road
 Partners that allowing insurers to rely on extrinsic factual
 evidence could potentially (1) compel the insured to adduce facts
 proving his or her own liability in the underlying suit; and (2)
 result in inconsistent judgments regarding facts that would be in
 dispute in the underlying lawsuit as well as relevant to the
 
14
         
  
        
           
            
             
           
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
insurer’s duty to defend. 92 Hawai' i at 417, 992 P.2d at 112. 
As Lexington correctly points out, these concerns will generally 
not be implicated when the question is whether an insurer should be able to look to other insurance companies’ policies when disclaiming the duty to defend. The question of whether the insured has coverage under another policy is typically one of contract interpretation, and thus may not involve issues that could be in dispute in the underlying action.
5 
While the insurance company in Dairy Road Partners
 
conducted independent investigative research into the
 circumstances of the underlying occurrence, here, in contrast,
 the “research” contemplated would be identifying and interpreting
 the policies of other companies that had potentially applicable
 insurance. Therefore, extrinsic “facts” may be distinguished
 analytically from extrinsic “policies”, and Dairy Road Partners
 does not mandate a specific answer to the first certified
 question.
 
B.
 
“Primary insurance is typically the first layer of
 
coverage.” See 23 Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 145.1,
 
5
 As this case illustrates, however, sometimes the question of
 
whether the insured is covered under another policy will involve facts that
could be relevant to the underlying litigation. As will be explained infra,
the question of whether VP & PK is covered under Nautilus’s policy turns on
whether Kila Kila was negligent -- an issue squarely addressed in the
 underlying litigation.
 
15
         
       
        
       
          
        
       
        
        
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 3 (2003) [hereinafter “Appleman”]; Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. 
Sentinel Ins. Co., 120 Hawai' i 329, 354, 205 P.3d 594, 619 (App. 
2009). A carrier’s obligations under a primary policy attach whenever there is a possibility of coverage, even when that possibility is remote. See, e.g., Dairy Road Partners, 92 
Hawai'i at 412, 992 P.2d at 107. “The second layer of coverage 
is excess coverage.” 23 Appleman § 145.1, at 4. The difference between coverages has been explained thusly: 
Because separate premiums are assessed against the insured
for excess and primary coverage, excess coverage is not
triggered until the underlying primary policy limits are
exhausted within the meaning of the excess policy. Also, in
contrast to primary policies, a pure excess policy provides
specific coverage above an underlying limit of primary
insurance and often will refer directly within the excess
policy declaration and policy itself to primary insurers as
well as other excess insurers.
 
Id. 
1.
 
Here, Lexington’s policy provides that its otherwise 
primary insurance becomes excess in the event that “other 
insurance” is available. This is known as an “other insurance” clause. See Walton v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 55 Haw. 
326, 329, 518 P.2d 1399, 1401 (1974). Such clauses have been upheld in this jurisdiction, so long as “‘they are not in contravention of statutory inhibitions or public policy.’” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 120 Hawai' i at 349-50, 205 P.3d at 614-15 
(quoting First. Ins. Co. of Hawai' i v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 423, 
665 P.2d 648, 655 (1983) (other citation omitted)). As relevant 
16
         
 
       
           
         
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to this case, Lexington’s otherwise primary policy becomes an
 
excess policy by operation of the “other insurance” clause. 
The relationship between the potential primary and
 
excess coverages in this case is different from many other types
 of cases where excess coverage is considered. Here, Lexington’s
 policy was primary coverage for VP & PK (not taking into
 consideration the “other insurance clause”), and Nautilus’s
 policy was primary coverage for Kila Kila, and possibly also
 provided primary coverage for VP & PK by operation of Nautilus’s
 “Additional Insureds” endorsement. Thus, presumably, VP & PK
 negotiated with Lexington and paid premiums for a primary
 coverage policy that included, inter alia, the “other insurance”
 clause, and Kila Kila negotiated with Nautilus and paid premiums
 for a primary coverage policy that included, inter alia, the
 additional insured endorsement of VP & PK.
6
 
2.
 
To reiterate, the policy that Nautilus issued to Kila
 
Kila included an endorsement of VP & PK as an “additional
 insured”, stating that “WHO IS INSURED is amended to include as
 an insured [VP & PK], but only for liability arising out of [Kila
 Kila’s] negligence and only for occurrences or coverage not
 
6
 Nautilus’s policy also contained a substantially similar “other
 
insurance” provision, but as will be explained infra, since there are no
allegations that Kila Kila had “other insurance”, this provision from
Nautilus’s policy is not at issue.
 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
otherwise excluded in the policy to which this endorsement
 
applies.” (Emphasis added.) Lexington’s “other insurance”
 clause, in turn, only applies if VP & PK has other insurance, and
 so in order for Lexington’s “other insurance” clause to become
 operable, it appears that the “additional insured” endorsement in
 Nautilus’s policy must also be triggered.
 
Nautilus alleges that the “additional insured”
 
endorsement in its policy could have been resolved in two
 different ways, depending on the outcome in the underlying case. 
Based on the language of the endorsement, Nautilus asserts that
 VP & PK would only be covered as an additional insured under its
 policy in the event that Kila Kila were found to be negligent. 
According to Nautilus, the coverage of VP & PK was contingent on
 the outcome of the underlying litigation, and therefore,
 Lexington had no right to consider Nautilus’s policy when
 disclaiming the duty to defend. 
Nautilus further cites to a New York case, 83 Kajima
 
Const. Servs., Inc. v. Cati, Inc., 302 A.D.2d 228 (N.Y. App. Div.
 2003), in support of its contention. Nautilus analogized the
 circumstances in Cati, Inc., which involved two insurers with
 “additional insured” language in one of the policies, to those in
 this case. According to Nautilus, the coverage of one of the
 insureds in Cati, Inc. was contingent on “the negligence or
 responsibility of the named insured.” (Quoting Cati, Inc., 302
 
18
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.D. at 228.) The New York Appellate Division, First Department,
 
held that under those circumstances, the duty of one of the
 insurers to defend could be “deferred pending determination of
 the underlying action.” (Quoting id. at 229.) Nautilus contends
 that in this case, based on its additional insureds provision,
 Nautilus’s duty to defend VP & PK could have similarly been
 deferred until Kila Kila’s negligence was determined in the
 underlying case, and that, until such a determination was made,
 Lexington would have been obligated to defend VP & PK. 
Nautilus also alleges that Lexington wrongly assumed
 
that it was an excess insurer pursuant to its “Other Insurance”
 clause. In Nautilus’s view, “Lexington was primary as to the
 liability of its named insured, and could have been primary
 throughout the entire defense[,]” because Nautilus’s Additional
 Insured Endorsement did not even apply until Kila Kila was found
 negligent. According to Nautilus, it had the right to place
 conditions on its additional insured endorsement obligation, and
 if those conditions were not met, then VP & PK would not have
 been an additional insured to Nautilus’s policy.
 
Moreover, Nautlius alleges that “[if] members of the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court can come to two different interpretations 
with respect to the same insurance policy,” as they did in Dairy Road Partners, where two justices dissented to the majority’s interpretation of the business automobile liability policy, 
19
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“surely Lexington can appreciate the possibility that when it
 
interpreted Nautilus’ policy that there may be an interpretation
 of the policy that was different from its own interpretation.” 
As a policy matter, Nautilus maintains that, “[b]ased on the
 complexity of an insurance policy, an insurer should not be
 allowed to look at another insurer’s policy when deciding whether
 or not the insurer owes its insured a duty to defend.” 
As to the significance of the limitations on Nautilus’s
 
“Additional insured Endorsement,” Lexington argues that it does
 not matter whether it was conditioned on Kila Kila’s negligence,
 because there were allegations in the underlying action that Kila
 Kila had been negligent, and Nautilus had a duty to defend based
 on those allegations. According to Lexington, “[j]ust because it
 was later determin[ed] that Kila Kila was not negligent, does not
 negate Nautilus’ duty to defend.” 
Lexington avers that, by operation of its “Other
 
Insurance” provision, Nautilus was the primary insurer of VP &
 PK, and was defending, and therefore Lexington had no duty as an
 excess insurer to defend under the circumstances. Lexington
 distinguishes Cati, Inc. on the basis that the additional insured
 provision in that case was worded differently than Nautilus’s
 Additional Insured Endorsement. In Cati, Inc., the policy
 provided that “additional insured coverage will be primary only
 if the underlying claim is determined to be solely as a result of
 
20
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the negligence or responsibility of the named insured[,]” (some 
emphasis omitted) (quoting Cati, Inc., 302 A.D. 2d at 229), whereas Nautilus’s Additional Insured Endorsement does not contain that specific contingent language. Therefore, Lexington asserts, because there was negligence on the part of Kila Kila alleged in the underlying action, Nautilus “had the primary duty to defend as determined at the outset pursuant to the language of the Additional Insured Endorsement and Hawai' i law.” 
In its Reply Brief, Nautilus responds that in a
 
coverage dispute all relevant insurance policies may be
 considered, but that when an insurer is determining its duty to
 defend its insured, “[t]he fact that there is another insurer
 providing a defense to the insured is irrelevant [because] [a]n
 insurance policy between an insurer and its insured is personal.” 
Nautilus argues that allowing one insurer to look at another
 insurer’s policy would increase the risk of prejudice, for
 example, should the insurer misinterpret another insurer’s
 policy. Nautilus explains that, illustrative of such, Lexington
 has misinterpreted Nautilus’s Additional Insured endorsement to
 be contingent on “alleged negligence” when in actuality it is
 contingent on “actual negligence.” According to Nautilus, if
 Lexington’s interpretation of the Additional Insured Endorsement
 were accurate, then Nautilus would have had to pay the judgment
 against VP & PK so long as the complaint alleged negligence
 
21
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
against Kila Kila, regardless of whether the jury found Kila Kila
 
to actually be negligent. 
Nautilus also counters Lexington’s argument that
 
limiting an insurer’s ability to consider other insurance
 policies would render “other insurance” provisions meaningless. 
Nautilus avers that “other insurance” clauses, like the one in
 Lexington’s policy, relate to the duty to indemnify, rather than
 the duty to defend. The duty to indemnify would not be affected
 by any limitations on what an insurer can consider in deciding
 whether it has the duty to defend. 
3.
 
In recognition of the fact that the duty to defend is 
broader than the duty to indemnify, Hart v. Ticor Title Ins. Co., 126 Hawai' i 448, 458, 272 P.3d 1215, 1225 (2012), courts have 
held that “if an exclusion may operate to relieve an insurer of its duty to indemnify and the applicability of the exclusion cannot be determined until after a trial, the insurer must defend the underlying suit.” Ostrager & Newman, Insurance Coverage Disputes § 5.02(a), at 312. Nautlius’ argument is that since 
the “other insurance” provision in Lexington’s policy would operate to relieve Lexington of its duty to indemnify only if Kila Kila was negligent, an issue to be determined at trial, Lexington had the duty to defend the underlying suit. 
22
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
C.
 
Ultimately, in deciding whether insurers may look to 
other policies in disclaiming the duty to defend, we rely on 
policy considerations behind why the duty to defend exists, including what options are available to insurers, Hawai' i 
jurisprudence on the duty to defend, the possible risks in allowing insurers to disclaim their duty based on other policies, and the reasonable expectations of insureds. 
We have observed that “insurers have the same rights as 
individuals to limit their liability[] and to impose whatever conditions they please on their obligation, provided they are not in contravention of statutory inhibitions or public policy.” First Ins. Co. of Hawai' i, Inc. v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 423, 665 
P.2d 648, 655 (1983) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). On the other hand, however, we have long held that any ambiguities in an insurance contract regarding coverage are resolved in favor of the insured as against the insurer. See 
Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai' i 473, 489, 135 P.3d 
82, 98 (2006) (explaining that ambiguities must be resolved in favor of the insured and “policies are to be construed in accord with the reasonable expectations of a layperson”); Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai' i 445, 458, 99 P.3d 96, 109 (2004) 
(holding that the ambiguity in the term of the insurance contract should be resolved in favor of the insured); Estate of Doe v. 
23
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Paul Revere Ins. Group, 86 Hawai' i 262, 277, 948 P.2d 1003, 1118 
(1997) (stating that this court must “resolve any contractual 
ambiguities against the insurer”); see also Allstate Ins. Co. v. Pruett, 118 Hawai' i 174, 186 P.3d 609 (2008) (applying these 
principles in interpreting ambiguous language in an insurance contract exclusion). 
When it comes to the duty to defend, a heavy burden is 
placed on the insurer if that insurer wishes to disclaim its duty. To reiterate, “‘the duty to defend rests primarily on the possibility that coverage exists.’” Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawai' i at 
488, 135 P.3d at 97 (emphasis in original) (quoting Dairy Road Partners, 92 Hawai' i at 412, 992 P.2d at 107). Furthermore, to 
reiterate, all doubts as to a duty to defend are resolved against the insurer and in favor of the insured. Id. 
“The contractual obligation to defend is triggered by
 
the insured tendering the defense to the insurer.” 22 Appleman §
 136.1, at 8. If an insurer is not certain as to whether coverage
 exists, there are several options available to that insurer. The
 insurer may file a declaratory judgment action to determine
 whether it is required to defend, it can defend under a non-
waiver agreement or reservation of rights, or it can refuse to
 defend and risk the consequences. 22 Appleman § 136.7, at 45. 
The first of these options enables an insurer to
 
establish in a court action whether it must defend. This permits
 
24
         
        
          
             
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
an insurer to determine coverage issues, “allowing the insurer to
 
address the limits of its duty to defend without risking a later
 finding that it acted in bad faith.” Id. at 50. However, as
 
will be explained, an otherwise primary insurer may not disclaim
 its duty to defend on the basis of a general “other insurance”
 provision.
7 By requiring that a primary insurer have the duty to
 
defend, regardless of its “other insurance” clause, an insured
 will be ensured a defense where he or she may be entitled to one. 
The second option, defending under a non-waiver 
agreement or reservation of rights, permits an insured to “satisfy its duty to defend the policyholder while simultaneously preserving its ability to rely later on any available policy defenses that might have vitiated the duty.” Id.; see AIG Hawaii 
Ins. Co., Inc. v. Smith, 78 Hawai' i 174, 179-80, 891 P.2d 261, 
266-67 (1995) (discussing the validity of a reservation of rights by the insurer in connection with tendering a defense). It has been explained that “[a] reservation of rights agreement is notice by the insurer to the insured that the insurer will defend the insured but that the insurer is not waiving any defenses . . . it may have under the policy.” First Ins. Co. v. Hawaii, 
Inc. v. State, 66 Haw. at 422, 665 P.2d at 654 (internal 
7
 Of course, where one insurance policy explicitly contemplates the
 
operation of another specifically named policy by reference, the insurer will
not be looking outside its own policy, and therefore may look to that named
policy in disclaiming its duty to defend.
 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
quotation marks and citation omitted). In the event that it is
 
later determined that the insurer had no duty to defend, the
 insurer may recoup its expenses from the insured. See 22
 
Appleman § 136.7, at 46. 
This ability of an insurer to tender a defense under a
 
reservation of rights, without necessarily acceding to the notion
 that its policy provides coverage, supports the conclusion that
 insurers should not be permitted to look to other policies in
 disclaiming the duty to defend. Insofar as an insurer may
 believe that another policy provides coverage, in lieu of its
 policy, that insurer may tender a defense under a reservation of
 rights -- leaving open the possibility that another insurer may
 be ultimately responsible for the costs of coverage.
 
It is the third of these options -- an insurer refusing 
to defend and risking the consequences -- that we hope to avoid in situations where the insurer would be primary, except by operation of its “other insurance” clause. Where an insured has contracted for primary insurance, an insurer should not be able to refuse to defend and place the risk on the insured, of the insurer’s erroneous understanding of another insurance policy that is not part of the original contract. Instead, all primary carriers should be involved in the initial proceedings where the complaint alleges facts within the scope of coverage. See Dairy 
Road Partners, 92 Hawai' i at 422, 992 P.2d at 117. 
26
         
         
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In Hawai' i, it has been established that insurers may 
8
look to the facts of the complaint  and their own policies in
determining whether they have the duty to defend a particular
 
action. 
In Lexington’s view, insurance companies should be able
 
to interpret 
other policies as well in disclaiming the duty to
 
defend. The danger in this approach, as Nautilus points out, is
 that the insurance company may misinterpret the other policy in
 disclaiming its duty. Of course, an insurer may misinterpret its
 own policy, but misinterpretation may be of a greater risk where
 the insurer is examining a contract to which it is not a party. 
We have held that “[t]o ascertain whether coverage 
exists in insurance coverage disputes, we must look to the language of the insurance policy consistent with the insurer and insured’s intent and expectations.” Methven-Abreu v. Hawaiian 
Ins. & Guar. Co., 73 Haw. 385, 390, 834 P.2d 279, 283 (1992) (internal quotation marks omitted); but cf. Willis v. Swain, 129 Hawai'i 478, 485 n.12, 304 P.3d 619, 626 n.12 (2013) (“While 
courts say they are looking for the intention of the parties, in reality they are making a judgment about the scope of coverage based on the text of the policy, the circumstances, and public policy.” (emphasis omitted) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). An insurer who is not a party to a 
8
 As explained supra, Dairy Road Partners limited the ability of
 
insurers to use extrinsic facts in disclaiming their duty to defend.
 
27
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
particular “other” contract may not be able to accurately
 
ascertain the expectations of the insurer and insured who are the
 actual parties to the other contract. 
Moreover, the relationship between the insured and its 
primary insurer with respect to the duty to defend is a personal one. See, e.g., Am. Fid. & Cas. Co. v. Penn. Thresherman & 
Farmers’ Mut. Cas. Ins. Co., 280 F.2d 453, 459 (5th Cir. 1960) (stating that “the duty to defend is one which is personal to the relationship of [the] insurer and [the] assured”). The insured chose a particular insurer as its primary insurer, and as such, the insured has the reasonable expectation that that insurer will come to the insured’s defense where coverage is applicable. See Dairy 
Road Partners, 92 Hawai' i at 422, 992 P.2d at 117; Commerce & Indus, 
Ins. Co. v. Bank of Hawai' i, 73 Haw. 322, 327, 832 P.2d 733, 736 
(1992) (“An insurer has a duty to proceed in defense of a suit, at least to the point of establishing that liability upon which plaintiff was relying was in fact not covered by the policy, and not that it merely might not be.” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
Accordingly, where an insured has contracted for primary 
insurance, that insured should be entitled to a defense by its insurer. See Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co. v. Indust. Indem. 
Co., 76 Hawai' i 166, 169, 872 P.2d 230 (1994) (holding that the 
“insurer’s duty to defend its insured is contractual in nature”). 
28
          
          
             
        
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In General Motors Acceptance Corp. v. Nationwide Insurance Co., 828
 
N.E.2d 959 (N.Y. 2005), for example, the New York Court of Appeals
 addressed a similar situation where there were two coincidental
 primary insurance policies, but where one was deemed “excess” by
 the operation of an “other insurance” clause. 828 N.E.2d at 962. 
That court reasoned that “[p]rimary insurance premiums are based,
 at least in part, on the insurer’s consideration that it may be
 liable to defend an action[,]” and held that “[r]elieving primary
 insurers of the duty to defend would provide a windfall to the
 carrier insofar as the costs of defense -- litigation insurance -­are contemplated by, and reflected in, the premiums charged for
 primary coverage.” Id. 
Therefore, we hold that a primary insurer may not look to
 
another insurance policy in disclaiming its duty to defend. If a
 primary insurer is tendered a defense, and believes that it is
 actually an excess insurer or otherwise has no duty to defend by
 operation of its “other insurance” clause, then that primary
 insurer must still defend in the action. This is the appropriate
 remedy, rather than leaving the defense up to other insurers or,
 potentially up to the insured, where the insured has contracted for
 primary insurance coverage.
9 The options available for a primary
 
9
 However, where an insurer holds a true excess policy, then the
 
parties have bargained for excess insurance. As noted, in many of these true
excess policies, the other applicable primary insurance is specifically
listed, and such policies are designed to provide coverage over and above
(continued...)
 
29
         
            
          
           
           
              
           
          
           
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
insurer that believes it has been rendered an excess insurer by the
 
operation of its “other insurance” clause are discussed below.
 
III.
 
Question 2:  Whether an “other insurance” clause that
 
purports to release an otherwise primary insurer of the duty to
 defend if the insurer becomes excess as to liability is
 enforceable.
 
A.
 
As to this question, the bulk of Nautilus’s arguments
 
are premised on the specific provisions of Lexington’s policy,
 rather than as addressed toward the more general question posed
 by the Ninth Circuit to this court. Nautilus avers that
 Lexington’s “Other Insurance” clause violated “‘the rule the
 insurance provisions that take away or limit coverage must be
 conspicuous, plain, and clear.’” (Quoting Carmel Dev. Co. v. RLI
 Ins. Co., 126 Cal. App. 4th 502, 516 (2005).) It reiterates that
 Lexington’s “Other Insurance Clause” is contingent on the outcome
 at trial, and since Kila Kila was found not to be negligent,
 
9(...continued)
other existing primary policies. See 23 Appleman § 145.1, at 5 (“[I]n
contrast to primary policies, a pure excess policy provides specific coverage
above an underlying limit of primary insurance and often will refer directly
within the excess policy declaration and policy itself to primary insurers as
well as other excess insurers.”). In such cases, an insurer may look to other
insurance policies in disclaiming its duty to defend in order to avoid
needless litigation either in the form of declaratory judgment actions, or
contribution of defense costs after the fact, where the insured did not
bargain for primary coverage from that insurer in the first instance, as was
explicitly considered in the contract between the insurer and insured.
 
30
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Nautilus was not responsible for any loss and therefore VP & PK
 
had no “other valid and collectible insurance.” Nautilus further
 argues that Lexington’s “Other Insurance” clause should be
 interpreted to limit indemnification only. As to “Other
 Insurance” clauses generally, however, Nautilus does posit that
 an “Other Insurance” clause that purports to release an otherwise
 primary insurer of the duty to defend if the insurer becomes
 excess as to liability should not be enforceable because it
 “fails to give the insured adequate notice that it may not
 receive a defense it believed it bargained for” and “blurs the
 distinction between an insurer’s duty to defend and duty to
 indemnify.” 
In response, Lexington alleges that there is no public
 
policy against enforcement of “other insurance” provisions, and
 that the ICA has recognized the utility of excess “other
 insurance” clauses in the context of uninsured motorist
 insurance. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co, 120 Haw. at 353-354, 205 P.3d
 
at 618-19. Lexington maintains that under California law,
 federal and state courts routinely enforce excess other insurance
 clauses in the absence of prejudice to the insured. (Citing
 Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. Md. Cas. Co., 65 Cal. App. 4th 1279,
 1304 (1998) (“The courts will generally honor the language of
 excess ‘other insurance’ clauses when no prejudice to the
 interests of the insured will ensue.”).) Lexington avers that
 
31
         
         
         
        
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the insured in this case was not prejudiced by the enforcement of
 
the “other insurance” clause, and was not left without a defense
 due to the circularity of other insurance provisions. Lexington
 also declares that the placement of its clause does not violate
 “the rule that insurance provisions that take away or limit
 coverage must be conspicuous, plain, and clear”, that if Nautilus
 had refused to defend VP & PK, Lexington would have defended
 under the terms of its policy and contrary to Nautilus’s
 suggestion, the insured would not be left “in a lurch”. 
In its Reply Brief, Nautilus reiterates that
 
“[i]nsureds should not be left to wonder if the carriers that
 they have been paying premium rates to may or may not come to
 their defense because they have been added on to another policy
 as an additional insured.” As a policy matter, Nautilus suggests
 that “[i]f insureds are added on as additional insureds on
 another policy, let the insureds reap the benefits, not the
 insurance companies who have been receiving premiums to provide
 primary coverage.” 
B.
 1.
 
In Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., the ICA majority
10
 
10
 The Honorable Corinne K.A. Watanabe filed an opinion dissenting in 
part, holding that the excess “other insurance” clause “invalidly limited
Liberty Mutual’s [uninsured motorist] liability, as defined by Hawai 'i 
statutes and case law, is against public policy and is, therefore void and
(continued...)
 
32
         
    
  
             
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
addressed an “other insurance” clause of an insurance policy
 
sharing some characteristics with the type of policy described in
 
the Ninth Circuit’s certified question -- specifically, it made
  
the named insurer into an excess insurer if there was any other 
collectible insurance, under certain circumstances. 120 Hawai' i 
at 345, 349, 205 P.3d at 610, 614. The “Other Insurance” provision in Liberty Mutual’s policy stated, in part, that “
any 
insurance we [Liberty Mutual] provide with respect to a vehicle you [the named insured] do not own shall be excess over any other collectible insurance.” Id. at 345, 205 P.3d at 610 (emphases 
added). Thus, as with the “Other Insurance” provision presented in this case, the Liberty Mutual provision transformed some of its apparently primary coverage into excess coverage, if there 
was other collectible insurance available. See id.
 
Rather than the duty to defend, the question in Liberty
 
Mutual Insurance Co. was whether Liberty Mutual was required to
 
pay for uninsured motorist benefits as a primary insurer or as an
 
excess insurer. Id. at 336, 205 P.3d at 601. In addressing this
 
issue, the ICA referred to policy considerations, and also
 
considered the statutory scheme governing automobile insurance
 coverage, which is not at issue in this case. The ICA majority
 
10(...continued)
unenforceable.” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. , 120 Hawai 'i at 356, 205 P.3d at 621 
(Watanabe, J., dissenting in part). 
33
         
 
  
         
                
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
upheld the excess “other insurance” clause in Liberty Mutual’s
 
policy, stating that “such clauses serve valid purposes, such as
 helping to keep costs of premiums down[,]” and that “[b]y
 allowing insurance companies to set the priority of payment
 through excess provisions, they are better able to assess the
 risk of providing the coverage and to charge the insured
 accordingly.” Id. at 353, 205 P.3d at 619.
 
2.
 
This case presents a different question, however, in
 
that Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. considered an excess “other
 insurance” clause in the context of the duty to indemnify -- and
 here we consider the validity of that type of provision when it
 
11
 allows the insurer to escape or become excess  as to the duty to
defend
 where the insurer is excess as to liability. In the
 
discussion supra, it was explained how the duty to defend is broader than the duty to indemnify, Hart, 126 Hawai' i at 458, 272 
P.3d at 1225, and in accordance with that axiom, Nautilus urges us to make unenforceable any clauses relieving the primary insurer of the duty to defend if the insurer becomes excess as to 
liability. 
11
 Lexington avers that the operation of its “other insurance” clause
 
makes it only excess as to the duty to defend, and does not allow it to escape
the duty to defend entirely when it becomes excess as to liability. Both
 
situations are addressed herein, and the same result would apply in either
situation.
 
34
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
However, in light of our holding as to the first
 
certified question, we conclude that we need not render those
 
clauses completely unenforceable. Instead, we simply reiterate
 that a primary insurer has the initial duty to defend, regardless
 of any “other insurance” provision purporting to relieve that
 insurer of the duty to defend if it is deemed excess as to
 liability, but that an insurer may enforce such an “other
 insurance” clause when obtaining equitable contribution or
 reimbursement for defense costs where it believes that it has
 been made excess by operation of an “other insurance” clause.
 
This result is consistent with the expectations of the 
insured, specifically that where the insured is paying for primary insurance, it will be defended where there is a possibility of coverage. See Dairy Road Partners, 92 Hawai' i at 
412, 992 P.3d at 107. The insured will not be “left in a lurch,” as Nautilus avers, because the primary insurer, regardless of its “other insurance” clause, will have a responsibility to defend. Moreover, while such clauses may not be used to allow an otherwise primary insurer to refuse to tender a defense altogether, they will be enforced to achieve an equitable result between two or more insurance companies, an approach that allows the terms of the contract to take effect, without placing an 
undue burden on the insured. Cf. Sentinel Ins. Co., 76 Hawai' i 
at 302, 875 P.2d at 919 (holding that under the circumstances of 
35
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the case, “[e]quity . . . dictates that the court allocate
 
contribution among liable insurers in proportion to the time
 periods their policies covered”).
 
We note that some courts have held that if a primary
 
insurer undertakes the insured’s defense, it may not seek
 reimbursement from another primary insurer, on the grounds that
 there is no contractual relationship between the two insurers and
 that the defending insurer was undertaking duties consistent with
 its contract with the insured. 22 Appleman § 136.10 at 80-81;
 see, e.g., Jostens, Inc. v. Mission Ins. Co., 387 N.W.2d 161, 166
 (Minn. 1986) (“This court has held that when there is a bona fide
 dispute between two carriers with overlapping coverages as to
 which is primary, whichever undertakes to defend cannot pass on
 its defense expense to the other carrier.”). However, we
 conclude that the better approach is to allow one insurer to
 obtain contribution from another co-insurer that is also
 contractually obligated to defend the insured. See Nat’l Indem.
 
Co. v. St. Paul Ins. Co., 724 P.2d 544, 544-45 (Ariz. 1986)
 (“When an insurer has a duty to defend the insured, there should
 be no reward to the insurer for breaching that duty. A breach of
 the obligation to defend should not be encouraged, but the rule
 which allows an insurer to avoid the costs of defense tends to
 encourage an avoidance of the insurer’s responsibilities.”). 
This contribution or reimbursement shall be in accordance with
 
36
         
  
         
           
         
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
all contract terms, including those purporting to make one
 
insurer excess to the other where “other insurance” is
 available.
12
 
As to the Ninth Circuit’s second certified question, we
 
therefore answer “yes”, but conditionally. “Other insurance”
 clauses purporting to relieve the insurer of the duty to defend
 if the insurer becomes excess as to liability are enforceable,
 but only in an action between two or more insurers for recovery
 of defense costs.
 
IV.
 
Question 3: Whether the irreconcilability of “other
 
insurance” provisions in otherwise primary insurance policies
 should be determined before or after the operation of the “other
 insurance” provisions is determined.
 
The “irreconcilability” referenced by the Ninth Circuit
 
in this question is the concept, mentioned above, that “other
 insurance” provisions may become irreconcilable, or mutually
 repugnant, where identical clauses are presented in two primary
 liability policies. “When both policies contain ‘other
 insurance’ clauses which provide that the coverage afforded shall
 be deemed excess insurance if other insurance exists to cover the
 
12
 As will be discussed infra, where both primary insurers have
 
“other insurance” clauses purporting to relieve them of the duty to defend,
such clauses are irreconcilable, or “mutually repugnant” and therefore will
 not be enforced, leaving both insurers as primary insurers for purposes of
cost allocation.
 
37
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
loss, most courts hold that the excess clauses operate to cancel
 
each other out and the policies of both insurers must be
 considered primary insurance.” Ostrager & Newman, 2 Handbook on
 Insurance Coverage Disputes § 11.03, at 1001. 
A.
 
Nautilus argues that it should be first determined
 
whether the two policies insured against the same risk at the
 same level of coverage, then determine whether or not the two
 policies conflict, and only then determine the operation of the
 “Other Insurance” provisions. According to Nautilus, the two
 policies in this case did not insure against the same risk at the
 same level of coverage, and so there was no need to determine
 whether the policies conflict. Nautilus further alleges that,
 even assuming that the two policies did provide the same level of
 coverage, the policies contain almost identical “other insurance”
 language and therefore are irreconcilable. Finally, Nautilus
 contends that the operation of the “other insurance” provisions
 should be determined last because until it has been determined
 that there is a “loss”, which is typically determined at the end
 of the underlying lawsuit, it is not necessary to determine the
 operation of the “other insurance” provisions. 
Lexington responds that a court should first determine
 
whether “other insurance” provisions in two policies actually
 conflict. In Lexington’s view, “[t]he rule of repugnancy should
 
38
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
only apply if there is an actual conflict between the two “other
 
insurance” clauses,” and here, there was no such conflict. 
(Citation omitted.) (Emphasis in original.) Contrary to
 Nautilus’s argument, Lexington maintains that there is no need to
 decide whether there is the same level of coverage or level of
 risk between the two policies, because the duty to defend does
 not require this determination. Instead, Lexington notes,
 “‘other insurance’ provisions must be reviewed at the inception
 of litigation,” because “[i]f there is a covered claim . . . 
then there is a duty to defend; but then where there are multiple
 insurers, then the policy language, the contractual language,
 must be reviewed and analyzed to determine if there is a priority
 or primary in that defense.” 
B.
 
As noted, the majority view is that “other insurance” 
policies that are irreconcilable, or “mutually repugnant” will negate each other, and neither will be enforced. See Liberty 
Mut. Ins. Co., 120 Hawai' i at 354, n.23, 205 P.3d at 619 n.23 
(explaining, but not applying, this concept). The underlying proposition is that where both policies have identical “other insurance” provisions which provide that the coverage afforded will be deemed excess insurance if other insurance exists to cover the loss (or tender a defense), these excess clauses operate to “cancel each other out”, and the policies of both 
39
         
         
          
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
insurers must be considered primary insurance. See, e.g., CSE
 
Ins. Grp. v. Northbrook Prop. & Cas. Co., 23 Cal. App. 4th 1839
 
(1994); Empire Cas. Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 764
 P.2d 1191, 1199 (Colo. 1998); Universal Underwriters Ins. Co. v.
 Allstate Ins. Co., 592 A.2d 515, 517 (N.H. 1991). Put another
 way, if each excess clause was given effect, neither policy would
 provide primary coverage.
13 See, e.g., Fed. Ins. Co. v. Atl.
 
Nat’l Ins. Co., 250 N.E.2d 193 (N.Y. 1969).
 
Setting the issue of irreconcilability aside
 
temporarily, we note that although both policies in this case
 contain an “other insurance clause,” by their operation the
 clauses do not create a scenario in which the two policies would
 “cancel each other out” and neither would provide primary
 coverage. Only Lexington’s “other insurance” provision could
 potentially take effect in this case, because VP & PK was added
 as an “additional insured” onto Nautilus’s policy. By contrast,
 the “other insurance” provision in Nautilus’s policy would not
 have taken effect because Kila Kila was not an “additional
 insured” on Lexington’s policy. By adding VP & PK as an
 “additional insured” under certain circumstances, Nautlilus
 understood that it may have had to provide coverage for VP & PK. 
13
 This same reasoning applies where two or more primary policies
 
contain “escape” clauses, which, if both were enforced, would deprive the
insured of all coverage. See 22 Appleman § 140.3, at 399.
 
40
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Presumably this consideration was taken into account as part of
 
the premiums that Nautilus charged to Kila Kila. 
These circumstances are distinguishable from the
 
situation argued by Nautilus in its briefs. A more typical
 situation arises where there is one insured and two insurance
 companies, and both insurance companies are deemed excess by
 operation of the “other insurance” provisions, thereby leaving
 the insured with no primary insurance. Here, instead, VP & PK
 will either be covered by Nautilus as a primary insurer, because
 it is listed as an “additional insured” on Nautilus’s policy, or,
 the “additional insured” provision will not come into play, so VP
 & PK will not be covered by Nautilus, and therefore, the “other
 insurance” provision in Lexington’s policy will not be triggered,
 and Lexington will remain the primary insurer. 
Where it is possible to avoid a finding of “mutual
 
repugnance” altogether, therefore, it should be determined from
 the face of the two policies, and the allegations in the
 complaint, whether such allegedly “mutually repugnant” clauses
 are actually relevant before both clauses are deemed inoperable. 
For example, it has been explained that “[w]hen only one of two
 policies co-insuring the same loss contains an ‘other insurance”
 clause, courts generally will give effect to the ‘other
 insurance’ provision (if it is not contrary to statute or public
 policy).” Ostrager & Newman, 2 Handbook on Insurance Coverage
 
41
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Disputes § 11.03[b], at 999. This rule seeks to effectuate the
 
intent of the insurers and avoid cancelling out contract terms
 that need not be voided. Similarly, when only one of the “other
 insurance” clauses in two or more policies would be relevant in a
 given case based on the terms of the clause and the allegations
 in the underlying case, the clause that does become operational
 should be given effect.
 
This is not to say, however, that the full operation of
 
the clauses must be determined before irreconcilability may be
 considered. For example, here, there is a dispute about whether
 VP & PK was actually covered as an “additional insured” under
 Nautilus’s policy, based on the issue of Kila Kila’s negligence,
 which was resolved only in the underlying trial. A court looking
 at the insurance contracts at any time prior to the conclusion in
 the underlying litigation would not necessarily be able to
 ascertain whether Lexington’s “other insurance” would actually
 become fully operational. However, in this case one would be
 able to determine whether the clauses would even be relevant by
 looking at the face of the contracts and the allegations of the
 complaint. Lexington’s clause is relevant and Nautilus’s is not. 
Based on this preliminary determination, there would be no need
 to consider irreconcilability or mutual repugnance.
 
By determining whether an “other insurance” clause is
 
triggered first, a court may be able to avoid irreconcilability
 
42
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
or mutual repugnance, such as in this case, and better effectuate 
the contract language. This is consistent with the principle that “[i]nsurance policies are subject to the general rules of contract construction,” and thus, “the court must . . . respect the plain terms of the policy and not create ambiguity where none exists.” First Ins. Co. of Hawai' i, Inc., 66 Haw. at 423-24, 665 
P.2d at 655 (alteration in original) (internal brackets, citations, and quotation marks omitted). We hold, therefore, that it must first be determined whether two or more “other insurance” provisions are relevant, based on the face of the policies and the complaint, and only then must it be decided whether the provisions are irreconcilable. The complete operation of the “other insurance” clauses may be resolved thereafter. 
V.
 
Question 4: Whether, and when, an excess insurer, or
 
otherwise primary insurer who becomes an excess insurer by
 operation of an “other insurance” clause, has a duty to defend. 
A.
 1.
 
As to this question, as noted before, Nautilus avers
 
that a primary insurer who becomes an excess insurer by operation
 of an “Other Insurance” clause has the duty to defend its insured
 because “the duty to defend is one which is personal to the
 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relationship of [the] insurer and [the insured].” Nautilus
 
analogizes the facts to those of American Fidelity & Casualty
 Co., where, according to Nautilus, two individuals, Clay and
 Britt, were covered by two different insurers. (Citing 280 F.2d
 at 455.) “American” was Clay’s primary insurer and
 “Pennsylvania” was Britt’s primary insurer. (Citing id.) 
American brought an action seeking a declaration that it did not
 have a duty to defend Clay, because Clay was an additional
 insured under the insurance policy between Britt and
 Pennsylvania. (Citing id. at 457.) 
American’s argument was based on the “other insurance”
 
clause in its policy, which American alleged rendered its policy
 excess and Pennsylvania’s primary, thus relieving American of any
 duty to defend Clay until Pennslyvania had exhausted its policy
 limitations in doing so. (Citing id. at 456-57, 456 n.4.) 
Nautilus refers to the Fifth Circuit’s holding stating that
 American was incorrect in believing that based on the “other
 insurance” clause, “‘it was merely an ‘excess’ insurer, its duty
 to defend, like the obligation to pay, was excess also.’” 
(Quoting id. at 458.) The Fifth Circuit concluded that “‘there
 can be no possible basis for American’s denial of its contractual
 duty of defense.’” (Quoting id. at 457.)
 
Thus, Nautilus maintains that Lexington is still
 
required to defend VP & PK even if it were excess as to its
 
44
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
defense obligations. In support of this contention, Nautilus
 
cites to Southern Farm Bureau Casualty Insurance Co. v. Allstate
 Insurance Co., 150 F. Supp. 216 (W.D. Ark. 1957), for the
 proposition that even where the insured’s primary insurer was
 excess to another insurer for damages, it still had the duty to
 defend the named insured, and to State Farm Mutual Automobile
 Insurance Co. v. Foundation Reserve Insurance Co., 431 P.2d 737,
 741 (N.M. 1967), which held that even though Allstate’s insurance
 was excess, that did not relieve it of its duty to defend. In
 Nautilus’s view, the better rule is to require a primary insurer
 who finds itself in an excess position because of an “other
 insurance” clause to defend its named insured, because this rule
 would “benefit an insured who paid for primary coverage and
 expected primary coverage,” closing loopholes that would allow an
 insurance company to “shirk its responsibility.” 
If the rule were otherwise, Nautilus points to the
 
possibility for oscillating coverage in this case, where
 Lexington looked at Nautilus’s policy and concluded it was excess
 and therefore did not owe a duty to defend, but where because at
 trial Kila Kila was found not negligent, Nautilus’s policy then
 became inapplicable to VP & PK, making Lexington VP & PK’s
 primary insurer again. Nautilus concludes that because there is
 only a possibility that a primary insurer may become excess, that 
45
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
insurer has the duty to defend regardless of what the “other
 
insurance” clause may state.
 
2.
 
Lexington answers that by operation of its “other
 
insurance” clause, it did not have a duty to defend unless and
 until Nautilus had exhausted its coverage, or unless Nautilus
 refused to defend. Lexington avers that despite Nautilus’s
 allegations about the expectations the insured, here it is
 undisputed that VP & PK never tendered its claim to Lexington,
 but instead directly to Nautilus, “who VP & PK must have assumed
 would provide them a defense.” Lexington states that it is “not
 asserting that it had no duty to defend, but rather by its policy
 terms, [its] duty to defend was excess to Nautilus’s duty under
 [both insurance companies’] policy language.” 
According to Lexington, some courts hold to the
 
contrary of the Fifth Circuit’s decision in American & Casualty
 Co., with respect to the respective duties that subsist among one
 or more otherwise primary liability insurers. Lexington
 maintains that the better approach is to “follow those courts
 that give effect to or reconcile competing clauses dealing with
 the existence of other insurance, at least where the insured is
 being provided a defense by one or more of its carriers.” In
 connection with this proposal, Lexington cites to United States
 Fidelity & Guaranty Co. v. Federated Rural Electric Insurance
 
46
         
        
            
            
             
            
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Corp., 37 P.3d 828 (Okla. 2001), for the proposition that
 
“‘[W]here an insured has both primary and excess liability
 insurance, the excess insurer is not responsible to participate
 in the costs of defense until after the limits of the primary
 policy are exhausted[,]’” (quoting U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co., 37 P.3d
 at 832-33), and to Western Casualty & Surety Co. v. Western World
 Insurance Co., 769 F.2d 381 (7th Cir. 1985), for the view that
 “‘when one policy is primary and the other is excess, only the
 primary insurer need defend claims below the limits of the
 primary policy.” (Quoting W. Cas. & Sur. Co., 769 F.2d at
 385).)
14
 
Finally, Lexington asserts that its approach is
 
consistent with the insurance law principles of “(1) honoring
 insurers’ rights to limit their liability and impose whatever
 conditions they please on their obligation, provided they are not
 in contravention of statutory inhibitions or public policy; and
 (2) that every insurance contract shall be construed according to
 the entirety of its terms and conditions as set forth in the
 policy.” Lexington also points out that there is no prejudice to 
14
 Lexington also cites Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. Pacific
 
Indemnity Co. , 579 F. Supp. 140, 145 (W.D. Pa. 1984), Continental Casualty Co.
v. Pacific Indemnity Co. , 134 Cal. App. 3d 389 (1982), Hartford Accident &
Indemnity Co. v. Ryder Truck Rental, Inc. , 85 A.D.2d 145, 447 (N.Y. App. Div.
1982), and U.S. Fire Insurance Co. v. United Service Auto Ass’n , 772 S.W.2d
218, 220 (Tex. Ct. App. 1989).
 
47
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the insured, apparently under terms such as those at issue in
 
this case, “because it must be and will be defended.” 
3.
 
Nautilus replies that the cases cited by Lexington in
 
support of its position are not applicable to this case. 
Nautilus argues that United States Fiduciary & Guarantee Co.
 dealt with a true excess carrier, not one who becomes excess
 through an “other insurance” provision, and that similarly,
 Pacific Indemnity Co. dealt with “true excess” insurers. 
Additionally, it states that Continental Casualty Co., Hartford
 Accident & Indemnity Co., and U.S. Fire Insurance Co. do not
 involve an additional insured issue. 
With respect to the Seventh Circuit’s decision in
 
Western Casualty & Sururety Co., Nautilus maintains that that
 case supports its position that Lexington owed a duty to defend. 
According to Nautilus, Western Casualty & Sururety Co. held that
 “‘when a case is settled the claims of the two insurers must be
 resolved according to the terms of the excess clauses.’” 
(Quoting W. Cas. & Sur. Co., 769 F.2d at 385.) Nautilus points
 out the hypothetical Western Casualty & Sururety Co., regarding
 the possible outcome had that case gone to trial, and “the
 judgment revealed” that the first primary insurer did not cover
 the “loss”, then that court may have allowed that primary insurer
 to recover from a second primary insurer who had been deemed
 
48
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
excess because there was other primary insurance covering the
 
“loss”. (Citing id. at 386.) Nautilus says that it, like the
 first primary insurer in the hypothetical, did not cover the
 “loss” and therefore Nautilus should be able to recover the costs
 of defense from Lexington. 
B.
 In response to this certified question, we hold that 
an otherwise primary insurer who becomes an excess insurer by operation of an “other insurance” clause owes the duty to defend from the time the defense is tendered. “[T]he duty to defend must be determined when the claim is initially asserted.” Hart, 
126 Hawai' i at 458, 272 P.3d at 1225 (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted). 
1.
 
Our disposition as to the first question essentially
 
resolves this question as well -- because we hold that primary
 insurers who could allegedly become excess insurers by operation
 of an “other insurance” clause are not permitted to look to other
 policies when determining whether they have a duty to defend. 
Therefore, the duty to defend will arise as if they are the
 primary insurers, inasmuch as they have not yet been deemed an
 “excess insurer” by operation of the “other insurance” provision. 
Pursuant to our holding herein, only if an otherwise primary
 insurer is deemed an “excess insurer” in an action seeking
 
49
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
contribution or reimbursement of defense costs may that insurer
 
look to the operation of an “other insurance” clause making it
 excess.
 
As to question 2, we held that “other insurance”
 
clauses purporting to release an otherwise primary insurer of its
 duty to defend if it becomes excess as to liability are
 enforceable in certain circumstances. However, the question of
 liability cannot be determined until after the conclusion of
 litigation (or sometimes at all, in the event that the case
 settles). “[A]n insurer’s ultimate non-liability should not free
 it from its concurrent and distinct contractual duty to defend.” 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Therefore,
 the duty to defend may not be disclaimed by an otherwise primary
 insurance carrier during the proceedings on the basis of a clause
 purporting to make that insurer excess.
 
The instant case illustrates the problem with allowing
 
an insurer to disclaim the duty to defend at any time before the
 conclusion of the litigation based on such a clause. For
 example, the underlying litigation has been concluded in this
 case, and it does not appear that Lexington can actually be
 deemed an “excess insurer”. As explained supra, Lexington can
 only be an excess insurer if VP & PK is covered by another
 policy. VP & PK is covered by Nautilus’s policy only for
 occurrences arising out of Kila Kila’s negligence. Kila Kila was
 
50
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
found not to be negligent in the underlying litigation. Hence,
 
the additional insured coverage of VP & PK in Nautilus’s policy
 was not operable, and, accordingly, Lexington’s “other insurance”
 policy was also not operable. It would appear to answer the
 question presented, that Lexington, therefore, is the primary
 insurer, and Nautilus should be able to recover defense costs in
 full from Lexington. None of this could necessarily have been
 determined before the close of litigation, however, since VP &
 PK’s indemnity coverage was dependent upon a particular finding. 
As explained supra, our case law holds that the duty to 
defense arises where there is a mere possibility of coverage. See Dairy Road Partners, 92 Hawai' i at 413, 992 P.2d at 108. 
Extrapolating from this principle, we conclude that where it cannot be determined whether an otherwise primary insurer becomes an excess insurer until the conclusion of the underlying litigation, that an otherwise primary insurer has the duty to defend, from the time it receives tender of the defense. In the Seventh Circuit decision cited by parties’ briefs, Western Casualty & Surety Co., that court stated that “[t]he state [of Illinois] seeks to encourage all carriers to participate in the initial proceedings, and as the state courts have found, it is a bad idea to inform insurance carriers that whichever is the least faithful to its obligation to the insured will escape all liability as long as a responsible carrier covers the loss.” 769 
51
         
 
            
              
              
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
F.2d at 383. We agree that all carriers must be encouraged to
 
participate in initial proceedings, and our holding as to these
 questions is intended to mandate otherwise primary insurers to
 defend and avoid uncertainty on the part of insureds as to who
 will in fact provide his, her, or its defense.
 
2.
 
We turn briefly to the cases cited by the parties in
 
support of their respective positions. In American Fiduciary &
 Casualty Co., cited by Nautilus, the Fifth Circuit appears to
 have reached the same conclusion that we reach herein, namely
 that where the insurance coverage of an otherwise primary insurer
 would become excess over other “valid and collectible insurance”
 by operation of an “other insurance” clause, that primary insurer
 must undertake the defense. 280 F.2d at 457. The Fifth Circuit
 explained that the duty to defend is one which is personal to the
 relationship of the insurer and the insured -- and as such,
 “[w]hatever may be the right ultimately to saddle off a part of
 the cost of defense actually undertaken once payment has been
 made, . . . it is contrary to the very nature of the contract
 that the insurer can scout around in hopes that it can find
 someone whose defense the [insured] is compelled to accept.”
15
 
15
 The Fifth Circuit does also appear to rely, in part, on the fact
 
that the “other insurance” clause at issue in that case did not refer to the
 
duty to defend. American Fiduciary & Casualty Co. , 280 F.2d at 459. As
 
quoted supra, the “other insurance” clause in this case does refer to the duty
(continued...)
 
52
         
         
              
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id. at 459-60 (emphasis added).
 
Lexington does not appear to dispute the holding of
 
American Fiduciary & Casualty Co., but instead sets forth case
 
law from other jurisdictions in support of a different approach. 
In U.S. Fiduciary & Guarantee Co., the Oklahoma Supreme Court
 held that an excess insurer has no duty to participate in defense
 costs. 37 P.3d at 830. In that case, however, one of the
 insurance companies involved was a primary insurer and one was a
 true excess insurer, and thus it is not relevant in deciding this
 certified question. Id. In Pacific Indemnity Co., the Western
 
District of Pennsylvania held that two insurance policies
 covering the same risk both contained competing excess clauses,
 and therefore neither clause was given effect and the two
 insurers stood on equal ground. 579 F. Supp. at 143. The costs
 of the defense were then pro-rated in proportion with the policy
 limits of the primary policies. Id. at 144. Thus, Pacific
 
Indemnity Co. also appears not to support Lexington’s position
 because the two competing “other insurance” clauses were deemed
 irreconcilable and not given effect. Id. at 143. 
In Continental Casualty Co., the California Court of
 
Appeal addressed a dispute between two insurance carriers over
 
15(...continued)
to defend. However, the Fifth Circuit’s reasoning remains persuasive
regardless of the presence or absence of a reference to the duty to defend in
the “other insurance” clause.
 
53
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
their respective liability for settlement of a malpractice case. 
134 Cal. App. 3d at 393. That court construed the two “other
 insurance” clauses in the policies, where the issue was
 “conflicting excess insurance coverage[,]” id. at 397, and
 accordingly concluded that it could “see no justification for
 choosing one policy over the other as being primarily liable for
 the excess liability.” Id. Continental Casualty Co. thus
 
allocated liability where there were irreconcilable clauses,
 unlike this case, where the issue is defense costs. 
Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co. is also inapposite,
 
in that it appears to rest its holding on the fact that the
 action involved an accident with a lessee driver, where one
 insurer was the lessor’s insurer and one insurer was the driver’s
 insurer. 85 A.D.2d at 147 (“There is no reason why the insurer
 of a lessor should not be required to defend against an accident
 of a lessee driver even when the driver has his own separate
 insurance coverage.”). In U.S. Fire Insurance Co., moreover, it
 was “undisputed and uncontested” by one of the insurers that if
 both insurers’ automobile liability policies provided coverage,
 then under Texas law, its policy would be the primary policy and
 the other one would be the excess policy. 772 S.W.2d at 222. 
Thus, the primary/excess issue had already been resolved by
 operation of Texas law, id., and as such, U.S. Fire Insurance Co.
 is not on point.
 
54
         
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In the Seventh Circuit’s decision in Western Casualty &
 
Surety Co., one otherwise primary insurer was deemed excess based
 
on a provision in its policy deeming it excess if the insured had
 “other insurance insuring against a loss covered by this policy.” 
769 F.2d at 383-84 (emphasis added). That court’s holding
 appears to be based on the fact that the case settled, and
 therefore there was an established “loss” that would make one of
 the insurers excess. Id. at 384. It stated that “when a case is
 
settled the claims of the two insurers must be resolved according
 to the terms of the excess clauses[.]” Id. at 385. Although the
 
Seventh Circuit did explain that “when one policy is primary and
 the other is excess, only the primary insurer need defend claims
 below the limits of the primary policy[,]” this statement was in
 a context where one insurer sought compensation from the other
 for the costs of litigating and settling the suit. Id. at 383,
 
385. 
In sum, none of the cases cited by Lexington evince
 
policy rationales that would support an approach different from
 the one we take in responding to the Ninth Circuit’s certified
 
questions. We therefore hold that the duty to defend arises at
 
the outset of the litigation for an otherwise primary insurer who
 
could become an excess insurer by operation of an “other
 insurance clause.”
 
55
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VI.
 
Based on the foregoing, we answer the certified
 
questions as follows:
 
1. Whether an insurer may look to another insurer’s policy
 
in order to disclaim the duty to defend, where the complaint in
 
the underlying lawsuit alleges facts within coverage.
 
Unless another insurer’s policy is specifically named
 
in the first insurer’s policy, an insurer may not look to another
 
insurer’s policy in order to disclaim the duty to defend, where
 the complaint in the underlying lawsuit alleges facts within
 coverage.
 
2. Whether an “other insurance” clause that purports to
 
release an otherwise primary insurer of the duty to defend if the
 
insurer becomes excess as to liability is enforceable.
 
An “other insurance” clause purporting to release an
 
otherwise primary insurer of the duty to defend if the insurer
 
becomes excess as to liability is enforceable, but only as
 between two or more insurers seeking to allocate or recover
 defense costs.
 
3. Whether the irreconcilability of “other insurance”
 
provisions in otherwise primary insurance policies should be 
56
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determined before or after the operation of the “other insurance”
 
provisions is determined.
 
The relevance of the “other insurance” provisions
 
should be determined from the face of the policies and the
 
allegations in the complaint first. Then, it can be decided
 whether the relevant “other insurance” provisions are
 
irreconcilable or “mutually repugnant.” If the provisions are
 
reconcilable, the operation of the “other insurance” provisions
 
may then be considered.
 
4. Whether, and when, an excess insurer, or an otherwise
 
primary insurer who becomes an excess insurer by operation of an
 
“other insurance” clause, has a duty to defend.
 
An otherwise primary insurer who becomes an excess
 
insurer by operation of an “other insurance” clause has a duty to
 
defend as soon as a claim is tendered to it and there is the mere
 possibility that coverage of that claim exists under its policy.
 
Roy F. Hughes and
Charlene Tran Murata,
for plaintiff-appellant /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
Randall Y. Yamamoto and
Christine E. Savage,
for defendant-appellee
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
57
 