   
 
                                                    
                                                                 
         
      
        
     
        
        
          
    
        
        
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
Electronically Filed
---o0o--­Supreme Court              
SCCQ-11-0000329 
ELIZABETH MILLER and MARTIN KAHAE, as Co-Pers 28-DEC-2011onal
Representatives of the Estate of Penelope (Penny) Spiller,
09:32 AM Deceased, and as Party-Plaintiffs for Penelope (Penny) Spiller,
Plaintiffs,
 
vs.
 
HARTFORD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, a Connecticut Domestic
For-Profit Corporation and MEDAMERICA INSURANCE COMPANY,
a Pennsylvania Domestic For-Profit Corporation,
Defendants.
 
NO. SCCQ-11-0000329
 
CERTIFIED QUESTION FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF HAWAI
'I
 
(CIV. NO. 09-00381)
 
DECEMBER 28, 2011
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY DUFFY, J.
 
The United States District Court for the District of
 
Hawai'i (District Court) certified the following questions of law 
to this court:
 
1.	 If an insurer commits bad faith, must an insured prove
she suffered substantial economic or physical loss
caused by the bad faith to recover emotional distress
damages caused by the bad faith?
 
2.	 If an insured must suffer substantial economic or physicalloss to qualify for emotional distress damages caused byinsurer bad faith, what does Hawai 'i law require as to how 
that loss must be proven? 
3.	 If a plaintiff must prove substantial economic or physical
loss, must any emotional distress damages bear a reasonable
relationship to that loss?
     
  
         
        
         
       
          
              
           
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Upon review of the Certified Questions, this court determined 
that “the First Question -- and only that question -- is amenable to answer by this court pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 13, which requires that the question be ‘determinative of the cause.’” Order on Certified Questions at 1. We now modify the question presented to (1) limit its applicability to first-party insurance contracts, and (2) delete “substantial” from “substantial economic or physical loss.” The question now reads as follows: 
If a first-party insurer commits bad faith, must an insured
prove the insured suffered economic or physical loss caused
by the bad faith in order to recover emotional distress
damages caused by the bad faith?
 
Based on the analysis below, we hold that if a first-
party insurer commits bad faith, an insured need not prove the
 
insured suffered economic or physical loss caused by the bad
 faith in order to recover emotional distress damages caused by
 the bad faith. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A.	 Factual Background
 
This lawsuit arises from an insurance contract between
 
1
Plaintiff Penelope (Penny) Spiller (“Ms. Spiller”)  and
1
 Ms. Spiller was the original Plaintiff in this action, filed July
 
9, 2009. She lost her battle with cancer on September 10, 2010. On
 
December 21, 2010, Elizabeth Miller and Martin Kahae were substituted as the
“Co-Personal Representatives of the Estate of Penelope (Penny) Spiller,
Deceased, and as Party-Plaintiffs for Penelope (Penny) Spiller.” Although two
continue...
 
2
    
  
 
             
  
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defendants Hartford Life Insurance Company (“Hartford”) and
 
MedAmerica Insurance Company (“MedAmerica”). 
1.	 Ms. Spiller’s Long-Term Care Policy and Her Cancer
Diagnosis
 
In 2001, Ms. Spiller, a State of Hawai' i employee on 
the island of Moloka< i, purchased a Hartford long-term care 
insurance policy (“Policy”) through the Hawai' i Public Employees 
Health Fund.2 Ms. Spiller’s Policy with Hartford became 
effective on February 1, 2001, when she was fifty-seven years 
old. 
On October 1, 2001, Hartford and MedAmerica
 
(collectively “Defendants”) entered into an Indemnity and
 Assumption Reinsurance Agreement (“Reinsurance Agreement”)
 through which Hartford “transferred certain policy liabilities
 and administrative functions for its long-term care policies to
 MedAmerica.” The Reinsurance Agreement provided that if certain
 policyholders did not agree to the novation by MedAmerica, they
 
would be designated a “non-consenting policyholder.” On the
 
“assumption effective date,” MedAmerica, as the “assumption
 
reinsurer,” accepted all of Hartford’s policy liabilities except
 
1...continue
 
P
laintiffs now exist in this case, this opinion will refer to Ms. Spiller as
the sole Plaintiff.
 
2
 Ms. Spiller retired in May 2005.
 
3
    
 
          
          
          
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
those of non-consenting policyholders. In this respect,
 
MedAmerica became an “assumption reinsurer.” As to these non-
consenting policyholders, MedAmerica became the “indemnity
 
reinsurer” and a co-insurer with Hartford. Ultimately, Hartford
 
retained responsibility for certain obligations to non-consenting
 
policyholders. 
The Reinsurance Agreement also transferred all
 
administrative functions, even those of non-consenting
 policyholders, from Hartford to MedAmerica. For example,
 MedAmerica became responsible for “receiving, processing,
 investigating, evaluating[] and paying claims filed by
 policyholders[,]” including non-consenting policyholders. 
Additionally, the Reinsurance Agreement allowed MedAmerica to use
 Hartford’s “names, logos, trade names, trademarks[] and service
 marks for the purposes of performing the administrative
 services.” As a result, “as to non-consenting policyholders,
 MedAmerica became Hartford[’s] . . . managing agent.” 
The Hawai' i Public Employees Health Fund did not 
consent to the novation between MedAmerica and Hartford and policyholders such as Ms. Spiller became non-consenting policyholders. The District Court explains: 
[t]he parties dispute the scope of the transfer of obligations,
and contest the precise meaning of certain terms of the
Reinsurance Agreement. . . . Regardless, it appears undisputed
that Hartford Life still has responsibility -- whether as a
 reinsurer, coinsurer, or as an indemnitor -- for fulfilling actual
 
4
    
        
    
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
policy obligations (payment of benefits) owed to non-consenting
policyholders such as [Ms.] Spiller.
 
On January 6, 2007, Ms. Spiller “suffered a grand mal
 
seizure and was diagnosed with lung cancer that had metastasized
 
to her brain[,]” at the age of sixty-three. In May 2007,
 Ms. Spiller applied for long-term care benefits under her Policy. 
Defendants found Ms. Spiller eligible for benefits, and paid her
 caregiver (her companion Martin Kahae) for services beginning in
 October 2007. Defendants provided coverage for Ms. Spiller for
 almost a year, then terminated her benefits on August 25, 2008. 
Nearly five months later, on January 23, 2009, Defendants
 reinstated her benefits retroactively. This litigation arises
 from the circumstances and reasons surrounding Ms. Spiller’s
 benefits termination and subsequent reinstatement.
 
2.	 Ms. Spiller’s Claim for Benefits Under Her Long-Term
Care Policy
 
According to the terms of Ms. Spiller’s Policy,
 
policyholders are eligible for benefits when classified as
 
“chronically ill.” “Chronically ill” is defined in the Policy as
 being certified by a “licensed health care practitioner” within
 the year prior to applying for benefits as:
 
a) being unable to perform (without Hands-on Assistance
from another individual) at least two Activities of Daily Living
 
5
    
              
  
     
           
          
         
          
         
   
          
           
      
           
       
         
       
           
          
         
        
       
          
             
   
      
          
          
             
         
       
           
         
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[(ADLs)] 3 for a period of at least 90 days due to a loss of
 
functional capacity; or
 
b) requiring Substantial Supervision 4 to Protect Yourself
 
from threats to health and safety due to a Severe Cognitive
5
Impairment .
The Policy requires a policyholder to establish a “Severe
 
Cognitive Impairment” by: 
(1) incorrectly answer[ing] four or more questions on the “Short
 
Portable Mental Status Questionnaire,” (2) achiev[ing] a score of
23 or lower on the Folstein Mini-Mental Status Exam (“Folstein”),
 
3 The Policy defines “Activities of Daily Living” as consisting of
 
the following “self-care functions”:
 
Bathing: Washing Yourself by sponge bath; or [sic] in
either a tub or shower, including the task of getting into
or out of the tub or shower.
 
Dressing: Putting on and taking off all items of clothing
and any necessary braces, fasteners or artificial limbs.
 
Toileting: Getting to and from the toilet, getting on and
off the toilet[] and performing associated personal hygiene.
 
Transferring: Moving into or out of a bed, chair or
 
wheelchair.
 
Continence: The ability to maintain control of bowel and
bladder function; or, when unable to maintain control of
bowel or bladder function, the ability to perform associated
personal hygiene (including caring for catheter or colostomy
bag).
 
Eating: Feeding Yourself by getting food into Your body
from a receptacle (such as a plate, cup or table) or by a
feeding tube or intravenously.
 
4
 The Policy defines “Substantial Supervision” as “continual
 
supervision (which may include cueing by verbal prompting, gestures or other
demonstrations) by another person that is necessary to protect You from
threats to Your heath or safety (such as may result from wandering).”
 
5
 The Policy defines “Severe Cognitive Impairment” as “a loss or
 
deterioration in intellectual capacity that requires Substantial Supervision
and is comparable to (and includes) Alzheimer’s disease and similar forms of
irreversible dementia and is measured by clinical evidence and standardized
tests that reliably measure impairment[.]”
 
6
    
       
       
        
         
   
  
       
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or (3) “[e]xhibit[ing] specific behavioral problems requiring
daily supervision, including but not limited to: wandering,
abusive or assaultive behavior, poor judgement [sic] or
uncooperativeness which poses a danger to them or others, extreme
bizarre personal hygiene habits.”
 
In May 2007, after Ms. Spiller applied for long-term
 
care benefits, MedAmerica’s “third party vender” hired registered
 
nurse Michael Kahalekulu (“Mr. Kahalekulu”) to perform a Benefit
 Determination Assessment (“BDA”) on Ms. Spiller, as required by
 her Policy. Through the BDA, Mr. Kahalekulu concluded that Ms.
 Spiller needed supervision because of her seizures. She was also
 unable to perform two ADLs. Hence, claims handler Annette LaFica
 (“Ms. LaFica”) approved Ms. Spiller’s benefits by letter (on
 Hartford stationery) on October 17, 2007. At this time,
 Defendants recommended that Ms. Spiller have 24-hour supervision.
 
Defendants contend that in October 2007, Defendants
 
gave Ms. Spiller only “conditional approval” that was subject to
 
reassessment.
6 Moreover, Defendants claim Ms. Spiller originally
 
failed to demonstrate that she was sufficiently impaired (through
 
either ADLs or cognitively) to qualify for benefits under her
 Policy in May 2007. In fact, they maintain that Ms. Spiller
 understood her benefits were “conditional” when Defendants
 
6
 The time between Ms. Spiller’s application and approval
 
encompassed a 90-day “elimination” or “deductible” period.
 
7
    
          
      
        
           
            
           
           
         
         
            
            
             
          
           
           
          
           
          
            
            
            
            
           
           
            
          
            
           
             
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
approved them in October 2007.7
 
Mr. Kahalekulu performed a second BDA for Ms. Spiller
 
on December 21, 2007. The second BDA indicated that she required
 
assistance with at least three ADLs, specifically bathing,
 transferring and dressing. Also, Ms. Spiller had a Folstein
 score of nineteen, which indicated she had “Severe Cognitive
 Impairment,” and qualified for continued long-term care benefits. 
Accordingly, Defendants extended Ms. Spiller’s benefits through
 June 30, 2008. 
7 The District Court cites part of a “lengthy Call Notes Report”
 
dated October 18, 2007, by Ms. LaFica:
 
Spoke with daughter, Jessie[,] yesterday and advised her
that we were able to approve [Ms. Spiller] for benefits with
an incur date of 5/21/07. . . . We have ample documentation
that [Ms. Spiller] is a very ill person. [Diagnosis] is
[cancer] of the lung with [metastasis] to the brain. the
 brain lesions are causing seizure activity. The seizures
 leave [Ms. Spiller] [in]capacitated for days and at those
times she is an almost total assist with all ADL’s . Based
 
on the BDA she did not meet triggers. I requested records
 
from 2 of her treating physicians. Dr. Dan, as he is called
by the family, (they describe him as a “surfing doctor[]”)
 keeps very sketchy records. After 4 attempts to secure his
office notes I still don’t have the official record. [Ms.
Spiller] lives on a remote Hawaiian island and doesn’t seek
tx after seizures. Tx after seizures would be pretty much
comfort measure and logistically . . . doesn’t make any
sense . . . . I suggested that we deny/appeal/re-assess. Her
 EP [elimination period] is calendar day and she did not want to
deny because the time toward EP would be lost. Again requested
records from Dr. Dan which did not shed any light on seizure
frequency. I have had increased contact with daughter over the
past 2-3 weeks. She reports on multiple occassions [sic] that
[Ms. Spiller] is having seizures. [Ms. Spiller] can’t get out of
bed, transfer, toilet, bath or dress with increasing frequency.
Dr. Dan did send a letter stating that [Ms. Spiller] was having
hallucinations and required 24 hour supervision. . . . Approved
 
[Ms. Spiller] for benefits. I am reassessing at this time. [Ms.
 Spiller] and family are aware.
8
    
             
         
           
            
            
             
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mr. Kahalekulu performed a third BDA for Ms. Spiller on
 
July 28, 2008. Ms. Spiller argues that this BDA indicated she
 
required assistance with two ADLs, specifically, bathing and
 dressing. Also according to the third BDA, Ms. Spiller’s
 Folstein score increased to twenty-five, though she claims she
 still required supervision due to her cognitive impairments. 
After Ms. Spiller’s third BDA, Defendants terminated
 
her benefits. Barbara Mottern (“Ms. Mottern”),
 Hartford/MedAmerica’s new contact (i.e., replacing Ms. LaFica who
 previously handled Ms. Spiller’s claim), telephoned Ms. Spiller
 and informed her that Hartford/MedAmerica was terminating her
 long-term care benefits on August 25, 2008. Mottern explained
 that Ms. Spiller was no longer classified as “cognitively
 impaired” or incapable of performing two ADLs as required by the
 Policy. On August 22, 2008, Ms. Mottern recorded in her “NotePad
 Report”:
 
Insured no longer meets cog. trigger -- in fact did very well on
 
testing. Needs assist[ance] with Bathing, Dressing for sleeves
but lives in tropical climate on island of Maui [sic] Discovered
caregiver is sig. other -- who resides with insured. Falls under
 exclusion of “if no charge would be made in the absence of
insurance. . . .” Will approve thru September 6, 2008 due to lack
of tim[e]liness on our part.
 
Defendants terminated Ms. Spiller’s benefits as of September 2,
 
2008 (“an August 25, 2008 entry reads ‘Error in above notepad
 dated 8/22/2008: Approval to 8/31/2008, denied assessment
 
9
    
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
#4.’”). Defendants’ September 19, 2008 letter (on Hartford
 
stationery) confirmed Ms. Spiller’s benefit termination.
 
Defendants maintain that the July 28, 2008 BDA rendered
 
Ms. Spiller ineligible for benefits. Specifically, they contend
 that Ms. Spiller required help with only one ADL, bathing. 
Defendants argue it was reasonable to surmise that Ms. Spiller
 failed to meet the ADL for dressing because the July 28, 2008 BDA
 was inconsistent with her prior ADLs for dressing. Particularly,
 the July 28, 2008 BDA contained inconsistencies regarding the
 frequency she needed help dressing (i.e., “daily,” “when needed,”
 “at times”). More notably, Defendants cite to Mr. Kahalekulu’s
 statements that Ms. Spiller needed assistance with dressing “with
 sleeves on tops,” and that she “at times has difficulty putting
 on pull-over tops and needs assistance from [Mr. Kahae].” 
Moreover, Defendants contend that because Ms. Spiller’s
 
Folstein score exceeded the eligibility threshold of twenty-
three, the BDA’s conclusion that Ms. Spiller needed help dressing
 because of “confusion” is irrelevant. Also, Defendants stress
 they were waiting, “after several requests,” for Ms. Spiller’s
 
8
medical records from her treating physician, Dr. McGuire,  and
maintain that no other medical record explains the frequency or
 
8
 Dr. McGuire is known by the family as “Dr. Dan.”
 
10
    
           
          
              
           
            
  
              
            
           
         
      
   
             
         
              
             
                
                     
 
           
           
          
           
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
severity of her seizures.9 Also, Defendants emphasize that
 
because Mr. Kahalekulu was a “third party vender,” they were
 
entitled to conduct their own assessment of Ms. Spiller in order
 to confirm her eligibility. 
The District Court explains that Ms. Mottern “appears
 
to have taken issue with benefits being paid to [Mr.] Kahae,
 [Ms.] Spiller’s live-in companion.” Ms. Mottern recorded that
 Mr. Kahae
10 “falls under exclusion of ‘if no charge would be made
 
in the absence of insurance.’” Here, Ms. Mottern referred to the
 
9 The District Court notes that on August 26, 2008, the day after
 
Ms. Mottern telephoned Ms. Spiller and terminated her benefits, Dr. McGuire
called Ms. Mottern and “wanted to know if there was anything he could do to
 change [their] minds.” Ms. Mottern was “apparently not impressed with Dr.
 McGuire” (who Ms. LaFica described in her notes as a “surfing doctor”).
 Ms. Mottern documented:
 
I asked him what kind of Dr. he was, a general practitioner? . . .
He said yes, a general practitioner. I then asked, “a PCP?”
 [primary care physician] He said yes, a “PCP[.]” Throughout the
conversation he spoke very slowly, in short sentences, often
repeating what I said as a question.
 
Ms. Mottern further recorded:
 
I told him if he wanted to send us copies of his medical
documentation concerning Penelope, we would be happy to review and
consider the information. “Send . . . the . . . documentation . .
 .” was his answer. I [reiterated] we would like to review her
records for the past two years, . . . was it lots of pages? He
 stated “. . . lots . . . of . . . pages. . . .” His voice
 drifted off.
 
MedAmerica received copies of Dr. McGuire’s medical records on Ms. Spiller on
October 28, 2008. Defendants maintain that these records still lacked any
indication of Ms. Spiller’s frequency or severity of seizures, whether she
needed help with ADLs or whether she was cognitively impaired.
 
10
 As mentioned earlier, Mr. Kahae was appointed as a co-Personal
 
Representative of Ms. Spiller’s estate upon her death.
 
11
    
   
          
             
           
            
                  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Policy exclusion for “any expenses incurred . . . for which no
 
charge is normally made in the absence of insurance.” Even so,
 Defendants previously approved Ms. Spiller’s benefits with
 knowledge that she received care from a private caregiver (i.e.,
 Mr. Kahae) under an “Alternative Care Benefit” provision which
 allowed benefits “for providers, treatments[] or services
 otherwise specified in the Policy” if “cost effective,”
 “appropriate” and “consistent with general standards of care.” 
In other words, “Defendants apparently knew of, and approved,
 [Ms.] Spiller’s situation with [Mr.] Kahae.” 
Ms. Mottern raised this issue with Ms. Spiller in their
 
August 25, 2008 telephone conversation. However, Defendants do
 not assert that this was a basis for terminating Ms. Spiller’s
 benefits. Nevertheless, some evidence in the record suggests
 that Ms. Spiller believed that her Policy exclusion was a basis
 for her benefit termination.
11
 
Additionally, Ms. Mottern questioned whether Mr.
 
Kahalekulu was biased in his assessment because he became friends
 
11
 Ms. Spiller wrote an email stating in relevant part “Med America
 
[sic] says that my evaluation said that I am better and that [Mr. Kahae]
should work for free[.]” Ms. Mottern documented a conversation with Ms.
 Spiller’s attorney friend that “insured told him we won’t let her use her
 boyfriend to care for her . . . . Did state that is not an issue at this
 time[.]”
 
12
    
          
             
             
             
           
         
         
          
            
            
            
          
              
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
with Ms. Spiller.12 When Ms. Spiller spoke with Ms. Mottern
 
regarding her benefits termination in September 2008, Ms. Mottern
 
wanted to schedule another BDA. Ms. Spiller requested that Mr.
 Kahalekulu conduct the assessment, but Ms. Mottern denied her
 request. 
Ms. Mottern’s September 19, 2008 letter to Ms. Spiller
 
approved Ms. Spiller’s request to appeal her benefit termination. 
Ms. Mottern then scheduled another BDA. 
3.	 Events Following Ms. Spiller’s Termination of Benefits
 
Post-cancellation, Ms. Spiller “repeatedly sought
 
reinstatement of benefits.” The relationship between Ms. Spiller
 
and Ms. Mottern became increasingly hostile as Ms. Spiller worked
 toward her reinstatement. The District Court cites several areas
 in the record demonstrating the animosity between Ms. Spiller and
 Ms. Mottern:
 
•	 Ms. Spiller Deposition: “I yelled at [Ms. Mottern], and I
 
seized . . . . And [Ms. Mottern] insisted that I had done
everything wrong. I hadn’t gotten her paperwork . . . .
While I was talking to her I would get upset. She had a
 very like accusatory tone, you were friends . . . with [Mr.
Kahalekulu] . . . . She was awful.”
 
•	 Ms. Mottern: “Insured called me again to re-iterate our
conversations from yesterday. She has sent us a picture of
 herself in her casket. . . . Stated [Mr. Kahae] has a
 separate address: he is staying with her since she is sick.
I stated that is not what you told me yesterday.”
 
12
 A note from Ms. Spiller stated “[s]ince I said [Mr.] Kahalekulu
 
became my friend, they say he is not qualified to evaluate me and Med America
[sic] will [choose] another nurse to send.”
13
    
          
             
           
            
  
          
             
           
              
 
           
            
                 
         
         
            
          
            
         
           
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
•	 Ms. Mottern: “I called insured to request that she stop
trying to reach out to [Ms. LaFica]. . . . She states [Ms.
LaFica] has been nice to her and I have been nothing but
trouble to her. . . . States she will seize and fall and
 hurt herself.
 
•	 Ms. Mottern: “Called today -- stated yesterday that she was
left alone and had a grand mal seizure - - ‘if it wasn’t for
 someone coming to give her [V]alium . . . she would have
died and I would be happy’ . . . . Continued to yell at
 me[.]”
 
•	 Ms. Mottern: “When I asked her how she was doing sh[e]
 stated ‘not well: still in seizure from yesterday’ . . . .
 records from Dr. McQuire [sic] are on the backs of MRI
reports and [Ms. Spiller’s] funeral plot letter.”
 
•	 Ms. Mottern: “Penny stated that she wants Annette LaFica
back, as she understands her -- all her problems started
when I took over. . . . [She] [b]egan to get very excited
stating her policy is not medical necessity and she is tired
of all this. I stated she is right policy is not medical
 necessity -- she started yelling she would like to strangle
me and became noticabley [sic] upset. I told her we needed
 to hang up now.”
 
During her deposition, Ms. Spiller testified to her
 
contentious relationship with Ms. Mottern: “on my birthday she
 
informed me that she was pulling, basically pulling the plug on
 any reasonable cash flow I had to keep me and my household
 operational and get the supervision I needed without having to
 
call my children back to watch me all the time.” Moreover,
 
Ms. Spiller was “very upset” and “very anxious.” She testified
 
that her seizures were increasing. Ms. Spiller described her
 experience with Defendants as feeling “like a death sentence.” 
Ms. Spiller attempted suicide after her benefits
 
termination. She stated in her deposition, “I took a hundred and
 six pills, a combination of Keppra and Diazepam, and a piece of
 
14
    
         
       
          
              
         
        
      
            
          
     
          
           
        
           
         
            
  
   
             
          
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
banana. . . . I though [sic] I wouldn’t be a burden to
 
anybody[.]” Following her attempted suicide, Ms. Spiller sought
 treatment from psychiatrist Sonia Patel (“Dr. Patel”). On
 October 28, 2008, Dr. Patel wrote a letter to Ms. Mottern,
 stating in pertinent part:
 
I am currently providing Penelope with psychiatric treatment. She
 
has suffered from emotional disturbances, including decreased mood
and increased anxiety, since her Long Term Care Policy was
stopped. . . . It is of utmost importance that Penelope be given
continued care for brain cancer and brain cancer treatment
 sequelae, which include uncontrolled seizures, loss of balance and
falls, disorientation, difficulties with memory, concentration[]
and spatial judgment. She requires no less than full time care in
order to prevent injuries or possible death related to her
unpredictable seizures or falls.
 
Dr. McGuire also wrote to Ms. Mottern on November 10, 2008:
 
Ms. Spiller has been diagnosed with brain cancer and metastatic
lung disease. Due to her diagnosis, Ms. Spiller also suffers from
headache, blurred vision, vertigo, tinnitus, speech and memory
[loss], walking difficulty, weakness and seizure disorder. . . .
[I]t is not medically recommended that patient be left
unsupervised at any time of the day or night due to possible
injuries or death.
 . . .
 I’ve noted . . . the matter of possible termination of her long
term care has contributed to an increase of emotional symptoms and
increase of seizure disorder within the past few months.
 
On November 4, 2008, Ms. Spiller’s daughter called
 
Ms. Mottern and Ms. Mottern provided notification over the
 
telephone that she denied Ms. Spiller’s appeal. On November 21,
 2008, Ms. Mottern wrote a letter to Ms. Spiller (again on
 Hartford stationery) stating: “[t]he denial of benefits under
 your Hartford long term care policy documented in our letter to
 you on September 19, 2008, has been upheld. Please know that we
 
15
    
        
           
            
            
           
      
          
             
           
           
            
           
            
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have carefully reviewed all documentation presented to us, to
 
render this decision.” Ms. Mottern’s notes explain her reasoning
 behind the denial:
 
Nothing documents [Ms. Spiller’s] inability to perform her
activities of daily living. Have records from Dr. Thompson -­which are the most credible; record from Dr. McQuire [sic] are on
the back of MRI reports and Penny’s funeral plot letter. Letter
 from psychiatrist stating she needs benefits. None of it is
 credible except the records from Dr. Thompson.
 
Ms. Mottern also justified Ms. Spiller’s denial in a November 4,
 
2008 “NotePad” report:
 
BDA received was not conclusive as narrative did not match
 
objective info. Unable to get another assessor to go out to see
her as assessor felt threatened by comment from insured about her
being part of denial and question if ever saw the movie Psycho.
 
Info received from PCP is for year 2007 only. Have requested
 
documents from him 3 times. Neuro Radiologist Dr. Thompson gives
the most clear cut, objective assessment. . . . Letter from
 Psychiatrist was requested by insured. Therefore, I have to
believe the best evidence we have obtained is from Dr. Thompson.
 
Dr. Thompson’s medical records for Ms. Spiller indicate that she
 
experienced only a singular grand mal seizure over the preceding
 year and a half and that her mental status was normal, she lacked
 any “focal deficits” and she was doing well as of June 2008. 
After Defendants denied Ms. Spiller’s appeal, she filed 
complaints with the New York Insurance Department and the Hawai' i 
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Insurance Division, and ultimately retained an attorney. MedAmerica responded to an inquiry from the Hawai' i Insurance Division on December 5, 2008, 
explaining (on MedAmerica stationery) its determination that Ms. 
16
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Spiller did not meet the “triggers of her policy; she did not 
need hands-on assistance with at least [two] ADLs and was not shown to be cognitively impaired[]” based upon her July 28, 2008 BDA and medical records received. The Hawai' i Insurance Division 
responded to MedAmerica on December 17, 2008 that “[t]he statements from Ms. Spiller’s doctors appear to comply with the policy requirement that substantial supervision is required to protect Ms. Spiller from threats to her health and safety due to severe cognitive impairment, as well as being unable to perform at least two ADL’s.” 
Ms. Spiller’s attorney, Mark Davis, wrote a letter to
 
Ms. Mottern on January 5, 2009, demanding that she fully
 reinstate Ms. Spiller’s benefits, reimburse her for the costs she
 incurred in connection with the denial of her benefits since
 August 2008, and threatening a bad faith suit. 
Also on January 5, 2009, Ms. Spiller contacted 
Ms. Mottern to report that she was taken to Moloka< i hospital for 
another seizure. Ms. Spiller’s fourth BDA was performed on January 9, 2009. This BDA indicated that Ms. Spiller “was chronically ill, requiring assistance with all ADLs[] and was a threat to her own safety.” 
Defendants restored Ms. Spiller’s long term care
 
benefits on January 23, 2009 and notified her that “‘in good
 
17
    
          
       
        
          
           
            
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
faith the approval period begins on 9/1/08,’ i.e.,
 
retroactively.” Ms. Spiller continued to receive her contractual
 benefits until her death on September 10, 2010. 
B. Procedural Background
 
On July 9, 2009, Ms. Spiller filed her Complaint in the 
State of Hawai' i Circuit Court of the Second Circuit against 
Hartford, Hartford Financial, and MedAmerica,
13 alleging the 
following claims against all Defendants: (1) insurer bad faith, breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (2) negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED); (3) intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED); and (4) punitive damages.
14 While Ms. Spiller’s Complaint included 
allegations of economic loss and physical injury, she did not seek damages for these losses. Rather, she sought damages for the emotional distress incurred during the period that her benefits were denied, together with punitive damages. As specifically related to these Certified Questions, Ms. Spiller’s first claim alleges that Defendants “unreasonably and wrongfully 
13
 On November 15, 2010, the parties stipulated to the dismissal of
 
Defendant Hartford Financial Services Group with prejudice.
 
14
 Ms. Spiller’s Complaint also alleges that Defendants “attempted to
 
have [her] sign an authorization for Alternative Care Benefits, which would
release [them] from any claims, including for bad faith, and ‘threatened [Ms.
Spiller] that her claim payments would not be approved unless she signed and
returned the document to Hartford.’”
 
18
    
 
  
   
          
         
          
           
     
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
denied and delayed payment of long term care benefits owed to
 
[her], and undermined the protection and security [she] sought to
 
gain by buying long term care insurance from Hartford.”
 
Moreover, Ms. Spiller contends that such conduct by Defendants
 
constitutes a “breach of Hartford's fundamental duty to treat
 [her] fairly and in good faith, without deception and dishonesty,
 and to exercise due care, diligence, fairness and good faith in
 its investigation and handling of [her] insurance claim.” 
On August 18, 2009, Defendants removed the case to the
 
Federal District Court. During discovery on September 27, 2010,
 
Ms. Spiller responded to Defendants’ First Request for Answers to
 
Admissions by answering “admit” to the following: (1) “You are
 not making a claim for economic loss” and (2) “You are not making
 a claim for physical injury.” Defendant Hartford filed a Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment regarding Ms. Spiller’s punitive
 damage claim on October 7, 2011. All Defendants filed a Motion
 for Summary Judgment regarding Ms. Spiller’s bad faith claim on
 October 8, 2011.
15 The parties argued these motions on December
 
15
 The District Court states,
 
[c]onstruing the facts in the light most favorable to [Ms.]
Spiller, the record contains ample evidence that a factfinder
could reasonably interpret as construing bad faith. In short,
there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants
acted in bad faith.
 
A reasonable jury could find that an insurer acts in bad faith by
continue...
 
19
    
         
          
          
            
            
            
         
            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6, 2010, at which time the District Court requested supplemental
 
briefing on whether a “claim for -- or recovery for, or evidence
 of -- economic loss or physical injury is necessary before an
 insured can recover emotional distress damages caused by insurer
 bad faith.” 
On December 14, 2010, Ms. Spiller filed a Motion to
 
Withdraw Response to Request for Admission, requesting to
 withdraw her September 27, 2010 admission that she was neither
 claiming economic loss nor physical injury. On January 3, 2011,
 Defendants responded with a Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to
 Withdraw Response to Request for Admission. Ms. Spiller filed a
 Reply and Supplemental Reply to Defendants’ Opposition on
 January 10, 2011. The parties filed supplemental memoranda as to
 the appropriateness of certifying questions of law to this court
 at the request of the District Court on February 18, 2011. The
 District Court held a hearing regarding these supplemental
 memoranda on February 5, 2011 and took the motions under
 advisement. 
15...continue
 
c
anceling long-term care benefits for a sixty-three year old woman
dying from incurable lung and brain cancer -- where the
 
cancellation is based on inconsistent phrasing in a BDA (“at
times,” “daily”) as to the need for help with dressing, and a
belief that a woman living in a tropical climate on a Hawaiian
Island would have no need to wear clothes with sleeves (and thus
did not need assistance with dressing) -- after previously finding
her eligible for benefits for nearly a year based upon two prior
qualifying BDAs.
 
20
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On March 21, 2011, the District Court requested comment 
from the parties regarding proposed certified questions to the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court. The parties responded with comments on 
March 28, 2011. 
The District Court issued its Certified Questions on 
April 7, 2011. This court issued its Order On Certified Questions on May 4, 2011, requesting the parties to file briefs 
on the Certified Question in accordance with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. Defendants filed their 
opening brief on July 13, 2011. Ms. Spiller filed her answering brief on August 18, 2011, and Defendants responded on September 1, 2011. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Certified Question
 
“The supreme court shall have jurisdiction and powers .
 
. . [t]o answer, in its discretion . . . any question or
 proposition of law certified to it by a federal district or
 appellate court if the supreme court shall so provide by rule[.]” 
HRS § 602-5(a)(2) (Supp. 2010).
 
“When a federal district court or appellate court 
certifies to the Hawai' i Supreme Court that there is involved in 
any proceeding before it a question concerning the law of Hawai' i 
that is determinative of the cause and that there is no clear 
21
     
         
        
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
controlling precedent in the Hawai' i judicial decisions, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court may answer the certified question by written 
opinion.” Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 13(a) 
(2010). Ultimately, the District Court’s “phrasing of the 
question[s] should not restrict the [this court’s] consideration of the problems and issues involved. [This court] may reformulate the relevant state law questions as it perceives them to be, in light of the contentions of the parties.” Allstate 
Ins. Co. v. Alamo Rent-A-Car, Inc., 137 F.3d 634, 637 (9th Cir. 1998) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
An issue of law presented by a certified question is 
reviewed by this court de novo under the right/wrong standard of review. Francis v. Lee Enter., Inc., 89 Hawai' i 234, 236, 971 
P.2d 707, 709 (1999). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The Certified Question
 
The certified question presents a question of law of 
first impression in Hawai' i: 
If a first-party insurer commits bad faith, must an insured
prove the insured suffered economic or physical loss caused
by the bad faith in order to recover emotional distress
damages caused by the bad faith?
 
Since the issue presented assumes that an insurer has 
committed bad faith, we will begin our analysis by reviewing our 
Hawai'i law on bad faith in the first-party insurance context. 
22
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Best Place, Inc. v. Penn America Insurance Co.
 
Hawai'i first recognized a tort bad faith cause of 
action in a first-party insurance context in Best Place, Inc. v. 
Penn America Insurance Co., 82 Hawai' i 120, 920 P.2d 334 (1996). 
In Best Place, the insured sued its fire insurer for (1) breach of contract and (2) tortious breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing after the insurer denied a claim for fire loss. Id. at 122, 920 P.2d at 336. We held that there is a 
legal duty, implied in a first-party insurance contract, that the insurer must act in good faith in dealing with its insured, and a breach of that duty of good faith gives rise to an independent tort cause of action. Id. at 132, 920 P.2d at 334. 
Before expressly recognizing the tort of bad faith in 
the first-party insurance context, we reviewed our case law dealing with insurer bad faith, together with statutory law regulating the insurance industry in Hawai' i. Id. at 123-27, 920 
P.2d at 337-41. We then discussed, and distinguished, the alternative theories of tort and contract for insurer misconduct. Id. at 127-32, 920 P.2d at 341-46. We noted that the key distinction between the alternative theories was that the tort theory provided the insured a broader range of compensatory damages and certain additional items of recovery, such as damages 
23
    
        
        
         
        
       
        
 
         
          
         
         
       
        
      
        
       
          
         
         
          
      
        
         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for emotional stress and punitive damages, which are generally
 
not available in actions based solely on breach of contract: 
By characterizing the insured’s cause of action as sounding
in tort, the courts adopting this reasoning made available
to the insured a broader range of compensatory damages and
certain additional items of recovery, such as damages for
emotional distress and punitive damages, which are generally
not available in actions founded solely on breach of
contract.
 
Id. at 127-28, 920 P.2d at 341-42 (emphasis added) (quoting W.
 
Shernoff, S. Gage and H. Levine, Insurance Bad Faith Litigation,
 § 1.07(2) (1994)).
 
We further noted in Best Place the sound policy
 
considerations underlying the adoption of the tort of bad faith
 in the insurance context. 
We are also persuaded that there are sound reasons for
recognizing a cause of action in tort for breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the
insurance context. Adopting the tort of bad faith is
consistent with the case law and statutory provisions
dealing with insurer misconduct in this jurisdiction. In
 addition, the special relationship between insurer and
insured is, as the Rawlings court observed, atypical, and
the adhesionary aspects of an insurance contract further
justify the availability of a tort recovery. Finally, a bad
faith cause of action in tort will provide the necessary
compensation to the insured for all damage suffered as a
result of insurer misconduct. Without the threat of a tort
 action, insurance companies have little incentive to
promptly pay proceeds rightfully due to their insureds, as
they stand to lose very little by delaying payment .
 
Id. at 132, 920 P.2d at 346 (emphasis added); see also Rawlings
 
v. Apodaca, 151 Ariz. 149, 726 P.2d 565 (1986). 
In follow-up to the policy reasons supporting the tort
 
of bad faith, we made it clear that the insurer’s tort duty to
 
24
    
         
            
         
        
         
         
  
         
         
         
       
           
        
        
        
         
          
          
         
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
act in good faith in dealing with its insured is independent of
 
the insurer’s contractual duty to pay claims: 
The breach of the express covenant to pay claims, however,
is not the sine qua non for an action for breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. “The
 implied covenant is breached, whether the carrier pays the
claim or not, when its conduct damages the very protection
or security which the insured sought to gain by buying
insurance.”
 
Id. (quoting Rawlings, 151 Ariz. at 157, 726 P.2d at 573). 
Finally, the Best Place court then set forth the
 
standard for establishing tort liability in first-party cases: 
We believe that the appropriate test to determine bad faith
is the general standard set forth in Gruenberg and its
 
progeny. Under the Gruenberg test, the insured need not
show a conscious awareness of wrongdoing or unjustifiable
conduct, nor an evil motive or intent to harm the insured.
An unreasonable delay in payment of benefits will warrant
recovery for compensatory damages under the Gruenberg test.
However, conduct based on an interpretation of the insurance
contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith .
 
In addition, an erroneous decision not to pay a claim for
benefits due under a policy does not by itself justify an
award of compensatory damages. Rather, the decision not to
 pay a claim must be in “bad faith.”
 
Id. at 133, 920 P.2d at 347 (emphasis added) (citations omitted);
 
see McCormick v. Sentinel Life Ins. Co., 153 Cal. App. 3d 1030,
 200 Cal. Rptr. 732 (1984); see also Gruenberg v. Aetna Life Ins.
 Co., 108 Cal. Rptr. 480, 510 P.2d 1032 (1973). 
In summary, when Best Place recognized the tort of bad
 
faith in the first-party insurance context, it intended to
 provide the insured with a vehicle for compensation for all
 damages incurred as a result of the insurer’s misconduct,
 including damages for emotional distress. We made a clear
 
25
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
distinction between contractual remedies for failure to perform
 
contractual obligations, and the tort remedy of bad faith for
 breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing,
 whether the insurer ultimately pays the claim or not. Our
 rationale for recognizing the tort of bad faith with its
 potential liability for all damages incurred as a result of the
 insurer’s misconduct, including emotional distress damages, was
 two-fold: (1) bad faith conduct by an insurer damages the very
 protection or security which the insured sought to gain by buying
 insurance (id. at 129-30, 920 P.2d at 343-44), and (2) in the
 absence of the threat of a bad faith action, insurers would have
 little incentive to promptly pay benefits owing to their insured
 as they would stand to lose very little by delaying payment if
 the insured was limited to contractual remedies (id. at 132, 920
 P.2d at 346). 
Significantly, there is no language in Best Place that
 
would indicate that this court intended to place a threshold
 requirement of economic or physical loss caused by bad faith for
 recovery of emotional distress damages incurred as a result of an
 insurer’s bad faith conduct. Best Place recognized that a bad
 
faith claim by an insured stems from the manner in which an
 insured’s claim was handled, rather than from a determination of
 whether the insured had suffered an economic or physical loss. 
While we have not previously directly addressed the specific
26
    
           
           
           
         
          
             
         
           
          
       
           
          
           
        
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
issue of whether to adopt an economic or physical loss threshold
 
rule, our subsequent case law following Best Place reveals that
 we have, consistent with Best Place, refrained from imposing such
 a threshold when presented with a claim for bad faith.
 
In Enoka v. AIG Hawaii Insurance Co., Inc., 109 Hawai' i 
537, 120 P.3d 850 (2006), we held that even where the insurer had no contractual duty to pay any money or benefits, such that an economic loss could not be incurred, the insured could nonetheless bring a claim against the insurer for bad faith mishandling of the insured’s claim. 
As this court stated in Best Place , the insurer may commit bad
faith, “whether the carrier pays the claim or not.” 82 Hawai 'i at 
132, 920 P.2d at 346 (emphasis added); see also Francis v. Lee
Enterprises, Inc. , 89 Hawai 'i 234, 971 P.2d 707 (1999) (noting 
that, in Best Place , “[w]e further explained that an action for 
the tort of ‘bad faith’ will lie . . . when an insurance company
unreasonably handles or denies payment of a claim ”) (emphases
added). Surely an insurer must act in good faith in dealing with
its insured and in handling the insured's claim, even when thepolicy clearly and unambiguously excludes coverage. Inasmuch asEnoka has alleged that AIG handled the denial of her claim forno-fault benefits in bad faith, we conclude that she is notprecluded from bringing her bad faith claim even where there is nocoverage liability on the underlying policy. Accordingly, we holdthat the trial court erred in determining that, because Enoka'sbreach of contract claim failed, her bad faith claim must fail. 
Enoka, 109 Hawai' i at 552, 128 P.3d at 865; see also Catron v. 
Tokio Marine Mgmt., Inc., 90 Hawai' i 407, 978 P.2d 845 (1999), 
Christiansen v. First Ins. Co. of Hawaii, Ltd., 88 Hawai' i 442, 
967 P.2d 639 (1998), rev’d on other grounds, 88 Hawai' i 136, 963 
P.2d 345 (1998). 
In summary, Best Place and our subsequent case law
 
evidence an intent to provide the insured with a vehicle for
27
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
compensation for all damages incurred as a result of the 
insurer’s misconduct, including damages for emotional distress, without imposing a threshold requirement of economic or physical loss. Best Place, 82 Hawai' i at 132, 920 P.2d at 346. 
C.	 The Conflicting Views of California and Colorado on the
Certified Question
 
As discussed in the preceding section, Best Place and
 
its progeny do not support Defendants’ contention that this court
 
should impose a threshold requirement of proving economic or
 physical loss caused by a first-party insurer’s bad faith in
 order to recover emotional distress damages caused by the bad
 faith. However, since we have not previously directly addressed
 this specific issue, we will proceed to discuss the conflicting
 positions advocated by the parties. 
1.	 Position of Defendants Hartford and MedAmerica
 
Defendants rely primarily on California law indicating
 
that economic or financial loss is required before an insured may
 
recover emotional distress damages for bad faith, citing, inter
 alia, Waters v. United Services Automobile Ass’n, 41 Cal. App.
 4th 1063, 1074, 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 910, 916 (Cal. App. 1996) (Under
 Gruenberg, “emotional distress damages are recoverable in a first
 party bad faith case only when the insured establishes financial
 loss . . . . Then, and only then, may the insured recover for
 emotional distress damages as well as the pecuniary loss.”).
 
28
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Defendants’ rationale for applying California law is
 
summarized in the following points: 
1.	 since the California case of Gruenberg is the 
source of Hawaii’s bad faith law, Hawai' i should 
follow California’s law on the issue presented in this case; 
2.	 five other jurisdictions (Arizona, Wyoming, Wisconsin, South Dakota and Nebraska) addressing the question in this case have followed California law, while only one jurisdiction (Colorado) has accepted the Plaintiff’s position, and that jurisdiction has safeguards in place to guard against unlimited liability, which Hawai' i does not 
have; 
3.	 since first-party insurance contracts are
 primarily designed to protect the insured from
 financial loss, unless there is a measurable
 economic loss, the insured should not be able to
 recover emotional distress damages in the absence
 of financial loss; 
4.	 the requirement for economic or physical loss
 addresses concerns over trivial, fraudulent,
 fictitious, or “subjective and easily feigned”
 emotional distress claims; and 
29
    
 
        
            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
5.	 allowing a bad faith claim to go forward on a
 
claim for emotional distress damages alone would
 open “the proverbial floodgates” to unnecessary
 litigation. 
2.	 Position of Plaintiff Ms. Spiller
 
Plaintiff, on the other hand, advocates that we should
 
follow Colorado in rejecting California’s economic loss
 
requirement for the recovery of emotional distress damages in
 insurer bad faith actions, citing the Colorado Supreme Court en
 banc decision of Goodson v. American Standard Insurance Co. of
 Wisconsin, 89 P.3d 409 (Colo. 2004).
16
 
In Goodson, the insurer disputed the claims of the
 
insured driver and her two minor children for personal injury
 protection benefits arising out of treatment for injuries
 received in an automobile accident. Goodson, 89 P.3d at 412. 
The insurer initially denied Plaintiffs’ claims on the basis that
 they did not receive treatment from an insurer-approved provider
 organization. Id. Later, the insurer claimed that the
 
automobile insurance policy was ineffective at the time of the
 accident because of a failure to pay the premium. Id. Finally,
 
the insurer agreed that the policy was in effect at the time of
 
16
 Plaintiff notes that, like Hawai 'i, Colorado looked to the 
California case of Gruenberg as a foundation for its bad faith law. 
30
    
       
           
           
           
         
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the accident, but a dispute ensued over requested independent
 
medical evaluations to determine whether the plaintiffs’ injuries
 were related to the accident and whether the medial treatment was
 reasonable and necessary. Id. The insurer ultimately paid the
 
full amount of the outstanding medical bills, which totaled
 slightly over $8,000. Id. at 412-13.
 
The plaintiffs subsequently filed suit against the
 
insurer, and the case was submitted to the jury solely on the
 tort claim of bad faith breach of the insurance contract. Id. at
 
413. The insurer requested an instruction requiring the jury to
 
find substantial property or economic loss as a pre-requisite to
 an award of emotional distress damages. The trial court refused
 to give the instruction, reasoning that if such an instruction
 were required, 
[i]nsurance companies would understand that they can fiddle
around and put the insured through all sorts of hoops and
problems and difficulties . . . and then at the last minute,
the insurer can pay the bills . . . and eliminate damages
for emotional distress, and the whole idea of bad faith
handling of insurance cases goes out the window.
 
Id.
 
The jury returned a verdict against the insurer,
 
awarding plaintiffs $75,000 in non-economic damages, and $75,000
 
in punitive damages. Id. The insurer appealed, claiming that
 
the trial court erred in refusing to instruct the jury that it
 could award damages for emotional distress only if the plaintiffs
 proved substantial property loss or economic damages caused by
31
    
           
          
       
         
        
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the insurer’s breach. Id. The court of appeals agreed with the
 
insurer’s contention, citing a prior Colorado court of appeals
 
case holding that the requirement of substantial property or
 economic loss for emotional distress damages caused by bad faith
 was necessary to reduce the threat of fictitious claims. Id. at
 
413-14. 
The Colorado Supreme Court granted certiorari, and
 
reversed the court of appeals: 
We hold that, in a tort claim against an insurer for breach
of the duty of good faith and fair dealing, the plaintiff
may recover damages for emotional distress without proving
substantial property or economic loss . To the extent this
 
holding conflicts with the court of appeals’ decision in
 Farmers Group, Inc. v. Trimble , 768 P.2d 1243 (Colo. App.
1988) (“Trimble III”), we overrule that decision.
 
Id. at 412 (emphasis added).
 
The rationale of the Colorado Supreme Court in
 
rejecting California’s substantial economic loss requirement is
 
summarized in the following points: 
1.	 following the California rule would encourage
 insurers to unreasonably refuse to pay, or delay
 payment of, a valid claim of the insured and then
 avoid liability for bad faith emotional distress
 damages by making payment at the last minute and
 then claiming that the California requirement of
 substantial economic loss has not been satisfied
 (id. at 413 (citing Goodson trial court)); 
32
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2.	 an insured purchases insurance to provide personal
 
security and peace of mind to protect against
 future risk. The fact that an insurer belatedly
 pays a claim in full does not erase the emotional
 distress caused by prior bad faith conduct in
 refusing to pay, or delaying payment of, a valid
 claim of the insured (id. at 417); 
3.	 emotional distress is a likely and foreseeable
 consequence of a bad faith denial of benefits
 afforded under a contract of insurance (id.); 
4.	 the basis for an insured’s bad faith tort
 liability claim is the insurer’s conduct in
 unreasonably refusing to pay, or delaying payment
 of, a valid claim and failing to act in good
 faith, not the insured’s ultimate financial
 liability (id. at 415); and 
5.	 the Colorado legal system contains numerous
 safeguards to protect against fictitious claims
 for emotional distress arising out of the
 insurer’s conduct. These safeguards include,
 inter alia, (1) the jury system itself, which
 imposes burdens of proof on the plaintiff insured
 to prove bad faith conduct by the insurer, and
 that the plaintiff suffered emotional distress as
33
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a result of the insurer’s conduct; (2) a statutory
 
cap limit on damages for non-economic injuries,
 and (3) rules of civil procedure which provide 
that the trial court can reduce damages awards
 that are excessive (id. at 417). 
D. Our Analysis
 
Based upon our review of Hawai' i law, and the 
conflicting views of California and Colorado on the certified question, we are persuaded that Colorado’s view is more compatible with the rationale of Best Place and its progeny. As discussed in detail earlier herein, when we recognized the tort of bad faith in first-party insurance contracts in Best Place, we intended to make available to the insured a broader range of compensatory damages, including damages for emotional distress, that were generally not available in actions founded solely on breach of contract. Best Place, 82 Hawai' i at 132, 920 P.2d at 
346. 
Significant to the certified question presented herein,
 
in Best Place we expressly noted the policy consideration that
 “[w]ithout the threat of a tort action, insurance companies have
 little incentive to promptly pay proceeds rightfully due to their
 insureds, as they stand to lose very little by delaying payment.” 
Id. We further explained that the implied covenant of good faith
 
and fair dealing is breached “whether the carrier pays the claim
34
    
  
         
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
or not, when its conduct damages the very protection or security
 
which the insured sought to gain by buying insurance.” Id.
 
(quoting Rawlings, 151 Ariz. at 157, 726 P.2d at 573).
 
Notably, there is no language in Best Place that would
 
indicate we intended to place a threshold requirement of economic
 or physical loss caused by bad faith in order to recover
 emotional distress damages incurred as a result of the insurer’s
 bad faith. 
Based on the rationale underlying Best Place and its
 
progeny, we do not agree with California’s view that financial
 loss is the linchpin requirement for the recovery of emotional
 distress damages in first-party bad faith cases. We agree with
 Colorado’s view that the basis for an insured’s first-party bad
 faith claim is the insurer’s conduct in breaching its duty to
 deal with its insured in good faith, not the insured’s ultimate
 financial liability.
17
 
Defendants claim that Hawai' i lacks the safeguards which 
Colorado has in place to guard against fictitious claims and unlimited liability for emotional distress first-party claims. While we agree that Hawai' i and Colorado law are not the same on 
all aspects of bad faith law, we disagree that Hawai' i lacks 
17
 While economic loss is not required to recover for emotional
 
distress in this context, nevertheless the existence of such loss, or lack
thereof, could be relevant to determining the amount of damages recoverable.
35
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
adequate safeguards against fictitious claims of, and unlimited
 
liability for, emotional distress damages resulting from an
 insurer’s bad faith. 
First, the obvious: before the issue of damages 
(emotional distress and others) may be considered, the plaintiff must first prove liability for bad faith, i.e., that the defendant insurer breached its implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in its dealings with its insured. The burden of proof for bad faith liability is not insubstantial. As we stated in Best Place, an insurer’s conduct that is based on an interpretation of the insurance contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith; moreover, an erroneous decision not to pay a claim for benefits due under a policy does not by itself prove liability. Rather, the decision not to pay a claim must be in “bad faith” in order to prove liability. Best Place, 82 
Hawai'i at 133, 920 P.2d at 347. 
Second, the jury system itself serves as a safeguard
 
against fictitious claims of, and unlimited liability for, 
emotional distress damages allegedly resulting from an insurer’s
 bad faith. Our experience is that jurors are not easily
 deceived, and take their responsibilities seriously in evaluating
 the evidence and following the law as instructed by the trial
 court. As stated by the Colorado Supreme Court in Goodson: 
36
    
         
         
        
       
          
        
     
         
         
         
         
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the jury system itself serves as a safeguard; we routinely
entrust the jury with the important task of weighing the
credibility of evidence and determining whether, in light of
the evidence, plaintiffs have satisfied their burden or
proof. With regard to claims for bad faith breach of
insurance contract, the insured must prove damages by a
preponderance of the evidence.
 
Goodson, 89 P.3d at 417 (citations omitted).
 
Third, by order of remittitur to the plaintiff, the
 
trial court can reduce a damages award for emotional distress
 
damages that it finds is excessive in light of the evidence. As
 stated in Au v. Kelly, 2 Haw. App. 534, 537 (1981): 
Under HRCP [Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure] Rule 59, when
the trial court believes that the judgment for damages is
excessive and against the weight of the evidence, it mayorder a remittitur and alternatively direct a new trial ifthe plaintiff refuses the remittitur. 
(citations omitted).
 
In summary, Hawai' i law provides adequate safeguards 
against fictitious claims of, and unlimited liability for, 
emotional distress damages resulting from an insurer’s bad faith. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing analysis, we answer the
 
certified question as follows: 
If a first-party insurer commits bad faith, an insured
 need not prove that the insured suffered economic or 
37
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
physical loss caused by the bad faith in order to 
recover emotional distress damages caused by the bad 
faith. 
On the briefs: 
Paul Alston,
David A. Nakashima 
and Malia E. Kakos 
of Alston Hunt Floyd
& Ing for Defendants
Hartford Life Insurance 
Company, a Connecticut
Domestic For-Profit 
Corporation and MedAmerica
Insurance Company, a
Pennsylvania Domestic
For-Profit Corporation
 
Mark S. Davis,
Michael K. Livingston
and Loretta Sheehan 
of Davis Levin Livingston
for Plaintiffs Elizabeth 
Miller and Martin Kahae,
as Co-Personal 
Representatives of the
Estate of Penelope
(Penny) Spiller, Deceased,
and as Party-Plaintiffs
for Penelope (Penny)
Spiller
 
Alan Van Etten 
of Deeley King Pang &
Van Etten, LLLP for
Amicus Curiae, United
Policyholders
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr. 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
38
 