 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCEC-24-0000794 24-DEC-2024 12:02 PM Dkt. 50 FFCL 
SCEC-24-0000794 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
KELLY T. KING, ROBERT KING, DANIEL KALEOALOHA KANAHELE, 
RACHEL CHRISTOPHER, WENDY CHING, PATRICIA NUCKOLLS, 
LISA SEIKAI DARCY, ROBIN KNOX, BRANDI CORPUZ, 
ANN L. PITCAITHLEY, 
BRIDGET A. MOWAT, KRISSTA CALDWELL, 
CLARE H. APANA, CALEB S. HARPER, LEONARD NAKOA III, 
SUSAN CAMPBELL, PHYLLIS ROBINSON, BONNIE NEWMAN, AMY J. CHANG, 
KYLANNAH SPRADLIN, JOCELYN CRUZ, DANIEL GRANTHAM, ALIKA ATAY, 
WILLIAM R. GREENLEAF, ASHFORD DELIMA, PAUL DESLAURIERS,   
CONNIE  JO  HAMILTON,  GARY  GREGG SAVAGE, COLLEEN DELIMA,  
KAREN DORRANCE, and MICHAEL ZARATE,  
Plaintiffs, 
 
vs. 
 
MOANA M. LUTEY, County Clerk, County of Maui, and TOM COOK, 
Defendants. 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND JUDGMENT 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., McKenna, Eddins,  Ginoza, and Devens,  JJ.)  
Upon consideration of the “Complaint for Election Contest” 
filed by the Plaintiffs on November 25, 2024 (complaint) and the 
parties’ submissions, we rule in favor of Defendants and against Plaintiffs as to all claims stated in the complaint.  
 In accordance with Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 11-174.5 
(Supp. 2021), we enter the following findings of fact, 
conclusions of law and judgment. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
1.  As of 2020 the elections in the State of Hawai
ʻi have 
been conducted primarily by mail, but in-person voting is still available at voter service centers. See HRS §§ 11-101 (Supp. 2021), 11-109 (Supp. 2021). 
2.  On November 5, 2024, the County of Maui held a 
nonpartisan general election for the seat of the South Maui 
councilmember. The two candidates were Defendant Tom Cook and 
Plaintiff Kelly T. King. 
3.  For the subject election, the State of Hawaiʻ i Office 
of Elections was responsible for the printing and counting of ballots. HRS § 11-110(b)(1)(B) (Supp. 2021). Defendant Moana M. Lutey, in her official capacity as the County Clerk of Maui County (Clerk) was responsible for the mailing and receipt of ballots, among other duties. HRS § 11-110(b)(1)(A); see HRS §§ 11-106 (Supp. 2021), 11-108 (Supp. 2021). 
4.  HRS § 11-102 (Supp. 2022) sets forth the procedures 
for conducting elections by mail. Under this process, on or 
about Friday, October 18, 2024, the Clerk began mailing out the 
ballot packages to registered voters. See HRS § 11-102(b). The ballot package to a voter included: an official ballot; a return 
2  
   
    
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 identification envelope with postage prepaid; a secrecy envelope or secrecy sleeve; and instructions.  HRS § 11-102(a). 
5.  The return identification envelope used in the subject   
election visibly stated the following instructions on the   
envelope: “SIGNATURE REQUIRED: If you do not sign, your ballot will not be counted!”   Under this header appeared the following  
affirmation:  
I affirm: I am a resident and registered voter of the 
representative district and precinct as indicated on this 
envelope and have voted without the personal assistance of my employer, agent of my employer, agent of my labor union,or any candidate listed on the ballot. 
From the “signature required” header appeared an arrow pointing 
to a blank rectangular box signaling where a voter was 
instructed to sign the voter’s name. 
6. The front of the return identification envelope stated 
“Official Election Mail,” included the return address for the Elections Division, Office of the County Clerk, and a notice that no postage was necessary if mailed in the United States. 
7.  The secrecy sleeve had the following information  
stated, in pertinent part, on its front and back:  
SECRECY SLEEVE INSTRUCTIONS 
1. After you have finished voting, re- fold your ballot 
and place into this optional secrecy sleeve.
2. Place the secrecy sleeve into the postage paid 
return envelope.
3. Sign the affirmation statement on the returnenvelope. If you do not sign, your ballot will not be counted. 
4. Mail or deliver your signed and sealed return envelope.  Your ballot must be received by 7:00 pm
on Election Day to be counted. Visit 
3  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 elections.hawaii.gov for information on returning 
and tracking the status of your ballot. 
Made an error or changed your mind? Contact your County
Elections Division for a replacement ballot. Do not use whiteout. 
Forgot to use this sleeve? Your vote will remain 
confidential whether or not you used this optional ballotsecrecy sleeve. 
View the Digital Voter Guide at elections.hawaii.gov. 
Election fraud and voter fraud may subject the voter, upon
conviction, to imprisonment, a fine, or both. For complete information, consult Chapter 19, Hawaii RevisedStatutes. 
8.  The secrecy sleeve referred the voter to an internet 
website where the voter could obtain a copy of the “Digital 
Voter Guide” published by the State of Hawaiʻi Office of 
Elections. This Digital Voter Guide informed the voter, in 
pertinent part, as to the processing of ballots and tracking of ballots as follows: 
PROCESSING YOUR BALLOT 
The signature on the return envelope is compared to the
signature on your voter record. If officials are unable to confirm a match, you’ll be notified to fix the issue within
five business days post- election. 
If your signature is successfully matched, your ballot is
securely transported to the counting center.  At the counting center, your voted ballot is processed through
vote counting scanners. 
TRACK YOUR BALLOT 
Sign up for ballot tracking alerts via text, email or voice call at elections.hawaii.gov. The service lets you know
where your ballot is and sends key reminders including an
alert when the ballot return deadline is approaching. 
9.  For the general election, pursuant to HRS § 11-106, 
Hawaiʻi Administrative Rule (HAR) § 3-177-651 (eff. 2020), and 
HAR § 3-177-652 (eff. 2020), the Clerk was responsible for 
4   . . ..  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 reviewing return identification envelopes and providing notice 
to voters whose envelopes were deemed deficient.     
10. HRS § 11-106 provides: 
§ 11-106. Deficient return identification envelopes 
If: 
(1) A return identification envelope is returned with 
an unsigned affirmation; 
(2) The affirmation signature does not match a
reference signature image; or 
(3) A return identification envelope contains anothercondition that would not allow the counting of the ballot, 
the clerk shall make an attempt to notify the voter by
first class mail, telephone, or electronic mail to inform
the voter of the procedure to correct the deficiency. The 
voter shall have five business days after the date of theelection to cure the deficiency. The chief election officer may adopt rules regarding requirements and
procedures for correcting deficient return identification
envelopes. The counting of ballots and disclosure of 
subsequent election results may continue during the timeperiod permitted to cure a deficiency under this section. 
The clerk’ s inability to contact voters under this section 
shall not be grounds for a contest for cause under section 11-172. This section shall apply to all return
identification envelopes, including ballots utilizing the provisions of section 11- 107 or chapter 15 or 15D. 
11. HAR § 3-177-651 provides in pertinent part: 
§ 3-177-651. Return identification envelopes; general 
preparing of ballots for counting. 
(a) Upon receipt of the return identification envelope, the
clerk may prepare the ballots for counting. Before opening return identification envelopes and counting the ballots,
the return identification envelopes shall be checked for
the following: 
(1) Signature on the affirmation statement; 
(2) Whether the signature corresponds with a
reference signature image using the provisions of HAR § 3-177-652; and 
(3) Whether there is a condition that would not allow 
the counting of the contents of the return
identification envelope (e.g. the voter has already 
5  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 voted, or otherwise returned a return identification 
envelope that has been validated). 
(b)
 If any requirement listed in subsection (a) is not met
or if the return identification envelope appears to be tampered with, the clerk shall mark across the face of theenvelope “invalid” and it shall be kept in the custody of
the clerk and disposed of as prescribed for ballots in HRS § 11-154, unless it is subsequently determined to be valid.
To the extent a return identification envelope is deemed invalid, the provisions of HAR § 3- 177-654 relating to the 
correction of deficient return identification envelopes may
apply. 
 . . . . 
(e)
 All return identification envelopes complying with
subsection (a) shall be deemed valid and secured by 
election officials for subsequent processing and counting. 
12. HAR § 3-177-652 provides: 
§ 3-177-652. Return identification envelopes; signature 
validation. 
(a) The clerk will initially compare the signature on a 
return identification envelope with the reference signatureor reference signatures of the voter. The clerk may authorize the use of a signature device, as defined in HAR
§ 3-177-653, to compare signatures. A signature considered
matched by a signature device will be considered valid and 
not require further verification. 
(b) A “reference signature” is any signature provided in
connection with the administration of elections or any
signature provided to election officials from a governmental entity obtained in the ordinary course ofbusiness (e.g. voter signatures on any election issued form or application, correspondence with election officials,
signature capture cards sent to and returned by voters,
signatures from the Department of Transportation or county licensing examiners, or signatures from any governmentalentity shared with election officials). 
(c) Any signature not initially validated by the signature
device or that was not submitted to a signature device will be visually compared by the election official. 
(1) As a return identification envelope was issued
and transmitted to the voter, the return of the 
return identification envelope or electronicequivalent will be rebuttably presumed to be from the voter and any signature contained therein as that ofthe voter; 
(2) A voter is permitted to use a variation of their 
6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 name, to the extent it can be recognized as such by 
the reviewing election official; 
(3) The election official will review the general
appearance of the signatures taking into account the 
above noted rebuttable presumption, permitted namevariations, and the following: 
(A) type of writing (e.g. cursive versusprint); 
(B) speed of writing (e.g. harmonious versus
slow and deliberate); 
(C) overall spacing; (D) overall size and proportions; 
(E) position of the signature (e.g. slanted
versus straight); and 
(F) spelling and punctuation. 
(4) The election official will consider whether any 
apparent differences can be reasonably explained, by the facts and circumstances surrounding the signatures. The election official may consider, but
not be limited to, the following considerations: 
(A) When the signatures were made in comparisonto each (e.g. a significant period of time has transpired between signatures); 
(B) The age of the writer at the time of the 
signatures; 
(C) How the signatures were made (e.g. driver
license offices may use an electronic signature
pad to record signatures, including those used for voter registration, while an envelope may be signed in ink); or 
(D) Whether household members signed and
returned each other’ s return identification 
envelope by accident, in which case, if thesignatures match each of the correct voter’ s 
signature reference image and the voters have 
not otherwise voted, such that the counting of
the impacted ballots would not result in a
voter having voted a ballot not associated with their residence or containing questions orcontests they are not eligible to vote on, the impacted return identification envelopes may be 
considered valid. 
(d) A voter may make a mark in place of a signature on the
affirmation statement on the return identification envelope 
7  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 so long as there is a witness’ signature and address on the 
affirmation statement. In such a situation, the return 
identification envelope will be considered valid. If no 
witness’ signature and address appear on the affirmation
statement, then the return identification envelope will be deemed invalid. However, if a voter is physically unableto sign or to make a mark, they may use the provisions of 
HRS § 456- 19 to have a notary sign on their behalf, and the 
return identification envelope will be considered valid. 
13.  Under HAR § 3-177-653 (eff. 2020) a “signature device” 
is a device that “either captures images or uses imported images 
which it analyzes and compares to existing signature reference images.” 
14.  For the subject general election, in accordance with 
HAR § 3-177-652(a), the Clerk utilized a signature device 
described by the Clerk as the Agilis election mail sorting and 
processing system (signature device). This signature device was utilized by the Clerk to compare the signature on the return identification envelopes received from voters with the reference signatures in that particular voter’s registration file.   The 
signature scanning device would either accept the signature as valid or would reject the signature as invalid. 
15.  Return identification envelopes accepted by the 
signature scanning device were placed in sealed and locked containers and transported to the counting center operated by 
the State of 
Hawaiʻi Office of Elections. 
16.  The signature device utilized by the Clerk would flag 
potentially deficient return identification envelopes where, in 
8  
 pertinent part, a signature was missing or the signature did not 
match the reference signature.  
17.  For those return identification envelopes rejected by 
the signature device, the Clerk’s staff visually compared the 
signature on the rejected return identification envelope with 
the voter’s reference signatures on file. The Clerk’s staff performing this task were trained and instructed to examine the signatures with the presumption that the voter did, in fact, sign the return identification envelope. The signature specimens on file for a voter typically contained multiple reference signatures from a variety of government sources including applications to register to vote submitted by the 
voter to the Office of Elections, or applications submitted by a 
voter to the Department of Motor Vehicles for a driver’s license or State identification card (collectively, “voter’s registration file”). See also HRS § 11-15.7 (Supp. 2021) (establishing automatic registration to vote as part of any application for the issuance of a State identification card or driver’s license, with the applicant presented the option to decline); HAR § 3-177-153(a) (authorizing the sharing of 
digitized signatures captured by a government agency with 
election officials to validate and confirm a voter’s identity in any election-related matter in which a signature is necessary); HAR § 3-177-652(b) (defining “reference signature”). 
9  
 18.  If the Clerk’s staff determined that the signature 
matched any reference signature in the voter’s registration file, 
the return identification envelope would be validated and placed in sealed and locked containers and transported to the counting 
center operated by the State of Hawaiʻ i Office of Elections. 
19.  If the Clerk’s staff determined that the signature on 
the return identification envelope did not match any of the 
reference signatures on file for the voter, the return 
identification envelope would be reviewed by the supervising election administrator for a final determination.   
20.  The supervising election administrator employed the 
same criteria as staff by presuming, as part of this review, that the signature was from the voter. The administrator would not identify a signature as deficient unless it exhibited identifiable differences from the reference signatures and these 
differences could not be reasonably explained, such as changes 
in age.    
21.  If the election administrator determined 
 that the  
signature matched any reference signature in the voter’s registration file, the return identification envelope would be validated and the ballot would then be placed in sealed and locked containers and transported to the counting center 
operated by the State of Hawaiʻ i Office of Elections. 
10  
 22.  Return identification envelopes deemed invalid by the 
Clerk were securely stored and locked in the vault in the Office  
of the County Clerk.  
23.  For these return identification envelopes deemed 
invalid, the Clerk employed several means by which it would 
notify these voters that their return envelopes were deemed deficient.  
24.  First, each voter was mailed a letter via the United 
States Postal Service by first class mail. This letter was mailed within one business day of receipt of a deficient return identification envelope throughout the entire election cycle and was mailed to the same address as the original ballot package.  
25.  Second, if a voter had an email address on file, they 
would have received an email notifying the voter when the ballot was received by the Clerk’s Office, or of any deficiency requiring action by the voter.   Every voter in Maui County with 
an email address on file with the Clerk’s Office received an email within a day of their return envelope being deemed deficient by the Clerk’s Office.  
26.  Third, if a voter had a phone number on file the 
Clerk’s Office would call or attempt to call the voter to inform them of their need to cure, how to cure and their deadline to cure.  
11  
 27.  In accordance with the process set forth in HRS § 11-
106 and HAR § 3-177-651, the Clerk would determine that a return 
identification envelope was deficient where, in pertinent part, there was no signature, or the signature was rejected by the 
signature device as failing to match the reference signatures on 
file for the voter and the Clerk’s election administrator, upon review, agreed with this invalidity determination. 
28.  For the subject election, there were a total of 1,556 
return identification envelopes that, following validation by the signature device and visual comparison by election officials described above, were determined to be missing the voter’s signature, contained a signature that did not match the voter’s 
reference signature images, or contained another condition that 
required a determination that the return identification envelope was deficient. As to the type of other “conditions” that may result in invalidation of the return identification envelope, HAR § 3-177-651(a)(3) sets forth the following examples: “the voter has already voted, or otherwise returned a return identification envelope that has been validated.” 
 
29.  All voters with a return identification envelope 
rejected as deficient were mailed a letter with notice on how to cure the deficiency within one business day of the Clerk’s receipt of the deficient envelope. The Clerk introduced an authenticated copy of the letter that was mailed to affected 
12  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 voters. This letter appeared on the Clerk’s letterhead and 
provided the voter with notice of the reason for the deficiency as well as the following instructions on how to correct the deficiency: 
You may fix this deficiency by printing, completing, 
and signing the form on the reverse side of this letter. 
Computer- generated signatures are not acceptable. Note 
that the Affidavit must be received no later than 4:30 p.m.on November 13, 2024. Additionally, if the deficiency is
due to a mismatched signature . . . or another condition, please provide proof of identity, such as a photo of agovernment- issued photo ID. 
Then, the letter provided the address and contact 
information for the Clerk’s office, including an email address 
where the completed form and proof of identification could be submitted, as well as a phone number that any voter with questions could call. 
30.  In addition to the deficiency notice and cure process 
detailed above, all voters in the County of Maui had the option of independently tracking the status of their ballots online using the services of a company called BallotTrax.   Voters did 
not need to create an account to view their ballot status and the service was free to use. BallotTrax provided the option of allowing voters to receive updates on their ballot’s status by text message, email, or phone. Every voter was provided the option of signing up online for this free service. To promote the BallotTax system, the Clerk’s Office issued press releases, radio advertisements, and social media posts. 
13  
 31.  With respect to those voters that submitted a return 
identification envelope on the date of the general election 
(November 5, 2024) which the Clerk identified as deficient, the Clerk’s Office mailed a letter to these voters with instructions 
on how to cure the deficiency by United States Postal Service on 
November 6, 2024. In addition by November 6, 2024 these same voters — if enrolled in BallotTax — would have received an email notification of their ballot deficiencies with instructions to call the Clerk’s office. And by close of business on November 7, 2024 the Clerk’s Office had placed calls to every voter with a phone number on file to provide notice that the return identification envelope had been marked deficient. 
32.  For the general election, the deadline for a voter to 
cure the deficient return identification envelope was 4:30 p.m. on Wednesday, November 13, 2024. 
33.  Four of the Plaintiffs received a cure letter from the 
Clerk’s Office and had the opportunity to timely cure the deficiency with their return identification envelopes. 
34.  All return identification envelopes that were deemed 
valid were secured in sealed containers and transferred to the 
State of Hawaiʻi Office of Elections to be opened and counted.   
For the subject general election no return identification 
envelopes were opened by the Clerk’s Office. Rather, the 
opening and counting of ballots was the exclusive responsibility 
14  
 of the State of Hawaiʻi Office of Elections. See  HRS § 11-
110(b)(1)(B). 
35.  In response to the notice provided by the Clerk’s 
Office to the 1,556 voters with return identification envelopes 
deemed deficient, the Clerk’s Office received timely and complete responses from 594 voters to cure the deficiency thereby allowing the ballots for these voters to be counted and 
included in the final tally.   Twenty-three voters decided to 
vote in-person rather than cure their deficient mail-in ballots. 
A total of 939 voters ultimately failed to cure their deficient return identification envelopes by the statutory deadline of November 13, 2024. See HRS § 11-106. 
36.  The Clerk’s Office in performing their duties 
established by law to contact the 1,556 voters with deficient return identification envelopes, was informed by 
sixteen voters that the return identification envelopes 
received by the Clerk had not been mailed by them. The Clerk’s Office transmitted this information to the Maui Police Department for investigation into potential election fraud. 
37.  At the end of the cure period on November 13, 2024 
the final result for the office of councilmember for South 
Maui was reported by the State of Hawaiʻi Office of 
Elections as follows: Defendant Cook had received 26,423 
15  
  
 
 votes; and, Plaintiff King had received 26,326 votes. Blank 
votes totaled 10,750. Thus, the vote differential is 97 votes in favor of Defendant Cook (election result). 
38.  On November 25, 2024, Plaintiffs filed the election 
contest with this court and thereby challenged the election result. The claims stated in the complaint are addressed below. The Plaintiffs include the candidate, Plaintiff King, as well as thirty voters who claim to reside within the subject election district. 
39.  The parties subsequently filed motions seeking summary 
judgment in their favor. In accordance with HRS § 11-174.5, the parties also submitted evidence for the court to review, 
including declarations and records. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
1. To prevail on an election complaint seeking to 
invalidate a general election the plaintiff must establish “that 
a correct result cannot be ascertained because of a mistake or fraud on the part of the voter service center officials[.]” HRS 
§ 11-174.5; see also Waters v. Nago
, 148 Hawaiʻi 46, 65, 468 P.3d 
60, 79 (2019) (invalidating the special election where the 
correct result could not be determined because invalidly received ballots were commingled with the other ballots). 
2. All claims of Plaintiffs’ Complaint are grounded in 
the theory that the Clerk erred in the review of the signatures 
16  
  
 
 
 
   
 on the return identification envelopes. Plaintiffs argued, in 
pertinent part, that the Clerk erred by failing to apply the presumption set forth in HAR § 3-177-652(c)(1) that the return identification envelope was from the voter and any signature was 
that of the voter. Plaintiffs also contended the Clerk erred in 
applying the standards required by law with respect to the review of voter’s signatures on the return identification envelopes. 
3. In opposition, the Clerk argued that the Clerk’s 
office committed no mistake or error in the processing and review of return identification envelopes submitted by voters. The Clerk argued, among other things, that the process employed 
by the Clerk’s office complied with the applicable election laws 
set forth at HAR § 3-177-652.  The Clerk contended that the process her office employed provided the presumption of validity required by HAR § 3-177-652(c)(1) to all of the submitted return identification envelopes, and only rejected a signature when there were sufficient discrepancies to warrant a finding that they could not be verified, thereby overcoming any presumption of validity. 
4. For the reasons set forth below, we agree with the 
Clerk. The burden was on Plaintiffs to establish a mistake by the Clerk such that the correct result of the election cannot be 
17  
  
 
 
 
  
 ascertained. HRS § 11-174.5. Based on the evidence submitted, 
we hold that Plaintiffs failed to sustain this burden. 
5. HAR § 3-177-652 is a rule adopted by the Chief 
Election Officer under HRS § 11-4 (Supp. 2019), which authorized 
the Chief Election Officer to promulgate rules governing 
elections. Id.HAR § 3-177-652 sets forth the process the 
Clerk was required to follow in validating signatures on return identification envelopes submitted by voters. 
6. The evidence established that the Clerk followed the 
process set forth in HAR § 3-177-652(a) by submitting the return identification envelopes in the first instance to a signature device which would identify any return identification envelopes 
that should be subjected to further review. The reasons the 
signature device would reject a return identification envelope included the failure of the voter to actually affix the voter’s signature to the return identification envelope, or where the signature device determined that the signature on the return identification envelope did not match the voter’s reference signature in that particular voter’s registration file. Next, the Clerk’s Office performed a manual review of the signature 
where it provided a presumption to the signature that it was 
from the voter. 
7. Plaintiffs take issue with this second step — the 
manual review performed by the Clerk’s Office. In support, 
18  
   
 
 
 
  Plaintiffs submitted evidence from four voters who testified 
they signed their “ordinary signature” yet their return identification envelopes were rejected by the Clerk based on a determination that the signatures on the return identification 
envelope did not match the reference signatures on file for each 
voter. 
8. The record lacks sufficient evidence for this Court to 
conclude whether, in fact, the Clerk erred in the review of these four voters’ signatures. For example, the reference signature for each of these voters was not submitted by the Plaintiffs; nor was a copy of the signature that was made on the subject return identification envelope. This Court is thus not 
persuaded that the Clerk made a mistake in the review of these 
four signatures at issue. 
9. Even if the record could establish an actual mistake 
by the Clerk in the review of these four signatures, Plaintiffs carried the burden of establishing that these mistakes caused a difference in the election such that the correct result is not ascertainable. See HRS §§ 11-172, 11-174.5. Plaintiffs failed 
to sustain this burden because the record established that each 
of these same four voters was provided with notice and the 
opportunity to cure the deficiency determination made by the Clerk. 
19  
  
 
 10. Under HRS § 11-108(c) the Clerk was statutorily 
required to “make reasonable efforts to determine the validity 
of ballots within five business days following an election day.” For any return identification envelope the Clerk determined was 
deficient based on a signature that did not match the reference 
signature image, the Clerk was required by HRS § 11-106 to “make an attempt to notify the voter by first class mail, telephone, or electronic mail to inform the voter of the procedure to correct the deficiency. The voter shall have five business days after the date of the election to cure the deficiency.” HRS § 11-106. 
11. The evidence established that every voter with a 
return identification envelope that the Clerk determined was deficient under HAR §§ 3-177-651 and 3-177-652, was mailed a letter that provided the voter with notice and the opportunity to cure the deficiency. The preponderance of the evidence established that all of these notices were mailed by the Clerk to the same address where the original ballot was mailed within one business day of the Clerk’s receipt of the deficient return identification envelope. For any return identification 
envelopes that were received on the election date (November 5, 
2024) the notice of deficiency was mailed to the voter the next day on November 6, 2024. See HRS § 11-106. This mailing 
occurred well before the November 13, 2024 deadline for the 
20  
  
 
 
 voter to cure the deficiency identified on the return 
identification envelope. See id. (establishing the statutory 
deadline of five business days following an election day to cure a deficiency with a return identification envelope). 
12. In addition to providing the mailed notice required by 
HRS § 11-106, the Clerk established a process to provide email and telephone notice of the deficiency to any voter with an email address or telephone number on file. The emailed notice of deficiency was transmitted to voters on a rolling basis within one business day of the Clerk’s receipt of the deficient return identification envelope. For those voters that submitted deficient return identification envelopes on November 5, 2024 
(election date), the emailed notice of deficiency was provided 
no later than November 6, 2024. All telephone calls providing notice of the deficiency were made by the Clerk to voters with a valid phone number on file by no later than November 7, 2024. The Clerk’s email and phone notices of deficiency were provided to those voters well before the November 13, 2024 deadline for those voters to cure. See HRS § 11-106. 
13. We conclude that the Clerk’s actions in providing 
notice to these voters complied with the election laws including the requirement set forth in HRS § 11-108(c) that “[t]he clerk shall make reasonable efforts to determine the validity of ballots within five business days following an election day.” 
21  
  The reasonableness of the Clerk’s actions in providing notice is 
demonstrated by the following undisputed facts: the Clerk’s Office received timely and complete responses from 594 voters to cure the deficiency thereby allowing the ballots for these 
voters to be counted and included in the final tally; twenty-  
three voters decided to vote in-person rather than cure their 
deficient mail-in ballots; and, sixteen voters informed the  
Clerk’s Office that the return identification envelopes received by the Clerk — and which the Clerk had determined were deficient — had not been mailed by them and this information was thereafter transmitted by the Clerk’s Office to the Maui Police Department for further investigation into potential election 
fraud. Moreover, at least four Plaintiffs acknowledged 
receiving notice from the Clerk of the deficiency determination associated with their return identification envelopes, and were able to timely cure the deficiencies before the November 13, 2024 deadline. Upon curing the deficiencies, the return identification envelopes for these Plaintiffs were securely transferred to the counting center operated by the State of 
Hawaiʻi Office of Elections.  
14. We conclude that all the 939 voters whose return 
identification envelopes were deemed deficient by the Clerk and subsequently failed to cure the deficiency by the statutory 
deadline, were provided with reasonable notice and the 
22  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 opportunity to correct the deficiency on the return 
identification envelope. The preponderance of the evidence established that all of these 939 voters were equally provided with the opportunity to participate in the election and none of 
them was disenfranchised as a result of the Clerk’s deficiency 
determination. 
15. Plaintiffs failed to establish any error was committed 
by the Clerk in the review and processing of the return identification envelopes. Plaintiffs also failed to establish a legal cause between the mistakes alleged in the complaint and the final election results because the preponderance of the evidence established that every voter with a rejected return 
identification envelope was provided with notice and a 
sufficient period of time to cure the deficiency determination made by the Clerk. 
16. We hold that Plaintiffs as to all claims failed to 
establish that the correct result of the election cannot be ascertained because of a mistake on the part of the Clerk. See
HRS § 11-174.5. Accordingly, the court rules in favor of Defendants and against Plaintiffs as to all claims made in the 
Complaint. 
17. The final result as reported by the Chief Election 
Officer is Tom Cook with 26,423 votes and Kelly T. King with 
26,326, which is a vote differential of 97 in favor of Tom Cook. 
23  
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
     18. The court issues this decision based on the evidence 
submitted by the parties and the record before the court. See
HRS § 11-174.5(b) (providing “the court shall cause the evidence 
to be reduced to writing and shall give judgment, stating all 
findings of fact and of law”). Accordingly, the motions pending 
before the court are denied as moot. 
JUDGMENT 
It is hereby ordered in accordance with HRS § 11-174.5 that 
Defendant Tom Cook received a majority of the votes cast and has been elected to the office of councilmember for the South Maui seat on the Maui County Council. 
The court enters judgment in favor of Defendants and 
against Plaintiffs as to all claims stated in the complaint. 
The Clerk shall sign and deliver to Defendant Tom Cook the 
certificate of election which shall be conclusive of the right of Defendant Tom Cook to the office of councilmember for the South Maui seat on the Maui County Council. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, December 24, 2024. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza /s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
24 