 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCEC-24-0000800 10-JAN-2025 02:13 PM Dkt. 47 FFCL 
SCEC-24-0000800 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
COREY ROSENLEE,  
Plaintiff, 
 
vs. 
 
GLEN TAKAHASHI, in his official capacity as the City Clerk of 
the City and County of Honolulu; REX QUIDILLA, in his official 
capacity as the Elections Administrator of the City and County 
of Honolulu; SCOTT NAGO, Chief Election Officer, State of Hawaiʻ i 
Office of Election; and ELIJAH PIERICK, 
Defendants. 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND JUDGMENT 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., McKenna, Eddins, Ginoza, and Devens, JJ.) 
Upon consideration of the “Complaint for Election Contest” 
filed by the Plaintiff Corey Rosenlee on November 25, 2024 
(complaint) and the parties’ submissions, we rule in favor of 
Defendants and against Plaintiff as to all claims stated in the 
complaint.  
  
  
 In accordance with Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 11-174.5 
(Supp. 2021), we enter the following findings of fact, 
conclusions of law and judgment. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
1. As of 2020 the elections in the State of Hawaiʻ i have 
been conducted primarily by mail, but in-person voting is still available at voter service centers. See HRS §§ 11-101 (Supp. 
2021), 11-109 (Supp. 2021). 
2. On November 5, 2024, the State of Hawaiʻ i held a 
general election for State Representative, District 39. The two 
candidates were the Republican candidate, Defendant Elijah 
Pierick, and the Democratic candidate, Plaintiff Corey Rosenlee. 
3. For the subject election, the State of 
Hawaiʻi Office 
of Elections was responsible for the printing and counting of 
ballots. HRS § 11-110(b)(1)(B) (Supp. 2021). 
The City Clerk of 
the City and County of Honolulu was responsible for the mailing and receipt of ballots and voter service centers, among other 
duties. HRS § 11-110(b)(1)(A); see HRS §§ 11-106 (Supp. 2021), 
11-108 (Supp. 2021). 
4. HRS § 11-102 (Supp. 2022) sets forth the procedures 
for conducting elections by mail. 
Under this process, on or 
about Friday, October 18, 2024, the Clerk began mailing out the 
ballot packages to registered voters. See HRS § 11-102(b). The 
ballot package to a voter included: an official ballot; a return 
2  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  identification envelope with postage prepaid; a secrecy envelope 
or secrecy sleeve; and instructions. HRS § 11-102(a). 
5.  For the general election, pursuant to HRS § 11-106, 
Hawaiʻi Administrative Rule (HAR) § 3-177-651 (eff. 2020), and 
HAR § 3-177-652 (eff. 2020), the Clerk was responsible for reviewing return identification envelopes and providing notice 
to voters whose envelopes were deemed deficient. 
6. HRS § 11-106 provides: 
§ 11-106. Deficient return identification envelopes 
If: 
(1) A return identification envelope is returned with 
an unsigned affirmation; 
(2) The affirmation signature does not match a reference signature image; or 
(3) A return identification envelope contains another condition that would not allow the counting of 
the ballot, 
the clerk shall make an attempt to notify the voter by 
first class mail, telephone, or electronic mail to inform the voter of the procedure to correct the deficiency. The 
voter shall have five business days after the date of the election to cure the deficiency. The chief election 
officer may adopt rules regarding requirements and 
procedures for correcting deficient return identification envelopes. The counting of ballots and disclosure of 
subsequent election results may continue during the time period permitted to cure a deficiency under this section. 
The clerk’ s inability to contact voters under this section 
shall not be grounds for a contest for cause under section 
11-172. This section shall apply to all return 
identification envelopes, including ballots utilizing the provisions of section 11- 107 or chapter 15 or 15D. 
7. HAR § 3-177-651 provides in pertinent part: 
§ 3-177-651. Return identification envelopes; general 
preparing of ballots for counting. 
(a) Upon receipt of the return identification envelope, the 
clerk may prepare the ballots for counting. Before opening 
return identification envelopes and counting the ballots, 
3  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the return identification envelopes shall be checked for 
the following: 
(1) Signature on the affirmation statement; 
(2) Whether the signature corresponds with a 
reference signature image using the provisions of HAR 
§ 3-177-652; and 
(3) Whether there is a condition that would not allow 
the counting of the contents of the return 
identification envelope (e.g. the voter has already 
voted, or otherwise returned a return identification 
envelope that has been validated). 
(b) If any requirement listed in subsection (a) is not met or if the return identification envelope appears to be 
tampered with, the clerk shall mark across the face of the 
envelope “invalid” and it shall be kept in the custody of 
the clerk and disposed of as prescribed for ballots in HRS 
§ 11-154, unless it is subsequently determined to be valid. 
To the extent a return identification envelope is deemed 
invalid, the provisions of HAR § 3- 177-654 relating to the 
correction of deficient return identification envelopes may apply. 
 . . . . 
(e) All return identification envelopes complying with subsection (a) shall be deemed valid and secured by 
election officials for subsequent processing and counting. 
8. HAR § 3-177-652 provides: 
§ 3-177-652. Return identification envelopes; signature 
validation. 
(a) The clerk will initially compare the signature on a 
return identification envelope with the reference signature 
or reference signatures of the voter. The clerk may 
authorize the use of a signature device, as defined in HAR 
§ 3-177-653, to compare signatures. A signature considered 
matched by a signature device will be considered valid and 
not require further verification. 
(b) A “reference signature” is any signature provided in 
connection with the administration of elections or any signature provided to election officials from a 
governmental entity obtained in the ordinary course of 
business (e.g. voter signatures on any election issued form 
or application, correspondence with election officials, 
signature capture cards sent to and returned by voters, signatures from the Department of Transportation or county 
licensing examiners, or signatures from any governmental 
entity shared with election officials). 
4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (c) Any signature not initially validated by the signature 
device or that was not submitted to a signature device will 
be visually compared by the election official. 
(1) As a return identification envelope was issued and transmitted to the voter, the return of the 
return identification envelope or electronic 
equivalent will be rebuttably presumed to be from the 
voter and any signature contained therein as that of 
the voter; 
(2) A voter is permitted to use a variation of their 
name, to the extent it can be recognized as such by 
the reviewing election official; 
(3) The election official will review the general 
appearance of the signatures taking into account the 
above noted rebuttable presumption, permitted name 
variations, and the following: 
(A) type of writing (e.g. cursive versus print); 
(B) speed of writing (e.g. harmonious versus 
slow and deliberate); 
(C) overall spacing; (D) overall size and proportions; 
(E) position of the signature (e.g. slanted 
versus straight); and 
(F) spelling and punctuation. 
(4) The election official will consider whether any 
apparent differences can be reasonably explained, by 
the facts and circumstances surrounding the 
signatures. The election official may consider, but 
not be limited to, the following considerations: 
(A) When the signatures were made in comparison 
to each (e.g. a significant period of time has 
transpired between signatures); 
(B) The age of the writer at the time of the 
signatures; 
(C) How the signatures were made (e.g. driver 
license offices may use an electronic signature pad to record signatures, including those used 
for voter registration, while an envelope may 
be signed in ink); or 
(D) Whether household members signed and 
returned each other’ s return identification 
5  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 envelope by accident, in which case, if the 
signatures match each of the correct voter
’s 
signature reference image and the voters have not otherwise voted, such that the counting of 
the impacted ballots would not result in a 
voter having voted a ballot not associated with their residence or containing questions or 
contests they are not eligible to vote on, the 
impacted return identification envelopes may be 
considered valid. 
(d) A voter may make a mark in place of a signature on the affirmation statement on the return identification envelope 
so long as there is a witness’ signature and address on the 
affirmation statement. In such a situation, the return identification envelope will be considered valid. If no witness’ signature and address appear on the affirmation 
statement, then the return identification envelope will be deemed invalid. However, if a voter is physically unable 
to sign or to make a mark, they may use the provisions of 
HRS § 456- 19 to have a notary sign on their behalf, and the 
return identification envelope will be considered valid. 
9.  Under HAR § 3-177-653 (eff. 2020) a “signature device” 
is a device that “either captures images or uses imported images 
which it analyzes and compares to existing signature reference 
images.” 
10.  For the subject general election, in accordance with 
HAR § 3-177-652(a), the Clerk utilized a signature device. This signature device was utilized by the Clerk to compare the 
signature on the return identification envelopes received from 
voters with the reference signatures in that particular voter’s 
registration file. The signature scanning device would either 
accept the signature as valid or would reject the signature as 
invalid. 
6  
  
 
 
 11. Return identification envelopes accepted by the 
signature scanning device were transferred to State of Hawaiʻ i 
Office of Elections for counting. 
12. The signature device utilized by the Clerk would flag 
potentially deficient return identification envelopes where, in 
pertinent part, a signature was missing or the signature did not 
match the reference signature. 
13. For those return identification envelopes rejected by 
the signature device, the Clerk’s staff visually compared the 
signature on the rejected return identification envelope with 
the voter’s reference signatures on file. The Clerk maintained 
that in performing this task it presumed that the voter did, in fact, sign the return identification envelope. The signature 
specimens on file for a voter typically contained multiple 
reference signatures from a variety of government sources 
including applications to register to vote submitted by the 
voter to the Office of Elections, or applications submitted by a 
voter to the Department of Motor Vehicles for a driver’s license 
or State identification card (collectively, “voter’s registration file”). See also HRS § 11-15.7 (Supp. 2021) 
(establishing automatic registration to vote as part of any application for the issuance of a State identification card or 
driver’s license, with the applicant presented the option to 
decline); HAR § 3-177-153(a) (eff. 2020) (authorizing the 
7  
  
 
 
 sharing of digitized signatures captured by a government agency 
with election officials to validate and confirm a voter’s 
identity in any election-related matter in which a signature is 
necessary); HAR § 3-177-652(b) (defining “reference signature”). 
14. If the Clerk’s staff determined that the signature 
matched any reference signature in the voter’s registration file, 
the return identification envelope would be validated and 
transferred to State of Hawaiʻ i Office of Elections for counting. 
15. If the Clerk’s staff determined that the signature on 
the return identification envelope did not match any of the 
reference signatures on file for the voter, the return 
identification envelope would be reviewed by a designated supervising election administrator or permanent staff for a 
final determination. 
16. If during this second tier review, the election 
administrator or permanent staff determined that the signature 
matched any reference signature in the voter’s registration file, 
the return identification envelope would be validated and 
transferred to State of Hawaiʻ i Office of Elections for counting. 
17. For these return identification envelopes deemed 
invalid, the Clerk mailed each voter a letter via the United 
States Postal Service by first class mail. This letter was 
mailed within one business day of receipt of a deficient return identification envelope throughout the entire election cycle. 
8  
  
 
 
 This letter explained that the voter had until Wednesday, 
November 13, 2024 to cure the deficiency and provided 
instructions on how to cure the deficiency. With respect to 
those voters that submitted a return identification envelope on 
the date of the general election (November 5, 2024) which the 
Clerk identified as deficient, the Clerk’s Office mailed a 
letter to these voters with instructions on how to cure the 
deficiency by United States Postal Service on November 6, 2024. 
18. For the subject election, there were a total of 111 
return identification envelopes that, following validation by the signature device and visual comparison by election officials 
described above, were determined to be missing the voter’s 
signature or contained a signature that did not match the 
voter’s reference signature images. 
19. For the general election, the deadline for a voter to 
cure the deficient return identification envelope was on 
Wednesday, November 13, 2024. 
20. All return identification envelopes that were deemed 
valid were transferred from the Clerk to the State of Hawaiʻ i 
Office of Elections to be opened and counted. For the subject 
general election no return identification envelopes were opened 
by the Clerk’s Office. Rather, the opening and counting of 
ballots was the exclusive responsibility of the State of Hawaiʻ i 
Office of Elections. See HRS § 11-110(b)(1)(B). 
9  
  
  
 
 
 21. In response to the notice provided by the Clerk’s 
Office to the 111 voters with return identification envelopes 
deemed deficient, the Clerk’s Office received timely and 
complete responses from 47 voters to cure the deficiency thereby 
allowing the ballots for these voters to be counted and included 
in the final tally. A total of 64 voters ultimately failed to 
cure their deficient return identification envelopes by the 
statutory deadline of November 13, 2024. See HRS § 11-106. Of 
these 64 return identification envelopes that were never cured, 
20 of the envelopes had no signature, and 44 had a signature 
that was not accepted as valid by the Clerk. 
22. At the end of the cure period on November 13, 2024 
the final result for State Representative, District 39 was 
reported by the State of Hawaiʻ i Office of Elections as 
follows: Defendant Pierick had received 4,712 votes; and, 
Plaintiff Rosenlee had received 4,701 votes. Blank votes 
totaled 587. Thus, the vote differential is 11 votes in 
favor of Defendant Pierick (election result). 
23. On November 25, 2024, Plaintiff Rosenlee filed the 
election contest with this court and thereby challenged the election result. The claims stated in the complaint are 
addressed below. 
24. Defendants subsequently filed motions seeking 
dismissal or summary judgment in their favor. In accordance 
10  
  
 
 
  
 with HRS § 11-174.5, the parties also submitted evidence for the 
court to review. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
1. To prevail on an election complaint seeking to 
invalidate a general election the plaintiff must establish “that a correct result cannot be ascertained because of a mistake or 
fraud on the part of the voter service center officials[.]” HRS 
§ 11-174.5(b); see also Waters v. Nago, 148 Hawaiʻ i 46, 65, 468 
P.3d 60, 79 (2019) (invalidating the special election where the 
correct result could not be determined because invalidly 
received ballots were commingled with the other ballots). 
2. Plaintiff’s complaint alleged six claims. 
First, that the Clerk committed a mistake in the review of 
signatures on return identification envelopes. 
Second, that the Clerk committed a mistake by only mailing 
notice of the Clerk’s deficiency determination. 
Third, that the Clerk committed a mistake in securing and 
monitoring in-person voting lines. 
Fourth, that the Clerk committed a mistake because the long 
lines to vote on election day deprived voters of their right to vote. 
The fifth and sixth claims were grounded in the theory that 
the Clerk’s decision to reject a voter’s signature as deficient 
was an equal protection and due process violation. 
11  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 3. In opposition, the Clerk argued that the Clerk’s 
office committed no mistake in the processing and review of 
return identification envelopes submitted by voters, nor in the 
supervision of voter service centers. In defense, the Clerk 
maintained, among other things, that Plaintiff submitted no 
evidence to carry his burden of proof. 
4. For the reasons set forth below, we agree with the 
Clerk. The burden was on Plaintiff to establish a mistake by the Clerk such that the correct result of the election cannot be 
ascertained. HRS § 11-174.5(b). Based on the evidence 
submitted, we hold that Plaintiff failed to sustain this burden. 
5. HAR § 3-177-652 is a rule adopted by the Chief 
Election Officer under HRS § 11-4 (Supp. 2019), which authorized 
the Chief Election Officer to promulgate rules governing 
elections. Id.HAR § 3-177-652 sets forth the process the 
Clerk was required to follow in validating signatures on return identification envelopes submitted by voters. 
6. The evidence established that the Clerk followed the 
process set forth in HAR § 3-177-652(a) by submitting the return identification envelopes in the first instance to a signature 
device which would identify any return identification envelopes 
that should be subjected to further review. The reasons the 
signature device would reject a return identification envelope 
included the failure of the voter to actually affix the voter’s 
12  
  
 
 
 
 
 signature to the return identification envelope, or where the 
signature device determined that the signature on the return 
identification envelope did not match the voter’s reference 
signature in that particular voter’s registration file. Next, 
the Clerk’s Office performed a manual review of the signature. 
The Clerk’s Office presumed the signature was from the voter. 
7. Plaintiff takes issue with this second step — the 
manual review performed by the Clerk’s Office. Yet Plaintiff submitted no relevant evidence to support his claim that the 
Clerk committed a mistake in the review of return identification 
envelopes. 
8. Even if the record could establish an actual mistake 
by the Clerk in the review of the signatures on the return 
identification envelopes, Plaintiff carried the burden of 
establishing that these mistakes caused a difference in the 
election such that the correct result is not ascertainable. See
HRS §§ 11-172 (Supp. 2021), 11-174.5. Plaintiff failed to 
sustain this burden because the record established that every 
voter with a deficient return identification envelope was 
provided with notice and the opportunity to cure the deficiency 
determination made by the Clerk. 
9. Under HRS § 11-108(c) the Clerk was statutorily 
required to “make reasonable efforts to determine the validity 
of ballots within five business days following an election day.” 
13  
  
 
 For any return identification envelope the Clerk determined was 
deficient based on a signature that did not match the reference 
signature image, the Clerk was required by HRS § 11-106 to “make 
an attempt to notify the voter by first class mail, telephone, 
or electronic mail to inform the voter of the procedure to 
correct the deficiency. The voter shall have five business days 
after the date of the election to cure the deficiency.” HRS 
§ 11-106. 
10. The evidence established that every voter with a 
return identification envelope that the Clerk determined was deficient under HAR §§ 3-177-651 and 3-177-652, was mailed a 
letter that provided the voter with notice and the opportunity 
to cure the deficiency. The preponderance of the evidence 
established that all of these notices were mailed to the voter 
within one business day of the Clerk’s receipt of the deficient 
return identification envelope. For any deficient return 
identification envelopes that were received on the election date (November 5, 2024) the notice of deficiency was mailed to the 
voter the next day on November 6, 2024. See HRS § 11-106. This 
mailing occurred well before the November 13, 2024 deadline for the voter to cure the deficiency identified on the return 
identification envelope. See id. (establishing the statutory 
deadline of five business days following an election day to cure a deficiency with a return identification envelope). 
14  
  
 11.  We conclude that the Clerk’s actions in providing 
notice to these voters complied with the election laws including 
the requirement set forth in HRS § 11-108(c) that “[t]he clerk 
shall make reasonable efforts to determine the validity of 
ballots within five business days following an election day.” 
The reasonableness of the Clerk’s actions in providing notice is 
demonstrated by the undisputed fact that 47 of the initially 
rejected 111 return identification envelopes were cured by voters who received the mailed notice of deficiency from the 
Clerk. Upon curing the deficiencies, the return identification 
envelopes for these voters were securely transferred to the 
counting center operated by the State of Hawaiʻ i Office of 
Elections.  
12. We conclude that all the 64 voters whose return 
identification envelopes were deemed deficient by the Clerk and 
subsequently failed to cure the deficiency by the statutory 
deadline, were provided with reasonable notice and the 
opportunity to correct the deficiency on the return 
identification envelope. 
The preponderance of the evidence 
established that all of these 64 voters were equally provided 
with the opportunity to participate in the election and none of 
them was disenfranchised as a result of the Clerk’s deficiency 
determination. 
15  
  
 
 
 
 
 13. Plaintiff failed to establish any error was committed 
by the Clerk in the review and processing of the return 
identification envelopes. Plaintiff also failed to establish a 
legal cause between the mistakes alleged in the complaint and 
the final election results because the preponderance of the 
evidence established that every voter with a rejected return 
identification envelope was provided with notice and a 
sufficient period of time to cure the deficiency determination made by the Clerk. 
14. Plaintiff’s claim that voters improperly entered the 
voting line after the deadline on the election day was not 
supported by any admissible evidence. 
15. As to Plaintiff’s claim of long lines impacting 
voting, the Clerk argued in opposition that the Clerk was under 
no legal obligation to maintain a maximum wait time for in-
person voting on election day. For the reasons set forth below, 
we agree with the Clerk. Under HRS § 11-102(d), the Clerk was required to establish voter service centers and places of 
deposit. The record established that the Clerk complied with 
this statutory duty by maintaining two voter service centers on 
election day. 
While the Clerk did not submit any evidence as to the dates 
the voter service centers were open and available to the public, 
we take judicial notice of the fact that the 2024 Hawaiʻ i Voter 
16  
    
  
                                                 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 Guide published by the Office of Elections informed the public 
that voter service centers were opened beginning on October 22, 
2024 through election day for voter registration and accessible 
in-person voting.1 
As such, we are not persuaded by the evidence presented by 
Plaintiff that the Clerk committed any mistake in establishing 
and supervising the voter service centers. 
We also reject Plaintiff’s suggestion that the long wait 
times at the voter service centers on election day means that voters were disenfranchised. First, no direct evidence was 
submitted by Plaintiff that any voter in State District 39 was 
deprived of the right to vote. Second, the record established 
that voters had over two weeks to cast their votes. This is 
because the election process established by election officials 
provided voters with a vote-by-mail option from October 19, 2024 
and in-person voting as early as October 22, 2024. Thus, 
election officials provided voters with over two weeks to cast their ballots leading up to the general election day, November 
5, 2024.
2 
1 See 2024 Hawaiʻ i Voter Guide, State of Hawaiʻ i, Office of Elections 
(2024), https://digitalvoterguide.hawaii.gov/wp- content/themes/hawaii-
elections/assets/pdf/general_digital_voter_guide_en_US.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/7NFX- 8JVA] 
2 The Clerk should consider whether the strong demand for in- person 
voting on the general election day demonstrates a prospective need for more 
voter service centers in the City and County of Honolulu. See generally HRS 
§ 11-109 (requiring the clerk to establish voter service centers “ to service 
the particular needs of each county’ s voters”). 
17  
  
 
 
 
 
 16. We hold that Plaintiff as to all claims failed to 
establish that the correct result of the election cannot be 
ascertained because of a mistake on the part of the Clerk. See
HRS § 11-174.5(b). Accordingly, the court rules in favor of Defendants and against Plaintiff as to all claims made in the 
complaint. 
17. The final result as reported by the Chief Election 
Officer is Elijah Pierick with 4,712 votes and Corey Rosenlee with 4,701, which is a vote differential of 11 in favor of 
Elijah Pierick. 
18. The court issues this decision based on the evidence 
submitted by the parties and the record before the court. See
HRS § 11-174.5(b) (providing “the court shall cause the evidence to be reduced to writing and shall give judgment, stating all 
findings of fact and of law”). Accordingly, the motions pending 
before the court are denied as moot. 
JUDGMENT 
It is hereby ordered in accordance with HRS § 11-174.5 that 
Defendant Elijah Pierick received a majority of the votes cast 
and has been elected to the office of State Representative, 
District 39. 
The court enters judgment in favor of Defendants and 
against Plaintiff as to all claims stated in the complaint. 
18  
  
 
    
    
    
  The Chief Election Officer shall sign and deliver to 
Defendant Elijah Pierick the certificate of election which shall 
be conclusive of the right of Defendant Elijah Pierick to the 
office of State Representative, District 39. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, January 10, 2025. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
19 