                                                                                                                             
                                                                     
  
 
       
  
 
 
  
           
          
         
           
          
          
             
           
            
              
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 27-JAN-2022 09:00 AM Dkt. 183 ORD 
SCMF-20-0000152  
   
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI 
In
  the  Matter  of  the  Judiciary’s  Response  
to  the  COVID-19  Outbreak  
THIRD  EXTENSION  OF   ORDER  REGARDING  TEMPORARY  SUSPENSION  
OF  THE  TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  HAWAIʻI  RULES  OF   PENAL  PROCEDURE  
RULE  5(c)(3)  
(FIRST  CIRCUIT)  
 (By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  and  Eddins,  JJ.,  
and  Wilson,  J.,  dissenting )  1
The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  caused  a  public  health  
emergency.   In  response  to  the  declared  state  of  emergency,  the  
Judiciary  postponed  non-urgent  court  business  and  limited  in-
person  proceedings  in  an  effort  to  ensure  the  health  and  safety  
of  court  users  and  Judiciary  personnel,  and  to  minimize  the  risk  
of  spreading  COVID-19  in  the  courts.   As  COVID-19  cases  remained   
1 See Dissent to Amended Order Re: Felony Defendants (Filed August 18, 
2020); Order Re: Petty Misdemeanor, Misdemeanor, and Felony Defendants at 
Maui Community Correctional Center, Hawai‘i Comm unity Correctional Center, and 
Kaua‘i Community Correctional Center (Filed August 24, 2020); Order Re: Petty 
Misdemeanor, Misdemeanor, and Felony Defendants (Filed August 27, 2020); and 
Order Denying Petitioner’s “Motion to Compel Compliance with This Court’s 
Orders” (Filed September 1, 2020). The Dissent was filed on February 18, 
2021, in SCPW-20-0000509. See
 also Dissent Re: Order Regarding Temporary 
Extension of the Time Requirements Under Hawai‘i Rule s of Penal Procedure Rule 
10(a), (b), and (c) (Circuit Court of the Third Circuit), filed on June 1, 
2021.                                                            
 2 
          
         
         
          
          
        
        
         
          
              
         
          
           
        
        
        
         
        
           
  
          
  
 
       
         
          
           
      
       
        
       
       
         
       
        
      
       
       
         
 
 low, court operations resumed in accordance with public health 
safety guidance, and to the extent possible with available 
resources. Criminal proceedings have proceeded in-person and by 
video conference in accordance with court rules and as feasible. 
In mid-July 2020, there was a surge of COVID-19 cases 
in Hawai‘i, and p articularly within our community correctional 
centers and facilities, including at the O‘ahu Community 
Correctional Center (“OCCC”), where inmates were being held in 
quarantine and the transport to court of custody defendants was 
suspended. At the time, in a letter to the court, the Office of 
the Public Defender requested the temporary suspension of, inter 
alia, Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3),2 noting that 
defendants released from OCCC on bail or otherwise may need to 
quarantine and comply with isolation requirements, and that 
allowing the courts to continue matters for non-custody 
defendants would assist in those endeavors. 
On August 27, 2020, this court entered an order 
temporarily suspending the time requirements set forth under 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) for First Circuit criminal matters. The order 
2 HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) provides the following time requirements for a 
preliminary hearing: 
The court shall conduct the preliminary hearing 
within 30 days of initial appearance if the defendant 
is not in custody; however, if the defendant is held 
in custody for a period of more than 2 days after 
initial appearance without commencement of a 
defendant’s preliminary hearing, the court, on motion 
of the defendant, shall release the defendant to 
appear on the defendant’s own recognizance , unless 
failure of such determination or commencement is 
caused by the request, action or condition of the 
defendant, or occurred with the defendant's consent, 
or is attributable to such compelling fact or 
circumstance which would preclude such determination 
or commencement within the prescribed period, or 
unless such compelling fact or circumstance would 
render such release to be against the interest of 
justice.  3 
            
        
          
     
         
        
         
         
         
         
         
           
        
         
            
        
       
        
           
          
       
        
        was extended as conditions required. The order expired on May 
31, 2021, when the statewide positivity rate and 
hospitalizations had stabilized, and there was reported to be no 
active COVID-19 cases at OCCC. 
Since  then,   the  rate  of  positive  COVID-19  cases  and  
hospitalizations  on  O‘ahu,  and  within  our  community  correctional  
facilities,  have  continued  to  fluctuate.   In  early  August  2021,  
statewide  infection  and  hospitalization  rates  surged,  with  
record  numbers  of  positive  cases  and  rapidly  increasing  
hospitalizations  being  reported.   It  was  therefore  necessary  to  
temporarily  suspend  the  time  requirements  set  forth  under  HRPP  
Rule  5(c)(3)  for  First  Circuit  criminal  matters.    
Thus, on
 August 19, 2021, this court entered the 
“Order Regarding Temporary Suspension of the Time Requirements 
Under Hawai‘i Rul es of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3) (First 
Circuit),” which provided that the First Circuit may temporarily 
extend the time requirements for preliminary hearings no longer 
than reasonably necessary to protect public health and safety, 
while encouraging judges to follow the time requirements under 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) to the extent possible and to utilize remote 
technology as feasible. As pandemic-related restrictions and 
conditions remained in place, this court extended the provisions 
of the August 19, 2021 order. Currently, the August 19, 2021 
order expires on January 28, 2022. 
The rate
 of positive COVID-19 cases and 
hospitalizations on O‘ahu, and within our community correctional 
centers, continues to fluctuate. In the last month, with the 
emergence of the Omicron variant, Hawai‘i saw a surge in 
statewide positive case numbers and hospitalizations, with 
record numbers of positive cases and rapidly increasing 
hospitalizations being reported. Additionally, with the grand  4 
           
            
         
   
        
         
            
         
         
         
         
          
      
         
         
       
  
            
        
         
          
      
         
       
       
       
 
          
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins jury
 in recess and the suspension of the annual initial 
impaneling of a grand jury as set forth under HRS § 612-16(a) 
through early March 2022, the number of preliminary hearings 
increases significantly. 
As the pandemic conditions continue to evolve and 
impact our community, health and safety precautions continue to 
remain in place. Given the fluidity of these conditions and the 
current trajectory of the pandemic, flexibility and vigilance in 
adapting to these extraordinary circumstances is vital, and the 
continued need to protect court users and Judiciary personnel 
during this unprecedented time remains paramount. Thus, an 
extension of the August 19, 2021 order for First Circuit 
criminal matters is necessary. 
Accordingly, pursuant to article VI, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitut ion and Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes §§ 601-1.5 and 
602-5(a)(6), and Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, 
IT IS
 HEREBY ORDERED that the August 19, 2021 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Suspension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3) (First Circuit)” 
for First Circuit criminal matters is extended until March 25, 
2022, unless otherwise modified or extended. 
Dated: Honolulu,
 Hawaiʻi, January  27, 2022. 
