 
  
 
      
   
                                                                  
 
                                                                  
 
 
        
          
        
            
         
           
        
          
        
         
                                                           
          Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 11-SEP-2020 10:21 AM 
SCMF-20-0000152  
  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
In  the  Matter  of  the  Judiciary’s  Response  
to  the  COVID-19  Outbreak  
ORDER  EXTENDING  ORDER  REGARDING  TEMPORARY  EXTENSION  
OF  THE  TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  
HAWAIʻI  RULES  OF  PENAL  PROCEDURE  RULE  5(c)(3)  
 (By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  and  McKenna,  JJ.,  
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  
with  Wilson,  J.  dissenting )  1
The COVID-19 pandemic
 has caused a public health 
emergency. In response to the pandemic, the Judiciary postponed 
non-urgent court business and limited in-person proceedings in 
an effort to ensure the health and safety of court users and 
Judiciary personnel, and to minimize the risk of spreading 
COVID-19 in the courts. As COVID-19 cases remained low, court 
operations resumed in accordance with public health safety 
guidance, and to the extent possible with available resources. 
Criminal proceedings have proceeded in-person and by video 
conference in accordance with court rules and as feasible. 
1 A dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  2 
   
       
        
         
          
        
         
          
          
           Since  July   2020,  however,  there  was  a  surge  of  COVID-
19  cases  in  Hawai‘i,  with  record  numbers  of  positive  cases  and  
increased  hospitalizations  being  reported.   There  was  also  a  
surge  of  COVID-19  cases  in  our  community  correctional  centers  
and  facilities,  particularly  at  the  O‘ahu  Community  Correctional  
Center  (“OCCC”).   As  a  result,  inmates  were  being  held  in  
quarantine  and  the  transport  of  custody  defendants  was  
suspended,  thus  impacting  the  time  requirements  for  preliminary  
hearings  under  Hawai‘i  Rules  of  Penal  Procedure  (“HRPP”)  Rule  
5(c)(3).   Further,  in  a  letter  to  the  court  dated  August  18,  
2020,  the  Office  of  the  Public  Defender  requested  the  temporary  
suspension  of,  inter  alia,  HRPP  Rule  5(c)(3),  noting  that  
defendants  released  from  OCCC  on  bail  or  otherwise  may  need  to  
quarantine  and  comply  with  isolation  requirements,  and  that  
allowing  the  courts  to  continue  matters  for  non-custody  
defendants  would  assist  in  those  endeavors.  
Thus, on
 August 27, 2020, this court entered the 
“Order Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements 
Under Hawai‘i Rul es of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3),” which 
provided that the first circuit may temporarily extend the time 
requirements for preliminary hearings no longer than reasonably 
necessary to protect public health and safety, while encouraging 
judges to follow the time requirements under HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
to the extent possible and to utilize remote technology as 
feasible. The order expires on September 17, 2020.      
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
   
       
        
        
   
          
        
          
         
     
         
       
       
       
 
      Since  the  order  was  filed,  the  number  of  positive  
COVID-19  cases  and  hospitalizations  statewide  has  remained  high,  
and  the  transport  of  custody  defendants  from  all  O‘ahu  
correctional
  facilities  continue  to  be  suspended.   The  current  
public  health  emergency  and  the  changing  conditions  require  
flexibility  and  vigilance.   The  continued  need  to  protect  the  
health  and  safety  of  court  users  and  Judiciary  personnel  during  
this  unprecedented  time  remains  vital,  thus  necessitating  a  
further  extension  of  the  August  27,  2020  order  for  first  circuit   
criminal  matters.    
Accordingly, pursuant
 to article VI, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitut ion and Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 602-
5(a)(6),
 Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency Proclamations, and 
HRS § 601-1.5, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the August 27, 2020 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3)” for first circuit 
criminal matters is extended until October 16, 2020, unless 
otherwise further modified or extended. 
Dated: Honolulu,
 Hawaiʻi, Septemb er 11, 2020. 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
3 