 
  
 
      
 
     
        
                                                                  
 
       
    
                                                                   
 
                                                           
            Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 13-NOV-2020 08:11 AM Dkt. 75 ORD 
SCMF-20-0000152 
IN
 THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
In
 the Matter of the Judiciary’s Response 
to the COVID-19 Outbreak 
THIRD  EXTENSION  OF  ORDER  REGARDING  
TEMPORARY  EXTENSION  OF  THE  TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  
HAWAIʻI  RULES  OF  PENAL  PROCEDURE  RULE  5(c)(3)  
 (By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  and  McKenna,  JJ.,  
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  
with  Wilson,  J.,  concurring  and  dissenting1)  
The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  caused  a  public  health  
emergency.    In  response   to  the  pandemic,  the  Judiciary  postponed   
non-urgent  court  business   and  limited   in-person  proceedings  in  
an  effort  to  ensure  the  health  and  safety  of  court  users  and  
Judiciary  personnel,  and  to  minimize  the  risk  of  spreading  
COVID-19  in  the  courts.   As  COVID-19  cases  remained  low,  court  
operations  resumed  in  accordance  with  public  health  safety  
guidance,  and  to  the  extent  possible  with  available  resources.   
1 A concurrence and dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  
 Criminal   proceedings   have  proceeded   in-person   and  by  video  
conference  in  accordance  with  court  rules  and  as  feasible.  
In  July  2020,  there  was  a  surge  of  COVID-19  cases  in  
Hawai‘i,  with  record  numbers   of  positive   cases  and  increased  
hospitalizations  being  reported.    There  was  also  a  surge  of  
COVID-19  cases  in  our  community  correctional  centers  and  
facilities,  particularly  at  the  O‘ahu  Community  Correctional  
Center  (“OCCC”).   As  a  result,  inmates  were  being  held  in  
quarantine  and  the  transport  of  custody  defendants  was  
suspended,  thus  impacting  the  time  requirements  for  preliminary  
hearings  under  Hawai‘i  Rules  of  Penal  Procedure  (“HRPP”)  Rule  
5(c)(3).   Further,  in  a  letter  to  the  court  dated  August  18,  
2020,  the  Office  of  the  Public  Defender  requested  the  temporary  
suspension  of,  inter  alia,  HRPP  Rule  5(c)(3),  noting  that  
defendants  released  from  OCCC  on  bail  or  otherwise  may  need  to  
quarantine  and  comply  with  isolation  requirements,  and  that  
allowing  the  courts  to  continue  matters  for  non-custody  
defendants  would  assist  in  those  endeavors.  
Thus,  on  August  27,  2020,  this  court  entered  the  
“Order  Regarding  Temporary  Extension  of  the  Time  Requirements  
Under  Hawai‘i  Rules  of  Penal  Procedure  Rule  5(c)(3),”  which  
provided  that  the  first  circuit  may  temporarily  extend  the  time  
requirements  for  preliminary  hearings  no  longer  than  reasonably  
2
  
  
      
       
          
         
          
          
         
          
      necessary  to  protect  public  health  and  safety,  while  encouraging   
judges  to  follow  the  time  requirements  under  HRPP  Rule  5(c)(3)  
to  the  extent  possible  and  to  utilize  remote  technology  as  
feasible.   Since  then,  as  the  COVID-19  cases  continued  to  remain  
high,  as  transports  of  custody  defendants  from  all  O‘ahu  
correctional  facilities  were  suspended,  and  the  number  of  
citations  issued  for  Hawaiʻi  Revised  Statutes  (“HRS”)  ch.  127A  
violations  grew  exponentially,  this  court  extended  the  
provisions  of  the  August  27,  2020  order.   Currently,  the  August  
27,  2020  order,  as  extended,  expires  on  November  16,  2020.    
The
 rate of positive COVID-19 cases and 
hospitalizations on  O‘ahu, including at OCCC, continues to 
fluctuate, and the number of citations for HRS ch. 127A 
violations continues to grow. These evolving conditions require 
flexibility and vigilance, and the continued need to protect the 
health and safety of court users and Judiciary personnel during 
this unprecedented time remains paramount. Thus, a further 
extension of the August 27, 2020 order for first circuit 
criminal matters is necessary. 
Accordingly,  pursuant  to  article  VI,  section  7  of  the  
Hawaiʻi  Constitution,  HRS  §§  601-1.5  and  602-5(a)(6),  and  
Governor  David  Y.  Ige’s  Emergency  Proclamations,   
3
  
           
        
          
         
      
  
       
       
       
 
      IT
 IS HEREBY ORDERED that the August 27, 2020 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3)” for first circuit 
criminal matters is further extended until December 31, 2020, 
unless otherwise further modified or extended. 
Dated:   Honolulu,  Hawaiʻi,  November  13,  2020.  
/s/  Mark  E.  Recktenwald  
/s/  Paula  A.  Nakayama  
/s/  Sabrina  S.  McKenna  
/s/  Lisa  M.  Ginoza  
4
 