                                                                  
  
  
 
      
  
 
                                                                  
 
 
        
          
        
            
         
           
          
        
         
       
          
        
                                                           
            
            
           Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 27-JAN-2022 08:39 AM Dkt. 179 ORD 
SCMF-20-0000152  
   
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI 
In  the  Matter  of  the  Judiciary’s  Response  
to  the  COVID-19  Outbreak  
FOURTH  EXTENSION   OF  ORDER  REGARDING  TEMPORARY  EXTENSION  OF  THE  
TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  HAWAIʻI   RULES  OF  PENAL  PROCEDURE  RULE  
10(a),  (b),  and  (c)  
(CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  THIRD  CIRCUIT)   
(By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  and  Eddins,  JJ.,  
with  Wilson,  J.,  dissenting )  1
The COVID-19
 pandemic has caused a public health 
emergency. In response to the pandemic, the Judiciary postponed 
non-urgent court business and limited in-person proceedings in 
an effort to ensure the health and safety of court users and 
Judiciary personnel, and minimize the risk of spreading COVID-19 
in the courts. As COVID-19 cases remained low, court operations 
resumed in accordance with public health safety guidance, and to 
the extent possible with available resources. Criminal 
proceedings have proceeded in-person and by video conference in 
accordance with court rules and as feasible. 
In late May 2021, there was an uptick of COVID-19 
positive cases being reported at the Hawai‘i Commun ity 
1 See Dissent Re: Order Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time 
Requirements Under Hawai‘i  Rules of  Penal Procedure Rule 10(a), (b), and (c) 
(Circuit Court of the Third Circuit), filed on June 1, 2021.  2 
          
        
            
          
         
          
            
        
          
          
        
         
        
              
       
        
         
           
        
         
        
           
         
          
         
        
         
           
        
            
       Correctional Center (“HCCC”). Throughout this period, it was 
reported that there were approximately two hundred fifty-six 
active positive COVID-19 cases at HCCC. As a result, HCCC was 
in lockdown and no transport or remote hearings were occurring 
at the time, thus affecting the time requirements for 
arraignments under Hawai‘i Rules o f Penal Procedure Rule 10. 
Thus, on June
 1, 2021, this court entered the “Order 
Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i Rules of  Penal Procedural Rule 10(a), (b), and (c),” 
which provided that the third circuit may temporarily extend the 
time requirements for arraignments no longer than reasonably 
necessary to protect public health and safety, while encouraging 
judges to utilize remote technology whenever possible. 
Currently, the June 1, 2021 order expires on January 28, 2022. 
The rate of
 positive COVID-19 cases and 
hospitalizations on Hawai‘i Island , and within  our community 
correctional centers, continues to fluctuate. In the last 
month, with the emergence of the Omicron variant, Hawai‘i saw a 
surge in statewide positive case numbers and hospitalizations, 
with record numbers of positive cases and rapidly increasing 
hospitalizations being reports. Additionally, it is also 
understood that HCCC continues to remain in lockdown. As the 
pandemic conditions continue to evolve and impact our community, 
health and safety precautions continue to remain in place. 
Given the fluidity of these conditions and the current 
trajectory of the pandemic, flexibility and vigilance in 
adapting to these extraordinary circumstances is vital, and the 
continued need to protect the health and safety of court users 
and Judiciary personnel during this unprecedented time remains 
paramount. A further extension of the June 1, 2021 order for 
third circuit criminal matters is therefore necessary.  3 
          
        
       
 
            
        
           
         
       
        
       
       
       
 
          
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins Accordingly, pursuant
 to article VI, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitut ion, Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes §§ 601-1.5 and 
602-5(a)(6), and Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, 
IT IS
 HEREBY ORDERED that the June 1, 2021 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i  Rules of  Penal Procedural Rule 10(a), (b), and (c)” for 
third circuit criminal matters is further extended until March 
25, 2022, unless otherwise modified or extended. 
Dated: Honolulu,  Hawaiʻi, January  27, 2022. 
