                                                                                                                             
                                                                     
  
 
       
  
 
 
        
          
        
            
         
           
        
          
  
       Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 11-SEP-2020 10:27 AM 
SCMF-20-0000152  
   
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI   
In  the  Matter  of  the  Judiciary’s  Response  
to  the  COVID-19  Outbreak  
ORDER  EXTENDING   ORDER  REGARDING  
TEMPORARY  EXTENSION  OF  THE  TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  
HAWAIʻI   RULES  OF  PENAL  PROCEDURE  RULE  10(a),  (b),  and  (c) 
(By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  and  McKenna,  JJ.,  
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  
with  Wilson,  J.,  dissenting )  1
The COVID-19
 pandemic has caused a public health 
emergency. In response to the pandemic, the Judiciary postponed 
non-urgent court business and limited in-person proceedings in 
an effort to ensure the health and safety of court users and 
Judiciary personnel, and to minimize the risk of spreading 
COVID-19 in the courts. As COVID-19 cases remained low, court 
operations resumed in accordance with public health safety 
guidance, and to the extent possible with available resources. 
1 A dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  2 
   
       
           
         
         
        
           
         
         
         
          
         
        
           
          
        
         
         
        
         
         
         
         Criminal  proceedings   have  proceeded  in-person  and  by  video  
conference  in  accordance  with  court  rules  and  as  feasible.  
Since July
 2020, however, there was a surge of COVID-
19 cases in Hawai‘i, with record numbers of positive cases and 
increased hospitalizations being reported. There was also a 
surge of COVID-19 cases in our community correctional centers 
and facilities, particularly at the O‘ahu Community Correctional 
Center (“OCCC”). As a result, additional time was required to 
be afforded for arraignments in order to give sufficient 
opportunity for those released from OCCC to self-isolate or 
quarantine for possible COVID-19 exposure as necessary and to 
ensure the health and safety of court users and personnel. 
Thus, on
 August 18, 2020, this court entered the 
“Order Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements 
Under Hawai‘i Rul es of Penal Procedure Rule 10(a), (b), and (c),” 
which provided that the first circuit may temporarily extend the 
time requirements for arraignments no longer than reasonably 
necessary to protect public health and safety, while encouraging 
judges to utilize remote technology whenever possible. The 
order expires on September 17, 2020. 
Since the
 order was filed, the number of positive 
COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations statewide has remained high. 
The current public health emergency and the changing conditions 
require flexibility and vigilance. The continued need to       
     
     
     /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
           
        
           
         
        
         
 
            
        
           
         
       
         
      
      
      
 
     protect
 the health and safety of court users and Judiciary 
personnel during this unprecedented time remains vital, thus 
necessitating a further extension of the August 18, 2020 order. 
Accordingly, pursuant to article VI, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi  Constitution and  Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes § 602-5(a)(6), 
Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency Proclamations, and HRS § 601-
1.5,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the August 18, 2020 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Extension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 10(a), (b), and (c)” for 
first circuit criminal matters is extended until October 16, 
2020, unless otherwise further modified or extended. 
Dated: Honolulu,
 Hawaiʻi, Septemb er 11, 2020. 
3 