                                                                                                                             
                                                                     
  
 
       
  
 
  
           
          
         
           
          
          
             
           
            
              
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCMF-20-0000152 27-JAN-2022 08:50 AM Dkt. 181 ORD 
SCMF-20-0000152  
   
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
In  the  Matter   of  the  Judiciary’s  Response  
to  the  COVID-19  Outbreak  
THIRD  EXTENSION  OF   ORDER  REGARDING  TEMPORARY  SUSPENSION  
OF  THE  TIME  REQUIREMENTS  UNDER  HAWAIʻI  RULES  OF   PENAL  PROCEDURE  
RULE  5(c)(3)  
(THIRD  CIRCUIT)  
 (By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  and  Eddins,  JJ.,  
and  Wilson,  J.,  dissenting )  1
The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  caused  a  public  health  
emergency.   In  response  to  the  declared  state  of  emergency,  the  
Judiciary  postponed  non-urgent  court  business  and  limited  in-
person  proceedings  in  an  effort  to  ensure  the  health  and  safety  
of  court  users  and  Judiciary  personnel,  and  to  minimize  the  risk  
1 See Dissent to Amended Order Re: Felony Defendants (Filed August 18, 
2020); Order Re: Petty Misdemeanor, Misdemeanor, and Felony Defendants at 
Maui Community Correctional Center, Hawai‘i  Community C orrectional Center, and 
Kaua‘i Community Correctional Center (Filed August 24, 2020); Order Re: Petty 
Misdemeanor, Misdemeanor, and Felony Defendants (Filed August 27, 2020); and 
Order Denying Petitioner’s “Motion to Compel Compliance with This Court’s 
Orders” (Filed September 1, 2020). The Dissent was filed on February 18, 
2021, in SCPW-20-0000509. See
 also Dissent Re: Order Regarding Temporary 
Extension of the Time Requirements Under Hawai‘i  Rules of  Penal Procedure Rule 
10(a), (b), and (c) (Circuit Court of the Third Circuit), filed on June 1, 
2021.                                                            
 2 
      
     
         
           
           
       
         
       
          
        
          
   
  
          
  
 
       
         
          
           
      
       
        
       
       
         
       
        
      
 of  spreading  COVID-19  in  the  courts.   As  COVID-19  cases  remained   
low,  court  operations  resumed  in  accordance  with  public  health  
safety  guidance,  and  to  the  extent  possible  with  available  
resources.   Criminal  proceedings  have  proceeded  in-person  and  by  
video  conference  in  accordance  with  court  rules  and  as  feasible.   
In late May 2021, there was an increase in COVID-19 
positive cases being reported at the Hawai‘i Community 
Correctional Center
 (“HCCC”). As a result, HCCC was in lockdown 
and the transport of custody defendants was suspended. In early 
August 2021, statewide infection and hospitalization rates 
surged, with record numbers of positive cases and rapidly 
increasing hospitalizations being reported. Additionally, HCCC 
remained in lockdown with no transports occurring. It was 
therefore necessary to temporarily suspend the time requirements 
set forth under HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)2 for Third Circuit criminal 
matters. 
2 HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) provides the following time requirements for a 
preliminary hearing: 
The court shall conduct the preliminary hearing 
within 30 days of initial appearance if the defendant 
is not in custody; however, if the defendant is held 
in custody for a period of more than 2 days after 
initial appearance without commencement of a 
defendant’s preliminary hearing, the court, on motion 
of the defendant, shall release the defendant to 
appear on the defendant’s own recognizance , unless 
failure of such determination or commencement is 
caused by the request, action or condition of the 
defendant, or occurred with the defendant's consent, 
or is attributable to such compelling fact or 
circumstance which would preclude such determination                                                            
 3 
     
   
        
         
           
        
         
    
        
         
  
     
       
         
 
 Thus,  on  August  19,  2021,  this  court  entered  the  
“Order  Regarding  Temporary  Suspension  of  the  Time  Requirements  
Under  Hawai‘i  Rules  of   Penal  Procedure  Rule  5(c)(3)  (Third  
Circuit),”  which  provided  that  the  Third  Circuit  may  temporarily   
extend  the  time  requirements  for  preliminary  hearings  no  longer  
than  reasonably  necessary  to  protect  public  health  and  safety,  
while  encouraging  judges  to  follow  the  time  requirements  under  
HRPP  Rule  5(c)(3)  to  the  extent  possible  and  to  utilize  remote  
technology  as  feasible.   As  pandemic-related  restrictions  and  
conditions  remained  in  place,  this  court  extended  the  provisions   
of  the  August  19,  2021  order.   Currently,  the  August  19,  2021  
order  expires  on  January  28,  2022.  
The rate of positive
 COVID-19 cases and 
hospitalizations on Hawai‘i Island , and within  our community 
correctional centers, continues to fluctuate. In the last 
month, with the emergence of the Omicron variant, Hawai‘i saw a 
surge in statewide positive case numbers and hospitalizations, 
with record numbers of positive cases and rapidly increasing 
hospitalizations being reported. 
As the pandemic
 conditions continue to evolve and 
impact our community, health and safety precautions continue to 
or commencement within the prescribed period, or 
unless such compelling fact or circumstance would 
render such release to be against the interest of 
justice.       
     
     
     /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
             
           
        
        
          
       
            
        
         
         
       
  
            
        
         
          
      
         
      
      
      
 
     remain in place. It is also understood that HCCC continues to 
remain in lockdown. Given the fluidity of these conditions and 
the current trajectory of the pandemic, flexibility and 
vigilance in adapting to these extraordinary circumstances is 
vital, and the continued need to protect court users and 
Judiciary personnel during this unprecedented time remains 
paramount. Thus, an extension of the August 19, 2021 order for 
Third Circuit criminal matters is necessary. 
Accordingly, pursuant to article VI, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi  Constitution and  Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes §§ 601-1.5 and 
602-5(a)(6), and Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, 
IT IS
 HEREBY ORDERED that the August 19, 2021 “Order 
Regarding Temporary Suspension of the Time Requirements Under 
Hawai‘i  Rules of  Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(3) (Third Circuit),” 
for Third Circuit criminal matters, is extended until March 25, 
2022, unless otherwise modified or extended. 
Dated: Honolulu,
 Hawaiʻi, January  27, 2022. 
/s/
 Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
4 