SCMF-20-0000152 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
In the Matter of the Judiciary’s Response  
to the COVID-19 Outbreak 
CONCURRENCE AND DISSENT RE: ORDER REGARDING  
TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF THE TIME REQUIREMENTS UNDER  
HAWAIʻI RULES OF PENAL PROCEDURE RULE 10 (a), (b), and (c) 
(By: Wilson, J.)   
Arraignment is a critical stage of a criminal proceeding.  
Its purpose is “to identify  the accused, inform him of the 
charge, and obtain his plea, the object of the plea being to 
make an issue to be tried.”  State v. Basnet , 131 Hawai‘i 286, 
297, 318 P.3d 126, 137 (2013) (citing Territory of Hawai‘i v. 
W.H. Marshall,  13 Haw. 76, 83 (1900)) .   Hawaii Rule of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP)  Rule 10 provides specific time periods for 1
1 Under federal law the arraignment is referred to as “ a sine qua non  to the 
trial itself— the preliminary stage where the accused is informed of the 
indictment and pleads to it, thereby formulating the issue to be tried. ” 
Hamilton v. State of Ala., 368 U.S. 52, 55, 82 S. Ct. 157, 1 59 (1961). Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCMF-20-0000152
20-AUG-2020
03:40 PM2 2arraignment of a defendant.   Failure of the court to comply with 
the time limitations of Rule 10 requires dismissal of the charge 
without prejudice.3
The Majority now suspends  the right to an arraignment 
under HRPP Rule 10 for citizens in the First Circuit Court for 
the State of Hawai ‘i.  The period of suspension is indefinite:  
“no longer than is reasonably necessary to protect public health 
and safety .”  Consequently all citizens in the first circuit who 
have been arrested and taken into custody for new offenses, lose 
for an indefinite period of time their constitutionally 
guaranteed rights to be informed of the charge against them, to 
2 HRPP Rule 10 provides:  
(a)A defendant who has been held by district court
to answer in circuit court shall be arraigned in
circuit court within 14 days after the district
court’s oral order of commitment following (i)
arraignment and plea, where the defendant elected
jury trial 
or did not waive the right to jury trial
or (ii) initial appearance or preliminary hearing,
whichever occurs last.
(b)Following service of grand jury warrant, a
defendant arrested in the jurisdiction or returned to
the jurisdiction shall be arraigned not later than 7
days following the arrest or return.
(c)Following service of an information charging
warrant of arrest, a defendant arrested in the
jurisdiction or returned to the jurisdiction shall be
arraigned not later than 7 days  following arrest or
return.
3 We hold first, that respectfully, the Family Court of the First Circuit 
(the family circuit court) should have arraigned  Petitioner/ Defendant –
Appellant Sushil Basnet (Basnet) in accordance with Hawai‘i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 10(a), but because it failed to do so, the case must be 
dismissed without prejudice .  Basnet, 131 Hawai‘ i at 287, 318 P.3d at 127. 3 plead not guilty and to demand their right to a speedy trial.  
Without their arraignment, they are also deprived of the 
opportunity to plead guilty, be sentenced, complete their 
sentence and regain their freedom.  An incarcerated citizen 
at 
the O‘ahu
 Community Correctional Center (OCCC) whose right to 
arraignment  is indefinitely suspended is indefinitely exposed to
cruel and unusual conditions that become more severe as the 
threat of the COVID-19 infection exponentially increases. 
The Majority’s decision to suspend the arraignment 
rights of incarcerated citizens at OCCC is without support.  It 
is based entirely on concerns applicable to out- of-custody 
defendants.  No factual basis is offered to support the 
Majority’s conclusion that  the modern technology commonly 
employed at OCCC for incarcerated citizens arraigned by video 
conference poses a threat to public health and safety.  The 
Majority order does not consider the current practice that 
counters the assumption that technology is unavailable to allow 
arraignment by video conferencing.  At present, in- custody 
defendants are arraigned from OCCC with the judge and defense 
counsel participating by video  conference in the courtroom.  The
conclusion that COVID- 19 precludes incarcerated citizens from 
receiving a virtual arraignment is thus belied by the present 
practice.  Moreover, no hearing has been conducted with the 
Department of Public Safety and the Office of the Public  4 Defender to determine whethe r the surrender of the right to  
arraignment is necessary.  The public defender ’s office and the 
private defense bar have not been given an on -the-record 
opportunity to address whether their incarcerated clients’ right 
to an arraignment, including  the time limitations prescribed in 
HRPP Rule 10 , should be suspended indefinitely.  
Notwithstanding the apparent, proven availability of 
less restrictive alternatives and the absence of on-the-record 
input from defense counsel represent ing incarcerated pretrial 
defendants, the Majority  orders that incarcerated citizens no 
longer have the protection of arraignment  afforded by  HRPP Rule 
10.Implicitly, the Majority finds that the present practice of
video conferencing threatens public health and safety, or, for 
unstated reasons, can no longer be employed effectively in the 
first circuit. 
Respectfully, the instant bare record does not support 
the Majority’s conclusion that  the exercise of the right to 
arraignment by incarcerated citizens poses a threat to public 
health and safety; nor does the record contain evidence to  
support the conclusion that protection of public health an d 
safety cannot be accommodated by conducting video conference 
arraignments.  And the Majority reaches its conclusion without 
providing incarcerated citizens the process they are due, 
including, at the very least, notice and an opportunity to be 5 heard before their right to an arraignment is suspended. 
Accordingly I dissent to the Majorit y’s suspension of the right 
to an arraignment for incarcerated people of the First Circuit.  
As for accused citizens who are not in custody at 
OCCC—and who do not suffer the fear of incarceration in the 
midst of a rampant, life- threatening COVID -19 epidemic—the 
Office of the Public Defender for the State of Hawai ‘i has agreed
to the suspension of HRPP Rule 10.  
As to this suspension,  I 
concur.  
Dated:  Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, 
August 20, 2020. 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
Associate Justice 
