 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER **  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCOT-17-0000777 30-NOV-2018 03:48 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
---oOo---
IN THE MATTER OF CONTESTED CASE HEARING RE
  
CONSERVATION DISTRICT USE APPLICATION (CDUA) HA-3568
  
FOR THE THIRTY METER TELESCOPE AT THE MAUNA KEA SCIENCE
  
RESERVE, KAʻ OHE MAUKA, H ĀMĀKUA, HAWAI ʻI, TMK (3)404015:009
  
SCOT-17-0000777, SCOT-17-0000811, & SCOT-17-0000812  
 
APPEAL FROM THE BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES  
(BLNR-CC-16-002 (Agency Appeal))  
 
NOVEMBER 30, 2018  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., MCKENNA, J., and 
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED,
 
WITH POLLACK, J., CONCURRING IN PART, WITH WHOM WILSON, J., 
JOINS AS TO PARTS I-III, AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCKENNA, J., IN WHICH  
POLLACK, J., JOINS EXCEPT AS TO PART V.C.1
  
I. Introduction 
These appeals were filed from a September 27, 2017 decision 
of the Board of Land and Natural Resources (“BLNR”) authorizing 
issuance of a Conservation District Use Permit for the Thirty 
Meter Telescope (“TMT”) near the summit of Mauna Kea.  
 
 
    
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
                     
1   The term “Native Hawaiian” refers to one “whose ancestors were natives 
of the Hawaiian Islands prior to 177 8, without regard to blood quantum,” 
while the term “native Hawaiian” refers to one with at least fifty percent 
Hawaiian ancestry. Melody Kapilialoha MacKenzie & D. Kapua ʻala Sproat, A 
Collective Memory of Injustice: Reclaiming Hawai ʻi’s Crown Lands Trus t in 
Response to Judge James S. Burns, 39 U.  HAW.  L.  REV.  481, 528 (2017).  See also   
JON M.  VAN DYKE,  WHO OWNS THE CROWN LANDS OF HAWAIʻI?  1 n.1 (2008) (using the term 
“Native Hawaiian” to “refer to all persons descended from the Polynesians who 
lived in the Hawaiian Islands when Captain James Cook arrived in 1778,” and distinguishing it from the term “native Hawaiian,” which is defined as a  
person with 50 percent or more Hawaiian blood in the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, ch. 42, sec. 201(a)(7), 42 Stat. 108 (1921)).  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 ** 
Appellant Native Hawaiian1 cultural practitioners believe 
that Mauna Kea, as a sacred manifestation of their ancestry, 
should be honored in its natural state and is desecrated by 
development of astronomy facilities near its summit.  In 
contrast, Appellees submit that telescope use is an allowed and 
appropriate use of the summit area, that various measures are 
being taken to reduce the impact of the TMT, and that Mauna Kea 
can also be honored through the advancement of scientific 
knowledge that TMT would provide. 
In this opinion, we address whether the BLNR properly 
applied the law in analyzing whether a permit should be issued 
for the TMT. Upon careful consideration of the written 
submissions, the applicable law, and the oral arguments, and for 
the reasons explained below, we now affirm the BLNR’s decision 
authorizing issuance of a Conservation District Use Permit 
(“CDUP”) for the TMT. 
2
  
 
 
   II. Factual and Procedural Background 
  A. The Mauna Kea Summit 
 
 Some Native Hawaiians, including some of the appellants, 
consider Mauna Kea, which rises to an elevation of 13,796 feet 
above sea level, to be an ancestor, a living family member and 
progenitor of Hawaiians, born of Wākea (Sky Fa ther) and Papa 
(Earth Mother). They consider the Mauna Kea summit area, also 
known as Kūkahauʻ ula (cluster of pu ʻu or cinder cones), to be a 
wahi pana (storied place) and wao akua (the place where gods 
reside), the realm of ancestral akua (gods, goddesses, deities) 
believed to take earthly form as the pu ʻu, the waters of Lake 
Waiau, and other significant landscape features.  The summit of 
Mauna Kea is thought to touch the sky in an unique and important 
way, as a piko (navel) by which connections to the ancestors are 
made known to them, or as the piko ho ʻokahi (the single navel), 
which ensures spiritual and genealogical connections, and the 
rights to the regenerative powers of all that is Hawai ʻi. The 
large number of shrines on Mauna Kea indicate that there was a 
pattern of pilgrimage, “a walk upward and backward in time to 
cosmological origins,” to worship the snow goddess Poliʻahu and 
other akua such as Kūkahau, Līlīnoe, and Waiau. As discussed 
later, various Native Hawaiian traditional and customary 
practices are derived from these beliefs, which have also led to 
related contemporary cultural practices.  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
3

  
 
 
  
  
  B. Development of Modern Astronomy on Mauna Kea Summit 
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
 The General Lease allows the University to use the MKSR as 
a scientific complex and   reserve.  The University began 
operating the first  observatory on Mauna Kea in 1968.    
Thereafter, the following additional astronomical observatories ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Before Western contact, the summit area was considered kapu 
(taboo) to all but the highest chiefs and priests, and 
unavailable to the general public. Archaeological research also 
indicates that from as early as 1100 A.D., and continuing 
through the 1700s up until the time of Western contact, Native 
Hawaiians mined extremely high quality, dense, blue-black basalt 
in a 4,800 acre adze quarry on the southern slopes of Mauna Kea 
concentrated between 11,500 and 12,400 square feet above sea 
level to produce tools to cut trees, shape canoes, and carve 
other smaller items. 
After statehood, in 1968, the BLNR entered into a General 
Lease with the University of Hawaiʻ i (“University”) for the Mauna 
Kea Science Reserve ( “MKSR”); the General Lease is scheduled to 
terminate on December 31, 2033. The MKSR totals 11,288 acres, consisting of a 10,763-acre cultural and natural preserve and a 
525-acre Astronomy Precinct, and includes almost all of the land 
on Mauna Kea above the 12,000-foot elevation, except for certain 
portions that lie within the Mauna Kea Ice Age Natural Area Reserve (“MKIANAR”). 
4
  
 
 
  Construction of these observatories and roads has had 
significant cumulative adverse impacts on cultural,  
                     
    
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
became operational in the summit region of  the MKSR:  the 
University 2.2-meter Telescope (1970  ), the United Kingdom 
Infrared Telescope (“UKIRT”)(1979)(now owned by the University), 
the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (operated by the 
University)(1979), the Canada-France-Hawaiʻ i Telescope (1979);  
(5) the California Institute of Technology (“ Caltech”)  
Submillimeter Observatory (“CSO”)(1986), the James Clerk Maxwell 
Telescope (“JCMT”)(1986)(now owned by the University), the Very 
Long Baseline Array (1992), the W. M. Keck Observatory, first 
phase (1992) and second phase  (1996), the Subaru Observatory 
(“Subaru”)(1999), the Gemini North Observatory (1999), and the  
Submillimeter Array (2002).  The 4.6 mile segment of Mauna Kea Access Road just past the Onizuka Center for International 
2 Astronomy (also known as  Hale Pōhaku),  located at the 9,200 foot 
level of Mauna Kea, is unpaved until just above 11,600 feet, 
where it then extends near to the summit and loops along the Pu ʻu 
Kea, Puʻ u Hauʻoki, and other pu ʻu to reach existing observatories 
through paved or unpaved driveways.  The roads have also 
increased access to the summit area of Mauna Kea for at least 
some Native Hawaiian cultural practitioners.   
The University also manages the Hale Pōhaku mid -level facilities and 
the Summit Access Road between Hale Pōhaku and the MKSR, including 400 yards 
on either side of the road, but excluding the MKIANAR . 
5
 2  
 
 
  In response to significant criticism raised in a 1998 
audit, the University ’s  Board of Regents ( “BOR”) adopted the 
MKSR Master Plan ( “Master Plan”) in 2000  , which updated   
management guidelines for the  areas of Mauna Kea managed by the 
University, including the MKSR.  The Master Plan established the 
Office of Mauna Kea Management (“OMKM”) , housed in the  
University of Hawai ʻi at Hilo (“UHH ”). The OMKM is advised by  
volunteer residents of the Big Island of the Mauna Kea 
Management Board and Kahu Kū Mauna ( Guardians of the Mountain)  
to effectuate the Master Plan’s goals of (1) protecting 
cultural, natural,  educational/scientific, and recreational 
resources; (2) preserving and  protecting the cultural and 
natural landscape; (3) preserving and managing  cultural 
resources and practices for future generations; (4) defining 
areas for use of cultural, natural and recreational resources; 
(5)  protecting the right to exercise traditional cultural ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
archaeological, and  historic resources in the MKSR.  The 
observatories have also had significant cumulative adverse  
impacts on geology, soils, and slope stability   in the MKSR 
because they significantly modified the preexisting  terrain, the 
tops of certain pu ʻu were flattened  to accommodate observatory 
foundations, and some materials removed from the pu ʻu were  pushed 
over their sides, creating steeper slopes more  susceptible to 
disturbance.    
6

  
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
 In 2003, Caltech and the University of California formed 
the TMT Corporation, a California non-profit public benefit 
corporation, for the purpose of fostering astronomy through building a thirty meter telescope.   In 2008, the TMT 
Corporation, in consultation with the University, began assessing the development of the TMT  in Area E, on the northwest 
slope of Mauna Kea, below the summit ridge.  This location was 
selected for a next generation large telescope (1) due to its 
significant distance from historical and cultural sites, 
including Kūkahauʻ ula and Lake Waiau, (2) to minimize visibility ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
practices; (6) allowing for sustainable, integrated planning and 
management; and (7) protecting and enhancing astronomy research. 
The Master Plan identifies five types of astronomy 
development and their locations within the 525-acre Astronomy 
Precinct area of the MKSR, described as Areas A through F, for 
redevelopment or expansion of existing observatory facilities. 
These locations include Area E, intended for development of a 
next generation large telescope, such as the TMT. 
After preparation of the Master Plan, a Comprehensive 
Management Plan was also finalized in April of 2009. Various 
sub-plans were also prepared, including a Cultural Resources 
Management Plan and a Decommissioning Plan for the 
decommissioning of existing telescopes.  
C. The TMT 
7
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 The TMT would be the first optical/infrared observatory  of 
its size to integrate adaptive optics, which corrects for image 
distortion caused by the atmosphere,  into its design.   The 
proposed TMT project actually consists of four components, the TMT observatory within Area E (“TMT Observatory”), an access way ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
from significant cultural areas on the summit and from Waimea, 
Honokaʻa and Hilo, (3) to reduce wind shear forces, (4) because 
it is not a good wēki u bug habitat, and (5) to minimize its 
potential to obscure astronomical observations by existing 
observatories.  On May 23, 2009, a draft Environmental Impact 
Statement (“EIS”) for the TMT was published; some of the Appellants submitted comments before issuance of the May 8, 2010 
Final EIS.    
TMT International Observatory, LLC ( “
TIO”) was formed on 
May 6, 2014 as a nonprofit organization comprised of 
the Regents of the University of California, Caltech, the 
National Institutes of Natural Sciences of Japan, the National Astronomical Observatories of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
the Department of Science and Technology of India, and the 
National Research Council of Canada, and succeeded TMT 
Corporation as owner of the TMT project. TIO was formed so that 
the voting power and telescope observing time could vary amongst 
its members proportionate to their respective contributions to 
the TMT Project. 
8
  
 
 
  The ground surface of the proposed TMT Observatory is 600 
feet below the summit ridge.  The proposed TMT Observatory  would 
have a total height of roughly 180 feet above that ground 
surface, with an exterior radius of 108 feet and a dome shutter 
102.5 feet in diameter.   
 Conservation District Use Application (“CDUA”) HA -3568 for 
the TMT was originally submitted on September 2, 2010.  The BLNR  
initially granted a CDUP on April 12, 2013.   In our December 2, 
2015 opinion in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 
136 Hawaiʻ i 376, 363 P.3d 224 (2015)  (“Mauna Kea I”), we vacated 
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit’s May 5, 2014 order 
affirming the BLNR’s issuance of th e first CDUP. We held that  
the  BLNR’s approval of a CDUP before conducting a contested case 
hearing violated the due process rights  of parties with standing 
to assert Native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights. 
Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawai ʻi at 390-91, 363 P.3d at 238-39.   We also ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
from the Mauna Kea Access Road (“Access Way”), upgrades to 
existing transformers at the electrical substation near Hale 
Pōhaku in the mid-level of Mauna Kea, and a headquarters in 
Hilo. With respect to construction of the TMT Observatory, the 
observatory dome, support building, and the area disturbed 
during construction would be about five acres (“the TMT 
Observatory site”). The issues on appeal in this case focus on 
the proposed TMT Observatory and Access Way.  
9
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
    
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
held that a state agency must perform its functions in a manner 
that fulfills the  State’s affirmative obligations under the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution.  Mauna Kea I,  136 Hawaiʻ i at 414, 363 P.3d 
at 262 (Pollack, J., concurring, in which Wilson, J., joined,  
and McKenna, J., joined as to Part IV). We therefore ordered a 
remand to the BLNR for a contested case hearing before the Board 
or a new hearing officer.   Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 399, 363 
P.3d at 247.    
On remand, the BLNR appointed 
a hearing officer, retired 
Third Circuit judge Riki May Amano (“Hearing Officer” or 
“Amano”), who conducted a contested case hearing over forty-four 
days, on the following dates in 2016 and 2017:  October 20, 24 -
27, and 31; November 2 and 15-16; December 1-2, 5-6, 8, 12-13, 
16, and 19- 20; January 3-5, 9-12, 19, 23-26, and 30-31; 
February 13-16, 21-23, and 27-28; and March 1-2. The Hearing 
Officer issued her “Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law, and Decision and Order” on July 26, 2017. 
After submission of exceptions to the proposed decision and 
responses to the exceptions and oral arguments, on September 27, 2017, the BLNR issued its 271-page Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law and Decision and Order (“BLNR Decision and Order”) 
containing 1070 Findings of Fact (“FOF” singular or “FOFs” 
10
  
 
 
    
 Five of seven board members, BLNR Chairperson Case and 
members James A. Gomes, Thomas H. Oi, Samuel “Ohu” Gon III, and 
Christopher Yuen signed the BLNR Decision and Order to indicate 
agreement.   Members Stanl ey H. Roehrig and Keith “Keone” Downing 
signed with the notation “I do not concur[.]”    
   
   
 
                     
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
plural) and 512 Conclusion s of Law (“COL” singular or “COLs” 
plural).3 
Pursuant to Act 48 of 2016,4 direct appeals were filed to 
5this court.
3 Due to the length of the BLNR Decision and Order, many of the specific 
FOFs, COLs, and CDUP conditions referenced in this opinion are not quoted.  
The entire BLNR Decision and Order is available on- line at  
https://perma.cc/H49Z -XN7B. 
4 Act 48 of 2016, effective August 1, 2016, added Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes 
§ 183C-9 to make final decisions and orders from contested cases concerning 
conservation districts directly appealable to this court. 2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48, §§ 2 & 14 at 76, 82. 
5   In SCOT- 17-0000777, the appellants are Petitioner s-Appellants Mauna Kea 
Anaina Hou (“MKAH”) and its President Kealoha Pisciotta, Clarence Kukauakahi 
Ching, Flores- Case ʻOhana, Deborah J. Ward, Paul K. Neves, and KAHEA: The 
Hawaiian Environmental Alliance (collectively the “MKAH Appellants”). The 
MKAH Appellants’ previous appeal resulted in our December 2, 2015 opinion in 
Mauna Kea I.  SCOT-17-0000811 was filed by Intervenor -Appellant Temple of 
Lono (“Appellant Temple of Lono” or “Temple”). SCOT -17-0000812 was filed by 
Intervenors- Appellants Mehana Kihoi, Joseph Kuali ʻi Camara, Leina ʻala 
Sleightholm, Kalikolehua Kanaele, Tiffnie Kakalia, Brannon Kamahana Kealoha, 
Cindy Freitas, William Freitas (“Kihoi Appellants”), and Intervenor -Appellant 
Harry Fergerstrom (“Appellant Fergerstrom”). The appellees are t he BLNR, the 
State of Hawaiʻ i Department of Land and Natural Resources (“DLNR”), the State 
of Hawaiʻ i (the “State”),  and Suzanne D. Case (“Case”), in her official 
capacity as Chair of the BLNR (usually collectively referred to as the 
“BLNR”), and the Unive rsity of Hawaiʻ i at Hilo (“UHH”). Intervenor s-appellees 
are TMT International Observatory, LLC (“TIO”) and Perpetuating Unique 
Educational Opportunities, Inc. (“PUEO”).   A fourth appeal, SCOT -17-0000705, 
filed on October 10, 2017, by Intervenor -Appellant Dwight J. Vicente, was 
dismissed on March 15, 2018 based on a failure to file an opening brief after 
notice was provided.   
11
  
 
 
  
 The great majority of the BLNR’s FOFs and COLs are not 
challenged on appeal. The points of error that are alleged on 
appeal by the various Appellants are categorized and summarized 
6as follows:  
  
 
    
   
    
   
 
    
   
      
   
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
    
   
    
   
   
    
     
    
   
 
                     
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
III. Points of Error on Appeal 
A.	 Disqualification Issues 
1.	 Whether the BLNR erred by refusing to disqualify Amano as the Hearing O fficer based 
on her family membership in the ʻImiloa 
Astronomy Center; 
2.	 Whether the BLNR erred by refusing to 
disqualify Deputy Attorneys General who had 
advised the BLNR in Mauna Kea I from continuing 
to advise the Hearing Officer and the BLNR in 
the contested case hearing after remand; 
3.	 Whether the BLNR erred by overruling objections 
to the participation of BLNR members Yuen and 
Gon in the contested case hearing after remand . 
B.	 Native Hawaiian Rights Issues 
1.	 Whether the BLNR fulfilled its duties under  
Article XII, Section 7 and Ka  Pa
ʻakai o  Ka ʻĀina 
v. Land Use Commission ;  
2.	 Whether the BLNR erred in concluding that the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution does not protect 
contemporary native Hawaiian cultural 
practices; 
3
.	 Whether the TMT Project violates religious exercise rights of Native Hawaiians protected 
by federal statutes ; 
4.	 Whether the Hearing Officer should have allowed briefing and a hearing on a motion to 
disqualify UHH as applicant based on its 
alleged hostility toward the traditional 
Hawaiian faith; 
Various appellants raise various issues on appeal, some which are 
duplicated by other appellants and some of which are asserted by only one appellant. Appellants raising the various issues are sometimes identified. 
12
 6  
 
 
   
   
    
   
 
    
   
    
    
   
 
  
 
     
     
      
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
     
  
   
    
   
 
   
   
    
     
   
 
   
     
    
     
     
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
5.	 Whether the Hearing Officer should have allowed 
briefing and a hearing on a motion to dismiss 
based on violation of the desecration statute 
of the Hawaiʻ i Penal Code ; 
6.  	Whether the Hearing Officer should have 
excluded challenges to the legal status of the 
State of Hawaiʻ i and its ownership of Mauna Kea 
as well as the existence of the Kingdom of Hawaiʻi. 
C.	 Public Trust and Land Use Issues 
1. Whether the TMT Project violates Article XI, 
Section 1 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution and 
public trust principles; 
2.	 Whether conditions of Hawai ʻi 
Administrative Rules (“HAR”) § 13-5- 30(c) 
(1994) for issuance of a CDUP were satisfied. 
D.	 Other Procedural Issues 
1.	 Whether the original CDUA should have been 
stricken and a new CDUA required ; 
2.	 What the nature of the proceeding was below, 
and whether there is an appropriate record on 
appeal; 
3.	 Whether TIO and PUEO should have been admitted 
as parties; 
4.	 Whether the Hearing Officer’s scheduling of 
presentations by the parties violated 
Appellants’ due process rights ; 
5.	 Whether the Hearing Officer improperly failed 
to issue final orders in a timely fashion ; 
6.	 Whether the Hearing Officer improperly failed to provide reasoned explanations for her 
orders; 
7.	 Whether the Hearing Officer improperly failed to provide required rulings and explanations 
for thousands of proposed findings of fact ; 
8. 	Whether the entire proceeding was not 
legitimate. 
13
  
 
 
   
 
 The standards for reviewing each of the points of error  
alleged on appeal are set out in Hawai  ʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”)  
§ 91–14(g) (2012 & Supp. 2016)  , “Judicial review of contested 
cases,” which provides as follows:   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
 
 Under HRS § 91 –14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable 
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding 
procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings 
of fact are reviewable under subsection (5); and an agency ’s 
exercise of discretion is reviewable under subsection (6).   Save 
Diamond Head Waters LLC v. Hans Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai ʻi 
16, 24–25, 211 P.3d 74, 82 –83 (2009) .  
  Pursuant to HRS § 91  –14(g), an agency’s conclusions of law 
are reviewed de novo.    United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, 
AFL–CIO v. Hanneman, 106 Hawaiʻ i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 
(2005).   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
IV. Standards of Review 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision 
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision and order 
if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been 
prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions, 
decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; (2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the 
agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of 
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
14  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
  V. Discussion of Points of Error on Appeal 
 
  A. Disqualification Issues 
 
 
 
  1. Whether the BLNR erred by refusing to disqualify 
Amano as the Hearing Officer based on her family membership in the ʻImiloa Astronom
y Center 
   
 
   a. Background 
 
 Appellants assert that the BLNR erred by refusing to 
disqualify Amano as the Hearing Officer based on her family 
membership in the ʻImiloa Astronomy Center (“ ʻImiloa”).   After 
our remand in Mauna Kea I, the BLNR delegated the conduct of the 
contested case hearing to a hearing officer, pursuant to HAR § 
13-1-32(b) (2009), and through the pro  curement process of HRS  §  
103D-304 (2012).   The BLNR appointed a committee of three, 
consisting of retired Hawai ʻi Supreme Court Associate Justice 
                     
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
An agency’s exercise of discretion will not be overturned 
unless arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by a clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. Paul’s Elec. Serv. Inc. v. 
Befitel, 104 Hawai ʻi 412, 417, 91 P.3d 494, 499 (2004) 
(citing HRS § 91–14(g)(6)). 
In the next section, we analyze each point of error based 
on the applicable standard of appellate review.
7 We provide 
additional factual and procedural background information as appropriate. 
Some points of error are addressed in footnotes. 
15
 7  
 
 
  
  
  
                     
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
James E. Duffy, Jr., Deputy Attorney General Stella Kam, and 
BLNR Member Christopher Yuen, to evaluate hearing officer 
applicants. The BLNR issued Minute Order No. 1, attaching 
Amano’s disclosure statement as Exhibit 1 and setting a deadline 
for any objections to her appointment. 
Appellants objected to Amano’s selection, citing Mauna Kea 
I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at  389, 363 P.3d at 237 (“[J]ustice can perform 
its high function in the best way only if it satisfies the appearance of justice.” (quoting Sifagaloa v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Emps. Ret. Sys., 74 Haw. 181, 189, 840 P.2d 367, 371 (1992)) (emphasis omitted).   They argued Amano could not be impartial 
because she was a dues paying member of ʻImiloa, which is a part 
of UHH. They pointed out that TIO is listed on the website as a 
corporate member of ʻImiloa, and that ʻImiloa had benefited and 
would benefit from the TMT  Project, as it was among the 
recipients of over $100,000 in contributions to outreach 
8 activities already made by TIO,  and, as stated in the Final EIS, 
the TMT Project “will work with . . . ʻImiloa to develop exhibits 
that reflect the nationally-recognize d natural resources” of the 
area.  
It is unclear how much ʻImiloa received of the over $100,000, but 
according to the Final EIS, these amounts were contributed from 2008 -10 and 
other recipients included the Akamai Intern program, the Waiākea High School 
Robotics program, the IfA Elementary School Robotics program, the Journey to 
the Universe program, Kona teachers’ workshops, a DOE mentoring program 
workshop, and intern employment. 
16
 8  
 
 
     
 
  
                     
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Amano then filed a supplemental disclosure stating she had 
been unaware that ʻImiloa was connected to UHH and that it had 
not crossed her mind that ʻImiloa  was or could be connected to 
the instant case. She further stated that her family membership 
to ʻImiloa had been active since April 2008 with annual dues of 
$85, and it was set to expire and would not be renewed.  She  
indicated she had visited ʻImiloa five to six times since 2008 
and had used the 10% restaurant and gift shop discount an 
average of three times per year. She also stated  that when she 
and her husband joined ʻImiloa, it seemed to them like a 
membership-based cultural organization like the Japanese 
Cultural Center of Hawai ʻi and the Bishop Museum on O ʻahu.  
Appellants filed supplemental objections additionally 
arguing that the membership reflected Amano’s personal and 
financial support of the astronomy mission of UHH, which 
includes development of the TMT Project.  Appellants asserted 
that, at minimum, an appearance of a conflict or an appearance 
of impropriety existed, requiring disqualification.9 
In Minute Order No. 4, the BLNR denied the objections, 
ruling that the membership does not confer a right to 
participate in ʻImiloa’s governance. The BLNR noted that in 
Appellants also argued below and on appeal standards governing an 
arbitrator’s duties of disclosure under HRS Chapter 658A, which do not apply 
and are not further discussed. 
17
 9  
 
 
                      
   
 
 Subject to the rule of necessity, a judge shall  
disqualify or recuse himself or herself in any proceeding 
in which the judge’s impartiality* might reasonably be 
questioned , including but not limited to the following 
circumstances:
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 10 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
accordance with Sussel  v. City & Cty. of Honolulu Civil Serv. 
Comm’n, 71 Haw. 101, 108, 784 P.2d 867, 871 (1989), 
administrative adjudicators are disqualified for an “appearance  
of impropriety,” which is similar to the standard for the 
disqualification of judges. The BLNR noted that Hawai ʻi Revised 
Code of Judicial Conduct (“HRCJC”) Rule 2.11(a)  (2014)  requires  
disqualification of a judge if “the judge’s impartiality might 
10 reasonably be questioned.”   The BLNR reasoned that even if 
HRCJC Rule 2.11(a)(2)(A) and (C) (2014) provide: 
. . . .
 
(2) The judge knows* that the judge, the judge’s spouse or 
domestic partner,* or a person within the third degree of 
relationship* to either of them, or the spouse or domestic 
partner* of such a person is: 
(A)
 a party to the proceeding, or an officer, 
director, general partner, managing member, or trustee of a 
party; 
. . . . 
(C) a person who has more than a de minimis* interest 
that could be substantially affected by the 
proceeding. . . . 
The starred terms are defined as follows: 
*“Impartiality” means “absence of bias or prejudice in 
favor of, or against, particular parties or c lasses of parties, 
as well as maintenance of an open mind in considering issues that 
come or may come before a judge. ” “Knows” means “actual 
knowledge of the fact in question. 
A person’s knowledge may be 
inferred from circumstances.” “Third degree of relationship” 
“includes the following persons related to the judge by blood or 
marriage: great -grandparent, grandparent, parent, uncle, aunt, 
brother, sister, child, grandchild, great -grandchild, nephew, and 
niece.” “De minimis” in the context of interests pertaining to 
disqualification of a judge, means “an insignificant interest 
that could not raise a reasonable question regarding the judge’s 
impartiality.” “Terminology,” HRCJC.  
18
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
                     
       ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
ʻImiloa was classified as a party based on its affiliation with 
UHH, the Hearing Officer’s family membership did not create the 
fiduciary or managerial relationship between an adjudicator and 
party precluded by HRCJC Rule 2.11(a)(2)(A).  The BLNR opined 
that no reasonable person would infer that the possible benefits 
from the membership would cause Amano not to be impartial.  The 
BLNR concluded that the membership was a “de minimis” interest 
under HRCJC Rule 2.11(a)(2)(C)11 that did not rise to the level 
of an “appearance of impropriety.” The BNLR characterized 
Amano’s membership as akin to a museum membership, not a 
membership in an advocacy group. 
The BLNR also concluded that the membership “does not  
remotely resemble the prejudgment found objectionable in . . . 
[Mauna Kea I]” where the BLNR had voted on the merits of the 
CDUA before holding the contested case hearing. It ruled that 
Amano’s membership did not show personal and financial support 
of the astronomy mission at UHH.   It also ruled that exposure to 
ʻImiloa’s exhibits about astronomy on Mauna Kea did not imply 
prejudgment, and  that the Hearing Officer’s entitlement to a 
“presumption of honesty and integrity” remained intact. The 
BLNR also accepted Amano’s representation and found that Amano 
See supra note 10. 
19
 11  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
did not know ʻ Imiloa was part of UHH or that it had any 
connection with the CDUA. 
The BLNR also discussed whether it should exercise its 
discretion to replace the Hearing Officer despite a lack of 
grounds for disqualification. It declined to do so because 
Amano had been selected as the most qualified applicant by the 
committee. 
Appellants filed a motion for reconsideration. Both UHH 
and TIO responded that the motion should be denied on the 
merits, but to preemptively eliminate any basis for further 
delays and appeals, they requested that an alternative hearing 
officer be appointed. The BLNR denied the motion, stating it would be nearly impossible to find a hearing officer who 
subjectively appears fair to every possible person interested in 
the TMT Project. The BLNR also noted that the Appellants had 
not objected to Amano’s disclosed involvement in mediating 
employment disputes involving UHH, which arguably demonstrated 
more substantive connections to UHH.  
Appellants later filed a renewed motion to disqualify, 
asserting Amano should be disqualified because Amano (1) had not 
ruled on Appellants’ motions to disqualify the BLNR’s and the 
Hearing Officer’s counsel and to strike the CDUA and /or for 
summary judgment, (2) allegedly disregarded cultural protocol in 
accessing Mauna Kea during the site visit, (3) was escorted to 
20
  
 
 
  The renewed motion was also denied by the BLNR.  With 
respect to the new arguments, the BLNR ruled: (1) the lack of a 
ruling on two motions, out of more than fifty filed by the 
parties, did not evidence an appearance of impropriety; (2) not 
following Appellants’ proposed site visit route also did not 
evidence an appearance of impropriety; (3) the presence of 
DOCARE officers did not evidence bias, as the officers protect 
the safety of everyone present; (4) Amano had been driven on the 
site visit by a DOCARE officer, not a UHH employee; (5) Amano’s 
connection with Henderson did not evidence bias, as her connection was limited to having attended law school with his 
wife, who was also a member of the Board of Governors of Maximum 
Legal Services Corporation, for which Amano served as Executive 
Director; and (6) there was no evidence of bias based on Amano’s 
setting of deadlines.  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the restroom by armed and uniformed DLNR Enforcement (“DOCARE”) 
officers who stood guard at hearings, showing her fear of the 
parties, (4) had allegedly ridden in a vehicle with a UHH 
employee for the site visit, (5) had a connection to Deputy 
Attorney General Harvey Henderson, and (6) did not require UHH 
to disclose witness statements, exhibits, and position 
statements before the Appellants’ deadlines.  
21

  
 
 
      
 On appeal, the parties repeat the  arguments they made 
below.   Preliminarily, Appellants’ additional argument, that 
UHH and TIO should be judicially estopped from arguing that  the  
BLNR did not err in denying disqualification, lacks merit.  The 
issue on appeal is whether Amano should have been disqualified. 
Judicial estoppel  prohibits parties from taking inconsistent 
positions. Lee v. Puamana Cmty. Ass’n , 109 Hawaiʻ i 561, 575 –76, 
128 P.3d 874, 888– 89 (2006).   UHH and TIO have consistently 
argued that there was no basis for disqualification;  thus, 
judicial estoppel does not apply.  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
b. Analysis 
Turning to the merits, we review the alleged due process 
violation de novo, but we are bound by relevant factual findings 
made by the BLNR unless they are clearly erroneous. The BLNR 
found that Amano did not know ʻImiloa was part of UHH or that it 
had any connection with the TMT application, that ʻImiloa 
membership is akin to a museum membership and is not a 
membership in an advocacy group, that the membership does not 
confer a right to participate in ʻImiloa’s governance, that the 
membership did not show personal and financial support of the 
astronomy mission at UHH, and that exposure to ʻImiloa’s exhibits 
about astronomy on Mauna Kea did not imply prejudgment.  These 
findings are not clearly erroneous. The BLNR also ruled that no 
reasonable person would infer that the possible benefits from 
22
  
 
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the membership would cause Amano not to be impartial.  These 
rulings of law are not wrong. 
With respect to the applicable law, the BLNR properly 
concluded that “an administrative adjudicato r should [not] be 
allowed to sit with impunity in a case where the circumstances 
fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and reasonably 
cast suspicion on [the adjudicator’s] impartiality.” Sussel, 71 
Haw. at 109, 784 P.2d at 871 (citation omitted), and that  
administrative adjudicators are held to the same standard as judges. The BLNR also concluded that, like judges, 
administrators serving as adjudicators are  presumed to be 
unbiased.   Sifagaloa, 74 Haw. at 192, 840 P.2d at 372,  and that  
this presumption is rebutted only by a showing of a 
disqualifying interest, either pecuniary or institutional, or 
both. See id.     
The BLNR applied the correct test for impropriety:  whether 
a reasonable person knowing all the facts would doubt the impartiality of Amano, or whether the circumstances would cause 
a reasonable person to question Amano’s impartiality. We agree 
that the circumstances of this case did  not rebut the 
presumption that Amano  would be capable of impartially 
performing her duties . Amano’s connection to ʻImiloa was too 
attenuated, as her connection was not shown to be anything other 
than a membership, no different than a membership of a member of 
23
  
 
 
    
   
     
   
   
  
 MKAH Appellants assert that the BLNR erred by denying their 
motion to disqualify Deputy Attorney s General Julie China and  
William Wynhoff (collectively “the DAGs”), who had represented 
the BLNR in the first appeal leading to Mauna Kea I.  Appellants 
argue these DAGs should have been disqualified based on   White v. 
Bd. of Educ., 54 Haw. 10, 501 P.2d 358 (1972).  They also assert  
the DAGs should have been disqualified because they conferred  
with UHH and TIO attorneys during the pendency of the appeal in ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the general public. The membership did not represent an unusual 
commitment to ʻ Imiloa, different from what any other member might 
have. Membership alone does not lead to a conclusion that a 
member supports a mission to build the TMT, even assuming that 
this is ʻ Imiloa’s mission.  No disqualifying interest was shown 
and the circumstances did not  fairly give rise to an appearance 
of impropriety and reasonably cast suspicion on her 
impartiality. For the reasons given by the BLNR, the bases for 
disqualification asserted in the renewed motion for 
reconsideration are also without merit.  Therefore, there was no 
error in the denial of the requests to disqualify the Hearing Officer.  
2.	 Whether the BLNR erred by refusing to disqualify 
Deputy Attorneys General who had advised the BLNR in 
Mauna Kea I from continuing to advise the Hearing 
Officer and the BLNR in the contested case hearing 
after remand. 
24
  
 
 
   
 
 In White, a public school teacher requested a hearing due 
to a proposal to terminate her employment.  54 Haw. at 11, 501 
P.2d at 360.  After the hearing officer had prepared proposed 
findings of fact and conclusions of law, the deputy attorney 
general who had represented the Superintendent of Education in 
the adversary hearing against the teacher advised the Board of 
Education as decision maker with respect to the hearing 
officer’s findings and conclusions . 54 Haw. at 16, 501 P.2d at 
363.  We held that a deputy attorney general who had acted as  
counsel for the Superintendent against the teacher in the 
adversary hearing should not have been consulted by the Board in 
its decision making capacity. Id.  
 White  is distinguishable.  With respect to the issues in 
this case, the DAGs  advised and represented the DLNR, BLNR, and 
the Hearing Officer in their adjudicative capacities and not as 
12 adversaries of the Appellants.   Appellants also assert  the DAGs 
should also have been disqualified because they conferred with 
counsel for UHH and TIO regarding the arrests and prosecution of 
                     
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Mauna Kea I regarding arrests and prosecution of individuals on 
Mauna Kea.  
25
 12   The Intermediate Court of Appeals  made a similar distinction in 
Kilakila ʻ O Haleakalā v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , No. CAAP- 13-3065, 2014 WL 
5326757 (App. Oct. 17, 2014)(mem.), in affirming the BLNR’s denial of 
Kilakila’s motion to disqualify the deputy attorney general who had represented the BLNR in an adjudicative capacity in both proceedings.  
Kilakila, mem. op. at 38 –39, 2014 WL 5326757, at *25.   
 
 
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
protesters on Mauna Kea. As argued by  the BLNR, however, it is  
the DAGs’ duty “to administer and render legal service s to . . . 
the State departments and offices as the governor may direct.”   
State v. Klattenhoff, 71 Hawaiʻ i 5 98, 602, 801 P.2d 548, 550 
(1990), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Walton, 133 
Hawaiʻi 66, 324 P.3d 876 (2014).  It is also their duty to  “give 
advice and counsel to the heads of departments . . . and other 
public officers, in all matters connected with their public 
duties, and otherwise aid and assist them in every way requisite 
to enable them to perf orm their duties faithfully.” HRS § 28-4 
(1993).   The DAGs had a duty to advise the BLNR with respect to 
legal issues regarding possible conferral of trespassing charges 
to county prosecutors.   These legal issues differ from the 
issues involved in this appeal as to whether a CDUP should have 
been granted.   
Therefore, even if the DAGs represented the BLNR in an 
adversarial position as to whether to confer trespassing charges 
to county prosecuto
rs regarding Mauna Kea protests, the 
adversarial representation was not with respect to whether a CDUP should have been authorized after the remand.  Indeed, as 
the BLNR points out, if the BLNR had determined that no CDUP 
should issue, the DAGs would have been responsible for defending 
that decision. 
26
  
 
 
  The DAGs have always been required to assist  the  BLNR in a 
manner to enable the Board to perform its duties faithfully.   
Their duty never changed, and they have consistently represented 
the interests of the BLNR.  This differs from White, in which 
the deputy attorney general first represented the 
Superintendent, then the BOE, who could have had differing 
interests.  
 For all of these reasons, the  BLNR did not err in denying 
Appellants’ motion to disqualify based on White.  
    
  
  3.	 Whether the BLNR erred by overruling objections to the 
participation of BLNR members Yuen and Gon in the 
contested case hearing after remand.   
 
 Appellants argue that  the BLNR  committed a due process 
violation by overruling their objections to the participation of 
BLNR members Christopher Yuen (“Yuen”) and Samuel Gon (“Gon”)  in 
the proceedings after remand.  Due process requires 
disqualification where “circumstances fairly give rise to an 
appearance of impropriety and reasonably cast suspicion on the 
adjudicator’s impartiality.” Kilakila ʻO Haleakalā v. Bd. of  
Land & Nat. Res.,  138 Hawaiʻ i 383,   425, 382 P.3d 195, 237 (2016) 
(“Kilakila III”)  (Pollack, J., dissenting) (citations  omitted).   
The test for prejudgment in an agency context is “whether a 
disinterested observer may conclude that (the agency) has in 
some measure adjudged the facts as well as the law . . . in 
advance of hearing the matter.” Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawai ʻi at 395, ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
27

  
 
 
     
 Soon after the Hearing Officer was  appointed, Appellants 
filed objections asserting Yuen should be  disqualified.  By 
Minute Order No. 9 dated June 3, 2016, the BLNR overruled these 
objections. On appeal, Appellants reassert their arguments 
below regarding Yuen’s participation.  Appellants point to a  
1998 interview of Yuen published online by environment-hawaii.org in which Yuen made statements regarding Mauna Kea, 
which Appellants characterize as “strong and favorable opinions 
and positions of future telescope development.” Specifically, 
Appellants take issue with the following statements made by Yuen 
during the interview:  
 For all the criticism and the auditors [sic] report —  
I just don’t see a lot of harm that’s been done to those 
resources [historic sites, archaeological sites, bug 
communities, cleanliness of the area, public safety issues, 
some culturally significant areas] by the astronomy 
facilities being put up there and with all this activity in the last 20 —25 years.  
 
 
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
363 P.3d 243 (citation omitted).  As noted earlier, 
administrative adjudicators are, however, entitled to a  
“presumption of honesty and integrity.” Sifagaloa, 74 Haw. at 
193, 840 P.2d at 372.     
a. Yuen’s participation 
. . . . 
The auditor’s report was critical. 
There wer e some 
delays. The big archaeological study was late, certainly 
the arthropod study was delayed. But if you try to 
identify what has gone wrong — has something been destroyed 
or lost? Again, apart from just the thing that you have all those domes sticki ng up there, it’s been done in a 
pretty responsible way. 
28
  
 
 
  There are people that don’t like having all those 
buildings up there —  which is a valid point of view, but 
the basic decision was made almost 20 years ago. And, 
honestly, I don’t see what differen ce it would make to have 
a few more telescopes up there as long as you site them properly. It doesn’t make a qualitative change in the mountaintop if you do that.  
  
 The MKAH Appellants focus on two lines to assert Yuen had 
prejudged the CDUA: “[H]onestly, I don’t see what difference it 
would make to have a few more telescopes up there as long as you 
site them properly. It doesn’t make a qualitative change in the 
mountaintop if you do that.”  
 Yuen’s comments , however, also contained criticism of 
telescope projects.  The quotation above contains his comments  
delays in completing studies.   He also criticized the manner in 
which the Subaru telescope had been constructed, which involved 
the grading out of puʻ u and potent ial destruction of bug 
habitats.  He also stated that Mauna Kea “is a very important, 
prominent place” and that individuals who “don’t like having all 
those buildings up there” had a “valid point of view.”   He 
opined that, unfortunately, the State had already irrevocably changed the landscape nearly twenty years ago when it first 
allowed telescopes.   He also stated that any future telescope 
project would need, at minimum,  to be “site[d] . . . properly,” 
meet the demands of good stewardship, and leave intact habitat and archaeological and cultural sites.    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
29

  
 
 
  Thus, Yuen’s comments, made in 1998, did not indicate he 
would approve all future telescope applications.  In the context 
of the entirety of Yuen’s comments, the BLNR did not err in 
ruling that the circumstances did  not fairly give rise to  an 
appearance of impropriety and did  not reasonably cast suspicion 
on Yuen’s impartiality. See  Kilakila III, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 425, 
382 P.3d at 237 (Pollack, J., dissenting).  
 
   
      
  
  
 
                     
 
 13    To the extent Appellants also argue a statutory basis for 
disqualification, Appellees correctly respond that Yuen was appointed to the 
BLNR pursuant to HRS § 171 -4(b) (1993 & Supp. 2005), which requires that  the  
BLNR have at least one member “with a background in conservation and natural 
resources.”  HRS § 84 -14 (1993 & Supp. 2012) then provides:  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Appellants also argue that Yuen should have been 
disqualified because he had bee
n a member of the panel that 
selected Amano and had voted on Appellants’ motions to 
disqualify her.  There is no due process violation based on 
this assertion.13 
Thus, Yuen’s disqualification was not required by due 
process, and the BLNR did not err by denying Appellants’ request to disqualify him. 
A person whose position on a board, commission, or 
committee is mandated by statute, resolution, or executive 
order to have particular qualifications shall only be 
prohibited  from taking official action that directly and 
specifically affects a business or undertaking in which the person has a substantial financial interest; provided that 
the substantial financial interest is related to the 
member’s particular qualifications.  
(Emphasis added). There was no allegation or evidence that Yuen has a substantial financial interest in the TMT Project.  
30
  
 
 
     
  
 
                     ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
b. Gon’s participation 
Appellants first objected to Gon’s participation during 
closing arguments  before the BLNR.  Appellants reiterate their 
argument below that Gon  
should have been disqualified because he 
had previously voted and signed off  on the original CDUP vacated 
by Mauna Kea I.  During their  appeal of the first CDUP, however, 
Appellants represented they were not seeking recusal of any 
member of the BLNR.   See  Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 398, 363 
P.3d at 246. In addition, Mauna Kea I  remanded the case for a 
second contested case hearing “before the Board or a new hearing 
officer,” not a new Board. Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 399, 363 
P.3d at 247.   Moreover, there is no legal authority requiring  a 
Board member to be disqualified because he had approved a 
decision that is later vacated and remanded. If such authority  
existed, no vacated decision could ever be remanded to the same 
14 board or lower court judge.   
Thus, Gon’s disqualification was not required by due 
process, and the BLNR did not err by denying Appellants’ request 
to disqualify him. 
31
 14   Like Yuen, Gon was appointed to the BLNR as a member with “particular 
qualifications,” in Gon’s case pursuant to HRS § 171 -4(c) (1993 & Supp. 2014) 
as a member “with demonstrated expertise in native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary practices.” Like Yuen, Gon is statutorily prohibited from taking 
official action only where it “directly and specifically affects a business or undertaking in which [he] has a substantial financial interest.” HRS § 
84-14(a).  See supra   note 13.  There is also no allegation or evidence that 
Gon has a substantial financial interest in the TMT Project.  
   
    
  1. Whether the BLNR fulfilled its duties under 
Article XII, Section 7 and Ka Paʻ akai o Ka ʻ Āina v. 
Land Use Commission  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
B. Native Hawaiian Rights Issues 
The protection of Native Hawaiian traditional and customary 
rights is enshrined in Article XII, section 7 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution, which provides as follows: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights, 
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, 
cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua ʻa 
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who 
inhabited the Hawaiian Island s prior to 1778, subject to 
the right of the State to regulate such rights. 
These rights of Native Hawaiians who inhabited the  Hawaiian 
Islands before 1778 are property interests protected by the due 
process clause of Article I, section 5 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution.   Flores v. Bd. of Land and Nat. Res., 143  Hawaiʻi 
114, 126, 424 P.3d  469, 481 (2018) (citing  Mauna Kea I, 136 
Hawaiʻi at 390, 363  P.3d at 238).  
In Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai ʻi Cty.   Planning 
Comm’n  (“PASH”), we reaffirmed the State’s obligation to 
protect the reasonable exercise of customary and traditionally exercised rights of Hawaiians to the extent feasible.   79 Hawaiʻ i 
425, 450 n.43, 903 P.2d 1246, 1271 n.43  (1995).   Then in Ka  
Paʻakai o Ka ʻ Āina v. Land Use Comm’ n, we set out an analytical 
framework “to help ensure the enforcement of traditional and 
customary Native Hawaiian rights while  reasonably accommodating 
competing private development interests. ” 94 Hawaiʻ i 31, 35, 7 
32

  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
P.3d 1068, 1072 (2000). We held that in order to fulfill its 
duty to preserve and protect customary and traditional Native 
Hawaiian rights to the extent feasible, as  required by Article 
XII, Section 7 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution, an administrative 
agency must, at minimum, make specific findings of fact and 
conclusions of law as to the following: (1) the identity and 
scope of valued cultural, historical, or natural resources  in 
the relevant area, including the extent to which traditional and  
customary Native Hawaiian rights are exercised in the area; (2) 
the extent to which those resources  -—  including traditional and 
customary Native Hawaiian rights  —- will be affected or impaired 
by the proposed action; and (3) the feasible action,  if any, to 
be taken by the agency  to reasonably protect Native Hawaiian 
rights if they are found to exist .   Ka Pa ʻakai, 94 Hawai ʻi at 47, 
7 P.3d at 1084. MKAH and Kihoi Appellants assert  that  the BLNR  
failed to meet these obligations.  
The Ka Pa ʻakai  analysis is designed to effectuate Article 
XII, Section 7 and protect rights traditionally and customarily exercised by Native Hawaiians for subsistence, cultural and 
religious purposes .   The first step of the analysis required the 
BLNR to make specific findings and conclusions about the identity and scope of valued cultural, historical, or natural 
resources in the relevant area,  including the extent to which 
traditional and customary Native Hawaiian rights are exercised 
33

  
 
 
   
  
 In summary, the BLNR found that  the majority of Native 
Hawaiian cultural practitioners on Mauna Kea conduct their 
practices at the summit of Mauna Kea (Pu ʻu Wēkiu), Lake Waiau, 
                     
   
   
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
in the area. The BLNR made numerous findings of fact and 
conclusions of law in this regard.15 
The issues on appeal relate to Native Hawaiian cultural 
resources, and we therefore focus our discussion on these 
issues. In addition to testimonial evidence, in reaching its 
findings, the BLNR had available numerous recent research 
studies, plans, and impact assessments documenting cultural 
resources on Mauna Kea, including Native Hawaiian traditional 
16 and customary practices.   
15 See FOFs 175- 225 regarding HAR § 13 -5-30(4) on pp. 219- 25, 531-567 on 
pp. 91 to 98 regarding biologic resources, 568 -675 on pp. 98 to 116 regarding 
archaeological and historic resources, FOFs 676 -839 on pp. 116- 55 regarding 
cultural resources and practices, FOFs 840 -860 on pp. 155- 58 regarding visual 
and aesthetic issues, FOFs 861 -888 on pp. 158 -63 regarding hydrology and 
water resources, and COLs 365- 437 on pp. 244 -54. 
16   The Kihoi Appellants allege in Point of Error B(2) that the BLNR 
erred by stating that Article XII, Section 7 does not protect 
contemporary Native Hawaiian cultural practices. The record reflects, 
however, that the BLNR appropriately took into account contemporary (as well as customary and traditional)  Native Hawaiian cultural practices, 
finding and concluding that none were taking place within the TMT Project site or its immediate vicinity, aside from the recent 
construction of ahu to protest the TMT Project itself, which was not 
found to be a reasonable exercise of cultural rights.  Further, 
although the BLNR defined the “relevant area” in its Ka Paʻakai  analysis 
as the TMT Observatory site and Access Way, the Board’s findings also 
identified and considered the effect of the project upon cultural 
practices in the vicinity of the “relevant area” and in other areas of 
Mauna Kea, including the summit region, as Ka Paʻ akai  requires. See 94  
Hawaiʻi at 49, 7 P.3d at 1086 (faulting the agency for failing to 
address “possible native Hawaiian rights or cultural  resources outside 
[the area at issue]”).  
 
34
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
    
 
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Puʻu Līlīnoe, or Kūkahau ʻula. Cultural practices at Mauna Kea 
include solstice and equinox observations on Puʻ u Wēkiu, burial 
blessings, depositing of piko (umbilical cord) near Lake Waiau 
as well as collection of its water for use in healing and ritual 
practices, the giving of offerings and prayers at the ahu lele 
(sacrificial altar or stand), behind the visitor center adjacent 
to Hale Pōhaku, monitoring or observing the adze quarry, or 
observing stars, constellations, and the heavens. 
The BLNR found no evidence, however, of Native Hawaiian 
cultural resources, including traditional and customary 
practices, within the TMT Observatory site area and the Access 
Way, which it characterized as the relevant area. There was no 
physical evidence that the TMT Observatory site was used for 
storing piko, iwi (bones of the dead), placenta or other 
artifacts. There was no evidence of ahu (shrine or altar), lele 
(sacrificial altar), or other historic properties therein. 
There was also no evidence of mele (song, anthem, or chant) or 
hula being performed in the area. After extensive surveying, no 
archaeological or historic sites or burials were found in any of 
the TMT Observatory site or Access Way areas. 
The BLNR also analyzed Native Hawaiian cultural resources 
in the vicinity of the TMT Observatory and the Access Way.  
Native Hawaiians had erected ahu in the general vicinity of the TMT Observatory site. The closest, consisting of a single 
35
  
 
 
   
 
  
    
 
  
  
  
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
upright stone and several support stones,  is 225 feet away, 
another is 1300 feet away, and a third is 1600 feet away.   The 
BLNR concluded that the two ahu  built on the Access Way in 2015 
as protests against the TMT did not constitute a traditional and 
customary right or practice, and in any event did not meet 
PASH’s requirement of reasonableness.   PASH, 79 Hawai  ʻi at 447, 
903 P.2d at 1268.   
The BLNR conducted a thorough analysis as required by the 
first step of the Ka Pa
ʻakai analysis . The BLNR found no Native 
Hawaiian cultural resources or traditional or customary 
practices within the TMT Observatory site and Access Way areas. 
It correctly concluded that the two ahu constructed on the TMT 
Access Way in 2015 as protests against TMT are not protected as 
Native Hawaiian traditional or customary rights. 
The second step of the Ka Paʻakai analysis required the BLNR 
to make findings regarding the extent to which cultural 
resources -— including traditional and customary Native Hawaiian 
rights -— will be affected or impaired by the proposed action.  The BLNR found that the TMT Project will not adversely impact 
cultural resources, whether in the relevant area of the TMT 
Observatory site and Access Way, or in other areas of Mauna Kea. 
If the three ahu in the vicinity of the TMT Observatory site are 
within the relevant area, the BLNR found that the TMT would not 
affect them. Also, if the summit is considered to be within the 
36
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
                     
   
 
   
   
   
 
 
 17 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
relevant area, the BLNR found that the TMT Observatory will not 
be visible from Lake Waiau, Pu ʻu Līlīno e, or Kūkahauʻ ula, which 
are culturally sensitive areas of the summit of Mauna Kea, and 
that the TMT would not impact the other cultural practices 
discussed above. The BLNR also found that since 2000, cultural 
and/or spiritual practices have been occurring while astronomy 
facilities have existed, and that those activities would not be 
prevented by the TMT Observatory, which would be located 600 
feet below the summit ridge. 
The third Ka  Paʻa kai  requirement  requires findings regarding 
the feasible action, if any, to be taken to reasonably protect 
Native Hawaiian rights if they are found to exist.  Native 
Hawaiian rights were not found to have been exercised in the 
relevant area, so the third requirement was not required to be 
addressed. In any event, the BLNR discussed measures that had 
been taken to avoid impact on  Native Hawaiian rights and 
17 practices in the Mauna Kea summit area  and imposed special 
18 conditions to avoid impacts on those practices.   
FOF 747 states: 
The University and TIO have established measures to avoid and 
minimize direct and indirect impacts on cultural practices, including but not limited to the following: 
(1) selecting a site off of the Kūkahau ʻula summit and away 
from known historic and traditional cultural properties and 
cultural resources; 
(2) selecting a site that minimizes the impact of the TMT 
Project on viewplanes; 
(continued. . .)  
37
  
 
 
      
   
  
    
                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
The MKAH Appellants also challenge the following two 
conditions imposed by the BLNR for issuance of the CDUP, 
alleging that they demonstrate that “preservation and protection 
of native Hawaiian rights are not being addressed before the 
land is reclassified,” as Ka Paʻakai requires, and that the BLNR 
(continued. . .) 
(3) complying with all applicable provisions of the CMP and 
sub-plans; 
(4) engaging in direct and regular consultation with Kahu 
Kū Mauna, with the broader Hawai ʻi Island community, and 
with cultural practitioners on various issues; 
(5) establishing an outreach office to engage with the 
larger community; (6) developing and implementing a Cultural and Natural 
Resources Training Program for all TMT staff and 
construction workers; and 
(7) minimizing TMT Observatory operations (up to 4 days per 
year) to accommodate cultural activities on culturally sensitive days of the year. 
Special Conditions 30, 34, and 36 provide as follows: 
30. Should historic remains such as artifacts, burials or concentration of charcoal be encountered during 
construction activities, work shall cease immediately in 
the vicinity of the find, and the find shall be protected 
from further damage. The contractor shall immediately 
contact the State Historic Preservation Division . . . 
which will assess the significance of the find and 
recommend an appropriate mitigation measure, if necessary; 
the Applicant will also notify the Office of Hawaiian 
Affairs at the same time; 
. . . . 
34. Daytime activities at TMT will be minimized on up to 
four days per year, as identified by Kahu Kū Mauna; 
. . . . 
36. UHH shall allow reasonable access to the area 
established under Condition 35 for the exercise of any 
native Hawaiian traditional and customary practices to the 
extent feasible, reasonable, and safe. The allocation of this area shall be in addition to all other cultural and 
access rights of native Hawaiians to other areas of Mauna 
Kea as provided by law or by other conditions set forth 
herein[.] 
38
  
 
 
   
  
 
 This  “improper delegation ”  argument stems from our holding   
in  Ka Pa ʻakai  that an agency cannot delegate its duties  to a  
developer. Ka Pa  ʻakai, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 50-51, 7 P.3d at 1087-88.  
Again, it was not necessary to address the third Ka Pa  ʻakai  
requirement. In addition, although at first blush conditions 35 
and 41 may appear to be delegations, they are not; they are  
outside and in addition to Ka Pa  ʻakai  requirements, and were 
imposed to ensure  that Native Hawaiian practices in the Mauna 
Kea area will continue to be protected.    
     
   
   
  2.	 Whether the TMT Project violates religious exercise 
rights of Native Hawaiians protected by federal 
statutes.   
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
improperly delegated its duty to protect and preserve Native 
Hawaiian rights: 
35. UHH shall consult with the Kahu Kū Mauna Council and 
cultural practitioners to the extent feasible to plan for, 
and establish, an appropriate area on Mauna Kea, within the MKSR, to be used by native Hawaiians for religious and 
cultural purposes; provided that this condition shall not 
affect the timing of TMT construction or operation.  
. . .. 
41. Kahu Kū  Mauna shall review policies concerning the 
construction and retention of personal or group shrines 
such as ʻ ahu, and recommend policies to OMKM and/or 
the BLNR 
as appropriate, within 18 months.  .  .  .  
Thus, the BLNR discharged its K
a Paʻakai duties. 
Kihoi Appellants assert that the BLNR erred by not 
addressing the substantial burden and impact the TMT would have 
on their rights under the Free Exercise Clause of the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution.  The BLNR Decision 
and Order, however, describes each of the Kihoi Appellants, then 
39
  
 
 
  
 
 Kihoi Appellants also cite to The Religious Freedom 
Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000b et seq. (“RFRA”) , which they 
allege requires application of a strict scrutiny standard when 
determining whether the Free Exercise Clause has been violated. 
In State v. Sunderland  , 115 Hawaiʻ i 396, 403, 168 P.3d 526, 533 
(2007), however, we “already [took] note of the fact that the 
United States Supreme Court, in [City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997)], invalidated RFRA insofa r as it ‘exceeded the 
enumerated powers of Congress and was, therefore, unconstitutional.’ . . . As a result, RFRA is inoperative as to 
the individual states.” Thus, RFRA applies only to the federal 
government, and does not apply to the TMT Project.   Sunderland, 
115 Hawaiʻ i at 403 n.9, 168 P.3d at 533 n.9.  
 Kihoi Appellants  also argue that the land use provisions of 
the “Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 
2000” (“RLUIPA”), 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000cc, et seq. , protect 
individuals, houses of worship, and other religious institutions 
from discrimination in zoning and landmarking laws.   Kihoi 
Appellants did not raise any argument under that statute during ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
addresses each of their testimonies, their witnesses, and 
arguments. The Kihoi Appellants also erroneously assert that 
the testimony of Appellant Kanaele was never addressed, as his 
testimony was addressed in BLNR Decision and Order FOFs 21, 250, 
794, and 886. 
40
  
 
 
   
    
   
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the contested case proceeding.  In any event, as held by the 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Navajo Nation v. U.S. Forest 
Serv., 535 F.3d 1058, 1077 (9th Cir. 2008),  RLUIPA “applies only 
to government land-use regulations of private land  –  such as 
zoning laws – not to the government’s management of its  own 
land.”  
Therefore, this point of 
error is without merit. 
3.	 Whether the Hearing Officer should have allowed 
briefing and a hearing on a motion to dismiss based 
on a request to disqualify UHH as applicant based on 
its alleged hostility toward the traditional Hawaiian faith. 
Appellant Temple of Lono alleges that the Hearing Officer 
failed to allow briefing and a hearing on its attempts to have 
UHH disqualified as the applicant for the CDUA based on 
statements UHH made in a pre-hearing memorandum.  The issue 
arises out of stat ements contained in UHH’s August 1, 2016 
memorandum in opposition to Appellant Temple of Lono’s motion before the Hearing Officer seeking summary judgment on two claims regarding its religious practices, that (1) “th e summit 
of Mauna a Wākea is a sacred site of special significance in the traditional Hawaiian faith” and that (2) “the traditional 
Hawaiian faith is still practiced.” 
The Temple’s opening brief does not quote the allegedly 
offending language, but asserts that it is in a section entitled 
41
  
 
 
      
   
   
   
    
   
   
   The Temple’s religious fundamentalism calls into play the  
tension between the establishment clause and the free exercise  
clause. The Temple wants full expansion of the free exercise  
clause regarding Mauna Kea. . . . In short, the Temple cannot  
use this proceeding to obtain a religious servitude over Mauna  
Kea, as part of advancing the Temple’s fundamentalist agenda.    
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                     
   
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
“Policy Considerations for Motion,” in which UHH included the 
following statements:  
The problem with fundamentalism in religion – any religion – is 
its intolerance and inability to compromise. Fundamentalist 
religion when confronted with a conflict between cooperation and conformity to doctrine invariably chooses the latter, regardless 
of the harm it brings to the society of which it is a part. The 
Temple wants a religious servitude over all of Mauna Kea, for the 
purpose of advancing its own religious agenda. 
Appellant Temple of Lono challenged this language as an ad 
hominem19 attack. The Hearing Officer denied various attempts to 
have UHH disqualified as the CDUA applicant based on this 
language in its memorandum. 
UHH argues that the offending language was not an attack on 
Appellant Temple of Lono, but rather was a response to the 
Temple’s argument that because Mauna Kea is viewed as sacred and 
is of special significance to its faith, the TMT Project could 
not be constructed there. UHH indicates that while it believes 
Mauna Kea could accommodate both the TMT Project and traditional 
Native Hawaiian religion, the Temple rejects that sharing of 
Mauna Kea. It asserts that the language in question argued that 
such an absolutist position amounted to seeking a religious 
Black’s Law Dictionary 48 (10 th ed. 2014) defines “ad hominem” as 
“[a]ppealing to personal prejudices rather than to reason; attacking an 
opponent’s character, esp. in lieu of a rational response to the opponent’s 
stand or statement. . . .” 
42
 19  
 
 
  
 
 
      
    
   
    
  4. Whether the Hearing Officer should have excluded 
challenges to the legal status of the State of Hawai ʻi 
and its ownership of Mauna Kea as well as the 
existence of the Kingdom of Hawai ʻi.  
 
 
  Appellant Fergerstrom asserts that the summit of Mauna Kea,  
as well as the ahupua ʻa of Kaʻ ohe in the District of Hāmākua are 
lands still held by the Hawaiian Kingdom. He alleges that the  
Hearing Officer wrongfully denied him his right to present 
expert testimony from Professor Williamson Chang of the 
University of Hawai ʻi William S. Richardson School of Law.  
Professor Chang proposed to testify  that the State of Hawai ʻi 
does not exist as a matter of United States Constitutional law 
                     
  
  
 
  
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
servitude over the mountain, which would itself run afoul of the 
establishment clauses of both the federal and state 
constitutions. 
Despite UHH’s reasoning , the tenor of the language in its 
memorandum was unnecessary. Neither the Hearing Officer nor the 
BLNR were required to disqualify UHH as the CDUA applicant based 
on this language, and this argument is without merit.20 
Appellant Temple of Lono also argued in Point of Error B(5) that the 
Hearing Officer should have allowed briefing and a hearing on a motion to 
dismiss based on violation of the desecration statute of the Hawai ʻi Penal 
Code, HRS § 711- 1107 (2014). The Hearing Officer considered the motion and 
properly denied it based on the grounds that:  (1) the agency lacked 
jurisdiction to adjudicate alleged violations of the Penal Code; and (2) the Temple failed to carry its summary judgment motion burden. Thus, this point 
of error is without merit. 
43
 20  
 
 
  
 The United States Supreme Court’s interpretations of the 
United States Constitution are, however, binding throughout the 
United States. As pointed out by Professor Jon M. Van Dyke in 
his book W HO  OWNS  THE  CROWN  LANDS  OF  HAWAIʻI, at page 212 note 86:  
 
 
 
  
                     ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
because annexation through a Joint Resolution of Congress rather 
than through a Treaty of Annexation was ineffective.21 
The U.S. Supreme Court gave tacit recognition to the 
legitimacy of the annexations of Texas and Hawai ʻi by joint 
resolution, when it said in De Lima v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 1, 
196 (1901), that “territory thus acquired [by conquest or 
treaty] is acquired as absolutely as if the annexation were 
made, as in the case of Texas and Hawaii, by an act of 
Congress.” See also   Texas v. White, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 700 
(1868), stating that Texas had been properly admitted as a 
state in the United States.  
In other words, like Hawai ʻi, Texas was also admitted as a state 
through a joint resolution of Congress.  The United States 
Supreme Court has thus indicated that the process by which 
Hawai‘i was incorporated into the United States was lawful and 
binding, and we are bound by this determination. In addition, 
as we stated in State v. Kaulia, “[W]e reaffirm that ‘[w]hatever 
may be said regarding the lawfulness’ of its origins, ‘the State 
of Hawaiʻ i . . . is now a lawful government.’”  128 Hawai ʻi 479, 
44
 21   For a historical perspective, see Congress’s Joint Resolution to  
Acknowledge the 100th Anniversary  of the January 17, 1893 Overthrow of the 
Kingdom of Hawaii signed into law by then  -President Bill Clinton on November 
23, 1993 as  Public Law No. 103 –150, 107 Stat. 1510 (1993), quoted in full in 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Housing and Community Development Corp. of 
Hawaii, 117 Hawaiʻ i 174, 183 -86, 177 P.3d 884, 893 -96 (2008).  For additional 
Native Hawaiian perspectives,  see  Volume 39, Number 2 (Summer 2017) of the 
University of Hawaiʻ i Law Review.   
 
 
  
 
  
  
    
    
  1. Whether TMT Project violates Article XI, Section 
1 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution and public 
trust principles.  
 
 
     
   
    
   
   
  
   
         
   
  
 In In re Water use Permit Applications, 94 Hawaiʻ i 97, 9 
P.3d 409 (2000)  (“Waiāhole I”), in ruling that under Article XI, 
Sections 1 and 7 and the sovereign reservation, water is a  
public trust resource, we  stated that “[w]e need not define the 
full extent of article XI, section 1’s reference to ‘all public 
resources’ at this juncture.” Waiāhole I , 94 Hawaiʻ i at 133, 9  
P.3d at 445.  Since then,  “[t]his court has never precisely 
demarcated the dimensions of the public trust doctrine as ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
487, 192 P.3d 377, 385 (2013) (citing State v. Fergerstrom, 106 
Hawaiʻi 43, 55, 101 P.3d 652, 664 (App. 2004)).     
The BLNR is bound by the United States Supreme Court’s and 
this court’s precedent s regarding the legal status of the State 
of Hawaiʻ i. Therefore, the Hearing Officer did not err by 
excluding the proposed evidence. 
C. Public Trust and Land Use Issues 
Article XI, Section 1   Hawaiʻi Constitution provides as 
follows:  
For the benefit of present and future generations, 
the State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and 
protect Hawaii ’s natural beauty and all natural resources, 
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and 
shall promote the development and utilization of these resources 
in a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance 
of the self -sufficiency of the State. 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State 
for the benefit of the people. 
45

  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
                     
   
 
  
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
incorporated in Article XI, Section 1. ” See Mauna Kea I, 136 
Hawaiʻi at 404, 363 P.3d at 252 (Pollack, J., concurring).  
The plain language of Article XI, Section 1 provides that 
all public natural resources, including land, are held in trust 
by the State for the benefit of the people. We therefore now 
hold that conservation district lands owned by the State,22 such 
as the lands in the summit area of Mauna Kea, are public 
resources held in trust for the benefit of the people pursuant 
to Article XI, Section 1.23 The plain language of Article XI, 
Section 1 further requires a balancing between the requirements of conservation and protection of public natural resources, on 
the one hand, and the development and utilization of these resources on the other in a manner consistent with their 
conservation.  We have also stated that the balancing must be 
“consistent with . . . conservation [ of these resources] and in 
furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State.” Waiāhole I, 
94 Hawaiʻ i at 139, 9 P.3d at 451. We have also stated Article 
XI, Section 1, requires the state both to “protect” natural resources and to promote their “use and development ,” consistent 
22 HRS § 183C- 2 (2011) provides that the “`[c]onservation district’ means 
those lands within the various counties of the State bounded by the 
conservation district line, as established under provisions of Act 187, 
Session Laws of Hawaii 1961, and Act 205, Session Laws of Hawaii 1963, or 
future amendments thereto.” 
23 Other types of public lands (and whether or how public trust principles 
should apply to such lands) are not before us at this time. 
46
  
 
 
                      
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 These other constitutional provisions and effectuating legislation are 
not at issue in this case, but they may play a part in defining public trust 
principles under Article XI, Section 1 with regard to conservation district lands owned by the State. Therefore, with respect to the Article XI, Section 
1 public trust as to conservation lands, we do not wholesale adopt our precedent setting out public trust principles as applied to the state water 
resources trust. See  Waiāhole I, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 133- 44, 9 P.3d at 445 -56, and 
its progeny. Rather the dimensions of this trust remain to be further 
demarcated.  
 24   We note that Appellants only assert a violation of public trust 
principles under Article XI, Section 1, and although Appellees raise 
arguments based on permissible uses of ceded lands pursuant to Section 5(f) 
of the Admission Act of 1959, Appellants have not alleged a violation of the 
ceded lands trust. Section 5(f) ceded lands trust purposes are “[1] the 
support of the public schools and [2] other public educational institutions, [3]  the betterment of the conditions of native Hawaiians ,  as defined in the 
Hawaiian Homes Commission  Act, 1920, as amended, [4] the development of farm 
and home ownership on as widespread a basis as possible for the making of public improvements, and [5] the provision of lands for public use. ” Office 
of Hawaiian Affairs v. State, 96 Hawaiʻ i 388, 390, 31 P.3d 901, 903 (2001).   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 ** 
with the conservation of the natural resources.   Id.   We have 
also indicated that any balancing between public and private 
purposes must begin with a presumption in favor of public use, 
access and enjoyment.  Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai ʻi at 142, 9 P.3d at 
24454.  
Ceded lands are also subject to Article XII, Section 4 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution, which provides that “[t]h e lands granted to the State of Hawaii 
by Section 5(b) of the Admission Act and pursuant to Article XVI, Section 7, 
of the State Constitution, excluding therefrom lands defined as ‘available 
lands’ by Section 203 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, shall be held by the State as a public trust for native Hawaiians and the 
general public.” Article XVI, Section 7 in turn provides that “[ a]ny trust 
provisions which the Congress shall impose, upon the admission of this State, 
in respect of the lands patented to the State by the United States or the 
proceeds and income therefrom, shall be complied with by appropriate 
legislation. 
Such legislation shall not diminish or limit the benefits of 
native Hawaiians under Section 4 of Article XII.” 
The BLNR also cites to Article X, Section 5 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution, 
which creates the University and gives it title to all real property conveyed 
to it, to “be held in public trust for its purposes, to be administered and 
disposed of as provided by law. ” 
47
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
                     
  
 
    
 
 
    
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
In our de novo determination of whether these requirements 
of Article XI, Section 1 have been met, we consider relevant 
findings in the BLNR Decision and Order.25 
With respect to the requirements of conservation and 
protection of public natural resources, the BLNR’s finding that 
the TMT Project will not cause substantial adverse impact to 
geologic sites is not challenged.  The TMT Project does not 
involve the irrevocable transfer of public land to a private 
party.  The TMT is to be decommissioned at the end of its 
anticipated 50 year useful life or at the end of the lease,26 
whichever comes first, pursuant to the Decommissioning Plan, and the land must then be restored. The BLNR also imposed as 
conditions of the CDUP various measures that will help protect 
the land in the area, such as requiring compliance with all laws 
as well as representations made regarding measures designed to 
reduce the negative impact of the project, requiring funding of 
the re-naturalization of the closed access road on Pu ʻu Poliʻahu, 
25 We do not address Justice Pollack’s suggested analytical framework for 
addressing whether an agency is in compliance with its public trust 
obligations because, as he states, the BLNR has fulfilled its public trust 
obligations in any event . See Section IV of the Opinion of Pollack, J., 
Concurring in Part and Concurring in Judgment . 
26 The current General Lease expires on December 31, 2033. 
48
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
                     
   
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
and permanent decommissioning of three telescopes as soon as 
possible and two additional telescopes by December 31, 2033.27 
With respect to the development and utilization of the land  
consistent with its  conservation and in furtherance of the self-
sufficiency of the State, with a presumption in favor of public  
use, access, and enjoyment, Appellants point out that in  
Waiāhole I, we  upheld the exercise of Native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary rights as a public trust purpose.  
Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai ʻi at 137, 9 P.3d at 449.  Appellants assert 
that the use by Native Hawaiians of the land proposed to be used 
for TMT is a public use while use by TMT users is a private use.   
As discussed earlier, however, there was no actual evidence 
of use of the TMT Observatory site and Access Way area by Native 
Hawaiian practitioners. 
Furthermore, in general, astronomy and 
Native Hawaiian uses on Mauna Kea have co-existed for many years 
and the TMT Project will not curtail or restrict Native Hawaiian 
uses.  In addition, the TMT is an advanced world-class telescope 
designed to investigate and answer some of the most fundamental 
questions regarding our universe, including the formation of stars and galaxies after the Big Bang and how the universe 
evolved to its present form. Native Hawaiians will also be 
included in other direct benefits from the TMT. Use of the land 
27 See the additional discussion in Section V(C)(2)(a) below regarding 
decommissioning, including funding for decommissioning. 
49
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 We therefore hold that the TMT comports with Article XI, 
Section 1 public trust principles  and that  the BLNR met its 
duties as trustee under the Article XI, Section 1 public land 
28 29 trust  through its Decision and Order.    
                     
   
 
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
by TMT will result in a substantial community benefits package, 
which has already provided over $2.5 million for grants and 
scholarships for STEM education benefitting Hawaiʻ i students.  
The package also includes an additional commitment to provide $1 
million annually for this program. The TMT Project will also 
result in a workforce pipeline program that will lead to a pool 
of local workers trained in science, engineering, and technical 
positions available for employment in well paid occupations. 
TIO will pay sublease rent to the University, the first 
telescope developer on Mauna Kea to do so, which will be used 
for the management of Mauna Kea through the Mauna Kea Special 
Management Fund, administered by OMKM. Thus, use of the land by TMT is consistent with conservation and in furtherance of the 
self-sufficiency of the State. 
We held in Mauna Kea I that an agency must perform its functions in a 
manner that fulfills the State’s affirmative obligations under the Hawai ʻi 
constitution. Mauna Kea I , 136 Hawaiʻ i at 414, 363 P.3d at 262 (Pollack, J., 
concurring, in which Wilson, J., joined, and McKenna, J., joined as to Part 
IV). In addition, “[t]he duties imposed upon the state are the duties of a 
trustee and not simply the duties of a good business manager.” Waiāhole I , 94 
Hawaiʻi at 143, 9 P.3d at 455 (citation omitted).  Therefore, in performing 
its duties, the role of an agency is not merely to be a passive actor or a 
neutral umpire, and its duties are not fulfilled simply by providing a level 
playing field for the parties. Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 414, 363 P.3d at 
(continued. . .) 
50
 28  
 
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                  
 
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
2.	 Whether the conditions of HAR § 13-5-30(c) for 
issuance of a CDUP were satisfied. 
Pursuant to HAR § 13-5-24(c)(4)  (1994), “astronomy 
facilities under a management plan approved simultaneously with 
the [Board] permit ” is a permissible land use in the resource 
subzone, within which the MKSR is situated.  Before granting a 
CDUP for any proposed land use, however,  the BLNR must consider 
the eight criteria of HAR § 13-5-30(c) in evaluating the merits  
of the specific proposed use.  HAR § 13-5-30(c) provides:  
(c) In evaluating the merits of a proposed land use, the 
department or board shall apply the following criteria: 
(1) The proposed land use is consistent with the purpose of the conservation district; 
(2) The proposed land use is consistent with the 
objectives of the subzone of the land on which the 
use will occur; 
(3) The proposed land use complies with provisions and guidelines contained in chapter 205A, HRS, 
entitled “Coastal Zone Management”, where applicable; 
(4) The proposed land use will not cause substantial 
adverse impact to existing natural resources within 
the surrounding area, community, or region; (5) The proposed land use, including buildings, 
structures, and facilities, shall be compatible with 
(continued. . .)
 262 (Pollack, J., concurring, in which Wilson, J., joined, and McKenna, J., 
joined as to Part IV.) 
29	   FOF 360 states that “TIO has already received substantial funds and 
will undertake additional fundraising efforts once a decision has been made as to the project approval.” Although the BLNR addressed funding of 
decommissioning after completion, it is unclear whether other than an 
agreement from TIO to perform, the BLNR has  adequately ensured that buildings 
or equipment will not be left behind and the areas used by TMT will be 
restored in the event full funding is not obtained for completion of 
construction or insufficient funds for decommissioning are available. Its 
duties as trustee require that it do so.   The BLNR has discretion under 
Special Condition 43 to impose “[o]ther terms and conditions” on the CDUP. Therefore, the BLNR should  ensure that the areas used by TMT will be re  stored  
to their natural state  s  at no cost to the State, whether through requiring an 
appropriate performance bond or through imposing funding and/or other requirements.   
51
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 HAR § 13-5-30(c) (4) prohibits a “proposed land use” if it 
will “cause substantial adverse impact to existing natural 
resources within the surrounding area, community, or region .” 
HAR §  13-5-2 (1994) defines “natural resources” to mean 
“resources such as plants, aquatic life and wildlife, cultural, historic, recreational, geologic, and archeological sites, ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the locality and surrounding areas, appropriate to 
the physical conditions and capabilities of the 
specific parcel or parcels; 
(6) The existing physical and environmental aspects 
of the land, such as natural beauty and open space 
characteristics, will be preserved or improved upon, whichever is applicable; 
(7) Subdivision of land will not be utilized to 
increase the intensity of land uses in the 
conservation district; and 
(8) The proposed land use will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, and 
welfare. 
The applicant shall have the  burden of demonstrating that a 
proposed land use is consistent with the above criteria.  
The BLNR made extensive FOFs and COLs regarding each of the 
eight criteria. See BLNR Decision and Order, pp. 77 to 189, FOF 
429-1040, pp. 213-37, COL 121-321.  Appellants generally allege 
that the BLNR’s findings in this regard are erroneous, but their 
generalized assertions relate only to subsections (4) through 
(6), as discussed below. 
a. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) 
52
  
 
 
  
 Similar to the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope ( “ATST”)  
atop Haleakalā, Kilakila  III, 138 Hawai ʻi at 402-05 , 382 P.3d at 
214-17, it is undisputed that even without the TMT, the 
                     ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
scenic areas, ecologically significant areas, watersheds, and 
30minerals.”
The BLNR concluded that the TMT Project will not cause 
substantial adverse impacts to existing natural resources within 
the surrounding area, community, or region.  Appellants  agree 
with the BLNR ’s conclusion that the cumulative effects of 
astronomical development and other uses in the summit area of 
Mauna Kea, even without the TMT, have already resulted in 
substantial, significant and adverse impacts, but challenge the 
BLNR’s conclusion  that, therefore, the impacts on natural 
resources within the Astronomy Precinct of the MKSR would be substantially the same even in the absence of the TMT Project.   
30   In Ka Paʻakai, we declined to define “cultural resources”  stating, 
“‘[c]ultural resources  ’ is a broad category, of which native Hawaiian rights 
is only one subset.  In other words, we do not suggest that the statutory 
term, ‘cultural resources ’  is synonymous with the constitutional term, 
customary and traditional native Hawaiian rights.” Ka  Paʻakai, 94 Hawai ʻi at 
47 n.27, 7 P.3d at 1084 n.27   .  Although not specifically asserted by 
Appellants as a point of error, the BLNR suggested in COL 203 that cultural 
practices are not cultural  resources protected  by HAR § 13-5- 30(c)(4), 
stating “[u]nder the definition of ‘Natural resource’ in HAR §  13-5-2, 
cultural, historical, and archaeological ‘sites’ are ‘natural resources’; but cultural practices  are not necessarily.” However, the DLNR had included 
Native Hawaiian “cultural practices” within its assessment of “natural resources,” despite the University’s incorrect position that “cultural 
practices” are not “natural resources.” In addition, the BLNR’s HAR  § 13-5-
30(c)(4) analysis contains numerous references to its assessment of the   
impact of the TMT Project on cultural practices.  See, e.g., COLs 198, 199, 
205-10, 212, and 215.  Therefore, any error in COL 203 is harmless.   
 
53
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 31 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
cumulative effect of astronomical development and other uses in  
the summit area of Mauna Kea have resulted in impacts that are 
substantial, significant and adverse.   We opined in Kilakila  
III, however, that  the  “BLNR does not have license to endlessly 
approve permits for construction in conservation districts, 
based purely on the rationale that every additional facility is 
purely incremental. It cannot be the case that the presence of 
one facility necessarily renders all additional facilities as an 
‘incremental’  additio n.”   Kilakila  III, 138 Hawai ʻi at 404, 382 
P.3d at 216.  
As discussed earlier, there was no evidence of use of the 
TMT Observatory site and Access Way area for Native Hawaiian 
cultural practices. The BLNR asserts that in determining 
whether the TMT Project would have a substantial adverse impact 
on natural resources within the broader 
surrounding area, 
community, or region, as prohibited by HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4), it properly considered a host of measures designed to address 
environmental and cultural impacts of the TMT Project.
31 These 
In its FOF 522, the BLNR listed a number of measures designed to reduce 
or offset the negative impact of the TMT project, including: (1) site 
selection and infrastructure design to lessen the visual, cultural and 
environmental impact; (2) TMT Access Way design to reduce impact; (3) implementing a cultural and natural resources training program; (4) 
developing educational exhibits; (5) restoring Pu ʻu Poliʻahu; (6)providing a 
sense of place within the TMT facilities; (7) providing financial 
contributions to support cultural programs; (8) implementing specific 
cultural and community outreach efforts; (9) implementing cultural observance 
days; (10) continuing consultation with the State Historic Preservation 
Division and Kahu Kū Mauna Council regarding protocols for the relocation of 
(continued. . .) 
54
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                  
 
 
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
measures included project level measures, as well as the 
University’s commitment to decommissioning the CSO, Hōkū Ke ʻa, 
and the UKIRT telescopes by the time TMT is operational.    
Appellants assert that these measures are insufficient and 
that, in any event, there is no commitment to restore the 
abandoned Poliʻ ahu Road and to decommission three telescopes. FOF 
344 indicates, however, that TIO committed to restore the closed 
access road on Puʻ u Poliʻahu in accordance with plans already 
approved by the DLNR. Also, the University committed to the 
decommissioning and restoration of the CSO, H ōkū Keʻa, and the 
UKIRT telescopes by the time TMT is operational. Moreover, 
Special Conditions 10 and 11 for the CDUP provide: 
10. The University will decommission three telescopes 
permanently, as soon as reasonably possible, and no new 
observatories will be constructed on those sites. This 
commitment will be legally binding on the University and 
shall be included in any lease renewal or extension 
proposed by the University for Mauna Kea; 
11. Notwithstanding any lease renewal or extension, 
consistent with the Decommissioning Plan, at least two 
additional facilities will be permanently decommissioned by 
December 31, 2033, including the Very Long Baseline Array antenna and at least one additional observatory.
32 
(continued. . .) 
the modern shrine (11) working with OMKM to develop and implement a wēkiu bug 
habitat restoration study (12) developing and implementing an invasive 
species prevention and control program; and (13) 
continuing consultations 
with cultural practitioners.    
Although Special Condition 11 lacks the language included in Special 
Condition 10 specifying that it is a legally binding commitment, we interpret it and the other conditions included in the BLNR’ s Decision and Order to be 
similarly binding. 
55
 32  
 
 
  With respect to the decommissioning commitment and 
requirement, the University owns four telescopes on Mauna Kea: 
UKIRT, JCMT, Hōkū Ke ʻa, and the University 2.2-meter Telescope. 
The University operates the University 2.2-meter Telescope and Hōkū Keʻ a; UKIRT and JCMT are operated by other organizations.  
CSO and Hōkū Keʻ a have already submitted their notices of intent 
to decommission.  The University has also committed to  
decommission UKIRT by the time TMT becomes operational. In 
addition, Special Condition 11 requires that the Very Long Baseline Array antenna and at least one additional observatory 
be decommissioned by December 31, 2033.   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
With respect to funding for decommissioning, 
in January 
2010, OMKM promulgated a Decommissioning Plan as a Sub-Plan of 
the Mauna Kea Comprehensive Management Plan. The 
Decommissioning Plan calls for all new telescopes and existing 
telescopes that renegotiate their subleases to develop 
decommissioning funding plans to provide assurances of funds to 
finance the removal of their facilities and restore sites when the time to decommission arrives. The CSO decommissioning will 
be performed under the Decommissioning Plan.  TIO has also 
committed to decommissioning the TMT under the Decommissioning 
Plan. Its funding plan calls for depositing a million dollars 
per year, with adjustments for inflation, commencing upon 
observatory operation for the 50-year useful life of the TMT.  
56
  
 
 
  
 Thus, contrary to Appellants’ assertion, there are 
commitments to restore the abandoned Poliʻ ahu Road  and to 
decommission three telescopes by the  time TMT is operational.  
There is also a requirement to decommission two additional 
telescopes by December 31, 2033, a commitment to not seek any 
additional telescope sites to replace the five telescopes that will be removed, and a plan for decommissioning other 
telescopes, including the TMT.  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
The University is responsible for funding and executing the 
decommissioning of its own facilities. Before the transfer of 
ownership of the UKIRT and JCMT facilities to itself, the 
University secured $2.5 million for each telescope from the 
United Kingdom to defray the anticipated costs of 
decommissioning those telescopes. 
It was appropriate for the BLNR to consider  these measures 
in its HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) analysis.   Kilakila III, 138 Hawai   ʻi 
at 404-05, 382 P.3d at 216-17; Morimoto v. Bd. of Land & Natural  
Res., 107 Hawaiʻ i  296, 303, 113 P.3d 172, 179 (2005).     
The BLNR also recognized that “[t]he incremental nature of 
a project’s impacts, standing alone, cannot endlessly justify 
development within an existing developed area[,]” but found 
that, “in this case, the TMT Project’s compliance with all 
applicable rules, regulations, and requirements, the Master 
Plan, CMP, sub-plans, and the TMT Management Plan, along with 
57
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the mitigation measures committed to in the TMT Final EIS, CDUA, 
and TMT Management Plan, demonstrate that the TMT Project will 
not cause substantial adverse impact to the existing natural 
resources within the surrounding area, community, or region 
under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4).” Because (1) the TMT will not cause 
substantial adverse impact to existing plants, aquatic life and wildlife, cultural, historic, and archaeological sites, 
minerals, recreational sites, geologic sites, scenic areas, 
ecologically significant areas, and watersheds, (2) mitigation 
measures of restoring the abandoned Poliʻ ahu Road and 
decommissioning five telescopes will be adopted, and (3) other 
measures to lessen the impacts of the TMT will be adopted, the BLNR did not clearly err in concluding that the TMT will not 
have a substantial adverse impact to existing natural resources 
within the surrounding area, community, or region, as prohibited 
by HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) . 
b. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5) 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5)  required the BLNR to evaluate whether 
“[t]he proposed land use, including buildings, structures, and 
facilities, [is] compatible with the locality and surrounding 
areas and  appropriate to the physical conditions and 
capabilities of the specific parcel or parcels .”   Appellants 
specifically challenge the BLNR’s conclusion that TMT is 
“compatible with the locality and surrou nding areas.”  
In this 
58

  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
case, the BLNR analyzed the TMT for purposes of HAR § 13-5-
30(c)(5) in the context of  the 525-acre Astronomy Precinct  of 
the MKSR.  In Kilakila   III, we affirmed the BLNR’s analysis of 
the ATST  project within the  Haleakalā High Altitude Observatory  
(“HO”) site, a single,  highly developed 18.166-acre area within 
a much larger conservation district.  Kilakila III, 138  Hawaiʻi 
at 405, 382 P.3d at 217.  Appellants argue that the area 
evaluated for impacts for the ATST on Haleakalā  differs 
significantly from the 525-acre Mauna Kea Astronomy Precinct, 
which encompasses an area including the summit and Northern 
Plateau areas of Mauna Kea.   
There do not appear to be any clear criteria as to how to 
determine what should constitute the a ppropriate “locality and 
surrounding areas.” Nonetheless, total deference to the BLNR’s 
decision regarding the area to be evaluated would allow many of the HAR § 13-5-30(c) criteria to be circumvented through 
strategic delineation, and there accordingly must be a sound and 
rational basis for defining the relevant locale. 
In this case, it is true that Astronomy Precinct is 525 
acres, and much larger than the site evaluated in Kilakila III.  
Under the MKSR Master Plan, however, astronomy development is 
restricted to a defined 150-acre portion of the 525-acre 
Astronomy Precinct. The issue raised by Appellants regarding 
HAR § 13-5-30(c) is whether “[t] he proposed land use . . . [is] 
59
  
 
 
         
 HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6)  (1994) provides: “The existing physical 
and environmental aspects of the land, such as natural beauty 
and open space characteristics, will be preserved or improved 
upon,  whichever is applicable[.]”  
 Appellants allege this requirement was not met.  The BLNR 
points out that, in Kilakila III, we  upheld the BLNR’s findings 
and conclusions with respect to § 13-5-30(c)(6) on the grounds that:  
   
     
   
     
    
    
   
      
    
    
   
     
   
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
compatible with the locality and surrounding areas . . . .”   The 
BLNR noted that the proposed location of the TMT Project is a half mile from the summit area, in proximity to the eleven other 
previously developed facilities for astronomy within the 
Astronomy Project.  Therefore, on these facts, we cannot say 
that the BLNR erred  in concluding that  the TMT Project is 
“compatible with the  locality and surrounding areas.”   
c. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6) 
BLNR noted that “[t]he ATST will not enhance the natural beauty 
or open space characteristics of the HO site. ” However, because 
“[t]he HO site contains various astronomy facilities, including 
support buildings, roads and parking lots[,] ” and “the proposed 
ATST is similar to existing facilities, ” BLNR concluded that 
“[t]he ATST will be consistent with and will preserve the 
existing physical and environmental aspects of 
the land. . . . ” Additionally, BLNR considered numerous 
mitigation commitments in the CDUA, which were designed to mitigate impacts on biological resources. . . . Therefore, 
similar to its analysis of HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4), BLNR articulated 
with “reasonable clarity ” why the ATST would preserve the 
existing physical and environmental aspects of the land. 
They cite to Kilakila III, 138 Hawai ʻi at 407, 382 P.3d at 219. 
60
  
 
 
  The BLNR cites to various measures, including the removal 
of telescopes from the summit ridge,  which will be taken to 
preserve the natural beauty and open space characteristics of 
the land. Furthermore, the University formally committed that 
this is the last new area of Mauna Kea where a telescope project 
would be sought. The BLNR’s findings with respect to HAR § 13-
5-30(c)(6) are not  clearly erroneous.   
  
 
  
  
   
  1.	 Whether the original CDUA should have been stricken 
and a new CDUA required.   
 
 
   
 
 The sections of the Hawaiʻ i Administrative Rules cited by 
the MKAH Appellants do not support their position. HAR § 13-5  -
31 (1994) does not explicitly state who may apply for a permit; 
rather, it require  s the signature of the landowner.  HAR § 13-5-
31(a)(5).  HAR § 13-5-31(b) then allows  “the State of Hawaii or 
government entity with management control over the parcel” to 
sign as landowner when the CDUA pertains to state or public ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Therefore, Appellants’ allegations based HA R § 13-5-30(c) 
are without merit. 
D.	 Other Procedural Issues 
MKAH Appellants argue the Hearing Officer erred when she 
denied their motion to 
strike the CDUA because TIO and TOC are 
different corporations. They assert the CDUA “should have been 
stricken and a new application submitted” because the CDUA had 
been brought by UHH on behalf of TOC, not on behalf of TIO.  
61
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
     
  
  
 
 
    
                     
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
land.  The rules do not require the CDUA applicant to submit a 
new application after a change in developers.33 
Appellants assert they were not given an opportunity to 
comment on the actual entity for which the CDUP was ultimately 
intended. Appellants had ample opportunity during the contested 
case hearing, however, to comment on TIO, challenge its 
participation by opposing its admission as a party, and cross-
examine its witnesses.  
Therefore, this point of error is without merit. 
2.	 What the nature of the proceeding was below, and 
whether there is an appropriate record on appeal. 
Appellant Temple of Lono asserts that the manner in which 
the proceedings were handled after remand makes it unclear 
whether this was a new contested case or a resumption of the 
prior contested case.  It argues that if the remand was treated 
as initiation of a new contested case, then the process had to 
provide some means for people to qualify as parties by 
requesting a contested case, such as a public hearing, citing to 
HAR § 13-1-29 (2009). It further asserts that after remand, the 
BLNR stated that the contested case was being “resumed” but also 
stated that “no chapter 92 public meeting was required to “start 
up” the contested case. It asserts that, after remand, the 
If a proposed project has changed significantly, however, it appears an 
amended application would be required to comport with due process 
requirements of adequate notice and an opportunity to be heard on the actual 
project. 
62
 33  
 
 
  Appellant Temple of Lono appears to misapprehend the 
difference between a “contested case” and a “contested case 
hearing.” “‘Contested case’ means a proceeding in which the 
legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are 
required by law to be determined after an opportunity for agency 
hearing.” HRS § 91 -1 (1993 & Supp. 2017) .  In Mauna Kea I, we 
vacated the judgment that followed the first contested case 
hearing and remanded the case for a new hearing  without 
dismissing the contested case itself. 136 Hawai ʻi at 399, 363 
P.3d at 247.  Thus, in the contested case hearing after remand, 
just as in a new trial after remand, a new record on appeal is 
created based on admitted evidence.  
 The Hearing Officer therefore appropriately  
included in the record on appeal filings from the contested case 
up until the point in time that the CDUA was originally 
approved. She then continued the proceeding from that point, 
with filings and evidence from the second contested case hearing. This point of error is therefore without merit.  
   
  3. Whether TIO and PUEO should have been admitted as 
parties.  
 
 MKAH Appellants, Appellant Temple of Lono, and Appellant 
Fergerstrom assert the Hearing Officer and the BLNR erred by  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
proceeding  “ended up as a h ybrid recognized nowhere in the 
rules.”  
63
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
admitting TIO and PUEO as parties to the contested case hearing 
after our remand in Mauna Kea I. They assert TIO and PUEO’s 
motions to intervene were not timely because they were filed 
after our remand, five and a half years after the February 25, 
2011 board meeting at which the BLNR approved the CDUA and 
ordered that a contested case hearing be held. 
As discussed in the previous section, we remanded for a new 
“contested case hearing,” and did not require initiation of a new “contested case.” Admitting interested parties to 
participate for the new contested case hearing on remand was consistent with the due process concerns of Mauna Kea I.  See 
id. Also, HAR § 13-1-31(a) (2009) requires the decision maker 
to determine the parties “within a reasonable t ime following the 
ten-day period following the board meeting.” The “board meeting” in question is “the board meeting at which the subject 
matter of the request is scheduled for board disposition” identified in HAR § 13-1-29 (2009), which, in this case, was the February 25, 2011 board meeting. 
HAR § 13-1-31(b) and (c) (2009), however, do not support 
Appellants’ assertion that TIO and PUEO’s applications were 
untimely. Subsection (b) gave the Hearing Officer authority to 
admit parties based “upon timely application.”  Subsection (c) 
gave the Hearing Officer discretion to admit parties “who can 
show a substantial interest in the matter” so long as “the 
64
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
  4.	 Whether the Hearing Officer’s scheduling of 
presentations by the parties violated Appellants’ due 
process rights.   
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
requestor’s participation [would] substantially assist the board 
in its decision making.” 
Although PUEO and TIO “were not admitted “at the ‘same 
time’ as the request for [the MKAH Appellants] on or about 
February 25, 2011 for a contested case hearing,” there was no 
abuse of discretion or other error. Although HAR § 13-1-31(d) (2009) states, “Al l persons with similar interests seeking to be 
admitted as parties shall be considered at the same time so far 
as possible[,]” it does not preclude a later addition of 
parties. 
Thus, the intervention of new parties after remand from 
this court was not erroneous.  
This issue arises out of an August 23, 2016 procedural 
ruling by the Hearing Officer requiring all parties to simultaneously submit witness lists, their witnesses’ written direct testimonies, exhibit lists, and exhibits, at a date to be 
set sometime in October 2016. Appellants argue that as the 
party seeking the CDUP, UHH had the burden of presenting a case 
sufficient to secure the BLNR’s approval of the CDUA, citing to 
HAR § 13-1-35(k) (2009), which provides: 
The party initiating the proceeding and, in the case of 
proceedings on alleged violations of law, the department, shall 
have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing 
65
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
evidence as well as the burden of persuasion.  The quantum of 
proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence.  
They assert that opponents have no burden of proof and should 
not have been required to put on their  case simultaneously with 
UHH. They further assert that requiring them to prepare their  
case without seeing UHH’s case violated their due process 
rights.   
The Hearing Officer has discretion t
o determine hearing 
procedures pursuant to HAR § 13-1-32(b) and (c) (2009), but it 
appears that there was an abuse of that discretion. As Appellants argue, UHH had the burden, and even if exhibit lists 
and exhibits were properly ordered to be simultaneously 
submitted, the opponents of granting a permit for construction 
of the TMT should not have been required to submit their 
testimonies simultaneously with UHH.  Despite the Hearing 
Officer’s initial deadline, however, Appellants were able to add 
new witnesses and exhibits throughout the evidentiary proceeding 
well past that deadline, and rebuttal witnesses were allowed 
upon a showing of good cause. Moreover, Appellants do not 
allege any actual prejudice due to the initial simultaneous 
submission requirement. Thus, Appellants were provided their 
due process right “to be heard at a meaningful time and in a 
66
  
 
 
  
  
    
    
   
 
 Appellant Temple of Lono asserts the Hearing Officer failed 
to comply with the requirement to provide a ruling on each of 
its proposed FOFs. It cites HRS § 91-12 (1993), which provides  
as below, with emphases added:  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 The Hearing Officer’ s Proposed Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order stated in the 
Introduction section:  
   
   
  
   
                     
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 34 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
meaningful manner[. ]” Sandy Beach Def. Fund v. City Council, 70 
Hawaiʻi 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989) (citations omitted).34 
5.	 Whether the Hearing Officer improperly failed to 
provide required rulings and explanations for 
thousands of proposed findings of fact. 
Decisions and orders.   Every decision and order adverse   
to a party to the proceeding, rendered by an agency in a    
contested case, shall be in writing or stated in the record and   
shall be accompanied by separate findings of fact and conclusions  
of law.   If any party to the proceeding has filed proposed    
findings of fact, the agency shall incorporate in its decision a    
ruling upon each proposed finding so presented.   The agency shall  
notify the parties to the proceeding by delivering or mailing a   
certified copy of the decision and order and accompanying    
findings and conclusions within a reasonable time to each party   
or to the party ’s attorney of record.  
Any proposed finding of fact submitted by the parties which is 
not specifically incorporated is rejected for one or more of the 
following reasons : 
In Point of Error D(5), Appellant Temple of Lono 
asserts there was 
often significant time between the filing of its motions and issuance of rulings on those motions, and asserts eighteen motions were not decided or 
decided late. Of the eighteen motions, all but one were filed after the July 
18, 2016 motions deadline, and the Hearing Officer eventually ruled on all 
motions. In Point of Error D(6), the Temple alleges that the Hearing Officer 
refused to provide “reasoned explanations” fo r her rulings. The record 
indicates that explanations were provided to the Temple for all of the 
rulings. Therefore, these points of error lack merit. 
67
  
 
 
     
   
   
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 Appellant Temple of Lono alleges that without specific 
rulings on each proposed finding, a party is left to first 
search out which proposed findings the Hearing Officer rejected. 
It asserts that the proposing party must engage in pure 
speculation as to which of the above possible reasons or 
combination of reasons a proposed finding had been rejected, and 
that this process does not provide a meaningful opportunity to 
file exceptions.  
 In Mitchell v. BWK Joint Venture, 57 Haw. 535, 540-43, 560 
P.2d 1292, 1296-97 (1977), we held  that HRS § 91-12 was not 
violated when a board rejected wholesale a number of  
proposed findings “for the reason that these findings of fact had been disapproved by the board or were repetitious of 
testimony which was already in evidence”. We also stated:  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
--They are repetitious or similar to the Hearing Officer’s own 
findings of fact or conclusions of law or decision and order, and/or 
-- They are not supported by reliable and/or probative evidence, 
and/or  
-- They are in whole or in part not supported by and/or are  
contrary to the facts or law, and/or  
-- They are immaterial, superfluous, and/or irrelevant to the
material facts, issues, and/or law of this case.   
The respondent offered 53 proposed findings, of which the Board  
accepted 20. It rejected the remaining proposed findings “because 
they are, in whole or in part, contrary to the facts or the law  
or because they are immaterial. ”   Such a statement indicated the  
Boardʼs ruling with respect to its adoption or rejection of all  
53 of the proposed findings, and we see no objection to  
including all 53 rulings in one sentence instead of 53 separate  
sentences .  
68
  
 
 
   
                     
   
 
 
  
 35 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Mitchell, 57 Haw. at 541-42, 560 P.2d at  1296-97(emphasis 
added).  In Application of Hawaiian Tel. Co., we also stated 
that “[i]t is a settled rule in administrative law that a 
separate ruling on each proposed finding filed by a party is not 
indispensable. . . . All that is required is that the agency 
incorporate its findings in its decision.”  54 Haw. 663, 668, 
513 P.2d 1376, 1379 (1973) (citation omitted). Also, the ICA 
ruled in Outdoor Circle v. Harold K.L. Castle Tr. Estate, that 
where an agency “made and incorporated reasonably clear 
findings” and “[b]y choosing those, it impliedly rejected all 
others,” the agency did not violate HRS § 91-12.   4 Haw. App. 
633, 645, 675 P.2d 784, 792 (1983). The ICA also ruled in  
Survivors of Timothy Freitas, Dec. v. Pac. Contractors Co., that 
HRS § 91-12 does not require “a separate ruling on each proposed 
finding”.   1 Haw. App. 77, 84, 613 P.2d 927, 932 (1980).   To the 
extent the Hearing Officer did not adopt the Temple of Lono’s proposed findings, they were impliedly rejected on the merits.  
Therefore, this point of error is also without merit.
35 
Finally, in Point of Error D(8), Appellant Temple of Lono asserts that 
because the new Hearing Officer knew that the BLNR had earlier approved the 
permit, there is a question of how the Hearing Officer “would be any less 
influenced by the premature approval of the permit than the hearing officer in the first proceeding.” In Mauna Kea I, however, we ordered that the 
permit issued in the first proceeding be vacated and the matter remanded to the BLNR “so that a contested case hearing can be conducted before [ the BLNR] 
or a new hearing officer, or for other proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.” Mauna Kea I, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 381, 399, 363 P.3d at 229, 247 . The 
Hearing Officer was therefore required to read the court’s opinion, which 
details the previous procedural history. If Appellant Temple of Lono’s 
(continued. . .) 
69
  
 
 
  
 Upon our careful review of the issues raised in these 
appeals as discussed above, we affirm  the BLNR’s September 27,  
2017, Decision and Order authorizing issuance of a CDUP  for the 
TMT.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
VI. Conclusion 
Richard Naiwieha Wurdeman   
for appellants  Mauna Kea Anaina Hou,    
Kealoha Pisciotta,      
Clarence Kukauakahi    
Ching, Flores-Case ʻOhana,   
Deborah J. Ward, Paul K.    
Neves, and Kahea:  
The Hawaiian Environmental  
Alliance  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti 
Gary Z. Zamber  
for intervenor-appellants  
Temple of Lono, Mehana   
Kihoi, Joseph Kuali ʻi Camara,  
Leinaʻala Sleight holm,  
Kalikolehua Kanaele,  
Tiffnie Kakalia, Brannon  
Kamahana Kealoha, Cindy   
Freitas, and William Freitas    
Intervenor-appellant  
Harry Fergerstrom, pro se,  
on the briefs  
(continued. . .)  
position was correct, there could never be a new contested hearing after  
remand if an agency or hearing officer was aware of the prior  ruling that had 
been set aside; decisions of judges are also sometimes vacated and remanded 
to them for further proceedings consistent with an appellate court’s 
decision. Thus, this point of error is also without merit.  
70
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Clyde J. Wadsworth  
(William J. Wynhoff,  Kimberly  
Tsumoto Guidry, Julie   China,   
and Kalikoʻ onalani D. Fernandes  
with him on the briefs)  
for appellees State of Hawai  ʻi,  
Board of Land and Natural   Resources,  
and Chairperson Suzanne D. Case   
John P. Manaut, Ian L.    
Sandison, Joyce W.Y.  
Tam-Sugiyama and Lindsay N.  
McAneeley for appellee   
University of Hawai ʻi at Hilo  
Ross T. Shinyama and 
J. Douglas 
Ing (Brian A. Kang and Summer H. 
Kaiawe with them on the briefs) for intervenor-appellee 
TMT International Observatory LLC 
Lincoln S.T. Ashida and Newton J. 
Chu (Vaughn G.T. Cook with them on 
the briefs) for intervenor-appellee Perpetuating Unique Educational Opportunities, Inc. 
71
 