**  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION OF THE GAS COMPANY, LLC
dba HAWAII GAS FOR APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASES AND 
REVISED RATE SCHEDULES AND RULES  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
(Agency Appeal) 
 
SCOT-19-0000044 
 
JUNE 9, 2020  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 1
 
I.  Introduction  
In this appeal, Life of the Land and Hui Aloha ʻĀina o Ka 
Lei Maile Aliʻi (“LOL” and “ KLM,” respectively, or sometimes 
 
1  Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 602 -10 (2016), titled 
“Full court; oral argument; substitute justices,” the parties before this 
court “shall be entitled to consideration by a full court.”  Further, under 
that statute, “Oral argument shall be before a full cour t. . . .”  “After 
oral argument of a case,” however, “if a vacancy arises or if for any other 
reason a justice is unable to continue on the case, the case may be decided 
or disposed of upon the concurrence of any three members of the court without 
filling the vacancy or the place of such justice.”  The full court 
(consisting of Chief Justice Recktenwald and Justices Nakayama, McKenna, 
Pollack, and Wilson) heard oral argument on this case on January 23, 2020.  
After oral argument, Justice Wilson recused hims elf.  Therefore, this case is 
hereby decided by Chief Justice Recktenwald and Justices Nakayama, McKenna, 
and Pollack.   Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCOT-19-0000044
09-JUN-2020
08:43 AM**  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
2 
 collectively “Appellants”) challenge whether the Public 
Utilities Commission (“PUC” ) fulfilled its statutory and 
constitutional obligations in reviewing an application for a 
rate increase submitted by Hawaiʻi Gas (“HG”).  HG sought to pass 
on to its customers the costs of its two recently established 
liquid natural gas (“LNG”) projects.  HG began importing LNG 
from the mainland to lessen its reliance on synthetic natural 
gas (“SNG”) manufactured in Hawaiʻi.  LNG displaces a portion of 
SNG in HG’s operations.  
Concerned about LNG’s effects on  climate change, as well as 
climate change’s impact upon native Hawaiians, LOL and KLM moved 
to intervene in HG’s rate case.  The PUC denied them intervenor 
status but allowed them to participate in the proceedings on a 
limited basis.  Specifically, LOL an d KLM were allowed to 
address only “ whether the [PUC] should disallow as unreasonable 
[HG’s] LNG costs due to the effects of [HG’s] use of imported 
LNG on the State’s reliance on fossil fuels2 and greenhouse gas 
emissions” (“GHG emissions”)3.  The PUC ex pressly considered the 
 
2  Under HRS § 243 -3.5 (2017), “fossil fuel” is defined as “a hydrocarbon 
deposit, such as coal, natural gas, or liquefied natural gas,  derived from 
the accumulated remains of ancient plants or animals and used for fuel; 
provided that the term specifically does not include petroleum product.”  
  
3  The regulations implementing HRS Chapter 342B  (2010) (titled “Air 
Pollution Control” ), contain the following definition of “Greenhouse gases”:  
“the air pollutant defined as the aggregate group of six greenhouse gases:  
carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, methane, hydrofluorocarbons, 
perflu[o]rocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride.”   Hawaii̒ Administrative Rules 
(“HAR”) § 11-60.1-1 (2014).  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
3 
  following issue to be “outside the scope of this rate 
proceeding”:  “The participants’ asserted interest in a clean 
and healthful environment beyond the State’s borders, given the 
Hawaii Constitution’s limited application and scope t o a clean 
and healthful environment within the State’s borders.”   
Ultimately, the PUC approved HG’s rate increase in Decision 
and Order No. 35969.  It adopted HG’s representation that the 
two LNG projects would decrease GHG emissions in -state.  LOL and 
KLM appeal, raising statutory and constitutional challenges to 
the PUC’s Decision and Order.  HG continues to challenge whether 
LOL and KLM have standing to bring this appeal.4    
In summary, the issues raised in this appeal, and this 
court’s resolution of each issue, as appropriate, are as 
follows:  
A.   Which standing test applies in this appeal, and 
whether the Appellants have standing under the applicable 
test. 
 
Resolution:  The two-part test for standing 
applies, in which the Appellants must show that 
they are “persons aggrieved” who “participated” 
in the contested case.  Appellants meet this 
test, because they demonstrated their members’ 
right to a clean and healthful environment was 
specially, personally and adversely affected  by 
the PUC’s Decision and O rder, and they were 
participants in HG’s contested case.  
 
 
4  HG had raised standing in an earlier motion to dismiss.   This court 
denied the motion to dismiss without prejudice to re -visiting the issue upon 
consideration of the merits of the appeal.    
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
4 
 B. Whether the PUC fulfilled its obligations under HRS  
§ 269-6(b) (2007 & Supp. 2011 ), which provides the 
following:  
 
The public utilities commission shall 
consider the need to reduce the State’s 
reliance on fossil fuels through energy 
efficiency and increased renewable energy 
generation in exercising its authority 
and duties under this chapter.  In making 
determinations of the reasonableness of 
the costs of utility system capital 
improveme nts and operations, the 
commission shall explicitly consider, 
quantitatively or qualitatively, the 
effect of the State’s reliance on fossil 
fuels on price volatility, export of 
funds for fuel imports, fuel supply 
reliability risk, and greenhouse gas 
emissions.  The commission may determine 
that short -term costs or direct costs 
that are higher than alternatives relying 
more heavily on fossil fuels are 
reasonable, considering the impacts 
resulting from the use of fossil fuels.  
 
Resolution:  The PUC did not ful fill its 
obligations under HRS § 269 -6(b) because its 
Decision and Order simply reiterated HG’s 
representations that its LNG projects would 
decrease GHG emissions.  Further, the PUC’s 
geographic limitation demonstrated that the PUC 
did not intend to consid er GHG emissions from 
production, development, and transportation of 
LNG occurring outside of the state.  Without 
that information, however, the PUC could not 
have explicitly considered the hidden and long -
term costs of the state’s reliance on fossil 
fuels.   
 
C.  Whether the PUC violated the Appellants’ due process 
rights by not affording the Appellants a meaningful 
opportunity to be heard concerning GHG emissions.  
 
Resolution:  The PUC violated the Appellants’ 
due process rights because the substantive 
limitations on their participation in this rate 
case rendered meaningless any opportunity to be 
heard on the GHG emissions issue.  
 
D.  Whether the PUC abused its discretion in developing a 
policy on measuring GHG emissions through adjudication 
rather than rul e-making. 
 
Resolution:  The PUC did not abuse its 
discretion in proceeding through adjudication **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
5 
 in this case.  The PUC did not attempt to 
bypass a rule, amended rule, or pending rule 
concerning how it should measure GHG emissions.  
Further, Appellants were not unduly burdened in 
this rate case proceeding.   
 
E. Whether the PUC fulfilled its affirmative 
constitutional obligation to protect native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary practices.  
 
Because the PUC improperly curtailed 
Appellants ’ substantive partic ipation, the 
record is not sufficiently developed for us to 
address this issue.  On remand, the PUC should 
consider its constitutional obligations.  
 
F. Whether the PUC fulfilled its affirmative 
constitutional obligation as trustee over natural resources 
within the State’s public trust.  
 
Again, because the PUC improperly curtailed 
Appellants ’ substantive participation, the 
record is not sufficiently developed for us to 
address this issue.  On remand, the PUC should 
consider its constitutional obligations.  
 
II.  Background  
A.  HG’s rate case application  
 In August 2017, HG filed an application with the PUC for 
approval to increase its existing gas utility rates and to 
revise certain rate schedules and rate rules.   This “rate case” 
was brought pursuant to HRS § 269 -16 (2007 & Supp. 2014 ), titled 
“Regulation of utility rates; ratemaking procedures.”  Under 
that statute, “All rates, fares, charges, classifications, 
schedules, rules, and practices made, charged, or observed by 
any public utility . . . shall be just and reasonable and shall 
be filed with the [PUC].”  HRS § 269 -16(a) (2007 & Supp. 2014 ).  
HG explained that it needed a total revenue increase of $14 .962 
million, “or 14.58% increase over revenue at present rates, in **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
6 
 order for HG to have the opportunity to recover its reasonably 
incurred expenses and earn its requested rate of return of 7.51% 
on its prudently incurred investments in utility property” since 
its last rate case in 2009.      
Relevant to this appeal, HG sought to include the co sts of 
two new LNG projects in its rate base:  the SNG Backup 
Enhancement Project and the 30% SNG Conversion Project.  HG 
explained that there is “no indigenous natural gas in Hawaii or 
access to natural gas distribution pipelines, which means that 
gas must either be synthetically manufactured or imported.”   HG 
stated that it manufactures its own SNG through a catalytic 
conversion process “utilizing a by -product of the oil refining 
process known as naphtha (i.e., SNG Feedstock).”   HG depends 
upon Par Hawaii  Refining, LLC to supply it with SNG Feedstock.   
HG explained that this imported oil product subjects gas rates 
to “meaningful price volatility.”   Therefore, HG had secured PUC 
approval to import LNG as a way to “diversify its fuel supply to 
reduce its dep endence on oil -based feedstock and local refinery 
infrastructure.”  
 The first of the two new LNG projects was the SNG Backup 
Enhancement Project.  It involved the purchase of close to one 
million dollars in equipment, including three LNG ISO 
containers, a trailer chassis, a trailer -mounted mobile re -
gasifier, and certain improvements to Pier 38, the location of **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
7 
 the backup system.   In 2014, the PUC issued an order that, inter 
alia, did not preclude HG from including these costs in its next 
rate case (PUC Doc ket No. 2013 -0184).     
 The second of the two new LNG projects was the 30% SNG 
Conversion Project, which uses imported LNG to displace 30% of 
HG’s SNG production.  The PUC previously approved the project in 
2016 (PUC Docket No. 2014 -0315).  HG estimated t he project cost 
to be $13.9 million for ISO containers, LNG regasification and 
injection equipment, relocation of a plant maintenance building, 
and the ISO container site.        
B.  PUC Order No. 35112 setting the rate case issues 
On December 18, 2017, via  Order No. 35112, the PUC 
identified the issues raised by HG in its Application.  All of 
the issues pertained to the economic reasonableness of the rate 
increase.   The only other party to this proceeding was the  
Consumer Advocate,  an ex officio party pursuant to HRS § 269 -51 
(2007 & Supp. 2014 ) (“The executive director of the division of 
consumer advocacy shall be the consumer advocate in hearings 
before the public utilities commission.  The consumer advocate 
shall represent, protect, and advance the i nterests of all 
consumers . . . of utility services. . . . The consumer advocate 
shall have full rights to participate as a party in interest in 
all proceedings before the public utilities commissions.”).  See **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
8 
  also HAR § 6-61-62(a) (1992) (“The consumer ad vocate is, ex 
officio, a party to any proceeding before the commission.”).  
C.  This court’s MECO opinion 
 Four days before the PUC set its procedural schedule in 
Order No. 35112, this court issued its opinion in In re 
Application of Maui Elec . Co., 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 408 P.3d 1 (201 7) 
(“MECO”).  In MECO, we held that there is a “protectable 
property interest” in the “right to a clean and healthful 
environment guaranteed by article XI, section 9 and defined by 
HRS Chapter 269,” which governs the PUC.  141 Hawaiʻi at 253, 
271, 408 P.3d at 5, 23.  We also examined the legislative 
history of HRS § 269 -6(b), as amended in 2011, which revealed 
the legislature’s intent “to require the [PUC] to consider the 
hidden and long -term costs of reliance on fossil fuels, wh ich 
subjects the State and its residents to ‘increased air 
pollution’ and ‘potentially harmful climate change due to the 
release of harmful greenhouse gases.’”  141 Hawaiʻi at 263, 408 
P.3d at 15.  We further held that “HRS § 269 -6(b)’s requirement 
to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and to consider greenhouse 
gas emissions applies to the fulfillment of all of the 
Commission’s duties.”  Id.   
 
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
9 
 D.   Motions to intervene  
 Weeks after the MECO opinion was filed, in January 2018, 
LOL and KLM5 each moved to intervene in this rate case.  LOL 
asserted it had an interest in the environment and in climate 
change.  KLM stated that it represented native Hawaiian 
interests.    
 HG opposed both LOL’s and KLM’s motions to intervene.   In 
both filings, HG  challenged whether LOL and KLM had standing, 
arguing that neither met the traditional three -prong test for 
standing ((1) injury in fact; (2) causation; and (3) 
redressability)).   Further, HG argued that the PUC had already 
approved the “current importatio n of LNG, as a displacement to 
[HG’s] existing oil -based naphtha fuel source,” in previous 
dockets, Docket No. 2013 -0184, the SNG Backup Enhancement 
Project, and Docket No. 2014 -0315, the 30% SNG Conversion 
Project.   HG noted LOL was granted participant st atus in th e 30% 
SNG Conversion Project and “had an opportunity to meaningfully 
advocate its position” then.   HG also argued that, if KLM wanted 
to oppose the HG’s importation of LNG, it should have done 
likewise.   HG concluded its oppositions stating it wa s not 
 
5  Another non-profit group, 350 Hawaiʻi, also moved to intervene.   350 
Hawaiʻi is not a party to the instant appeal.    
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
10 
 opposed to having the PUC grant LOL and KLM participant status 
in the proceedings.    
E.   PUC Order No. 35267 denying LOL’s and KLM’s motions to 
 intervene but granting LOL and KLM participant status 
 limited to sub-Issue No. 1h  
 
In February 2018, the PUC denied the Appellants’ motions to 
intervene; on its own motion, however, the PUC granted the 
Appellants participant status in this rate case.  In its Order 
No. 35267, t he PUC limited their participation to addressing 
only the foll owing issue, which the PUC added to the rate case 
proceeding as “ sub-Issue No. 1h”:  
1.  Whether HG’s proposed rate increase is reasonable, 
including, but not limited to:  
. . . . 
 h.  With respect to [HG’s] purchase and use of 
 imported [LNG] as part of its  gas utility operations, 
 HRS § 269 -6(b)’s  requirement that:  
 
  In making determinations of the reasonableness  
  of the costs of utility system capital   
  improvements and operations, the commission  
  shall explicitly consider, quantitatively or  
  qualitatively, the effect of the State’s   
  reliance on fossil fuels . . . and greenhouse  
  gas emissions.  The commission may determine  
  that short -term costs or direct costs that are  
  higher than alternatives relying more heavily  
  on fossil fuels ar e reasonable, considering the 
  impacts resulting from the use of fossil fuels.  
 
 In effect, whether the commission should disallow as 
 unreasonable [HG’s] LNG costs due to the effects 
 of [HG’s] use of imported LNG on the State’s 
 reliance on fossil fuels  and greenhouse gas 
 emissions.  
 
The PUC restricted LOL and KLM’s input on the GHG emissions 
issue as follows:  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
11 
 Concomitantly, issues outside the scope of this rate 
proceeding (Docket No. 2017 -0105) include, but are not 
necessarily limited to:  
 
The particip ants’ asserted interest  in a clean and 
healthful environment beyond the State’s borders, 
given the Hawaii Constitution’s limited application 
and scope to a clean and healthful environment within 
the State’s borders.  
 
Evidence of a causal connection betwe en greenhouse 
gas emissions and climate change.  
 
Instead, this commission, pursuant to HRS § 91 -10(4) 
(taking notice of judicially recognizable facts) and 
HAR § 6-61-48 (official notice of matters as may be 
judicially noticed by the courts of the State), takes 
official notice of:  
 
A.  Act 32, part I, Session Laws of Hawaii 
2017, by which the Legislature: (i) recognizes 
that “[c]ountless scientific studies have 
concluded that greenhouse gas emissions are a 
leading contributing factor to global 
warming[;]” and (ii) finds that climate change 
is “real.”  
 
B.  HRS chapter 342B, part VI, Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions, including HRS § 342B -71, which 
states: 
 
Statewide greenhouse emissions limit, adoption.   
A statewide greenhouse gas emissions limit to 
be achieve d by 2020 is hereby established that 
is equal to or below the level of the statewide 
greenhouse gas emissions in 1990, as determined 
by section 3 of Act 234, Session Laws of Hawaii 
2007; provided that for the purposes of this 
Act greenhouse gas emissions f rom airplanes 
shall not be included.  
HRS § 342B -71. 
 
Whether [HG’s] importation, purchase, and use of LNG 
should be banned or prohibited by federal or State 
law or by the commission.  
 
Whether fracking should be banned or prohibited by 
federal or State law or by the commission.  
 
Whether all new coal, oil, and gas projects, 
including “climate intense” projects, should be 
banned by federal or State law or by the commission.  
 
The PUC  rejected HG’s argument that LOL should be barred 
“from asserting a HRS § 269 -6(b) review under the specific **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
12 
 circumstances of the subject proceeding” simply because LOL did 
not participate in the SNG Backup Enhancement Project docket 
before the PUC, and partic ipated on a limited basis in the 30% 
SNG Conversion Project docket before the PUC.   Likewise, the PUC 
stated that KLM was not similarly barred from asserting an HRS  
§ 269-6(b) review in this case simply because KLM did not move 
to intervene or otherwise p articipate in the two prior LNG 
dockets.   The PUC explained that it read MECO’s standing 
requirement as “appl[ying] to whether an entity has the 
requisite standing to appeal,” not whether an entity has “met 
its burden of proving that it is entitled to inte rvene or 
participate in a [PUC] proceeding, pursuant to the applicable 
provisions of HAR §§ 6 -61-55 and 6 -61-56.”    
F.   LOL’s notice and the PUC Order No. 35346 addressing that  
notice 
 
 On March 5, 2018, LOL filed a “Notice” with the PUC, 
challenging Order No. 35627’s “exclusion of the entire section 
of Act 234 [of the 2007 Legislative Session] regarding the 
global nature of emissions.”   Act 234 established a “Greenhouse 
gas emissions reduction task force” and directed it to create a 
“work plan” that “shall include but is not limited to the 
following objectives: . . . . Recommendations to minimize 
‘leakage’ or a reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases within 
the State that is offset by an increase in emissions of **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
13 
  greenhouse gases outside the State. . . .”  Act 234, 2007 Haw. 
Sess. Laws, at 700.   LOL stated that the PUC should have also 
taken judicial notice of the global nature of emissions instead 
of limiting sub -Issue No.  1h to the Participants’ interest in “a 
clean and healthful environment within the State’s borders,” and 
not “beyond the State’s borders.”      
 In Order No. 35346, dated March 16, 2018, the PUC addressed 
LOL’s Notice.   It reaffirmed its limitation in sub -Issue No. 1h 
to a clean and healthful environment within, not beyond, th e 
State’s borders by citing to article XV, section 1 of the Hawaiʻi 
State Constitution, which is titled “Boundaries” and provides 
the following:  
The State of Hawaii shall consist of all the islands, 
together with their appurtenant reefs and territorial an d 
archipelagic waters, included in the Territory of Hawaii on 
the date of enactment of the Admission Act, except the 
atoll known as Palmyra Island, together with its 
appurtenant reefs and territorial waters; but this State 
shall not be deemed to include th e Midway Islands, Johnston 
Island, Sand Island (offshore from Johnston Island) or 
Kingman Reef, together with their appurtenant reefs and 
territorial waters.  
 
The PUC also cited to section 2 of the Admission Act, which 
similarly provides  as follows:   
The State of Hawaii shall consist of all the islands, 
together with their appurtenant reefs and territorial 
waters, included in the Territory of Hawaii on the date of 
enactment of this Act, except the atoll known as Palmyra 
Island, together with its appurtenant  reefs and territorial 
waters, but said State shall not be deemed to include the 
Midway Islands, Johnston Island, Sand Island (offshore from 
Johnston Island), or Kingman Reef, together with their 
appurtenant reefs and territorial waters.  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
14 
  G.  Joint information requests and HG’s responses  
 In February 2018, LOL and KLM6 filed joint information 
requests to HG seeking answers to 85 questions, the vast 
majority of which HG refused to answer.   Of importance to this 
appeal, LOL and KLM asked HG the following question, labeled  
JP-IR-49 (“information request 49”) :  “What [are]  the cumulative 
lifetime greenhouse gas emissions associated with each project 
seeking rate recovery in this instant docket[?]”   HG first 
objected to the question as being “vague, ambiguous, irrelevant 
and outside the scope of sub -Issue No.  1h.”  HG ultima tely 
answered the question, however, and represented that the LNG 
projects  would result in decreased GHG emissions as follows : 
Without waiving any right or objection thereto, HG states 
as follows with respect to the LNG -related p rojects:  
Currently for the 30% [SNG] Conversion Project, which 
displaces quantities of SNG with LNG, greenhouse gas 
emissions associated with the SNG Plant’s stationary 
equipment fuel use (reported to the EPA under Subpart C) 
would decrease  due to the amou nt of SNG displaced with LNG.  
In other words, greenhouse gas emissions associated with 
SNG production would decrease  because less SNG is produced.  
Greenhouse gas emissions associated with LNG sold to HG 
customers (reported to the EPA under Subpart NN) wo uld be 
nearly identical to displaced SNG because LNG is chemically 
similar to the SNG produced at the SNG Plant.  The life of 
the 30% [SNG] Conversion Project has not been determined.  
Currently for the [SNG] Backup Enhancement Project, a 
similar displacement principle would be applicable.  
However, because the amount of vaporized LNG injected into 
the transmissions pipeline will vary according to the 
number and length of SNG Plant shutdowns, the actual amount 
is difficult to quantify.  For every therm of vaporized LNG 
 
6  Another organization, Hawaiʻi 350, was also included in the joint 
filing, but it is not a party to the present appeal.  See supra, note 5.   **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
15 
 injected into the pipeline to back up the SNG Plant, the 
total amount of greenhouse gas emissions would decrease  due 
to the reduction in stationary equipment fuel necessary to 
create the displaced  SNG.  The life of the [SNG] Backup 
Enhancement Project has not been determined.  
 
H.  Joint participants’ testimony and exhibits 
 In March 2018, LOL and KLM jointly7 filed testimony and 
exhibits.  KLM highlighted the following impacts of climate 
change on  native Hawaiian cultural practices:   
(1) storms and rising sea levels will destroy navigation 
points for Hawaiian seafarers;  
 
(2) “forced migration of Polynesian communities [will] 
exacerbat[e] culture, identity, social welfare, and self -
determination ef forts”; 
 
(3) “rising temperature and ocean acidification [will] 
alter[] marine species distribution, impacting lawaiʻa, and 
their cultural knowledge and practices”;  
 
(4) “Papahānaumokuā kea Marine National Monument will lose 
nesting [and pupping] sites for Hawaiian Monk Seal[s], 
Green Turtle nesting areas and Laysan Finch habitat”;  
 
(5) “coastal erosion and rapid sea level rise . . . [will] 
threaten[] the cultural practice of burying  ̒iwi kupuna 
along Hawaiʻi’s shores, which prevents the ʻuhane from 
joining the ʻaumakua, interrupting the delicate balance 
between salt and fresh water in loko iʻa, flooding and loss 
of burial grounds, home sites, fishponds, historic trails, 
heiau, and petroglyphs, the loss of salt cultivation, beach 
erosion, and contamination of  crops and freshwater 
resources”;  
 
(6) “declining health of the forests, [including] ʻōhiʻa 
lehua losses from Rapid ʻŌhiʻa Death, ʻāhinahina  species on 
Mauna Loa, Mauna Kea and Haleakalā  under threat, avian 
malaria infected mosquito populations moving up mountains 
ruining [the] few remaining disease -free refuges for native 
birds”; and  
 
(7) “mountains are under attack [,] resulting in the loss of 
the snow season on Mauna Kea, the loss of th e home of 
Poliʻahu.” 
 
 
7  Another organization, Hawaiʻi 350, was also included in the joint 
filing, but it is not a party to the present appeal.  See supra, notes 5&6.   **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
16 
 KLM characterized climate change’s effect upon native Hawaiians 
as “another overthrow.”      
 LOL’s written testimony focused on two kinds of accounting 
methodologies by which GHG emissions can be measured.   The first 
is the “Productio n-Based GHGE Accounting System” (“PAS”), and 
the second is the “Customer -Based GHGE Accounting System” 
(“CAS”).   LOL testified that the PAS method determines “the 
greenhouse gas emissions at a power plant per BTU of power 
generated ,” while the CAS method d etermines “the embedded 
greenhouse gas emissions per BTU of power generated.”   In other 
words, CAS takes into account greenhouse gases produced not 
simply upon the use of fuel (as PAS does), but also greenhouse 
gases produced upon making the fuel itself.  LOL asserted HG’s 
“fuel has large, hidden emissions which distort the value of 
their fuel.”   LOL stated that the PUC had yet to adopt any 
particular accounting methodology for measuring GHG emissions.   
It urged the PUC to adopt the CAS methodology.   LOL also 
asserted that the “participants would expect that they would 
have due process rights to review any other proposed system 
before its adoption.”    
I.   Briefing on sub-Issue No. 1h  
 
 In June 2018, HG and the Consumer Advocate settled on a 
reasonable rate increase; therefore, the evidentiary hearing 
scheduled for that month was waived by the parties and **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
17 
 participants.   In lieu of an evidentiary hearing on the 
remaining sub -Issue No. 1h, HG and the participants  agreed to 
file opening and reply  briefs.8   
 In its opening brief, HG argued that the PUC should not 
disallow, as unreasonable, HG’s LNG costs “due to the effects of 
HG’s use of imported LNG on the State’s reliance on fossil fuels 
and greenhouse gas emissions,” because (1) the PUC “ha[d ] 
already determined that HG’s expenditures for LNG [we]re prudent 
and in the public interest in Docket Nos. 2014 -0315 [30% SNG 
Conversion Project] and 2013 -0184 [SNG Backup Enhancement 
Project]”; (2) HG’s response to information request 49  was that 
its LNG projects would decrease GHG emissions; and (3) LOL and 
KLM did not introduce any contrary evidence and, instead, 
offered only generalized statements regarding broad policy 
issues.  In their joint reply brief, LOL and KLM counter-argued 
that HG “presented  no data on life cycle emissions to 
substantiate [the] claim” that its two LNG projects would 
decrease GHG emissions, as it asserted in its response to 
information request 49.      
 In their joint opening brief, LOL and KLM cited MECO, 141 
Hawaiʻi 249, 408 P.3d 1, to hold the PUC to its statutory 
obligation under HRS § 269 -6(b) to consider the “hidden and long 
 
8  The Consumer Advocate, while a party, did not take a position on sub -
Issue No. 1h.     **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
18 
 term costs” of HG’s LNG projects.   To that end, they called on 
the PUC to adopt the CAS methodology for measuring “life  cycle” 
GHG emissions .  They noted, for example, that LNG fracked9 out-
of-state releases methane, which is “34 times stronger than 
[carbon dioxide] in trapping heat over a 100 -year period and 86 
times strong er over 20 years.”   LOL and KLM also urged the PUC 
to fulfill its obl igations under Hawaiʻi state constitutional 
provisions protecting (1) Hawaiʻi’s natural resources, which are 
held in public trust, (2) the right to a clean and healthful 
environment, and (3) native Hawaiian traditional and customary 
rights.  LOL and KLM accused HG of recklessly expanding LNG use 
in Hawaiʻi without providing clear information about its GHG 
emissions.   In its reply brief, HG pointed out that it did not 
seek to expand the use of LNG; rather, the LNG projects had 
already been approved, and HG s ought only to include those 
projects in its rate base.     
J.  PUC Decision and Order No. 35969  
 On December 21, 2018, the PUC handed down its Decision and 
Order No. 35969.   It approved HG and the Consumer Advocate’s 
stipulation upon settlement, granting HG an increase of 
$8,896,152, or approximately 8.39% over revenues at present 
rates . . . .”   The PUC specifically found that both the 30% SNG 
 
9  The record does not indicate where or how HG’s imported LNG is sourced.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
19 
 Conversion Project and the SNG B ackup Enhancement Project were 
“used and useful for public utilities purposes”  and granted as 
“reasonable” the stipulated cost recovery for both projects.   
The PUC specifically found and concluded, “The [S]NG Backup 
Enhancement System increases the reliabi lity of [HG’s] SNG 
operations in the event of planned and unplanned SNG Plant 
outages, to the customers’ benefit.”   It also appeared to adopt, 
in its specific findings and conclusions, a prior 
“articulat[ion]” that the 30% SNG Conversion Project would 
increase Hawaiʻi’s “fuel diversity” in two ways:  first, by 
diversifying the State’s fuel supply by adding LNG; and, second, 
by diversifying the State’s sources of fuel, because HG planned 
to purchase LNG from “two different suppliers through different 
ports in difference regions,” in the event one supplier were to 
become unavailable.    
 The PUC’s Decision and Order contains a separate section 
addressing sub -Issue No. 1h, titled “In Making Determinations of 
the Reasonableness of the Costs of Utility System Cap ital 
Improvements and Operations, the Commission Shall Explicitly 
Consider, Quantitatively or Qualitatively, the Effect of the 
State’s Reliance on Fossil Fuels on Price Volatility, Export of 
Funds for Fuel Imports, and Fuel Supply Reliability Risk, and 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” which tracks the language of HRS     
§ 269-6(b).  The commission stated that it “explicit[ly] **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
20 
 consider[ered], weigh[ed], and balanc[ed] . . . the four 
specified criteria ” before “find[ing] reasonable [HG’s] 2018 
Test Year LNG utilit y system capital improvements and operations 
costs.”  The PUC therefore “decline[d] to disallow [HG’s] 2018 
Test Year LNG costs.”   The PUC made “specific[] find[ings] and 
conclu[sions]” concerning the four specified criteria, grouping 
its analysis of “pric e volatility” and “fuel supply reliability 
risk” together, then addressing “export of funds for fuel 
imports,” and “greenhouse gas emissions.”   
 As to GHG emissions, the PUC appeared to adopt HG’s 
representation that the 30% SNG Conversion Project and SNG  
Backup Enhancement Project would result in decreased GHG 
emissions:  
A.  For the 30% [SNG] Conversion Project (i.e., Docket No. 
2014-0315), greenhouse gas emissions associated with the 
SNG Plant’s stationary equipment fuel use will decrease 
(i.e., reported  to the EPA under Subpart C), while 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with LNG sold to 
customers (i.e., reported to the EPA under Subpart NN) will 
be nearly identical to displaced SNG; and  
 
B.  For the [S]NG Backup Enhancement . . . Project (i.e., 
Docket No. 2013 -0184), a similar displacing SNG with LNG 
principle will apply.  
 
14.  As [HG] specifically explains:  
 
Currently for the 30% [SNG] Conversion Project, which 
displaces quantities of SNG with LNG, greenhouse gas 
emissions associated with the SN G Plant’s stationary 
equipment fuel use (reported to the EPA under Subpart C), 
would decrease  due to the amount of SNG displaced with LNG.  
In other words, greenhouse gas emissions associated with 
SNG production would decrease  because less SNG is produced.   
Greenhouse gas emissions associated with LNG sold to HG 
customers (reported to the EPA under Subpart NN) would be 
nearly identical to displaced SNG because LNG is chemically **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
21 
 similar to the SNG produced at the SNG Plant.  The life of 
the 30% [SNG] Conversion Project has not been determined.  
 
Currently for the [SNG] Backup Enhancement Project, a 
similar displacement principle would be applicable.  
However, because the amount of vaporized LNG injected into 
the transmissions pipeline will v ary according to th e 
number and length of SNG Plant shutdowns, the actual amount 
is difficult to quantify.  For every therm of vaporized LNG 
injected into the pipeline to back up the SNG Plant, the 
total amount of greenhouse gas emissions would decrease  due 
to the reduction in stationary equipment fuel necessary to 
create the displaced SNG.  The life of the [SNG] Backup 
Enhancement Project has not been determined.  
  
 The PUC then found and concluded, “Participants have not 
produced any credible eviden ce:  (A) which contradicts [HG’s] 
evidence; or (B) that [HG’s] use of LNG as part of its utility 
operations will increase greenhouse gas emissions.”   The PUC 
continued, “Instead, Participants rely on general assertions, 
without credible evidentiary support , that [HG’s] use of 
imported LNG will increase greenhouse gas emissions.”    
 The PUC included a separate section in its Decision and 
Order titled “Commission’s Response to the Legal Arguments 
Raised.”   The PUC first concluded that “HRS § 269 -6(b), by its 
plain language, does not mandate the [PUC’s] adoption of the 
Customer -Based GHGE Accounting System (i.e. CAS) described by 
[LOL and KLM] .”  Next, with respect to the Hawaiʻi State 
Constitution’s rights t o due process and to a clean and 
healthful environment, the PUC expressly acknowledged MECO’s 
holding that “HRS Chapter 269 is a law relating to environmental 
quality that defines the right to a clean and healthful **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
22 
 environment under article XI, section 9 o f the Hawaii 
Constitution, by providing that express consideration be given 
to reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the [PUC’s] decision -
making (specifically citing to HRS § 269 -6(b)). . . .”  The PUC 
also acknowledged MECO’s due process holding that a cle an and 
healthful environment is a protected property interest, and that 
the PUC has “authority to set limitations in conducting the 
proceedings so long as the procedures sufficiently afford an 
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningfu l 
manner on the issue of [a utility’s proposed] impact on the 
asserted property interest.”   The PUC then concluded that LOL 
and KLM were afforded an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful 
time and in a reasonable manner on sub -Issue No. 1h, due to 
their extensive participation in the rate case proceedings.   LOL 
and KLM timely appealed the PUC’s Decision and Order.  
III.  Standards of review 
A.  Agency appeals 
 This court reviews appeals from PUC decisions under HRS    
§ 91-14(g), which states the following:  
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;  
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of 
the agency;  
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
23 
 (4) Affected by other error of law;  
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, 
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or  
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of 
direction or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.  
 
 Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, pursuant to 
subsections (1), (2) and (4); questions regarding procedural 
defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact 
(FOF) are reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard, 
pursuant to subsection (5) ; and an agency’s exercise of 
discretion is reviewed under the arbitrary and capricious 
standard, pursuant to subsection (6).  Matter of Haw . Elec. 
Light Co. , 145 Hawaiʻi 1, 10-11, 445 P.3d 673, 682 -83 (2019) 
(“HELCO”) (citation omitted).  “Mixed questions of law and fact 
are ‘“reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the 
conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the 
particular case.”’”  HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi at 11, 445 P.3d at 683.  
(citation omitted).  
B.  Statutory interpretation  
We review the circuit court’s interpretation of a 
statute de novo.  State v. Pacheco , 96 Hawaiʻi 83, 94, 26 P.3d 
572, 583 (2001) .  Our statutory construction is guided by 
established rules:  
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention o f the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  And we must read 
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and 
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
24 
 96 Hawaiʻi at 94, 26  P.3d at 583 (citations omitted).   
C.  Constitutional law 
 Questions of constitutional law are reviewed de novo, under 
the right/wrong standard.  Blair v. Harris , 98 Hawaiʻi 176, 178, 
45 P.3d 798, 800 (2002).  
D.  Agency rule-making    
 An agency possesses broad discretion to proceed by general 
rule-making or by adjudication.  Application of Hawaiian Elec. 
Co., 81 Hawaiʻi 459, 467, 918 P.2d 561, 569 (1996).  This court 
reviews for an abuse of discretion an agency’s decision to 
proceed by adjudication rather than by rule -making.  
IV.  Discussion   
A.   LOL and KLM have standing to appeal the PUC’s decision and 
order. 
 
 HG once again argues LOL and KLM lack standing to bring 
this appeal, contending they do not satisfy the traditional 
three-prong test for standing used in MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 408 
P.3d 1:  (1) injury in fact, (2) causation, and (3) 
redressability.   LOL and KLM counter-argue that the app licable 
test for standing in administrative appeals is the two -prong 
test used in HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi 1, 445 P.3d 673:  (1) “one must 
be a person aggrieved . . . by a final decision and order in a 
contested case, ” and (2) “the aggrieved person must have **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
25 
 participated in the contested case from which the decision 
affecting him resulted.”   
 The two-prong test for standing applies.  MECO applied the 
traditional three -prong standing test on appeal because the 
appellants there challenged a PUC order denying them intervenor 
or participant status in the first instance.  141 Hawaiʻi at 256, 
408 P.3d at 8.  In this case, HG did not appeal the PUC’s order 
granting LOL and KLM participant status.  Rather, this is an 
appeal brought by LOL and KLM, who participated in the contested 
rate case and are aggrieved by the PUC’s final decision and 
order.  They are bringing an administrative appeal.  Therefore, 
we apply the well -established two -prong standing test, most 
recently re -affirmed in HELCO, for intervenors or participants 
who are appealing final decisions and orders of the PUC.  See 
also Life of the Land , Inc. v. Land Use Comm’n , 61 Haw. 3, 6, 
594 P.2d 1079, 1081 (1979) (holding there are “two basic 
requirements” for standing to appeal an agency d ecision:  
“first, one must be a person aggrieved and second, the aggrieved 
party must have participated in a contested case.”); Application 
of Hawaiian Elec . Co., 56 Haw. 260, 265, 535 P.2d 1102, 1106 
(1975) (“[W]here the appellants have been ‘aggrieved’ b y the 
action of the PUC, and where they were involved as 
‘participants’ during the agency hearings, and where the PUC 
staff (the agency through which they participated at the **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
26 
 hearings) has failed to appeal the decision of the PUC, the 
appellants may challe nge the order of the PUC in this court.”); 
City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Pub. Utils. Comm’n. , 53 Haw. 431,  
433, 495 P.2d 1180 , 1182 (1972) (per curiam) (“HRS § 91 -14(a), 
which provides ‘(a )ny person aggrieved by a final decision and 
order in a contested ca se . . . is entitled to judicial review  
. . .’, is clear and unambiguous that the person aggrieved must 
have been involved in the contested case before the PUC.”).   
 In this case, Appellants have sufficiently alleged that the 
PUC’s decision “specially, per sonally, and adversely affected ” 
their members.  HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi at 21, 445 P.3d at 693.  LOL 
is a Hawaiʻi nonprofit organization with members who live, work, 
and recreate in Hawaiʻi and are “deeply concerned” about the 
environmental and financial impacts of climate change in 
Hawaiʻi.  LOL asserts that sea level rise as a result of climate 
change and increased GHG emissions will result in over 20,000 
Hawaiʻi residents in need of new h omes and could “generate 
substantial social, infrastructure, and economic impacts with 
ripple effects throughout the State,”  which will invariably harm 
its members.   Similarly, KLM is a Hawaiʻi nonprofit dedicated to 
protecting native Hawaiian rights, with  members who reside in 
Hawaiʻi and have an interest in protecting native Hawaiian **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
27 
 traditions and culture.  It asserts that the combined effects of 
climate change will adversely impact its members.  For example,  
saltwater intrusions into the freshwater aqui fers, coastal 
erosion and rapid sea level rise [will] threaten [] the 
cultural practice of burying ʻiwi kupuna along Hawaiʻi’s 
shores, which prevents the ʻuhane from joining the ʻaumakua, 
interrupting the delicate balance between salt and fresh 
water in lok o iʻa, flooding and loss of burial grounds, home 
sites, fishponds, historic trails, heiau, and petroglyphs, 
the loss of salt cultivation, beach erosion, and 
contamination of crops and freshwater resources.  
 
Thus, Appellants have demonstrated they are “per sons aggrieved” 
who participated in the contested case; therefore, they have 
standing to appeal.  
B.   The PUC did not fulfill its statutory obligations under HRS 
 § 269-6(b). 
 
 Appellants argue the PUC failed to carry out its mandate 
under HRS § 269-6(b), which states the following (with emphas es 
added): 
The public utilities commission shall consider the need to 
reduce the State’s reliance on fossil fuels through energy 
efficiency and increased renewable energy generation in 
exercising its authori ty and duties under this chapter.   In 
making determinations of the reasonableness of the costs of 
utility system capital improvements and operations, the 
commission shall explicitly consider, quantitatively or 
qualitatively, the effect of the State’s relia nce on fossil 
fuels on  price volatility, export of funds for fuel 
imports, fuel supply reliability risk, and  greenhouse gas 
emissions .  The commission may determine that short -term 
costs or direct costs that are higher than alternatives 
relying more heavil y on fossil fuels are reasonable, 
considering the impacts resulting from the use of fossil 
fuels.  
 
First, the Appellants contend that the PUC’s consideration of 
GHG emissions should not have been geographically limited to 
those emissions occurring within the State’s borders.   Second, **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
28 
 the Appellants assert that the PUC’s Decision and Order merely 
adopted, without substantiating, HG’s representations in 
information request 49 that its LNG projects would result in 
decreased GHG emissions.      
 As to the Appellants’ first point, HG and the PUC respond 
that the plain language of HRS § 269 -6(b) does not require the 
PUC to consider GHG emissions beyond the State’s borders.   As to 
the Appellants’ second point, HG and the PUC counter -argue that 
the PUC made express findings on the GHG emissions issue in the 
section of its Decision and Order titled “Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions,”  and that HG’s answer to information request 49 is 
the “only credible evidence in the record.”     
 Appellants are correct.  In interpreting HRS § 269 -6(b), we 
look to “the language contained in the statute itself,” which 
must be read “in the context of the entire statute and 
construe[d] . . . in a manner consistent with its purpose.”  
Pacheco, 96 Hawaiʻi at 94, 26 P.3d at 583 (citations omitted).  
We note that the plain language of HRS § 269 -6(b) does not limit 
the PUC’s consideration of GHG emissions to those only occurring 
within the state.  Also, elsewhere in the HRS, where the 
legislature has intende d to limit consideration of certain GHG 
emissions, it plainly does so.  For example, HRS § 342B -71 
(2010) sets a “[s]tatewide greenhouse gas emissions limit” at 
“equal to or below the level of the statewide greenhouse gas **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
29 
 emissions in 1990,” but it specifi cally excludes “greenhouse gas 
emissions from airplanes.”  It is “generally presumed that the 
legislature acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate 
inclusion or exclusion” of terms in its statutes.  State v. 
Savitz, 97 Hawaiʻi 440, 447, 39 P.3d 567 , 574 (2002) (holding 
that the legislature could have drafted a statute to include a 
limitation on the court’s discretion, and noting that “[t]he 
fact that it did not do so manifests its intent that it chose 
not to do so”).  If the legislature intended HRS  § 269-6(b) to 
exclude from the PUC’s consideration GHG emissions generated 
out-of-state by imported fossil fuels, it would have done so.   
 We have also already extensively examined the purpose of 
HRS § 269 -6(b), as amended, in MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 408 P .3d 1.  
In that case, we noted “a primary purpose” of the statute is to 
“require the [PUC] to consider the  hidden and long -term costs  of 
reliance on fossil fuels, which subjects the State and its 
residents to ‘increased air pollution’ and ‘potentially harm ful 
climate change due to the release of harmful greenhouse 
gases.’”   MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi at 263, 408 P.3d at 15 (citing H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1004, in 2011 House Journal, at 1332) 
(emphasis added)).  
    Appellants contend HG has quite literally “hidden” the GHG 
emissions impact of its imported LNG.   The “hidden” GHG 
emissions impacts Appellants are concerned with include GHG **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
30 
  emissions from the extraction, development, production, and 
transportation of imported LNG, which occur out -of-state, but 
which, nonetheless, impact Hawaiʻi due to the global nature of 
GHG emissions.  We agree with this contention.10  In MECO, this 
court noted that “it is commonly understood that ‘[a]ir 
pollution is transient’ and is ‘heedless’ of even ‘state 
boundaries.’”  141 Hawaiʻi at 268, 408 P.3d at 20 (citing  E.P.A. 
v. EME Homer City Generation, L.P. , 134 S.Ct. 1584 , 1592 
(2014)).  
 Over a decade b efore we issued our MECO opinion, the 
legislature had already expressed its concern about the impact 
on Hawaiʻi of GHG emissions produced out -of-state.  In 2007, the 
legislature committed the state to reduce, by January 1, 2020, 
 
10  We note the Appellants and HG touch on the Commerce Clause of the 
United States Constitution in their briefing.  Under the Commerce Clause, 
Congress has the power to “regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among 
the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.”  U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, 
cl. 3.  The Commerce Clause “has long been understood to have a ‘negative’ 
aspect that denies the States the power unjustifiably to discriminate agai nst 
or burden the interstate flow of articles in commerce.”  Or. Waste Sys., Inc. 
v. Dep’t of Envtl. Quality of State of Or. , 511 U.S. 93, 98 (1994).   
HG argues that interpreting HRS § 269 -6(b) to take into account out -of-
state GHG emissions produced by i ts imported LNG is extra -territorial 
legislation, and per se unconstitutional under Healy v. Beer Inst ., 491 U.S. 
324, 336 (1989), because it attempts to regulate GHG emissions beyond 
Hawaiʻi’s borders.   Failing that, HG argues in the alternative that 
interpreting HRS § 269 -6(b) this way violates the commerce clause under  Pike 
v. Bruce Church , Inc., 397 U.S. 137 (1970), because the burden imposed on 
interstate commerce outweighs any putative local benefit to Hawaiʻi.   
To the extent the dormant Commerce Cla use is even implicated in this 
case, it is not violated.   HRS § 269 -6(b) tasks the PUC only with 
explicitly  “considering” GHG emissions from HG’s imported LNG, not regulating 
GHG emissions extra -territorially.  Further, the burden associated with 
“consider ing” out -of-state GHG emissions is minimal compared to the local 
benefit at stake:  the constitutional protection of a clean and healthful 
environment.    **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
31 
 “statewide greenhouse gas e missions to levels at or below the 
best estimations and updates of the inventory of greenhouse gas 
emissions estimates for 1990.”  Act 234 , H.B. 226 , 24th Leg., 
Reg. Sess. (2007) (enacted), available at  
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2007/  
bills/GM1005_.PDF, also available at https://perma.cc/TH44 -RFPQ.  
To that end, Act 234 established the  Greenhouse Gas Emission s 
Reduction Task Force “to prepare a work plan and regulatory 
scheme for implementing the maximum practically and technically 
feasible and cost -effective reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions from sources or categories of sources o f greenhouse 
gases to achieve the statewide greenhouse gas emissions limits 
by 2020.”  Id.  The legislature specifically directed the Task 
Force to craft “[r]ecommendations to minimize ‘leakage’ or a 
reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases within the St ate that 
is offset by an increase in emissions of greenhouse gases 
outside the State. . . .”  Id. at PDF p. 11.  The Task Force’s 
work plan, in turn, “strongly insist[ed] the life -cycle impact 
of energy sources be considered in any adopted energy laws,” 
because “even though an energy technology may be relatively 
clean-burning within the boundaries of Hawaii, the process in 
which it is made elsewhere is also of importance.”  The 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Task Force, Work Plan for 
Greenhouse Gas Emis sions Reduction s 14 (Dec. 30, 2009), **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
32 
 http://energy.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2016/03/2015 -
greenhouse -gas-program.pdf , also available at 
https://perma.cc/5EZQ -LK9Z.  Thus, since Act 234, part of this 
state’s GHG emission reduction strategy has included taking into 
account out -of-state GHG “leakage” resulting from our energy 
choices.11     
 In this rate procee ding, HG and the PUC have largely 
disregarded any possible GHG emission leakage from imported LNG.    
The PUC’s geographic limitation in Order No. 35112 indicates 
that it did not intend to, and in fact did not, explicitly 
consider out -of-state LNG -related GHG emissions in discharging 
its duties under HRS § 269 -6(b).  The PUC’s action was contrary 
to law and, therefore, an abuse of discretion.   
 
11  It is important to note that the EPA, California, and Oregon have all 
adopted, in some form, Argo nne National Laboratory’s “Greenhouse gases, 
Regulated Emissions and Energy use in Transportation” (or “GREET”) Model, see 
https://greet.es.anl.gov/ , also available at  https://perma.cc/TQ7Q -XYGM, to 
calculate life -cycle GHG emissions.  See Rocky Mountain Farmers Union v. 
Corey, 730 F.3d 1070, 1081 -82 (9th Cir. 2013) (explaining California’s CA -
GREET Model); Am. Fuel & Petrochemica l Mfrs. v. O’Keeffe , 903 F.3d 903, 908 -
09 (9th Cir. 2018) (explaining Oregon’s OR -GREET model); and Regulation of 
Fuels and Fuel Additives:  Renewable Fuel Standard Program (“RFS”), 72 Fed. 
Reg. 23900, 23907 (May 1, 2007) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 80) (ex plaining 
how the EPA utilized GREET in calculating life -cycle GHG emissions for its 
RFS Program).  California’s CA -GREET modeling can be found at 
https://w w2.arb.ca.gov/resources/documents/lcfs -pathway-certified -carbon-
intensities , also available at  https://perma.cc/U3VB -R898.  Oregon’s OR -GREET 
modeling can be found by accessing the link for the “carbon intensity values” 
Excel worksheets located at 
https://www.oregon.gov/deq/aq/programs/Pages/Clean -Fuel-Pathways.aspx , also 
available at  https://perma.cc/VLX9 -AU3.  The EPA’s RFS GREET modeling can be 
found at https://www.epa.gov/fuels -registration -reporting -and-compliance -
help/lifecycle -greenhouse -gas-results, also available at  
https://perma.cc/64 7V-YVPA.  Thus, life -cycle GHG emission information is 
available to participants.  See also note 13, infra.  
  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
33 
  Next, the PUC’s limited and perfunctory review of GHG 
emissions in this rate case is evident in the Greenhouse Gas  
Emissions section of its Decision and Order No. 35969.   Instead 
of making any independent factual findings concerning the GHG 
emissions of HG’s LNG -related projects, the PUC simply repeated 
HG’s representation (made in HG’s response to the Appellants’ 
information request 49) that GHG emissions from its SNG plant 
will decrease where LNG displaces SNG.   There is no GHG 
emissions information about the LNG HG uses.   Therefore, the PUC 
could not have fulfilled its “ affirmative duty  ‘to reduce the 
State’s relian ce on fossil fuels through energy efficiency and 
increased renewable energy generation,’” as HRS § 269 -6(b) 
requires, because the PUC could not have “‘explicitly 
consider[ed]’ the effect of the State’s reliance on fossil fuels 
on the level of ‘greenhouse g as emissions.’”   MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi 
at 269 n.36, 408 P.3d at 21 n.36 (emphasis added).  
     Further, as Appellants point out, the PUC did not conduct a 
“quantitative or qualitative analysis” that substantiates its 
finding that HG’s LNG projects will decrease GHG emissions.   In 
this way, this case is closely analogous to  HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi 1, 
445 P.3d 673.   In that case, HELCO sought the PUC’s review of an 
amended power purchase agreement (“Amended PPA”) between it and 
Hu Honua Bioenergy, LLC, in which  Hu Honua would construct and 
operate a biomass -fueled energy production facility, and HELCO **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
34 
 would purchase energy from the facility.   145 Hawaiʻi at 5-6, 445 
P.3d at 677 -78.  LOL moved to intervene in order to assert its 
environmental interests in the pro ject, but the PUC granted it 
participant status instead.   145 Hawaiʻi at 6, 445 P.3d at 
678.  The PUC limited LOL’s participation to addressing business 
aspects of the project (whether the energy price components 
properly reflect the cost of biomass fuel s upply, and whether 
HELCO’s purchase power arrangements were prudent and in the 
public interest); LOL’s limited participation did not allow it 
to address environmental aspects of the project.   145 Hawaiʻi at 
7, 445 P.3d at 679.   As a result, HELCO and Hu Ho nua refused to 
answer LOL’s information requests concerning GHG emissions as 
beyond the scope of LOL’s participation.   145 Hawaiʻi at 8, 445 
P.3d at 680.   
     The PUC in HELCO ultimately approved the Amended PPA.   145 
Hawaiʻi at 9, 445 P.3d at 681.   In its findings and conclusions, 
the PUC merely “restated HELCO’s representations that the 
biomass facility could potentially save approximately 15,700 
barrels of fuel per year and contribute to the State’s 
[renewable portfolio standard] goals,” but “it made no  express 
findings or conclusions regarding the biomass facility’s GHG 
emissions.”   145 Hawaiʻi at 24, 445 P.3d at 696.   LOL appealed, 
arguing that the PUC did not explicitly consider GHG emissions **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
35 
 in determining whether the costs of the Amended PPA were 
reasonable, in violation of HRS § 269 -6(b), and that it was 
denied due process to protect its right to a clean and healthful 
environment due to the PUC’s limitation on its  
participation.   145 Hawaiʻi at 10, 445 P.3d at 682.  
     In HELCO, this court held tha t the PUC needed to do more 
than restate HELCO’s representation about energy savings; 
instead, this court required the PUC to “substantiate this 
finding by addressing the hidden and long -term environmental and 
public health costs of reliance on energy prod uced at the 
proposed facility.”   145 Hawaiʻi at 24, 445 P.3d at 
696.  HELCO continued, “These costs include the ‘potential for 
increased air pollution as a result of GHG emissions’ directly 
attributed to energy generation at the facility, as well as GHG 
emissions produced at earlier stages in the production process, 
such as fuel production and transportation.”   Id. (citing MECO, 
141 Hawaiʻi at 263, 408 P.3d at 15).   
     The HELCO court further noted that “[a]n agency’s findings 
should be ‘sufficient to a llow the reviewing court to track the 
steps by which the agency reached its decision.’”   HELCO, 145 
Hawaiʻi at 11, 445 P.3d at 683.   Where they are not , a “remand 
pursuant to HRS § 91 -14(g) is appropriate ,” as the  “agency’s 
findings are incomplete and prov ide no basis for review.”   145 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
36 
 Hawaiʻi at 24, 445 P.3d at 69 6 (citations omitted) .  In this 
case, the PUC similarly restated HG’s representation that its 
LNG projects will decrease GHG emissions, but it did not 
substantiate those findings in a manner that would allow this 
court to track the steps by which it reached its 
decision.          
     The PUC contends that this case was just a rate case, and 
that the PUC had already fulfilled the requirements of HRS      
§ 269-6(b) in the earlier dockets approving t he LNG 
projects.   The PUC, however, specifically granted the Appellants 
participant status to address HRS § 269 -6(b) with respect to GHG 
emissions.  Also,  MECO stated that “HRS § 269 -6(b)’s requirement 
to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and to consider gre enhouse 
gas emissions applies to the fulfillment of  all of the 
Commission’s duties.”   141 Hawaiʻi at 263, 408 P.3d at 
15 (emphasis added).   See also MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi at 269, 408 P.3d 
at 21 (“[T]he consideration of whether energy charges are 
reasonable or a business arrangement is prudent would 
necessarily involve an evaluation of the hidden and long -term 
costs of the activities . . . , including consideration of the 
potential for harmful greenhouse gas emissions.”).  
 In this case, the PUC did not fulfill the statutory 
requirements of HRS § 269 -6(b) because (1) it did not explicitly 
consider all of the GHG emission impacts of HG’s LNG projects, **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
37 
 having erroneously previo usly determined that the out -of-state 
GHG emissions from HG’s imported LNG were beyond the scope of 
the rate proceeding, and, (2) upon considering the limited 
evidence submitted in this case, merely restating, without 
substantiating, HG’s representation th at its LNG projects would 
decrease GHG emissions.  
C.   The PUC’s limitations in sub -Issue No. 1h violated 
 Appellants’ due process rights.  
 
 The Appellants argue that the PUC violated their due 
process rights, under the Fifth Amendment to the United State s 
Constitution, as well as under article I, section 5 of the 
Hawaiʻi State Constitution, by denying them a meaningful 
opportunity to be heard.   “The basic elements of procedural due 
process of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at 
a meaning ful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental 
deprivation of a significant property interest.”  HELCO, 145 
Hawaiʻi at 25, 445 P.3d at 697  (citations omitted) .  Under MECO, 
141 Hawaiʻi 249, 408 P.3d 1, Appellants possess a protected 
property interest in a clean and healthful environment under 
article XI, section 9 of the Hawaiʻi State Constitution, which 
states:   
Each person has the right to a clean and healthful 
environment, as defin ed by laws relating to environmental 
quality, including control of pollution and conservation, 
protection and enhancement of natural resources.  Any 
person may enforce this right against any party, public or 
private, through appropriate legal proceedings, subject to 
reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
38 
  
HRS § 269 -6(b) is a “law relating to environmental quality,” and 
it requires the PUC to “explicitly consider, quantitatively or 
qualitatively, the effect of the State’s reliance on fossil 
fuels on . . . greenhouse gas emissions.”     
 Appellants acknowledge that MECO held that the PUC “has the 
authority to set limitations in conducting the proceedings so 
long as the procedures sufficiently afford an opportunity to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner” in a 
proceeding before it, citing MECO, 141 Hawaiʻi at 270, 408 P.3d 
at 22.  They point to HELCO, however, as a case in which the 
PUC’s limitations deprived participants of a meaningful 
opportunity to be heard.   Specifically, they state that this 
court in HELCO found a due process violation where the P UC 
limited participants to addressing two economic sub-issues, when 
the participants’ asserted interest was environmental, not 
economic.   Analogizing HELCO to their case, the Appellants argue 
that the PUC violated their due process rights by limiting the 
scope of sub -Issue No. 1h to exclude Appellants’ interest in the 
full consideration of the GHG emission impact of HG’s imported 
LNG.   
 The PUC counters that it framed sub -Issue No. 1h to 
“mirror”  the language of HRS § 269 -6(b); therefore, it argues, 
the Appellants’ due process rights were not violated.   Next, **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
39 
 both HG and the PUC argue that Appellants were afforded a 
meaningful opportunity to be heard in this rate proceeding, as 
Appellants participated extensively by submitting joint 
information requests, wr itten testimony and exhibits, responses 
to HG’s information requests, and opening and reply briefs on 
sub-Issue No. 1h.    
 In this case, as discussed supra, Section IV.B, the PUC 
limited its consideration of GHG emissions to those within the 
boundaries of the state, truncating Appellants’ property 
interest in a manner not required under the plain language of 
HRS § 269 -6(b), and in a manner contrary to MECO.  See 141 
Hawaiʻi at 268, 408 P.3d at 20 (“[I]t is commonly understood that 
‘[a]ir pollution is transient’ and is ‘heedless’ of even ‘state 
boundaries.’”) (citation omitted).  In limiting the Appellants’ 
constitutionally protected interest in this way, the PUC 
violated the Appellants’ due process rights.  See HELCO, 145 
Hawaiʻi at 25-26, 445 P.3d at 69 7-98 (holding that the PUC’s 
limitation upon LOL’s participation to exclude its asserted 
interest in a clean and healthful environment violated LOL’s due 
process rights).  Therefore, the PUC’s argument that it properly 
framed sub -Issue No. 1h to “mirror” HRS § 269 -6(b) fails.  
Further, whe n the Appellants’ interest is limited in this way, 
the “opportunities to be heard” cannot be said to be meaningful.   **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
40 
 D.   The PUC did not abuse its discretion in adjudicating HG’s 
 rate case rather than proceeding through rule -making.   
 
 Also at issue in this case is whether the PUC improperly 
created GHG emissions policy through the ad hoc adjudication of 
HG’s rate case, wher e such policy should develop through the 
rule-making procedures of HRS chapter 91, Hawaiʻi’s 
Administrative Procedure Act  (“HAPA”) .12  This court has 
previously explained the difference between rule -making and 
adjudication as follows:  “Rule  making is agency action 
governing the future conduct either of groups or persons or of a 
single individual; it is essentially legislative in nature.     
. . . Adjudication, conversely, is concerned with the 
determination of past and present rights and liab ilities.”   
Foster Vill . Cmty. Ass’n, 4 Haw. App. at 475 -77, 667 P.2d at 
857-58.  The parties acknowledge that “agencies are allowed the 
broad discretion to choose whether to develop policy by rule -
making or adjudication.”  In re Application of HECO , 81 Hawaiʻi 
 
12  HAPA was enacted “to provide a uniform administrative procedure for all 
state and county boards, commissions, departments or offices which wou ld 
encompass the procedure of rule  making and adjudication of contested cases.”  
Foster Vill . Cmty. Ass’n v. Hess , 4 Haw. App. 463, 475, 667 P.2d 850, 857 
(1983) (citation omitted).  Chapter 91 contains procedures for state agencies 
to follow with respect to rule-making.  HRS § 91 -1 (2012) defines a rule as 
“each agency statement of general or particular applicability and future 
effect that implements, interprets, or prescribes law or policy, or describes 
the organization, procedure, or practice requirements of any agency.”  HRS   
§ 91-3 (2012) requires an “adopting agency,” “prior to the adoption of any 
rule authorized by law,” to, among other things, “[g]ive at least thirty 
days’ notice for a public hearing,” and “[a]fford all interested persons 
opportunity to submit data, views, or argumen ts, orally or in writing.”  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
41 (continued. . .)  
 at 468, 918 P.2d at 570 (citation omitted).  However, 
“policymaking by adjudication is an abuse of discretion if:  (1) 
it is used to ‘circumvent the requirements of the Administrative 
Procedure Act’ by amending a recently amended rule or bypassing 
a pending rule -making proceeding; or (2) ‘an agency’s sudden 
change of direction leads to undue hardship for those who had 
relied on past policy.’”  Id. (citation omitted).  
  In this case, only the second form of abuse of discretion 
is at issue, as there is no rule, recently amended rule, or 
pending rule -making proceeding concerning how the PUC shall 
measure GHG emissions.13  As to when an agency engages in a 
 
13  We note other states, as well as the federal government, have developed 
rules for measuring GHG emissions using a life -cycle analysis, at least for 
transportation fuels.  See, e.g. , Clean Air Act § 211(o), 42 U.S.C.          
§ 7545(o) (1)(H) (2009) (defining “lifecycle greenhouse gas emission” as the 
“aggregate quantity of greenhouse  gas emissions  (including direct emissions 
and significant indirect emissions such as significant emis sions from land 
use changes), as determined by the Administrator, related to the full fuel 
lifecycle , including all stages of fuel and feedstock production and 
distribution, from feedstock generation or extraction through the 
distribution and delivery and use of the finished fuel to the ultimate 
consumer, where the mass values for all greenhouse gases are adjusted to 
account for their relative global warming potential”); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 
17, § 95481(a)(38) (20 20) (defining “ Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions” as 
“aggregate quantity of greenhouse gas emissions (including direct emissions 
and significant indirect emissions , such as significant emissions from land 
use changes), as determined by the Executive Officer, related to the full 
fuel life cycle, including all stages of fuel and feedstock production and 
distribution, from feedstock generation or extraction through the 
distribution and delivery and use of the finished fuel to the ultimate 
consumer, where the mass values for all greenh ouse gases are adjusted to 
account for their relative global warming potential”); Or. Rev. Stat.        
§ 468A.266(2)(b) (2018) (authorizing the Oregon Environmental Quality 
Commission to adopt “[s]tandards for greenhouse gas emissions attributable to 
the fuels throughout the lifecycles of the fuels, including but not limited 
to emissions from the production, storage, transportation and combustion of 
the fuels and from changes in land use associated with the fuels”).    
 As indicated in note 11, supra, the EPA, California, and Oregon have 
all adopted models to calculate life -cycle GHG emissions.  We also note with **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
42 
 “sudden change of direction lead[ing] to undue hardship for 
those who had relied on past policy,” two  cases guide this 
court’s inquiry:  Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 66 Haw. 
538, 669 P.2d 148 (19 83) (“Lifeline Rates ”), and In re 
Application of HECO , 81 Hawaiʻi 459, 918 P.2d 561.  Both are 
cases in which this court held the PUC did not abuse its 
discretion by proceeding through adjudication rather than rule -
making.   
 In Lifeline Rates , HECO initiated a rate case seeking to 
increase its rates.  66 Haw. at 539, 669 P.2d at 150.  Two 
community groups intervened and asked the PUC to establish 
lifeline ra tes under a federal statute.  Id.  Thereafter, the 
PUC treated the case as a contested case, placing the burden of 
proof on intervenors, holding an evidentiary hearing, and 
entering detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law before 
declining to imple ment lifeline rates.  66 Haw. at 540, 669 P.2d 
 
(continued . . .) 
approval that the PUC has recently asked the Hawaii Natural Energy Institute 
(“HNEI”) to “conduct a study to provide estimates for the lifecycle 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of various energy products and production 
technologies in Hawaii,” including SNG and LNG, to assist it in decision 
making under HRS § 269 -6(b).  The PUC asked HNEI to develop the “boundar y 
conditions” to “explicitly identify pr ocesses to be included” in a life -cycle 
analysis, such as “mining, transportation of raw and finished materials, 
manufacturing, electricity production, and end -of-life disposal.”   Letter 
from James P. Griffin, Ph.D, chair of the PUC, et al. to Richard E. 
Rocheleau, Director of HNEI (Aug. 28, 2019), available at     
https://puc.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/08/ 08.28.19 -Letter-to-
Director -Rocheleau_Lifecycle -Analysis -Task-Force-Request.pdf , also available 
at https://perma.cc/38NK -MCWK. 
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
43 
 at 150.  The intervenors appealed, arguing “that the [PUC] 
should have somehow told them what they must prove.”  66 Haw. at 
540, 669 P.2d at 151.  This court framed the intervenors’ 
argument to be “that it was  error for the [PUC] to proceed by 
way of a contested case hearing (although they did not object 
thereto) and that the [PUC] instead should have adopted rules 
pursuant to § 91 -3, HRS.”  66 Haw. at 541, 669 P.2d at 151.   
 This court affirmed the PUC’s orde r and rejected the 
intervenors’ argument as follows:  
In this case, the appellants accepted, without objection, 
the contested case procedure and, in fact, took their 
appeal based on statutes which provide for appeals from an 
“order” in a contested case.  T hat being so, we will not 
here entertain their alternative contention that the 
“order” entered was instead a “rule” which should have been 
differently handled.  
 
Moreover, if what appellants desired was the promulgation 
of a “rule” by the PUC, they should have proceeded by 
petition for the adoption of such rule pursuant to § 91 -6, 
HRS.  The agency then would have been obliged within 30 
days to either deny the petition, stating its reasons in 
writing for the denial, or initiate proceedings in 
accordan ce with § 91 -3, HRS.  
Id. 
 Similarly, in In re Application of HECO , this court again 
rejected community intervenors’ argument on appeal that the PUC 
impermissibly engaged in rule -making in the guise of 
adjudicating a contested case.  81 Hawaiʻi 459, 918 P.2 d 561.  In 
that case, HECO applied to the PUC for permission to commit 
funds to construct high -voltage overhead transmission lines.  81 
Hawaiʻi at 461, 918 P.2d at 563.  The intervenors argued, among **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
44 
 other things, that the transmission lines should be plac ed 
underground.  81 Hawaiʻi at 463, 918 P.2d at 565.  In its 
Decision and Order, the PUC declined to require HECO to place 
its transmission lines underground,  
unless (1) there [was] a compelling reason (which outweighs 
the cost) to place the lines undergr ound or (2) there is a 
stated public policy requiring the lines to be laid 
underground or (3) the ratepayers as a whole consent to 
bear the high cost of putting the lines underground . . . . 
That placing the transmissions lines overhead may obstruct 
one’s view plane, in and of itself, is not sufficient cause 
to require the ratepayers to bear the cost of laying the 
lines underground.  
 
81 Hawaiʻi at 464, 918 P.2d at 566.   
 The intervenors appealed, arguing that the “PUC violated 
HAPA by failing to properly pr omulgate rules to establish when 
transmission lines will be placed underground.”  81 Hawaiʻi at 
465, 918 P.2d at 567  (footnote omitted) .  In other words, they 
argued “that what would qualify as ‘additional justification’ or 
criteria is clearly a statement of policy by the PUC, thereby 
requiring a rule -making proceeding prior to a contested case 
hearing under HAPA.”  81 Hawaiʻi at 466, 918 P.2d at 568.   
 After analogizing the intervenor’s case to Lifeline Rates , 
this court similarly concluded that no undue hardship existed, 
because (1) intervenors participated in the contested case 
without objection; (2) they took their appeal from the PUC’s 
order pursuant to HRS §§ 91 -14 and 269 -16(f); (3) they should 
have proc eeded by petition for the adoption of a rule under HRS **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
45 
 § 91-6 if the promulgation of a rule was what they desired; (4) 
the contested case process afforded them extensive procedural 
opportunities to support their position; and (5) the PUC entered 
detailed f indings of fact and conclusions of law.  In re 
Application of HECO , 81 Hawaiʻi at 470-71, 918 P.2d at 5 72-73 
(footnote s omitted).  
 Similarly, in this case, the Appellants participated in the 
contested case format without objection (by filing their motions 
to intervene); took their appeal under statutes governing 
appeals of contested case orders issued by the PUC, HRS §§ 91 -14 
(2012 & Supp. 2016 ) and 269-15.5 (2007 & Supp. 2016 ); should 
have initiated a rule -making petition if that is what they 
desired (as it appeared in LOL’s testimony early on that it 
sought to have the PUC adopt the CAS methodology for measuring 
GHG emissions); and were afforded the procedural benefits 
(though limited) of participating in a contested case , through 
the opportunities  to, among other things, propound information 
requests to HG and to brief sub -Issue No. 1h.  Lastly, the PUC 
entered detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law.  Thus, 
under both Lifeline Rates  and In re Application of HECO , the 
Appellants “cannot no w be heard to complain that they suffered 
undue hardship” due to whatever perceived rule -making they 
believe the PUC engaged in.  81 Hawaiʻi at 471, 918 P.2d at 573 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
46 
 (footnote omitted).  In sum, the PUC did not abuse its 
discretion in adjudicating HG’s rate  case.  
E.   Native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights   
 
  The Appellants allege that the PUC did not fulfill its 
constitutional obligation to protect KLM’s native Hawaiian 
customary and traditional rights under article XII, section 7 of 
the Hawaiʻi Constitution, which provides the following:  
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights, 
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, 
cultural and religious pur poses and possessed by ahupua ʻa 
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who 
inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to 
the right of the State to regulate such rights.  
 
As indicated above, Appellants assert  various impacts to native 
Hawaiian cultural practices.  
 In Matter of Conservation District Use Application HA -3568, 
143 Hawaiʻi 379, 431 P.3d 752 (2018)  (“Mauna Kea II ”), we 
reaffirmed “the State’s obligation to protect the reasonable 
exercise of customary and traditionally exercised rights 
of Hawaiians to the extent feasible. ”  143 Hawaiʻi at 395, 431 
P.3d at 768, c iting Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawaiʻi 
Cty. Planning Comm’n , 79 Hawaiʻi 425, 450 n.43, 903 P.2d 1246,  
1271 n.43 (1995) .  
 Because the PUC improperly curtailed Appellants ’ 
substantive participation, the record is not sufficiently **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
47 
 developed for us to address this issue.  On remand, the PUC 
should consider its constitutional obligations.  
F.   The State’s public trust resources  
  
 Appellants  also argue that the PUC failed to fulfill its 
affirmative obligations as a public trustee over the state’s 
natural resources under article XI, section 1 of the Hawaiʻi 
State Constitution, which provides the foll owing: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, the 
State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and 
protect Hawaii’s natural beauty and all natural resources, 
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, 
and shall promote the development and utilization of these 
resources in a manner consistent with their conservation 
and in furtherance of the self -sufficiency of the State.  
 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State 
for the benefit of the people.  
 
 As we reiterated  in Mauna Kea II , a state agency must 
perform its functions in a manner that fulfills the  State’s 
affirmative obligations under the Hawaiʻi constitution.  143 
Hawaiʻi at 387, 431 P.3d at 760.   We also note , however,  that HG 
and the PUC ’s reliance on the ICA’s decision in  In re Molokai 
Pub. Utils., 127 Hawaiʻi 234, 277 P.3d 328 (App. 2012), to argue 
that a rate case does not trigger a state agency’s public trust 
obligations where there is no chang e in use of the public trust 
resource , is misplaced .  That case  was effectively overruled by 
this court’s decision in  Ching v. Case , 145 Hawaiʻi 148, 177 –78, 
449 P.3d 1146, 1175 –76 (2019), in which we held that the state 
has a continuing  duty to monitor t he use of trust property, even **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
48  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
  
   
 if the use of the property has not changed.  See also Lānaʻians 
for Sensible Growth v. Land Use Comm ’n, 2020 WL 2511131 , at *7 
(Haw. May 15, 2020)  (noting that the LUC possesses a continuing 
constitutional obligation to ensure that measures it imposes to 
protect public trust resources are implemented and complied 
with).  Thus, the PUC's constitutional obligations are ongoing, 
regardless of the nature  of the proceeding.   
 Again, because the PUC improperly curtailed Appellants ’ 
substantive participation, the record is not sufficiently 
developed for us to address this issue.  On remand, the PUC 
should consider its constitutional obligations.  
V.  Conclus ion  
 For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the PUC’s Decision and 
Order No. 35969 and remand this case to the PUC for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
Lance D. Collins
for Appellants    
      
David Y. Nakashima 
(Jeffrey T. Ono and  
John E. Dubiel with him 
on the briefs)   
for Appellee Hawai ʻi Gas  
 
 
 
Andrew D. Goff   
(Clare E. Connors and
Bryan C. Yee with him
on the briefs) 
for Appellee Public 
 
Utilities Commission  
 
 
