***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I  
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION OF 
HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC. 
 
FOR WAIVER OF THE NA PUA MAKANI WIND PROJECT FROM THE 
FRAMEWORK FOR COMPETITIVE BIDDING, AND APPROVAL 
OF THE POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT FOR RENEWABLE AS-AVAILABLE 
ENERGY WITH NA PUA MAKANI POWER PARTNERS, LLC. 
________________________________________________________________  
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION  
(AGENCY DOCKET NO. 2013-0423) 
 
SCOT-20-0000309 
 
JUNE 29, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ.,  
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE KURIYAMA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction  
In this case, we decide whether the Public Utilities 
Commission (“PUC”) abused its discretion in deciding not to re -
open a December 2014 order (“Order No. 32600 ”) upon allegations  
brought five years later  that changed circumstances  warranted  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCOT-20-0000309
29-JUN-2021
10:33 AM
Dkt. 109 OP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 relief from the order.  Order No. 32600  approved a Purchase 
Power Agreement (“PPA”) in which  Hawaiian Electric Company 
(“HECO”) agreed to purchase wind energy  generated by  Na Pua 
Makani (“NPM”) on a wind farm to be constructed  in Kahuku, on 
the island of Oʻahu.  The PPA priced wind energy at 14.998 cents 
per kilowatt hour (“kWh”) , which the PUC found to be reasonable .  
The PUC also exempted the project from it s Competitive Bidding 
Framework.  
Five years later, i n 2019, Life of the Land (“LOL”) sought 
to re-open Order No. 32600 , allegi ng that (1) NPM ’s incidental 
take license (“ITL”) over the Hawaiian hoary bat  was untimely 
obtained in May 2018 , in violation of the PPA ; (2) that the 
14.998 cents per kWh was unreasonable  in light of a Scientific 
American blog article noting that wind ene rgy prices nationwide 
had fallen by 2017 ; and (3) that the PUC’s order did not analyze 
the greenhouse gas emissions (“GHG emissions”) impact of the 
project, in violation of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 269 -
6(b) (2007 & Supp. 2011 ).  Having never appealed Order No. 32600  
or timely moved for reconsideration  or rehearing of that order 
under the PUC’s rules, LOL instead sought to re -open the order 
with reference to Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure (“HRCP”) Rule 
60(b) (2006), specifical ly under subsections (4), (5), and (6) 
of that rule .  Under HRCP Rule 60(b), a court may provide relief 
from a judgment when “(4) the judgment is void; (5) . . . it is ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective 
application; or (6) any ot her reason justifying relief from the 
operation of the judgment.”   The PUC’s rules do allow the agency 
to refer to the HRCP “for guidance” whenever the PUC’s rules are 
“silent on a matter.”     
As for why Order No. 32600 was “void” under HRCP Rule 
60(b)(4) , LOL argued that  the PPA was voided under its own terms 
when NPM obtained the allegedly untimely ITL.  LOL argued that 
the ITL was a “Land Right” that NPM needed to obtain 120 days 
after the execution of the PPA (or 120 days after a later-
executed amended  PPA), as opposed to  a “Governmental Approval” 
that NPM needed to obtain  by the date construction commenced.  
LOL also argued that the parties’ representations regarding 
these deadlines under the PPA must be “strictly construed” 
because the PUC had exempted them from the Competitive Bidding 
Framework.   LOL also argued that Order No. 32600 was void 
because it contained no analysis of the GHG emissions impact of 
the wind farm project, as required under HRS § 269 -6(b).   
As for why it would be “inequita ble” for Order No. 32600 to 
have prospective effect  under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) , LOL argued 
that the 14.998 cent price per k Wh of wind energy was not 
reasonable , because a Scientific American blog article noted 
that wind prices under PPAs nation wide had falle n to two cents 
per kWh by 2017.  LOL also argued that Order No. 32600 was ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
 inequitable because it contained no analysis of the GHG 
emissions impact of the wind farm project, as required under HRS 
§ 269-6(b).   
As for “any other reason justifying relief from  the 
operation of the judgment” under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6), LOL argued 
that Order No. 32600 contained no analysis of the GHG emissions 
impact of the wind farm project, as required under HRS § 269 -
6(b).   
HECO and the Consumer Advocate1 opposed LOL’s motion f or 
relief, arguing that resort to HRCP Rule 60(b) for guidance was 
not necessary, because LOL should have timely sought relief 
under an existing PUC administrative rule, HAR § 16 -601-137 
(2019), which sets forth the procedure for moving for rehearing 
or reconsideration of a PUC order.  They also argued that LOL 
failed to timely appeal Order No. 32600 to the  ICA.  The PUC 
agreed.  
After a hearing, the PUC denied LOL’s motion for r elief in 
Order No. 37074.   The PUC concluded it was without jurisdiction 
                     
1  The Consumer Advocate was an ex officio party to these 
proceedings pursuant to HRS § 269 -51 (2007 & Supp. 2014) (“The executive 
director of the division of consumer  advocacy shall be the consumer advocate 
in hearings before the public utilities commission.  The consumer advocate 
shall represent, protect, and a dvance the interests of all consumers . . . of 
utility services. . . . The consumer advocate shall have full rights to 
participate as a party in interest in all proceedings before the public 
utilities commission.”).  See also Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules ( “HAR”) § 6 -
601-62(a) (2019 ) (“The consumer advocate is, ex officio, a party to any 
proceeding before the commission.”).    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 . . . . 
 to consider LOL’s motion, because LOL had not timely appealed 
the order to the ICA under HRS § 269 -15.5 (2007 & Supp. 2014), 
within thirty days of the issuance of the order.   Alternatively, 
the PUC ruled that LOL ’s motion for relief was an untimely 
motion for rehearing or recons ideration under HAR § 16-601-137, 
which was required to have been filed within ten days of service 
of Order No. 32600.   The PUC also ruled that LOL did not have 
“standing ,” in any event,  to raise the issue of HECO and NPM’s 
compliance with the PPA in obtaining an ITL, as LOL was neither 
a party nor intended third -party beneficiary of the PPA.   The 
PUC concluded that HECO and NPM were free to invoke contractual 
remedies to address any alleged delay in obtaining the ITL.   
LOL timely appealed Order No. 37074, raising the following 
points of error:  
The PUC reversibly erred in the following ways:  
 
(1)  by concluding it lacked jurisdiction to consider 
[LOL’s] motion for relief on the basis that it is untimely 
under a strict construal of statutes creating a right of 
appeal and rules governing reconsideration.  
. . . . 
(2) by treating [LOL’s] motion for relief pursuant to HAR §  
16-601-1 as an untimely filed or failed motion for 
reconsideration.  
. . . . 
 (3)  by failing to re -open proceedings to address HE CO and 
NPM’s failure to obtain  land rights under amended PPA  § 
11.2 or, alternatively, to strictly construe parties’ 
failure to obtain site control as required by Part IV.B.8 
of the competitive bidding framework, from which parties 
had obtained a waiver.  
. . . . 
(4) by treating the approval of the amended PPA as a 
contract between private parties and engaging in contract 
interpretation in concluding the meaning of the amended PPA 
approval.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 (5)  by delegating its powers to interpret its order 
approving the PPA and amendments to the same private 
parties – HECO and NPM – as a consequence of concluding 
that its approval of the PPA can be amended through 
“contractual mechanisms” available exclusively to the 
private parties to the contract.  
 
 We hold that t he PUC did not abuse its discretion in 
declining to turn to HRCP Rule 60(b) to re -open Order No. 32600.  
First, as to the GHG emissions issue, the absence of a GHG 
emissions analysis  was readily apparent in Order No. 32600 when 
it was filed  in December 2014 .  LOL could have timely moved for 
rehearing or reconsider ation of the order under HAR § 16 -601-
137.  LOL could have also timely appealed the order under HRS § 
269-15.5.  An HRCP Rule 60(b) motion is not a substitute for a 
timely appeal.  Therefore , the PUC properly declined to re -open 
Order No. 32600 to address GHG emission s.  Second, as to the 
reasonableness of wind energy prices, the Scientific American  
blog article does not provide the  “extraordinary circumstances ” 
necessary to invoke relief under HRCP Rule 60(b).   Third, any 
alleged failure of HECO or NPM to timely obtain an ITL does not 
“void” the PPA and Order No. 32600.  Such an argument , assuming 
LOL has standing to raise it, finds no basis in the plain 
language of the PPA  or Order No. 32600 .  Therefore, the PUC did 
not abuse its discretion by declining to  re-open Order No. 32600 
using HRCP Rule 60 (b) for guidance in analyzing this claim.   As 
LOL provided no justification for obtaining relief from Order 
No. 32600, we affirm the PUC’s Order No. 37074.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 II.  Background  
A.  HECO’s Application   
 On December 12, 2013,  HECO filed an application with the 
PUC requesting an order approving a waiver of the NPM wind farm 
project from the Competitive Bidding Framework ,2 approving a PPA 
between HECO and NPM , finding that the purchased energy charges 
to be pai d by HECO pursuant to the PPA (14.998 cents per kWh) 
were reasonable, and find ing that the purchased power 
arrangements under the PPA were prudent and in the public 
interest.   HECO also notified the PUC that it would conduct an 
Interconnection Requirements  Study and later seek PUC approval 
of the construction of overhead power lines to connect the wind 
farm to HECO’s power grid.  
 The PPA was dated October 3, 2013 and attached as Exhibit 1 
to HECO’s application.   Relevant to this appeal, the PPA 
contained th e following definition s of “Governmental Approvals” 
and “Land Rights” : 
“Governmental Approvals”:  All permits, licenses, 
approvals, certificates, entitlements and other 
                     
2  Under the Competitive Bidding Framework, HECO is required to use 
competitive bidding as the mechanism to acquire future generation  resources 
or a block of generation resources, whether or not such resource has been 
identified in its Integrated Resource Plan.  See Competitive Bidding 
Framework, Part II.A.3.   HECO noted, however, that there are “certain 
circumstances where competitive bidding may not be appropriate, in which case 
a waiver may be granted ” by the PUC.   These circumstances include “when more 
cost-effective . . . generation resources are more likely to be acquired more 
efficiently through different procurement processes.”   The PUC may waive the 
Competitive Bidding Framework requirements “upon a showing that the waiver 
will likely result in a lower cost supply of electricity to the utility’s 
general body of ratepayers, or is otherwise in the public interest.”    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
 authorizations issued by Governmental Authorities, as well 
as any agreements with  Governmental Authorities, required 
for the construction, ownership, operation and maintenance 
of the Facility and the Company -Owned Interconnection 
Facilities, and all amendments, modifications, supplements, 
general conditions and addenda thereto.  
 
“Land Rights”:  All easements, rights of way, licenses, 
leases, surface use agreements and other interest s or 
rights in real estate.  
 
 The PPA also contained the following provisions in Article 
11, titled “Government Approvals, Land Rights and Compliance 
with Laws”: 
11.1  Governmental Approvals for Facility .  Seller shall 
obtain, at its expense, any and all Governmental Approvals 
required for the construction, ownership, operation and 
maintenance of the Facility and the interconnection of the 
Facility to the Co mpany System.  
 
11.2  Land Rights for Facility .  Seller shall obtain, at 
its expense, any and all Land Rights required for the 
construction, ownership, operation and maintenance of the 
Facility and the interconnection of the Facility to the 
Company System.  Seller shall provide to Company, no later 
than the earlier of the Effective Date or 120 Days after 
the Execution Date, copies of the documents  establishing 
(i) the right of Seller to construct, ow n, operate and 
maintain the Facility on the Site and (ii) a ny other Land 
Rights required for such construction , ownership, operation 
and maintenance.  If required by Company and not prohibited 
by Law Seller shall record a memorandum or short form of 
such documents.  
 
 Article 22.2(D) contained the following represe ntation by 
the Seller (NPM)  regarding when it would obtain Governmental 
Approvals and Land Right s:   
Seller represents, warrants and covenants that: . . .  As 
of the commencement of construction, Seller shall have 
obtained (1) all Land Rights and Governmen tal Approvals 
necessary for the construction, ownership, operation and 
maintenance of the Company -Owned Interconnection Facilities 
and (ii) all Governmental Approvals necessary for the 
construction, ownership, operation and maintenance of the 
Facility.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 Further, the PPA contained an Attachment K, title d “Guaranteed 
Project Milestone s,” and an Attachment L, titled “Reporting 
Milestones,” which were placeholder document s pending the 
results of the Interconnection Requirements Study.   (After the 
Interconnection Requirements Study was finished, Attachment K to 
the Amended PPA stated that August 31, 2019 was the “Guaran teed 
Commercial Operations Date, ” and Attachment L to the Amended PPA 
stated that December 31, 2017 was the “Construction Start Date ,” 
whereby “Seller shall obtain and provide Company all permits, 
licenses, easements and approvals to construct the Company -Owned 
Interconnection Facilities.” )      
 Regarding how the PPA may be voided, Article 12.5(B) allows 
HECO, prior to the effective d ate, to “declare the Agreement 
null and void if . . . Seller is in breach of any of its 
representations, warranties and covenants under the Agreement, 
including but not limited to, (1) the provisions of Section 
22.2(C) requiring Seller to have obtained all  Land Rights 
necessary for the construction, ownership, operation and 
maintenance of the Facility for the Initial Term. . . .”   The 
PPA, however, contained grace periods for NPM of up to 90 days 
where a “guaranteed project milestone” deadline is missed.   If 
NPM still did not meet a guaranteed project milestone even with 
the applicable grace period , article 13.4(B) of the PPA allowed ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
 HECO the right to terminate the Agreement  after 180 days of 
NPM’s failure . 
 Lastly, the PPA contained a  provision, Article 29. 22, 
titled “No Third Party Beneficiaries,” which stated the 
following:  
Nothing expressed or referred to in this Agreement will be 
construed to give any person or entity other than the 
Parties any legal or equitable right, remedy, or claim 
under or with res pect to this Agreement or any provision of 
this Agreement.  This Agreement and all of its provisions 
and conditions are for the sole and exclusive benefit of 
the Parties and their successors and permitted assigns.  
 
B. LOL’s Motion to Intervene    
 On Decemb er 23, 2013, LOL moved to intervene in the matter.   
LOL identified itself as “non-profit, public interest, 
environmental group” founded in 1970.   Since 1970, LOL has 
followed energy issues and has intervened in energy dockets 
before the PUC.     
 LOL noted  that certain North Shore community members 
initially supported wind farms but had grown weary of them.  LOL 
also expressed concern over  GHG emissions  impacts as follows : 
[T]he major greenhouse gas emission associated with wind 
farms occurs in its development phase.  Raw materials such 
as limestone, chalk, shale, clay, and sand are quarried, 
crushed, finely ground, and blended in a high temperature 
process which produces a hard nodular material called 
“clinker.”  The production of clinker is a major  source of 
greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
 On March 21, 2014, the PUC issued Order No. 31998 denying 
LOL’s motion to intervene and granting it participant status 
instead.  The PUC identified the issues in the docket as the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
 following , with LOL’s participation limited to addressing just 
the first and fourth issues : 
1.  Whether the [PUC] should approve HECO’s request for a 
waiver from Parts II.A.3.b(iii) and II.A.3.d of the  
[Competitive Bidding]  Framework.  
 
2.  Whether the Power Purchase Agreement for Renewable A s-
Available Energy, dated October 3, 2013, by and between 
HECO and Na Pua Makani Power Partners, for the Project 
should be approved.  
 
3.  Whether the purchased energy charges to be paid by HECO 
pursuant to the PPA are reasonable.  
 
4.  Whether the purchased  power arrangements under the PPA, 
pursuant to which HECO purchases energy on an as -available 
basis from Na Pua Makani are prudent and in the public 
interest.  
 
5.  Whether HECO should be authorized to include the 
purchased energy charges (and related reven ue taxes) that 
HECO incurs under the PPA in and through HECO’s ECAC  
[Energy Cost Adjustment C lause], to the extent such costs 
are not included in base rates.  
 
6.  Whether the 46 kV line extension that is included as 
part of Company -Owned Interconnection Fa cilities should be 
constructed above the surface of the ground, pursuant to 
HRS § 269 -27.6(a).  
 
C.  Statements of Position  
 On June 20, 2014, LOL filed its “Statement of Position.”   
It did not contest  the project ’s waiver  from the Competitive 
Bidding Framework, stating, “ This project is a low cost 
renewable project.”   With respect to whether the PPA was prudent 
and in the public interest, LOL stated it had “chosen to focus 
on one interesting issue:  party sales.”   LOL noted that the PPA 
prohibited sales  of energy from the facility to any third party.   
LOL proposed selling excess wind-generated energy to hydrogen -
making facilities to provide alternative energy to the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 transportation sector.   LOL did not follow up on its concerns 
over GHG emissions from the  production of “clinker.”     
D.    The PUC’s Decision and Order No. 32600  
 
 On December 31, 2014, the PUC issued its Order No . 32600.  
Relevant to this appeal, the Order (1) approved HECO’s request 
for a waiver from the Competitive Bidding Framework; (2) 
approved, with modifications , the PPA for the project; and (3) 
deferred action on HECO’s request to construct 46  kV above -
ground lines pending the filing of a completed Interconnection 
Requirements Study.   The PUC found and concl uded that the 
levelized pri ce of 14.998  cents per kWh of wind energy was 
reasonable.  
 Relevant to this appeal, the PUC Order stated the 
following, under a sub -section titled “Compliance with Laws and 
Regulations”:  
Under Article 11 of the PPA, NPM is responsible for 
obtaining, at its  expense, any and all necessary permits, 
government approvals, and land rights for the construction 
and operation of the Facility, including, but not limited 
to, rights -of-way, easements, or leases.  According to 
HECO, prior to commencement of construction  of the Company -
Owned Interconnection Facilities, NPM shall provide the 
necessary permits, government approvals, a nd land rights 
for construction,  ownership, operation, and maintenance of 
Company-Owned Interconnections Facilities.  
 
LOL did not move for reh earing or reconsideration of Order No. 
32600.  LOL did not appeal Order No. 32600 to the  ICA.  
 
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 E.   The Amended and Restated Power Purchase Agreement 
 Dated August 12, 2016 and Interconnection Requirements 
 Study, Filed with the PUC on September 15, 2016 ; and the 
 PUC’s Decision and Order No. 34866  
 
 Almost two years after the PUC issued Order No. 32600, on 
September 15, 2016,  HECO filed an  application seeking the PUC’s 
approval of the construction of above -ground power lines to 
connect the wind farm to HECO’s grid.   HECO attached an Amended 
and Restated Power Purchase Agreement Dated August 12, 2016  
(“Amended PPA”)3 which incorporated the completed Interconnection 
Requirements Study.    
 On October 13, 2017, the PUC issued its Decision and Order 
No. 34866  approving HECO’s request to construct the above -ground 
46 kV line extension  and closed the docket .    
F.   The Proceedings Giving Rise to this Appeal:  LOL’s Motion 
 for Relief from Order No. 32600  
 
 1.  LOL’s Motion for Relief from Order No. 32600  
 
 Almost two years later, o n September 11, 2019, LOL  filed a 
“Motion for Relief from Order No . 32600” pursuant to HAR § 16 -
601-1 (2019) and HRCP Rule 60(b).   HAR § 16 -601-1 is titled 
“Purpose,” and it states the following:  
These rules govern the practice and procedure before the 
public utilities commission, State of Hawaii.  They shall 
be liberally construed to secure the just, speedy, and 
inexpensive determination of every proceeding.  Whenever 
this chapter is silent on a matter, the commission or 
hearings of ficer may refer to the Hawaii Rules of Civil 
Procedure for guidance.  
                     
3  The provisions of the PPA relevant to this appeal are not materially 
different in the Amended PPA.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
  
LOL argued that HAR § 16 -601-1 allowed the PUC to turn to HRCP 
Rule 60(b) for guidance because the PUC’s  rules were silent on 
the relief LOL sought . 
 HRCP Rule 60 is titled “Relief from Judgment or Order.”  
Subsection (b) of HRCP Rule 60 governs relief from judgment or 
order due to “[m]istakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly 
discovered evidence; fraud, etc.”  HRCP Rule 60(b) states the 
following in full:  
On motion and upon such te rms as are just, the court  may 
relieve a party or a party’ s legal representative from a 
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following 
reasons: (1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable 
neglect; (2) newly discovered evidence which by due 
diligence could not have been discovered in time to move 
for a new trial under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether 
heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), 
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party; 
(4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgme nt has been 
satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior judgment 
upon which it is based has been reversed or otherwise 
vacated, or it is no longer equitable that the judgment 
should have prospective application; or (6) any other 
reason justifying relief  from the operation of the 
judgment. The motion shall be made within a reasonable 
time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one 
year after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered 
or taken. A motion under this subdivision (b) does not 
affect the finality of a judgment or suspend its operation. 
This rule does not limit the power of a court to entertain 
an independent action to relieve a party from a judgment, 
order, or proceeding, or to set aside a judgment for fraud 
upon the court. Writs o f coram nobis, coram vobis, audita 
querela, and bills of review and bills in the nature of a 
bill of review, are abolished, and the procedure for 
obtaining any relief from a judgment shall be by motion as 
prescribed in these rules or by an independent acti on.  
 
 LOL asserted it was entitled to relief under H RCP Rule 
60(b)(4), (5), and (6) .  First, LOL argued Order No. 32600 was 
void, for purposes of HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), because NPM obtained ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
 an ITL beyond the deadlines set forth in the PPA.   LOL attached 
the Board of Land and Natural Resources’ (“BLNR”) May 16, 2018 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order 
approving the Final Habitat Conservation Plan and Incidental 
Take License for the wind project.   LOL characterized the ITL as 
a “Land Right.”  Under th e PPA’s (and Amended PPA’s) § 11.2 
titled “Land Rights for Facility ,” LOL argued Land Rights must 
be obtained no later than the earlier of the effective date of 
the Amended PPA (August 12, 2016) or 120 days after the 
execution date (Decembe r 10, 2016):  
Seller shall obtain, at its expense, any and all Land 
Rights required for the construction, ownership, operation 
and maintenance of the Facility and the interconnection of 
the Facility to the Company System.  Seller shall provide 
to Company, n o later than the earlier of the Effective Date 
or 120 Days after the Execution Date, copies of the 
documents establishing (i) the right of Seller to 
construct, own, operate and mainta in the Facility on the 
Site and (ii) any other Land Rights required for s uch 
construction, ownership, operation and maintenance.  If 
required by Company and no t prohibited by Laws, Seller 
shall record a memorandum or short form of such documents.  
 
 LOL argued that NPM’s failure to timely obtain an  ITL also 
violated “the thresho ld requirements of ‘site control’ imposed 
by the Competitive Bidding Framework.”   LOL quoted Part IV.B.8 
of the Competitive Bidding Framework for the following 
“requirement” of “site control”:  
As part of the design process, the utility shall develop 
and specify the type and form of threshold criteria that 
will apply to bidders, including the utility’s self -build 
proposals.  Examples of potential threshold criteria 
include requirements that bidders have site control, 
maintain a specified credit rating, and d emonstrate that 
their proposed technologies are mature.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 LOL noted that Order No. 32600 approved of the project’s waiver 
from the Competitive Bidding Framework.   As such, LOL argued 
that HECO and NPM’s “representations to the [PUC], including as 
to the Amended PPA’s land rights requirements, are to be 
strictly construed.”   Thus, LOL asserted “[b]ecause the 
underlying PPA that was subject to the [PUC’s] approval is void, 
so is” Order No. 32600 “approving the PPA.”     
 LOL also argued Order No. 32600 was void, for purposes of 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), because the PUC failed to consider GHG 
emissions in its Order No. 32600 as HRS § 269 -6(b) requires .  
HRS § 269 -6 is titled “General powers and duties,” and sub-
section (b) provides the following:  
The [PUC] shall co nsider the need to reduce the State’s 
reliance on fossil fuels through energy efficiency and 
increased renewable energy generation in exercising its 
authority and duties under this chapter.  In making 
determinations of the reasonableness of the costs of 
utility system capital improvements and operations, the 
commission shall explicitly consider, quantitatively or 
qualitatively, the effect of the State’s reliance on fossil 
fuels on price volatility, export of funds for fuel 
imports, fuel supply reliability r isk, and greenhouse gas 
emissions.  The commission may determine that short -term 
costs or direct costs that are higher than alternatives 
relying more heavily on fossil fuels are reasonable, 
considering the impacts resulting from the use of fossil 
fuels.   
 
LOL argued that there was no time limit on a Rule 60(b)(4) 
attack on a judgment, citing International Savings & Loan 
Association v. Carbonel , 93 Hawaiʻi 464, 5 P.3d 454 (App. 2000).     
 As for relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) (whether it would be 
inequita ble for the PUC’s Order No. 32600 to have prospective ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
 application), LOL argued that  two reasons make the order 
inequitable:  (1) the wind project “did not comply with HRS § 
269-6(b) [requiring the PUC to consider the  effect of the 
project on GHG emissions]  and therefore harmed [LOL’s] property 
interests in its rights to a clean and healthful environment 
protected by due process; and , (2) the pricing of the 
electricity is not reasonable.”   As to the GHG emissions  issue, 
LOL noted that Order No. 32600 contain ed no GHG emissions 
analysis.   LOL cited to this court’s then -recently published  
cases, Matter of Hawaiʻi Electric Light Company, 145 Hawaiʻi 1, 
22-23, 445 P.3d 673, 694 -95 (2019) (“ HELCO”) (requiring the PUC 
to explicitly consider GHG emissions) , and In re Application of 
Maui Electric Co mpany, 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 253, 271, 408 P.3d 1 , 5, 
23 (2017) (“MECO”) (holding that there is a protectable property 
interest to “a clean and healthful environment guaranteed by 
article XI, section 9 and defined by HRS Chapte r 269.”).     
 With respect to the price of wind energy, LOL argued that 
the 14.998 cents per kWh price of wind energy was unreasonable, 
pointing to a  Scientific American blog post  titled “Wind Energy 
is One of the Cheapest Sources of Electricity, and It’s  Getting 
Cheaper,” dated August 28, 2017 and authored by Robert Fares, 
which noted that wind en ergy could be as inexpensive a s two 
cents per kWh.   The blog post summarized the U.S. Department of 
Energy’s (“DOE”) annual Wind Technologies Market Report for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
 2017.  LOL did not attach the Wind Technologies Market Report 
itself.  The report is located on the DOE’s website at 
www.energy.gov/eere/wind/downloads/2017 -wind-technologies -
market-report.  [https://perma.cc/A7PQ -LCLJ]  Regarding the  two-
cent figure, the DOE note d, “Key findings of the report include: 
. . . . After topping out at 7 ¢/kWh in 2009, the average 
levelized lo ng-term price from wind power sales agreements has 
dropped to around 2 ¢/kWh – though this nationwide average is 
dominated by projects that hail from the lowest -priced region, 
in the central United States.”   Id. 
 Lastly, LOL asserted that the lack of findin gs on GHG 
emissions also entitled it to relief from Order No. 32600 under 
Rule 60(b)(6) (the “catch -all” provision).   LOL requested a 
hearing and/or a contested case hearing on its motion for 
relief.  
 2.   HECO’s Memorandum in Opposition to LOL’s Motion f or  
  Relief 
 
 On October 15, 2019, HECO filed its memorandum in 
opposition to LOL’s motion for relief.   HECO argued the PUC 
lacked jurisdiction over the motion.   HECO explained that the 
PUC’s jurisdiction is set by statute and that it cannot waive 
deadlines for entertaining untimely appeals in order to enlarge 
its jurisdiction , citing Tanaka v. Department of Hawaiian Home 
Lands, 106 Hawaiʻi 246, 103 P.3d 406  (App. 2004) .  It asserted ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
 that LOL was required to have appealed Order No. 32600 within 30 
days, citing HRS § 269 -15.5, HRS § 91 -14, HRCP Rule 72(b), and 
HRAP Rule 4(a).   
 HECO next argued that “LOL’s attempts to shoehorn its 
appellate issues into HRCP Rule 60 are improper.”   HECO 
contended that relief under Rule 60(b) required a showing of 
“hardship so extreme and unexpected as to justify [a court] in 
saying that [the moving parties] are the victims of oppression,” 
citing United States v. Swift & Co. , 286 U.S. 106, 119 (1932).   
HECO also contended  that LOL did not move for relief under HRCP 
Rule 60(b) within a “reasonable time.”   HECO pointed out that 
the reasonableness of wind energy prices and the absence of a 
GHG emissions analysis w ould have been  apparent when Order No. 
32600 was issued in December 2014; LOL’s motion for relief, 
however, was filed five years later.   Second, HECO maintained 
that, by December 10, 2016 (120 days after the execution of the 
Amended PPA), it would also have been apparent that an ITL for 
the wind farm project had not yet been obtained; LOL’s motion 
for relief, however, was filed almost three years past that 
date.   
 HECO next argued that, even if the PUC entertained LOL’s 
motion for relief, the motion would nonetheless fail on the 
merits.  First, HECO argued that LOL improperly characterized  
the ITL as a “Land Right” under § 11.2 of the PPA when it wa s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 actually a “ Government al Approval” under § 11.1 of the PPA.   
HECO points out that § 11.2 of the PPA defines “ Land Rights” as 
“[a]ll easements, rights of way, licenses, leases, surface use 
agreements and other inter ests or rights in real estate.”   LOL 
had argued Land Rights must be obtained within 120 days of the 
execution of the PPA , or by December 10, 2016 .  “Government al 
Approvals,” on the other hand,  are defined in § 11.1 as “[a]ll 
permits, licenses, approvals, c ertificates, entitlements and 
other authorizations issued by Governmental Authorities, as well 
as any agreements with Governmental Authorities, required for 
the construction, ownership, operation and maintenance of the 
Facility and the Company -Owned Interc onnection Facilities. . . 
.”  Governmental Approvals have no express deadline set forth in 
the PPA, but HECO footnoted, “Government al Approvals must be 
completed by the Commercial Operations Date.  See generally HECO 
Application, Ex. 1, Article 13 (Oct. 3,  2013).”  HECO pointed 
out that the ITL was a Government al Approval because it was 
triggered by the construction and operation of the wind turbines 
and issued by the B LNR.    
 HECO argued that even if the ITL is considered a “ Land 
Right,” a delay in obtaining it would not constitute a material 
breach of the PPA or justify voiding the entire PPA.   HECO 
stated that neither it nor NPM intend ed for a delay in obtaining 
the ITL to constitute a material breach of the PPA.   In any ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 event, HECO argued , LOL did not have standing to argue that the 
PPA has been breached.      
 As to LOL’s argument that NPM has failed to obtain “site 
control” under the Competitive Bidding Framework, HECO presented 
three counter-arguments.   First, the PUC approved the waiver of 
the project from the Competitive Bidding Framework, so the 
portion of the framework quoted by LOL does not apply.   Second, 
HECO pointed out that the portion of the framework quoted by LOL 
does not require “site control”; rather, it lists “site control” 
as an ex ample of a “potential threshold criteria” a utility can 
consider including in the bidding process.   Third, HECO 
maintained the NPM has actual site control :  the BLNR approved a 
lease of land to NPM for the project on October 14, 2016.   
 Moreover, HECO argu ed that HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) would  apply 
to “void” Order No. 32600 only if the PUC “lacked jurisdiction 
of either the subject matter or the parties or otherwise acted 
in a manner inconsistent with due process.”   HECO argued the PUC 
indisputably had jurisdict ion over the issues and parties in 
this matter, which involved reviewing a PPA of a public utility.   
HECO also argued that any due process argument was waived when 
LOL failed to timely appeal Order No. 32600.     
 HECO next argued that LOL did not explain how analysis of 
GHG emissions, had it been included in Order No. 32600, would 
have changed the PUC’s decision.   HECO pointed out that the BLNR ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
 found that the wind energy project “would . . . eliminate about 
one million tons of CO2 over twenty years.”   HECO pointed out 
that in other dockets, LOL had strongly advocated for wind power 
(among other alternative energy sources, like solar power).   
HECO argued LOL could not invoke equity in its motion for relief 
while taki ng a position on wind power inconsistent with its past 
positions .   
 Finally, HECO argued that its wind energy price is 
reasonable.   It asserted the PUC should not consider LOL’s blog 
article on wind power costs in the interior United States, which 
did not discuss wind generation in Hawaiʻi.    
 3.   The Consumer Advocate’s Response to LOL’s Motion for  
  Relief 
 
 On October 15, 2019, the Consumer Advocate filed its 
response to LOL’s motion for relief , recommending that the PUC 
deny the motion on procedural  grounds.  The Consumer Advocate 
argued that LOL was allowed to participate on the issue of 
whether the PPA was prudent and in the public interest, which 
would have included the provisions concerning when the parties 
would obtain an ITL.   The Consumer Advo cate stated that any 
challenge to the se provisions a fter the PPA was approved should 
have been brought in a timely motion for reconsideration under 
HAR § 16 -601-137.  The deadline for filing such a motion was ten 
days after the service of Order No. 32600 u pon LOL.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
  As to LOL’s argument that HRCP Rule 60(b) applied, the 
Consumer Advocate disagreed, stating that the PUC’s 
administrative rules are not “silent” on the relief LOL 
requested.   In addition to filing a timely motion for 
reconsideration under HAR § 16 -601-137, LOL could have turned to 
Subchapter 5 of the PUC’s rules (governing complaints and PUC 
investigations), and/or Subchapter 16 of the PUC’s rules 
(governing declaratory orders) .  
  The Consumer Advocate  warned, “Allowing this motion would 
set a dangerous precedent by allowing a party to question any 
prior [PUC] decision outside of the timelines for appeal set 
forth in the [PUC’s] rules of practice and procedure, and 
thereby unde rmine the authority of the [PUC] to make final and 
effective rulings.”  
 The Consumer Advocate stated it was “not clear that LOL has 
fully supported all of its assertions” regarding why Order No. 
32600 was void and/or inequitable.   The Consumer Advocate did , 
however, acknowledge that “certain milestones have been missed,” 
such as the March 31, 2019 deadline for installing turbines and 
generators at the site, and an August 31, 2019 guaranteed 
commercial operation date.   It noted, though, that the “PPA has 
terms that allow cure periods for such situations.”    
 Lastly, the Consumer Advocate pointed out that “[i]f it 
bec[a]me[] evident and supported that there [we]re breaches in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 the PPA or other events that are contrary to the public 
interest, the [PUC] should se ek to timely investigate those 
matters” using its authority under HRS § 269 -7(a).  HRS § 269 -7 
(2007) is titled “Investigative powers.”  Subsection (a) 
provides the following:  
The public utilities commission and each commissioner shall 
have power to examin e into the condition of each public 
utility, the manner in which it is operated with reference 
to the safety or accommodation of the public, the safety, 
working hours, and wages of its employees, the fares and 
rates charged by it, the value of its physical  property, 
the issuance by it of stocks and bonds, and the disposition 
of the proceeds thereof, the amount and disposition of its 
income, and all its financial transactions, its business 
relations with other persons, companies, or corporations, 
its complia nce with all applicable state and federal laws 
and with the provisions of its franchise, charter, and 
articles of association, if any, its classifications, 
rules, regulations, practices, and service, and all matters 
of every nature affecting the relations and transactions 
between it and the public or persons or corporations.  
 
 The Consumer Advocate concluded its response by stating a 
hearing on LOL’s motion for relief was not necessary, and that a 
contested hearing was precluded, because the PUC’s docket fo r 
the wind project had already been closed.  
 4.  Further Briefing on the Motion for Relief  
 LOL requested leave to file replies to HECO and the 
Consumer Advocate.   The PUC granted the request and also allowed 
HECO and the Consumer Advocate to further respo nd.  The PUC also 
set LOL’s motion for relief on for hearing on November 22, 2019.    
 On November 14, 2019, LOL filed replies to HECO  and the 
Consumer Advocate .  In its reply to HECO, LOL raised the 
argument that Order No. 32600 was void , for purposes of HRCP ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 Rule 60(b)(4) , because the PUC did not analyze the wind 
project’s  GHG emissions impact and, therefore, violated LOL’s 
due process rights under MECO.  LOL argued t his due process 
right was not fully clarified until the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court 
extended MECO in HELCO, a case that was not published until 
2019.  LOL contended that the PUC has an independent obligation 
to explicitly consider GHG emissions and cannot rely on the 
BLNR’s analysis of GHG emissions in the ITL.   LOL also stated it 
was not raising th e allegedly delayed ITL as a breach of the 
PPA; rather, LOL raised the parties’ noncompliance with the PPA 
as a violation of the PUC’s approval of the PPA.   Therefore, LOL 
contended, contract concepts such as standing, breach, and the 
parties’ intent were irrelevant.     
 In its reply to the Consumer Advocate, LOL stated that it 
could not have sought relief under HAR § 16 -601-137, because the 
operative facts in LOL’s motion were not known 10 days from the 
date of service of Order No. 32600.   LOL also argued  that it 
could not seek relief from Order No. 32600 through a declaratory 
order, because the agency declaratory order process was “not 
intended to allow review of concrete agency deci sions for which 
other means of review are available,” citing Citizens Aga inst 
Reckless Development v. Zoning Board of Appeals , 114 Hawaiʻi 184, 
197, 159 P.3d 143, 156 (2007).   Lastly, LOL acknowledged that 
the PUC could sua  sponte investigate a public utility, but LOL ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 noted that the PUC had not opened an investigation into this 
matter.    
 On November 19, 2019, HECO and the Consumer Advocate filed 
their reply briefs responding to LOL’s reply briefs.   HECO 
emphasized that LOL  “is unable to identify any case that 
supports its jurisdictional arguments; any case that suggests it 
can raise an alleged failure to analyze greenhouse ga[ses] 
(‘GHG’) where it cannot identify GHG harms; or any case that 
suggests its Motion was brought i n a ‘reasonable time.’ ”  HECO 
continued, “ Nor has LOL identified any authority that su pports 
its substantive positions.”     
 For its part, the Consumer Advocate argued that LOL could 
have raised the GHG emissions issue upon a timely motion for 
reconsidera tion of Order No. 32600 , because LOL was also the 
organization raising GHG emissions issues in MECO and HELCO.  In 
other words, LOL did not have to wait until the publication of 
this court’s opinions in MECO and HELCO to continue raising the 
issue in PUC d ockets.  The Consumer Advocate also urged the PUC 
not to entertain LOL’s motion for relief, brought years after 
the PUC’s Order No. 32600, as doing so would inject uncertainty 
into utility regulation and chill investment, including 
renewable energy investm ent, in Hawaiʻi.  The Consumer Advocate 
argued that the PUC’s orders should not be rendered “void” based 
on facts or circumstances that occur after an order is issued.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 The Consumer Advocate stressed  that the PUC should act upon new 
facts or circumstances through its investigative powers.   
 5.  The PUC’s Decision and Order No. 37074  
 After a November 22, 2019 hearing on LOL’s motion for 
relief, the PUC denied the motion in its Order No. 37074, filed 
on April 16, 2020.   The Order noted in the introduct ion and 
conclusion that the PUC “is carefully monitoring the Project 
development and intends to follow up with HECO and [NPM], 
outside of this proceeding, to inquire whether any violations of 
the PPA] have occurred, and if so, will take appropriate 
action.”  
 The PUC concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to rule on 
LOL’s motion for relief under Tanaka, 106 Hawaiʻi 246, 103 P.3d 
406.  This was because HRS § 269 -15.5 (the statute governing 
appeals from PUC orders at the time of the December 2014 Order 
No. 32600) required LOL to have appealed Order No. 32600 to the 
ICA within 30 days.   Pursuant to Tanaka, the PUC stated that 
LOL’s failure to timely appeal Order No. 32600 deprived it of 
jurisdiction to hear further matters related to the order , 
including LOL’s motio n for relief .  The PUC also noted that HAR 
§ 16-601-137 required any motion for relief from Order No. 32600 
to have been filed “within ten days after the decision or order 
is served upon the party. . . .”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
  The PUC addressed LOL’s argument that LOL could not have 
known, in the days and weeks after Order No. 32600 issued, that 
the ITL would not be obtained until 2018.   The PUC countered 
that similar circumstances existed in Tanaka, where the 
defendant in that case could not have known, at the time of a 
DHHL order terminating his lease for criminal activity , that his 
criminal conviction would be later vacated.   The PUC thus 
rejected “any argument by LOL that the issuance of the 
Incidental Take License somehow tolled the HAR § 16 -601-137 
reconsideration deadline. . . .”   
 The PUC also rejected LOL’s argument that “failure to 
comply with [the PPA] is not being analyzed as a breach of 
contract between private parties, but rather, as a violation of 
the [PUC’s] approval.”   The PUC stated that it had approved  the 
PPA as a whole, “which included the various contractual 
mechanisms and remedies within the PPA to address any such 
delays.”   The PUC noted that neither HECO nor NPM elected to 
invoke the contractual mechanisms and remedies within the PPA.   
Further, th e PUC continued, the ITL is “better defined as a 
‘Governmental Approval,’ rather than a ‘Land Right, ’ under the 
plain language of the PPA, implicitly concluding that the ITL 
was therefore not untimely obtained.  
 The PUC stated that, in any event, any alle ged delay was 
“not relevant under the circumstances, as LOL lacks standing to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
 assert a breach of the PPA, and thus could not have brought a 
motion for reconsideration . . . .”   The PUC stated that LOL was 
neither a party to the PPA nor an intended third -party 
beneficiary of the PPA.   Moreover, the PUC continued, even if 
the delay did toll the HAR § 16 -601-137 deadline, “LOL waited 
nearly a year and a half [after the May 16, 2018 ITL was issued 
to] fil[e] its Motion for Relief on September 11, 2019.”    
 Lastly, the PUC concluded that its administrative rules are 
not silent on the matters raised in LOL’s motion  because HAR § 
16-601-137 applied ; therefore, there was no need for LOL to 
incorporate HRCP Rule 60(b) through HAR § 16 -601-1.  The PUC 
pointed out tha t LOL could have challenged the PUC’s Order No. 
32600 with respect to GHG emissions and energy pricing when the 
order was issued, which were both issues that were known at the 
time of the filing of the order.   Thus, the PUC concluded LOL’s 
motion for relie f constituted an untimely motion for 
reconsideration of Order No. 32600.  In any event, the PUC 
continued, HAR § 16 -601-1 permits, but does not require, the PUC 
to turn to the HRCP for guidance.    The PUC also favorably 
repeated  the Consumer Advocate’s poi nt that LOL could have filed 
a complaint under HAR § 16 -601, Subchapter 5, or a petition for 
declaratory relief under HAR § 16 -601, Subchapter 16.   
 
    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
 G.  LOL’s Direct Appeal  of Order No. 37074  
 On April 27, 2020, LOL filed a timely notice of appeal of 
Order No. 37074 to this court.  
H.  Jurisdictional Statements  
 1.  HECO’s Statement Contesting Jurisdiction  
 On July 6, 2020, HECO filed a Statement Contesting 
Jurisdiction.   HECO argue d that this c ourt lacks jurisdiction 
because LOL failed to appeal Order No. 32600 within 30 days , as 
it was required to do under HRS § 269 -15.5, HRS chapter 602, and 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) .  HECO again cited Tanaka, 106 Hawaiʻi 246, 103 
P.3d 406, for the proposition that LO L’s failure to timely 
appeal Order No. 32600 divested the PUC of jurisdiction to 
entertain LOL’s motion for relief.      
 HECO also argued that this court lacks jurisdiction over 
LOL’s appeal of Order No. 37074 because the motion for relief 
was an impermis sible collateral attack on Order No. 32600.   
Moreover, HECO argued LOL’s motion for relief sought to re -
litigate the GHG emissions and energy price issues, which could 
have been timely raised after Order No. 32600 was issued.   
Lastly, HECO contended that t his court lacks jurisdiction over 
LOL’s appeal “for the separate and independent reason that the 
2019 proceeding was not a contested case.”   Under HRS § 269 -
15.5, “[o]nly a person aggrieved in  a contested case proceeding 
provided for in [HRS chapter 269] m ay appeal from the order.”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
31 
 HECO argued that there is “no statute or rule that requires a 
hearing on a ‘Motion for Relief.’”   Therefore, HECO maintained, 
“the hearing on the Motion for Relief was discretionary,” and 
“there was no contested case.”   Under HR S § 269-15.5, HECO 
argued, this court lacks jurisdiction over LOL’s appeal, which 
“should be summarily dismissed.”   
 2.  LOL’s Statement of Jurisdiction  
 Also on July 6, 2020, LOL filed a Jurisdictional Statement.    
LOL asserted that this court has juris diction over the appeal 
pursuant to HRS §§ 91 -7, 91-14(a), 269 -15.5, 269 -15.51, 602 -5, 
632-1, 641-1, and “constitutional provisions for due process and 
the right to a clean and healthy environment ” under Haw. Const. 
art. I, § 5 and art XI § 9.      
 LOL argued that it has standing to bring an administrative 
appeal under the “two -prong standing test” used in HELCO, 145 
Hawaiʻi at 21, 445 P.3d at 691:  (1) “one  must be a person 
aggrieved . . . by a final decision and order in a contested 
case,” and (2) “th e aggrieved person must have participated in 
the contested case from which the decision affecting him 
resulted.”   LOL contends it is a “person aggrieved” because PUC 
Order No. 37074 denied LOL’s requested relief.   Further, LOL 
asserted that it was a partic ipant in the PUC’s contested case 
proceeding, and that Order No. 37074 “is a final decision in the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
32 
 contested case proceedings for purposes of appeal as it left no 
further issues to be determined.”    
 LOL concluded its jurisdictional statement by asking this 
court to “assert its jurisdiction to vacate PUC Order No. 37074 
. . . and remand these matters to PUC for further proceedings.”   
 3.  This court possesses jurisdiction over this appeal.  
 This court possesses  jurisdiction at a minimum to rule on 
the jurisdictional issue raised in this case.   See Beneficial 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Casey , 98 Hawaiʻi 159, 164 -65, 45 P.3d 359, 364 -
65 (2002) .  First, we are not persuaded that the case relied 
upon by HECO and the PUC, Tanaka, 106 Hawaiʻi 246, 103 P.3d 406, 
compels the conclusion that LOL’s failure to timely appeal Order 
No. 32600 divests this court of jurisdiction over this case.  
The Tanaka case is distinguishable  because the appellant in that 
case did not try to re -open agency proceedings using HRCP Rule 
60(b), and the ICA did not decide the case with reference to 
HRCP Rule 60(b).    
 In Tanaka, the Hawaiian Homes Commission (“HHC”) terminated 
Raymond T. Tanaka ’s lease with the Department of Hawaiian Home 
Lands (“DHHL”) after Tanaka was convicted of drug posse ssion.  
106 Hawaiʻi at 247-48, 103 P.3d at 407 -08.  The HHC notified 
Tanaka that he had ten days from the date of service of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
33 
 order to request reconsideration4 by the HHC and thirty days to 
institute proceedings for judicial review in the circuit court 
under HAPA, HRS chapter 91.  106 Hawaiʻi at 248, 103 P.3d at 408.  
Tanaka neither moved for reconsideration nor appealed the 
decision.   Id.   
 The following year, the ICA vacated Tanaka’s conviction and 
remanded his case for a new trial .  Id. (citing State v. Tanaka , 
92 Hawaiʻi 675, 994 P.2d 607 (App. 1999)).  A new criminal trial 
was not held, as the prosecutor moved to nolle prosequi without 
prejudice.  106 Hawaiʻi at 249, 103 P.3d at 409.  In 2000 and 
2001, Tanaka and his counsel wrote letters to the HHC requesting 
reinstatement of Tanaka’s DHHL lease.  106 Hawaiʻi at 248-49, 103 
P.3d at 408 -09.   
 The HHC denied Tanaka’s request.  106 Hawaiʻi at 249, 103 
P.3d at 409.  He appealed the denial to the circuit court, which 
                     
4  The Commission administrative rule setting forth Tanaka’s right to seek 
reconsideration or rehearing was HAR § 10 -5-42 (1998), which stated the 
following:  
(d) The commission may entertain a written petition to 
reconsider or re -hear its final order, decision or ruling.  
The petition shall be determined with reasonable expedition 
so that the aggrieved party may have timely opportunity to 
appeal.  De nial of such petition shall be in writing with 
the reasons stated therefore.  
(e) Petition to reconsider or re -hear any final order, 
decision or ruling of the commission shall be filed not 
later than ten days after a person is served with a 
certified copy o f the final decision and order of the 
commission.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
34 
 affirmed the HHC.   Id.  Tanaka then appealed the circuit court’s 
judgment to the ICA.   Id. 
 The ICA concluded that Tanaka’s “failure to appeal from the 
Commission’s December 1998 Final Order left the Commission 
without jurisdiction to act on Tanaka’s 2000 and 2001 requests 
for reconsideratio n.”  Id.  Further, the ICA held that the 
Commission was without jurisdiction to even hold the November 
2001 proceeding because “it was not a separate ‘contested case 
hearing’” under HRS § 91 -14(a).  Id.  Lastly, the  ICA concluded 
that “a party’s failure to  timely request an agency review 
hearing not only bars the agency from considering that request, 
but also precludes the circuit court from considering an appeal 
of the administrative decision.  Id. (quoting Association of 
Apt. Owners of the Governor Clegho rn v. M.F.D., Inc. , 60 Haw. 
65, 68-70, 587 P.2d 301, 304 (1978)).  The ICA thus vacated the 
circuit court’s judgment and remanded the case to the circuit 
court for an order dismissing the appeal in the circuit court.  
106 Hawaiʻi at 252, 103 P.3d at 4 12. 
 During the course of its opinion, the ICA footnoted the 
following:  
Tanaka argues on appeal that the [Commission] had 
jurisdiction to consider his request for reinstatement 
because “substantially changed circumstances exist,” i.e., 
the dismissal of his crim inal charges.  However, Tanaka 
offers no authority to support this position and, as we 
have pointed out, there appears to be no authority for such 
late review.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
35 
 106 Hawaiʻi at 250 n.8, 103 P.3d at 410 n.8.  This footnote 
highlights the distinction between the Tanaka case and this one .  
While both sought a re -opening of agency proceedings due to 
substantially changed circumstances, Tanaka “offer[ed] no 
authority to support this position,” while LOL asks this court 
to consider whether HRCP Rule 60(b) provides  such authority.  
Moreover, DHHL’s administrative rules do not appear to contain a 
provision that would allow it to turn to the HRCP for guidance 
where its own rules are silent in any event.  See HAR chapter 
Title 10.  By contrast, the PUC’s  HAR § 16 -601-1 expressly 
contemplates turning to the HRCP where the PUC’s rules are 
silent.  Therefore, Tanaka is limited to its unique facts.  
Tanaka does not compel the conclusion that this court lacks 
jurisdiction over this appeal.   
 HECO next argues that LOL’s moti on for relief was a 
collatera l attack on Order No. 32600.  We disagree.  A 
collateral attack is “an attempt to impeach a judgment or decree 
in a proceeding not instituted for the express purpose of 
annulling, correcting or modifying such a judgment or decr ee.”  
HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi at 11-12, 445 P.3d at 683 -84 (citation 
omitted).  The “collateral attack doctrine is implicated when an 
independent suit seeks to impeach a judgment entered in a prior 
suit.”  Id.  It applies “in situations in which a second lawsuit 
has been initiated challenging a judgment or order obtained from ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
36 
 a prior, final proceeding.”  Id.  In this case, LOL’s motion for 
relief was submitted in the same proceeding that generated Order 
No. 32600; it is not an “independent suit” or a “second lawsuit” 
attacking a prior proceeding.  See also PennyMac Corp. v. 
Godinez, 148 Hawaiʻi 323, 329, 474 P.3d 264, 270 (2020) (“A Rule 
60(b) motion is therefore not a ‘collateral attack’ – the 
purpose of Rule 6 0(b) is to provide a mechanism for challenging 
a final judgment.”).    
 Correlatively, LOL’s motion for relief was brought  within 
the same contested case proceeding.  Therefore, LOL is correct 
in arguing that it is a person aggrieved by Order No. 37074, 
which it brought under an HRCP Rule 60(b) motion challenging 
Order No. 32600 in a contested case proceeding, in which it was 
a participant.  See HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi at 21, 445 P.3d at 693 
(holding that in order to appeal an agency decision, an 
appellant must b e (1) “a person aggrieved . . . by a final 
decision and order in a contested case,” and (2) “the aggrieved 
person must have participated in the contested case from which 
the decision affecting him resulted”) .  We have jurisdiction 
over this appeal.  
III.  Standards of Review  
A.  Direct Appeal  
 This court reviews direct appeals from PUC decisions under 
HRS § 91 -14(g), which states the following:  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
37 
 Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or  statutory provisions;  
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of 
the agency;  
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;  
(4) Affected by other error of law;  
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, 
and substantial evidence on the w hole record; or  
(6) Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by abuse of 
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.  
 
 “Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, pursuant to 
subsections (1), (2) and (4); questions regarding procedural 
defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact 
(FOF) are reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard, 
pursuant to subsection (5) ; and an agency’s exercise of 
discretion is reviewed under the arbitrary  and capricious 
standard, pursuant to subsect ion (6).”  HELCO, 145 Hawaiʻi at 10-
11, 445 P.3d at 682 -83 (citation omitted).  “Mixed questions of 
law and fact are ‘“reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard 
because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and 
circumstances of the particular case .”’”  Id. (citation 
omitted).  
B.  Interpretation of Statutes  
“We review the  . . . interpretation of a statute  de 
novo.” State v. Pacheco , 96 Hawaiʻi 83, 94, 26 P.3d 572, 583 
(2001). Our statutory construction is guided by established 
rules: ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
38 
 When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of  the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself. And we must read 
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and 
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.  
 
96 Hawaiʻi at 94, 26 P.3d at 583 (citations omitted).  
C.  Interpretation of A dministrative Rules 
 In interpreting the HAR,  
[t]he general principles of construction which apply to 
statutes also apply to administrative rules.  As in 
statutory construction, courts lo ok first at an 
administrative rule’s language.  If an administrative 
rule’s language is unambiguous, and its literal application 
is neither inconsistent with the policies of the statute 
the rule implements nor produces an absurd or unjust 
result, courts en force the rule’s plaining meaning.  
 
Kaleikini v. Yoshioka , 128 Hawaiʻi 53, 67, 283 P.3d 60,  74 (2012) 
(citations omitted).   
D.  Interpretation of Court Rules  
 An appellate court reviews the interpretation of court 
rules de novo.  Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 120 Hawaiʻi 181, 
197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009).  
E.  Interpretation of Contracts  
 “As a general rule, the construction and legal effect to be 
given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an 
appellate court.”  Casumpang v. ILWU Local  142, 108 Hawaiʻi 411, 
420, 121 P.3d 391, 400 (2005) (cleaned up).   
IV.  Discussion  
 On appeal, LOL raises the following points of error:  
 The PUC reversibly erred in the following ways:  
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
39 
 (1)  by concluding it lacked jurisdiction to consider 
[LOL’s] motion for relief on the basis that it is untimely 
under a strict construal of statutes creating a right of 
appeal and rules governing reconsideration.  
. . . . 
(2) by treating [LOL’s] motion for relief pursuant to HAR § 
16-601-1 as an untimely filed or failed motion for 
reconsideration.  
. . . . 
(3)  by failing to re -open proceedings to address HE CO and 
NPM’s failure to obtain  land rights under amended PPA § 
11.2 or, alternatively, to strictly construe parties’ 
failure to obtain site control as required by P art IV.B.8 
of the competitive bidding framework, from which parties 
had obtained a waiver.  
. . . . 
(4) by treating the approval of the amended PPA as a 
contract between private parties and engaging in contract 
interpretation in concluding the meaning of th e amended PPA 
approval.  
. . . . 
(5)  by delegating its powers to interpret its order 
approving the PPA and amendments to the same private 
parties – HECO and NPM – as a consequence of concluding 
that its approval of the PPA can be amended through 
“contractu al mechanisms” available exclusively to the 
private parties to the contract.  
 
Briefly restated, LOL argues that the PUC’s administrative rules 
are “silent” on providing relief from a n order in these 
circumstances.  Therefore, LOL argues that , under HAR § 1 6-601-
1, the PUC should have turned  to HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), (5), and 
(6) to grant LOL relief.   
 LOL argues that under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), Order No. 32600 
is “void” because (1) NPM failed to timely obtain an ITL under 
the PPA’s terms , and (2) the PUC failed  to analyze the GHG 
emissions impact of the wind farm project under HRS § 269 -6(b), 
which violates LOL ’s due process right to a clean and healthful 
environment.  LOL contends  that under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5), it is 
“no longer equitable” for Order No. 32600 t o “have prospective ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
40 
 application ” with regard to wind prices, because (1) a 2017 
Scientific American blog article stated that wind prices had 
fallen to 2 cents per kWh, making the PPA’s 14.998 cents per kWh 
price unreasonable , and (2) the PUC failed to analyze the GHG 
emissions impact of the wind farm project under HRS § 269 -6(b).  
Lastly, LOL maintains  that under HRCP Rule (60)(b)(6), the PUC’s 
failure to consider GHG emissions constitutes “any other reason 
justifying relief from the operation of the” o rder.   
 Both HECO and the PUC argue that HAR § 16 -601-1 permits, 
but does not require, the PUC to turn to the HRCP for guidance.  
Both argue that the PUC did not need to turn to HRCP Rule 60(b) 
because the PUC’s administrative rules are not “silent” on 
providing relief from a n order.  Specifically, HAR § 16 -601-137 
allows motions for rehearing or reconsideration of a PUC order 
to be filed within 10 days of service of the order.  Both HECO 
and the PUC also argue that LOL could have appealed Order No. 
32600 within 30 days, under HRS § 269 -15.5, which governs 
appeals from PUC decisions and orders.  The PUC further points 
out that LOL could have filed a formal complaint under HAR § 16 -
601-67 (2019), or a petition for a declaratory order under HAR § 
16-601-159 (2019).  Moreover, b oth HECO and the PUC also argue 
that even if the PUC did turn to HRCP Rule 60(b) for guidance, 
LOL’s motion for relief was not filed within a reasonable time .  
 Additionally , HECO asserts that, as a factual matter, the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
41 
 ITL was not obtained too late, because it was a Government al 
Approval that was obtained prior to the commercial operations 
date, as the PPA required .  Moreover, b oth HECO and the PUC 
argue, LOL lacks standing to assert an alleged breach of the 
terms of the PP A, because only HECO and NPM are parties to the 
PPA, and because LOL is not an int ended third -party beneficiary 
of the PPA.     
A.   The PUC’s rules  are silent on the manner in which a 
 participant can obtain relief from an order due to facts 
 that develop  after the time to appeal the order has passed.   
 
 Under HAR § 16-601-1, the PUC has the discretion, but is 
not required , to turn to the HRCP  for guidance where its rules 
are silent.  Again, HAR § 16 -601-1 states, in relevant part, 
“Whenever this chapter  [i.e., HAR chapter 16 -601] is silent on a 
matter, the commission or hearings officer may refer to the 
Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure for guidance.”  HECO and the PUC 
argue that the PUC rules are not silent on the relief LOL 
sought.  Specifically, they co ntend HAR § 16 -601-137 applies, 
which covers motions  “seeking any change in a decision [or] 
order,” such as “reconsideration, rehearing, further hearing, or 
modification, suspension, vacation, or a combination thereof.”  
Such a motion must be filed 10 days  after service of  the 
decision or order.  (Alternatively, they contend LOL could have 
timely appealed Order No. 32600 under HRS § 269 -15.5, which 
states that “an appeal from an order of the [PUC] under this ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
42 
 chapter shall lie, subject to chapter 602, in the  manner 
provided for civil appeals from the circuit court,” which, under 
chapter 602 at that time, required appeal to the ICA within 30 
days after entry of the order .)  LOL, on the other hand, argues 
that there is no PUC rule under which it could have soug ht 
relief from an order based on circumstances that developed after 
the time for filing a motion for rehearing or reconsideration 
(or an agency appeal)  has passed ; therefore, the PUC should have 
turned to HRCP Rule 60(b).  
  In this case, neither HAR § 16 -601-137 nor HRCP Rule 60(b) 
alone provides for the relief LOL sought.  To reiterate, LOL 
based its motion for relief on three claims: (1) the parties 
untimely obtained an ITL in May 2018 , in violation of the terms 
of the PPA , which therefore voided Order No. 32600 ; (2) 14.998 
cents per kWh of wind energy was unreasonable, in light of a 
2017 Scientific American blog article stating that wind energy 
prices had dropped to 2 cents per kWh , and (3) the PUC’s Order 
No. 32600 contained no findings of fact or conc lusions of law 
about GHG emissions, in violation of HRS § 269 -6(b). 
 On one hand, LOL could have raised the absence of a GHG 
emissions analysis in Order No. 32600 in a timely motion for 
rehearing or reconsideration under HAR § 16 -601-137 or a timely 
appeal under HRS § 269 -15.5.  In 2011, HRS § 269 -6(b) was 
amended to requir e the PUC to explicitly consider the effect of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
43 
 a project like the wind farm on GHG emissions.  See 2011 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 109, § 1 at 287 -88 (newly mandating the PUC to 
“explicitly consider, quantitatively or qualitatively, the 
effect of the State’s reli ance on fossil fuels on ,” inter alia, 
“greenhouse gas emissions.”)  The absence of a GHG emissions  
analysis  is evident on the face of Order No. 32600 .  Order No. 
32600 was filed on December 31, 2014 , well after this amendment 
was passed .  Thus, as to the G HG emissions issue, the PUC did 
not abuse its discretion in declining to re -open Order No. 32600 
under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), (5), or (6) to address the GHG 
emissions issue.  A motion under HRCP Rule 60(b) “i s not a 
substitute for a timely appeal from the ori ginal judgment.”  
Stafford v. Dickison , 46 Haw . 52, 57 n.4, 374 P.2d 665, 669 n.4 
(1962) (citations omitted).      
 On the other hand, t wo of these bases for re -opening Order 
No. 32600 could not have been timely raised in a motion for 
rehearing or reconsideration under HAR § 16 -601-137 (or timely 
appealed under HRS § 269 -15.5).  First, the parties did not 
obtain an ITL until May 2018, and this fact could not have been 
known 10 days (or 30 days) af ter the PUC issued Order No. 32600 .  
Second, the 2017 Scientific American blog article about wind 
energy prices did not exist 10 days (or 30 days) after the PUC 
issued Order No. 32600. Therefore, LOL could not have used HAR § 
16-601-137 (or HRS § 269.15.5)  to seek relief on these bases.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
44 
 The PUC’s administrative rules are silent as to how to seek 
relief from a PUC order based on facts like these that develop 
after the 10-day rehearing or reconsideration date (and the 30 -
day appeal date) ha ve passed.  In the se circumstances, LOL 
reasonably argues that relief under HRCP Rule 60(b) (4) or (5)  
may be available .  We further examine these subsections below.  
B.   HRCP Rule 60(b)  generally , and subsections (4) and (5)  
 specifically   
 
 HRCP Rule 60  is titled “Relief f rom Judgment or Order.”  
Subsection (b) of the rule is titled “Mistakes; inadvertence; 
excusable neglect; newly discovered evidence; fraud, etc.,” and 
it states the following , in relevant part : 
On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court  may 
relieve a party or a party’ s legal representative from a 
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following 
reasons: (1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable 
neglect; (2) newly discovered evidence which by due 
diligence could not have bee n discovered in time to move 
for a new trial under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether 
heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), 
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party; 
(4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment has been 
satisfied, rel eased, or discharged, or a prior judgment 
upon which it is based has been reversed or otherwise 
vacated, or it is no longer equitable that the judgment 
should have prospective application; or (6) any other 
reason justifying relief from the operation of the  
judgment. The motion shall be made within a reasonable 
time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one 
year after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered 
or taken. . . .  
 
The ITL and wind price issues  concern Rule 60(b)(4) (“the 
judgment  is void”)  and (5) (“it is no longer equitable that the 
judgment should have prospective application”) , respectively .   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
45 
  As to HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), this court has said, “The 
determination of whether a judgment is void is not a 
discretionary issue.  It has b een noted that a judgment is void 
only if the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction of either 
the subject matter or the parties or otherwise acted in a manner 
inconsistent with due process of law.”  Carbonel , 93 Hawaiʻi at 
473, 5 P.3d at 463  (quoting  In re Hana Ranch Co. , 3 Haw. App. 
141, 146, 642 P.2d 938, 941 (1982))  (cleaned up) .  The question  
on appeal is whether an allegedly untimely ITL somehow “voids” 
Order No. 32600.  
 Next, HRCP Rule 60(b)(5)  “is based on the historic power of 
a court of equity to modify its decree in the light of change d 
circumstances .”  11 Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice and Procedure  § 2863 (3d ed. 2021) .  Wright & 
Miller explain that Rule 60(b)(5) is not a substitute for an 
appeal.  It does not  allow “re-litigation of issues that have 
been resolved by the judgment. ”  Id.  Instead, the rule refers 
to “some change in conditions that makes continued enforcement 
inequitable.”   Id.  The burden is on the movant to “demonstrate 
extraordinary circumstan ces justifying relief. ”  Id.  The 
question on appeal is whether a 2017 Scientific American blog 
article reporting on a nation wide decrease in wind energy prices 
constitutes “extraordinary circumstances justifying relief.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
46 
  A motion brought under HRCP Rule 60(b) is also subject to 
various deadlines.  Unlike subsections (1), (2), and (3) of HRCP 
Rule 60, which are all subject to a one -year deadline, a motion 
brought under subsection (5) is subject to “a reasonable time.”  
A motion brought under subsection (4)  may be brought “ regardless 
of how much time has passed between entry of judgment and filing 
the motion.”  Bank of Hawaii v. Shinn, 120 Hawaiʻi 1, 11, 200 
P.3d 370, 380 (2008).  Where there are “exceptional situations,” 
however, it appears the “reasonable” time limit applies.  See 
Calasa v. Greenwell , 2 Haw. App. 395, 398, 633 P.2d 553, 554 
(“Except in exceptional situations, there is no time limit  on an 
attack on a judgment as  void.”) (citation  omitted).   A 
“reasonable time” calls for an inquiry into “the explanation for 
the delay in applying for reinstatement of the action.”  Hawaiʻi 
Housing Authority v. Uyehara , 77 Hawaiʻi 144, 149, 883 P.2d 65, 
70 (1994).    
C.  The merits of LOL’s 60(b) (4) and (5)  arguments  
 We next discuss whether the PUC abused its discretion in 
declining to consider LOL’s motion for relief under HRCP Rule 
60(b)(4)  and (5).    
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
47 
  1. The PUC did not abuse its discretion in declining to  
  turn to HRCP Rul e 60(b)(4) for guidance with respect  
  to LOL’s claim that the parties were late in obtaining 
  an ITL.   
  
  Again, under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), an order is “void only if 
the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction of either the 
subject matter or the parties or otherwise acted in a manner 
inconsistent with due process of law.”  Carbonel , 93 Hawaiʻi at 
473, 5 P.3d at 463 (quoting Hana Ranch Co. , 3 Haw. App. at 146, 
642 P.2d at 941).  The question on appeal is whether an 
allegedly untimely obtained ITL somehow “voids” Order No. 32600.  
We hold that it does not.  T he “voiding” of the PPA and Order 
No. 32600 that LOL sought to prove did not involve defects in 
jurisdiction or a due process violation, as HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) 
requires.  See Carbonel , 93 Hawaiʻi at 473, 5 P.3d at 463.  
Rather, LOL sought to show that the PPA was voided by its own 
terms due to the parties’ alleged failure to obtain an ITL u nder 
the deadlines set forth in the PPA , and, therefore, the PUC’s 
Order No. 32600 approving the PPA was void.   
 In service of this reading of the PPA’s terms, LOL contends 
that the parties’ waiver from the Competitive Bidding Framework 
required the PUC t o “strictly construe” the representations made 
by the parties in the PPA regarding obtaining the ITL.   LOL’s 
construction of the PPA and the Competitive Bidding Framework is 
incorrect.  First, LOL argue s that NPM’s alleged failure to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
48 
 timely obtain an ITL violated “the threshold requirements of 
‘site control’ imposed by the Competitive Bidding Framework.”   
LOL quoted Part IV.B.8 of the Competitive Bidding Framework for 
the following “requirement” of “site control”:  
As part of the design process, the utility  shall develop 
and specify the type and form of threshold criteria that 
will apply to bidders, including the utility’s self -build 
proposals.  Examples of potential threshold criteria 
include requirements that bidders have site control, 
maintain a specified  credit rating, and demonstrate that 
their proposed technologies are mature.  
 
This provision, however, applies to criteria that a utility may 
impose when considering bidders during the competitive bidding 
process.  HECO and NPM are exempt from the Competit ive Bidding 
Framework; therefore, this provision simply does not apply, 
either to impose a requirement of “site control” upon NPM or to 
support LOL’s non sequitur that waiver from the Competitive 
Bidding Framework requires the PUC to “strictly construe” th e 
PPA.   
 LOL further misconstrues the PPA in arguing that the I TL 
was a “Land Right” under the PPA.  The PPA defines a “Land 
Right” as “[a]ll easements, rights of way, licenses, leases, 
surface use agreements and other interest or rights in real 
estate.”  An ITL is not a right in real estate.  LOL construes 
the ITL to be a land right, however, to establish an earlier 
date under the PPA by which NPM was obligated to obtain the ITL.  
Specifically, u nder section 11.2 of the PPA, NPM was required to 
obtain all  “land rights” within 120 days from the execution date ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
49 
 of the PPA.  (The initial PPA was executed on October 3, 2013, 
and the Amended PPA was executed on August 12, 2016.)   The ITL 
was not obtained until May 2018.  
 By contrast, HECO and the PUC argue that the ITL was a 
“Governmental Approval” under the PPA .  A “Governmental 
Approval” is defined as   
All permits, licenses, approvals, certificates, 
entitlements and other authorizations issued by 
Governmental Authorities, as well as any agreements with 
Governmental Authorities, required for the construction, 
ownership, operation and maintenance of the Fa cility and 
the Company -Owned Interconnection Facilities, and all 
amendments, modifications, supplements, general conditions 
and addenda thereto.  
 
An ITL is a governmental approval issued by the  BLNR pursuant to 
HRS Chapter 195D.  As a “Governmental Approva l,” NPM was 
responsible for procuring it under the terms of Article 22(D) of 
the PPA,  which state,  “As of the commencement of construction, 
Seller shall have obtained  . . . all Governmental Approvals 
necessary for the construction, ownership, operation and  
maintenance of the Facility.”   As for when the “commencement of 
construction” was to take place, Attachment L to the Amended PPA 
stated that December 31, 2017 was the “Construction Start Date,” 
at least as to the overhead powerlines, whereby “Seller shall  
obtain and provide Company all permits, licenses, easements and 
approvals to construct the Company -Owned Interconnection 
Facilities.”)   (HECO has notified this court that 
“[c]onstruction of all eight turbines that comprise the project ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
50 
 was completed in lat e February 2020,” and that the project 
“remains on track to commence testing activities in June and to 
be operational later this summer,” meaning summer 2020. )    
 Regarding how the PPA may be voided, Article 12.5(B) allows 
HECO, prior to the effective date, to “declare the Agreement 
null and void if . . . Seller is in breach of any of its 
representations, warranties and covenants under the Agreement, 
including but n ot limited to, (1) the provisions of Section 
22.2(C) requiring Seller to have obtained all Land Rights 
necessary for the construction, ownership, operation and 
maintenance of the Facility for the Initial Term. . . .”   As 
explained above, however, the ITL w as a “Governmental Approval, ” 
so Article 12.5(B) , which references “Land Rights, ” does not 
apply.   
 The PPA also allowed HECO to terminate the agreement under 
Article 13.4(B) if NPM missed “guaranteed project milestones,” 
but NPM was also allowed 90 -day grace periods in those 
instances, under Article 13.3.   If NPM still did not meet a 
guaranteed project milestone even with the applicable grace 
period, article 13.4(B) of the PPA allowed HECO the right to 
terminate the Agreement after 180 days of NPM’s failu re.  Thus, 
contrary to LOL’s contention, there is no  provision in the PPA 
under which the  PPA necessarily becomes void due to a late 
Governmental Approval.  Therefore, contrary to LOL’s argument, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
51 
 it does not follow that the PUC’s Order No. 32600 was void f or 
having approved the PPA.   
 Lastly, the PUC characterized LOL as lacking “standing” to 
raise an alleged breach of the PPA because LOL was neither a 
party nor an intended third -party beneficiary .  We cannot say 
such an observation is incorrect, as LOL’s sole basis for 
“voiding” Order No. 32600 rested on an attempt to demonstrate 
that the parties had breached the PPA.  As explained above, the 
conditions under which breach occur, and the remedies for 
breach, were terms of the PPA that applied only to HECO a nd NPM.   
In short, LOL’s attempt to “void” the PPA and Order No. 32600 
under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) is unavailing .  Therefore, the PUC did 
not abuse its discretion in declining to turn to that subsection 
for guidance in reviewing LOL’s claim that the parties were late 
in obtaining an ITL.   
 2.   The PUC did not abuse its discretion in declining to  
  turn to HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) for guidance on addressing  
  LOL’s wind energy pric e claim, as the 2017 Scientific  
  American blog article did not constitute    
  “extraordinary circumstances” entitling LOL to relief . 
 
 Lastly, LOL argues that the PUC should have turned to HRCP 
Rule 60(b)(5) to guide it in analyzing the claim that the PPA’s 
14.998 cent per kWh wind energy price was unreasonable,  in light 
of a 2017 Scientific American blog article stating that wind 
energy nationwide could be as inexpensive as two ce nts per kWh.   
Although Rule 60(b)(5) allows modification of orders due to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
52 
 changed circumstances, the “burden is on the movant to 
demonstrate extraordinary  circumstances justifying relief. ”  11 
Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and 
Procedure  § 2863 (emphasis added) .  In this case, the blog 
article does not demonstrate such “extraordinary circumstances .” 
Again, the blog post summarized the U.S. DOE’s Wind Technologies 
Market Report for 2017.   Regarding the two -cent figure, the DOE 
noted that it was a “nationwide average ,” “dominated by projects 
that hail from the lowest -priced region, in the central United 
States.”  As HECO pointed out at oral argument, Hawaiʻi was 
excluded from the DOE’s report.  T he DOE footnoted within its 
report th at data about “U.S. wind power capacity located in 
Hawaii, Alaska, and Puerto Rico is typically excluded from [its] 
analysis sample due to the unique issues facing wind development 
in these three isolated states/territories.”  
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2018/08/f54/2017_wind
_technologies_market_report_8.15.18.v2.pdf at 68 . 
[https://pe rma.cc/A7PQ -LCLJ] Therefore, the two-cent figure is 
irrelevant in this case.     
 Further, “[t]he burden of establishing an abuse of 
discretion [in denying an HRCP Rule 60(b)] motion is on the 
appellant, and a strong showing is required to establish it.”  
PennyMac Corp. , 148 Hawaiʻi at 327, 474 P.3d at 268  (citation 
omitted) .  LOL’s blog article does not provide the requisite  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
53 
 “strong showing” necessary for this court to conclude that the 
PUC abused its discretion in declining to afford LOL relief 
under HRCP  Rule 60(b)(5).      
V.  Conclusion   
 For the foregoing reasons, the PUC did not abuse its 
discretion in declining to turn to HRCP Rule 60(b) for guidance 
in addressing L OL’s motion for relief from Order No. 32600 .  
Therefore,  PUC Order No. 37074 is affirmed.   
Lance Collins   
(Bianca Isaki with him
on the briefs)   
for appellant   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Christine E. Kuriyama 
 
  
       
Randall C. Whattoff 
(Kamala S. Haake with him
on the brief)   
for appellee HECO    
  
 
Mark J. Kaetsu 
(Caroline C. Ishida with him
on the brief) 
for appellee PUC  
    