*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE PETITION OF KU ULEI HIGASHI KANAHELE AND 
AHIENA KANAHELE, INDIVIDUALS, FOR A DECLARATORY ORDER CONCERNING
THE INVALID CLASSIFICATION OF THE DE FACTO AND IMPROPER 
INDUSTRIAL USE PRECINCT ON APPROXIMATELY 525 ACRES OF STATE LAND
USE CONSERVATION DISTRICT LANDS LOCATED IN MAUNA KEA AND HILO, 
COUNTY OF HAWAII, TAX MAP KEY NO.: 4- 4-015:0090 (POR.)  
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCOT-19-0000830 
 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND USE COMMISSION 
(DOCKET NO. DR- 19-67 (Agency Appeal))
 
MARCH 15, 2023  
 
 RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, J., 
CIRCUIT JUDGE CATALDO, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY,  
AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM McKENNA, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.  
 
This is another  case in the series of proceedings 
challenging the construction of the Thirty Meter Telescope 
(TMT).  However, unlike prior proceedings that only  sought to Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCOT-19-0000830
15-MAR-2023
08:04 AM
Dkt. 131 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 prevent the TMT from being built, Appellants Kuʻulei Higashi 
Kanahele and Ahiena Kanahele (collectively, the Kanaheles) seek 
to use the Land Use Commission’s ( the Commission or LUC) 
districting authority in a way that could compel  the removal of  
all astronomy facilities located within the Astronomy Precinct 
by petitioning the Commission  for declaratory r elief. 
On November 29, 2019, the Commission  issued a written 
Order Denying Petition for Declaratory Order (LUC Order).  The 
Commission  explained that it lacked jurisdiction (1)  to use the 
declaratory ruling procedure to undermine decisions already 
made, and (2)  to regulate land uses in the Astronomy Precinct 
because the legislature granted such authority to the Department 
of Land and Natural Resour ces (the Department or DLNR). 
The following day, the Kanaheles appealed  to this 
court.  The Kanaheles seek to use the Commission ’s declaratory 
ruling authority (1)  to challenge  past decisions that astronomy 
facilities are permissible within conservation districts  and 
(2) to contravene the Department ’s power to regulate 
conservation district  uses.  Contrary to the Kanaheles’ claim 
that the Commission may restrict land uses through Hawaiʻi 
Revised Statutes (HRS)  § 205-2(e),1 the statute merely identifies  
                     
1  HRS § 205-2 (2017) provides  in relevant part:  
 
(a) There shall be four major land use districts in 
which all lands in the State shall be placed: urban, rural, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3                      
agricultural, and conservation.  The land use commission 
shall group contiguous land areas suitable  for inclusion in 
one of these four major districts.  The commission shall 
set standards for determining the boundaries of each 
district, provided that:  
 
(1) In the establishment of boundaries of urban 
districts those lands that are now in urban use 
and a suff icient reserve area for foreseeable 
urban growth shall be included;  
 
(2) In the establishment of boundaries for rural 
districts, areas of land composed primarily of 
small farms mixed with very low density 
residential lots, which may be shown by a minimum 
density of not more than one house per one -half 
acre and a minimum lot size of not less than one -
half acre shall be included, except as herein 
provided;  
 
(3) In the establishment of the boundaries of 
agricultural districts the greatest possible 
protection shall be given to those lands with a 
high capacity for intensive cultivation; and  
 
(4) In the establishment of the boundaries of 
conservation districts, the “forest and water 
reserve zones” provided in Act 234,  section 2, 
Session Laws of Hawaii 1957, are renamed 
“conservation districts” and, effective as of July 
11, 1961, the boundaries of the forest and water 
reserve zones theretofore established pursuant to 
Act 234,  section 2, Session Laws of Hawaii 1957, 
shall constitute the boundaries of the 
conservation districts; provided that thereafter 
the power to determine the boundaries of the 
conservation districts shall be in the commission.  
 
In establishing the boundaries of the districts in each 
county, the commission shall give consideration to the 
master plan or general plan of the county.  
 
(b) Urban districts shall include activities or uses 
as provided by ordinances or regulations of the county 
within which the urban district is situated.  
In addition, urban districts shall include geothermal 
resources exploration and geothermal resources development, 
as defined under  section 182 -1, as permissible uses.  
 
   . . . .  
 
(e) Conservation districts shall include areas 
necessary for protecting watersheds and water sources; 
preserving scenic and historic areas; providing park lands, 
wilderness, and beach reserves; conserving indigenous or *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 uses that are permitted within conservation districts.  The 
statute does not authorize the Commission to  exclude or enforce 
certain land uses within conservation districts.  
I. BACKGROUND  
A. The Mauna Kea Observator ies 
In January 1964, Gerard Kuiper began invest igating 
Mauna Kea as a possible observatory site.  David Leverington, A 
History of Astronomy: From 1890 to the Present  276 (2012).  That 
same year, the University of Hawaiʻi (UH) and the University of 
Arizona entered into an agreement to build a test telescope and 
dome on Mauna Kea.  Id.  An access road was built in May 1964, 
and the Mauna Kea Observatory was dedicated on July 20, 1964.  
Id.  By 1970, UH completed a second telesco pe on Mauna Kea.  Id.  
By 2008, thirteen  telescopes had been constructed in the 
Astronomy Precinct .  Mauna Kea Comprehensive Managemen t Plan 93 -
94 (Apr. 2009) . 
                     
endemic plants, fish, and wildlife, including those which 
are threatened or endangered; preventing floods and soil 
erosion; forestry; open space areas whose existing 
openness, natural conditio n, or present state of use, if 
retained, would enhance the present or potential value of 
abutting or surrounding communities, or would maintain or 
enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources; 
areas of value for recreational purposes; other rela ted 
activities; and other permitted uses not detrimental to a 
multiple use conservation concept.   Conservation districts 
shall also include areas for geothermal resources 
exploration and geothermal resources development, as 
defined under  section 182 -1. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 B. Hawaiʻi Land Use Laws  
Hawaiʻi’s land use laws developed almost in parallel to 
the growth in astronomy on Mauna Kea.  In 1961, the State 
adopted a statewide land use law .  1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, 
at 299-305.  As a part of this law, the legislature established 
the Commission  with significant powers.  1961 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 187, § 2 at 300.  The legislature authorized the Commission 
to “group contiguous land areas suitable for one of .  . . three 
major uses into a district and designate it as an urban 
district, agricultural district or conservation district, as the 
case may be.”  1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187 , § 3 at 300.   
Notably, t he legislature mandated  that “the boundaries 
of the forest and water reserve zones theretofore established 
pursuant to Act 234, SLH 1957, shall constitute  the [initial] 
boundaries of the conservation districts, provided, that 
thereafter the power to determine the boundaries of the 
conservation districts shall be in the commission.”  1961 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 187 , § 3 at 300.  Moreover, the legislature 
granted the Commission  power to amend district b oundaries, and 
even required the Commission  to review district boundaries every 
five years .  1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187 , §§ 6, 12 at 301 -03.   
However, the legislature declined to provide the 
Commission  with powers to regulate land uses within the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 conservation districts .  1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187 , § 3 at 
300 (“Zoning powers within conservation districts shall be 
exercised by the [board of commissioners of agriculture and 
forestry] to which is assigned the responsibility of 
administering the provisions of Act 234, SLH 1957.”); see also  
1957 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 234 , § 2 at 254 -56. 
In 1963, the legislature recognized a “demonstrated 
. . . need for clarifying the provisions of .  . . Act 187 .  . . 
with reference  to the division of authority between the land use 
commission and the counties,” and therefore amended the land use 
laws.  1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 205 , § 1 at 315.  As a part of 
this effort , the legislature created a fourth district category 
— rural — and articulated :  
Conservation districts shall include areas necessary for 
protecting watersheds and water sources; preserving scenic 
areas: [sic] providing park lands, wilderness and beach 
reserves; conserving endemic plants, fish, and wildlife; 
preventing f loods and soil erosion; forestry; and other 
related activities; and other permitted uses not 
detrimental to a multiple use conservation concept.  
1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 205 , § 2 at 316 -17.  The legislature 
also transferred governing  authority over the conservation 
districts to the Department .  1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 205 , § 2 
at 318.  The legislature further provided that “[t]he 
appropriate .  . . agency charged with the administration of 
. . . zoning laws shall enforce .  . . the use classification 
districts adopted by the commission and shall report to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7  commission all violations thereof.”  1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 
205, § 2 at 320.  However, the legislature retained the 
requirement that the Commission  review district classifications 
every five years.  19 63 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 205 , § 2 at 320.  
In 1975, the legislature repealed its mandate that the 
Commission regularly review the district boundaries, but 
expressly provided that the Commission still had authority to 
petition itself to redistrict district bou ndaries.  1975 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 193 , §§ 5-6 at 443  (“Any department or agency of 
the State including the land use commission  . . . may petition 
the land use commission for a change in the boundary of a 
district.”) (emphasis added ), 445 (repealing the mandatory five-
year review).    
In 1985, the legislature re -enacted the mandatory 
five-year district boundary review requirement, but transferred 
the authority to periodically review and initiate district 
boundary amendment proceedings  to the Department of Planning and 
Economic Development.  1985 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 230, §  2 at 417.2  
The legislature subsequently transferred the authority to the 
                     
2  At the same time, the legislature amended HRS §  205-4 to delete the 
phrase “including the land use commission”  from its articulation that “ [a]ny 
department or agency of the State .  . . may petition the land use commission 
for a change in the boundary of a district.”  1985 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 230, 
§ 4 at 418.  Thus, it appears that the legislature intended to strip the 
Commission of its authority to amend district boundaries sua sponte . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8   Office of State Planning in 1988.  1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 352 , 
§ 3 at 679.  The Office of State Planning – now the Office of 
Planning and Sustainable Development  (the Planning Office)  – 
retains the authority to review the districts to this day.  See 
HRS § 205-18 (Supp. 2021) .3   
C. Astronomy Precinct  Districting  
The Commission  issued its first st ate land use 
district boundar y maps in 1964.  See Land Use Comm’n, SLU 
District Boundary Maps , https://luc.hawaii.gov/maps/land -use-
district -boundary -maps/.  The Commission  issued its second state 
land use district boundar y maps in 1974.  Id.  The Commission  
did not change the Astronomy Precinct from a conservation 
district in either of these processes.  
The Planning Office  subsequently completed a state 
land use district boundary review in 1992.  See Off. of State 
Planning, State Land Use District B oundary Review Hawaii  (1992), 
http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/lud/20210500%20Boundary%20Revie
w/1992HawaiiStateLandUseDistrictBoundaryReview.pdf  (1992 
Boundary Review) .  The Planning Office  recognized that “[t]he 
University of Hawaii’s Master Plan for the Mauna Kea Science 
                     
3  In 2021, the legislature amended HRS  § 205-18 to authorize, rather t han 
require, the Planning Office to conduct district boundary reviews.   
Currently, HRS § 205-18 reads: “The office of planning and sustainable 
development may undertake a review of the classification and districting of 
all lands in the State.”  HRS §  205-18 (Supp. 2021) (emphasis added).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9  Reserve calls for 13 telescopes by the year 2000.”  Id. at 23.  
However, the Planning Office  did not call for the Astronomy 
Precinct to be redistricted from a conservation district to an 
urban district.4  Id. at 121-27. 
D. Prior Proceedings Related to the T MT 
Planning for the TMT began prior to 2010.  Matter of 
Conservation Dist . Use Application HA 3568 , 143 Hawaiʻi 379, 386, 
431 P.3d 752, 759 (2018) ( Mauna Kea II ); see also Mauna Kea 
Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land and Nat . Res., 136 Hawaiʻi 376, 381, 
363 P.3d 224, 229 (2015)  (Mauna Kea I ).  On September 2, 2010, 
UH submitted a Conservation District Use Application to  the 
Department .  Mauna Kea II , 143 Hawaiʻi at 387, 431 P.3d at 760.   
In 2013, the Department granted a conservation district use 
permit (2013 CDUP) before holding a contested case hearing.  Id.  
This court vacated the 2013 CDUP and remanded for the Department  
to hold a contested case hearing.  Id.; see also  Mauna Kea I , 
136 Hawaiʻi at 399, 363 P.3d at 247. 
Between October 2016 and Marc h 2017, a Department -
appointed hearing officer conducted a contested case hearing 
                     
4  Most recently, the Planning Office completed another state land use 
district boundary review on January 28, 2022.  Off. of Planning and 
Sustainable Development, State Land Use Review of Districts  (Jan. 28, 2022), 
http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/lud/20220128%20State%20Boundary%20Review -
Final/SLUReviewofDistricts1 -28-22Final3.pdf (2022 Boundary Review).  The 
Planning Office did not recommend that the Astronomy Precinct be redistricted 
from a conser vation district to an urban district.  Id. at 125-38, 35. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 over forty-four days.  Mauna Kea II , 143 Hawaiʻi at 387, 431 P.3d 
at 760.  Kuʻulei Kanahele was among the witnesses who testified 
in opposition to the Department issuing a co nservation district 
use permit  (CDUP) for the TMT. 
On September 27, 2017, the Department  issued its 
decision and order  (DLNR Decision)  authorizing the issuance of a 
conservation district use permit for the construction of the 
TMT.  Mauna Kea II , 143 Hawaiʻi at 384, 387, 431 P.3d at 757, 
760.  The DLNR Decision was appealed to this court.  Id.   
On October 30, 2018, this court affirmed the DLNR 
Decision.  Mauna Kea II , 143 Hawaiʻi at 409, 431 P.3d at 782.   
E. The Kanaheles’ Petition  
On September 3, 2019, the Ka naheles filed the 
underlying petition with the Commission .  In the p etition, the 
Kanaheles asked the Commission  to “issue declaratory orders 
stating:”  
 (1) current industrial research facility uses in the 
[Astronomy Precinct5] are appropriate within the ur ban 
district as prescribed by HRS §  205-2(b) and not the 
conservation district;  
 
 (2) further industrial uses proposed for the 
[Astronomy Precinct] must comply with HRS chapter 205 and 
Commission procedures for obtaining a district boundary 
amendment to reclassify conservation lands into the urban 
district; and , 
 
                     
5  The Kanaheles refer to the 525 -acre area in which the Mauna Kea 
observatories are located as a “de facto industrial precinct.”  Because this 
court has identified the area as an “ Astronomy Precinct” in prior decisions,  
this opinion continues to use  that terminology.  See Mauna Kea II , 143 Hawaiʻi 
at 385, 431 P.3d at 758 ; Mauna Kea I , 136 Hawaiʻi at 381, 363 P.3d at 229 . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11  (3) even if a single scientific laboratory or other 
research facility may be appropriate within non -urban 
districts, the successive, individual approval of thirteen 
scientific laboratories, other research facilities, and 
associated offices, parking lots, and u tilities, within the 
[Astronomy Precinct] constitutes urban uses inconsistent 
with conservation district uses and/or detrimental to a 
multiple use conservation concept for which a district 
boundary amendment must be obtained . 
On October 24 and 25, 2019, th e Commission  held a 
hearing on the Kanaheles’ petition.  The Commission  heard 
testimony from twenty-three witnesses; a representative of West 
Maui Preservation Association and Na Papaʻi Wawae ʻUlaʻula; and 
the Kanaheles; and heard  a statement from the Kana heles’ 
attorney . 
The Kanaheles acknowledged that part of the purpose of 
their petition was to oppose the construction of the TMT.  The 
Kanaheles also indicat ed that they were not asking the 
Commission  to reclassify the Astronomy Precinct from a 
conservatio n district to an urban district, but rather to give 
the Kanaheles “the opportunity to say we don’t want rezoning”  
that already occurred  through the construction of the astronomy 
facilities . 
The Kanaheles’ attorney  argued that the Commission’s 
authority to issue the requested declarations arose from HRS 
§ 205-2(e).  Specifically, the Kanaheles’ attorney reasoned that 
the Commission could use its “exclusive authority to determine 
the districts” and note d that the astronomy facilities “don’t *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 fit any –– industrial structures don’t fit any of the 
descriptions of conservation lands, including permitted uses 
that are not detrimental to a multiple use conservation 
concept.”  Thus, the Kanaheles’ attorney  explained that the 
Kanaheles were  
asking [the Commission ] just to interpret 205 and say the 
concentration of industrial research facilities on Mauna 
Kea are appropriate uses or are appropriate within the 
urban district or in an urban district as prescribed by 
205-2 and not the conservation district.  Further 
industri al uses must comply with boundary amendment 
procedures to reclassify those lands into the urban 
district.  
The Kanaheles’ attorney  noted that the Kanaheles’ petition was 
“not seeking enforcement of anything except for [HRS chapter] 
205.” 
When asked about the practical result of the 
Kanaheles’ petition, the Kanaheles’ attorney acknowledged that 
“in order to keep things as they are ,” “the legal effect of [the 
Kanaheles’] petition is to .  . . force the State of Hawaiʻi or 
whoever might be con sidered the landowner of the land on which 
the telescopes sit to have to file a request for a [district] 
boundary amendment.”  In the event the district boundary 
amendment request is denied, the astronomy  facilities “would 
either have to come down, or they  would reapply and try to find 
another way to mitigate it better.”  
The Commission  voted to deny the Kanaheles’ petition 
five to two.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 On November 29, 2019, the Commission  issued its 
written LUC Order.  As relevant here,  the Commission  cited to 
Citizens Agai nst Reckless Dev elopment  v. Zoning B oard of Appeals 
of Honolulu , 114 Hawaiʻi 184, 196 -97, 159 P.3d 143, 155 -56 (2007) 
(CARD) and determined “that the declaratory ruling procedure 
could not be invoked by the Petitioner’s [sic] in this matter.”   
The Commissi on recognized  that the Department  has authority to 
govern conservation districts under HRS §  205-5(a).6  The 
                     
6  HRS § 205-5 (2017) provides:  
 
(a) Except as herein provided, the powers granted to 
counties under  section 46 -4 shall govern the zoning within 
the districts, other than in conservation districts.   
Conservation districts shall be governed by the department 
of land and natural resources pursuant to chapter 183C.  
 
(b) Within agricultural districts, uses compatible to 
the activities described in  section 205 -2 as determined by 
the commission shall be permitted; provided that accessory 
agricultural uses and services described in  sections 205 -
2 and 205-4.5 may be further de fined by each county by 
zoning ordinance.  Each county shall adopt ordinances 
setting forth procedures and requirements, including 
provisions for enforcement, penalties, and administrative 
oversight, for the review and permitting of agricultural 
tourism us es and activities as an accessory use on a 
working farm, or farming operation as defined in  section 
165-2.  Ordinances shall include but not be limited to:  
 
(1) Requirements for access to a farm, including road 
width, road surface, and parking;  
 
(2) Requirements a nd restrictions for accessory 
facilities connected with the farming operation, 
including gift shops and restaurants;  
 
(3) Activities that may be offered by the farming 
operation for visitors;  
 
(4) Days and hours of operation; and  
 
(5) Automatic termination of the accessory use upon 
the cessation of the farming operation.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14                      
 
Each county may require an environmental assessment under 
chapter 343 as a condition to any agricultural tourism use 
and activity.  Other uses may be allowed by special permits 
issued pursuant to this chapter.   The minimum lot size in 
agricultural districts shall be determined by each county 
by zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, or other lawful 
means; provided that the minimum lot size for any 
agricultural use shall not be less than one acre,  except as 
provided herein.  If the county finds that unreasonable 
economic hardship to the owner or lessee of land cannot 
otherwise be prevented or where land utilization is 
improved, the county may allow lot sizes of less than the 
minimum lot size as spe cified by law for lots created by a 
consolidation of existing lots within an agricultural 
district and the resubdivision thereof; provided that the 
consolidation and resubdivision do not result in an 
increase in the number of lots over the number existing 
prior to consolidation; and provided further that in no 
event shall a lot which is equal to or exceeds the minimum 
lot size of one acre be less than that minimum after the 
consolidation and resubdivision action.  The county may 
also allow lot sizes of less  than the minimum lot size as 
specified by law for lots created or used for plantation 
community subdivisions as defined in  section 205 -
4.5(a)(12), for public, private, and quasi -public utility 
purposes, and for lots resulting from the subdivision of 
abandoned roadways and railroad easements.  
 
(c) Unless authorized by special permit issued 
pursuant to this chapter, only the following uses shall be 
permitted within rural districts:  
 
(1) Low density residential uses;  
 
(2) Agricultural uses;  
 
(3) Golf courses,  golf driving ranges, and golf -
related facilities;  
 
(4) Public, quasi -public, and public utility 
facilities; and  
 
(5) Geothermal resources exploration and geothermal 
resources development, as defined under  section 
182-1. 
  
In addition, the minimum lot size  for any low 
density residential use shall be one -half acre and 
there shall be but one dwelling house per one -half 
acre, except as provided for in  section 205 -2. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 Commission  also recognized that the legislature delegated 
authority to enforce uses within conservation districts to the 
Department . 
The Commission  consequently concluded:  
20.  Based on the information provided by Petitioners, the 
Commission concludes that the Petition involves lands 
that are currently classified within the State Land Use 
Conservation District.  
 
21.  Based on the information provided  by Petitioners, the 
Commission concludes that it lacks authority under HRS 
Chapter 205 to require a landowner to petition for 
reclassification.  
 
22.  Based on the information provided by Petitioners, the 
Commission concludes that pursuant to HRS §§  205-5(a), 
205-15, and HRS §§  183C-3 and 183C -6(a), it is the 
Department of Land and Natural Resources and not the 
Commission, [sic] that is statutorily authorized to 
determine, permit, and enforce land uses within the 
State Conservation District.  
 
23.  The Commission concludes that the plain language of HRS 
§ 205-5(a) makes clear that governance over the State 
Conservation District is under the authority of the 
DLNR pursuant to HRS §  183C.  Therefore, the Commission 
lacks subject matter jurisdiction and mus t deny the 
Petition.  
The Commission  summarized the reasons for its denial  of the 
Kanaheles’ petition : “[t]he Petitioner [s] ha[ve] requested a 
ruling on a statutory provision not administered by the 
Commission and a matter that is not otherwise within the 
jurisdiction of the Commission.”  
F. The Kanaheles’ Appeal  
The following day, the Kanaheles filed a notice of 
appeal before this court.  This court granted intervenor status *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 to TMT International Observatory LLC (TIO) and UH over the 
Kanaheles’ objections.  
The parties’ arguments  and relevant procedural 
background  are detailed as necessary in the Discussi on section 
below.  The Commission , TIO, and UH contend that this court 
lacks jurisdiction over the Kanaheles’ merits claims , and that 
the LUC Order was correctly decided.  Meanwhile, t he Kanaheles 
contend this court has jurisdiction to consider the appeal and 
raise four points of error, with multiple sub -arguments in each.  
The Kanaheles’ overarching points of error are:  
(1)  The LUC clearly erred, arbitrarily, and  
incorrectly concluded , [sic] the Kanaheles “requested a 
ruling on a statutory provision not administered by the 
[LUC] and a matter that is not otherwise within the 
jurisdiction of the [LUC].”  
 
(2)  Finding of fact (FOF) ¶22, which is a legal 
conclusion in  substance, constituted clear error and is 
incorrect as a legal conclusion.  FOF ¶22 provides: “Based 
on the Petition, [the Kanaheles’] arguments and responses 
to questions by the Commissioners, and the testimony of the 
Petitioners, Petitioner’s [ sic] seek a declaratory order 
from the Commission requiring that a district boundary 
amendment be obtained for the Property.”  
 
(3)  The LUC incorrectly concludes:  
 
The Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has considered and 
ruled on permitting and jurisdictional issues 
regarding Mauna Kea  [sic] in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou 
v. Bd. Of Land & Nat. Res. , 136 Hawaii 376, 363 
P.3d 224 (2015) [ Mauna Kea I ] and Matter of 
Conservation District Use Application HA -3568 for 
the Thirty Meter Telescope , 143 Hawaii 379, 431 
P.3d 752 (2018 ) [Mauna Kea  I] [sic].  
 
The Kanaheles’ [sic] rebutted this position through their 
filings and oral statements.  
 
(4) Under FOF ¶26, “the [LUC] further concludes that 
the declaratory procedure could not be invoked by the 
Petitioner in this matter.  . .”  FOF ¶26, which is a legal *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 conclusion in substance, constitutes clear error and is an 
incorrect legal conclusion.  The Kanaheles pointed out that 
CARD did not apply because they were “not seeking review of 
BLNR’s decision because BLNR never had the authority to 
redistrict lands and didn’t make a decision on that issue.”  
(Underscored [sic] notations in the Kanaheles’ Opening Brief)  
(citations omitted).  
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Jurisdiction  
“The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that we review de novo under  the right/wrong standard.  
Questions regarding su bject matter jurisdiction  may be r aised at 
any stage of a cause of action .”  Lingle v. Haw . Gov’t Emps. 
Ass’n, AFSCME, Local 152 , 107 Hawaiʻi 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 
(2005) ( quoting Amantiad v. Odum , 90 Hawaiʻi 152, 158 -59, 977 
P.2d 160, 166 -67 (1999)).  
B. Statutory Interpretation  
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo.”  Keep the N. Shore Country v. 
Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 150 Hawaiʻi 486, 506 P.3d 150 (2022) 
(citing State v. Ruggiero , 114 Hawai‘i 227, 231, 160 P.3d 703, 
707 (2007) ). 
C. Administrative Agency Appeals  
This court’s review of administrative agency decisions 
is governed by HRS §  91-14(g).  The statute provides:  
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petition ers may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions;  
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency;  
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;  
 
(4) Affected by other e rror of law;  
 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or  
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion.  
HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016).  “[U]nder HRS §  91-14(g), 
conclusions of law are reviewable under subsections (1), (2), 
and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection 
(3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s 
exercise of discretion under subsection (6).”  Paul’s Elec. 
Serv., Inc. v. Befitel , 104 Hawaiʻi 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 
(2004) (brackets in original) (quoting In re Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 
81 Hawaiʻi 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)).  
III.  DISCUSSION  
A. This Court Has Jurisdiction over the K anaheles’ Appeal.  
The Commission, TIO, and UH argue that this court lacks 
jurisdiction to hear the Kanaheles’ direct appeal of the LUC 
Order.  The Commission and TIO  contend that because the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 Kanaheles’ petition was not a contested case, this court does 
not possess jurisdiction under HRS § 205 -19(a) (2017 and Supp. 
2019), which only authorizes this court to directly review a 
final decision or order of contested cases under HRS chapter 
205. 
In contrast, t he Kanaheles argue that this court has  
jurisdiction over the instant appeal  pursuant to  HRS §§ 205-
19(a), 91-8 (2012), and 91-14(b) (Supp. 2016) , given this 
court’s statutory interpretation of HRS §§ 91 -8 and 91 -14 in 
Lingle, 107 Hawaiʻi 178, 111 P.3d 587 .  The Kanaheles posit that 
Lingle held that  HRS §§ 91-8 and 91 -14 are to be “read 
together ,” making declaratory and contested case orders  share 
the same status  for purposes of judicial review.   See id. at 
185-86, 111 P.3d at 594-95.  Therefore, because HRS § 205 -19 
authorizes this court to directly review orders from  contested 
cases, HRS § 205 -19 also authorizes  this court to directly 
review orders granting or denying declaratory order  petitions , 
given the shared status of declaratory and contested case 
orders. 
The Kanaheles are correct that this court poss esses 
jurisdiction to hear their appeal .   
“The right to appeal is purely statutory and exists only 
when jurisdiction is given by some constitutional or statutory *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20  
. . . . provision. ”  Id. at 184, 111 P.3d at 593.  The statutes 
pertinent to this court’s jurisdictio n over the Kanaheles’ 
appeal are HRS §§ 91 -8, 91-14, and 205 -19.   
HRS § 91 -14 authorizes judicial review of a final 
decision or order in a contested case.7  However, the LUC Order 
denying declaratory relief did not result from a contested case, 
as the Kanaheles acknowledged .  A contested case is “a 
proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of 
                     
7  HRS § 91-14 (2012 and  Supp. 2016)  provides in relevant part:  
 
(a) Any person aggrieved by a final decision and 
order in a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the 
nature that deferral of review pending entry of a 
subsequent final decision would deprive appellant of 
adequate relief is entitled to judicial review thereof 
under this chapte r; but nothing in this section shall be 
deemed to prevent resort to other means of review, redress, 
relief, or trial de novo, including the right of trial by 
jury, provided by law.   Notwithstanding any other provision 
of this chapter to the contrary, for t he purposes of this 
section, the term “person aggrieved” shall include an 
agency that is a party to a contested case proceeding 
before that agency or another agency.  
 
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, proceedings 
for review shall be instituted in th e circuit court or, if 
applicable, the environmental court, within thirty days 
after the preliminary ruling or within thirty days after 
service of the certified copy of the final decision and 
order of the agency pursuant to rule of court, except where 
a statute provides for a direct appeal to the supreme court 
or the intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter 
602.  In such cases, the appeal shall be treated in the 
same manner as an appeal from the circuit court to the 
supreme court or the intermediate  appellate court, 
including payment of the fee prescribed by  section 607 -
5 for filing the notice of appeal (except in cases appealed 
under sections 11 -51 and 40-91).  The court in its 
discretion may permit other interested persons to 
intervene.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 specific parties are required by law to be determined after an 
opportunity for agency hearing.”  HRS §  91-1 (Supp. 2017).  
If the statute or rule governing the activity in question 
does not mandate a hearing prior to the administrative 
agency’s decision -making, the actions of the administrative 
agency are not “required by l aw” and do not amount to “a 
final decision or order in a contested case” from which a 
direct appeal .  . . is possible.  
Bush v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n , 76 Hawaiʻi 128, 134, 870 P.2d 
1272, 1278 (1994).   “Stated differently, discretionary hearings 
are not cont ested cases because they are not required by law.”  
Lingle, 107 Hawaiʻi at 184, 111 P.3d at 593.   The Commission’s 
hearing on the Kanaheles’ petition was purely discretionary: a 
hearing was not required by administrative  rule, statute or 
constitution.8  The Commission’s discretionary hearing did not 
                     
8  Under HRS §  91-8, “[e]ach agency shall adopt rules prescribing .  . . 
the procedure for .  . . consideration” of petitions for declaratory rulings.  
The Commission’s rules provide:  
 
Consideration of petition for declaratory order.   (a) The 
commission, within ninety days after submission of a petition for 
declaratory order, shall:  
(1) Deny the petitioner where:  
(A) The question is speculative or purely 
hypothetical and does not involve an 
existing situation or one which may 
reasonably be expected to occur in the  near 
future; or  
(B) The petitioner’s interest is not of the type 
which confers sufficient standing to 
maintain an action in a court of law; or  
(C) The issuance of the declaratory order may 
adversely affect the interest of the State, 
the commission, or any of the officers or 
employees in any litigation which is pending 
or may be reasonably be [sic] expected to 
arise; or  
(D) The petitioner requests a ruling on a 
statutory provision not administered by the 
commission or the matter is not otherwise *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 transform the LUC Order into a contested case decision.  See id.  
As such, the Kanaheles were not part ies to a contested case 
hearing and their petition could not be reviewed directly  as a 
contested case order  under HRS § 91-14.  
However, HRS §§  91-8, 91-14, and 205 -19 together provide 
for this court’s review of the Kanaheles’ appeal  of the LUC 
Order, even though the LUC Order was not part of a contested 
case.  HRS § 91 -8 establishes the framework for  declarato ry 
rulings by agencies, and provides that “[o]rders disposing of 
petitions [for declaratory rulings] shall have the same status 
as other agency orders .”  This court  interpreted the “same 
                     
within the jurisdiction  of the commission; 
or 
(2) Issue a declaratory order on the matters 
contained in the petition; or  
(3) Set the petition for hearing before the 
commission or a hearings officer in accordance 
with this subchapter.  The procedures set forth 
in subchapter 7 shall be ap plicable.  
Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (HAR) §  15-15-100(a) (2019).  Relatedly, HAR 
§ 15-15-103 (2019) provides:  
 
Declaratory orders; request for hearing.   The 
commission may, but shall not be required to , conduct a 
hearing on a petition for declaratory or der.  Any 
petitioner or party in interest who desires a hearing on a 
petition for a declaratory order shall set forth in detail 
in the request the reasons why the matters alleged in the 
petition, together with supporting affidavits or other 
written briefs or memoranda of legal authorities, will not 
permit the fair and expeditious disposition of the 
petition, and to the extent that the request for a hearing 
is dependent upon factual assertion, shall accompany the 
request by affidavit establishing those facts . 
(Emphasis added.)  Based on this language, the Commission was not required to 
hold a hearing to resolve the Kanaheles’ petition.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 status” language of HRS § 91 -8 and held  that orders disposing of 
petitions for declaratory rulings , like orders in contested 
cases, are subject to judicial  review pursuant to HRS  § 91-14.  
Lingle, 107 Hawaiʻi at 185-86, 111 P.3d at 59 4-95.  Therefore, we 
held that a Hawai‘i Labor Relation Board order denying  the 
petitioner  for declaratory relief was subject to review by the 
circuit court , even though the decision did not result from a 
contested case.  Id. at 185, 111 P.3d at 595.  
Subsequently , in 2016 the legislature amended HRS § 91 -
14(b) to provide for direct review by th e supreme court or the 
intermediate appellate court when provided by statute.   2016 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48 , § 5 at 77.9  Now HRS § 91 -14(b) provides 
that “proceedings for review shall be instituted in the circuit 
court . . . except where a statute provides for a direct appeal 
to the supreme court or the intermediate appellate court[.]”  In 
the same 2016 Act , the legislature ena cted HRS § 205 -19, 
regarding contested cases arising under HRS chapter 205 .  2016 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48 §  3, at 76 -77.  HRS § 205 -19 provides: 
“any contested case under this chapter shall be appealed from a 
final decision and order or a preliminary ruling  that is of the 
nature defined by section 91 -14(a) upon the record directly to 
                     
9  The legislature repealed and reenacted HRS § 91 -14(b) without any 
changes to the language on July 1, 2019.  See 2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48 , 
§ 14 at 82; 2019 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 213, at 637.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 the supreme court for final decision.”  This court must presume 
the legislature was aware of Lingle when it passed Act 48 in 
2016.  See Peer News LLC v. City & Cnty . of Honolulu , 138 Hawaiʻi 
53, 69, 376 P.3d 1, 17 (2016) (“The legislature is presumed to 
know the law when it enacts statu tes, including this court’s 
decisions, and agency interpretations.”) ( citations omitted).  
Therefore, this court’s interpretation in Lingle of HRS §§  91-8 
and 91-14 that declaratory orders have the “same status” for 
judicial review as orders in contested cases applies to HRS 
§ 205-19.  See Lingle, 107 Hawaiʻi at 185-86, 111 P.3d at 594 -95.  
Thus, pursuant to  HRS §§ 91-8, 91-14 and 205 -19, this court has 
jurisdiction to directly review the Kanaheles’ appeal.   
B. The Commission  Correctly Determined That It Lacked 
Jurisdiction over the Kanaheles’ Petition.  
Before turning to the merits of the Kanaheles’ 
petition and appeal, some clarification regarding the Kanaheles’ 
requested relief is necessary.  Again, the Kanaheles seek three 
declaratory orders stating:  
 (1) current industrial research facility uses in the 
[Astronomy Precinct] are appropriate within the urban 
district as prescribed by HRS § 205-2(b) and not the 
conservation district;  
 
 (2) further industrial uses proposed for the 
[Astronomy Precinct] must comply with HRS chapter 205 and 
Commission procedures for obtaining a district boundary 
amendment to reclassify conservation lands into t he urban 
district; and,  
 
 (3) even if a single scientific laboratory or other 
research facility may be appropriate within non -urban 
districts, the successive, individual approval of thirteen *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 scientific laboratories, other research facilities, and 
associate d offices, parking lots, and utilities, within the 
[Astronomy Precinct] constitutes urban uses inconsistent 
with conservation district uses and/or detrimental to a 
multiple use conservation concept for which a district 
boundary amendment must be obtained.  
The Kanaheles are not asking the Commission  to issue a 
district boundary amendment to convert the Astronomy Precinct 
from a conservation district to an urban district.  In fact, the 
Kanaheles made clear that they would oppose any district 
boundary amendmen t petition seeking such a reclassification.10  
Instead, the Kanaheles are asking the Commission  to 
determine what constitutes prohibited  uses of conservation 
district lands via an interpretation of HRS §  205-2(e).  As the 
Kanaheles’ counsel explained:  
We’re asking you just to interpret 205 and say the 
concentration of industrial research facilities on Mauna 
Kea are appropriate uses or are appropriate within the 
urban district or in an urban district as prescribed by 
205-2 and not the conservation district.  Further 
industrial uses must comply with boundary amendment 
procedures to reclassify those lands into the urban 
district.  
The Kanaheles sought this determination as a m ethod 
for the Commission  to enforce its prior districting of the 
Astronomy Precinct as a conservation district.11  At the October 
                     
10  In the declarations attached to the Kanaheles’ petition before the 
Commission, Kuʻulei Kanahele  and Ahiena Kanahele both state d: “I would 
participate to strongly oppose a p roposed boundary amendment to reclassify 
conservation district lands at the Maunakea [sic] summit into the Urban 
district. ” 
 
11  The dissent posits that the Commission possesses authority to consider 
the cumulative impacts of conservation district use permits ( CDUPs) and 
determine whether the Astronomy Precinct is more appropriately classified as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 25, 2019 hearing on the Kanaheles’ petition before the 
Commission,  the Kanaheles’ attorney stated: “We’re not seeking 
enforcement of anything except for [HRS chapter] 205.”12  The 
Kanaheles’ counsel acknowledged  that “the legal effect of [the 
Kanaheles’] petition is to .  . . force the State of Hawaiʻi or 
whoever might be considered the landowner of the land on which 
the telescopes sit to have to file a request for a [district] 
boundary amendment.”  The Kanaheles’  counsel stated that i n the 
event that a district boundary amendment petition  is denied, the 
astronomy  facilities “would either have to come down, or they 
would reapply and try to find another way to mitigate it 
better.”  
                     
an urban rather than conservation district.  The dissent cites  to Lanihau 
Properties, LLC. , No. A00 -730, (Hawaiʻi Land Use Comm’n, 2003) in order to 
demonstrat e this point.  However, this argument is unavailing.  In Lanihau 
Properties , a party with a property interest entitled to seek 
reclassification requested redistricting in order to develop a business park.  
Id. at 2, 7.  In contrast, the Kanaheles explicit ly stated that they are not 
seeking to reclassify lands.  Rather, the Kanaheles are asking the Commission 
to determine what constitutes prohibited uses on conservation district land, 
and therefore to enforce the conservation district classification.  The 
Commission does not have the authority  to enforce uses on conservation 
district lands.  See infra Section B(3)(a).  As such, the dissent’s  arguments 
in this regard are inapposite.      
 
12  In the Kanaheles’ Reply to TIO’s Answering Brief, the Kanaheles argued 
HRS § 205-2(e) describes “uses of land that the LUC properly considers in 
determining and enforcing  conservation district use boundaries .” (Emphasis 
added.) 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 Moreover, as the Kanaheles acknowle dged, the Kanaheles 
would use the district boundary amendment proceedings to protest 
the development of the Astronomy Precinct.13  
In short, the Kanaheles request ed the three 
declaratory ruling s to enforce the Commission ’s classification 
of the Astronomy Pr ecinct as a conservation district and to 
protest the ongoing development of the Astronomy Precinct.  
1. The Commission correctly determined that the Kanaheles 
sought a declaratory order requiring a district 
boundary amendment for the Astronomy Precinct.  
The Kanaheles dispute the Commission’s finding that 
“[b]ased on the Petition, [the Kanaheles’] arguments and 
responses to questions by the Commissioners, and the testimony 
of the Petitioners, Petitioner’s [sic] seek a declaratory order 
from the Commission requir ing that a district boundary amendment 
be obtained for the Property.”  The Kanaheles contend they only 
“sought declaratory orders and not an order that a boundary 
amendment be obtained for the property,” and the requested 
declaratory orders would not compe l UH to seek a district 
boundary amendment because UH would have the option to remove 
the astronomy facilities . 
                     
13  During the October 25, 2 019 hearing  before the Commission , Kuʻulei 
Kanahele stated : “we are asking for that district boundary amendment so we 
have the opportunity to protest.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 However, the plain language of the Kanaheles’ petition 
requested a declaratory order  that explicitly required a 
district boundary amendment.  Th e Kanaheles’ third requested 
declaratory order would state that the current uses of the 
Astronomy Precinct “constitute[] urban uses inconsistent with 
conservation district uses and/or detrimental to a multiple use 
conservation concept for which a district boundary amendment 
must be obtained .”  (Emphasis added.)  
Consistent with the language of the third requested 
declaratory order, the Kanaheles consistently represented the 
requested  declaratory relief would require a district boundary 
amendment to the Commi ssion.  At the October 25, 2019 hearing 
before the Commission, the Kanaheles admitted that “the legal 
effect of [the Kanaheles’] petition is to .  . . force the State 
of Hawaiʻi or whoever might be considered the landowner of the 
land on which the telescope s sit to have to file a request for a 
boundary amendment.”  The Kanaheles  further explained that such 
a declaratory order  by the Commission  would create an 
enforcement requirement because, “by virtue of saying that those 
uses are outside or supposed to be in the urban district, that 
in itself, because the agencies are expected to comply, .  . . 
would put them in a situation where, yes, they wo uld have to do 
a [district] boundary amendment .”  (Emphasis added.)  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 Kanaheles also represented that a district boundary amendment 
must be filed and granted or else the astronomy facilities 
“would .  . . have to come down.”  
Because the plain language of  the Kanaheles ’ third 
requested declaratory order and their representations to the 
Commission make clear that the Kanaheles requested a declaratory 
order requiring a district boundary amendment, the Commission 
did not err by concluding the Kanaheles sought  a declaratory 
order requiring a district boundary amendment be obtained.  
Furthermore, the Kanaheles’ distinction that UH could 
simply remove the astronomy facilities is one without a 
difference.  According to the Kanaheles, they did not seek a 
declarator y order requiring that a district boundary amendment 
be obtained because the Commission would only issue a 
declaratory ruling that a district boundary amendment must be 
obtained to continue existing uses “inconsistent with 
conservation district concepts.”  Either way, the requested 
declaratory order would require a district boundary amendment, 
at which point UH would have two avenues to comply with the 
Commission’s determination: (1)  UH could “voluntarily” request a 
district boundary amendment or (2)  UH could comply through 
“removal of the industrial uses from the conservation district,” 
as the Kanaheles explained.  The fact two avenues exist through *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 which compliance with the  requested  declaratory order is 
possible is irrelevant to the substance of the reque sted 
declaratory order.   The Kanaheles’ requested declaratory relief 
would require a district boundary amendment in order for the 
astronomy facilities to continue operating.  
2. The Commission  correctly determined that it lacked 
jurisdiction to issue the requested declaratory 
orders. 
The Kanaheles also argue  “the LUC reversibly erred by 
ruling it lacked jurisdiction to issue declaratory orders on a 
matter not within its jurisdiction. ”  The Kanaheles argue that  
the Commission’s ruling : (a) “is inconsistent with the LUC’s own 
conclusion that it h olds jurisdiction to issue the requested 
declaratory order ”; (b) is invalid because it purports to alter 
and restr ict HRS chapter 205; (c)  is premised on incorrect legal 
conclusions; and (d)  is premised on clear error.  
a. The Commission  possesses jurisdiction to 
determine the boundaries of its jurisdiction.  
The Kanaheles first challenge the Commission ’s 
conclusion that:  
The Commission has jurisdiction to issue  this declaratory 
order.  HRS §  91-8, as implemented by the Commission’s 
administrative rules, HAR [Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules] 
§§ 15-15-98 through 15 -15-104.1, authorize the Commission 
to issue a declaratory order “as to the applicability of 
any statuto ry provision or of any rule or order of the 
commission to a specific factual situation.”  The 
Commission’s statutes, the applicability of which are put 
at issue in this Petition, are those sections of HRS 
Chapter 205 that govern the authority to reclassify  land 
and to govern the permitted uses on State Conservation 
District Lands.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 According to the Kanaheles, “LUC concedes it has jurisdiction to 
issue ‘this declaratory order’ and the Petition ‘put at issue’ 
the LUC’s statu tes and rules,” so therefore the Com mission’s 
“ruling that the Kanaheles requested a ruling on matters not 
administered or within the jurisdiction of the LUC must be 
incorrect.”  
The Kanaheles misconstrue the Commission ’s conclusion.  
The first sentence of the conclusion is : “The Commission h as 
jurisdiction to issue this declaratory order” — i.e., the 
Commission has jurisdiction to enter a declaratory order 
concluding that it lacks jurisdiction.  (Emphasis added.)  This 
follows the axiom that a decision -making body always has 
authority to dete rmine whether it has jurisdiction.  See, e.g. , 
State v. Brandimart , 68 Haw. 495, 497, 720 P.2d 1009, 1010 
(1986) (“A court always has jurisdiction to determine whether it 
has jurisdiction over a particular case.”).  If the decision -
making body concludes it  lacks jurisdiction, it may issue a 
decision stating as much.  See id.  The only prohibition is that 
the decision -making body “may not be able to maintain 
jurisdiction for the purpose of determining the merits of the 
case.”  Id. 
Moreover, although it is tr ue that the Commission  has 
the authority to issue “ a declaratory order as to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 applicability of any statutory provision or of any rule or order 
of [LUC],” HRS §  91-8,14 this authority is not available when, 
for example, “[t]here is no longer a question of  how the 
relevant laws .  . . ‘apply.’”  CARD, 114 Hawaiʻi at 156, 159 P.3d 
at 197.  As discussed below, such is the case here .  See infra 
Section B(3).  Consequently, the declaratory ruling procedure is 
not available for determining the applicability of HRS chapter 
205.  See CARD, 114 Hawaiʻi at 156, 159 P.3d at 197.  
b. The Commission ’s ruling does not purport to alter 
or restrict HRS chapter 205.  
The Kanah eles next challenge the LUC Order by 
contending that the Commission  improperly “attempt[ed] to 
modify, alter, or restrict the scope of HRS chapter 205.”  The 
Kanaheles emphasize that HRS §  205-2 grants the Commission  
jurisdiction over “all land,” including  “over the classification 
or reclassification of certain conservation district lands.”  
But the fact that HRS §§  205-2(a)(4) and 205 -4 
authorize the Commission  to reclassify conservation district 
                     
14  HRS § 91-8 provides:  
 
Any interested person may petition an agency for a 
declaratory order as to the  applicability of any statutory 
provision or of any rule or order of the agency.   Each 
agency shall adopt rules prescribing the form of the 
petitions and the procedure for their submission, 
consideration, and prompt disposition.  Orders disposing of 
petitions in such cases shall have the same status as other 
agency orders.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
33 lands does not mean that the Commission  can use its 
classific ation authority to enforce land uses within the 
Astronomy Precinct .  Rather, the legislature vested such 
enforcement authority in the Department through HRS §  205-5(a).  
See HRS § 205-5(a) (“Conservation districts shall be governed by 
the department of land and natural resources pursuant to chapter 
183C.”); HRS § 183C-3(7) (2011) (“The board and department 
shall . . . [e]stablish and enforce land use regulations on 
conservation district lan ds . . . .”).  Had the legislature 
intended to grant the Commission  any authority over the 
governance of conservation district lands, it could have done 
so.  See, e.g. , HRS § 205-5(b)-(c); HRS § 205-6(d) (2017).  It 
did not.  See generally  HRS chapter 205.   Insofar as this court 
“must read statutory language in the context of the entire 
statute,” it is the Kanaheles who cabin the scope of HRS chapter 
205 by disregarding the powers granted to the Department through 
HRS § 205-5(a).  See Gray v. Admin . Dir. of the Ct., 84 Hawaiʻi 
138, 148, 931 P.2d 580, 590 (1997)  (emphasis added)  (quoting 
State v. Toyomura , 80 Hawaiʻi 8, 18, 904 P.2d 893, 903 (1995) ).  
c. The Commission ’s ruling is not premised on 
incorrect legal conclusions.  
The Kanaheles also challenge the LUC Order for 
creating “a false equivalence between DLNR’s governance of the 
conservation district and the LUC’s jurisdiction to classify and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
34 reclassify lands.”  But it was the Kanaheles who  articulated  
that equivalence by asking the Commissi on to use its 
classification power to determine what constitutes prohibited  
uses within the Astronomy Precinct and, in turn, to enforce the 
prior conservation district classification.   
Under these circumstances, the LUC O rder does not 
indicate that the De partment ’s granting of successive 
conservation di strict use permits precluded the Commission  from 
reclassifying the Astronomy Precinct.  Rather, the LUC Order 
simply recognized that the legislature delegated the authority 
to control land uses within conser vation districts — and 
therefore the Astronomy Precinct — to the Department .  Insofar 
as the legislature did not authorize the Commission  to determine 
what constitutes prohibited  uses of conservation district lands, 
the Commission ’s use of its classificati on authority to govern 
the Astronomy Precinct would create the epitome of an 
administrative act “in excess of the statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency.”  See HRS § 91-14(g)(2) ; supra 
Section B(2)(b); infra Section (B)(3)(a) .  
d. The Commission ’s ruling is not premised on clear 
error. 
The Kanaheles further cha llenge the LUC Order because 
the Commission  denied the Kan aheles’ petition on the basis that 
“[t]he petitioner has requested a ruling on a statutory *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
35 provision not administered by the Commissio n . . . .”  According 
to the Kanaheles, the requested declaratory rulings would only 
implicate HRS chapter 205 because “HRS chapter 205 puts the LUC 
in charge of amending land use district boundaries and DLNR does 
not have that power.”  Again, however, the Kanaheles are not 
asking the Commission  to reclassify the Astronomy Precinct from 
a conservation district to a different district.   Instead, the 
Kanaheles are asking the Commission  to determine what 
constitutes prohibited  land uses within a conservation d istrict 
and to thereby enforce the Astronomy Precinct’s conservation 
district designation.  Insofar as the legislature delegated the 
authority to govern conservation district land uses  to the 
Department  under HRS §  205-5(a) and HRS chapter 183C, the 
Commission did not err in concluding that the Kanaheles 
“requested a ruling on a statutory provision not administered by 
the Commission.”  
3. The Commission  correctly interpreted CARD as 
precluding the Kanaheles’ petition.  
Lastly, the Kanaheles argue that the Commission  
improperly “interpreted CARD to require denial of the Kanaheles’ 
petition  on the basis that [the Department]  had already rendered 
a decision on the matter.”  The Kanaheles insist that their 
petition does not run afoul of CARD because ( a) it does not 
constitute an attempt to evade a prior decision ; and (b) CARD *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
36 arose in a distinguishable procedural posture.  The Kanaheles 
also contend that the Commission ’s application of CARD “would 
cause an absurd situation in which any county or state agency 
decision concerning any land would foreclose the LUC’s power to 
reclassify that land or a larger area within which that land was 
located.”  Th is point of error is meritless.  
a. The Commissi on lacks jurisdiction to issue a 
declaratory order to review the Department’s 
already-made decisions . 
Pursuant to HRS §  91-8:  
Declaratory rulings by agencies.   Any interested 
person may petition an agency for a declaratory order as to 
the applicability of  any statutory provision or of any rule 
or order of the agency.  Each agency shall adopt rules 
proscribing the form of the petitions and the procedure for 
their submission, consideration, and prompt disposition.  
Orders disposing of petitions in such cases  shall have the 
same status as other agency orders.  
This court discussed the boundaries of agencies’ 
declaratory ruling authority in CARD, 114 Hawaiʻi 184, 159 P.3d 
143.  We explained:  
 As both the title (“Declaratory rulings by agencies”) 
and the pertinen t text (“a declaratory order as to the 
applicability [of a statute, agency rule, or order]”) make 
clear, the declaratory ruling procedure of HRS § 91-8 is 
meant to provide a means of seeking a determination of 
whether and in what way some statute, agency r ule, or order 
applies to the factual situation raised by an interested 
person.  It was not intended to allow review of concrete 
agency decisions for which other means of review are 
available.  Reading HRS §  91-8 in a common sense fashion, 
and bearing in mi nd the plain meaning of the term 
“applicability,” it cannot seriously be maintained that the 
procedure was intended to review already -made agency 
decisions.  For such decisions , . . . the agency has 
already spoken as to the “applicability” of the relevant 
law to the factual circumstances at hand  — implicitly or 
explicitly it has found the relevant legal requirements to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
37 be met.  There is no longer a question of how the relevant 
laws . . . “apply.”  
 Use of the declaratory ruling procedural device only 
makes sense where the applicability of relevant law is 
unknown, either because the agency has not yet acted upon 
particular factual circumstances, or for some other reason 
the applicability of some provisions of law have not been 
brought into consideration.  
Id. at 196-97, 159 P.3d at 155 -56. 
In this case, the Department has  already spoken to the 
applicability of the laws implicated by the Kanaheles’ petition.  
Pursuant to its statutory authority, the Department has 
determined that the astronomy facilities constitu te permissible 
uses within the Astronomy Precinct.  
According to the Kanaheles, CARD “prohibits using 
declaratory petitions to review specific decisions made by the 
same agency from which declaratory orders were requested. ”  
Using this framework, the Kanah eles argue that their “petition 
could not constitute an attempt to evade a prior decision by the 
LUC or any other agency because no other agency has the 
authority to render declaratory rulings on the classification of 
lands into districts and the redistric ting of lands.”  
As a preliminary matter, t he Kanaheles’ focus on the 
Commission ’s reclassification powers is irrelevant .  Again, the 
Kanaheles are not asking the Commission  to reclassify the 
Astronomy Precinct from a conservation district into an urban 
district.  The Kanaheles want a declaration that the astronomy 
facilities are not permitted land uses within a conservation *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
38 district.  As such, the Kanaheles’ discussion of the 
Commission ’s authority to amend district boundaries and 
reclassify lands is not relevant to their request for a 
declaration on permitted uses within conservation districts . 
Additionally, the Kanaheles’ initial claim that CARD 
prohibits review of decision s “made by the same agency  from 
which declaratory orders were request ed” finds no footing in 
CARD.  CARD’s key holding to this case is that HRS §  91-8 does 
not allow for review of already -made decisions because, in such 
scenario s, “[t]here is no longer a question of how the relevant 
laws . . . ‘apply.’”  114 Hawaiʻi at 197,  159 P.3d at 156.  In 
other words, the declaratory ruling procedure is no longer 
available when a decision -making body with authority to address 
the question at issue provides an answer.  See id.  Such is the 
case here.  
“An administrative agency can only w ield powers 
expressly or implicitly granted to it by statute.”  Morgan v. 
Planning Dep ’t, Cnty. of Kauaʻi, 104 Hawaiʻi 173, 184, 86 P.3d  
982, 993 (2004) (quoting TIG Ins. Co. v. Kauhane , 101 Hawaiʻi 
311, 327, 67 P.3d 810, 826 (App. 2003)).   The legislature  did 
not grant the Commission  any authority to restrict conservation 
district land uses; the legislature delegated that power to the 
Department .  Pursuant to HRS §  205-5(a), “[c]onservation *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
39 districts shall be governed by the department of land and 
natural resources pursuant to chapter 183C.”   Under HRS §  183C-3 
(2011), the Department  shall: 
(1)  Maintain an accurate inventory of lands classified 
within the state conservation district by the state 
land use commission, pursuant to chapter 205;  
 
(2)  Identify and appropriately zone those lands classified 
within the conservation district;  
 
(3)  Adopt rules, in compliance with chapter 91 which shall 
have the force and effect of law;  
 
(4)  Set, charge, and collect reasonable fees in an amount 
sufficient to defray the cost of processing 
applications for zoning, use, and subdivision of 
conservation lands;  
 
(5)  Establish categories of uses or activities on 
conservation lands, including allowable uses or 
activities for which no permit shall be required ; 
 
(6)  Establish restrictions, requirements, and conditions 
consistent with the standards set forth in this chapter 
on the use of conservation lands ; and 
 
(7)  Establish and enforce land use regulations on 
conservation district lands including the collection of 
fines for violations of land use and terms and 
conditions of permits issued by the department . 
(Emphasis added .) 
In contrast, under HRS §  205-2, 
(a)  There shall be four major land use districts in 
which all lands in the State shall be placed: urban, rural,  
agricultural, and conservation.  The land use commission 
shall group contiguous land areas suitable for inclusion in 
one of these four major districts.  The commission shall 
set standards for determining the boundaries  of each 
district, provided that:  
 
. . . . 
 
(1) In the establishment of the boundaries of 
conservation districts, the “forest and water 
reserve zones” provided in Act 234, section 2, 
Session Laws of Hawaii 1957, are renamed 
“conservation districts” and, effective as of 
July 11, 1961, the boundari es of the forest and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
40 water reserve zones theretofore established 
pursuant to Act 234, section 2, Session Laws of 
Hawaii 1957, shall constitute the boundaries of 
the conservation districts; provided that 
thereafter the power to determine the boundaries  
of the conservation districts shall be in the 
commission.  
 
. . . . 
 
(e)  Conservation districts shall include  areas 
necessary for protecting watersheds and water sources; 
preserving scenic and historic areas; providing park lands, 
wilderness, and beach reserves; conserving indigenous or 
endemic plants, fish, and wildlife, including those which 
are threatened or e ndangered; preventing floods and soil 
erosion; forestry; open space areas whose existing 
openness, natural condition, or present state of use, if 
retained, would enhance the present or potential value of 
abutting or surrounding communities, or would mainta in or 
enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources; 
areas of value for recreational purposes; other related 
activities; and other permitted uses not detrimental to a 
multiple use conservation concept .  Conservation districts 
shall also include a reas for geothermal resources 
exploration and geothermal resources development, as 
defined under section 182 -1. 
(Emphasis added .) 
Reading these statutes in conjunction with one  
another, it is evident that the Commission  lacks authority to 
prohibit  land use s within the conservation distr icts.  Under 
HRS § 205-2(a), the Commission  “determine [s] the boundaries  of 
the conservation districts.”   (Emphasis added.)   HRS § 205-2(e) 
identifies, in turn, areas and uses that “[c]onservation 
districts shall include [.]”  While this language indicates what 
may be included within conservation districts, it does not grant 
the Commission  authority to use the conservation district 
classification to exclude certain land uses from the 
conservation district boundaries .  Had the  legislature wished to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
41 grant the Commission  such power, it could have done so as it did 
with the agricultural and rural districts.  For instance, the 
legislatu re dictates that “[w]ithin the agricultural district, 
all lands .  . . shall be restricted to the fo llowing permitted 
uses.”  HRS § 205-4.5(a) (2017).  The legislature similarly 
mandates that “[u]nless authorized by special permit issued 
pursuant to this chapter, only the following uses shall be 
permitted within rural districts.”   HRS § 205-5(c).  In these 
two cases, if an unauthorized land use is included within either 
the agricultural or rural district, either the governing county 
must terminate the use under HRS §  205-12 (2017) or the 
Commission could reclassify the land.   At no point does HRS 
§ 205-2(e) contain any of the limiting language used in HRS 
§§ 205-4.5 or 205 -5(c).  Nor does HRS §  205-2(e) identify any 
areas or land uses that the Commission  may not include within 
conservation district boundaries.   As such, HRS §  205-2(e) does 
not provide any basis by which the Commission  can exclude land 
uses within the Astronomy Precinct, or be required to reclassify 
the Astronomy Precinct because such land uses are present.  
Moreover, HRS chapter 183C and HRS § 205-5(a) 
establish that the Commission  lacks aut hority to enforce land 
use restrictions within the conservation district boundaries.  
This is because  HRS § 183C-3(7) authorizes the Department  to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
42 enforce conservation district land use restrictions.  See also  
HRS § 205-12 (“The appropriate officer or agen cy charged with 
the administration of county zoning laws shall enforce within 
each county the use classification districts adopted by the land 
use commission ”) (emphasis added) . 
Insofar as (1) it is the Department ’s responsibility 
to identify permissible land uses within a conservation district 
and (2) the Department  has determined that the astronomy 
facilities constitute permissible conservation district land 
uses, the Kanaheles may not use the declaratory ruling procedure 
to seek review of the Department ’s prior determinatio ns.  See 
CARD, 114 Hawaiʻi at 196-97, 159 P.3d at 155 -56.  At this point, 
“[t]here is no longer a question of how the relevant laws .  . . 
‘apply.’”  Id.  The Commission is consequently barred f rom 
issuing any of the requested declaratory orders.   See id.15 
                     
15  The Planning Office’s state land use district boundary review s also 
align with the Department’s determination.  Pursuant to HRS § 205-18, “[t]he 
office of planning and sustainable development may undertake a review of the 
classification and districting of all lands in the State”  and “may initiate 
state land use boundary amendments which it deems appropriate to conform to 
these plans [the Hawaii state plan, county general plans, and county 
development and community plans].”  The Planning Office completed its first 
state land use district boundary review in 1992.  See 1992 Boundary Review.   
At that time, the Planning Office was aware that UH intended to construct 
thirteen telescopes wi thin the Astronomy Precinct by 2000.  1992 Boundary 
Review at 23.  These thirteen telescopes constitute the current uses the 
Kanaheles identify in requested declaratory orders one and three.  The 
Planning Office did not recommend reclassifying the Astronom y Precinct from a 
conservation district into a different district  at that time .  1992 Boundary 
Review at 121 -27 (discussing recommended amendments).  To the extent the 
Planning Office could have pointed to the thirteen telescopes and their 
associated facil ities as a reason to reclassify the Astronomy Precinct, it 
did not.  See id.  Further, the 202 2 Boundary Review was conducted long after *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
43 b. The Kanaheles’ contention that they sought the 
Commission’s interpretation of HRS chapter 205 
rather than an enforcement order is irrelevant in 
light of CARD.  
Because the Commission is barred from issuing any of 
the requested declaratory orders, the Kanaheles’ contention that 
they merely “sought the LUC’s interpretation of HRS chapter 205 
and implementing rules concerning certain uses of conservation 
lands and not an enforcement order assessing  penalties or 
imposing injunctive relief for actual uses in violation of 
statutory requirements”  is irrelevant.  Because the sought 
declaratory orders would review the Department’s prior 
determinatio ns, the Commission is barred from issuing the 
orders.  See CARD, 114 Hawaiʻi at 196-97, 159 P.3d at 155 -56.   
c. CARD’s procedural posture is irrelevant.  
The Kanaheles point out that “the procedural posture” 
of the present case and CARD “are entirely distinct.”  However, 
the Kanaheles do not provide any expla nation as to why this 
matters.  Given that the Kanaheles do not articulate how or why 
the “entirely distinct” procedural postures must lead to 
different results, CARD’s procedural posture appears irrelevant.  
                     
UH proposed the TMT and did not recommend reclassification of the Astronomy 
Precinct.  Under these circumstances, the P lanning Office appears to have 
implicitly adopted the Department’s determination that the current industrial 
research facility uses within the Astronomy Precinct are appropriate  within 
the conservation district , and - contrary to the Kanaheles’ third reque sted 
declaratory order  - are uses consistent “with conservation district uses ” and 
not “detrimental to a multiple use conservation concept .”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
44 d. The LUC Order does not create an absurd result.  
Finally, the Kanaheles protest that the Commission’s 
interpretation of CARD would preclude the Commission from ever 
reclassifying land after a county or the Department ha s made a 
decision concerning such  land.  The LUC Order has no such 
consequence.  
Given that t he Kanaheles did not ask the Commission to 
reclassify the Astronomy Precinct, the Commission did not 
conclude that it was precluded from ever reclassifying the 
Astronomy Precinct.  Rather, the crux of the Commission’s 
decision was that it lacked authority to prohibit  land uses 
within conservation districts.  The Commission thereby 
determined that it lacked jurisdiction to exercise its 
declaratory ruling authority.  
4. The Commission correctly interpreted Mauna Kea I  and 
Mauna Kea II . 
The Kanaheles also argue  that the “LUC incorrectly 
interpreted Mauna Kea I  and Mauna Kea II ” by concluding : 
The Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has considered and ruled on 
permitting and jurisdictional issues regarding Mauna Kea  in 
[sic] Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. Of Land & Nat. Res. , 136 
Hawaii 376, 363 P.3d 224  (2015) and Matter of Conservation 
District Use Application HA -3568 for the Thirty Meter 
Telescope , 143 Hawaii 379, 431 P.3d 752  (2018) . 
According to the Kanaheles, the Commission’s conclusion was 
erroneous because “[n]either Mauna Kea I nor Mauna Kea II  passed *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
45 on the matter of the LUC’s jurisdiction to classify or 
reclassify lands within the conservation district.”  
However,  the Commission’s conclusion did not claim 
that either Mauna Kea I  or Mauna Kea II  passed on the 
Commission’s  jurisdiction.  The LUC Order simply stated that 
“[t]he Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has considered and ruled on 
permitting and jurisdiction issues regarding Mauna Kea[.]”  The 
Commission therefore did not misinterpret Mauna Kea I  or Mauna 
Kea II.  Rather, the Kana heles misread the LUC Order.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
This court ’s role is to interpret the statutory scheme 
as enacted by the legislature.   The dissent contends this 
opinion “eliminat[ed]  . . . the Commission’s jurisdiction over 
conservation land bearing CDUPs granted by the Department .”  Not 
so.  This court has faithfully interpreted the relevant statut es 
and concluded the statutory scheme does not permit the 
Commission to enforce uses within a conservation district.   This 
court did not, and indeed has no authority to,  rewrite an 
existing statute.   Rather, “[o]ur function is to interpret the 
statute [or statutory scheme]  as it exists, not to indulge in 
judicial legislation in the guise of statutory construction.”   
Territory of Hawaii v. Shinohara , 42 Haw. 29, 34 ( Haw. Terr. 
1957).  While the dissent appears to question  the efficacy of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
46 the statutory scheme  to protect conservation district land , it 
is the legislature’s role, not ours, to amend existing law.   See 
McIntosh v. Murphy, 52 Haw. 29,  39 469 P.2d 177 , 182 (1970) 
(Kobayashi, J., dissenting); Yates v. United States , 574 U.S. 
528, 570  (2015) (Kagan, J., dissenting)  (“If judges disagree 
with Congress's choice, we are perfectly entitled to say so  — in 
lectures, in law review articles, and even in dicta.  But we are 
not entitled to replace the statute Congress enacted with an 
alternative of our own design. ”).  
For the foregoing reasons, the Kanaheles ’ points of 
error lack merit, and the LUC Order is affirmed.  
 
Lance D. Collins 
and Bianca Isaki 
for Appellants 
 
Miranda C. St eed (Patricia 
Ohara and Lori N. Tanigawa  
on the brief) for Appellee  
Land Use Commission, State of
Hawaiʻi  
 
Jesse K. Souki and 
Joseph F. Kotowski, III, 
(Gary Y. Takeuchi also on the 
brief) for Intervenor- Appellee
University of Hawaiʻi  
 
Ross T. Shinyama and  
J. Douglas Ing (Brian Kang 
and Summer H. Kaiawe also on 
the brief) for Intervenor- Appellee
TMT International Observatory LLC  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Lisa W. Cataldo  
 
