 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
                                                           
  
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCOT-17-0000777 30-NOV-2018 10:45 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF CONTESTED CASE HEARING RE
  
CONSERVATION DISTRICT USE APPLICATION (CDUA) HA
-3568 
 
FOR THE THIRTY METER TELESCOPE AT THE MAUNA KEA SCIENCE RESERVE, 
KAʻOHE MAUKA, HĀMĀKUA, HAWAIʻI, TMK (3) 404015:009
  
SCOT-17-0000777, SCOT-17-0000811, and SCOT-17-0000812  
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES
  
(BLNR-CC-16-002 (Agency Appeal))
  
 
NOVEMBER 30, 2018  
 
AMENDED DISSENTING OPINION BY WILSON, J.1
 
I. Introduction 
The degradation principle.  The Board of Land and 
Natural Resources (BLNR) grounds its analysis on the proposition 
that cultural and natural resources protected by the 
Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi and its enabling laws lose 
1 This amended dissenting opinion makes technical corrections 
and minor substantive changes. 
1
   
 
   
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
legal protection where degradation of the resource is of 
sufficient severity as to constitute a substantial adverse 
impact.   Because the area affected by the Thirty Meter Telescope 
Project (TMT or TMT project) was previously subjected to a  
substantial adverse impact, the BLNR finds that the proposed TMT  
project could not have a substantial adverse impact on the existing natural resources. Under this analysis, the cumulative 
negative impacts from development of prior telescopes caused a substantial adverse impact; therefore, TMT could   not be the 
cause of a substantial adverse impact. As stated by the BLNR, TMT could not ”create a tipping point where impacts became 
significant.” Thus, addition of another telescope—TMT—could not 
be the cause of a substantial adverse impact on the existing 
resources because the tipping point of a substantial adverse 
impact had previously been reached.    
Appellants object to the principle advanced by the 
BLNR that “without the TMT Project, the cumulative effect of astronomical development and other uses in the summit area of 
Mauna Kea have previously resulted in impacts that are 
substantial, significant and adverse” and, therefore, “[t]he 
level of impacts on natural resources within the Astronomy 
Precinct of the [Mauna Kea Science Reserve (MKSR)] would be 
substantially the same even in the absence of the TMT 
Project[.]” In other words, BLNR concludes that the degradation 
2
   
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
to the summit area has been so substantially adverse that the 
addition of TMT would have no substantial adverse effect. Thus, 
while conceding that Mauna Kea receives constitutional and 
statutory protection commensurate with its unchallenged position 
as the citadel of the Hawaiian cultural pantheon, the BLNR 
applies what can be described as a degradation principle to cast 
off cultural or environmental protection by establishing that 
prior degradation of the resource —to a level of damage causing a 
substantial adverse impact —extinguishes the legal protection 
afforded to natural resources in the conservation district.   The 
degradation principle ignores the unequivocal mandate contained   
in Hawai ʻi Admini strative Rules (HAR) §  13-5-30(c)(4) prohibiting 
a Conservation District Use Permit (CDUP)  for a land  use that 
would cause a substantial adverse impact to existing natural resources.  The BLNR substitutes a new standard for evaluating  
the impacts of proposed land uses, a standard that   removes the 
protection to conservation land afforded by HAR §  13-5-30(c)(4).   
Using the fact that the resource has already suffered a substantial adverse impact, the BLNR concludes that further land uses could not be the cause of substantial adverse impact.   
Under this new principle of natural resource law,  one of the  
most sacred resources of the Hawaiian culture  loses its 
protection because it has previously undergone substantial adverse impact from prior development of telescopes.   The 
3
   
 
  
                                                           
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
degradation principle portends environmental and cultural damage 
to cherished natural and cultural resources. It dilutes or 
reverses the foundational dual objectives of environmental law— 
namely, to conserve what exists (or is left) and to repair 
environmental damage; it perpetuates the concept that the 
passage of time and the degradation of natural resources can 
justify unacceptable environmental and cultural damage.2 
2 The duty to preserve and rehabilitate in perpetuity a 
resource such as Kaho ʻolawe that has, over time, been severely degraded 
by government action is a duty potentially undermined or extinguished 
under the new degradation principle. See Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 6K- 3(a)(3) (1993) (requiring Kaho ʻolawe to be preserved and 
rehabilitated). The principle is directly contrary to the purpose of 
the federal National Environmental Policy Act, which notes the 
obligation of government to protect and restore the environment: 
[I]t is the continuing responsibility of the Federal 
Government to use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of national policy, to 
improve and coordinate Federal plans, functions, programs, 
and resources to the end that the Nation may — 
(1) fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding 
generations; 
(2) assure for all Americans safe, healthful, 
productive, and esthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings; 
(3) attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the 
environment without degradation, risk to health or 
safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences; 
(4) preserve important historic, cultural, and 
natural aspects of our national heritage, and 
maintain, wherever possible, an environment which 
supports diversity and variety of individual choice; 
(5) achieve a balance between population and resource 
use which will permit high standards of living and a 
wide sharing of life’s amenities; and 
(continued . . .) 
4
   
 
   
   
 
 
   
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
  
 
  
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
It is noteworthy that the party responsible for the 
substantial adverse impact to this protected resource is the 
State of Hawaiʻ i (State).  It is uncontested that the State 
authorized previous construction within the Astronomy Precinct 
of the MKSR that created a substantial adverse impact.  Thus, 
the party that caused the substantial adverse impact is 
empowered by the degradation principle to increase the damage. 
Now the most extensive construction project yet proposed for the 
Astronomy Precinct —a 180-foot building 600 feet below the summit 
ridge of Mauna Kea —is deemed to have no substantial adverse 
impact due to extensive degradation from prior development of 
telescopes in the summit area.  The degradation principle 
renders inconsequential the failure of the State to meet its 
constitutional duty to protect natural and cultural resources 
for future generations. It renders illusory the public trust 
duty enshrined in the Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻ i and 
heretofore in the decisions of this court to protect such 
resources. And its policy of condoning continued destruction of 
natural resources once the resource value has been substantially 
(. . . continued) 
(6) enhance the quality of renewable resources and 
approach the maximum attainable recycling of 
depletable resources. 
42 U.S.C. § 4331(b) (2012). 
5
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
                                                           
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
adversely impacted is contrary to accepted norms of the 
environmental rule of law. 
II. The BLNR and the Majority Fail to Comply with the 
Requirement of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) that the Impact of the Thirty 
Meter Telescope upon the Existing Adversely Impacted Cultural 
Resource Be Considered
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) prohibits a proposed land use in 
the conservation district that will cause a substantial adverse 
impact to existing natural resources: “I n evaluating the merits 
of a proposed land use, . . . [t]he proposed land use will not 
cause substantial adverse impact to existing natural resources 
within the surrounding area, community, or region.” Because 
“natural resources” includes cultural resources,3 land use cannot 
occur in the conservation district if it causes a substantial 
adverse impact to existing cultural resources. HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(4) sets the standard to evaluate whether the proposed land 
use project should be permitted. Under this standard, the 
impact of the proposed land use must be considered with an 
understanding of the condition of the existing natural resources. If the land use will cause a substantial adverse 
impact to the existing natural resources, it is prohibited. The 
3 “Natural resource” as defined by the version of HAR § 13 -5­
2 in effect when Appellees submitted their Conservation District Use 
Application included “resources such as plants, aquatic life and 
wildlife, cultural, historic, and archaeological sites, and minerals.” 
6
   
 
  
  It is undisputed that the relevant area  of the TMT 
project has suffered a substantial adverse impact to cultural 
5 resources due to the construction of twelve  telescopes: “ [T]he 
cumulative effects of astronomical development and other uses in 
the summit area of Mauna Kea have previously resulted in impacts 
                                                           
   
 
  
  
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
degradation principle violates HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) by removing 
the requirement to consider the effect of a proposed land use on 
the existing natural resource.  The degradation principle 
reverses the requirement that the impact of the new land use be 
considered; instead, the degradation principle requires that the 
impact not be considered once the existing resource has suffered 
a substantial adverse impact.  Consideration of the impacts of a 
proposed land use becomes irrelevant because the existing 
resource is already substantially degraded.4 
4 The Majority states that the “BLNR does not have license to 
endlessly approve permits for construction in conservation districts, 
based purely on the rationale that every additional facility is purely 
incremental. It cannot be the case that the presence of one facility 
necessarily renders all additional facilities as an ‘incremental’ 
addition.” Majority Opinion at 55 (quoting Kilakila ʻO Haleakalā v. 
Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 138 Hawai ʻi 383, 404, 382 P.3d 195, 216 
(2016)). However, the increment with the greatest impact of all 
telescopes, TMT, is deemed to not cause a substantial adverse impact 
because prior increments of telescope construction cumulatively caused a substantial adverse impact . 
5 The Astronomy Precinct of the MKSR “currently has eight 
optical / infrared observatories, three submillimeter observatories 
and a radio telescope.” Eight of these facilities became operational 
between 1970 and 1992; four became operational between 1996 and 2002. 
HAR § 13-5- 30(c)(4), the rule protecting natural resources from 
substantial adverse impacts, was adopted in 1994.  
7
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
    _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
that are substantial, significant and adverse.” Understandably,  
the proscription against imposition of a substantial adverse 
impact upon conservation district land contained in HAR § 13 -5­
30(c)(4) must be applied in light of the purpose of the chapter 
of which it is a part. See Kilakila , 138 Hawai ʻi 
at 405, 382 
P.3d at 217.  The purpose of HAR Title 13, Chapter 5 is to 
conserve, protect and preserve the important natural and 
cultural resources of the State of Hawaiʻ i in the conservation 
district: “The purpose of this chapter is to regulate land-use 
in the conservation district for the purpose of conserving, 
protecting, and preserving the important natural and cultural 
resources of the State through appropriate management and use to 
promote their long-term sustainability and the public health, 
safety, and welfare.” HAR § 13 -5-1.  To effectuate the 
protection of cultural resources in the conservation district 
mandated in HAR Chapter 13-5, HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) was adopted to 
prohibit land use that will cause a substantial adverse impact 
on cultural resources. The legislative history, the record of 
legislative intent preceding HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4), is an 
unequivocal expression of intent to protect conservation land 
from the consequences of the degradation principle. Rather than 
promote further degradation of conservation land that, in its 
“existing” condition, has been substantially adversely impacted, 
i.e., degraded, the Hawaiʻ i State Legislature (legislature) 
8
   
 
  
 
 
    
    
 
  
  
 
                                                           
  
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
created a management framework that protects against further 
degradation. The companion statute that authorized the 
implementation of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) is HRS Chapter 183C.  Its 
purpose is to conserve, protect, and preserve natural and 
cultural resources in the conservation district —not to establish 
a process permitting the degradation of such a resource once the resource has been substantially adversely impacted: 
The legislature finds that lands within the state 
land use conservation district contain important natural 
resources essential to the preserva tion of the State’ s 
fragile natural ecosystems and the sustainability of the State’s water supply. It is therefore, the intent of the 
legislature to conserve, protect, and preserve the 
important natural resources of the State through 
appropriate management and use to promote their long -term 
sustainability and the public health, safety and welfare. 
HRS § 183C-1 (2011).  The adoption of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) in 
1994 was intended to implement the purpose of HRS Chapter 183C, 
namely “clarify[ing] the department’s jurisdictional and management responsibilities within the State conservation 
district.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 491, in 1994 House Journal, 
at 1057. To clarify the responsibility of the State to 
conserve, protect, and preserve natural   resources, mandatory 
language prohibiting land use that causes substantial adverse impact on natural resources, including cultural resources, was 
6 codified.   The legislative history of HRS § 183C -1 and HAR § 13 ­
6 HAR § 13 -5-30(b) provides that, “[u]nless provided in this 
chapter, land uses shall not  be undertaken in the conservation 
(continued . . .) 
9
   
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
  
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
5-30(c)(4) contains no discussion of or allusion to the 
degradation principle; instead, its import is to provide more 
clear protection for Hawaii’s natural resources by preventing 
further damage to conservation land already subjected to substantial adverse impacts.
7 
(. . . continued) 
district.” (E mphasis added) . HAR § 13 -5-30(c) provides that, “[i]n 
evaluating the merits of a proposed land use, the department or board 
shall apply the following criteria.” ( Emphasis added) . We have 
interpreted this language to mean that a proposed land use is “prohibit[ed]” if it violates HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4), the fourth of these 
criteria. 
Majority Opinion at 54. As noted, consistent with the 
clarification of the State’s duty to protect cultural resources, the 
1994 passage of HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4) specifically defined natural 
resources to include cultural resources.  
7 HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4) protects natural resources in the 
conservation district from any land use that causes a substantial 
adverse impact. HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4) does not allow this protection to 
be balanced against any competing interest, such as economic value 
from the proposed land use. If the proposed land use will cause a substantial adverse impact to the existing cultural resource, no amount of compensation or economic benefit is legally capable of 
justifying the impact. This is in contrast to other Hawai ʻi resource 
management regimes, such as the Coastal Zone Management statute, which 
explicitly requires a balancing test: 
No development shall be approved unless the authority 
[designated by the county] has first found . . . [t]hat the 
development will not have any substantial adverse 
environmental or ecological effect, except as such adverse effect is minimized to the extent practicable and clearly 
outweighed by public health, safety, or compelling public 
interests. 
HRS § 205A- 26(2)(A) (2017).  Unlike the Coastal Zone Management 
regulatory regime, under HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4), economic benefit is not 
available as a justification for a project that will cause a 
substantial adverse impact on natural resources in the conservation 
district. A change of the land use classification to a designation 
other than conservation land would be necessary. 
10
   
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
As noted, the BLNR’s decision reverses the standard of 
protection in HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) requiring evaluation of the 
impacts of TMT on existing natural resources. The new 
“reversed” standard ignores the fact that the existing resource 
has been substantially adversely impacted. The degradation 
principle eliminates the analytical requirement of HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(4) that a determination be made as to whether the proposed 
land use will have a substantial adverse impact on the resource as it exists. Instead, the degradation principle provides that, 
once the resource has been substantially adversely impacted, the 
impact of the proposed land use cannot cause a substantial 
adverse impact. In this way, the BLNR omits the requirement of 
HAR § 13-5- 30(c)(4) that, regardless of whether the existing 
resource has previously sustained substantial adverse impact, 
the impacts of the construction of TMT on existing resources 
must be considered to determine whether TMT will cause a 
substantial adverse impact. The BLNR’s decision directly 
contradicts this court’s holding in Kilakila that required the 
proposed land use to be considered in the context of “existing natural resources within the surrounding area, community, or 
region.” HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4); see 138 Hawaiʻ i at 403, 382 P.3d 
at 215 (considering the impacts of a telescope in the context of 
the cultural resources of the site on which it was proposed to 
be located). 
11
   
 
    
 
 
                                                           
  
 
 
 The Majority’s conclusion that TMT will not have a  
substantial adverse impact on existing natural resources comes with 
little explanation , other than to make clear that it is relying upon 
the reasoning of the BLNR in its Decision and Order.  Majority Opinion at 59 (accepting the BLNR’s finding that “the T MT project will not 
cause substantial adverse impact to the existing natural resources 
within the surrounding area, community, or region under HAR § 13 -5
30(c)(4)”).   
  Though the  Majority accepts the BLNR’s conclusion of no 
substantial adverse impact, it provides no explanation as to how the 
BLNR reached its conclusion. It does not discuss the BLNR’s 
proposition that the substantial adverse impacts already imposed on 
the cultural resources mean that TMT could not be the cause of a substantial adverse impact.  Instead, the Majority begs the question. 
It states as a premise that TMT does not cause a substantial impact 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
Thus, the BLNR and the Majority acknowledge past 
telescope projects have had a substantial adverse impact on 
cultural resources,8 specifically that the cumulative effect of 
8 The BLNR described these impacts as being substantial, 
significant, and adverse: 
At the summit ridge, the existing observatories obscure 
portions of the 360 -degree panoramic view from the summit 
area. Overall, the existing level of the cumulative visual impact from past observatory construction projects at the 
summit ridge area has been considered to be substantial, 
significant, and adverse. 
Development of the existing observatories also 
significantly  modified the preexisting terrain.  The tops 
of certain pu ʻu, or cinder cones, were flattened to 
accommodate the foundations for observatory facilities.  
 
Some materials removed from the pu ʻu were pushed over the 
sides of the cinder cones, creating steeper slopes that are 
more susceptible to disturbance. Consequently, the 
existing level of cumulative impact from preexisting 
observatories on  geology, soils, and slope stability is 
considered to be substantial, significant, and adverse.  
The United Kingdom Infrared Telescope, specifically, was constructed 
on the summit ridge, which the BLNR described as “a more sensitive cultural area.” It foun d that the United Kingdom Infrared Telescope 
and the James Clark Maxwell Telescope obstruct views to the west, and the 2.2- meter telescope and NASA Infrared Telescope Facility obstruct 
views to the north.  
­
(continued . . .) 
12
   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
astronomical development on Mauna Kea and other uses of the 
summit area “have already resulted in substantial, significant 
and adverse impacts[.]”   Majority Opinion at 55.  Yet, based on 
the fact that the condition of the existing resource has already reached the point of substantial adverse impact, the proposed 
land use escapes scrutiny as to whether it will cause a 
substantial adverse impact; the “tipping point” beyond which 
impacts become substantial has already been reached due to the cumulative impacts of prior telescope development. The TMT 
project cannot, therefore, be the tipping point to cause a 
substantial adverse impact. The signature purpose of 
HAR § 13-5 ­
(. . . continued) 
and restates the premise as its conclusion. Thus, the Majority avoids 
an analysis of whether TMT causes a substantial adverse impact to the 
existing natural resources. The Majority lists resources that the BLNR concluded will not be affected, including cultural resources, and states that because they are not substantially adversely impacted, the 
BLNR was correct in concluding there is no substantial adverse impact: 
Because (1) the TMT will not cause  substantial adverse 
impact to existing plants, aquatic life and wildlife, 
cultural, historic, and archaeological sites, minerals, 
recreational sites, geologic sites, scenic areas, 
ecologically significant areas, and watersheds, (2) 
mitigation measures of restoring the abandoned Poli ʻahu Road 
and decommissioning five telescopes  will be adopted, and 
(3) other measures to lessen the impacts of the TMT will be 
adopted, the BLNR did not clearly err in c oncluding that 
the TMT will not have a substantial adverse impact to 
existing natural resources within the surrounding area, 
community, or region, as prohibited by HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4).  
Majority Opinion at 59 -60. Most of the Majority’s opinion regarding 
HAR § 13-5- 30(c)(4) is spent discussing the mitigation measures.  The 
focus on mitigation by the BLNR and the Majority supports the 
conclusion that the project will cause a substantial adverse impact. 
13
   
 
                                                            
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
30(c)(4),  to prevent land use that will cause a substantial 
adverse impact to natural resources in the conservation 
district, is extinguished. Without the protection afforded by 
HAR § 13-5- 30(c)(4)  and HRS § 183C-1, the way is open to a 
conclusion fraught with illogic: the construction of a 
telescope the magnitude of TMT will not cause a substantial 
adverse impact to a natural resource  of undisputed significant 
cultural value— notwithstanding that the resource has already 
been substantially adversely impacted by construction of twelve  
existing buildings of lesser size.   The real severity of the 
impact to the resource is made apparent by the effort of the 
BLNR and the Majority to mitigate the project’s effects with 
conditions that —though ineffective —support that Mauna Kea will 
9 be substantially adversely impacted when TMT is constructed.  
9   Although the Majority concludes that, in its degraded 
condition, the existing resource will not be substantially adversely 
impacted by the TMT project, it   takes a contradictory position 
implying acknowledgment that TMT will cause a substantial adverse 
impact that must be mitigated.  The Majority seeks  to mitigate the 
damage TMT will cause.  It relies upon the University of Hawai ʻi at 
Hilo’s (University) agreement to decommission three telescopes, the Very Long Baseline Array antenna, and one additional observatory.  The 
Majority presumes that the impact from TMT will become less than substantial once the mitigation measures are complete. However, contrary to the assumption of the Majority that  TMT can proceed 
conditioned on significant, long-term mitigation me   asures, HAR § 13-5
30(c)(4) prohibits land use in the conservation district where the 
land use will cause a substantial adverse impact.   Thus, restoration 
of cultural resources  to a condition that is not substantially 
adversely impacted must occur before a  Conservation District Use 
Permit is granted.  ­
(continued . . .) 
14
   
 
   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 Moreover, the mitigation measures adopted by the BLNR and 
the Majority do not constitute reasonable mitigation measures. They 
are illusory. Three of the telescopes have no required date of 
decommissioning. Instead, removal is relegated to an undefined point in the future when it is “reasonably possible” to remove them. These aspirational measures appear in Special Conditions 10 and 11 of the 
permit:  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
The degradation principle is antithetical to the 
intent expressed in HAR Chapter 13-5 to provide protection to 
natural resources in the conservation district. It causes 
(. . . continued) 
The University will decommission three telescopes 
permanently, as soon as reasonably possible, and no new 
observatories will be constructed on those sites. This 
commitment will be legally binding on the University and 
shall be included in any lease renewal or extension 
proposed by the University for Mauna Kea; 
. . . [C]onsistent with the Decommissioning Plan, at 
least two additional facilities will be permanently 
decommissioned by December 31, 2033, including the Very 
Long Baseline Array antenna and at least one additional observatory. 
If the University fails to decommission the five telescopes, the BLNR 
would be authorized, but not required, to revoke the permit for TMT.  See HAR § 13-5- 44.  Given that the BLNR speculates that the time it 
would take for TMT to become operational is a reasonable amount of 
time in which to decommission three telescopes, it seems highly 
unlikely that the BLNR would revoke the TMT permit after this 
reasonable amount of time has passed —that is, when TMT becomes 
operational. Even if the permit were revoked due to a failure to decommission the other telescopes, it is not clear that there would be adequate funding to decommission TMT before 2033. These conditions are little more than aspirational goals, as their enforcement would 
depend on action taken by the very entity presently granting the 
permit—the BLNR. And the term “as soon as reasonably possible” is 
vague enough as to be effectively unenforceable. These supposed conditions are ineffective as mitigation measures because their failure can occur at any time up to the completion of the construction 
of TMT, at which time they are highly unlikely to be put into effect. 
Rather than mitigating the adverse impact of TMT, they will permit 
further degradation of the resource that, in its existing condition, 
has already been substantially adversely impacted . 
15
   
 
  
 
  Norms of environmental law support the legislature’s 
intent to protect natural resources on conservation land — 
notwithstanding that it has been previously subjected to a 
substantial adverse impact. The degradation principle, on the 
other hand, violates norms of environmental law.  It allows  
further environmental and cultural damage to occur in a region of great cultural significance because the cultural resource has 
been previously substantially degraded and compromised.  This  
justification for acceleration of damage to a protected resource runs contrary to the intent embodied in article XII,  section 7 
and article XI, section 9 of the Constitution of the State of 
Hawaiʻi (Hawaiʻi Constitution)  to protect cultural and  
environmental rights. The degradation principle also 
contravenes widely acce  pted principles of law that protect the 
outstanding value of cultural and natural resources, 
notwithstanding degradation to the resource. These norms _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
cultural resources protected from substantial adverse impact to  
lose protection once they are substantially impacted in an 
adverse manner. The import of this method of rejecting the 
protection afforded to conservation land is the authorization of 
degradation of resources with utmost cultural and environmental 
importance. And so it has happened in the instant case.  
III. The Degradation Principle Violates Norms of Environmental 
Law 
16
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
include intergenerational equity, polluter pays, and non-
regression. 
A.	 Cultural and Environmental Rights Embodied in the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution 
The degradation principle contravenes provisions of 
the Hawaiʻ i Constitution that protect cultural and environmental 
rights. Article XII, section 7 affirms and protects the rights 
of Native Hawaiians to engage in traditional and customary 
practices. Under article XI, section 9, every person holds a 
substantive “right to a clean and healthful environment[.]”  
Contrary to article XII, section 7, and article XI, section 9, 
the degradation principle teaches that once a natural resource 
in the conservation district is degraded to the degree that it 
has suffered a substantial adverse impact, it is no longer worthy of protection; it bears insufficient worth to protect the 
resource from additional proposed development. 
This court has held that “‘[t]he right to a clean and 
healthful environment’ is a substantive right guaran teed to each 
person by Article XI, section 9 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution[.]”  
In re Application of Maui Elec. Co. , 141 Hawaiʻ i 249, 261, 408 
P.3d 1, 13 (2017) (quoting Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9).  Article XI, section 9 provides: 
Each person has the right to a clean and healthful 
environment, as defined by laws relating to environmental 
quality, including control of pollution and conservation, 
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Any person may enforce this right against any party, public or 
17
   
 
  
 
                                                           
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
private, through appropriate legal proceedings, subject to 
reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law. 
In Maui Electric , this court classified this right as “a 
property interest protected by due process.” 141 Hawaiʻ i at 261,  
408 P.3d at 13. The right to a clean and healthy environment is 
enumerated in laws relating to the environment including, for 
example, those that prohibit a proposed land use in a 
conservation district when it will “cause [a] substantial 
adverse impact to existing natural  resources[.]” HAR § 13 -5­
30(c)(4).  The degradation principle undermines the right to a clean and healthy environment because it allows unimpeded 
destruction of the environment once a determination is made that 
the natural resource protected from substantial adverse impacts 
within the conservation district has been subject to 
“substantial, significant and adverse” impacts from development. 
Majority Opinion at 55.  Similarly, the degradation principle 
vitiates the right to practice Native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary practices embodied in article XII, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitut ion
10  whenever the cultural practices have been 
10 “The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights, 
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural and 
religious purposes and possessed by ahupua ʻa tenants who are 
descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands 
prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State to regulate such 
rights.” Haw. Const. art. XII, § 7; see, e.g., In re Wai ʻola O 
Molokaʻi Inc., 103 Hawai ʻi 401, 409, 83 P.3d 664, 672 (2004) (holding 
that the Commission on Water Resource Management “failed to discharge 
(continued . . .) 
18
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
  
 
  
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
subjected to a substantial adverse impact in the conservation 
district. 
B. Intergenerational Equity 
The State holds Hawaii ’s natural resources in trust 
“[f]or the benefit of present and future generations[.]”11 Haw. 
Const. art. XI, § 1. This court has consistently emphasized the 
responsibility held by the State to ensure that the rights of 
future generations are preserved.  E.g., Kauai  Springs, Inc. v. 
Planning Comm’n of Cty. of Kaua ʻi, 133 Hawaiʻ i 141, 172, 324 P.3d 
951, 982 (2014) (“The public trust is, therefore, the duty and 
authority to maintain the purity and flow of our waters for 
future generations and to assure that the waters of our land are 
put to reasonable and beneficial uses.”); Kelly, 111 Hawaiʻ i at 
221–23, 140 P.3d at 1001–03 (discussing this court’s adoption of 
(. . . continued) 
its public trust duty to protect native Hawaiians’ traditional and 
customary gathering rights, as guaranteed by . . . [A]rticle XII, 
section 7 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution”); Kalipi v. Hawaiian Tr. Co. , 66 
Haw. 1, 4, 656 P.2d 745, 748 (1982) (recognizing this court’s 
obligation to protect and enforce the rights of Native Hawaiians to 
exercise traditional and customary practices embodied in article XII, 
section 7 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution). 
11 See, e.g. , In re ʻ Īao Ground Water Mgmt. Area High -Level 
Source Water Use Permit Applications , 128 Hawaiʻ i 228, 276, 287 P.3d 
129, 177 (2012); Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners , 111 Hawai ʻi 205, 
222-23, 140 P.3d 985, 1002 -03 (2006); In re Waiʻ ola O Moloka ʻi, 103 
Hawai
ʻi at 429– 31, 83 P.3d at 692 –94; In re Water Use Permit 
Applications 
(Waiāhole I) , 94 Hawai ʻi 97, 113, 129
-32, 138- 39, 141, 
189, 9 P.3d 409, 425, 441 -44, 450-51, 453, 501 (2000); Robinson v. 
Ariyoshi, 65 Haw. 641, 674, 658 P.2d 287, 310 (1982). 
19
   
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
                                                           
   
 
  
  
  _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
the public trust doctrine and the principle of intergenerational 
equity embodied therein); Waiāhole I , 94 Hawaiʻ i at 141, 9 P.3d 
at 453 (“Under the public trust, the state has both the 
authority and duty to preserve the rights of present and future 
generations in the waters of the state.”); Robinson , 65 Haw. at 
674, 658 P.2d at 310 (recognizing the State’s concomitant duty 
to protect water for future generations and ensure that water is 
“put to reasonable and beneficial uses”).12 
The BLNR promotes an analysis that requires it to 
ignore the impacts to future land uses arising from the 
cumulative effect of twelve telescopes built over the last fifty 
years in the MKSR. Future generations do not receive the 
benefit of protection of the cultural resource in the future 
because past substantial adverse impacts render it unnecessary 
12 U.S. courts have recognized that the federal government 
owes a public trust duty to present and future generations. In 
Juliana v. United States , the U.S. District Court for the District of 
Oregon ruled that a group of young environmental activists between the 
ages of eight and nineteen (plaintiffs) had standing to assert substantive due process and public trust claims against the U.S. government based on its failure to adopt adequate measures to decrease the country’s reliance on fossil fuels and reduce carbon emissions. Juliana v. United States , 217 
F.Supp.3d
 1224, 1233, 1267 (D. Or. 
2016), motion to certify appeal denied , No. 6:15- CV-01517-TC, 2017 WL 
2483705 (D. Or. June 8, 2017). 
The plaintiffs argued that the U.S. 
government has “known for over fifty years that carbon dioxide (“CO 2”) 
produced by burning fossil fuels were destabilizing the climate system 
in a way that would ‘significantly endanger plaintiffs, with the 
damage pers
isting for millennia.’” Id. at 1233.  The court granted 
the plaintiffs standing because they established that the “youth and 
future generations” would suffer harm “in a concrete and personal 
way.” Id. at 1224, 1267. 
20
   
 
     
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
to determine future impacts from TMT. In Unite Here! Local 5 v. 
City & Cty. of Honolulu , 123 Hawai ʻi 150, 231 P.3d 423 (2010) 
this court rejected a similar decision to ignore impacts of a 
proposed land use. 
In Unite Here! , this court emphasized the 
importance of considering future impacts from proposed 
development decisions. 
The case arose from a proposed expansion 
of Kuilima Resort at Turtle Bay (Kuilima) on the North Shore of 
Oʻahu. Unite Here! , 123 Hawaiʻ i at 154, 231 P.3d at 427.  In 
1985, Kuilima submitted an environmental impact statement (EIS) 
to the Department of Land Utilization. Id. The EIS identified 
various adverse impacts of the development including “drainage, traffic, dust generation, water consumption, marsh drainage 
input, loss of agricultural uses, construction noise, air 
quality, and sol
id waste disposal.” Id. at 155, 231 P.3d at 
428. Over the course of the next twenty years, the project 
encountered several delays. Id. at 157, 231 P.3d at 430. In 
2005—twenty years after the permit was granted —Kuilima submitted 
a Site Development Division Master Application Form and contended there was no basis for a supplemental EIS (SEIS) to 
assess changes to the surrounding area.  Id. at 154, 159, 231 
P.3d at 427, 432. The Department of Planning and Permitting 
agreed; it ruled that no SEIS was required because “[n]o time 
frame for development was either implied or imposed by the City 
Council as part of its [original] approval.” Id. at 159, 231 
21

   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
P.3d at 432. Kuilima was allowed to proceed without conducting 
a SEIS. 
Despite the fact that twenty years had passed since 
the initial project proposal, the circuit court affirmed the 
Department of Planning and Permitting’s decision. Id. at 166­
67, 231 P.3d at 439-40. It ruled “that a SEIS is required only when there is a substantive project change and . . . that, as a 
matter of law, the timing of the project had not substantively changed.” Id. This meant that absent a substantial change in 
the proposal itself, the original “EIS would remain valid in perpetuity and no SEIS could ever be required[.]” Unite Here! 
Local 5 v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 120 Hawaiʻ i 457, 472, 209 
P.3d 1271, 1286 (App. 2009) (Nakamura, J., dissenting), vacated, 
123 Hawaiʻ i 150, 231 P.3d 423 (2010). 
This court reversed the ICA’s majority 
decision.  The 
court found it significant that substantial, cumulative changes 
in the area occurred between 1985 and 2005. Unite Here! , 123 
Hawai
ʻi at 179, 231 P.3d at 452.  This included a dramatic 
increase in traffic and the introduction of endangered and 
threatened species in the area, including the monk seal and 
green sea turtle. Id. The court held that the timing of the 
project had substantively changed and this change had a significant effect on the project. 
Id. 
at 180, 231 P.3d at 453. 
The passage of twenty years created “an ‘essentially di fferent 
22
   
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
  _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
action’” than the one proposed, necessitating an SEIS. Id. at 
178, 231 P.3d at 451. In Unite Here! , this court contemplated 
“changes in the project area and its impact on the surrounding 
communities[.]” Id.
 In doing so, we considered the impacts of 
the proposed development on the rights and interests of future 
generations. Rather than freeze the analysis of the impacts by 
considering only a period twenty years in the past, this court 
recognized that the in
terests of subsequent generations required 
that the impacts on the resource be considered at the time the 
construction was to occur. 
The BLNR would return to the proposition rejected in 
Unite Here! that a project need not take into consideration the 
impacts of the proposed land use on the resource as it presently 
exists. 
The degradation principle removes the need to consider 
the impacts of TMT on the existing resource; once the existing cultural resource has been substantially adversely impacted, it 
is unnecessary to consider whether a future land use would cause 
a substantial adverse impact. In this way the BLNR ignores the 
rights of future generations to the protections specifically 
afforded them by the rule adopted in 1994, which mandates that 
“the proposed land use will not cause substantial adverse impact 
to existing natural resources within the surrounding area, 
community, or region.” HAR § 13 -5-30(c)(4).  The legislature 
did not intend that the rights of future generations to the 
23
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
                                                           
   
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
protection of Mauna Kea be ignored by disregarding the impact of 
the TMT project on a resource already substantially adversely 
impacted by the construction of twelve telescopes. 
Application of the degradation principle disregards 
the rights of future generations. It creates a threshold 
condition of damage —substantial adverse impact —that, once met, 
renders the resource available for future degradation. In so 
doing, the degradation principle presumes there is no natural resource value left to protect. The actions of prior and 
present generations extinguish the chance for future generations 
to protect the environmental and cultural heritage that once 
enjoyed legal protection. Future generations are left with the 
proposition enshrined in the degradation principle that 
incremental degradation to “the highest mountain peak in the 
Hawaiian Islands” and one that “is of profound importance in 
Hawaiian culture” justifies significant future degradatio n if 
the degradation attains a substantial adverse degree.  Mauna Kea 
Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. (Mauna Kea I) , 136 Hawaiʻ i 
376, 399, 363 P.3d 224, 247 (2015).
13 
13 Intergenerational equity is a tenet of international law.  
Principle 3 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 
prescribes the boundaries of intergenerational equity: “The right to 
development must be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental 
and environmental needs of present and future generations.” Rio 
Declaration on Environment and Development, princ. 3, June 14, 1992, 
31 I.L.M. 874, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.151/26. The International Court of 
(continued . . .) 
24
   
 
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
(. . . continued) 
Justice (ICJ) recognized intergenerational equity as early as 1996.  
In Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons , the ICJ noted 
“the environment is not an abstraction but represents the living 
space, the quality of life and the very health of human beings, including generations unborn .” 
Legality of the Threat or Use of  
Nuclear Weapons
, ICJ Reports 1996, p. 241, ¶ 29.  The Supreme Court of 
the Republic of the Philippines recognized the rights of future generations in 
Juan Antonio, et al. v. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr. , 
G.R.
 No. 101083, 224 S.C.R.A. 792 (S.C. July 30, 1993) (Phil.). In 
the Juan Antonio  case, the petitioners asserted claims to prevent mass 
deforestation based on the rights of “their generation as well as generations unborn.” 
Juan Antonio , 224 S.C.R.A. at 798.  The court’s 
decision arose from the principle of intergenerational equity: 
We find no difficulty in ruling that they can, for 
themselves, for others of their generation and for the 
succeeding generations, file a class suit.   Their 
personality to  sue in behalf of the succeeding generations 
can only be based on the concept of intergenerational responsibility insofar as the right to a balanced and 
healthful ecology is concerned. Such a right, as 
hereinafter expounded, considers the “rhythm and harm ony of 
nature.” Nature means the created world in its entirety. 
Such rhythm and harmony indispensably include, inter alia, 
the judicious disposition, utilization, management, renewal 
and conservation of the country’s forest, mineral, land, 
waters, fisheries, wildlife, off -shore areas and other 
natural resources to the end that their exploration, 
development and utilization be equitably accessible to the 
present as well as future generations. Needless to say, 
every generation has a responsibility to the next to 
preserve that rhythm and harmony for the full enjoyment of a balanced and healthful ecology.   Put a little 
differently, the minors’ assertion of their right to a 
sound environment constitutes, at the same time, the 
performance of their obligation to  ensure the protection of 
that right for the generations to come.  
Id. at 798- 99.  See also Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of  
India
, AIR 1996 SC 1, 11 (India) (recognizing that intergenerational 
equity is a cornerstone of the customary international law principle 
of sustainable development). Thus, intergenerational equity ensures 
accountability between the generations of mankind. 
25
   
 
   
  
   
 
  
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
C. Polluter Pays Principle 
The polluter pays principle seeks to deter 
environmental degradation by imposing liability on the polluter. 
See Joslyn Mfg. Co. v.  Koppers Co. , 40 F.3d 750, 762 (5th Cir. 
1994). Polluters must pay for the cost of restoring the value 
of the site damaged by their own activities and those impacted 
by the damage. Courts in the United States have applied 
polluter pays to remedy harm to the environment.  E.g., United 
States v. Capital Tax Corp. , 545 F.3d 525, 530 (7th Cir. 2008) 
(recognizing that the government can recover damages from responsible parties to clean up hazardous waste because “the 
‘polluter pays’” under Title 42, Sections 9606(a) and 9604(a) of 
the United States Code); Joslyn Mfg. Co. , 40 F.3d at 762 
(ordering the polluter to pay the cost of restoring a 
contaminated site and denying the polluter’s “scheme under which 
it could defray part of its clean-up cost by passing the 
contaminated property through a series of innocent landowners 
and then, when the contamination is discovered, demanding 
contribution from each”); see also Fla. Const. art. II, § 7(b) 
(incorporating the polluter pays principle to protect the Everglades Agricultural Area by holding those who cause 
pollution “primarily responsible for paying the costs of the 
abatement of that pollution”). 
26
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
   
 
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
“Polluter pays” is also a principle of international 
law. A prominent example of its application occurred in the 
Trail Smelter Arbitration spanning the late 1930s and early 
1940s.  See Trail Smelter Case (U.S. v. Can.)  , 3 R.I.A.A. 1905, 
1965 (Perm. Ct. Arb. 1938 and 1941). A trail smelter owned by a 
Canadian corporation emitted noxious sulphur dioxide fumes that 
drifted and harmed crops in the United States.  Id. at 1917, 
141965. The Permanent Court of Arbitration held Canada 
financially responsible for the damage and accorded compensation to the United States: 
[U]nder the principles of international law, as well as the 
law of the United Sates, no State has the right to use or 
permit the use of its territory in such a manner as to 
cause injury by fumes in or to the territory of another or 
the properties or persons therein, when the case is of 
serious consequence and the injury is established by clear 
and convincing evidence . . . . Considering the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal holds that the 
Dominion of Canada is responsible in international law for 
the conduct of the Trail Smelter. 
Id. Therefore, the polluter was liable for the environmental 
and economic harm caused by its pollution. Similarly, in the 
seminal case Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of India & Ors., the Supreme Court of India recognized the polluter pays 
14 The Permanent Court of Arbitration is an intergovernmental 
organization with 121 contracting parties (states) located in the 
Hague.  Permanent Court of Arbitration, https://pca -cpa.org/en/home/ 
(https://perma.cc/B2V9 -TCC9
) (last visited Nov. 7, 2018).  It was 
formally established through the Convention for the Pacific Settlement 
of International Disputes in 1899, arising out of a need for a forum 
to conduct dispute resolution among states. Id. 
27
   
 
  
 
 
 
Id.
                                                           
  
 
 
 
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
principle as a tenet of sustainable development —a principle of 
customary international law. AIR 1996 SC 1, 11-13, 22 (India).  
A citizens’ group challenged tanneries that were releasing 
untreated effluent into surrounding waterways and land.  Id. at  
1. The court defined polluter pays: 
[T]he absolute liability for harm to the environment 
extends not only to compensate the victims of pollution but 
also the cost of restoring the environmental degradation . 
. . . [P]olluter is liable to pay the cost to the individual sufferers as well as the cost of restoring the 
environmental degradation. 
 at 12.  The court ordered the formation of an official  
authority to implement the polluter pays principle to determine 
the costs of repaying victims and restoring the environment. 
15Id. at 22.  
15 In the absence of an express statutory or constitutional 
mandate, the court integrated international norms into domestic law. 
It noted that when customary international  law does not directly 
contradict domestic law, it is inherently incorporated into domestic law:  
In view of the above mentioned constitutional and 
statutory provisions we have no hesitation in holding that 
the precautionary principle and the polluter pays 
p[r]inciple are part of the environmental law of the 
country. 
Even otherwise once these principles are accepted as part 
of the Customary International Law there would be no 
difficultly in accepting them as part of the domestic law. 
It is almost accepted proposition of law that the rule of Customary International Law which are not contrary to the 
municipal law shall be deemed to have been incorporated in 
the domestic law and shall be followed by the Courts of 
Law. 
Vellore Citizens , AIR 1996 SC at 13.  Therefore, the court 
incorporated the polluter pays principle into its analysis. 
28
   
 
   The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, reviewing 
16 an appeal from  Trinidad and Tobago,  recently applied the 
polluter pays principle to address water pollution regulations:  
 
Fishermen & Friends of the Sea v. t  he Minister of Planning, 
Hous.  & Env’t [2017] UKPC  37 ¶ 2 (appeal taken from Trinidad and 
17 Tobago).   In Fishermen and Friends, a non-profit organization 
challenged a regulation promulgated by the Minister of Planning, 
Housing and the Environment that prescribed fixed fee amounts 
for cases of pollution or environmental degradation. 
Id.  ¶¶ 6­
7. The regulation was promulgated under the National 
Environmental Policy of Trinidad and Tobago which codifies the 
polluter pays principle. Id.  ¶ 5. Section 2.3(b) of the 
National Environmental Policy mandates that money collected from polluters “will be used to correct environmental damage.”  Id.   
                                                           
 17   In 2001, the Minister of Planning, Housing and the 
Environment promulgated the Water Pollution Rules and the Water 
Pollution (Fees) Regulations. Fishermen & Friends, ¶¶ 15 -16.  The 
Rules and Regulations established a permitting system whereby 
permittees that were releasing water pollutants above permissible 
levels were require d to pay a “prescribed fee.” Id.  ¶ 15. “The fee 
did not vary according to the type or amount of the pollution 
permitted” and therefore did not apply polluter pays. Id. ¶ 16.   _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
The Polluter Pays Principle . . .  is now firmly established 
as a basic principle of international and domestic 
environmental laws. It is designed to achieve the 
“internalization of environmental costs”, by ensuring that the costs of pollution contr
ol and remediation are borne by 
those who cause the pollution, and thus reflected in the costs of their goods and services, rather than borne by the community at large.  
16    Lord Carnwath, assigned from the Supreme Court of England, 
authored the opinion of the Council.  
29
   
 
  
 
 
  The Majority recognizes that the University is 
responsible for the substantial adverse impacts caused by its 
18 development in the summit area of Mauna Kea.   It is the 
“polluter” that caused cultural harm.   Under the Majority’s 
opinion, the polluter pays principle is reversed. The polluter 
is permitted to benefit from degradation so adverse that the 
removal of five telescopes —identified by the BLNR and the 
Majority—would be necessary to mitigate the substantial adverse 
                                                           
 18   The University began operating observatories on Mauna Kea 
in 1968.  _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
The regulation was challenged as inadequate because it imposed a 
flat fee on all polluters as opposed to a fee based on actual 
damage: 
“As a result of the flat fee model which has been selected, 
no fees collected are being used to correct environmental 
damage. This also has a consequential effect in respect of 
proportionality, as there is no ability to tailor the fee 
to meet the degree of damage which might be caused by 
different permittees. The costs associated with rectifying 
environmental damage will obviously vary according to the pollution load, pollutant profile, sensitivity of receiving 
environment and toxicity. ” 
Id.  ¶ 38. Under this reasoning, the court found that the 
regulation did not adequately incorporate the polluter pays 
principle and failed to comply with the National Environmental  
Policy. Id.  ¶¶ 43, 45, 53. The court enforced the polluter 
pays principle to ensure that polluters are held accountable for 
the actual harm caused by their development.  
30
   
 
    D. Non-regression Principle 
  The principle of non-regression imposes an affirmative 
obligation to not regress, or backslide, from existing levels of  
legal protection. This principle is generally applied in the 
context of cultural and social rights, and environmental law. 
19 The Clean Water Act,  for example, mandates a “general 
20 prohibition on backsliding[.]”   Cmtys. for a Better Env’ t v. 
State Water Res. Control Bd.
, 34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 396, 406 (Cal. 
Ct. App. 2005), as modified (Sept. 27, 2005).  It ensures that  
“subsequent permit effluent limits that are comparable to 
earlier ones are not allowed to ‘backslide,’ i.e., be less 
stringent.” Id.  
  
                                                           _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
impact upon cultural resources.    The protection of conservation 
land for future generations afforded by the polluter pays 
principle is lost.  
Nations have included the principle of non -regression 
in treaties and domestic legislation. 
For example, the Regional 
19   Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 -1387 
(2012).  
20   The U.S. District Court for the Northern District of 
California has recognized that the Clean Air Act also implements a 
non-regression policy.  WildEarth Guardians v. Jackson, 870 F.Supp.2d 
847, 850 (N.D. Cal. 2012), aff’d sub nom.  WildEarth Guardians v. 
McCarthy, 772 F.3d 1179 (9th Cir. 2014) (“In 1977, Congress further 
amended the Clean Air Act to add requirements designed to ensure not 
only that certain air quality standards were attained, but also that 
the air quality in areas which met the standards would not degrade or 
backslide.”).  
31
   
 
  
   _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and 
Justice in Environmental Matters between Latin America and the 
Caribbean, adopted in March 2018, provides that the parties 
shall be guided by the principle of non-regression.  Regional 
Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and 
Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin America and the 
Caribbean art. 3(c), March 4, 2018, 
https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_ no=XXVII-18&chapter=27&clang=_en (https://perma.cc/AVK7-5YGM). 
The European Parliament (Parliament) also applies the non-
regression principle to natural resources. Its significance as 
a principle of environmental protection was a central feature of 
the Parliament’s commitment to sustainable development. The 
Parliament specifically adopted a resolution that “calls for the 
recognition of the principle of non-regression in the context of 
environmental protection as well as fundamental rights[.]” 
Resolution of 29 September 2011 on Developing a Common EU 
Position Ahead of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable 
Development (Rio+20), P
ARL.  EUR.  DOC.  P7_TA(2011)0430 (2011).  The 
principle of non  -regression was applied by the United Nations  
General Assembly in 2012. G.A. Res 66/288, ¶ 20, annex, The 
Future We Want (July 27, 2012). General Assembly Resolution 
66/288 recognizes that “it is critical that we do not backtrack  
from our commitment to the outcome of the United Nations 
32
   
 
    
 
 
  
 
  The degradation principle  peels away this protection.  
It allows further degradation based on damage cumulatively 
caused by prior impacts.  The BLNR’s  analysis regresses to a 
former stage of the law —prior to the passage of HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(4) in 1994  —when the conservation district was not 
protected by the proscription codified in HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4)  
barring land use  that causes a “substantial, significant and 
adverse” impact on cultural resources. Per the degradation 
principle, protection of cultural resources at the summit of Mauna Kea regresses to a time prior to 1994, when the purpose of  
regulating land use in the conservation district had not yet _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
Conference on Environment and Development.” Id.  (emphasis 
added).  
Notwithstanding prevailing international norms 
disfavoring backsliding on legal protection of the environment, the analysis of the BLNR and the Majority does so.  The purpose 
of HAR § 13-5-1 is “to regulate land -use in the conservation 
district for the purpose of conserving, protecting, and 
preserving the important natural and cultural resources of the State through appropriate management and use to promote their 
long-term sustainability and the public health, safety, and 
welfare.” Therefore, the natural and cultural resources in 
conservation districts have a baseline level of protection from usage that causes a substantial adverse impact. 
33
   
 
    
  
   
 _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
been specifically defined  by regulation  as “conserving, 
protecting, and preserving the important natural and cultural 
resources of the State[.]” HAR § 13 -5-1 (1994) .   
The BLNR’s decision encourages regression by reversing 
protections for critical natural resources in the conservation 
district. It employs an analysis that renders TMT invisible: 
“Even without the TMT, the cumulative effect of astronomical 
development and other uses in the summit area of Mauna Kea have resulted in impacts that are substantial, significant and 
adverse.” Majority Opinion at 55 (emphasis added).  The BLNR 
and the Majority enhance regression by ignoring the impact of 
TMT. But viewed under the correct standard contained in HAR § 
13-5-30(c)(4), TMT is not invisible.  The principle of non-
regression made explicit in HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) requires that 
the effects of a 180-foot high structure, dug 21 feet into the 
earth, 600 feet below the summit of Mauna Kea, be considered. 
The degradation principle treats any further development on the 
cultural resource as inconsequential because the cultural 
resource has already been substantially adversely impacted.  As 
applied to the proposed project, the degradation principle 
adopts a regressive approach to managing environmental and 
cultural resources in the conservation district that violates 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4). 
34
   
 
   IV. Conclusion 
  The degradation principle ascribes to the legislature 
the intent that conservation land  lose its protection under the 
Hawaiʻi Constitut ion and the laws of the State of Hawaiʻ i  
whenever it has been subjected to a substantial adverse impact.  
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) is a direct refutation of such regressive 
treatment of conservation land  .  Instead, the legislature 
intended—consistent with its constitutional duty to future generations—to conserve, protect, and preserve “the important 
natural and cultural resources of the State through appropriate 
management and use to promote their long-term sustainability.” 
HRS § 183C-1.  Appellees’  Conservation District Use Application 
proposes a land  use that cannot be permitted if it causes a 
substantial adverse  impact on cultural resources.  HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(4).   The degradation principle substitutes a contrary 
standard that relieves the permittee of the burden to prove no 
substantial adverse impact —if the resource is already 
substantially adversely impacted. Correctly applied —and 
consistent with the clear intent of Hawaii’s legislature and 
norms of environmental law —HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) requires that the 
impacts of TMT be assessed with full recognition that the 
existing resource has already received  cumulative impacts that 
amount to a substantial adverse impact. In light of the correct 
standard, whether TMT will have a substantial adverse impact _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
35
   
 
  _***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_ 
where there already is a substantial adverse impact becomes 
straightforward. The substantial adverse impacts to cultural 
resources presently existing in the Astronomy Precinct of Mauna 
Kea combined with the impacts  from TMT—a proposed land use that 
eclipses all other telescopes in magnitude —would constitute an  
impact on existing cultural resources that is substantial and  
adverse. Accordingly, the Conservation District Use Application for TMT must be denied.  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
36
 