 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
          
         
         
           
         
            
         
        
                                                           
            Electronically Filed
Supreme Court SCPW-20-0000509 24-AUG-2020 03:20 PM  
SCPW-20-0000509  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
IN  THE  MATTER  OF  INDIVIDUALS  IN  CUSTODY  
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
ORIGINAL  PROCEEDING  
ORDER  RE:   
PETTY  MISDEMEANOR,  MISDEMEANOR,  AND  FELONY  DEFENDANTS  
AT  THE  MAUI  COMMUNITY  CORRECTIONAL  CENTER,  THE  HAWAI‘I   COMMUNITY   
CORRECTIONAL  CENTER,  AND  THE  KAUA‘I  COMMUNITY  CORRECTIONAL  CENTER  
(By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  and  Wilson,  JJ.,   
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  
with  Wilson,  J.,  concurring  and  dissenting )  1
On August
 12, 2020, the Office of the Public Defender 
(“OPD”) filed a petition for extraordinary writ pursuant to HRS 
§§ 602-4, 602-5(5), and 602-5(6) and/or a writ of mandamus 
(“Petition”). The Petition seeks, among other things, a 
reduction of the inmate populations at the State’s correctional 
centers and facilities in an effort to mitigate the harm that 
the COVID-19 pandemic may inflict upon inmates, the correctional 
staff, and the people of Hawai‘i. In this regard, the Petition 
seeks the expedited release of certain categories of inmates 
from the State’s correctional centers and facilities, without 
1 A concurrence and dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  
           
             
          
          
         
          
          
          
         
           
        
      
        
            
          
        
           
           
           
          
           
         
          
      
        
        
           
         
       
        
         the filing and hearing of individualized motions for release. 
On August 17, 2020, answers to the Petition were filed by: 
(1) Nolan
 P. Espinda, Director of the Department of Public 
Safety, State of Hawai‘i (“DPS”) and Edmund (Fred) K.B. Hyun, 
chairperson of the Hawaiʻi Paroling Authority; (2) Mitchell D. 
Roth, Prosecuting Attorney for the County of Hawaiʻi; (3) Donald 
S.
 Guzman, Prosecuting Attorney for the County of Maui; 
(4) Dwight
 D. Nadamoto, Prosecuting Attorney for the City and 
County of Honolulu; and (5) Justin F. Kollar, Prosecuting 
Attorney for the County of Kauaʻi. The answers addressed the 
OPD’s requested relief, stated objections and concerns, and 
provided alternative considerations. 
The
 COVID-19 pandemic has caused a public health 
emergency. Since July 2020, Hawai‘i has seen a surge of COVID-19 
cases in Hawai‘i, with record numbers of positive cases and 
increased hospitalizations being reported. While the majority 
of the cases are on O‘ahu, the neighbor island numbers have 
increased in recent weeks. In addition, since the Petition was 
filed, it has been reported that at least two hundred forty 
inmates and nearly fifty staff members have tested positive for 
COVID-19. Although the majority of these cases are related to 
the O‘ahu Community Correctional Center (“OCCC”), there have been 
positive COVID-19 test results in some of the other State 
correctional centers and facilities. 
This
 court recognizes the impact of COVID-19 on 
Hawaiʻi’s community correctional centers and facilities –- and 
the urgency by which suitable yet balanced action is required to 
reduce the inmate populations. Because the Maui Community 
Correctional Center (“MCCC”), the Hawai‘i Community Correctional 
Center (“HCCC”), and the Kaua‘i Community Correctional Center 
(“KCCC”) are overcrowded and exceed design capacity, and given 
2
  
           
            
          
          
          
         
          
           
         
            
         
    
        
         
   
         
        
         
   
        
         
          
        
        
           
     
          
    
     
 
           
        the current COVID-19 pandemic, they have the potential to not 
only place the inmates at risk of death or serious illness, but 
also endanger the lives and well-being of staff and service 
providers who work there, their families, and members of the 
community at large. Although the volume of positive COVID-19 
cases in the correctional centers and facilities varies between 
the different islands, given the virulent spread of the virus 
within close quarters, any spread of COVID-19 within any of the 
correctional centers and facilities also has the potential to 
tax the capacities of the health care systems on each of the 
islands and the limited resources of Hawai‘i’s community health 
care providers. 
This
 court also recognizes, however, public safety and 
health concerns regarding the release of inmates into the 
community. 
Responding
 to the impact of this crisis in Hawai‘i’s 
community correctional centers and facilities requires a careful 
consideration of interests, both for public health and public 
safety. 
Upon
 consideration of the submissions and record in 
SCPW-20-0000509, and the surge in COVID-19 positive test results 
in our community, including the rising numbers in the State’s 
correctional centers and facilities, and pursuant to this 
court’s authority under Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§ 602
-
5(3) & (6) and § 706-625, Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, and HRS § 601-1.5, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, with respect to MCCC, HCCC, and 
KCCC, as follows: 
Petty Misdemeanor or Misdemeanor Defendants 
1. With regard to pretrial detainees charged solely 
with petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor offenses, the respective 
3  
         
          
         
          
          
          
           
      
            
            
         
           
           
           
       
       
           
           
           
         
          
   f.   Each  pretrial  detainee  released  under  this  
provision  is  ordered  to  appear  as  follows,  unless  otherwise  
ordered:  
  court orders for  detaining the individuals are temporarily 
suspended and, by Wednesday, August 26, 2020, DPS shall release 
such pretrial detainees, except those charged with abuse of 
family or household members (HRS § 709-906), violation of a 
temporary restraining order (HRS § 586-4), violation of an order 
for protection (HRS § 586-11), violation of a restraining order 
or injunction (HRS § 604-10.5), or any other crime in family 
court, subject to the following conditions: 
a. The inmate has not received a positive 
COVID-19 test result, is not pending the result of a test that 
has been taken, and is not exhibiting COVID-19 symptoms. 
b. Additional inmates who later meet this 
criteria shall be expeditiously released as set forth herein. 
c. Before being released, the inmate shall 
provide to DPS current contact information, including 
residential address and/or telephone number, if available. 
d. The inmate shall self-isolate for fourteen 
days and wear a mask when within six feet of others. 
e. The inmate shall immediately report the 
development of COVID-19 symptoms to the Department of Health 
(“DOH”) and shall thereafter follow directives from the DOH. 
(i) For  those  inmates  in  the  second    
circuit :  on  December  1,  2020  at  8:30  
a.m.,  at  the  court  that  they  last  
appeared  except  all  district  court  
cases  will  be  held  at  the  Maui  
District  Court,  Hoapili  Hale,  2145  
Main  Street,  Wailuku,  Hawai‘i  9679 3;  
4  
      
      
      
     
   
          
              
                                  
                                  
            
     
   
     
        
       
                    
    
            
         
          
 
           
          
   
             
        
           
          
         
        if the pretrial detainee’s last 
appearance was on Moloka‘i
  or Lānaʻi , 
however, the OPD or defense counsel 
may appear without the inmate 
appearing in person. 
(ii) For
 those inmates in the third 
circuit : on December 1, 2020 at 1:30 
p.m. at the district court or circuit 
court that they last appeared. 
(iii) For those inmates in the fifth 
circuit : at the Fifth Circuit 
Courthouse, Pu‘uh onua Kaulike  
Building, 3970 Ka‘ana Street, Lihue, 
Hawai‘i 96766, on the date and time as 
ordered by the presiding judge. 
Failure to
 comply with court orders or to appear may result in 
further charges, including but not limited to, criminal 
contempt. 
g. All inmates under this category who have 
tested positive should be retested in accordance with guidance 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and/or the 
DOH. 
h. All inmates released under this provision 
shall maintain contact with their attorneys and appear at all 
future court hearings. 
i. When an inmate is released, all conditions 
of release originally imposed, if applicable, other than in-
person reporting, shall remain in full force and effect. DPS 
shall inform all inmates, prior to their release, of their 
continuing obligation to abide by conditions of deferral or 
probation or pretrial release to promote public safety. 
5  
              
            
          
        
      
        
          
          
      
            
          
 
        
        
        
        
          
          
          
          
           
     
       
            
           
        
    
             
            
            
            j. Any no-contact order shall remain in force. 
k. All inmates released under this provision 
shall comply with any federal, state, or local laws, directives, 
orders, rules, and regulations regarding conduct during the 
declared COVID-19 pandemic emergency, including “social 
distancing” mandates and any proclamations issued by Governor 
David Y. Ige or the Governor’s designee during the COVID-19 
emergency, as well as any mandates or proclamations issued by 
the respective Mayors of each island. 
l. All inmates released under this order shall 
further comply with all specific directives provided to them by 
DOH. 
2. With regard to individuals incarcerated solely 
due to petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor convictions, the 
respective court orders for incarcerating or imprisoning the 
individual are temporarily suspended and the provisions provided 
under Paragraph 1 above shall also apply except for those 
convicted of abuse of family or household members (HRS § 709-
906), violation of a temporary restraining order (HRS § 586-4), 
violation of an order for protection (HRS § 586-11), violation 
of a restraining order or injunction (HRS § 604-10.5), or any 
other crime in family court. 
Felony Defendants 
3. An expedited process, as set forth in paragraph 
4, below, shall be undertaken to address the issues related to 
release and temporary suspension of incarceration for the 
following categories of inmates: 
a. Inmates serving a sentence (not to exceed 18 
months) as a condition of felony deferral or 
probation except for (i) inmates serving a 
term of imprisonment for a sexual assault 
6  
            
            
            
            
             
            
            
            
           
              
              
          
           
        
             
            
            
           
            
           
            
           
                         
           
            
              
            
           
           
     conviction or an attempted sexual assault 
conviction; or (ii) inmates serving a term 
of imprisonment for any felony offense 
contained in HRS chapter 707, burglary in 
the first or second degree (HRS §§ 708-810, 
708-811), robbery in the first or second 
degree (HRS §§ 708-840, 708-841), abuse of 
family or household members (HRS § 709-
906(7)&(8)), or unauthorized entry in a 
dwelling in the first degree or in the 
second degree as a class C felony (HRS §§ 
708-812.55, 708-812.6(1) & (2)), including 
attempt to commit these specific offenses 
(HRS §§ 705-500, 705-501). 
b. All pretrial detainees charged with a 
felony, and those inmates who have pled 
guilty or no-contest and are awaiting 
sentencing, except those charged with a 
sexual assault or an attempted sexual 
assault, any felony offense contained in HRS 
chapter 707, burglary in the first or second 
degree (HRS §§ 708-810, 708-811), robbery in 
the first or second degree (HRS §§ 708-840, 
708-841), abuse of family or household 
members (HRS § 709-906(7)&(8)), or 
unauthorized entry in a dwelling in the 
first degree or in the second degree as a 
class C felony (HRS §§ 708-812.55, 708-
812.6(1) & (2)), including attempt to commit 
these specific offenses (HRS §§ 705-500, 
705-501). 
7  
    
                  
            
                           
  4.   An  “eligible  inmate”  is  an  inmate  or  detainee  who  
falls  within  the  categories  set  forth  in  Paragraph  3.a.,  3.b.,  
or  3.c.  above.   Under  the  expedited  process:   
           
          
          
           
        
         c.    Inmates   charged   with  a  felony  and  awaiting    
 adjudication
  of  motions  for  revocation  or   
 modification  of  probation  or  motions  to  set   
 aside  or  modify  deferral,  except  for   
 (i)  inmates  serving  a  term  of  imprisonment   
 for  a  sexual  assault  conviction  or  an    
 attempted  sexual  assault  conviction;  or   
 (ii)  inmates  serving  a  term  of  imprisonment   
 for  any  felony  offense  contained  in  HRS   
 chapter  707,  burglary  in  the  first  or  second  
 degree  (HRS  §§  708-810,  708-811),  robbery  in  
 the  first  or  second  degree  (HRS  §§  708-840,   
 708-841),  abuse  of  family  or  household    
 members  (HRS  §  709-906(7)&(8)),  or    
 unauthorized  entry  in  a  dwelling  in  the   
 first  degree  or  in  the  second  degree  as  a   
 class  C  felony  (HRS  §§  708-812.55,  708-  
 812.6(1)  &  (2)),  including  attempt  to  commit  
 these  specific  offenses  (HRS  §§  705-500,   
 705-501).  
a. Motions
 for release and temporary suspension 
of incarceration will be presumed to have been filed for 
eligible inmates identified in the lists provided by DPS on 
August 22, 2020. The OPD or private or court-appointed counsel 
may file supplemental information regarding any eligible inmate 
by Tuesday, August 25, 2020, at 4:00 p.m. 
8  
             
         
           
          
          
         
           
             
           
            
          
        
          
        
        
         
        
           
        
         
         
      
          
         
       
            
            
          
            
    b. Any objection to the release and temporary 
suspension of incarceration of any eligible inmates shall be 
filed by Wednesday, August 26, 2020 at 4:00 p.m. 
c. The respective courts should adjudicate 
these matters on a non-hearing basis but may, in extraordinary 
circumstances, set an expedited telephonic or video hearing. 
The courts may deny release of an eligible inmate if release 
would pose a significant risk to the safety of the inmate or the 
public. Whether a verified residence for an inmate will be 
required in a specific case will be left to the discretion of 
the judge, but alternative means of maintaining contact such as 
telephone, probation review hearings, or scheduled contacts with 
probation officers may also be employed. While judges are 
required to make individualized determinations, judges must not 
require verified residences for defendants, unless such a 
condition is supported by specific factual findings in an 
individual case. 
d. Except for eligible inmates for whom 
expedited telephonic or video hearings are scheduled, the 
respective circuit or family courts shall enter orders by 
Monday, August 31, 2020 determining whether each such eligible 
inmate should be released. 
e. Orders allowing release and temporary 
suspension of incarceration shall reflect that they are subject 
to the condition in Paragraph 5 below. 
5. Upon entry of the trial court’s release order, 
DPS shall release the inmate only if the inmate has not received 
a positive COVID-19 test result, does not have pending the 
result of a test that has been taken, and is not exhibiting 
COVID-19 symptoms. 
9  
             
         
            
          
        
         
           
  
  
             
          
          
           
         
         
         
   a.    All  inmates  shall  maintain  contact  with  
their  attorney  and  appear  at  all  future  court  hearings.  
           
           
            
         
   
         
         6. Additional individual motions may be filed for 
later identified eligible inmates. Any objections to such 
release must be filed within two business days of the filing of 
the motion. The respective circuit or family courts shall 
expeditiously address whether each such eligible inmate should 
be released. Any additional eligible inmates later released 
shall be subject to all applicable provisions set forth in this 
order. 
All Defendants 
7. When an inmate is released, all conditions of 
release originally imposed or set forth in any subsequent order, 
other than in-person reporting, shall remain in full force and 
effect. DPS shall inform all inmates, prior to their release, 
of their continuing obligation to abide by conditions of 
deferral or probation or pretrial release to promote public 
safety, and shall further advise them that: 
b.   Any  no-contact   order  shall  remain  in  force.  
c.
   Any  driver’s  license  suspension  shall  remain  
in  force.  
d.
   Obligations  to  report  to  probation  officers  
in-person  shall  be  converted  to  telephone  or  video  reporting  
under  further  order  of  the  respective  court.  
e. Each inmate
 released under this order is 
ordered to appear as directed by the presiding judge. Failure 
to comply with court orders or to appear as directed may result 
in further charges, including but not limited to, criminal 
contempt. 
8. In addition, all eligible inmates released 
pursuant to this order shall comply with the following: 
10  
           
       
         
           
           
          
          
     
           
         
       
       
          
          
          
           
        
            
      
         
            
           
          
        
          
             
           
           
           
            
           a. Before being released, the inmate shall 
provide to DPS current contact information, including 
residential address and/or telephone number, if available. 
b. The inmate shall self-isolate for fourteen 
days and wear a mask when within six feet of others. 
c. The inmate shall immediately report the 
development of COVID-19 symptoms to the DOH and shall thereafter 
follow directives from DOH. 
d. The inmate shall comply with any federal, 
state, or local laws, directives, orders, rules, and regulations 
regarding conduct during the declared COVID-19 pandemic 
emergency, including “social distancing” mandates and any 
proclamations issued by Governor David Y. Ige or the Governor’s 
designee during the COVID-19 emergency, as well as any mandates 
or proclamations issued by the respective Mayors of each island. 
e. The inmate shall further comply with all 
specific directives provided to them by DOH. 
9. All notices and information required under HRS 
§ 801D-4 shall be provided. 
Other Requirements 
10. DPS shall provide a list of all inmates released 
under this order, as well as the contact information provided by 
those inmates, to the OPD, the prosecuting attorney of the 
respective circuits, and the Administrative Director of the 
Courts no later than the next day following the inmate’s 
release. The list shall include the name of the inmate and the 
criminal case number(s) for which the inmate has been held. 
11. This order does not preclude any party from 
taking any other steps as may be deemed appropriate to obtain 
the release of an inmate during this time of emergency or stay 
any pending motions seeking the release of inmates. This order 
11  
   12.   This  court  reserves  its  authority  to  order  other  
measures.  
 
          
          
                              also  does  not  affect  DPS’s  authority  under  the  law  to  release  
inmates  on  its  own  accord.    
DATED:  Honolulu,  Hawai‘i,  August   24,  2020.  
/s/ Mark
 E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
12 