   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
      
      
 
 
          
      
 
          
      Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-20-0000509 26-AUG-2020 09:18 AM 
SCPW-20-0000509  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
IN
  THE  MATTER  OF  INDIVIDUALS  IN  CUSTODY 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
ORIGINAL
  PROCEEDING  
ORDER  GRANTING  IN  PART  AND  DENYING  IN  PART  
MOTION  FOR  CLARIFICATION  AND/OR  RECONSIDERATION  
(By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  and  Wilson,  JJ.,  
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy)  
On August 19, 2020, Nolan P. Espinda, Director of the 
Department of Public Safety, State of Hawaiʻi (“DPS ”), filed a 
motion (“Motion”) seeking clarification and/or reconsideration 
of the following orders: 
(1)   Amended  Order   Re:  Petty  Misdemeanor  and  Misdemeanor  
Defendants,  filed  on  August  17,  2020  (“Misdemeanor  
Order”);  and   
(2) Amended Order Re:
 Felony Defendants, filed on August 
18, 2020 (“Felony Order”). 
By order entered on August 20, 2020, this court directed 
responses to the Motion.  2 
  
 
         
       
          
          
          
           
         
    
           
         
          
         
          
          
    
         
       
          Upon  consideration   of  the  Motion,   the  responses  or  
opposition  filed  by  the  Office  of  the  Public  Defender  (“OPD”),  
Dwight  Nadamoto,  Prosecuting  Attorney  for  the  City  and  County  of  
Honolulu  (“Prosecuting  Attorney  Nadamoto”),  the  State  of  Hawai‘i, 
Department
  of  Health  (“DOH”),  and  Mitchell  Roth,  Prosecuting  
Attorney  for  the  County  of  Hawai‘i,  and  the  record  herein,  
IT IS
 HEREBY ORDERED that the Motion is granted in 
part and denied in part as follows: 
1. As to the request for clarification of whether 
district court orders transferring inmates to the custody of DOH 
for HRS § 704-404 fitness examinations remain valid, the request 
is denied in that the Misdemeanor Order did not affect the 
validity of district court orders transferring such inmates to 
the custody of DOH. 
2. As to the request for clarification of the term 
“[a]dditional inmates” as provided under Paragraph 1.b. of the 
Misdemeanor Order, the request is denied in that the Misdemeanor 
Order governs inmates that were in the O‘ahu Community 
Correctional
 Center at the time the Misdemeanor Order was filed 
and does not apply to newly arrested individuals or individuals 
arrested for new offenses. 
3. As
 to the request for reconsideration that 
individuals arrested for violating any COVID-19 quarantine 
proclamations or orders are not required to be released, the  3 
    
      
           
          
            
            
         
         
            
         
           
           
           
          
           
            
          
        
          
           
         
             request   is  denied  but  subsequent   arrestees   may  be  addressed   by  a  
future  order.       
4. As to the request for reconsideration of 
Paragraphs 1-3 of the Felony Order to exclude from release those 
defendants charged with Class A felony offenses, the request is 
denied in that the release of an “eligible inmate” as defined in 
the Felony Order was subject to the process for court review set 
forth in the Felony Order. 
5. As to the request for reconsideration of 
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Misdemeanor Order and Paragraph 3 of 
the Felony Order regarding inmates who re-offend after release 
or violate any condition of the orders, the request is denied 
but may be addressed in a future order. 
6. As to the request for clarification of whether an 
inmate is required to be re-tested after receiving a positive 
COVID-19 test result, the request is granted such that an inmate 
may be released without a re-test so long as the inmate is 
determined to no longer be infectious pursuant to the guidelines 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED that with respect to the 
OPD’s request in its response, identified as a “Motion to Compel 
Compliance with this Court’s Orders”, no later than Thursday, 
August 27, 2020, at 4:30 p.m., a response shall be filed by DPS  4 
         
        
      
       
       
       
           
    
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
and Prosecuting Attorney Nadamoto. The remaining respondents 
may file a response within the same time. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, August  26, 2020. 