                                                                                                                                  Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-21-0000342 07-JUL-2021 01:50 PM Dkt. 3 OGP 
SCPW-21-0000342 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I ex rel. Clare E. Connors,
Attorney General, Petitioner, 
vs. 
STATE OF HAWAI# I 2021 
REAPPORTIONMENT COMMISSION, Respondent. 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
ORDER GRANTING PETITION FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUS 
OR EXTRAORDINARY WRIT 
(
By
:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  McKenna,  Wilson,  and  Eddins,  JJ.) 
The State of Hawai# i ex rel. Clare E. Connors, Attorney 
General of the State of 
Hawai# i (“Petitioner”) has filed a 
petition for writ of mandamus or extraordinary writ, with the 
support of the State of Hawai# i 2021 Reapportionment Commission 
(“Commission”), to adjust the deadlines for the Commission to (1) issue public notice of its proposed legislative and congressional reapportionment plans and (2) file its final legislative and congressional reapportionment plans, by slightly less than six months. 
Upon consideration of the petition and the 
supporting documents, and given the unique circumstances faced by the Commission, the requested extraordinary writ is necessary and within this court’s authority.  At the start of every decade, the United States Census 
Bureau (“Census Bureau”) counts the total number of persons in 
each state. The following year, the Commission uses the data collected in the decennial census to reapportion the members of both houses of the State Legislature and the members of the U.S. House of Representatives allocated to Hawai# i among districts 
that are as of nearly equal population as is practicable. 
This 
year, however, due to the federal government’s unprecedented and unforeseeable delay in transmitting census data to the States as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is impossible for the Commission to meet the deadlines for issuing public notice of its proposed legislative and congressional reapportionment plans and filing its final legislative and congressional reapportionment plans as set forth under Haw. Const. art. IV, § 2 and HRS § 25-2. 
Article IV, Section 2 of the Hawai# i Constitution sets 
forth deadlines regarding the formation of the Commission and the submission of legislative reapportionment and congressional reapportionment plans: 
Section 2 . A reapportionment commission shall be
constituted on or before May 1 of each reapportionment
year and whenever reapportionment is required by courtorder. The president of the senate and the speaker ofthe house of representatives shall each select twomembers. Members of each house belonging to the partyor parties different from that of the president or thespeaker shall designate one of their number for eachhouse and the two so designated shall each select twomembers of the commission. The eight members soselected, promptly after selection, shall be certifiedby the selecting authorities to the chief electionofficer and within thirty days thereafter, shallselect, by a vote of six members, and promptly certifyto the chief election officer the ninth member who shall serve as chairperson of the commission. 
2 . . . . 
Not more than one hundred fifty days from the
date on which the members are certified, the
commission shall file with the chief election officer a reapportionment plan for the state legislature and areapportionment plan for the United Statescongressional districts which shall become law afterpublication as provided by law. 
 
HRS § 25-2(a), which was recently amended by Act 14, Session Laws 
of Hawai# i 2021, sets forth additional requirements and deadlines 
for legislative reapportionment: 
Legislative reapportionment. The commission 
shall reapportion the members of each house of the
legislature on the basis, method, and criteriaprescribed by the Constitution of the United Statesand article IV of the Hawaii State Constitution. For purposes of legislative reapportionment, a “permanentresident” means a person having the person’sdomiciliary in the State. In determining the totalnumber of permanent residents for purposes ofapportionment among the four basic island units, thecommission shall only extract non-permanent residentsfrom the total population of the State counted by theUnited States Census Bureau for the respectivereapportionment year. The commission shall conduct public hearings and consult with the apportionmentadvisory council of each basic island unit. No more 
than one hundred days from the date on which all members are certified, the commission shall cause to be given in each basic island unit, public notice[] of a legislative reapportionment plan prepared and proposed by the commission . At least one public
hearing on the proposed reapportionment plan shall beheld in each basic island unit after initial publicnotice of the plan. At least twenty days’ noticeshall be given of the public hearing. The notice shall include a statement of the substance of the proposed reapportionment plan, and of the date, time,and place where interested persons may be heardthereon. The notice shall be given at least once in abasic island unit where the hearing will be held. All interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity tosubmit data, views, or arguments, orally or inwriting, for consideration by the commission.  After 
the last of the public hearings, but in no event later than one hundred fifty days from the date on which all members of the commission are certified, the commission shall determine whether the plan is in need 
3 of correction or modification, make the correction or 
modification, if any, and file with the chief election officer, a final legislative reapportionment plan . 
Within fourteen days after the filing of the finalreapportionment plan, the chief election officer shallcause public notice [] to be given of the finallegislative reapportionment plan which, upon publicnotice, shall become effective as of the date offiling and govern the election of members of the nextfive succeeding legislatures. 
(Emphases added).   HRS § 25-2(b) sets forth additional 
requirements and deadlines for congressional reapportionment: 
The commission shall first determine the total number of members to which the State is entitled and shall then apportion those members among single memberdistricts so that the average number of persons in thetotal population counted in the last preceding UnitedStates census per member in each district shall be asnearly equal as practicable. . . . Not more than 
one hundred days from the date on which the members are certified, the commission shall cause public notice to be given of a congressional reapportionment plan prepared and proposed by the commission . The 
commission shall conduct public hearings on theproposed plan in the manner prescribed undersubsection (a). At least one public hearing shall beheld in each basic island unit after initial publicnotice of the plan. After the last of the public 
hearings, but in no event later than one hundred fifty days from the date on which all members of the commission are certified, the commission shall determine whether or not the plan is in need of correction or modification, make the correction or modification, if any, and file with the chief election officer, a final congressional reapportionment plan . 
Within fourteen days after filing of the finalreapportionment plan, the chief election officer shallcause public notice to be given of the finalcongressional reapportionment plan which, upon publicnotice, shall become effective as of the date offiling and govern the election of members of theUnited States House of Representatives allocated tothis State for the next five succeeding congresses. 
(Emphases added). 
Under the present constitutional and statutory 
framework, the Commission’s deadline to issue public notice of 
4  
 its proposed legislative and congressional reapportionment plans 
is July 22, 2021, and its deadline to file its final legislative and congressional reapportionment plans is September 10, 2021. 
Due to COVID-19-related delays, the Census Bureau has 
announced that it will not be able to provide 2020 census data to the states until between August 15 and August 31, 2021, and that delivery of the 2020 redistricting data would be delayed from March 31, 2021 to September 30, 2021. Given this forecasted delay in the Census Bureau’s release of the data, the Commission is unable to meet the time requirements under Haw. Const. art. IV, § 2 and HRS § 25-2. 
The purpose of the deadlines set forth in Haw. Const. 
art. IV, § 2 and HRS § 25-2 is to provide a means for timely action by the Commission to conduct a reapportionment. Taking this into consideration, together with the impossibility of compliance with the deadlines due to the extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances that we have faced over the past year –- a global public health crisis that has compelled the federal government to pause the decennial census and seek congressional authorization for an extension of its own deadline –- compels this court to provide relief in this instance. The Hawai# i State 
Senate also recognized the need for relief when it adopted Senate Resolution No. 220, S.D. 1, which requested the Attorney General “to begin legal proceedings to . . . petition the Hawaii Supreme Court seeking relief to prevent action against the Reapportionment Commission for the Reapportionment Commission’s 
5 failure to meet statutory or constitutional deadlines relating to 
the 2021 reapportionment plans resulting from the United States Census Bureau’s delay in delivering high quality data to the states and public[.]” 
Thus, pursuant to this court’s jurisdiction under 
article VI, section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Hawai# i, which provides this court with authority under HRS § 
602-5(6) “[t]o make and award such judgments, decrees, orders and mandates, . . . and do such other acts and take such other steps as may be necessary to carry into full effect the powers . . . given to it by law or for the promotion of justice in matters pending before it[,]” and in light of the extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances at issue here, a narrow, one-time adjustment to the deadlines, to enable the relevant constitutional and statutory redistricting provisions otherwise to operate as written and intended, is appropriate. 
Accordingly, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the petition for writ of 
mandamus or extraordinary writ is granted. The Commission shall: 
(1) issue a public notice of the Commission’s proposed 
legislative and congressional reapportionment plans no later than January 8, 2022;
 and 
(2) file its final legislative and congressional 
reapportionment plans with the Chief Election Officer no later than February 27, 2022. 
6 We emphasize that these adjustments to the relevant 
deadlines are solely limited to the required notice and filing 
set forth in (1) and (2), above. Should the federal government release the census data sooner, the Commission should make every effort to expedite its process and issue its public notice and final reapportionment plans in advance of the deadlines set forth in this order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i
, July 7, 2021. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwal/s/ Paula A. Nakayama /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna/s/ Michael D. Wilson /s/ Todd W. Eddins d 
 
7 