***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
SI UFAGA MOANA,  Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
THE HONORABLE FRANCES Q. F. WONG, Judge of the 
Family Court of the First Circuit, 
State of Hawai i, Respondent Judge, 
 
and 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent. 
(SCPW-17-0000532; CASE NO. 1FF C-17-0000575 )  
 
 
JAYVAN C. CURIOSO, Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
THE HONORABLE HILARY BENSON GANGNES, Judge of the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, 
State of Hawai i, Respondent Judge, 
 
and 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent. 
(SCPW-17-0000171; CASE NO. 1DCW-17 -0000868) 
 
 
SCPW-17-0000532 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCPW-17-0000532
21-NOV-2017
08:24 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 2  
ORIGINAL PROCEEDINGS 
 
NOVEMBER 21, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ . 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  Petitioner Si Ufaga Moana (Moana)  seeks a writ of 
mandamus directing the Honorable Frances Q. F. Wong to order his 
release forthwith from custody in accordance with the 
requirement that a defendant be released upon motion if a 
preliminary hearing has not commenced within two days of the 
defendant’s initial appearance.  See Hawaii Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 5(c)(3) (2014).  Petitioner Jayvan C. 
Curioso (Curioso) also  seeks a writ of mandamus directing the 
Honorable H ilary Benson Gangnes to order his release forthwith 
from custody in accordance with the two-day preliminary hearing 
requirement.   
  Because the State respectively charged Moana and 
Curioso (petitioners) by information and grand jury indictment 
during the pendency of these petitions, obviating the need for 
preliminary hearings, we ultimately deny the petitions as moot.  
We nonetheless consider the legal issues at the heart of these 
cases based on an exception to the mootness doctrine because 
they are capable of repetition but would otherwise evade review. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 3   Under our rules of court, w hen a delay in the 
commencement of a preliminary hearing is not caused by a 
defendant’s condition, action, or request and occurs without the 
defendant’s consent, the keeping of a defendant in c ustody is 
permitted only when compelling circumstances justify an ongoing 
deprivation of liberty.  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) .  We now provide 
guidance as to when circumstances are compelling for purposes of 
denying a defendant ’s motion for release  from custody when the 
defendant is held for a period of more than two  days after 
initial appearance without commencement of a preliminary 
hearing.   
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. Moana’s Arrest and Preliminary Hearing  
  On June 20, 2017, police arrested Moana for assault in 
the second degree in violation of  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-711 (2014 & Supp. 2016) .  On June 22, 2017, Moana was 
charged by complaint with a buse of family or household members , 
which was statutoril y enhance d to a class C felony due to the 
alleged incident occurring in the presence of a minor household 
member under the age of 14.  HRS § 709- 906(1), ( 9) (Supp. 2016).  
The same day, Moana made his initial appearance before the 
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court);  the family ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 4 court confirmed b ail at $30,000 and issued an order s cheduling a 
1preliminary hearing for June 26, 2017.   
  On the day of the preliminary hearing, the State 
requested a continuance, informing the family court that the 
complaining witness had “absented herself ” from the proceeding.  
The prosecutor  stated that the complainant  had expressed a 
reluctance to come to court when she was served on the preceding 
Friday by the prosecuting a ttorney’s investigators but  did not 
indicate that she did not intend to appear .  The prosecutor 
explained that he had since been contacted  by the complain ant’s 
aunt, who informed him that she had taken food to the airport to 
give to the complainant and her child.  B ased on this 
information, t he prosecutor stated that he was not sure whether 
the complain ing witness w as present on the island.   He requested 
additional time to locate and secure the complainant ’s 
cooperation, explaining that his office might obtain a material 
witness order if she was found on the mainland and refused to 
return voluntarily.  The prosecutor advised the court that, 
                                                           
 1 HRPP Rule 54(a) (1996) states that t he HRPP “apply to all penal 
proceedings in all courts of the State of Hawaii, except as provided in” HRPP 
Rule 54(b).   Moana’s case did not fall within any of the exceptions listed in 
HRPP Rule 54(b). 
  Because Moana’s initial appearance occurred on a Thursday, the 
scheduled hearing would have occurred within the two -day time limit as 
calculated under HRPP Rule 45(a)  (2012), which excludes holidays and 
weekends.  All references to time limits or elapsed time are computed in 
accordance with this rule.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 5 because Moana’s initial appearance was on June 22, 2017, “the 30 
days for preliminary hearing would run on Saturday, July 22nd ” 
2and requested that the hearing be rescheduled before that date.  
  Moana moved to dismiss the complaint or, in the 
alternative, for the family court to set aside bail and release 
him on his own recognizance to the supervision of his church 
pastor or mother , who were present in the courtroom.  The  
prosecutor opposed Moana’ s motion, citing the nature  of the 
offense.  He  explained that the complainant  was thirty-three-
weeks pregnant at the time Moana allegedly bit and punched her, 
causing injury to her ear and a possible concussion.  He  further 
stated that the argument leading to the incident  arose because 
the complaining witness asked for money to buy food for her and 
Moana’s two- year-old child.  T he prosecutor asserted that the 
child was present during the events  and Moana allegedly threw 
3Lego-style blocks at the child ’s head, caus ing bruising.   He 
also pointed to  Moana’s 2014 arrest for abuse of the same 
complaining witness,  contending  that the alleged attack was  an 
                                                           
 2 HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) requires courts to schedule a preliminary 
hearing within thirty days of a defendant’s initial appearance “if the 
defendant is not in custody.”  If a defendant has been “held in  custody for a 
period of more than 2 days after initial appearance without commencement of a 
defendant’s preliminary hearing,” the rule mandates the defendant’s release 
upon his or her own motion.  This provision is subject to several narrow 
exceptions, discussed infra.    
 3 The prosecutor explained that the State intended to pursue 
misdemeanor child abuse charges against Moana in a separate proceeding.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 6 escalation of violence toward the individual and that Moana 
might be a danger to her.  Lastly, the State argued that there 
had been “some obstruction”  from Moana’s family  during the 
investigation, making release into their custody inappropriate.  
Taken together, the S tate concluded, these factors were 
compelling reasons to conti nue the hearing and to keep Moana in 
custody. 
  The family court granted the State’s motion for a  
continuance and denied Moana’s motion  for dismissal of the 
complaint.  Seemingly relying on the State’s assertion  regarding 
the thirty -day period in which a preliminary hearing must be 
held, the court noted that the “ hearing [had been] se t very 
expeditiously within the 30 -day limit ,” which left the court 
free to continue it without legal obstacle. 
  With respect to bail reduction, the family court noted 
several factors guiding its discretion in setting or modifying 
bail, including Moana’s criminal history, the nature of the 
offense, and the vulnerable nature of the complainant and t heir 
4child.   The prosecutor asked for clarification regarding whether 
                                                           
 4 The family court also expressed general concern regarding 
individuals who threaten or otherwise attempt to persuade a witness not to 
testify, referencing an unrelated recent news story.  Because the parties did 
not allege such coercion and the record does not reveal any linkage of the 
news story to the facts of the case, we do not address the court’s general 
concern.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 7 these findings relating to bail also constituted compelling 
reasons for the continuance and for keeping Moana in custody, to 
which the court answered affirmatively.  
  The family court confirmed bail at $30,000 and 
scheduled the continued preliminary hearing for July 13, 2017, 
which was 15  days after Moana’s initial appearance .  The court 
informed the prosecutor that it had  intentionally left time 
before the  presumed 30 -day deadline for another  continuance if 
necessary, but it went on to warn that “the next time . . .  if 
the complaining witness fails to appear . . . [the State] 
need[s] a lot more information than what somebody might have 
said.”  Prior to the continued hearing date, Moana filed with 
this court a petition for a w rit of m andamus. 
B. Curioso’s Arrest and Preliminary Hearing  
  Police arrested Curioso on March 10, 2017 , for abuse 
of family or household m embers, HRS § 709- 906 (2014 & Supp. 
2016).  On March 13, 2017, Curioso was charged by complaint in 
the District Court of the First Circuit (district court) with 
kidnapping, HRS § 707- 720(1)(d)  (2014), terroristic threatening 
in the f irst degree, HRS § 707 -716(1)(e) (2014), and abuse of 
family or h ousehold m embers with a statutor y enhancement to a 
class C felony based on the charged conduct, HRS § 709- 906(1), 
(8).  Bail was set at $150,000 in the aggregate, and a 
preliminary hearing was scheduled for March 15, 2017. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 8   On the day of the preliminary hearing, the prosecutor 
requested a continuance to March 21, 2017,  to obtain a Tagalog 
interpreter for the complain ant, for whom English was a second 
language.  Curioso objected and moved for release on his own 
recognizance or, in the alternative, a reduction in bail.  The 
court denied Curioso’s requests and granted the State’s motion 
for a continuance.  The court explained that the State’s request 
was “reasonable” given that an interpreter was “necessary for 
the witness to give testimony” and the State was otherwise 
ready 
with its witnesses.  The preliminary hearing was rescheduled by 
the court to March 21, 2017, which was six days after Curioso’s 
5initial appearance
.   On March 16, 2017, Curioso filed a petition 
for a writ of mandamus. 
II. THE PETITIONS FOR WRITS OF MANDAMUS 
  Moana and Curioso argue that the j udges in their 
individual cases violated HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) by denying their 
respective motions for releas e on their own recognizance.  Th is 
rule requires that a court release a defendant upon motion “if 
the defendant is held in custody for a period of more than 2 
days after initial appearance without commencement of a 
defendant’ s preliminary hearing .”  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3).  However, 
                                                           
 5 The period also included a weekend, which is not figured into 
this total.  See supra, note 2. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 9 the State may maintain custody of a defendant when the delay is 
caused by the defendant or occurs with the defendant ’s consent.  
Id.  Release is also not required when the  failure to commence a 
timely preliminary hearing is attributable to a  “compelling fact 
or circumstance ” that would preclude determination of probable 
cause or commencement of the hearing or would render the 
defendant’s “release to be against the interest of justice .”  
Id. 
  In his petition for a writ of m andamus, Moana argue s 
that a preliminary hearing did not commence within two days from 
his initial appearance, obligating the family court to release 
him upon his motion.  Moana states that the court  appeared to 
base its ruling denying his release on a finding of a compelling 
fact or circumstance.   He disputes, however, that compelling 
reasons existed to hold him in custody under any of HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3)’s exceptions.   In its response,  the State argues that 
the court properly found compelling reasons to keep Moana in 
custody, including Moana’s criminal history, the nature of the 
alleged offense, and the vulnerable nature of the complainant 
and their child.  
  In his petition, Curioso similarly argues that a 
preliminary hearing did not commence within two days of his 
initial appearance and that none of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s 
exceptions justified his continued detention.  He asserts that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 10 the State’s failure to obtain a n interpreter for the complainant 
was neither a compelling circumstance precluding the 
commencement of a preliminary hearing within two days of his 
initial appearance nor one rendering his release against the 
interest of justice.  He points out that the State had five days 
to speak with the complainant  following his arrest to determine 
if an interpreter was needed for the preliminary hearing.  
  The State responds that it diligently attempted to 
find an interpreter as soon as the complainant requested one.  
In a declaration attached to the State’s re sponse, the 
prosecutor who requested the continuance avers that her review 
of case materials prior to the hearing did not reveal a need for 
an interpreter and that she was not informed of the request 
until the morning of the scheduled preliminary hearing.  She 
further avers that the State’s victim witness advocate made 
calls to ten different interpreters but was unable to arrange 
one for the scheduled time .  The prosecutor also states that she 
was unable to convince the complainant to proceed without an 
interpreter.  The prosecutor does not aver that any of this 
information was placed on the record on the date of the 
scheduled hearing.   
  The State asserts that the lack of an interpreter to  
aid the complainant in her testimony constituted a compelling 
circumstance that justified  the district court’s decision to not ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 11 release Curioso.  In support of its argument, the State points  
to this court’s repeated pronouncement s regarding the 
fundamental importance of individuals involved in litigation 
understanding the proceedings and being understood  in turn. 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. Mootness 
  As a threshold matter, we address whether the merits 
of the petitions are properly considered by this court.  We have 
long adhered to certain “prudential rules of judicial self -
governance ‘founded in concern about the proper--and properly 
limited--role of the courts in a democratic society. ’”  Kona Old  
Hawaiian Trails Grp.  v. Lyman, 69 Haw.  81, 87, 734 P.2d 161, 165 
(1987) (quoting Warth v. Seldin , 422 U.S. 490, 498 (1975)); Cty. 
of Haw. v. Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 Hawai i 391, 405, 235 P.3d 
1103, 1117 (2010).  Among these is the doctrine of mootness, 
which typically limits our rulings to “live controvers[ies] of 
the kind that must exist if courts are to avoid advisory 
opinions on abstract propositions of law.”  Kona, 69 Haw.  at 87, 
734 P.2d at 165 (quoting Hall v. Beals , 396 U.S. 45, 48 (1969)) .  
Accordingly, we will generally refrain from deciding cases in 
which we can no longer grant the relief a party seeks.  Ala Loop 
Homeowners, 123 Hawai i at 405, 235 P.3d at 1117 (citing ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 12 Kahoohanohano v. State , 114 Hawai i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(2007)). 
  When a defendant is indicted or charged by criminal 
information, a preliminary hearing need not--and, under our 
6rules, cannot--be conducted.  HRPP Rule (5)(c)(1) (2014).   This 
is because a complaint and preliminary hearing, indictment, and 
criminal information are separate, parallel methods by which a 
felony prosecution may be initiated.  See Haw. Const . art. I, § 
10; HRPP Rule 7(a) –(b) (2012).  The “real purpose” of a 
preliminary hearing is to confirm that probable cause exists to 
hold a defendant in custody, “and no purpose remains for” the 
hearing when probable cause is established through another 
mechanism, including indictment.  Chung v. Ogata ( Ogata I) , 53 
Haw. 364, 366, 493 P.2d 1342, 1343 (1972) (citing State v. 
Tominaga, 45 Haw.  604, 372 P.2d 356 (1962)).  We have thus held 
that both a defendant’s right to a preliminary hearing and a 
trial court’s jurisdiction to conduct such a hearing are cut off 
by an indictment, even when it is returned after the continuance 
of the preliminary hearing.  Chung v. Ogata (Ogata II) , 53 Haw. 
395, 395, 495 P.2d 26, 26 (1972); Tominaga , 45 Haw.  at 610, 372 
                                                           
 6 HRPP Rule (5)(c)(1) states that “the court shall schedule a 
preliminary hearing, provided that such hearing shall not be held  if the 
defendant is indicted or charged by information before the date set for such 
hearing. ”  (Emphasis added .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 13 7P.2d at 360.   The same would logically hold true for an 
information, by which probable cause may also be established.  
See HRS § 806-85 (2004). 
  On July 7, 2017, this court issued  an order directing 
the State to respond to Moana’s petition for mandamus.  The 
State filed a timely answer on July 10, 2017.  The following 
day, prosecutors charged Moana by felony information, cutting 
off his right to the continued preliminary hearing two days 
8before it was scheduled to take place.
  Similarly, this court on 
March 17, 2017, ordered the State to respond to Curioso’s 
petition.  The State filed a timely answer on March 20, 2017--
the day before Curioso’s continued preliminary  hearing.  The 
next day, the State obtained a grand jury indictment of Curioso, 
                                                           
 7 Tominaga and the two Ogata cases were decided prior to 1977, when 
preliminary hearings and indictments were governed by the District Court 
Rules of Penal Procedure (DCRPP) and Hawai i Rules of Criminal Procedure 
(HRCrP).  The HRPP are substantially modeled after the DCRPP and HRCrP, 
however, and the holdings of Tominaga and the two Ogata  cases are not 
undermined by the adoption  of the HRPP.  See infra (discussing the history 
and adoption of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)).  
 8 Unlike in Curioso’s case, in which the State filed a notice 
informing this court of the defendant’s indictment, the State did not notify 
this court that it had charged Moana by information.  Only research of the 
family court docket by this court revealed the supervening charge.  Although 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201 (1980) permits us to take judicial 
notice of such records on our own accord, we remind litigants that their duty 
of candor toward this tribunal includes a responsibility to disclose material 
facts that may affect the outcome of a case, including those facts that would 
render the case moot.  See AIG Haw. Ins. Co. v. Bateman , 82 Hawai i 453, 460, 
923 P.2d 395, 402 (1996).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 14 which effectively blocked  his preliminary hearing from 
proceeding hours before its scheduled commencement. 
  The petitioners’ rights to preliminary hearings --and 
release prior to those hearings--were extinguished when probable 
cause to hold them in custody was determined through other 
mechanisms.  Indeed, had the judges granted the petitioners’ 
motions for release,  the information and indictment would have 
formed independent legal bases for returning the petitioners to 
the State’s custody.  We are therefore compelled to deny the 
petitions as moot because we cannot provide the relief the 
petitioners seek. 
  This is not the end of our inquiry, however.  We have 
recognized exceptions to the mootness doctrine when its 
application would defeat its own purpose of preserving the 
judiciary’s proper role in a democratic society.  See, e.g. , 
State v. Tui , 138 Hawai i 462, 468, 382 P.3d 274, 280 (2016) 
(applying “capable of repetition but evading review” exception 
to mootness); Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem , 119 Hawai i 1, 
7, 193 P.3d 839, 845 (2008) (adopting collateral consequences 
exception to mootness); Doe v. Doe , 116 Hawai i 323, 326, 172 
P.3d 1067, 1070 (2007) (applying public interest exception to 
mootness).  Notwithstanding our normal reluctance  to rule 
outside of the context of a live controversy, this court will ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 15 resolve the merits of a claim for which it cannot grant relief 
when the alleged injury is capable of rep etition but by its 
9nature will evade appellate review.   Tui , 138 Hawai i at 468, 
382 P.3d at 280.  This often occurs when a class of injury is 
brief enough that “ the passage of time
 would prevent any single 
plaintiff from remaining subject to the restriction complained 
of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit .”  Id. 
(quoting Lethem, 119 Hawai i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843).   
  The se petitions fall within this exception to the 
mootness doctrine.  The two cases demonstrate that the 
continuance of a preliminary hearing beyond the two- day limit 
that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) sets for defendants in custody is an 
event capable of repetition.  Yet the coinciding determination 
by the district or family court of whether to release a 
defendant will nearly always evade appellate review under 
conventional notions of mootness.  As discussed, a determination 
of probable cause renders the issue moot by eliminating an 
appellate court’s ability to grant an effective remedy for the 
alleged injury.  This determination 
would occur when a 
                                                           
 9 Although th e “capable of repetition, yet evading review” 
exception has “merged at times” with the similar public interest exception to 
the mootness doctrine, “they are, in fact, ‘separate and distinct.’”  Doe, 
116 Hawai i at 327 n.4, 172 P.3d at 1071 n.4 (quoting Kaho ohanohano , 114 
Hawaii at 333 n.23, 162 P.3d at 727 n.23).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 16 rescheduled preliminary hearing is conducted in full, leaving 
only the brief duration of the continuance to obtain legal 
redress.  But even when this court stands ready to expeditiously 
resolve a challenge during this brief period, the State may 
bypass the court’s review  by filing an information or obtaining 
10a grand jury indictment.
  Because release decisions under HRPP 
Rule 5(c)(3) would otherwise be effectively unreviewable, we 
address the challenge the petitions raise in order to provide 
guidance to the district and family courts--although we are not 
able to grant the petitioners the release from custody they 
seek.  
B. HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s Release Mandate and Its Exceptions  
  Petitioners argue that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) required the 
judges in their cases to grant their motions for release from 
custody.  We review a trial court’s interpretation of court 
rules de novo.  See Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc. , 80 
Hawaii 345, 349, 910 P.2d 116, 120 (1996).   
  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) provides in full as follows: 
(3) TIME FOR PRELIMINARY HEARING;  RELEASE UPON FAILURE  OF TIMELY 
DISPOSITION .  The court shall conduct the preliminary hearing 
                                                           
 10 Hawaii Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 21(c) (2006) 
requires that respondents be given an opportunity to answer prior to a court 
granting a petition for a writ of mandamus.  This procedure provides 
notification to the State of this court’s pending review of an HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3) determination and affords an opportunity to file an information or 
obtain an indictment before the court may rule.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 17 within 30 days of initial appearance if the defendant is 
not in custody; however, if the defendant is held in  
custody for a period of more than 2 days after initial 
appearance without  commencement of a defen dant’s 
preliminary hearing, the court, on motion of the defendant,
shall release the defen dant to appear on the defendant’ s  
own recognizance , unless failure of such determination or 
commencement is caused by the request, action or condition 
of the defendant,  or occurred with the defendant’ s consent, 
or is attributable to such compelling fact or circumstance 
which would preclude such determination or commencement 
within the prescribed period, or unless such compelling 
fact or circumstance would render such release to be 
against the interest of justice.  
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) (emphasis added).  Thus, if a preliminary 
hearing has not commenced within two days of the initial 
appearance of a defendant held in custody, the rule directs  
courts to release the defendant upon his or her own motion.  
This general requirement is subject to three exceptions, 
however.  Release is not mandated when the failure to conduct a 
preliminary hearing within the prescribed time frame resulted  
from some action  or condition of the defendant,  upon the 
defendant’s request , or with the defendant’ s consent .  Release 
is also not required when a “compelling fact or 
circumstance . . . preclude [d]” the hearing from commencing or 
probable cause from being determined.   Lastly, HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
allows a court to deny a defendant’s motion for release when  a 
“compelling fact or circumstance” would make the release 
“against the interest of justice.”   
  The State does not argue that either judge relied on 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s  first exception when denying the petitioners ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 18 11their release.   Rather, the State contends that the respective 
courts found “compelling circumstances” that justified the 
continued detention of the petitioners.  The State does not 
specify which compelling circumstances exception of HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3) applies, and it is not apparent from the context of the 
courts’ rulings.  We therefore consider each of these exceptions 
in turn. 
1. HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s Second Exception  
  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) ’s second exception permits the 
continued detention of a defendant when “compelling ” facts or 
circumstances “preclude”  the determination of probable cause or 
the commencement of a preliminary hearing within the prescribed 
two-day period.  The HRPP does not  define “preclude” or 
12“compelling.”  See  HRPP Rule 2.3 (2012).   “It is well 
established that the interpretation of rules promulgated by the 
supreme court involves principles of statutory construction.”  
                                                           
 11 We note that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s first exception specifically 
provides that the release rule does not apply when the failure of the 
probable cause determination or commencement of the preliminary hearing is 
caused by the action of the defendant.  In other words, if the defendant’s 
conduct, for example, has caused a witness to not appear, release from 
custody is not required, and a compelling circumstance is irrelevant.  In 
this case, however, the State did not contend at the  hearing or in response 
to the petition that Moana engaged in  any actions following the offense to 
cause the witness not to appear.   
 12 The HRPP cross -reference Hawai i Electronic Filing and Service 
Rules (HEFSR) Rule 1 (2015) for definitions, but neither “preclude” nor 
“compelling” is defined in HEFSR Rule 1.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
State v. Bohannon , 102 Hawai i 228, 240, 74 P.3d 980, 992 (2003).   
The history and structure of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) may therefore 
guide our understanding of these terms.  See Morgan v. Planning 
Dept., Cty.  of Kauai , 104 Hawai i 173, 185, 86 P.3d 982, 994 
(2004). 
 19 a. The History of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
  Prior to 1977, two sets of rules governed Hawai i 
courts in criminal cases: the Hawai i Rules of Criminal Procedure 
(HRCrP) and the District Court Rules of Penal Procedure (DCRPP ).  
The HRCrP were promulgated in 1960 to “govern the procedure in 
the courts of the State in all criminal proceedings.”  HRCrP 
Rule 1 (1960).  Although HRCrP Rule 5(d)(1) (1960) provided a 
preliminary hearing to a defendant charged with a felony by 
complaint, the HRCrP neither specified a deadline by which such 
a hearing was to be conducted nor entitled the defendant to 
release when the hearing was not timely  held.  Rather, the rules 
required only that court s conduct the he aring “within a 
reasonable time. ”  HRCrP Rule 5(d)(2) (1960).  HRCrP Rule 5 did 
not further specify the parameters of what constituted a 
“reasonable time,” and the rule was likewise silent on the 
remedy should the preliminary hearing not be held in a timely 
manner. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 20   In November 1971, this court adopted  and promulgated 
the DCRPP, which “govern[ed] the procedure in the district 
13courts of the State in all penal proceedings
.”  DCRPP Rule 2 
(1972).  DCRPP Rule 25(b) (1972) functioned much the same as the 
version of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) now in effect.  Under DCRPP Rule 
25(b), a defendant charged with a felony in district court who 
was held in custody was entitled to a preliminary hearing within 
forty-eight hours.  If more than forty-eight hours passed 
without either a “disposition of the charge” or “commencement of 
a hearing,” the district judge was required to release the 
defendant unless the defendant’s  release was prohibited by law 
or the delay was due to the defendant’s “request, action or 
condition” or “occurred with [the defendant’s]  consent.”  DCRPP 
Rule 25(b)(1), (2).  Release of the defendant was also not 
required if the court “was satisfied that the State ha[ d] shown 
good cause why an order of release should not be issued .”  Id. 
(emphasis added).  Additionally, t he rule specified that “[s]uch 
good cause must consist of some compelling fact or circumstance  
which would preclude disposition of the charge within the 
                                                           
 13 The DCRPP superseded the HRCrP in district courts, in which the 
new rules applied when their application was not limited or modified by other
laws.  DCRPP Rule 2 (1972).  The HRCrP were left intact in all other courts. 
See Ogata I, 53 Haw. at 368,  493 P.2d at 1345 (“Those rules apply only to 
proceedings in the district courts and before district judges.  No provision 
thereunder applies to proceedings in the circuit courts  . . . .  [T]he 
circuit courts are governed by [the] H.R.Cr.P.”).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 21 prescribed period or would render such release to be against the 
interest of justice.”  Id. (emphasis added). 
  Thus, under DCRPP  Rule 25(b), a defendant in custody 
who was charged with a felony and did not receive a timely 
preliminary hearing was entitled to release unless, inter alia , 
the State could demonstrate the existence of “good cause ,” 
defined by the rule as a “compelling fact or circumstance ” that 
either (1) precluded the hearing from being held within the 
forty-eight-hour window, or ( 2) rendered  the defendant’s release 
against the interest of justice.  Id. 
  In 1977, the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
were adopted to replace the HRCrP and the DCRPP and to provide a 
comprehensive, unified set of rules governing criminal procedure 
in Hawai i.  See Comm. for Penal Rules Revision of the Judicial 
Council of Haw., Proposed Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure  at i-
ii (June 1975) (stating that the HRPP were “intended to govern 
penal procedure in all of the courts” and “will supersede both 
the [HRCrP] and the [DCRPP ]”).  In crafting the HRPP, the 
drafters sought to “retain the present rules [of the HRCrP] 
wherever justified.”  Id. at ii.  The Penal Rules Revision 
Committee (the Committee) declined to retain the substance of 
HRCrP Rule 5 regarding preliminary hearings, however, in favor 
of a rule modeled after  the more -protective DCRPP  Rule 25.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 22 Under a proposed draft of the HRPP transmitted to the Judiciary, 
courts w ere required to conduct a preliminary hearing for a 
defendant in custody on felony charges , and, “if the defendant 
[was] held in custody for a period of more than 4 days after 
first appearance without either a determination of probable 
cause or commencement of a hearing thereon,” the defendant was 
entitled to release.  Id. at 10—11.  The proposed rule retained 
two of DCRPP Rule 25 ’s exceptions, permitting c ourts to deny 
release if the failure to timely conduct or commence a 
preliminary hea ring (1) was caused by “the request, action or 
condition of the defendant or occurred with his consent” or (2) 
was attributable to “some compelling fact or circumstance which 
would preclude [the probable cause] determination or 
commencement within the pres cribed period.”  Id. at 11.   
  HRPP Rule 5 as adopted and promulgated by this court 
did not incorporate the Committee’s proposed departures from 
DCRPP Rule 25, including the extended four-day time limit for 
holding a preliminary hearing when a defendant is held in 
custody.  See HRPP Rule 5(c)(2) (1977).  The court instead 
retained the forty-eight-hour time limit and the exception 
permitting the continued confinement of a defendant when 
compelling circumstances rendered release against the interest 
of justice.  See id.  The rule has remained substantially the 
same in the years since. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 23   Th e history demonstrates this jurisdiction’s  strong 
commitment to protecting defendants held in custody by providing 
a prompt preliminary hearing.  The Committee first rejected the 
more flexible “reasonable time” standard contained in the HRCrP 
when the DCRPP were promulgated, instead establishing a firm 
deadline subject to few exceptions.  
Thus, an approach based on 
“reasonableness” that would have weighed the State’s 
administrative or prosecutorial needs against the hardship of 
the defendant was rejected, and instead the Committee 
recommended a proposed rule under which the rights of the 
defendant were highly protected.  This intention was reaffirmed 
when the Committee modeled Rule
 5 in the proposed draft of the 
HRPP after the more protective DCRPP rule, notwithstanding its  
otherwise stated intention to “ retain [ the HRCrP] wherever 
justified.”  Proposed Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure  at ii.  
The commitment was again confirmed  when this court adopted and 
promulgated the HRPP, strengthening Rule 5’s protections f or in-
custody defendants beyond those contained in the proposed draft 
of the Rule by reducing the prescribed time frame for 
commencement of the preliminary hearing from four days to forty-
eight hours. 
  The implication from the history of HRPP Rule 5 is 
clear: there is a strong presumption that a defendant should be 
released upon motion if a preliminary hearing has not commenced ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 24 within two days, and holding a defendant for a longer period 
without a preliminary hearing is permissible only in very 
limited situations.  Indeed, implicit in this court’s  adoption  
of a two-day time limit over  the proposed four-day limit was a 
statement that a delay of even two additional days was 
presumptively not permissible.  This presumption is also evident 
in the framework of the rule itself. 
b. The Structure of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
  Our strong commitment to protecting defendants from 
prolonged confinement without a preliminary hearing is reflected 
in HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s structure.  Unlike the Fe deral Rules of 
Criminal Procedure and the rules of many other jurisdictions, 
the two-day time limit contained in HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) is not 
framed as a but-for requirement in order to proceed with the 
preliminary hearing.  Compare HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) with Fed. R. 
Crim. P. 5.1(c) (2009) (“The magistrate judge must hold the 
preliminary hearing . . .”); Del. Super. Ct. Crim. R. 5(d) 
(2016) (“Such examination shall be held  . . .”); and Alaska R. 
Crim. P. 5(e)(4) (2017) (same) .  That is, HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
provides only for the release of the defendant upon the 
defendant’s motion if a hearing is not conducted within the 
prescribed time period; it does not provide for the dismissal of 
charges without prejudice, as many courts have held to be the 
case under the “mandatory” language of other jurisdictions.  See ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 25 State v. Hutcheson , 352 S.E.2d 143, 148 (W. Va. 1986) ( citing 
United States v. Rogers , 455 F.2d 407, 412 (5th Cir. 1972); 
United States v. Milano , 443 F.2d 1022, 1024, 1025 (10th Cir. 
1971); United States v. Assenza, 337 F. Supp. 1057, 1061 (M.D. 
Fla. 1972)).  Instead, the charges against the released 
defendant remain pending when the defendant is released, and the 
thirty-day time limit for out-of-custody defendants, which is 
couched in mandatory terms, becomes applicable.  In other words, 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) allows the State up to 
thirty days from a 
defendant’s initial appearance to remedy any complication that 
made conducting a preliminary hearing within the two
-day time 
limit inconvenient or otherwise problematic.  However, the rule 
requires that the defendant be released from custody upon motion 
until such a hearing takes place unless the State demonstrates 
that one of the rule’s  narrow exceptions is applicable. 
c. The Language and Operation of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)  
  With these principles in mind, we turn now to the 
language of HRPP Rule 5(c )(3)’s second exception.  The rule does 
not require the release of a defendant from custody upon motion 
if the nonoccurrence of a preliminary hearing “ is attributable 
to such compelling fact or circumstance which would preclude 
such determination or commencement within the prescribed 
period.”  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3).  T his phrasing suggests two 
separate requirements: a  “compelling fact o r circumstance ” must ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 26 exist, and that fact or circumstance must “ preclude  such 
determination [of probable cause] or the  commencement [ of a 
preliminary hearing ]” within two days of the defendant’s initial 
appearance.  
  W e interpret the meaning of “compelling” in light of 
our historical commitment to providing a defendant held in 
custody with a preliminary hearing within two days of initial 
appearance such that release is strongly presumed to be 
appropriate if a preliminary hearing does not commence within 
this period.  Both our history and the structure of HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3) indicate that only 
in narrow circumstances will the 
presumption be displaced
, allowing the defendant to be held 
longer than two days without commencement of the preliminary 
hearing.  Thus, a compelling fact or circumstance is an  
occurrence or situation that is of such gravity as to overcome 
the strong presumption that the release rule applies.   
  The absence of a witness from a hearing does not in 
itself present a circumstance of sufficient gravity to displace 
the strong presumption that the release rule applies.  Indeed, 
were the voluntary nonattendance of a witness considered 
compelling for purposes of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3), a witness could 
extend a defendant’s captivity at will simply by electing not to 
attend the preliminary hearing.  Such a result would be plainly 
contrary to the strong presumption of release embodied in the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 27 rule.  Rather, when the State has used due diligence to obtain 
the witness’ s presence, the court must consider the reasons for 
14the witness’s absence , if known.   Because the release rule is 
designed to have broad application, a situation must present 
serious considerations in order to be compelling.  Further, a 
circumstance caused by
 the State’s failure to exercise due 
diligence will rarely overcome the strong presumption that the 
release rule applies because the rule exists to protect 
defendants against unnecessary delays.  
  This interpretation is consistent with our  application 
of the compelling circumstance phrase in other contexts.  In 
Gannett Pacific Corp. v. Richardson , for example, we considered 
when preliminary hearings --like the ones here at issue-- could be 
closed to the public.  59 Haw. 224, 233, 580 P.2d 49, 56 —57 
(1978).  We determined that a departure from “this 
jurisdiction’s policy of openness in judicial proceedings” was 
justified only when the court concludes that the public’s 
exposure to potentially inadmissible evidence w as substantially 
likely to interfere with the defendant ’s right to a fair trial 
by an impartial jury.   Id.  We would later describe this 
decision as holding “that except under certain rare and 
                                                           
 14 When the reasons f or a witness’s absence cannot be ascertained, 
evidence of whether the witness intended to cooperate  may be relevant to the 
court’s analysis. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 28 compelling circumstances , courtroom proceedings shall be open to 
the public.”  Oahu Publ ’ns Inc. v. Ahn , 133 Hawai i 482, 495, 331 
P.3d 460, 473 (2014) (other emphasis omitted) (quoting Honolulu 
Advertiser, Inc. v. Takao , 59 Haw. 237, 238, 580 P.2d 58, 60  
(1978)).  Just as in the present cases, we identified a strong 
policy commitment “firmly embedded in o ur system of 
jurisprudence.”  Gannett , 59 Haw. at 228, 580 P.2d at 54.  As 
here, we permitted this commitment  to be overcome only by a 
showing of circumstances that raised a countervailing concern of 
great enough weight to overcome the strong presumption that the 
standard rule applies.  See also Amemiya v. Sapienza , 63 Haw. 
424, 428, 629 P.2d 1126, 1129 (1981) (holding that, 
notwithstanding legislative delegation of prosecutorial 
discretion to city and county public prosecutor, state attorney 
general may “supersede ” public prosecutor “in certain compelling 
circumstances,” including “dereliction of duty” and when 
conflict of interest exists). 
  Even when a compelling fact or circumstance is found 
to be present, however, it must actually result in preclusion of 
“determination [of probable cause] or commencement [of a 
preliminary hearing] within the prescribed period” for HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3)’s second exception to apply.  “Preclude” is generally 
defined as “to prevent or make impossible; to rule out ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 29 beforehand by necessary consequence.”  Preclude , Black’s Law 
Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014).   Preclusion will therefore occur 
either when a circumstance prevents the determination of 
probable cause at a preliminary hearing or when a circumstance 
prevents the commencement of the hearing within the two-day time 
frame.  The former situation will aris
e, for example, when there 
is an unavailability of evidence that is crucial to the probable 
cause determination.  The latter situation occurs, fo r example, 
when court personnel required to conduct a hearing, such as 
15defense counsel, are unable to be present.    
  An implicit corollary to the rule’s provisions is that 
any continuance granted under HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second 
exception must be no longer than needed to resolve the 
compelling fact or circumstance that precluded the determination 
of probable cause or the commencement of a hearing within the 
two-day time limit.  The court must be informed how the State 
intends to expeditiously 
address the circumstance precluding the 
determination of probable cause or commencement of the hearing
, 
and any continuance must be circumscribed to the period 
                                                           
 15 HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) additionally requires that there be a causal 
link between the compelling fact or circumstance and the nonoccurrence of the 
hearing.  The “failure of such determination or commencement” must be 
“attributable to  such compelling fact or circumstance.”  HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) 
(emphasis added).  Even when a hearing is precluded and a compelling fact or 
circumstance is present, HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception will not apply 
when the preclusion resulted from a separate, noncompelling event.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 30 necessary to resolve that circumstance.  The rule’s language, 
structure, and history demonstrate a policy determination that 
an in-custody defendant should be afforded a preliminary hearing 
within the prescribed tim
e frame of the rule.  Any deviation 
from this time frame should be measured relative to the two-day 
limit--not the thirty-day limit applicable to out-of-custody 
defendants.  Thus, 
the length of a requested continuance must be 
consistent with the rule’s obj ective of a prompt probable cause 
determination.     
  In summary, two days is the presumptive limit of 
acceptable delay, and holding a defendant without a preliminary 
hearing for a longer period is authorized under HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3)’s second exception only when compelling  circumstances 
prevent a timely  determination of probable cause or commencement 
16of the hearing.   The period of any requested continuance must 
be consistent with the prompt- determination purpose of the rule 
and correlated in duration to the specific circumstance that 
caused the preliminary hearing to not commence within the two -
17day time frame.    
                                                           
 16 We note that this corollary also applies to HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s 
other exceptions to the standard release rule.  Un der the rule’s first 
exception, for example, a hearing continued because of a defendant’s 
condition should occur as soon as the condition is alleviated.   
 17 Both petitioners acknowledge a dearth of caselaw regarding when a 
preliminary hearing “commences” for purposes of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3).  They 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 31 d. Application to Moana and Curioso’s Cases  
  The cases at hand provide illustrative examples of the 
operation of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception .  In Moana’s 
case, the State argues that the complainant ’s nonappearance  
despite being properly served was a compelling fact or 
18circumstance.
  Turning initially to the preclusion  requirement 
of the second exception, the complaining witness’ s absence at 
the preliminary hearing likely precluded a determination of 
probable cause, insofar as the witness’s testimony w ould provide 
crucial evidence on this issue.  However, t he State’s plan for 
                                                                        
(. . . continued) 
 
argue that the structure of the rule, which permits a delay in commencement 
without the release of the defendant if the delay occurs by the defendant’s 
request or with the defendant’s consent, necessarily contemplat es an 
opportunity for the defendant to move for continuance or consent to the 
State’s motion prior to commencement of the hearing.  Commencement must 
therefore occur later, when witnesses are sworn or evidence is presented, 
they conclude.  The State does not dispute this point.   
  We note that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) ’s text indicates that the two- day 
time limit for in- custody defendants is satisfied if a preliminary hearing 
commences within the time frame , and that conclusion of the hearing within 
the two- day period is not required.  In other words, a hearing commenced 
within the two- day period may extend beyond that time frame without 
necessitating the release of the defendant upon motion.  However, any 
continuance granted after the commencement of the hearing  must satisfy one of 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s exceptions or be based on the court’s inability to 
complete the hearing on the scheduled day  due to time restraints .  Any 
continuance would presumably be to the next court day.  
 18 The State also proffers Moana’s criminal history, the nature of 
the offense with which Moana was charged, and the vulnerable nature of the 
complainant as compelling circumstances on which the court relied.  Because 
these circumstances do not prevent the determination of 
probable cause  or the 
commencement of preliminary hearing within the two -day time frame, they 
clearly do not qualify under HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception.  We 
consider them further with respect to HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s third exception, 
discussed infra. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 32 securing the attendance of the complaining witness was of an 
indefinite nature and duration.  To hold a defendant during a 
continuance pursuant to HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception, 
the State must set forth the specific steps that it intends to 
take to expeditiously resolve the compelling circumstance, and 
the requested continuance must be limited to that time period.  
Here, the State made only vague statements indicating that it 
would attempt to locate and serve the witness again, possibly 
attempting to obtain a material witness order if necessary.  
Indeed, the State acknowledged that the complainant may no 
longer have be en in Hawai i and offered no information suggesting 
it had any knowledge of the witness’ s current location.  The 
strong presumption of release does not permit the State to hold 
a defendant for a period of time that does not preserve the 
defendant’s right to a prompt probable cause determination . 
  Because the continuance was clearly not limited to the 
time necessary to expeditiously resolve the circumstance 
precluding the hearing, we do not address whether the 
complaining witness’s absence constituted a compelling 
circumstance in light of the witnes s’s possible departure from 
the jurisdiction and previously expressed reluctance to testify.  
However, we note that when a compelling circumstance is not 
present or it cannot be ascertained whether a  witness’ s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 33 attendance can be promptly obtained, the court following the 
release of the defendant from custody
 may continue the 
preliminary hearing to any point withi
n the thirty -day time 
limit for an out-of-custody defendant.   
  In Curioso’s case,  the complainant was present and 
ready to testify at the scheduled preliminary hearing but was 
impeded from doing so by the
 lack of an interpreter.  The State 
avers that it could not have discovered the need for an 
interpreter earlier through ordinary diligence and that it made 
diligent efforts to obtain an interpreter as soon as the 
19complainant requested one.   As we have said, “ inherent in [the] 
nature of justice is the notion that those involved in 
litigation should understand and be understood.”   In re Doe , 99 
Hawaii 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 (2002) (quoting Figueroa v.  
Doherty, 303 Ill. App. 3d 46, 50, 707 N.E.2d 654, 658 (1999)).  
                                                           
 19 Although we assume in this case that the State exercised due 
diligence in attempting to secure an interpreter, we note that there is no 
indication in the record that the State contacted the court for assistance.  
The court is equipped with many resources in this area, including the ability 
to appoint an interpreter 
of its own selection at a hearing or trial.  See 
HRPP Rule 28(b) (2012) .  Further, the Hawai i State Judiciary has committed to 
“reasonably provid[ing] , free of charge, and in a timely manner, competent 
court interpreters for parties, witnesses and individuals with a substantial 
interest in a case.”   Judiciary’s Language Access Policy, Hawai i Judiciary 
Policy #12 (2014); see also  Hawaii State Judiciary, Language Access Plan for 
Persons with Limited English Proficiency, FY 2015 -2016, at 9 (“Non -Judiciary 
staff, including a public defender, prosecuting attorney, private attorney, 
or community advocate, may also inform the court of a client’s need for an 
interpreter in a particular case .”) 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/services/LEP.pdf.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 34 Given the fundamental importance of an interpreter in courtroom 
proceedings, the inability to obtain one presented a 
circumstance of such  gravity as to overcome the strong 
presumption that inheres in the release rule. 
  T he facts of the situation were thus compelling under 
the first prong of HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second  exception.  The 
interpreter was also essential court personnel necessary to 
commence the preliminary hearing.  With both requirements 
of 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second  exception met, t he district court 
would have been justified in relying upon it to deny Curioso’s 
motion for release.   
  However, the facts concerning the complaining 
witness’s late request for an interpreter, lack of prior 
indication that an interpreter was needed, and the State’s 
efforts to locate an interpreter were not shown to be part of 
20the record of the hearing in this case.   The district court 
also continued the hearing without any inquiry into when an 
interpreter could be obtained, and instead of continuing the 
hearing to the next day, which was a Friday, the hearing was 
rescheduled for the following Tuesday--after the weekend.  As 
discussed, when a defendant is kept in custody beyond the two-
                                                           
 20 The information was contained in an affidavit submitted with the 
State’s response to Moana’s petition for a writ of mandamus . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 35 day time limit pursuant to HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception,  
any postponement of the preliminary hearing is to be limited to 
the time necessary to address the circumstance preclu ding the 
hearing--here, the minimum time needed to secure an interpreter.    
2. HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s Third Exception  
  Because the State does not specify which of HRPP Rule 
5(c)(3)’s exceptions  the family court relied upon to deny 
Moana’s motion for release and keep him in custody until a 
continued hearing date two weeks hence, we also address the 
proffered facts in relation to the rule’s third exception , which 
allows a court to deny a motion for release if a “compelling 
fact or circumstance would render such release to be against the 
interest of justice. ”  
  Like HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception, the rule’s 
third exception requires that a court find that a “compelling 
fact or circumstance ” exists in order to keep a defendant in 
custody.  As we have concluded above, a fact or circumstance is 
compelling when it is of such gravity as to overcome the strong 
presumption that the standard release rule should apply to the 
situation.   
  The record does not indicate that any such compelling 
facts or circumstances were implicated in Moana’s case.  In 
addition to the nonappearance of the complainant, discussed 
above, the State argues that the family court relied upon three ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 36 compelling circumstances when it required  Moana to remain in 
custody while the complainant’s whereabouts were being 
determined: the nature of Moana’s alleged offense, the 
vulnerable nature of the complainant and their child , and 
Moana’s criminal history, which the State argues collectively 
indicated a potential danger to the absent complainant.  
However, simply referencing  the nature of an alleged offense 
does not present a fact that justifies departing from the 
standard rule because 
HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) was formulated and 
adopted to apply to all criminal offenses.  The rule does not 
provide for different 
periods of custody based on the type of  
offense.  That is, the third exception applies to compelling 
circumstances and not o
ffenses categorized as compelling.    
  Additionally, the record does not demonstrate any 
specific factual allegation that Moana posed a risk to the 
absent complainant that was of a sufficient gravity to overcome 
the strong presumption that the standard release rule should 
apply to the situation.  Indeed, the State’s argument that Moana 
posed a potential risk to the complainant was  undermined by the 
basis of its request for the continuance and the family court’s 
apparent reasoning for granting it.  The complainant’s 
whereabouts were unknown to the State, and the requested 
additional time by the prosecutor was to locate and obtain the 
complainant’s cooperation.   The prosecutor further explained ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 37 that his office might obtain a material witness order if the 
complainant was found on the mainland and refused to return 
voluntarily.  The court itself referred to the insubstantiality 
of the prosecutor’s request in its ruling, warning the 
prosecutor that “ the next time . . . if the complaining witness 
fails to appear . . . [the State] need[s] a lot more information 
21than what somebody might have said.”   The lack of a showing of 
compelling circumstances for the continuance request is clearly 
evident. 
  Even had the asserted facts constituted compelling 
circumstances, the State did not present the court with proposed 
measures to expeditiously address the concerns raised.  The 
strong presumption of release 
requires that a defendant in 
custody be afforded a hearing as promptly as feasible, and a 
continuance should in no event be longer than necessary to 
resolve the compelling circumstance that justified holding a 
defendant beyond the two- day time limit.  Just as under HRPP 
Rule 5(c)(3)’s second exception, the rule’s third exception does 
not authorize holding a defendant without a probable cause 
determination for a period beyond what is required by the 
                                                           
 21 The family court’s comments regarding “what somebody might have 
said” referred to the prosecutor’s statement to the court in his continuance 
request that he had been contacted by the complainant’s aunt, who informed 
him that she had taken food to the airport to give to the complainant and her  
child.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 38 compelling circumstance, and any continuance granted must comply 
with the prompt hearing mandate embodied in the rule. 
  It is  also noted that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3)’s third 
exception contains a second prong that requires a court to 
determine that the defendant’s release would be “against the 
interests of justice.”  Because the record does not support 
a 
finding that compelling circumstances existed to overcome the 
strong presumption that release 
was required, we do not address 
the possible situations in which the interests of justice 
provision may apply. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
  Because the petitions are moot, we cannot provide the 
relief the petitioners seek and therefore d eny their petitions.  
We nonetheless consider the legal questions they present, which 
are capable of repetition but would otherwise evade review, in 
order to provide guidance to the district and family courts.  We 
hold that HRPP Rule 5(c)(3) provides a strong presumption that 
the release upon motion of a defendant held in custody is 
required when a preliminary hearing has not commenced within two 
days of initial appearance.  When a delay is not caused by a 
defendant and occurs without the defenda nt’s consent, courts may 
deny a defendant’s motion for release only in a circumstance 
that is of such gravity as to overcome the  strong presumption of 
release.  If  such a compelling circumstance is found, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 39 continuance of the preliminary hearing must be consistent with 
the prompt- determination objective of the rule and must be no 
longer than needed to resolve the circumstance making the delay 
necessary. 
Jon N. Ikenaga 
for petitioners 
 
Rafael K. Renteria 
for respondent in 
SCPW-17-0000532  
 
Leigh M. Okimoto 
for respondent in 
SCPW-17-0000171  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
