                                                             
  
 
 
 
 
       
     
 
  
 
   
  
       
         
      
 
  
             
           
             
          
              
           
             
             
            
  
 
            Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-20-0000509 18-AUG-2020 04:18 PM 
SCPW-20-0000509  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
IN THE MATTER OF INDIVIDUALS IN CUSTODY 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
AMENDED ORDER RE: 
FELONY DEFENDANTS1 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, and McKenna, JJ., 
and Chief Judge Ginoza, assigned by reason of vacancy, 
with Wilson, J., concurring and dissenting2) 
On August 12, 2020, the Office of the Public Defender  
(“OPD”)  filed
  a  petition  for  extraordinary  writ  pursuant  to  HRS  
§§  602-4,  602-5(5),  and  602-5(6)  and/or  a  writ  of  mandamus  
(“Petition”).   The  Petition  seeks,  among  other  things,  a  
reduction  of  the  inmate  populations  at  the  State’s  correctional    
        
1 This amended order: (1) clarifies that the process set forth in the 
order is for motions for release and temporary suspension of incarceration; 
(2) amends Paragraph 1 to include a category of inmates who are awaiting 
adjudication of motions for revocation or modification of probation or 
motions to set aside or modify deferral, as well as pretrial inmates who have 
pled guilty or no-contest and are awaiting sentencing, subject to exceptions; 
(3) amends Paragraph 2.b. to set a deadline for objections to modification of 
probation of any eligible inmate; and (4) amends Paragraph 2.d. to set a 
deadline for disposing of motions for release of eligible defendants in HOPE 
Probation. 
2 A concurrence and dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  2 
            
         
            
         
        
          
        
            
          
        
          
          
         
            
          
         
            
           
        
        
           
        
           
           centers  and facilities in an effort to mitigate the harm that 
the COVID-19 pandemic may inflict upon inmates, the correctional 
staff, and the people of Hawai‘i. In this  regard, the Petition 
seeks the expedited release of certain categories of inmates 
from the State’s correctional centers and facilities, without 
the filing and hearing of individualized motions for release. 
The COVID-19 pandemic
 has caused a public health 
emergency. Since July 2020, Hawai‘i has seen  a surge of COVID-19 
cases in Hawai‘i, with record numbers of positive cases and 
increased hospitalizations being reported. Since the Petition 
was filed, there have been more than one hundred eighty-one 
inmates and thirty staff members that have tested positive for 
COVID-19 at the O‘ahu Community Correctional Center (“OCCC”), and 
testing of inmates at OCCC is ongoing. Given the rising number 
of COVID-19 cases at OCCC and the difficulties with social 
distancing, there is urgent and immediate concern in reducing 
the inmate population at OCCC to protect those who work at or 
are detained at OCCC, their families, and the community. 
This court recognizes
 the impact of COVID-19 on 
Hawaiʻi’s  community correctional  centers and facilities –- and 
the urgency by which suitable yet balanced action is required. 
The COVID-19 outbreak at OCCC, where appropriate physical 
distancing is not possible, has the potential to not only place 
the inmates at risk of death or serious illness, but also  3 
  
     
   
          
    
         
        
         
   
        
         
           
         
         
         
      
         
           endanger   the  lives   and  well-being  of  staff  and  service  providers 
who  work  at  OCCC,  their  families,  and  members  of  the  community  
at  large.   Because  of  the  virulent  spread  of  the  virus  within  
close  quarters,  the  COVID-19  outbreak  at  OCCC  also  has  the  
potential  to  tax  the  limited  resources  of  Hawai‘i’s  community  
health
  care  providers.     
This court also recognizes,
 however, public safety and 
health concerns regarding the release of inmates at OCCC into 
the community. 
Responding to the impact of this crisis in our 
community correctional centers and facilities requires a careful 
consideration of interests, both for public health and public 
safety. 
Upon consideration of the submissions and record in 
SCPW-20-0000509, the arguments presented at the August 14, 2020 
hearing, and the surge in COVID-19 positive test results in our 
community, including at OCCC, and pursuant to this court’s 
authority under Hawai‘i Revised St atutes (“HRS”) §§ 602-5(3) & 
(6) and §
 706-625, Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, and HRS § 601-1.5, 
IT  IS  HEREBY  ORDERED   that:  
1. An expedited process,
 as set forth in paragraph 
2, below, shall be undertaken to address the issues related to  4 
  
   
      
        
       
       
      
       
      
       
        
       
       
      
      
        
         
     
      
     
 release   and  temporary   suspension  of  incarceration  for  the 
following  categories  of  inmates  at  OCCC:  
a. 
b. Inmates
 serving a sentence (not to exceed 18 
months) as a condition of felony deferral or 
probation except for (i) inmates serving a 
term of imprisonment for a sexual assault 
conviction or an attempted sexual assault 
conviction; or (ii) inmates serving a term 
of imprisonment for any felony offense 
contained in HRS chapter 707, burglary in 
the first or second degree (HRS §§ 708-810, 
708-811), robbery in the first or second 
degree (HRS §§ 708-840, 708-841), abuse of 
family or household members (HRS § 709-
906(7)&(8)), or unauthorized entry in a 
dwelling in the first degree or in the 
second degree as a class C felony (HRS §§ 
708-812.55, 708-812.6(1) & (2)), including 
attempt to commit these specific offenses 
(HRS §§ 705-500, 705-501). 
All  pretrial  detainees   charged  with  a  
felony,  and  those  inmates  who  have  pled  
guilty  or  no-contest  and  are  awaiting  
sentencing,  except  those  charged  with  a   5 
       
       
        
       
        
      
     
       
         
      
       
      
 
         
      
       
       
       
       
      
       
       
        
       sexual assault or an attempted sexual 
assault, any felony offense contained in HRS 
chapter 707, burglary in the first or second 
degree (HRS §§ 708-810, 708-811), robbery in 
the first or second degree (HRS §§ 708-840, 
708-841), abuse of family or household 
members (HRS § 709-906(7)&(8)), or 
unauthorized entry in a dwelling in the 
first degree or in the second degree as a 
class C felony (HRS §§ 708-812.55, 708-
812.6(1) & (2)), including attempt to commit 
these specific offenses (HRS §§ 705-500, 
705-501). 
c. Inmates charged with a felony and awaiting 
adjudication of motions for revocation or 
modification of probation or motions to set 
aside or modify deferral, except for 
(i) inmates serving a term of imprisonment 
for a sexual assault conviction or an 
attempted sexual assault conviction; or (ii) 
inmates serving a term of imprisonment for 
any felony offense contained in HRS chapter 
707, burglary in the first or second degree 
(HRS §§ 708-810, 708-811), robbery in the  6 
        
       
     
         
         
      
      
     
              
          
          
          
          
         
            
        
         
     
           
         
            
          
       first or second degree (HRS §§ 708-840, 708-
841), abuse of family or household members 
(HRS § 709-906(7)&(8)), or unauthorized 
entry in a dwelling in the first degree or 
in the second degree as a class C felony 
(HRS §§ 708-812.55, 708-812.6(1) & (2)), 
including attempt to commit these specific 
offenses (HRS §§ 705-500, 705-501). 
2. An “eligible inmate” is an inmate or detainee who 
falls within the categories set forth in Paragraph 1.a., 1.b., 
and 1.c. above. Under the expedited process: 
a. Motions for release and temporary suspension 
of incarceration will be presumed to have been filed for 
eligible inmates identified in the lists provided by the 
Department of Public Safety (“DPS”) on August 17, 2020. The OPD 
or private or court-appointed counsel may file supplemental 
information regarding any eligible inmate by Tuesday, August 18, 
2020, at 4:00 p.m. 
b. Any objection to the release and temporary 
suspension of incarceration of any eligible inmates shall be 
filed by Wednesday, August 19, 2020 at 4:00 p.m. Any objection 
to modification of probation of any eligible inmates shall be 
filed by Thursday, August 20, 2020.  7 
          
          
         
           
             
           
            
          
        
          
        
        
         
        
       
          
         
          
          
          
               
       
         
       c.  The respective courts should adjudicate 
these matters on a non-hearing basis but may, in extraordinary 
circumstances, set an expedited telephonic or video hearing. 
The courts may deny release of an eligible inmate if release 
would pose a significant risk to the safety of the inmate or the 
public. Whether a verified residence for an inmate will be 
required in a specific case will be left to the discretion of 
the judge, but alternative means of maintaining contact such as 
telephone, probation review hearings, or scheduled contacts with 
probation officers may also be employed. While judges are 
required to make individualized determinations, judges must not 
require verified residences for defendants, unless such a 
condition is supported by specific factual findings in an 
individual case. 
d. Except for eligible inmates for whom 
expedited telephonic or video hearings are scheduled, as well as 
those defendants who are in HOPE Probation, the respective 
circuit or family courts shall enter orders by Monday, August 
24, 2020 determining whether each such eligible inmate should be 
released. For those eligible inmates in HOPE Probation, such 
orders shall be entered by Wednesday, August 26, 2020. 
e. Orders allowing release and temporary 
suspension of incarceration shall reflect that they are subject 
to the condition in Paragraph 3 below.  8 
            
            
          
            
      
          
          
          
           
         
         
         
        
         
         
        
  
        
         
       
           
           
            3.  Upon entry of the trial court’s release order, 
DPS shall release the inmate only if the inmate has not received 
a positive COVID-19 test result, does not have pending the 
result of a test that has been taken, and is not exhibiting 
COVID-19 symptoms. 
4. When an inmate is released, all conditions of 
release originally imposed or set forth in any subsequent order, 
other than in-person reporting, shall remain in full force and 
effect. DPS shall inform all inmates, prior to their release, 
of their continuing obligation to abide by conditions of 
deferral or probation or pretrial release to promote public 
safety, and shall further advise them that: 
a. All inmates shall maintain contact with 
their attorney and appear at all future court hearings. 
b. Any no-contact order shall remain in force. 
c. Any driver’s license suspension shall remain 
in force. 
d. Obligations to report to probation officers 
in-person shall be converted to telephone or video reporting 
under further order of the respective court. 
e. Each inmate released under this order is 
ordered to appear as directed by the presiding judge. Failure 
to comply with court orders or to appear as directed may result  9 
    
      
         
          
       
         
          
           
          
         
         
           
         
       
       
          
          
            
 
           
        
          
         in  further  charges,   including  but  not  limited  to,  criminal  
contempt.    
5. In
 addition, all eligible inmates released 
pursuant to this order shall comply with the following: 
a. Before being released, the inmate shall 
provide to DPS current contact information, including 
residential address and/or telephone number, if available. 
b. The inmate shall self-isolate for fourteen 
days and wear a mask when within six feet of others. 
c. The inmate shall immediately report the 
development of COVID-19 symptoms to the Department of Health 
(“DOH”) and shall thereafter follow directives from DOH. 
d. The inmate shall comply with any federal, 
state, or local laws, directives, orders, rules, and regulations 
regarding conduct during the declared COVID-19 pandemic 
emergency, including “social distancing” mandates and any 
proclamations issued by Governor David Y. Ige or the Governor’s 
designee during the COVID-19 emergency, as well as any mandates 
or proclamations issued by the Mayor of the City and County of 
Honolulu. 
e. The inmate shall further comply with all 
specific directives provided to them by DOH. 
6. Additional individual motions may be filed for 
later identified eligible inmates. Any objections to such  10 
             
          
        
         
           
 
           
           
            
           
           
       
            
           
         
           
           
            
       
           
      
 
 release  must be filed within two business days of the filing of 
the motion. The respective circuit or family courts shall 
expeditiously address whether each such eligible inmate should 
be released. Any additional eligible inmates later released 
shall be subject to all applicable provisions set forth in this 
order. 
7. This order does not preclude any party from 
taking any other steps as may be deemed appropriate to obtain 
the release of an inmate during this time of emergency or stay 
any pending motions seeking the release of inmates. This order 
also does not affect DPS’s authority under the law to release 
inmates on its own accord. 
8. DPS shall provide a list of all inmates released 
under this order, as well as the contact information provided by 
those inmates, to the OPD, Prosecuting Attorney Dwight Nadamoto, 
and the Administrative Director of the Courts no later than the 
next day following the inmate’s release. The list shall include 
the name of the inmate and the criminal case number(s) for which 
the inmate has been held. 
9. All notices and information required under HRS 
§ 801D-4 shall be provided.  11 
           
 
       
      
      
      
          
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
10. This court reserves its authority to order other 
measures. 
DATED: Honolulu,  Hawai‘i, August  18, 2020. 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 