 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-26-0000169 30-MAR-2026 11:39 AM Dkt. 12 ODDP 
SCPW-26-0000169 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I
 
MEGAN E. BRYAN, 
Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, STATE OF HAWAIʻ I;   
FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT, STATE OF HAWAIʻ I,  
Respondents. 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
(CASE NO. 1UF201006070) 
ORDER DENYING PETITION 
(By: McKenna, Acting C.J., Eddins, Ginoza, and Devens, JJ., 
and Circuit Judge Morikawa, assigned by reason of vacancy) 
On March 9, 2026, Petitioner Megan E. Bryan filed a 
“Verified Petition for Writ of Mandamus & Emergency Motion for 
Stay of April 1, 2026 Hearing.” 
For the reasons set forth below, the court denies the 
petition without prejudice to Petitioner seeking relief from the 
Family Court. The court also cautions Petitioner that she must 
comply with Rule 11 of the Hawaiʻ i Family Court Rules (eff.  2022), which requires a party to provide the court with accurate 
representations in all submissions. 
Rule 11 of the Hawaiʻ i Family Court Rules (HFCR) provides, 
in pertinent part: 
The signature of  an attorney or party constitutes a 
certificate by the signer  that the signer has read the 
pleading, motion, or other document; that to the best of 
the signer’s knowledge, information, and belief formed 
after reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is 
warranted by existing law  or a good faith argument for the 
extension, modification, or reversal of existing law, and 
that it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as 
to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless 
increase in the cost of litigation.   If a pleading, motion, 
or other document is not signed, it shall be stricken 
unless it is signed promptly after the omission is called 
to the attention of the pleader or movant.  If a pleading, 
motion, or other document is signed in violation of this Rule, the court, upon motion or upon its own initiative, 
shall impose upon the person who signed it, a represented party, or both, an appropriate sanction, which may include 
an order to pay to the other party or parties the amount of 
the reasonable expenses incurred because of the filing of 
the pleading, motion, or other document, including a 
reasonable attorney’ s fee.  
HFCR Rule 11 (emphases added). 
The Hawaiʻ i Family Court Rules are adopted under the Hawaiʻ i  
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) whenever applicable. HRAP 
Rule 2.1(a) (eff. 2010). Because Petitioner seeks a writ of 
mandamus arising from a Family Court matter, see HRAP Rule 21 
(eff. 2010), HFCR Rule 11 governs the filings she has submitted 
to this court. 
Here, Petitioner’s submissions contained multiple 
inaccurate case citations and failed to explain the factual basis for several assertions. For example, Petitioner cited 
2
   
   
 “State v. Burdett” as a 1981 opinion in Volume 63 of West’s 
Hawaiʻi Reports at page 357. Petitioner relied on this citation 
to argue that under Hawai
ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 576B-205 
(2018), the Family Court lacks jurisdiction to enforce a child 
support order because her child is now an adult. Petitioner’s 
citation to Burdett is incorrect. 
The actual case appearing at 
that citation is State v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 357, 628 P.2d 
1018, 1021 (1981), a case which does not address family court 
jurisdictional issues. 
Petitioner’s argument under HRS § 576B-205 is likewise 
without merit, as the statute contains no language terminating 
jurisdiction in the manner asserted. The petition included four 
additional inaccurate citations, none of which supported the 
propositions for which they were cited. 
The petition’s reliance on non-existent or hallucinated 
case citations strongly suggests that portions of the filing were generated using artificial intelligence (AI). 
HFCR Rule 11 requires a party to conduct a “reasonable 
inquiry” to ensure that a filing is “warranted by existing law.” 
HFCR Rule 11. When a party submits a filing that contains 
citations to non-existent cases, this conduct on its own 
constitutes a violation of HFCR Rule 11. The fake case citation 
makes clear that the party failed to conduct a reasonable inquiry into the validity of the legal authorities cited. This 
3
  is because a check of the citation would have revealed that the 
case did not exist. 
To satisfy Rule 11’s duty of a “reasonable inquiry,” 
Petitioner was required to verify that each citation was 
accurate and that the cited authority supports the proposition 
asserted. Notably, free on-site access to legal research 
databases is available at the Hawaiʻ i State Law Library.  
Reliance solely on AI-generated content to produce a case filing 
is inadequate because such content provides no assurance that 
the citations produced by it are valid or correctly described. 
Including fabricated citations not only violates HFCR Rule 
11 but also undermines the integrity of the court by introducing false material into a process grounded in truth, verified facts, 
and actual legal precedent. Such conduct wastes the opposing 
party’s time and resources in investigating and exposing the 
inaccuracies, diverting attention from the merits of the case. 
It also wastes judicial resources by requiring judges and court 
staff to verify citations and address misconduct, thereby 
reducing the time available to address other matters. 
Petitioner is advised that any future failure to comply 
with HFCR Rule 11 may result in sanctions, including an award of reasonable attorney fees incurred by the opposing party in 
responding to filings containing inaccurate or unsupported 
citations. 
4
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Based on the record, Petitioner has not demonstrated a 
clear and indisputable right to relief. See Womble Bond
Dickinson (US) LLP v. Kim, 153 Hawaiʻ i 307, 319, 537 P.3d 1154, 
1166 (2023). The petition is denied without prejudice to Petitioner seeking relief from the Family Court. 
A copy of this 
order shall be filed by the clerk in 1UF201006070. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, March 30 , 2026. 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
/s/ Trish K. Morikawa 
5 