 
 
 
 
 
SCPW-20-0000509 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF INDIVIDUALS IN CUSTODY 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
 
ORDER CONCLUDING PROCEEDING 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, and McKenna, JJ.,   
and Chief Judge Ginoza, assigned by reason of vacancy, 
with Wilson, J., dissenting) 
 
  On August 12, 2020, as a result of a surge in COVID-19 
positive cases primarily at the 
Oʻahu Community Correctional 
Center, the Office of the Public Defender (“OPD”) filed a 
petition for an extraordinary writ seeking, among other things, 
the expedited release of certain categories of inmates at 
Hawaiʻi’s community correctional centers and facilities.  At the 
time, the pandemic’s trajectory remained uncertain and 
vaccinations were not available.  Given the virulent spread of 
the virus within close quarters and the likely possibility that 
a spread of the virus in Hawai ʻi’s community correctional centers 
and facilities had the potential to tax the capacities of the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCPW-20-0000509
16-APR-2021
10:59 AM
Dkt. 164 ORD2 
 health care systems and the limited resources of the community 
health providers on each of the islands as the State continued 
to navigate this unprecedented pandemic, this court set forth 
procedures for release consideration of inmates and pretrial 
detainees who met certain criteria, as well as the process for 
addressing certain categories of newly arrested individuals or 
individuals arrested for new offenses, while protecting public 
health and public safety.   
  
Today, according to recent filings in this case, it 
appears that the rate of positive cases in Hawai ʻi’s correctional
centers and facilities has significantly declined since the 
petition was filed in August 2020, testing and other health and 
safety measures have been implemented within the correctional 
centers and facilities, and a vaccination program to vaccinate 
inmates is underway.  Thus, it appears that the conditions that 
necessitated swift action by this court in August 2020 are no 
longer prevalent.  Conclusion of this proceeding is therefore 
appropriate.            
  
We note that the State continues to have the option of 
filing individual motions seeking to modify the release status 
of any defendant, and the OPD or defense counsel may file 
individual motions seeking the release of any inmate.  
Additionally, the trial courts will have full discretion whether 
to set bail and to impose conditions of release.  Issues 3 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
 regarding inmate populations may be addressed through 
alternative means, including by the 
Hawai‘i Correctional Systems 
Oversight Commission, which was established by the Hawai ‘i State 
Legislature pursuant to Act 179, Session Laws of Hawai ‘i 2019, 
to, among other things, establish maximum inmate population 
limits for each correctional facility and formulate policies and 
procedures to prevent the inmate population from exceeding the 
capacity of each correctional facility.    
 
 Accordingly,
  
 
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that this original proceeding is 
concluded.  Orders related to the release or temporary 
suspension of incarceration of defendants arising out of this 
original proceeding shall remain in effect unless otherwise 
modified by specific order(s) of trial courts relating to 
specific defendants.  This order constitutes the final order of 
this proceeding.  
 
 DATED:  Honolulu, 
Hawaiʻi, April 16, 2021.  
 
      
      
      
      