 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCPW-13-0003250 16-JUL-2014 
09:07 AM 
---o0o---
OAHU PUBLICATIONS INC., dba The Honolulu Star-Advertiser, 
a Hawaiʻ i corporation, and KHNL/KGMB, LLC, dba Hawaiʻ i 
News Now, a Delaware corporation, Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
THE HONORABLE KAREN S.S. AHN, Circuit Court
Judge of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit,
Respondent Judge, 
 
and 
 
THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I and CHRISTOPHER DEEDY, Respondents. 
SCPW-13-0003250 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1647) 

JULY 16, 2014 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA AND POLLACK, JJ.,
CIRCUIT JUDGE BROWNING IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED, AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE KUBO IN PLACE OF McKENNA, J., RECUSED 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case requires us to address the procedures that a 
court must undertake to protect the constitutional right of the 
public to attend criminal trials while also protecting a 
defendant’s potentially countervailing constitutional right to a 
fair and impartial jury. 
Additionally, we address the 
procedures that a court is required to follow before denying public access to a transcript of a closed proceeding. 
These important issues arise out of petitions for 
writs of prohibition and mandamus by Oahu Publications Inc., dba The Honolulu Star-Advertiser (Honolulu Star-Advertiser), and 
KHNL/KGMB, LLC, dba Hawaii News Now (Hawaii News Now) 
(collectively, Petitioners). 
The petitions were filed after the 
court conducted five separate court proceedings that were not open to the public, and then subsequently sealed the transcript 
of these court sessions. The relevant proceedings took place on 
August 26, 2013, during the trial of 
State v. Deedy,  No. 1PC11­
1-001647, on the fifth day of jury deliberations. Later on that 
same day, the circuit court declared a mistrial as a result of a 
deadlocked jury. 
The Petitioners requested two writs. 
The first, a 
writ of prohibition, would prohibit the circuit court from 
enforcing any order sealing portions of the August 26, 2013 
proceedings and would order the circuit court to unseal all 
-2 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
transcripts from that date. The second, a writ of mandamus, 
would prohibit the circuit court from closing the courtroom in a 
similar manner in a re-trial of State v. Deedy  and in any other 
criminal proceeding. 
As explained below, the relief requested by the 
Petitioners’ writ of prohibition was subsequently provided following a remand of the matter to the circuit court; therefore 
the writ of prohibition is dismissed. 
We also deny the writ of 
mandamus that seeks to peremptorily prohibit Judge Karen S.S. 
Ahn (Judge Ahn) from again closing her courtroom unless specific 
steps are followed. However, in recognition of the rights and 
protections declared by the United States Supreme Court and the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution, we adopt procedures to guide our courts in 
the future when making a determination whether to close court 
proceedings or to deny public access to the transcript of the 
closed proceeding. 
1. Factual Background 
This original proceeding resulted from court 
proceedings that were not open to the public and from the 
sealing of the transcript of those proceedings during the trial 
of U.S. State Department Special Agent Christopher Deedy (Deedy 
or the Defendant), who was charged with murder in the second 
degree for shooting and causing the death of a patron in a fast 
food restaurant in Waikiki. The trial in the Circuit Court of 
-3 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
                     
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
    
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the First Circuit (circuit court) was presided over by Judge Ahn 
and lasted approximately five weeks until a mistrial was 
declared. Considerable public attention and media coverage was 
devoted to the trial. 
A. The non-public proceedings and sealing of the transcript 
On August 26, 2013, during the fifth day of jury 
deliberations, Judge Ahn held five court proceedings that were not open to the public, with the prosecutor, defense counsel, and Deedy to address matters relating to the jury. Following 
the last of these proceedings, the circuit court sealed the 
portions of the transcript that pertained to these court 
sessions. A partial transcript of the August 26, 2013 
proceedings, entitled “Partial Transcript of Proceedings,” notes 
the first three proceedings as being “held under seal,” with the 
times indicated: 
• “(Proceedings held under seal from 10:35 to 10:48a.m.)”1 
• “(Proceedings held under seal from 10:49 to 11:11 A.M.)”2 
• “(Proceedings held under seal from 1:05 p.m. to 1:18
p.m.)”.3 
1 The minutes on Ho ohiki indicate that the proceeding was held in
chambers, Judge Ahn and counsel had a discussion “re: jury”, and the 
transcript from the proceeding was sealed by the circuit court. 
2 The minutes on Ho ohiki indicate that the proceeding was held in
the courtroom, Judge Ahn and counsel had a discussion “re: jury”, and the 
transcript from the proceeding was sealed by the circuit court. 
3 The court’ s minutes on Ho ohiki indicate that the proceeding was
held via telephone conference in chambers, Judge Ahn and counsel had a 
discussion “re: jury”, and the transcript from the proceeding was sealed by 
the circuit court. 
-4 ­ 
 
 
  
   The fourth proceeding occurred at the bench in the 
afternoon of August 26, 2013. Judge Ahn called the case in open 
court and informed the parties that the jury could not reach a 
verdict, and the jury did not believe further deliberations would be helpful. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Defense counsel]: 
  
 
 
 
[State]: 
 
 
[Defense counsel]: 
 
 
After defense counsel objected to Judge Ahn’s proposal to poll the jury about their impasse and the court’s intention to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The partial transcript does not provide any context or background for these three proceedings, but some background 
information appears regarding the fourth and fifth court 
sessions. 
[Circuit court]: Good afternoon to all of you.  We ’ve 
received a communication, No. 5, from the jury, and as a
matter of record, the -- all other communications were 
answered with the consent of both counsel, and thatcommunication reads: 
We have unanimously voted that the jury does not have averdict, and that further deliberations will not resolve
our impasse. 
I propose to bring the jury out, question them about this
briefly. 
Anything more for the record? 
Yes, Your Honor. We’ d like to be heard 
on this matter, please. 
[Circuit court]:  
Yes. 
Your Honor, if Mr. Hart intends to put on the 
record things that we have discussed which have beensealed, we would request that those same arguments also besealed. 
Well, what I intend to put on the
record, and hereby do, is Mr. Deedy’ s objection to taking a 
verdict of hopelessly deadlocked at this point, and thereason is that the issues that came up this morning, both
in our meeting here in court and on our telephone
conference on the record at 1:00, suggest that there is
more that the Court can do. 
-5 ­ 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
declare the jury deadlocked, Judge Ahn conducted a bench 
conference with counsel. 
[Circuit court]:  All right.  Mr. Hart, why don’ t you folks 
approach. 
[Defense counsel]:  All right. 
The bench conference is referenced in the Partial Transcript with the notation “(Proceedings held under seal.).” 
At the conclusion of the bench conference, Judge Ahn 
cleared the courtroom, resulting in a fifth court proceeding 
that was not open to the public: 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your patience. At this 
time, I’ m going to ask everyone to leave this courtroom, 
including the electronic devices. You can wait right outside. This is not going to take all afternoon, I hope.
All right? Including the lavaliers, et cetera. 
The Petitioners were present in the courtroom at the time it was 
cleared but did not object to the closure. After the courtroom 
was cleared, the partial transcript reflects the notation 
“(Proceedings held under seal.).” 
Later that afternoon, Judge Ahn reopened the 
courtroom, brought in the jury, polled the jurors regarding their communication that additional time would not permit them 
to reach a unanimous verdict, and declared a mistrial. 
Except for the designation in the partial transcript 
and in the minutes that the proceedings were sealed, the record 
does not contain an oral or written order of the court sealing the transcript of the five proceedings. The record also does 
-6 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not indicate an objection by Deedy to the courtroom not being 
open to the public or the sealing of the transcript of these 
court proceedings. 
B. The Petition 
On September 6, 2013, the Petitioners filed the 
Petition for Writ of Prohibition and Writ of Mandamus (Petition). The Petitioners contended that each of the non­
public proceedings on August 26, 2013 and the partial sealing of the August 26, 2013 transcript violated their First Amendment 
rights, and they were entitled to immediate and contemporaneous 
access to the sealed documents “to serve [their] function as a 
courtroom monitor for the public.” The Petitioners asked this 
court to issue a writ of prohibition (1) prohibiting Judge Ahn 
from enforcing a purported order sealing any portion of the 
August 26, 2013 trial transcript, and (2) ordering the sealed 
portion of the August 26, 2013 transcript to be unsealed. The 
Petitioners also asked this court to issue a writ of mandamus ordering Judge Ahn to refrain from closing the courtroom and 
sealing documents in Deedy’s re-trial, or in future criminal 
proceedings, without first providing notice, an opportunity to 
be heard, and specific factual findings indicating the reason 
for preventing public access to the proceedings. 
On September 20, 2013, this court directed Judge Ahn, 
the State, and Deedy to answer the Petition. 
-7 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Judge Ahn responded in her submission to this court 
that relief by extraordinary writ was not appropriate. First, 
Judge Ahn noted that neither the Honolulu Star-Advertiser nor 
Hawaii News Now objected to the courtroom closure at the time of 
closure and never moved to unseal any portion of the August 26, 
2013 transcript in circuit court. Second, Judge Ahn contended 
that the law does not require notice each time a court 
proceeding is closed. Judge Ahn further contended that proceedings and communications between a judge and jury during 
jury deliberations are excepted from the press and the public’s 
presumptive right of access to criminal trials. Finally, Judge 
Ahn maintained that this court lacked a full and complete record 
of the events that transpired in the courtroom to sufficiently 
address a claim of right of access in the First Amendment 
context. 
The State’s answer presented arguments similar to 
those presented by Judge Ahn. The State argued that the Petition was premature since relief had not been sought in the 
circuit court. Additionally, the State asserted that jury 
deliberations, including written juror communications, are 
private and confidential and not subject to public access. 
Finally, the State contended that trial courts have discretion 
to protect the judicial process and ensure that the orderly 
-8 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
operation of court proceedings should not be encumbered in the 
manner proposed in the Petition. 
Deedy filed a joinder to the Petition. In an order filed October 16, 2013, this court 
permitted an amicus curiae brief to be filed on behalf of Peer News LLC, dba Civil Beat; LIN Television Corp., dba KHON; Hearst 
Television, Inc.; Hawaiʻ i Public Radio; Stephens Media LLC, dba 
Hawaiʻi Tribune-Herald and dba West Hawaiʻ i Today; Maui Time 
Productions, Inc., dba Maui Time Weekly; Hawaiʻ i Reporter, Inc.; 
Hawaiʻi Professional Chapter, Society of Professional 
Journalists; Media Council Hawaiʻ i; and The Reporters Committee 
for Freedom of the Press (collectively, Amici) in support of the 
Petition. Amici asked this court, in addition to granting the 
requested relief, to consider the broad context presented by the 
Petition and delineate specific procedures to be followed before a trial court may close proceedings in a criminal case. 
C. Temporary Remand 
On January 2, 2014, this court issued an order 
temporarily remanding the case to the circuit court (Order of Remand). The Order of Remand directed that the Petitioners file 
a request with the circuit court seeking access to the sealed 
portions of the transcript. The Order of Remand also allowed 
-9 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
                     
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for filing of memoranda by the parties, and directed the circuit 
court to hold a hearing and file a written ruling.4 
The Petitioners filed a Motion to Unseal Sealed 
Portions of Transcript of August 26, 2013 Proceedings (Motion to 
Unseal) on January 13, 2014. The State filed its response to 
the Motion to Unseal on January 21, 2014, and the Petitioners 
timely filed a reply. On January 29, 2014, Deedy filed a 
statement of no opposition to the Motion to Unseal. 
On February 10, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing 
on the Motion to Unseal. 
During the hearing, the parties agreed 
that Phoenix Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. Dist. Court for Dist. of 
Arizona was the proper test to be applied in determining whether the sealing of court records is warranted.
5 The State requested 
that, in the event the circuit court released the transcript, the jurors’ names be redacted because of a “chilling affect 
(sic) on picking a new jury.” The Petitioners did not object to 
4 The Order of Remand also provided that the record in this case be
supplemented with the transcript of the above- ordered hearing and with all 
documents filed in the circuit court in association with the remand. The 
Petitioners were ordered to supplement the record in this case with a 
transcript of the August 26, 2013 proceedings, “sealed” or “unsealed” as
ordered by the circuit court. Upon return of the case to this court, all 
parties were provided with the option to file supplemental briefs.  The Order 
of Remand specified a timeline for each action. 
In Phoenix Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. Dist. Court for Dist. of 
Arizona, the district court’ s decision to deny media access to a transcript
of a closed hearing was reviewed by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 156 
F.3d 940, 946- 47 (9th Cir. 1998).  The Ninth Circuit held that that a court 
must complete procedural and substantive requirements before closing a 
hearing and that a transcript of the closed hearing must be released when the 
competing interests precipitating hearing closure are no longer viable. 
-10 ­5  
 
 
  
   
  
                     
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“that singular request,” but entered a blanket objection “to the 
deletion[] of anything else without a full hearing, an 
opportunity to argue, and full findings and conclusions.” The 
circuit court indicated that it had not yet made a decision 
whether to release the transcript, but it would file a written 
ruling within the 21-day deadline allowed by the Order of 
Remand. 
On February 24, 2014, the circuit court issued an 
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion to Unseal Sealed Portions of Transcript of August 26, 2013 Proceedings 
(Partial Order to Unseal).
6 The Partial Order to Unseal 
acknowledged that “the news media have a qualified right of access to judicial proceedings and records.” Further, the order 
noted that “[a] transcript of any proceedings that have been 
closed . . . may be released when the danger of prejudice has 
passed and the factors militating in favor of closure no longer 
exist.” 
The Partial Order to Unseal explained the circuit 
court’s actions, indicating the circuit court’s “belief that necessary discussions between the [circuit court] and counsel, 
on the one hand, and deliberating jurors, on the other, 
6 The Partial Order to Unseal stated “[t]he Court takes judicial 
notice of the sealed portions of the transcript of the August 26, 2013,
proceedings.” 
-11 ­ 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
traditionally and historically have been closed to the 
public[.]” 
During these necessarily narrowly tailored discussions, the
[circuit court] must avoid intruding upon or inquiring into
the jury’ s deliberations, and must avoid exposing the 
individual jurors to anything that may in any way
improperly influence their continuing decision- making 
processes. 
The circuit court noted that requiring a juror to answer 
questions in front of family and friends of the Defendant, the 
alleged victim, and the news media could “expose a juror to pressure and matters which are not part of the evidence to be 
considered, but it also could hamper the [circuit court’s] 
search for candid answers from that juror.” The circuit court 
noted that privacy and security of the jurors and the importance 
of preserving an impartial jury to ensure a fair trial on behalf 
of both a defendant and the State, as the specific reasons 
supporting the closure: 
For all of these reasons, in order to preserve a juror’ s 
privacy and security and the integrity of a fair and 
impartial jury decision based solely upon the trial
evidence and the law provided by the Court, and to protect
the right of both parties to a fair trial and verdict,
public access would not play a significant positive role in
the functioning of this process. 
Therefore, the circuit court concluded that because “public 
access would not play a significant positive role,” the closure 
of the courtroom and denial of public access to the transcript 
of the closed proceedings was warranted. 
-12 ­ 
 
 
  
   The Partial Order to Unseal also recognized that the 
exigency of the situation had passed and that sealing the 
transcript was no longer required. 
  
 
 
The Partial Order to Unseal released the partially unsealed 
transcript, noting that the identities of the jurors had been 
redacted. 
 
                       The unsealed transcript indicates that on August 26, 
2013, during the fifth day of jury deliberations, the circuit 
court, in five separate instances, conducted court proceedings 
that were not open to the public to investigate potential juror 
misconduct.8 The first proceeding took place in the judge’s 
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Now that the initial jury has been discharged, a
substantial part of the [circuit court ’s] . . . concerns no 
longer apply. 
D. The Unsealed Transcript7 
7 The portions of the transcript that were unsealed by the Partial
Order to Unseal were filed with this court on March 11, 2014, along with a
copy of the Partial Order to Unseal and the related motion, response, and
reply. 
8 “Juror misconduct” does not necessarily mean a juror’ s bad faith 
or malicious motive, but means a violation of, or departure from, an
established rule or procedure for production of a valid verdict. Loving v.
Baker’s Supermarkets, Inc., 238 Neb. 727, 732 (1991).  In Hawaiʻ i, juror
misconduct may include bias, prejudice, passion, or misunderstanding of the
charge of the court on the part of the jury. HRS § 635-56 (1993). 
This court has described juror misconduct as any action related
to the jury that may result in a denial of a defendant’s Sixth A
mendment 
right to a fair trial. 
The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution guarantee
the criminally accused a fair trial by an impartial jury.
If any juror was not impartial, a new trial must be granted. However, not all juror misconduct necessarily
dictates the granting of a new trial. A new trial will not 
(continued. . .) 
-13 ­ 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
                                                                  
  
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
chambers from 10:35 to 10:48 a.m. The circuit court informed 
counsel that the jury foreperson had approached her law clerk 
with a concern regarding another juror. The court informed the 
parties that the jury foreperson had asked Judge Ahn’s law 
clerk, “‘What do we do if we feel one of the jurors is a friend 
of one of the sides?’” The circuit court and the parties 
discussed how to respond to the foreperson’s query.9 The court 
indicated that it would bring the foreperson into the courtroom 
to 
ask [the foreperson] whether he said something to [the law 
clerk] this morning and ask him what it was that he asked, 
let him tell us what his question was, then I’ m going to -­
I’m going to tell him I cannot -- I don’t want to know 
about your deliberation process or where -- what the jury 
is thinking about now, or has been thinking about, but can
you tell me what you meant.10  
(Footnote added). The court also indicated that it would 
instruct the foreperson not to discuss the questioning with his 
fellow jurors. 
8(. . .continued)  
be granted if it can be shown that the jury could not have been
influenced by the alleged misconduct. State v. Kim, 103 Hawaiʻ i 285,
290
-91, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205-06 (2003) (internal citations and quotations 
removed). 
9 The partially- redacted unsealed transcript does not refer to the 
foreperson by name but does refer to the foreperson using male pronouns. 
10 The court decided against questioning the foreperson in chambers
because the close proximity of the juror to the Defendant could be
“intimidating,” but had earlier indicated that it did not have a preference 
whether the questioning took place in court or in chambers. Judge Ahn stated 
“I don’t care, if you both agree that this [i.e. the courtroom] may be a 
better setting, that’ s fine with me.” 
-14 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The circuit court had prepared the courtroom for 
closure: “We’ve already kind of put paper over the main doors in 
the courtroom and the courtroom is locked, and I’ve contacted 
public relations with the judiciary and I think she’s going to 
tell the media that they can petition for a writ.11 The court 
indicated its awareness that the closure was adverse to the interests of the news media, stating “they know that they can— 
they’re--you know, their relief is through a petition.” 
This closed proceeding took place in the courtroom 
from 10:49 to 11:11 a.m. During this session, the circuit court, the State, and defense counsel questioned the foreperson. 
The foreperson indicated that he was not sure how to bring his 
concern to the court’s attention. 
I just -- I wanted to know if –- like if we -- like if -­
say if I think somebody might be, like, a friend of a 
friend of the -- one of the sides, if, you know, like what 
am I -- am I supposed to say something?  Am I supposed to
bring it up in there? 
The court then asked why the foreperson had asked that question. 
The foreperson related that: 
when we were --  you know, we always line up in the 
hallways, so one day I seen somebody shake somebody’ s hand 
like they --  they knew them, you know, like, hey, how’ s it, 
blah-blah-blah.  And then --  and then I noticed in the 
courtroom that they were sitting on one side.  And then 
when I went to lunch . . . . and I noticed that day that
that individual was sitting with that --  with the family, 
the person that shook the hand of the juror was --  was 
eating lunch with the family.  
11 The record does not indicate whether any media organizations were
informed of the closure by judiciary public relations personnel. 
-15 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court then allowed counsel to question the 
foreperson. Defense counsel attempted to ask whether the 
foreperson had “any sense about whether the juror disclosed any 
of these knowledges (sic) of the family or friends of the 
family?” The question was objected to by the State. 
The court did not rule on the objection, but in 
response to the State’s objection, the foreperson appears to 
have volunteered that he took the person with whom the juror shook hands to be a “friend of a friend.” 
That’s how I took it. I mean, it -- you know what I mean, 
I -- I didn’ t --you know, I didn’ t see him shake hands 
with any of the family of either side or -- you know what I 
mean, it was a -- you know, I just noticed that he shook 
hands with one person, and it looked like that person was
friends of a family. 
The foreperson was excused with instructions not to discuss what 
had just occurred with any other juror. After counsel debated 
the import of the foreperson’s observation, the foreperson was brought back into the courtroom and asked to identify the juror 
that shook hands with the third party. 
The identified juror was then brought to the courtroom 
and was asked by Judge Ahn, “[D]o you think you can be fair to 
both sides?” The juror answered “Yes,” and Judge Ahn confirmed 
“So you can be fair to both the government and the defense?” 
The juror again answered affirmatively. No other questions were 
asked. After the juror had exited, defense counsel indicated 
-16 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the questioning of the juror was insufficient. The circuit 
court rejected defense counsel’s concerns. 
During the third proceeding, from 1:05 to 1:18 p.m., 
the circuit court, defense counsel and the State held a 
conference in Judge Ahn’s chambers regarding the juror’s 
handshake. Defense counsel asked the court to further question 
the juror because of concerns that the jury would be deadlocked 
11-1. “[I]f there, in fact, is going to be a deadlock, the [circuit court] will have to determine whether there is manifest 
necessity for the dismissal of the juror because they’re unable 
to reach a verdict.” Defense counsel suggested that the circuit 
court needed to get further answers. 
[W]e don’ t know enough about [the juror] to have a 
confident answer to the question about whether or not [the 
juror] had some undisclosed contact with people close to 
one side or the other that the Court should’ ve known about, 
much the way it inquired of when he promptly andresponsibly raised his concern during the trial. 
The State suggested that the handshake was likely innocuous. 
Defense counsel replied that 
shaking the hand of a juror while the juror’ s waiting in 
line is not something we see every day, and further inquiry
to make sure that we have truly a fair and impartial juror,
particularly in light of the timing that the jurors
reported their deadlock . . . suggests the basis for the 
[circuit court] to inquire further. It may turn out to be
completely innocuous, in which case the record will reflectthat, or it may turn out to be more[.]  
At the end of this session in chambers, the court did not 
indicate that it would take any specific action. 
-17 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
During the fourth proceeding, counsel and the circuit 
court had a brief meeting at the bench. Defense counsel again 
urged the court to make a further investigation into the 
circumstances of the handshake. Defense counsel also suggested 
that if the issue was not resolved and the juror was proved not 
to be fair and impartial, it would present “potential double 
jeopardy problems of the first order.” The State agreed, asking 
the court to further question the juror. Counsel then debated the scope of the additional questioning of the juror, and the 
court decided to clear the courtroom. 
In this fifth proceeding, the circuit court closed the 
courtroom and further questioned the juror that shook hands with 
the third party. The court asked the juror if he remembered 
shaking hands with anyone while lined up with the jury, and the 
juror indicated that he did. The juror stated that the person 
with whom he shook hands was “just one guy I used to work with 
. . . . I think like almost seven years ago.” The juror indicated that the handshake did not “do anything to affect the 
case or my judgment.” The juror was not directly asked if the 
person with whom he shook hands was identified with the victim 
or the victim’s family, but the juror was asked a question that 
seemed to imply a relationship between the person with whom he 
shook hands and with somebody in the case. The question was 
phrased as follows: 
-18 ­ 
 
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Circuit court]  Okay.  And after that one incident, did 
you -- did you see this [redacted] again?  
 
[Juror] I think he was here one other time, but I never
talked to him.  
 
The juror was then excused to return to the jury. The State 
noted that it was satisfied that under the Furutani standard, 
the juror’s conduct did not rise to the level of substantial 
prejudice.12 Defense counsel disagreed and took the position 
that “more searching and further questioning should have been pursued and both sides should have had an opportunity to question [redacted] in a voir dire manner.” The record of the 
five proceedings was then sealed. 
  
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Circuit court] Okay.  And have you had any 
--I just want 
to ask this as a general question. Have you had any other
contacts or -- that -- with anyone who may be -- you think 
may be associated with anybody in this case or any friendsor whatever have you? 
[Juror] No, that was pretty much the only person that I’ ve 
seen, ‘cause then from when I leave court here, I usually 
go straight to my [redacted]’ s house and then either pick 
[redacted] up from work or go straight home. [Circuit court]  Okay.
  
[Juror] So that was pretty much the only time, besides  if 

we go out eat or something, but besides me actually talking
to anybody or something, that was the only person.
  
The unsealed transcript does not indicate any 
objection by Deedy to the five court proceedings not being open 
12 In State v. Furutani, this court held that a defendant bears the
initial burden of making a prima facie showing of a deprivation of the right
to a fair trial that could substantially prejudice the defendant, but once a
rebuttable presumption of prejudice has been raised, the burden of proving
harmlessness is upon the prosecution. 76 Hawaiʻ i 172, 181, 873 P.2d 51, 60
(1994). 
-19 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to the public or the sealing of the transcript of the 
proceedings. 
E. Supplemental Briefing 
The respondent parties did not file a supplemental 
brief. 
The Petitioners timely filed a Supplemental Brief In 
Support of Petition for Writ of Prohibition and Writ of Mandamus on March 31, 2014. In the Supplemental Brief, the Petitioners argue that despite the fact the circuit court unsealed the 
transcript, “compelling reasons still exist for granting the 
Petition.” The Petitioners assert that the unsealed August 26, 
2013 transcript reveals that “there is no indication that any 
part of the proceeding . . . should have been performed in 
camera or that the transcript ever should have been sealed.” 
The Petitioners contend that a “sealing order may only be 
entered upon a showing of ‘extraordinary need’ and, furthermore, 
must be ‘narrowly tailored’ . . . .” The Petitioners state that in the present case, “there is no indication of any need, let 
alone extraordinary need, for closing the proceedings and 
sealing the transcripts.” The Petitioners assert that: 
the issue at question— whether a single juror had passing 
contact with a third party member of the public who was
never confirmed to be connected to any witness or party—proved to be a trivial one that [the circuit court]
apparently concluded would not substantially prejudice the
jury deliberations. 
-20 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Therefore, the Petitioners conclude that there “was no 
extraordinary need to seal the transcript of those proceedings.” 
The Petitioners contend that the circuit court was required but 
failed to consider alternatives to closure of the courtroom and 
sealing the transcript such as redacting jurors’ names and other 
identifying features, which the Petitioners note that the court 
ultimately did. Lastly, the Petitioners maintain that any 
legitimate reason to close the courtroom and seal the transcript “vanished as soon as the Deedy trial concluded and the jurors’ 
duty ended.” 
The Petitioners additionally contend that the release 
of the transcript by the circuit court did not rectify the 
underlying harm to the Petitioners. The Petitioners identify 
the harms as: “the failure of [the circuit court] to provide the 
Petitioners with notice, an opportunity to be heard, and a 
detailed explanation of the necessity of closing the courtroom 
before conducting five closed proceedings and sealing the related portions of the transcript.” The Petitioners conclude 
that “[t]hose harms cannot be remedied by tardy release of the 
transcript, and this Court can and should exercise its mandamus 
and prohibitory powers to order [the circuit court] to refrain 
from future First Amendment violations.” 
-21 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
                     
      
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
II. Discussion 
Our analysis begins with the rulings of the United 
States Supreme Court that articulate a qualified public right of 
access to trial proceedings under the First Amendment. Second, 
we look to Hawaiʻ i law to determine the extent to which our 
Constitution and history pronounce similar rights of public 
access to courtrooms. Third, we examine the minimum procedures 
that must be observed in order to protect the public’s qualified 
right of access. We then turn to the two concerns precipitated 
in the current case: whether a public right of access applies to 
midtrial examination of jurors regarding allegations of 
misconduct, and under what circumstances the public has a right of access to a transcript of a closed proceeding. As we address 
each concern, we apply the principles elucidated to protect the 
right of access of the public to the proceedings that took place 
on August 26, 2013.
13 
13 Although we ultimately dismiss the writ of prohibition and deny
the writ of mandamus, this court has recognized an exception to mootness in 
cases involving questions that affect the public interest and are capable of 
repetition but evade review. Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water
Supply, 99 Hawaiʻ i 191, 196, 53 P.3d 799, 804 (2002). “Among the criteria
considered in determining the existence of the requisite degree of public
interest are the public or private nature of the question presented, the
desirability of an authoritative determination for the future guidance ofpublic officers, and the likelihood of future recurrence of the question.”
Id. at 196-97, 53 P.3d at 804- 05.  The phrase “capable of repetition, yet
evading review” means that a case will not be moot “where . . . the passage
of time would prevent any single plaintiff from remaining subject to the
restriction complained of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit.”Id.; see  Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia, 448 U.S. 555, 563 (1980) 
(holding that, “more often than not” criminal trials will be of sufficientlyshort duration that a closure order will evade review). Here, the likely 
(continued. . .) 
-22 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
                                                                  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A. 
“Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press . . . .” U.S. Const. amend 
I. “The right to attend criminal trials is implicit in the 
guarantees of the first amendment.”14 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. 
v. Virginia, 448 U.S. 555, 580 (1980). “Of course, this right 
of access to criminal trials is not explicitly mentioned . . . 
in the First Amendment.” Globe Newspaper Co. v. Superior Court 
for Norfolk Cnty.
, 457 U.S. 596, 604 (1982). However, the First 
Amendment is “broad enough to encompass those rights that, while not unambiguously enumerated in the very terms of the Amendment, 
are nonetheless necessary to the enjoyment of other First 
Amendment rights.” Id. 
The Supreme Court has noted that this qualified right 
of access is based upon the “two complementary considerations” 
of “logic and experience.” Press-Enter. Co. v. Superior Court 
13(. . .continued)  
evasion of full review and the public interest criteria of the public nature 
of the issue, the likelihood of recurrence, and the desirability of an 
authoritative determination are demonstrably evident.  Therefore, the instant
case falls within the exception to the mootness doctrine and we address themerits of the Petitioners’ arguments. 
14 “[M]any of the advantages of public criminal trials are equally
applicable in the civil trial context.” Gannett Co., Inc. v. DePasquale, 443
U.S. 368, 387 n.15 (1979). “For many centuries, both civil and criminal
trials have traditionally been open to the public . . . . While the operation
of the judicial process in civil cases is often of interest only to the
parties in the litigation, this is not always the case. . . . Thus, in somecivil cases the public interest in access, and the salutary effect of
publicity, may be as strong as, or stronger than, in most criminal cases.”
Id. 
-23 ­ 
 
 
of Cal. for Riverside Cnty., 478 U.S. 1, 8 (1986) (Press-
Enterprise II
); Globe Newspaper Co., 457 U.S. at 606. Under the 
“experience” consideration, a right of the public to attend trials relies on “whether the place and process have 
historically been open to the press and general public” because 
a “‘tradition of accessibility implies the favorable judgment of 
experience[.]’” Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 8 (quoting 
Richmond Newspapers, 448 U.S. at 589 (Brennan, J., concurring). 
Under the “logic” consideration, the right of the public to 
attend a criminal proceeding relies on whether “public access 
plays a significant positive role in the functioning of the 
particular process in question.” Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. 
at 8. 
  
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The value of openness lies in the fact that people not
actually attending trials can have confidence that
standards of fairness are being observed; the sure
knowledge that anyone is free to attend gives assurance
that established procedures are being followed and thatdeviations will become known. 
Press-Enter. Co. v. Superior Court of Cal., Riverside Cnty., 464 
U.S.
 501, 508 (1984) ( Press-Enterprise I ), (citing Richmond 
Newspapers, 448 U.S. at 569-71). If a criminal proceeding fulfills the logic and experience considerations, a qualified 
First Amendment right of access attaches to that proceeding. 
The qualified First Amendment right of access has been 
held by the Supreme Court to attach to criminal trials during 
the evidence and testimony-taking phase, 
Richmond Newspapers, 
-24 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
448 U.S. at 580; criminal trials involving minor victims, Globe 
Newspaper Co., 457 U.S. at 606; voir dire of potential jurors, 
Press-Enterprise I, 464 U.S. 501, 505 (1984); and the extensive 
preliminary hearings of the type utilized in California. Press-
Enterprise II , 478 U.S. at 10. 
B. 
Similar to the federal constitution, the Hawai
ʻi 
Constitution provides that “[n]o law shall be enacted . . . 
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press[.]” Haw. Const. 
art. I, § 4. “In interpreting and applying article I, section 4 
of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution, this court considers the case law 
established under the [F]irst [A]mendment to the United States 
Constitution.” In re Haw. Gov’t Employees Ass’n, AFSCME, Local  
152, AFL-CIO, 116 Hawaiʻ i 73, 84, 170 P.3d 324, 335 (2007).  
“Effectively, the language of federal and Hawaiʻ i constitutional 
free speech provisions is identical” but “this court may find 
that the Hawaiʻ i Constitution affords greater free speech 
protection than its federal counterpart.” Crosby v. State Dep’t 
of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawaiʻ i 332, 340 n.9, 876 P.2d 1300 n.9 
(1994), State v. Rodrigues, 128 Hawaiʻ i 200, 203 n.8, 286 P.3d 
809, 812 n.8 (2012). Therefore, article I, section 4 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution encompasses at least as much protection of 
the right of the public to access criminal trials as has been 
-25 ­ 
 
 
  
   
                     
   
 
 
   
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
found by the United States Supreme Court in the First Amendment 
to the United States Constitution. 
Hawaiʻi’s courts have a long tradition of accessibility 
by the public; the legal framework utilized by the ali i 
transitioned from the kapu system to the use of public trials by 
jury during the 1820s.15 Sally Engle Merry, Colonizing Hawaiʻ i: 
The Cultural Power of Law 70 (2000). Queen Liliʻ uo kalani 
reported that during her trial by a military tribunal in 
February 1895 the courtroom was “crowded with curious 
spectators.” Liliuokalani, Hawaiʻ i’s Story by Hawaiʻ i’s Queen 
279 (1990). The Queen’s trial was “open and well attended, and 
was covered in the daily press.” Jon M. Van Dyke & Paula 
Henderson, The Trial of Lili
ʻuokalani, in Trial of a Queen: 1895 
Military Tribunal (Hawaiʻ i State Judiciary 1996).16 Similarly, 
the “Massie” case, a 1932 high profile murder case that made 
headlines across the country was attended by a "standing-room­
only crowd of spectators.” David Stannard, The Massie case: 
Injustice and Courage, The Honolulu Advertiser.com (Oct. 14, 
15 The kapu system was an unwritten “traditional code consisting of
regulations promulgated by former kings or followed by general consent” that
“regulated relations between [the commoners] and the aliʻ i.” Sally Engle
Merry, Colonizing Hawaiʻ i: The Cultural Power of Law  55 (2000).  “Aliʻ i” means 
a chief, chiefess, ruler, monarch, or ki ng.  Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. 
Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 20 (1986). “Kapu” means a taboo or prohibition.
Id. at 
132. 
16 Queen Liliʻ uokalani’s trial is reflective of a tradition of public 
proceedings even though as a military tribunal, it is not a part of the
tradition of this court. 
-26 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2001), http:// the.honoluluadvertiser.com/article/2001/Oct/14/ 
op/op03a.html (last visited May 1, 2014). 
This court has recognized a tradition of public 
access, declaring it “firmly embedded in our system of 
jurisprudence” as a “general policy of open trials.” Gannett 
Pac. Corp. v. Richardson , 59 Haw. 224, 228, 580 P.2d 49, 54 
(1978). 
Open courts are a fundamental component of our system 
of law: “[c]ourts are established for the judicial 
administration of justice. They are open to the public . . . . 
The fact that they are open serves as a safeguard of the integrity of our courts.” State v. Hashimoto, 47 Haw. 185, 200, 
389 P.2d 146, 155 (1963). “The corrective influence of public attendance at trials for crime [i]s . . . important to the 
liberty of the people.” Territory v. Scharsch, 25 Haw. 429, 436 
(1920). “The words ‘public trial’ are self-explanatory.” Hashimoto, 47 Haw. at 200, 389 P.2d at 155. “[A] public trial 
is a trial at which the public is free to attend.” Scharsch, 25 
Haw. at 436. 
In 
Gannett Pac. Corp. , we addressed a petition by a 
local newspaper to prevent the closure of a preliminary hearing 
in a criminal trial upon a motion by the defendant. The trial 
court had granted the defendant’s motion to close the 
preliminary hearing due to concerns regarding the defendant’s 
Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial. Id.
 at 236, 580 P.2d at 
-27 ­ 
 
 
  
   Gannett Pac. Corp. explicitly recognized a qualified 
right of access to criminal trial proceedings. 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
52. This court prohibited the trial court from closing the 
hearing. Id. at 226, 580 P.2d at 52. 
Whether and to what extent preliminary hearings may be
closed to the public is a question of grave import, for it
involves not only the right of the accused to be tried byan impartial jury, but it also has a vital relevancy to the
right of the public to attend and to be present at judicial
proceedings.  
Id. at 227, 580 P.2d at 53 (emphasis added). “There will be 
situations, however, where this right of the public to know must 
yield to the overriding requirements of due process.” Id. at 
230, 580 P.2d at 55. 
On the same day that Gannett Pac. Corp.  was decided, 
this court also decided 
Honolulu Advertiser, Inc. v. Takao, 59 
Haw. 237, 580 P.2d 58 (1978). The Takao
 case referred to the 
decision in  Gannett Pac. Corp.  and its description of the public 
right of access. “We are also not here concerned with the public’s right to be present and to attend judicial proceedings 
as we were in [Gannett Pac. Corp.].” Takao, 59 Haw. at 238, 580 
P.2d at 60. “In [Gannett Pac. Corp.], we held that except under certain rare and compelling circumstances, courtroom proceedings 
shall be open to the public.” Id. (emphasis added). 
The question of whether the First Amendment was 
implicated in the public right of access was not decided by 
Gannett Pac. Corp. This court only responded to the question of 
-28 ­ 
 
 
whether the press had a unique right of access to public trials, 
above and beyond that of the public. The court concluded that 
under the circumstances there was “no such denial” of the “First 
Amendment right of freedom of the press” because the “closure 
[of the preliminary hearing] was directed at the public at large 
and was not limited to the representatives of the news media.” 
Gannett Pac. Corp.
, 59 Haw. at 229, 580 P.2d at 54 (emphasis 
added). “The right of media representatives to be present 
[during court proceedings] is derived from their status as 
members of the general public . . . they occupy no privileged 
position vis-a-vis the general public.” Gannett Pac. Corp., 59 
Haw. at 229-30, 580 P.2d at 54-55. 
  
   
                     
    
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Therefore, Gannett Pac. Corp.’s holding regarding a 
right of access to criminal trials as derived from the First Amendment is limited to a determination that the press does not 
have a unique First Amendment right of access beyond that held 
by the general public.
17 However, to the extent that Gannett 
17 The court in Gannett Pac. Corp. based its finding of “no . . . 
denial” of a First Amendment right on the priority of the Sixth Amendment
right to a fair trial by an impartial jury over the general policy of
openness. Gannett Pac
.  Corp., 59 Haw. at 232, 580 P.2d at 56 (“The right to 
trial by an impartial jury is fundamental.”). The court found the issue of 
closure was best left to the discretion of the court to balance the defendant’ s right to a fair trial with “this jurisdiction’ s policy of 
openness in judicial proceedings.” Id. at 233, 580 P.2d at 56- 57.  “The 
fundamentals of a fair trial ought to require no less than that highly
prejudicial information, which would not be admissible at trial, should be 
kept, if possible, from the eyes and ears of prospective jurors.” Id. This 
court found that in order to close a courtroom, the presiding judge must find 
that there is a “substantial likelihood that an open hearing . . . would
interfere with the defendant 
’s right to a fair trial by an impartial jury.”
(continued. . .) 
-29 ­ 
 
 
  
  
                       
17(. . .continued)                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Pac. Corp. declined to expressly recognize the public’s right of 
access in terms of the protection of the First Amendment, this 
restricted application has been superseded by the decisions of 
the United States Supreme Court. We have already noted the 
significant tradition in Hawaiʻ i of maintaining open court 
proceedings. Furthermore, the benefits identified by the 
Supreme Court under the “logic” prong as to the significant 
positive role played by public access is equally applicable in 
Hawaiʻi. See Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 8; Press-
Enterprise I, 464 U.S. at 508. Therefore, we hold that article 1, section 4 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides the public with 
a qualified right of access to observe court proceedings in 
criminal trials.
18 
Id.  at 233, 580 P.2d at 56- 57 (emphasis added).  To determine whether the 
likelihood was substantial 
the district judge shall consider [1] the nature of the
evidence sought to be presented; [2] the probability of
such information reaching potential jurors; [3] the likely
prejudicial impact of this information upon prospectiveveniremen; and [4] the availability and efficacy of
alternative means to neutralize the effect of such 
disclosures. 
Id. at 233-34, 580 P.2d at 57.  This court then found that “[j]udged by the
standards we have established, however, there was an insufficient basis for
[the trial court
’s] closure order.”  Id. at 235, 580 P.2d at 58. 
18 “[T]he reasons underlying openness in the criminal context, as 
enunciated in [ Gannett Pac. Corp. ], are equally compelling in the civil 
context.” In re Estate of Campbell, 106 Hawaiʻ i 453, 462, 106 P.3d 1096, 1105
(2005). 
-30 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
C. 
“Although the [First Amendment] right of access to 
criminal trials is of constitutional stature, it is not 
absolute.” Globe Newspaper Co. , 457 U.S. at 606. Exceptions to 
the general rule presuming openness of criminal trials must be limited and to preserve compelling interests. “Closed 
proceedings, although not absolutely precluded, must be rare and 
only for cause shown that outweighs the value of openness.” Press-Enterprise I, 464 U.S. at 501. “[T]he circumstances under 
which the press and public can be barred from a criminal trial 
are limited; the State’s justification in denying access must be 
a weighty one.” Globe Newspaper Co., 457 U.S. at 606. 
Therefore, the qualified right of public access 
provided by the First Amendment and article 1, section 4 can be 
overcome “only by an 
overriding interest  based on findings that 
closure is essential to preserve higher values and is narrowly 
tailored
 to serve that interest.” Press-Enterprise I , 464 U.S. 
at 510 (emphasis added); Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 9-10; 
see also Globe Newspaper Co., 457 U.S. at 606-07 (“Where . . . 
the State attempts to deny the right of access in order to 
inhibit the disclosure of sensitive information, it must be 
shown that the denial is necessitated by a compelling 
governmental interest, and is narrowly tailored to serve that 
interest”). The trial court must articulate the interest the 
-31 ­ 
 
 
closure protects, “along with findings specific enough that a 
reviewing court can determine whether the closure order was 
properly entered.” Press-Enterprise I , 464 U.S. at 510; Press-
Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 10. 
  
   
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Additionally, if the court is contemplating whether 
closure of the courtroom is necessary, it must provide a reasonable opportunity for the public to object. 
“[T]he press 
and the general public must be given an opportunity to be heard 
on the question of their exclusion.” Globe Newspaper Co. , 457 
U.S.
 at 609 n.25 (citing Gannett Co. , 443 U.S. at 401 (Powell, 
J., concurring)). The requirement of notice continues to apply 
when the compelling interest asserted is protection of the 
defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial by an 
impartial jury. United States v. Brooklier, 685 F.2d 1162, 1168 
(9th Cir. 1982); see also ABC, Inc. v. Stewart, 360 F.3d 90, 95 
(2d Cir. 2004) (noting that no notice had been provided before 
closure of voir dire in jury selection); In re S.C. Press Ass’n, 946 F.2d 1037, 1040 (4th Cir. 1991). 
The United States Supreme Court has not explicated a 
standard for notice. 
However, individual notice may be 
practicable under certain circumstances. 
Without adopting an inflexible rule, we believe that where
a closure motion is not filed of record or made in open
court, and when, as here, the court has been made aware of 
the desire of specific members of the public to be present
,
reasonable steps should be taken to afford such persons an 
-32 ­ 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  If objections are made by those “actually present,” 
the trial proceedings should be conducted to allow those 
objecting to removal to be heard before a closure order is 
entered. United States v. Raffoul , 826 F.2d 218, 226 (3d Cir. 
1987). Further, the courtroom shall not be closed except upon 
the court’s order. Id. Written motions for closure should be 
docketed immediately. Id. Motions for closure made outside the 
public’s hearing should be renewed in open court before being 
acted upon. Id. 
                     
   
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opportunity to submit their views to the court before
exclusion is accomplished. 19 
United States v. Brooklier, 685 F.2d 1162, 1168 (9th Cir. 1982) 
(footnote added).20 
19 To the extent practicable, a reasonable attempt should be made to 
notify entities or persons who have requested “Extended Coverage” of a case.
Extended Coverage means any recording or broadcasting of proceedings throughthe use of television, radio, photographic, or recording equipment by the
media or on behalf of educational institutions. Rules of the Supreme Court
of the State of Hawaiʻ i (RSCH), Rule 5.1(c).  Any person may request the court
to allow Extended Coverage.  RSCH Rule 5.1(e). That rule designates that
“[w]hen more than one media representative requests extended coverage . . .,
the media collectively shall designate one representative to work with the
coordinator, ” which may facilitate providing notice when contemplating 
closure. RSCH Rule 5.1(e)(5). 
20 But  see  Application of The Herald Co., 734 F.2d 93, 103 (2d Cir. 
1984) (noting Brooklier, but holding that general public notice suffices to 
afford an adequate opportunity to challenge a courtroom closure); 
Crowe v.
Cnty. of San Diego, 210 F. Supp. 2d 1189, 1191 (S.D. Cal. 2002) (notingBrooklier, but declining to provide special notice to the press because the 
court could see no reason why certain media organizations deserved special
notice and docket entry was reasonable); NBC Subsidiary (KNBC- TV), Inc. v. 
Superior Court, 20 Cal. 4th 1178, 1217, 980 P.2d 337, 364- 65 (1999) (noting 
Brooklier, but holding that adequate notice of the contemplated closure is 
provided if the trial judge announces in open court that he or she plans to 
hold or to consider holding a proceeding in closed session or when a motion
seeking closure is made in a written filing that is publicly docketed
reasonably in advance of a determination hearing). 
-33 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The requirements that must be satisfied by a court in 
order to overcome the qualified right of the public to access 
criminal trials may be divided into procedural and substantive 
elements. Oregonian Pub. Co. v. U.S. Dist. Court for Dist. of 
Or., 920 F.2d 1462, 1466 (9th Cir. 1990). The “procedural prerequisites to entry of an order closing a criminal proceeding 
to the public [are] (1) those excluded from the proceeding must 
be afforded a reasonable opportunity to state their objections; and (2) the reasons supporting closure must be articulated in 
findings.” Brooklier, 685 F.2d at 1167-68. The substantive 
reasons that must be found and included in the findings are: “(1) [the] closure serves a compelling interest; (2) there is a 
substantial probability that, in the absence of closure, this 
compelling interest would be harmed; and (3) there are no 
alternatives to closure that would adequately protect the 
compelling interest.” Oregonian Pub., 920 F.2d at 1466 (citing 
Press–Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 13–14). 
The procedural and substantive safeguards of the 
public’s right of access “are not mere punctilios, to be 
observed when convenient.” 
Phoenix Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. 
Dist. Court for Dist. of Ariz., 156 F.3d 940, 951 (9th Cir. 1998). Those safeguards 
provide the essential, indeed only, means by which the
public’s voice can be heard.  All too often, parties to the
litigation are either indifferent or antipathetic todisclosure requests. This is to be expected: it is not 
-34 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
their charge to represent the rights of others. However,balancing interests cannot be performed in a vacuum.  
Thus,
providing  the public notice and an opportunity to be heard 
ensures that the trial court will have a true opportunity
to weigh the legitimate concerns of all those affected by a
closure decision. Similarly, entry of specific findingsallows fair assessment of the trial judge’ s reasoning by 
the public and the appellate courts, enhancing trust in thejudicial process and minimizing fear that justice is being
administered clandestinely.  
Id. (emphasis added). The procedural protections of the First 
Amendment and article 1, section 4 right of access to criminal 
procedures are critical to inform the affected party, i.e. the 
public, that their rights are in imminent danger. 
Therefore, 
the standards promulgated by the United States Supreme Court place the responsibility on the trial court to provide notice 
that a compelling interest may necessitate closure of a 
proceeding, and afford an opportunity for the public to be 
heard. Requiring specific findings on the record enables the 
trial court to address each element necessary for closure and 
allows an appellate court to review the reasoning of the trial judge to ensure that protection of the public right was 
adequately considered. 
D. 
In determining whether a constitutional right of 
access is applicable to a particular portion of a trial proceeding not yet decided by the Supreme Court, courts have 
examined whether experience and logic indicate that the proceeding should be open. 
Once such a right is implicated, any 
-35 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
closure or limitation of access must demonstrate compliance with 
the prescribed procedural and substantive requirements. We 
first address the midtrial examination of jurors, and second, 
the sealing of a transcript of closed proceedings. 
1. 
When the proceeding at question is, as in this case, 
the examination of jurors during a criminal trial in order to investigate potential juror misconduct, the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to an impartial jury may be implicated and may 
conflict with the right of access of the public. “In all 
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a 
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and 
district wherein the crime shall have been committed[.]” U.S. 
Const. Amend. VI. The Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides similar 
protection: “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall 
enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial 
jury of the district wherein the crime shall have been 
committed[.] Haw. Const. art. I, § 14. 
The conflict between the public’s right of access and 
the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial by an impartial jury arises because in contrast to the benefits of 
open trials, jury deliberations require privacy. It is a 
“cardinal principle that the deliberations of the jury shall 
remain private and secret[.]” United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 
-36 ­ 
 
 
  
   The purpose for providing secret deliberations is to 
ensure the impartiality of the jury. The Supreme Court “has 
long recognized that adverse publicity can endanger the ability 
of a defendant to receive a fair trial.” Gannett Co., 443 U.S. 
at 378. 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
725, 737 (1993). “[P]ublic policy demands that the sanctity of jury deliberations be vigorously guarded to ensure frankness and 
open discussion.” State v. Kim, 103 Hawaiʻ i 285, 292, 81 P.3d 
1200, 1207 (2003). 
Compelling governmental interest in the integrity of jury
deliberation requires that the privacy of such
deliberations and communications dealing with them be
preserved. Confidentiality is a shield against externalconsiderations entering into the deliberative process.  
Such a shield prevents undermining of the integrity of thejury system. Juries must be permitted to deliberate fully
and freely, unhampered by the pressures and extraneous
influences which could result from access by the press tothe deliberative process. 
United States v. Gurney , 558 F.2d 1202, 1210-11 (5th Cir. 1977) 
(emphasis added). 
The right to a trial by an impartial jury is 
fundamental. Gannett Pac. Corp., 59 Haw. at 232, 580 P.2d at 
56. Where a defendant’s right to an impartial jury may be 
compromised by the possibility of external interference with 
jury deliberations or juror misconduct, the court has a duty to 
act. 
Where the trial court determines that the juror misconduct
could substantially prejudice the defendant’ s right to a 
fair and impartial jury, a rebuttable presumption ofprejudice is raised and the court must investigate the 
-37 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
                     
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
totality of circumstances to determine if the misconduct
impacted the jury
’s impartiality.  
State v. Yamada , 108 Hawaiʻ i 474, 479, 122 P.3d 254, 259 (2005) 
(emphasis added). When a court investigates allegations of 
juror misconduct pursuant to its duty to protect a defendant’s 
right to an impartial jury, its actions constitute trial 
proceedings, and rights of public access under the First 
Amendment and article 1, section 4 may attach. See Richmond 
Newspapers, 448 U.S. at 580 (holding that the right to attend criminal trials is implicit in the guarantees of the First Amendment). Therefore, that right of public access to observe 
criminal trials is potentially in conflict with the policy of 
protecting the integrity of jury deliberations in furtherance of 
a defendant’s right to an impartial jury. Thus, we must examine 
if considerations of tradition and logic provide a qualified 
First Amendment right of public access to midtrial examination 
of jurors to investigate potential juror misconduct. 
a. 
There is no clear tradition of closing a courtroom in 
Hawai
ʻi to conduct midtrial examination of jurors in order to 
investigate juror misconduct. No Hawaiʻ i case has ever upheld 
the closure of a court proceeding during trial.21 Closure has 
21 But cf. State v. Swanson, 112 Hawaiʻ i 343, 355, 145 P.3d 886, 898
(App. 2006) (concluding that defendant’ s constitutional rights to a public 
trial were not implicated when the jury returned its verdict after normal
(continued. . .) 
-38 ­ 
 
 
  
                                                                   
 
 
    
  Waller  
 
 
 
 
at 48.  In  Ortiz,
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been invalidated based on various grounds. See Gannett Pac. 
Corp., 59 Haw. at 235, 580 P.2d at 58; State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawaiʻ i 
181, 981 P.2d 1127 (1999) (holding that when a defendant invokes 
his Sixth Amendment right to a public trial, the court may only 
close the courtroom under the strict test set forth in Waller v. 
Georgia
, 467 U.S. 39 (1984))22; In re Estate of Campbell, 106 
Hawaiʻi 453, 454, 106 P.3d 1096, 1097 (2005) (holding that a 
common law presumption of judicial openness accompanies probate proceedings that may be overcome only upon a showing of strong 
countervailing reasons that outweigh the public’s presumptive 
right of access to court proceedings and records). Furthermore, 
21(. . .continued)  
business hours, when the courthouse was closed to the public, because the
closure was too trivial to implicate the constitutional guarantees); Freitas 
v. Admin. Dir. of Courts
, 104 Hawaiʻ i 483, 486, 92 P.3d 993, 996 (2004)
(declining to extend First Amendment rights of access to administrative
hearings). 
22 In Waller, the Supreme Court considered the extent of the 
accused’ s Sixth Amendment rights at trial.  Waller, 469 U.S. at 44. 
states that “the right to an open trial may give way in certain cases toother rights or interests[.]” 
Id. at 45. 
Based on Press-Enterprise I , 
Waller articulated a four- part test: 
[1] the party seeking to close the hearing must advance an
overriding interest that is likely to be prejudiced, [2]
the closure must be no broader than necessary to protect
that interest, [3] the  trial court must consider reasonable 
alternatives to closing the proceeding, [4] and it must
make findings adequate to support the closure.  
Id. 
 this court addressed the necessary evaluation a court 
must apply when a defendant objects to closure of courtroom proceedings that
a court deems may be necessary to protect a defendant’ s Sixth Amendment 
rights. Ortiz  adopted Waller’s four-part test and applied it to determine 
whether the courtroom was properly closed to the defendant’s relatives and
girlfriend over the defendant’ s objection.  Ortiz, 91 Hawaiʻ i at 191, 981 P.2d 
at 1137. This court found that the trial court’ s actions had violated the 
defendant’ s right to a public trial.  Id.  at 193, 981 P.2d 1139. 
-39 ­ 
 
 
  
    
  
  
                     
 23  See  State v.  Ho,  131 Hawaiʻ i  59, 314 P.3d 849 (App. 2013); State 
v. Keohokapu,
ʻ 127 
Hawaiʻi  91, 95, 276 P.3d 660, 664 (2012); State v. Mark, 120 
Hawaii  499, 521, 210 P.3d 22, 44 (App. 2009); State v. Pauline, 100 Hawaiʻ i  
356, 369, 60 P.3d 306, 319 (2002); Ortiz, 91 Hawaiʻ i  at 186, 981 P.2d at 1132.  
 
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
no Hawaiʻ i case involving individualized voir dire of jurors; 
that is, examination of jurors outside the presence of the other 
jurors, contains any indication that the voir dire was conducted in closed proceedings.
23 
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals has held that a 
court may close a courtroom without a pre-closure hearing for 
midtrial examination of jurors regarding misconduct. U.S. v. 
Edwards, 823 F.2d 111, 117 (5th Cir. 1987) (discussed infra). However, that case explicitly relied on “functional 
consideration[s] for an answer” rather than historical 
precedent.
24 Id. at 117. Additionally, in the past quarter-
century since Edwards was decided, few cases have relied upon 
its approach. 
One such case is State v. Halverson, 309 P.3d 795 
(Wash. Ct. App. 2013), where the trial court questioned a juror 
“in chambers, off the record,” during deliberations without the 
presence of the defendant. Halverson, 309 P.3d at 796. The 
decision in Halverson upheld in camera examination of jurors outside of the defendant’s presence based on “historical 
24 Edwards does not define “functional,” but the court examined the
deliberative process and hypothesized how open proceedings could disrupt that
process. Edwards, 823 F.2d at 117. Therefore, in this context “functional”
means the operations or process of a working jury. 
-40 ­ 
 
 
practices in Washington” and reliance upon Edwards. Id. at 797­
98. However, Halverson represents a significantly different 
historical tradition than that of Hawaiʻ i, as our law does not 
allow a judge to question a juror about potential misconduct 
without the defendant present. State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 
226, 738 P.2d 812, 827-28 (1987) (holding that the judge’s ex parte entry into the jury room and extended explanations in 
response to jury questions was improper).
25 A defendant in a 
criminal case has a procedural and constitutional right to be present whenever the court communicates with the jury. State v. 
Pokini, 55 Haw. 640, 651, 526 P.2d 94, 105 (1974). 
  
   
                     
    
   
 Estrada
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
We also note that the Ninth Circuit permitted closure 
of a courtroom in order to address jurors’ concerns regarding 
their safety due to the attendance at the trial of some 
“intimidating” individuals. United States v. Ivester,  316 F.3d 
955, 960 (9th Cir. 2003). The 
Ivester court first noted that 
“[h]ad the district court decided to question [the juror] in 
chambers without the defendant or spectators, we would conclude 
that there were no constitutional violations,” id. at 959, which, as noted, is contrary to our law. Additionally, the 
25 The Estrada  court exercised its supervisory powers to declare a 
judge’s practice of personally entering the jury room to answer the jurors’
questions improper and prejudicial. , 69 Haw. at  228, 738 P.2d at  
828. “In either a criminal or civil context, defendants are entitled to a
fair and impartial jury trial free from prejudicial ex parte influences.”
Id.   
-41 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
                     
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court characterized the assurances made to the jury in the 
closed courtroom not as a constitutional concern but as an 
administrative matter: “questioning the jurors to determine 
whether they felt safe is an administrative jury problem.” Id. 
at 960. 
Thus, a significant reason Ivester found no 
constitutional violation in the closure of the courtroom was 
because juror misconduct was not at issue, and the defendant’s 
right to a fair trial was not implicated. Id. 
Ivester does not 
hold that the examination of a juror concerning a fair trial may 
be addressed outside the presence of the public.26 Id. 
Therefore, Edwards and the few cases that rely on its 
holding provide weak support for a tradition of closing 
courtroom proceedings to conduct midtrial examination of jurors 
to investigate potential juror misconduct.27 
26 Matters directly impacting the security or safety of jurors might
appropriately be addressed in closed proceedings, but only where revealing 
the information publicly could frustrate efforts to protect jurors, and atranscript of the proceeding remains sealed only for so long as necessary.
See section II.D.2, infra. 
27 The Third Circuit has expressed a “general” preference, for
individual, in camera, questioning of a possibly- tainted juror, “[w]here 
there is a significant possibility that a juror or potential juror has beenexposed to prejudicial extra- record information.” 
 Gov’t of V.I.  v. Dowling , 
814 F.2d 134, 137 (3d Cir. 1987) (declining to find error in the en bancexamination of jurors regarding potential misconduct). However, the cases
cited by Dowling do not discuss the issue of public access to midtrial 
examination of jurors. See  United States  ex rel. Doggett v. Yeager, 472 F.2d 
229, 239 (3d Cir. 1973) (reversing a finding of no prejudice to the defendantby external information in part because the court examined jurors as a panel
rather than individually); United States v. D’Andrea, 495 F.2d 1170, 1173 n.8 
(3d Cir. 1974) (finding no prejudice to defendant from external information
and noting that “cases will arise where en banc examination [of jurors
concerning potential misconduct] is preferable and should be permitted[.]”);
United States v. Starks, 515 F.2d 112, 125 (3d Cir. 1975) (finding no abuse
(continued. . .) 
-42 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
                       
27(. . .continued)                                             
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In contrast, courts have found that pretrial and post-
trial examination of jurors should be held open to the public. 
See Press-Enterprise I, 464 U.S. at 510 (pretrial voir dire of 
potential jurors); accord Stewart, 360 F.3d at 98 (same); United 
States v. Simone, 14 F.3d 833, 840 (3d Cir. 1994) (post trial 
hearings to investigate juror misconduct); 
Barber v. Shop-Rite 
of Englewood & Assocs, Inc., 923 A.2d 286, 291-92 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2007) (same). 
In Simone, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals applied 
the experience and logic test to its analysis of post-trial examination of jurors and found no clear history of openness or 
closure. Simone, 14 F.3d at 838. 
Accordingly, the court 
concluded that “on the whole, the ‘experience’ prong of the ‘logic and experience’ test provides little guidance in this 
case.” Id. Therefore, Simone “rel[ied] primarily on the 
‘logic’ prong of the [experience and logic] test.” Simone, 14 
of discretion in refusing to examine jurors in camera regarding potential
misconduct, but generally recommending examination outside the presence ofother jurors); see  also  United States v. Addonizio, 451 F.2d 49, 67 (3d Cir. 
1971) (discussing examination of prospective jurors and recommending 
examination outside the presence of other jurors under certain
circumstances); Gov
’t of the V.I.  v. Rosado, 699 F.2d 121, 125 (3d Cir. 1983) 
(same). Therefore, Dowling  and its associated cases do not stand for the 
proposition that midtrial examination of jurors should be held outside thepresence of the public because those cases discuss the need to keep juror
testimony from other jurors, but do not address the issue of public access.
Furthermore, those cases do not establish a tradition of closing proceedings
to conduct such an examination, because in each case reviewed by the ThirdCircuit the examination of jurors or prospective jurors took place in open 
court. 
-43 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
F.3d at 838. See also United States v. Criden , 675 F.2d 550, 
555 (3d Cir. 1982) (finding historical analysis irrelevant, and 
examining the issue of first amendment access to pretrial 
hearings in terms of the “current role of the [F]irst 
[A]amendment and the societal interests in open pretrial 
criminal proceedings”);  Barber, 923 A.2d at 291-92 (“Given that 
there is no absolute right of access to a civil trial and that there is no history of reported and sanctioned public access to post-verdict civil jury voir dire concerning juror misconduct, 
the first prong of the [experience and logic] test provides 
little guidance.”) (emphasis added). 
In light of Hawai
ʻi’s case law and our firmly embedded 
general policy of open trials and with very minimal case 
authority supporting closure, there is no clear tradition of 
either open or closed proceedings when a court conducts a 
midtrial examination of jurors regarding potential misconduct. 
On the other hand, even assuming there is no tradition of 
holding such proceedings in open court, it cannot be said that 
there is a tradition in Hawaiʻ i’s courts of preventing public 
access to midtrial examination of jurors. Therefore, we 
conclude that the experience prong of the “logic and experience” 
test provides little guidance in this case and it is appropriate 
to give greater weight to the “logic prong” of the tradition and 
-44 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
logic test. See Simone , 14 F.3d at 838, Criden, 675 F.2d at 
555, Barber
, 923 A.2d at 291-92. 
b. 
Under the “logic” consideration, the right of the 
public to attend a criminal proceeding relies on whether “public 
access plays a significant positive role in the functioning of 
the particular process in question.” Press-Enterprise II,  478 
U.S.
 at 8. The United States Supreme Court has identified six 
“societal interests” that are advanced by open proceedings, all of which are present in this case. 
See Richmond Newspapers , 448 
U.S.
 at 569-572; Criden, 675 F.2d at 556 (referring to the 
considerations under the logic prong as “societal interests”). 
The first societal interest advanced by public access 
to criminal proceedings is that access promotes informed 
discussion of governmental affairs by providing the public with 
a more complete understanding of the judicial system, serving an 
“educative” interest. See Richmond Newspapers , 448 U.S. at 572; 
id. at 584 (Stevens, J., concurring); id. at 595-96 (Brennan, 
J., concurring). A second societal interest advanced by open 
proceedings is “assurance that the proceedings were conducted 
fairly to all concerned” thereby promoting a “perception of 
fairness.” Id. at 569, 570. Public confidence in and respect 
for the judicial system can be achieved only by permitting full public view of the proceedings. 
Id.
 at 595 (Brennan, J., 
-45 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
concurring). In the case of midtrial examination of jurors, 
public access to such proceedings would educate the public on 
the importance of an impartial jury. Further, an open 
proceeding would provide assurance that the system is fair to 
all concerned because it would ensure the public that 
significant misconduct, if any, is being appropriately addressed 
and managed. 
Parallel to the educational benefits and the assurance 
of fairness, public access to criminal proceedings also has a “significant community therapeutic value” because it provides an 
“outlet for community concern, hostility, and emotion.” 
Richmond Newspapers, 448 U.S. at 570-71. Societal interest in 
open proceedings is especially high in a newsworthy case where 
the public has already been following the progress of a 
proceeding through news reports and other media, or the case 
otherwise resonates as significant in the community. 
Where the 
public has made a significant investment of interest and 
attention in a case or proceeding, closing a portion of the 
proceeding will undoubtedly breed concern and result in 
unbridled speculation, whereas open proceedings will resolve 
such concerns. It is noted that the various circumstances in 
the present case resulted in significant public attention. 
Open proceedings also advance a fourth societal 
interest by serving as a check on “the misconduct of 
-46 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
participants” by exposing the judicial process to public 
scrutiny, thus discouraging decisions based on secret bias or 
partiality. See id. at 569 (plurality opinion). The fifth 
societal interest advanced by public observation is that public access enhances the performance of all involved. 
See id.
 at 569 
n.7. Opening the examination process to public scrutiny assures 
the public of the integrity of the participants in the system, 
and elevates confidence in the judicial process by providing greater transparency. The final societal interest, also 
implicated in the present case, is that public access to 
criminal proceedings discourages perjury. See id. at 596-97 
(Brennan, J., concurring). Public observation of juror examination will discourage perjury because members of the 
public who might be able to contradict false testimony will not 
learn of that testimony unless the proceedings are open to the 
public. 
Moreover, there does not appear to be any policy-based 
justification for an across-the-board denial of the First Amendment right of access to the narrow category of midtrial 
inquiries into jury misconduct. It is apparent that in the vast 
majority of criminal cases a need for a midtrial examination of a juror for potential misconduct will not arise, and only in a 
small portion of those cases when the need does arise will any 
of the risks associated with a high profile case involving 
-47 ­ 
 
 
  
   
                     
   
  
    
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
extensive media coverage be present. Thus, a rule automatically 
allowing closure of trial proceedings for midtrial questioning 
is neither warranted nor justified in light of the requirements 
of article I, sections 4 and 14 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution for a 
public trial.28 Even in a high-profile case, it should not 
automatically be assumed that midtrial juror questioning will 
necessarily endanger a defendant’s right to a fair and impartial 
jury. 
We also find the reasons set forth in Edwards for its 
holding that that there is no First Amendment right of the 
public to attend midtrial questioning to be unpersuasive. See 
Edwards, 823 F.2d at 117. The rationale of the Edwards’ 
decision is based upon the conclusion that an open court 
proceeding would “substantially raise the risk of destroying the 
effectiveness of the jury as a deliberative body” because the 
28 An across- the-board rule allowing closure at the presiding 
judge’s discretion would appear to be at odds with the ABA Principles for 
Juries and Jury Trials. “Juror voir dire should be open and accessible for
public view . . . . Closing voir dire proceedings should only occur  after a 
finding by the court that there is a threat to the safety of the jurors or
evidence of attempts to intimidate or influence the jury.” Principals for
Juries and Jury Trials, Standard 7(A.1), ABA (August 2005) (available at
http://aja.ncsc.dni.us/conferences/2010Annual/SpeakerMaterials/44%20
­
%20Mize%20ABA%20jury%20principles.pdf, last visited June 17, 2014) (emphasis 
added). This standard “acknowledges that established law requires courts to 
balance the privacy interests of jurors and the rights of litigants and the
public when determining whether to keep information touching on the private
lives of jurors out of the public domain . . . . [and is] designed to
establish a framework within which courts may balance those interests.” Id., 
cmt. Although the commentary indicates the standard is focused on jury
selection, id., the language of the standard does not restrict its 
application to pretrial voir dire. 
-48 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
                     
    
 
 
 
  See  Press-Enterprise 
  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
examination places the attorney in conflict with the juror and 
may create tension between members of the jury panel. Id. 
However, Edwards’ rationale does not explain why a closed proceeding would address this concern. See id. As Simone 
pointedly observed, the Edwards’ court provides “little explanation” for its conclusion that an open hearing would 
“exacerbate” “[t]he deleterious effects” of the midtrial 
examination. See Edwards, 823 F.2d at 117; Simone, 14 F.3d at 
840. 
Furthermore, Edwards undercuts its own holding by 
acknowledging that balancing the secrecy necessary to guarantee 
an impartial jury with the public’s right of access may not 
always result in closure: “we do not foreclose the possibility 
that the [F]irst [A]mendment . . . might require that 
proceedings involving the questioning of jurors be held in open 
court.” Edwards, 823 F.2d at 117 n.5.
29 Edwards further 
observes that “The issue of potential juror misconduct goes to 
the very heart of public confidence in the fairness or 
29 However, Edwards’ test for a First Amendment challenge —that in 
order “to sustain a [F]irst [A]mendment challenge, factors must exist to
demonstrate that open proceedings would play a ‘ significant positive role’ in 
the functioning of the particular proceedings in question”— reverses the
burden expressed in Press- Enterprise II, because Edwards requires the 
proponent of open proceedings to demonstrate a significant positive role that
open proceedings would play, rather than requiring the proponent of closure
to demonstrate a substantial probability of prejudice. 
II, 478 U.S. at 14 (holding that “the preliminary hearing shall be closed 
only if  specific findings are made demonstrating that . . . there is a 
substantial probability that the defendant’s right to a fair trial will be 
prejudiced . . . .”) (emphasis added). 
-49 ­ 
 
 
  
   
                     
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
appearance of fairness in judicial proceedings. Once the 
spectre of a tainted jury is raised, public scrutiny of the 
resolution of the issue is essential[.]” Id.  at 116 (emphasis 
added). 
Edwards, Halverson , and Ivester also present a more 
fundamental constitutional problem. If the public’s right to access and observe criminal trials can be analyzed and 
determined out of public view, the public has no opportunity to protect that right. See Phoenix Newspapers, 156 F.3d at 951 
(holding that the constitutional safeguards provide the essential, if not only, means by which the public’s voice can be 
heard). It may well be that in all three cases there were 
substantive reasons that secrecy was required for the proper 
function of the court. Those reasons could have been 
articulated as findings, satisfying constitutional 
requirements.30 However, had the courts undertaken to make 
findings, the public’s right of access would have been considered, and a reviewing court would have been able to 
determine whether the public right had been adequately 
protected. These cases did not identify a persuasive logical 
reason why midtrial examination of jurors to investigate 
misconduct should allow closure of a courtroom without 
30 For instance, in Ivester, “the court discussed the [jurors’ 
safety concerns] with counsel in open court with the jury absent.”  Ivester,
316 F.3d at 957- 58.  
-50 ­ 
 
 
  
  
  
                     
   
 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
consideration of the right of access of the public. On the 
contrary, Edwards expressly identified a potential First 
Amendment challenge to closure, thereby explicitly recognizing, 
at a minimum, a qualified First Amendment interest in that 
proceeding. 
c. 
Therefore, we hold that the qualified right of access 
to criminal trials under article 1, section 4 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution is not extinguished by the mere necessity to 
conduct midtrial examination of jurors to investigate potential 
juror misconduct. However, at the same time a defendant’s 
article 1, section 14 right to a fair trial under the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution is an overriding interest that may require that 
such proceedings be held in closed court.31 Accordingly, when 
the overriding interest asserted is the protection of 
defendant’s right to a fair trial, the test proscribed by Press-
Enterprise II appropriately balances those competing 
constitutional interests. Press-Enterprise II
, 478 U.S. at 14. 
31 We are not presented with, and therefore do not address, a
situation where a criminal defendant requests that court proceedings remain
open. See  Waller, 467 U.S. at 47 n.6 (noting that “[o]ne of the reasons 
often advanced for closing a trial— avoiding tainting of the jury by pretrial 
publicity (e.g., [Press– Enterprise I], 464 U.S., at 510) is largely absent 
when a defendant makes an informed decision to object to the closing of the
proceeding.”); Ortiz, 91 Hawaiʻ i at 191, 981 P.2d at 1137 (adopting Waller).
Under Ortiz and Waller, a court essentially applies the standard set forth in 
Press-Enterprise I.  Waller, 467 U.S. at 48; Ortiz, 91 Hawaiʻ i at 191, 981
P.2d at 1137. 
-51 ­ 
 
 
That is, the hearing should be “closed only if specific findings 
are made demonstrating that, first, there is a substantial 
probability that the defendant’s right to a fair trial will be 
prejudiced by publicity that closure would prevent and, second, 
reasonable alternatives to closure cannot adequately protect the 
defendant’s fair trial rights.”32 Id. 
  
   
                     
     
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  The United States Supreme Court has stated that “w hen engaging in 
interchanges at the bench, the trial judge is  not required to allow public or 
press intrusion upon the huddle.”   Richmond Newspapers, 448 U.S. at 598  n.23.  
The American Bar Association has expressed that trial judges should endeavorto keep proceedings open to the public. “The trial judge should maintain a
preference for live public proceedings in the courtroom with all parties
physically present.” Standard 6.18(a), ABA Standards for Criminal Justice,Special Functions of the Trial Judge, 3d Ed. (2000). “Although limited
matters may be conducted in chambers, public exposure to the criminal  process  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
d. 
During the second and fifth proceedings on August 26, 
2013, the circuit court closed the 
courtroom.33 The Partial 
32 This test is similar to that prescribed by Gannett Pac.  Corp.,
that in order to close a courtroom the presiding judge must find that there 
is a “substantial likelihood that an open hearing . . . would interfere with
the defendant’ s right to a fair trial by an impartial jury.  Gannett Pac. 
Corp., 59 Haw. 233, 580 P.2d at 56- 57.  See note 17, supra. To determine 
whether a substantial probability exits, the factors from Gannett Pac.  Corp.
may be helpful, as adapted to the particular situation. 
In determining whether there is such 
a likelihood, the 
district judge shall consider [1] the nature of the
evidence sought to be presented; [2] the probability of
such information reaching potential jurors; [3] the likely
prejudicial impact of this information upon prospective
veniremen; [4] and the availability and efficacy of
alternative means to neutralize the effect of such disclosures. 
Gannett Pac. Corp., 59 Haw. at 233- 34, 580 P.2d 49, 57.  
33 We do not address the first, third, and fourth proceedings that
were not open to the public because those proceedings took place in chambers
or at sidebar and involved questions of procedure rather than the actual
questioning of jurors. 
(continued. . .) 
-52 ­ 
 
 
  
   
                                                                  
  33(. . .continued)
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Order to Unseal and the partially unsealed transcript make clear 
that the circuit court was concerned with protecting the 
Defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial, however, the 
circuit court’s intent only became apparent following the 
issuance, six months later, of the Partial Order to Unseal. At 
the time of closure, there was no indication to the Petitioners 
why the circuit court felt compelled to close the courtroom. As 
these two proceedings occurred in court, a qualified right of the public to access the proceedings arose under both the First 
Amendment and article 1, section 4 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution.  
Accordingly, the court was obligated to make specific findings 
articulating the overriding interest that required closure. 
Press Enterprise I , 464 U.S. at 510. No contemporaneous 
articulation was made by the circuit court; therefore, the procedures of the circuit court were insufficient to protect the 
public’s First Amendment and article 1, section 4 rights of 
access to criminal proceedings. 
As the Partial Order to Unseal specifies that the 
compelling interest relied upon by the circuit court was the Defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial, the circuit 
court should have applied the test from 
Press-Enterprise II  to 
both fosters the appearance of fairness and impartiality 
and facilitates the 
deterrent impact of the criminal justice system.” Id., cmt. 
-53 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
                     
    
 
      
 
 
 See  Waller
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determine if closure was warranted.34 That is, the hearing 
should be “closed only if specific findings are made 
demonstrating that, first, there is a substantial probability 
that the defendant’s right to a fair trial will be prejudiced by 
publicity that closure would prevent and, second, reasonable 
alternatives to closure cannot adequately protect the 
defendant’s fair trial rights. Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 
14. 
The Partial Order to Unseal identified several 
interests warranting closure of the courtroom, including the privacy and security of the jurors and the importance of 
preserving an impartial jury to ensure a fair trial on behalf of 
both the Defendant and the State. While these reasons are 
indisputable in the generic sense, they do not as stated provide 
sufficient justification for a closure of a court proceeding.
35 
Press-Enterprise II , 478 U.S. at 15 (“The First Amendment right 
of access cannot be overcome by the conclusory assertion that publicity might deprive the defendant of that right.”); 
In re 
Memphis Pub. Co., 887 F.2d 646, 648 (6th Cir. 1989) (holding 
34 The test from  Gannett Pac. Corp.  may also have sufficiently 
protected the Defendant’s right to a fair trial. See  note 32, supra. 
35 We also note that the belated issuance of the Partial Order to 
Unseal is a less effective protection of the public right than would be 
contemporaneous findings. , 467 U.S. at 49 n.8 (“The post hoc 
assertion by the [court] that the trial court balanced the petitioners’ right 
to a public hearing . . . cannot satisfy the deficiencies in the trialcourt’s record.”).  
-54 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that “the naked assertion by the district court in this case 
that defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a fair trial ‘might 
well be undermined,’ without any specific finding of fact to 
support that conclusion, was insufficient to justify closure”). 
The circuit court indicated in its Partial Order to 
Unseal that it “must avoid exposing the individual jurors to 
anything that may in any way improperly influence their 
continuing decision-making processes.” The order suggests that questioning a juror in front of friends and family might “expose 
a juror to pressure and matters which are not part of the 
evidence to be considered, [and] also could hamper the Court’s 
search for candid answers from that juror.” Id. Therefore, the 
order concludes that 
in order to preserve a juror’ s privacy and security and the 
integrity of a fair and impartial jury decision based
solely upon the trial evidence and the law provided by the
Court, and to protect the right of both parties to a fair
trial and verdict,  public access  would not play a 
significant positive role in the functioning of this
process.  
(Emphasis added). 
We do not agree with the circuit court’s statement 
that “public access would not play a significant positive role 
in the functioning of this process.” As expressed by the 
Supreme Court’s recognition of a First Amendment right of public 
access, the parallel right of access under article 1, section 4 
of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution, and our firmly embedded general 
-55 ­ 
 
 
  
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
policy of open proceedings, public access always has a positive 
role in the functioning of the courtroom process. Gannett Pac. 
Corp., 59 Haw. at 228, 580 P.2d at 54. 
However, when midtrial 
examination of jurors raises a risk to a defendant’s right to a 
fair trial, the benefits of public access must be balanced 
against the equally weighty concern for a defendant’s fair and 
impartial jury in determining whether to close the proceedings 
to the public. 
While we do not decide whether the risk of prejudice 
to the Defendant’s rights to a fair trial and an impartial jury outweighed the public’s right of access in the present case, we 
note that it may have been helpful for the circuit court to have 
considered the factors delineated by 
Gannett Pac. Corp.  in 
determining whether there was a substantial likelihood that an open hearing would interfere with the Defendant’s right to a 
fair trial by an impartial jury. Gannett Pac. Corp., 59 Haw. at 
233, 580 P.2d at 56; see note 16, supra. Specifically, the 
circuit court may consider the nature of the likely testimony 
provided by individual jurors, the probability of such 
information reaching the remaining jurors, and the likely 
prejudicial impact of this information. Importantly, the court 
should always consider the availability or efficacy of 
alternatives to closure that could neutralize the effect of the 
reach of such prejudicial information.  Rather than articulating 
-56 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
generalized statements of policy, a court must make factual 
findings specific to the circumstances that indicate the 
substantial likelihood that an open hearing would interfere with 
the defendant’s right to a fair trial by an impartial jury. 
2. 
The question of access to a post-trial transcript of a 
closed hearing is distinct from the question of access to the hearing. “The two are not synonymous, for the rationale for closing a proceeding, such as infringement of the defendant’s 
right to a fair trial, may have no bearing on a decision to seal 
forever the content of in camera proceedings.” Phoenix 
Newspapers
, 156 F.3d at 946-47. 
“It would be an odd result 
indeed were we to declare that our courtrooms must be open, but 
that transcripts of the proceedings occurring there may be 
closed, for what exists of the right of access if it extends 
only to those who can squeeze through the door?” United States 
v. Antar,
 38 F.3d 1348, 1360 (3d Cir. 1994). “At the heart of 
the Supreme Court’s right of access analysis is the conviction that the public should have access to information; the Court 
never has suggested that an open proceeding is only open to 
those who are able to be bodily present in the courtroom 
itself.” Id. 
-57 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
a. 
With respect to the right of access to judicial 
documents under article I, section 4 of the Hawai
ʻi Constitution, 
the firmly embedded general policy of openness declared by 
Gannett Pac. Corp. also applies to the transcript of closed 
proceedings. “[A] complete record of those parts of the 
proceedings closed to the public shall be kept and made 
available to the public for a legitimate and proper purpose 
following the completion of trial or disposition of the case 
without trial.” Gannett Pac. Corp., 59 Haw. at 235, 580 P.2d at 
57; see also Takao, 59 Haw. at 242, 580 P.2d at 63 (finding that no irreparable harm was shown because the transcript was to be made available to the public as soon as the trial was 
concluded). “Historically, post-trial transcript access has 
been granted as soon as the factors which prompted hearing 
closure have been resolved.” Phoenix Newspapers, 156 F.3d at 
947. Therefore, under the experience prong of the Supreme Court 
test, precedent requires the release of the transcript once any 
competing interests that militate for closure of a hearing traditionally open to the public are no longer viable. 
The same logical interests that animate the public’s 
right of access to courtroom proceedings also underlie the 
benefits that result from public access to a transcript of 
closed proceedings once the danger that precipitated closure has 
-58 ­ 
 
 
   
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
passed. Unreasonable delay in the release of a transcript 
“frustrates[s] the ‘community therapeutic value’ of openness.” 
Press-Enterprise II, 478 U.S. at 13. Public access to a 
transcript of a closed proceeding also “enhances both the basic 
fairness of the criminal trial and the appearance of fairness so 
essential to public confidence in the criminal justice system.” 
Press-Enterprise I,
 464 U.S. at 508. Further, once the trial is 
completed, a defendant’s article 1, section 14 rights to a fair 
and impartial jury and public trial under the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution are typically no longer concerns, and consequently 
there would be no logical reason to continue to deny the right 
of access of the public for the purpose of protecting a defendant’s right to a fair trial. 
Thus, we hold that a qualified public right of access 
to a transcript of a closed proceeding is present under both the 
First Amendment and article 1, section 4 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution, once the overriding interests that militated for 
closure of the proceeding are no longer viable. 
“Indeed, the 
denial of the motion to release the transcripts was in itself a denial of the right of access protected by the first amendment.” 
Brooklier, 685 F.2d at 1172. “It must be tested by the same 
standard and must satisfy the same procedural prerequisites as 
the initial closure.” Id. Therefore, the same procedural and 
substantive protections that must be observed by a court 
-59 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
considering closure of courtroom proceedings in which the public 
has a potential qualified right of public access must also be 
observed if a court is contemplating to deny access to the 
transcript of the closed proceeding. 
If public access to a transcript is to be denied, “a 
trial judge should explain why the material is entitled to 
privacy.” Brooklier , 685 F.2d at 1172. “[I]f a court 
contemplates sealing a document or transcript, it must provide 
sufficient notice to the public and press to afford them the 
opportunity to object or offer alternatives.” Phoenix 
Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 951. 
“If objections are made, a hearing 
on the objections must be held as soon as possible.” Phoenix 
Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 949. 
The hearing should provide a 
“meaningful opportunity to address sealing the transcripts on 
the merits, or to discuss with the court viable alternatives.” 
Id. 
Substantively, the trial court is required to make 
specific findings demonstrating a compelling interest, a 
substantial probability that the compelling interest would be 
harmed, and there is no alternative to continued sealing of the 
transcript that would adequately protect the compelling 
interest. Id.
 at 949. The trial court may not rely on 
“generalized concerns” but must indicate facts demonstrating “a compelling interest justifying the continued sealing of the 
-60 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
hearing transcript.” Id.  at 950. Additionally, the court must 
“specifically explain the necessary connection between unsealing 
the transcript” and the infliction of irreparable damage 
resulting to the compelling interest. Id. (holding that the 
refusal to unseal the transcript was in error, as the court did not explain the required connection between unsealing the 
transcript and irreparable damage to the compelling interest). 
Further, only access to those parts of transcript 
“reasonably entitled to privacy” should be denied. Press-
Enterprise I , 464 U.S. at 513. 
Therefore, the “trial judge 
should seal [] such parts of the transcript as necessary to preserve the anonymity of the individuals sought to be 
protected.” 
Id. 
b. 
In the present case, the circuit court did not 
adequately protect the public’s right of access to the transcript of the closed proceedings as guaranteed by article I, 
section 4 of the Hawai
ʻi Constitution.  The transcript of the 
August 26, 2013 proceedings was sealed and public access was 
denied until February 24, 2014, some six months after the 
mistrial was declared. Based on the brevity of the questioning 
of the juror in the second and fifth proceedings and the fact 
that the court allowed the juror to continue deliberating, the 
circuit court was apparently convinced that the handshake at 
-61 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
issue did not present a serious risk of a biased jury or raise 
substantial issues of juror misconduct. Therefore, the 
transcript of the closed proceedings should have been unsealed 
as soon as practicable once the court allowed the jurors to 
resume deliberations, with appropriate redaction of any 
inappropriate statement about the subject matter of the 
deliberations and personal identifiers of the involved jurors. 
Further, at the close of the proceedings on August 26, 
2013, the jury reported that they were deadlocked and the circuit court declared a mistrial. Thus, any potential harm of 
intrusion into jury deliberations as a result of the court’s 
investigation had clearly passed when the mistrial was declared, 
again militating for the immediate release of the transcript. 
Juror privacy was never at risk by the release of the 
transcript. As the unsealed transcript demonstrates, redacting 
personal identifiers or replacing any identifying information 
with a juror-number generally strikes the quintessential balance between preserving juror privacy and allowing public access to 
review trial proceedings for fairness and impartiality. 
Therefore, under the circumstances of this case, the transcript 
of the closed proceeding should not have remained sealed on the 
basis of protecting juror privacy or security. 
In denying public access to the transcript, the 
circuit court did not apply the same procedural and substantive 
-62 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
requirements as would be required to close a courtroom. The 
circuit court was required to provide notice regarding its 
intention to deny access to the transcript and to hold a hearing 
allowing objections and alternatives to be presented if any 
person wished to be heard. The circuit court was further 
required to make specific findings on the record: (1) 
identifying the compelling interest that would be harmed by 
public access to the transcript, (2) demonstrating that a substantial risk of harm to the compelling interest would occur 
due to public access to the transcript, and (3) identifying any 
alternatives to denial of public access that the court 
considered but found insufficiently protective. 
Accordingly, the public’s qualified right of access to 
the transcript of the five proceedings on August 26, 2013, was 
not adequately protected at the time the circuit court sealed 
the transcript because the circuit court did not observe the 
procedural and substantive steps necessary to ensure public access was adequately considered in accordance with 
constitutional requirements. Further, the circuit court 
improperly continued to deny access to this transcript when the 
potential risk of harm to any compelling interests that had 
precipitated closure had passed. 
-63 ­ 
 
 
  
   
  
  
                     
 36  As noted, see  note 17, supra, “the reasons underlying openness in 
the criminal context, as enunciated in [ Gannett Pac. Corp.] , are equally 
compelling in the civil context.” Campbell,  106 Hawaiʻ i at  462, 106 P.3d at  
1105.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
IV. Conclusion 
The writ of prohibition is dismissed as moot because 
the circuit court has already unsealed the transcript of the 
closed proceedings of August 26, 2013, except for appropriate 
redactions as to juror identification. The writ of mandamus is 
denied as unnecessary in light of the directive of this opinion. 
In summary, article 1, section 4 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution provides the public a qualified right of access to 
observe court proceedings of criminal trials. In keeping with 
our firmly embedded policy of open trials, the circuit court, 
and all Hawaiʻ i courts conducting criminal proceedings involving 
adult defendants, are directed to refrain from closing trial 
proceedings that are presumptively open to the public.36 The 
presumption of openness may be overcome only by an overriding 
interest. The court must set forth specific findings 
demonstrating the closure is essential to preserve the 
overriding interest, and the closure is narrowly tailored to 
serve that interest. Press-Enterprise I,  464 U.S. at 510. 
Additionally, public access to a transcript of a 
closed proceeding must be given the same protections as a 
courtroom proceeding. Brooklier,  685 F.2d at 1172. A 
-64 ­ 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
transcript of those parts of the proceedings closed to the 
public must be made available to the public once the danger to 
the compelling interest has passed. Gannett Pac. Corp. , 59 Haw. 
at 235, 580 P.2d at 57; 
Takao
, 59 Haw. at 242, 580 P.2d at 63; 
Phoenix Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 947-48. 
However, a defendant’s right to a fair and impartial 
jury is a compelling interest that may outweigh the general 
policy of openness and public access guaranteed by article 1, 
section 4 of the Hawai
ʻi Constitution.  A defendant’s right to a 
fair and impartial jury may be implicated if the court is 
considering conducting midtrial questioning of jurors in order 
to investigate potential misconduct. In such a situation, the responsibility of the court is to make “specific findings . . . 
demonstrating that, first, there is a substantial probability 
that the defendant’s right to a fair trial will be prejudiced by 
publicity that closure would prevent and, second, reasonable 
alternatives to closure cannot adequately protect the 
defendant’s fair trial rights. 
Press-Enterprise II , 478 U.S. at 
14. In determining whether there is such a substantial 
probability, the judge may consider: the nature of the likely risk to the defendant’s right to an impartial jury; the 
probability of such risk impacting the jurors impartiality; the 
likely prejudicial impact of the risk; and, the availability and 
efficacy of alternative means to neutralize the effect of the 
-65 ­ 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reach of such risk. Gannett Pac. Corp. , 59 Haw. at 233-34, 580 
P.2d at 57. 
Jeffery S. Portnoy and 
John P. Duchemin for petitioners /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
/s/ Robert M. Browning 
/s/ Edward H. KuboRobyn Chun and 
Charleen M. Aina for respondent judge 
Janice T. Futa, Brook Hart,
Margaret C. Nammar, and
Thomas M. Otake for respondents 
Robert Brian Black 
for amici 
-66 ­