***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU; COUNTY OF HAWAI ‘I; 
COUNTY OF MAUI; COUNTY OF KAUA ‘I, Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I; SCOTT T. NAGO, in his capacity as 
Chief Election Officer, Respondents.  
 
 
SCPW-18-0000733 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
(CIV. NO. 18-1-1326-08)  
 
DECEMBER 20, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
  The right of the people to shape the way in which they 
are governed through free and fair elections is the basis of our 
democratic society.  At no time is this dynamic more pronounced 
than when the public is called upon to approve revisions to the 
Hawai‘i Constitution, the foundational document on which our Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCPW-18-0000733
20-DEC-2018
12:37 PM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 state government is based.  In order for the electorate to 
effectively exercise this most basic of rights, however, a 
ballot must be capable of rendering a knowing and deliberate 
expression of voter cho ice.  Thus, when a constitutional 
amendment is presented to the electorate for ratification, both 
our constitution and statutes require that the question posed to 
voters must be clear and neither misleading nor deceptive.  And 
it is this court’s duty to pr eserve the integrity of the 
electoral process by invalidating a question that fails to meet 
this standard.  
  In this case, several counties of the State of Hawai‘i 
challenged a ballot question authored by the state legislature 
that would approve an amendme nt granting the State the authority 
to impose a surcharge on investment real property.  The 
challengers argue that the ballot question was unclear and 
likely to mislead or deceive an average voter.  Upon review, 
this court  determined that the ballot questi on as written d id 
not comply with the requirement that its language and meaning be 
clear and not misleading .  We accordingly declared the ballot 
question invalid, stating at the time that this opinion would 
follow.  We now elaborate as to our reasoning.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3 I. BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. Real Property Taxation in Hawai ‘i 
  From the beginning of statehood until 1980, the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution fully reserved the taxing power to the State, 
delegable to the counties at the Hawai ‘i legislature’s sole 
discretion.  County of Kaua ‘i ex rel. Nakazawa v. Baptiste, 115 
Hawai‘i 15, 20, 165 P.3d 916, 921 (2007) (quoting Haw. Const. 
art. VII, § 3 (1968)).  As a result , a hybrid system of  real 
property taxation developed within the state.  Although the 
counties were statutorily authorized to set the specific tax 
rates applicable to land within their borders, the State 
retained all other relevant responsibilities, including the 
creation of exemptions, the administrative adjudication of tax 
appeals, and the actual collection of tax funds.  See  Stand. 
Comm. Rep. No. 42 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawai ‘i of 1978, at 
594-95 (1980) .  After the State 
was reimbursed for its administrative expenses, all revenues 
derived from real property taxes were remitted to the counties 
for their operations.  Id.  The counties depended heavily on 
these monetary transfers for their operating income, and by the 
time of the 1978 Constitutional Convention, the shared 
responsibility had become a “sore point between counties and the 
State.”  2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 
Hawai
‘i of 1978, at 247 (1980).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4   Prior to the  1978 Convention, county officials began 
to express frustration that the patchwork of concurrent 
authority had created confusion and a lack of accountability 
between the State and counties, with voters unable to determine 
“what level of government [was] responsible for the real 
property tax bite.”  Id.; accord Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 42 in 1 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai‘ i of 1978, 
at 594-95.  Further, county officials contended that the 
counties had differing needs and economic bases that were not 
fully served by state
-wide tax policies,  and that it was unfair 
that the counties were tasked with the full management of local  
affairs but had little control over their primary source of 
income.  See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 42 in 1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawai ‘i of 1978, at 595; 2 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai ‘i of 1978, 
at 247-48.   
  Responding to these concerns, the delegates adopted a 
proposed amendment to the Hawai‘i Constitution granting the 
counties exclusive authority over all functions related to the 
1taxation of real property.
  See 1 Proceedings of the 
                                                           
 1 The County of Kalawao, which at the time was managed by the State 
Department of Health and had no local government, was not included in the 
transfer of power.  See  2 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 
Hawai‘i of 1978, at 248.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 Constitutional Convention of Hawai ‘i of 1978, at 1198 (setting 
forth Haw. Const. art. VIII , § 3 as amended).  A report from the 
Committee on Local Government indicates the transfer was 
intended to grant the counties full control over their finances, 
eliminate public confusion as to which level of government was 
responsible for real property taxes, further the democratic 
ideal of home rule, and allow the counties flexibility in  
addressing  their unique local needs.  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 42 
in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai ‘i of 
1978, at 595.  The amendment was subsequently approved by Hawai ‘i 
voters, and ar ticle VIII , section 3 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution 
now states in full as follows:  
The taxing power shall be reserved to the State,  except so 
much thereof as may be delegated by the legislature to the 
political subdivisions, and except that all functions, 
powers and duties relating to the taxation of real property 
shall be exercised exclusively by the counties, with the 
exception of the county of Kalawao.  The legislature shall 
have the power to apportion state revenues among the 
several political subdivisions.  
(Emphasis added.)  Thus, only the counties currently possess the 
constitutional authority to levy a tax on real property within 
the State of Hawai‘i.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 B. Senate Bill 2922  
 
 On January 24, 2018, Senate Bill 2922 ( S.B. 2922) was 
introduced in the Hawai‘ i State Senate.2  S.B. 2922, 29th Leg., 
Reg. Sess. (2018).  I n the section of the bill setting forth 
proposed legislative findings, the bill stated  that article X, 
section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution requires the State to 
3provide a system of public education.   Id.  The bill noted  that 
Hawai‘i is unique among the United States in that it funds and 
administers its public school system at the State level rather 
than assigning the responsibility to its counties or another 
local political subdivision.  Id.   Citing a series of government 
studies that placed Hawai ‘i among the lowest ranked states in the 
nation for teacher salary and education expenditures, the  bill 
asserted that t he State was consistently failing to appropriate 
adequate revenue for education  from the state general fund, 
which undermined  the State’s mission of providing a quality 
education to all of Hawai ‘i’s children .  Id.  The bill concluded, 
“It is necessary to develo p a new means of funding Hawaii’ s 
                                                           
 2 The text of S.B. 2922 as originally introduced is available at 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2018/bills/SB2922_.HTM.  
 3 Article X, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution provides in 
relevant part as follows: “The State shall provide for the establishment, 
support and control of a statewide system of public schools free from 
sectarian control, a state university, public libraries and such other 
educational institutions as may be deemed desirable, including physical 
facilities therefor.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 public education system to ensure that the State will be able to 
prepare children to meet the social and economic demands of the 
twenty-first century. ”4  Id.   
  To this end , the bill proposed amending the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution pursuant to article XVII, section 3 to authorize 
“the legislature to establish a surcharge on residential 
investment property ” for the purpose of funding public 
5education.   Id.  Following a series of revisions by  both 
legislative chambers, S.B. 2922  was passed in late April 2018.  
                                                           
 4 These proposed findings, which are provided for context, were not 
included in the final version of the bill passed by the legislature.  See 
S.B. 2922, S.D.1, H.D.1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2018), 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2018/bills/SB2922_HD1_.htm.  
 5 Article XVII, section 3 provides in full as follows:  
The legislature may propose amendments to the constitution 
by adopting the same, in the manner required for 
legislation, by a two- thirds vote of each house on final 
reading at any session, after either or both houses shall 
have given the governor at least ten days' written notice 
of the final form of the proposed amendment, or, with or 
without such notice, by a majority vote of each house on 
final reading at each of two successive sessions.  
Upon such adoption, the proposed amendments shall be 
entered upon the journals, with the ayes and noes, and 
published once in each of four successive weeks in at least 
one newspaper of general circulation in each senatorial 
district wherein such a newspaper is published, within the 
two months' period immediately preceding the next general 
election.  
At such general election the proposed amendments shall be 
submitted to the electorate for approval or rejection upon 
a separate ballot.  
The conditions of and requirements for ratification of such 
proposed amendments shall be the same as provided in 
section 2 of this article for ratification at a general 
election.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 In its final form, the act proposed two changes  to the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution.   
  First, the act proposed amending article VIII, section 
3 as follows: 
TAXATION AND FINANCE  
Section 3.  The taxing power shall be reserved to the 
State, except so much thereof as may be delegated by the 
legislature to the political subdivisions, and except that 
all functions, powers and duties relating to the taxation 
of real property shall be exercised exclusively by the 
counties, with the exception of the county of Kalawao[.]; 
provided that the legislature may establish, as provided by 
law, a surcharge on investment real property.  The 
legislature shall have the power to apportion state 
revenues among the several political subdivisions.  
S.B. 2922, S.D.1, H.D.1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2018) ( proposed 
deletion bracketed and proposed addition underlined) .  Second , 
the bill proposed making the following addition to article X, 
section 1: 
PUBLIC EDUCATION  
Section 1.  The State shall provide for  the establishment, 
support and control of a statewide system of public schools 
free from sectarian control, a state university, public 
libraries and such other educational institutions as may be 
deemed desirable, including physical facilities therefor.  
There shall be no discrimination in public educational 
institutions because of race, religion, sex or ancestry; 
nor shall public funds be appropriated for the support or 
benefit of any sectarian or nonsectarian private 
educational institution, except that proceeds of special 
purpose revenue bonds authorized or issued under section 12 
of Article VII may be appropriated to finance or assist:  
1.  Not- for-profit corporations that provide early 
childhood education and care facilities serving the general 
public; and 
2.  Not- for-profit private nonsectarian and sectarian 
elementary schools, secondary schools, colleges and 
universities.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 Funding of public education shall be determined by the 
legislature; provided that revenues derived from a 
surcharge on investment real property pursuant to section 3 
of article VIII shall be used to support public education.  
Id. (proposed addition underlined).   
  Lastly, the act set forth the ballot question to be 
posed to the electorate for a vote on ratifying  the proposed 
amendment, as is required for enactment under Hawaii  Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 11- 118.5 (2011)6 and article XVII, section 3 of 
the Hawai‘ i Constitution.   See supra note 5.  The ballot question 
stated as follows: “Shall the legislature be authorized to 
establish, as provided by law, a surcharge on investment real 
property to be used to support public education?”   S.B. 2922, 
S.D.1, H.D.1. 
C. The Circuit Court Action (Civ. No. 18- 1-1326-08) 
  O n August 22, 2018, the City and Count y of Honolulu 
filed suit in the Circuit C ourt for the F irst Circuit (circuit 
court) against the State of Hawai ‘i and various state election 
officials in their official capacities.7  The action sought 
                                                           
 6 HRS § 11- 118.5 provides in full as follows: 
Any constitutional amendment proposed by the legislature 
shall include in final form the exact constitutional 
ratification question to be printed on a ballot. The 
constitutional ratification question shall be phrased in a 
manner to enable voters to express their choice on the 
constitutional amendment by providing a “yes” or “no” 
response. The language and meaning of a constitutional 
amendment shall be clear and it shall be neither misleading 
nor deceptive.  
 7 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 declaratory and injunctive relief invalidating S .B. 2922 and 
enjoining the ballot question from being placed on the November 
6, 2018 election ballot
.  In a second amended complaint filed 
the following week, the Counties of Hawai ‘i, Maui, and Kaua ‘i 
joined the City and County of Honolulu (collectively, the 
Counties8) as additional plaintiffs.  Then, on August 31, 2018, 
the Counties filed a M otion for Preliminary Injunction.9   
  In support of their motion, the C ounties argued in 
their submissions that the S.B. 2922 ballot question was 
misleading and deceptive in violation of HRS § 11- 118.5.10  They 
                                                           
 8 For purposes of clarity, this opinion uses the capitalized 
“Counties” when referring to the specific litigants in this case and the 
lower-case “counties” when generally referencing the state’s political 
subdivisions. 
 9 Three days before, the Counties filed an ex parte motion to 
shorten time on the forthcoming Motion for Preliminary Injunction.  Although 
the motion to shorten time is not included in the filings to this court, it 
appears from the filings in the record that the Counties asserted that the 
ballots would be submitted for printing on or about September 7, 2018, and 
thus an expedited schedule would be necessary to prevent the ballot question 
from being printed should the Counties prevail.  With its response, the State 
included a declaration by the Chief Election Officer.  The declaration  stated 
that, while September 7 was the deadline to submit the ballots to the 
printer, the logistics of compiling and translating over 240 different ballot 
types in time to comply with procedural safeguards and laws relating to the 
distribution of absentee ballots had already rendered it impracticable to 
make substantive changes to the ballots.  The Chief Election Officer stated 
that, should the Counties prevail, he could instead be ordered to issue a 
proclamation declaring that the ballot question should be considered stricken 
and any votes for or against it would have no effect.  
 10 Before the circuit court, the Counties also argued that the title 
under which the ballot question was to be printed was deceptive and 
misleading.  Thereafter, the Hawai ‘i Chief Election Officer chose to remove 
the title entirely, reasoning that it was not legally required.  The Counties 
did not challenge this decision.  
  In addition to HRS § 11 -118.5, the Counties’ motion relie d on 
Kahalekai v. Doi, in which this court indicated that the ratification 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11 argued that the ballot question’s use of the term “surcharge” 
did not accurately reflect the substantive nature and effect of 
the proposed amendment, which would be to alter a constitutional 
provision entitled “Taxation and Finance” to grant a new 
taxation power to the state legislature.  The ballot question 
also did not indicate that the proposed amendment would 
fundamentally change the allocation of authority between the 
State and c ounties by making the counties’ authority over real 
property taxation nonexclusive , the Counties continued.  T he 
Counties additionally argued that the phrase “investment real 
property” was vague and overbroad in that virtually any purchase 
of real property could be characterized as an investment.  And 
the Counties contended that the phrase “as provided by law” was 
misleading because voters may believe it indicated that the 
proposed practice was already authorized under current law, and 
in any event they would not know which law was being referred to 
as a limitation on the legislature’s new taxing power.   Lastly, 
the Counties argued that the phrase “to be used to support 
public education” was likely to mislead voters to believe 
funding for public education would necessarily increase if the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(. . . continued) 
 
processes prescribed in article XVII of the Hawai ‘i Constitution inherently 
require that an amendment ballot question be sufficiently clear to allow “a 
knowing and deliberate expres sion of voter choice.”  60 Haw. 324, 333 , 590 
P.2d 543, 550 (1979); s ee infra note 15.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12 proposed amendment were enacted, which the amendment did not 
actually require.11  A preliminary injunction was appropriate, 
the Counties concluded, because they were likely to prevail on 
the merits and the public interest weighed  in favor of 
protecting the integrity of the election. 
  In its responsiv e arguments, the State contended that 
every enactment of the legislature is presumptively valid and 
the ballot question clearly reflected the nature and effect of 
the proposed amendment.  “Surcharge” is a well understood term 
that often appears in statutes, the State argued , and it was 
properly used in the amendment and ballot question according to 
its legal definition: “[a]n additional tax, charge, or cost .”   
(Citing Surcharge, Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014). )  The 
State further argued that the proposed amendment would not 
fundamentally change the allocation of power between the State 
and counties because it would not restrict the counties’ power 
to tax real property; rather, it would simply authorize the 
legislature to impose a charge in addition to any real property 
tax imposed by the c ounties, which the ballot question 
                                                           
 11 The Counties additionally argued before the circuit court  that 
the process by which the legislature adopted S.B. 2922 was improper, that the 
amendment should be made only through a constitutional convention, and that 
the amendment would intrude on the University of Hawai ‘i’s and the Board of 
Education’s autonomy by granting the legislature sole authority to determine 
funding for public education, which the ballot question did not disclose.  
These arguments are not raised before this court, and they therefore are not 
further addressed. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 appropriately reflected .  Further, the State argued, the phrase 
“as provided by law” simply indicated that the provision was not 
self-executing and would require subsequent legislation to be 
implement ed.  And even if th e question and amendment were 
unclear, the State argued, a prel iminary injunction would 
nonetheless be inappropriate because the Counties could avail 
themselves of judicial remedies to invalidate the ballot 
question after the election if the measure were to pass, and 
thus there was no risk of irreparable harm.  In con trast, the 
State concluded, ordering a change to the ballot  would risk 
derailing the general election and would deprive the public of 
its right to vote on the proposed amendment, and the public 
interest therefore favored denial of the injunction.  
  The State further clarified its position d uring a 
September 7, 2018 hearing on the Counties ’ Motion for 
Preliminary Injunction .  During the hearing, the State 
maintained that the surcharge contemplated by the proposed 
amendment was not itself a tax on real property, but rather an 
independent tax  calculated based  on the amount of  real property 
tax imposed by the counties.   The legislature is authorized to 
enact such a fee pursuant to its general taxation power under ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 article VII, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution,12 the State 
argued, and the term “surcharge”  distinguishes  this extra fee 
from a direct tax on real property .  There was therefore a 
“clear, rational basis” for using the word “surcharge” instead 
of tax, the State concluded, making the choice of language 
neither deceptive n or unclear.  
 
 On September 20, 2018, the circuit court issued its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying 
Plaintiff Counties’ Motion for Preliminary Injunction, Filed on 
August 31, 2018 (Order Denying Injunction).   The court found 
that the language of the proposed amendment was not deceptive, 
noting that HRS § 11- 118.5 does not require a constitutional 
amendment to contain a detailed description of all of the issues 
and possible effects associated with the change.  Although the 
court acknowledged that the proposed language was not as clear 
as it could have been, the court found that it was clear enough 
to satisfy HRS § 11- 118.5, reasoning that many of the most 
important constitutional rights are phrased in general or vague 
terms.  The court thus found that the Counties were not likely 
to prevail on the merits and , in any event, allowing the public 
to vote on the ballot question would not cause irreparable harm.  
                                                           
 12 Article V II, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution provides as 
follows: “The power of taxation shall never be surrendered, suspended or 
contracted away.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 The court also found that, because the public has both an 
interest in not allowing a deficient question to appear on the 
ballot and an interest in voting on properly adopted non-
deficient ballot questions, the public interest on each side of 
the question balanced evenly and did not “tip the scal e in favor 
of issuing the injunction.”  
  The following day, the circuit court certified for 
interlocutory appeal its Order Denying Injunction and issued a 
stay of proceedings pending the issue’s final resolution.  
D. Petition for Extraordinary Writ 
  On September 26, 2018, the Counties filed with this 
court a Petition for Extraordinary Writ Seeking Pre- Election 
Relief.  The Counties explained  that they intend ed to file a 
“prompt notice of appeal” to challenge the circuit court’s Order 
Denying Injunction, but given the standard rules and deadlines, 
it would be virtually impossible to present the issue to this 
court through the normal appellate process prior to the November 
6, 2018 general election.  The Counties therefore contended that 
an extraordinary writ was the ir only practical way to obtain 
pre-election relief , which this court’s precedents establish is 
strongly preferred in contrast to post-election challenges.  
(Citing State ex rel. Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai ‘i 179, 185, 
932 P.2d 316, 322 (1997).)  They accordingly requested that this 
court issue an order to the Chief Election Officer directing him ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16 to issue a public proclamation stating that the ballot question 
should be considered stricken and that any votes for or against 
the measure would not be counted and would have no impact.  
  In addition to reiterating the ir arguments before the 
circuit court  regarding the ways in which the ballot question 
was misleading , the Counties contended that the point of view of 
the average voter should be the “touchstone” by which the ballot 
question’s clarity and potential for deception should be 
measured.  The average voter is much more likely to know what a 
“tax” is than to know what a “surcharge” means, the Counties 
argued, and it therefore should be  impermissible to make no 
reference to a tax in the ballot question --particularly when the 
sole purpose of the amendment is to raise government revenue.  
The Counties asserted  that the use of the alternate term 
“surcharge” was deceptive, suggesting that it  was likely 
motivated by a desire to circumvent the average voter’s 
reluctance to approve new taxes.  
  On October 4, 2018, this court directed the State 
respondents to file an answer to the Counties’ petition.  In its 
response, the State restated its argum ents that the ballot 
question and amendment were neither deceptive nor misleading.  
The State also argued that the petition should be denied because 
the Counties were improperly seeking a more favorable forum to 
relitigate a matter that had been decided ag ainst them in the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17 circuit court action.  The State further contended that, if 
construed as a petition for a writ of mandamus directed at the 
circuit court, the Counties’ petition was an attempt to 
circumvent the required appellate procedures.  The circuit court 
properly exercised its discretion in denying the preliminary 
injunction, the State continued, and an extraordinary writ 
should not be used to interfere with or control a trial court’s 
decision-making even when the decision is erroneous.13   
 
 This court heard oral argument on October 18, 2018, 
and the following day we issued an order granting the C ounties’ 
petition, declaring the ballot question invalid, and directing 
the Chief Election Officer to issue a public proclamation 
stating that no votes for or against the measure would be 
counted or have any impact.  Our order deferred issu ance of the 
present opinion due to the time constraints. 
                                                           
 13 The State also contended that two of the Respondents, Senate 
President Ronald D. Kouchi and Speaker of the House Scott K. Saiki, were 
improperly named in the petition because the Counties had failed to state a 
claim for relief against them.  The Counties argued in reply that the 
legislators were properly joined in the action to allow them an opportunity 
to be heard on the issue.  During oral argument in this case, counsel for the 
Counties indicated that they had no objection to the dismissal of the 
legislators, who had chosen not to appear.  Oral Argument at 00:08:45 -
00:09:05, City & Cty. of Honolulu v. State of Hawai ‘i (No. SCPW-18- 733), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/18/SCOA_101818_SCPW_18_733.mp3.  This court 
issued an order dismissing the two legislative respondents on October 19, 
2018. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18 II. DISCUSSION 
A. The Propriety of an Extraordinary Writ 
  The State urges that, notwithstanding any error on the 
part of the circuit court, an extraordinary writ is 
inappropriate under the circumstances.  This court has indeed 
often stated that an extraordinary writ will not be issued  when 
alternative relief is available.  See, e.g., State ex rel. 
Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 307, 788 P.2d 1281, 1283 (1990); 
Sapienza v. Hayashi, 57 Haw. 289, 293, 554 P.2d 1131, 1135 
(1976).  As such, an extraordinary writ is not a substitute for 
an appeal, and it will not lie to control a trial court’s 
discretion even when that discretion is exercised  in error.  
Honolulu Advertiser, Inc. v. Takao, 59 Haw. 237, 241, 580 P.2d 
58, 62 (1978). 
  Nevertheless, we have seen fit to depart from this 
rule in “ rare and exceptional situations ” in which “ the special 
and exigent circumstances of the particular case ” compel this 
court to act.  Sapienza, 57 Haw. at  293, 554 P.2d at 1135.  In 
Sapienza v. Hayashi, for instance, a trial court judge issued an 
order disqualifying the entire City and County of Honolulu 
Prosecutor’s Office from participati ng in a grand jury inquiry 
because the City Prosecutor was a political appointee of the 
Mayor who was accused of wrongdoing in the underlying matter.  
57 Haw. at 291– 92, 554 P.2d at  1133–34.  Upon being petitioned  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19 for extraordinary relief, this court held  that the order was 
overbroad.  Id. at 293, 554 P.2d at  1135.  Although the trial 
court’s order was presumably subject to challenge through normal 
appellate procedures, this court reasoned that “[t] o allow the 
matter to rest until the appeals process has run its course 
would forestall the expeditious presentation of legitimate 
criminal charges to the grand jury by the prosecuting attorney. ”  
Id. at 294, 554 P.2d at 1135.  “Obviously, this would  not be in 
the public interest ,” we stated, “ and [it] would work upon the 
public irreparable harm. ”  Id.  This court thus held that 
issuance of an extraordinary writ was appropriate.  Id. at 293, 
554 P.2d at 1135; see also  Gannett Pac.  Corp. v. Richardson, 59 
Haw. 224, 226-27, 580 P.2d 49 , 53 (1978) (holding that news 
media representatives were entitled to issuance of an 
extraordinary writ in their challenge to a district court’s 
closure to the public of a high profile preliminary hearing 
notwithstanding the representatives’ failure to appeal a 
previous denial of a petition for the same relief filed in 
circuit court “because it appear[ed] to us only too clear that 
the district courts [were ] in immediate need of direction from 
this court on a procedural and substantive matter of public 
importance”). 
  Even if the Counties had sought to expedite an appeal 
of the circuit court’s order through normal channels, they  could ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 not have obtained final resolution of this matter before the 
November 6 general election
 given the timeline established by 
our court rules governing appellate procedure.  See Hawai‘i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 (2016) (setting forth the 
required timeline for briefing cases on appeal); HRAP Rule 
11(b)(1) (2016 ) (providing the time limit for the assembly, 
certification, and filing of the record on appeal).  Had the 
normal appeal process been followed, this court would have ha d 
the authority to grant post-election relief by invalidating the 
results of a ballot question, and the Counties thus would not 
have been entirely without alternative relief if the amendment 
had been ratified during the pendency of this case
.  See, e.g., 
Taomae v. Lingle, 108 Hawai‘ i 245, 250, 118 P.3d 1188, 1193 
(2005) (invalidating constitutional amendment following 
ratification by the electorate because the State defendants 
failed to follow constitutionally mandated procedural 
requirements prior to the vote); 
Watland v. Lingle, 104 Hawai ‘i 
128, 132-3 3, 85 P.3d 1079, 108 3-84 (2004) (same) .   
  However, our precedents make clear that pre -election 
challenges are favored whenever  feasible.  See State ex rel. 
Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai‘i 179, 185, 932 P.2d 316, 322 
(1997) (“[T]he better practice would have been to expedite legal 
action prior to the election. ” (citing Blair v. Cayetano, 73 
Haw. 536, 836 P.2d 1066 (1992)).  The reasons for this ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 preference for pre-election challenges are myriad.  R esolving 
legal challenges to a ballot ’s validity  before an election 
generally conserves public resources and discourages  
gamesmanship by preventing litigants from “gambl[ing] on the 
outcome of the election contest then challeng[ing] it when 
dissatisfied with the results .”  Id.   
  But m ore importantly, settling such challenges before 
the votes are tallied protects the integrity of our most sacred 
democratic institutions.  The right of the citizenry to shape 
the way in which it is governed through free and fair elections 
is “the foundation of our representative society .”  Hayes v. 
Gill, 52 Haw. 251, 269, 473 P.2d 872, 883 (1970).  Just as 
actual arbitrary or 
artificial restrictions on that right 
undermine the true “ legitimacy of representative government, ” 
id. (citing Kramer v. Union Free School District No. 15, 395 
U.S. 621, 626 (1969)) , the appearance that the right is being 
denied undermines public perception s of legitimacy on which our 
system is equally dependent.  No matter how justified a court  
may be in setting aside the results of a popular election, such 
an action may be perceived as a subversion of the directly 
expressed will of the people.  See  Watland, 104 Hawai‘i at 143, 
85 P.3d at 1094 (Acoba, J., concurring) ( “Count first, and rule 
upon legality afterwards, is not a recipe for producing election 
results that have the public acceptance democratic stability ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 requires.” ( quoting Bush v. Gore , 531 U.S. 1046, 1047 (2000) 
(Scalia, J., concurring))).  Invalidating an electoral result 
thus threatens public confidence in both the efficacy of voting 
and the independence of our justice system, and this  risk of 
 irreparable harm is to be avoided if practicable.    
  In light of the concerns  inherent in the after- the-
fact invalidation of a democratically approved ballot measure, 
we hold that it was in the public interest to resolve this case 
prior to the November 6, 2018 general election, and we therefore 
turn to the merits of the Counties’ petition for extraordinary 
relief. 
B. The Proposed Amendment and Ballot Question  
  Article XVII of the Hawai ‘i Constitution sets forth two 
alternative processes by which the constitution may be amended.  
See Haw. Const. art. 
XVII, § 1.  Under the first, amendments can 
be proposed through a constitutional convention called by a 
majority vote of the electorate.  Haw. Const. art. XVII, § 2.  
Under the second, the legislature may propose amendments through 
either a two-thirds vote of each house or a simple majority vote 
during two successive legislative sessions.  Haw. Const. art. 
XVII, § 3.  In either case, proposed amendments must be 
submitted to and ratified by the electorate before they are 
formally incorporated into the Hawai ‘i Constitution.  Haw. Const. 
art. XVII, §§ 2 -3. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23   This court considered the details of this ratification 
requirement in Kahalekai v. Doi, 60 Haw. 324, 590 P.2d 543 
(1979).  In Kah alekai, the plaintiffs argued that a series of 
proposed constitutional amendments that had been approved by a 
majority vote of the electorate were not validly ratified due to 
the format of the ballot, which 
they contended made it 
inherently more difficult for a voter to mark a “no” vote than a 
“yes” vote.  60 Haw. at 331–32, 590 P.2d at 549 .  In reviewing 
the plaintiffs’ challenge, this court stated that it was nearly 
impossible to eliminate all possible bias from the layout of a 
ballot, as even basic formatting choices, such as listing 
candidates in alphabetical order, could arguably favor some 
contenders over others.  Id. at 332 n.4, 590 P.2d at 549 n.4.  
Rather than imposing “ an impractical standard of perfection ,” 
id., the court indicated that the constitution’s use of the term 
“ratification” inherently implies the informed, purposeful 
approval of the amendment by the electorate.  
Id. at 333, 590 
P.2d at 550.   
  Thus, reasoned the Kah alekai court, the pivotal 
inquiry is whether the ballot  generates “a knowing and 
deliberate expression of voter choice .”  Id.  The “broad 
authority” to propose amendments for ratification , we 
elaborated, “is subject to the limitation that the ballot must 
enable the voters to express their choice on the amendments ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 presented and be in such form and language as not to deceive or 
14mislead the public. ”  Id. at 338, 590 P.2d at 552 –53.  The 
court stated that this requirement can be met in part by the 
provision of supplemental voter information regarding the 
context and implications of a proposed amendment.  Id. at 339–
40, 590 P.2d at 553- 54.  “[W] here information placed before the 
electorate is neither deceptive nor misleading, ” we held,  “and 
they are given sufficient time within which to familiarize 
themselves with the contents and effect of the proposed 
amendments, they will be deemed to have cast informed ballots. ”  
Id. at 339–40, 590 P.2d at 553. 
  Kah alekai appears to have significantly informed the 
Hawai‘i State Legislature’s 1996 enactment  of various statutory 
requirements related to the ratification of proposed 
constitutional amendments.  See  1996 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 173 , §§ 
1-3 at 391- 93.  Notably, the Act  closely tracked language in 
Kahalekai in setting forth the rule that, when proposed by the 
legislature, “ [t] he language and meaning of a constitutional 
                                                           
 14 Although Kaha lekai appeared to rely on the “ratification” 
language in what is now 
article XVII of the Hawai ‘i Constitution, the court 
also approvingly cited  Kohler v. Tugwell, in which the federal district court 
indicated a similar requirement inheres in notions of due process.  See 292 
F.Supp. 978, 981 (E.D. La. 1968) (“The procedure f ollowed by Louisiana does 
not deprive the plaintiffs of Due Process for it is sufficient that 
Louisiana’s voters were informed by the ballot of the subject of the 
amendment, were given a fair opportunity by publication to consider its full 
text, and were not deceived by the ballot’s words.”), aff’d, 393 U.S. 531 
(1969). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 amendment shall be clear and it shall be neither misleading nor 
deceptive.”15  HRS § 11- 118.5. 
  Thus, proposed amendments and their corresponding 
ballot questions are both constitutionally and statutorily 
required to be phrased in clear language that is not likely to 
deceive or mislead voters as to their nature and effect.16  We 
                                                           
 15 It is noted that, by its plain text, HRS § 11 -118.5 refers to 
“the language and meaning of a constitutional amendment” rather than the 
language and meaning of the corresponding ballot question submitted to the 
voters for approval or rejection of the proposed constitutional amendment.  
We nonetheless hold that, given the clear parallels between HRS § 11 -118.5 
and our holding in Kah alekai, the legislature intended the statute to 
incorporate our precedent requiring that a ballot question be neither 
misleading nor deceptive.  The litigants appear to have presumed this 
interpretation to be correct throughout the proceedings in this case, and no 
party has argued that HRS § 11 -118.5 is inapplicable to the S.B. 2922 ballot 
question. 
  Along with establishing HRS § 11 -118.5, the 1996 Act also tasked 
the Chief Election Officer with “coordinat[ing] the preparation of 
appropriate voter education materials with the legislative reference bureau,” 
including “[a] summary, factsheet, and digest of the proposed constitutional 
amendment” that specified the amendment’s purpose, intent, and ramifications, 
as well as arguments for and against ratification.  See 1996 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 173, §§ 2- 3 at 392 -93.  This requirement was repealed in 2003, however, 
see 2003 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 8, § 1 at 16, and the ballot question itself is 
now the only statutorily required mechanism for providing voters with 
sufficient information to express a knowing and deliberate choice regarding 
ratification, as is constitutionally required.  Kaha lekai, 60 Haw. at 333, 
590 P.2d at 550.
 
 16 In considering the validity of amendments proposed by the 
legislature, this court has stated that “every enactment of the legislature 
is presumptively constitutional, and a party challenging the statute has the 
burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a r easonable doubt.”  Blair v. 
Cayetano, 73 Haw. 536, 542, 836 P.2d 1066, 1069 (1992) (quoting Schwab v. 
Ariyoshi, 58 Haw. 25, 31, 564 P.2d 135, 139 (1977)).  We note that proposed 
amendments and their corresponding ballot questions are not statutes, and the 
Counties’ challenge is based at least in part on statutory rather than 
constitutional grounds.  Nevertheless, article XV, section 3 of the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution specifically entrust s the legislature with the power to propose 
amendments, and courts owe deference to their coequal branch of government in 
its performance of constitutionally assigned functions.  Thus, we will a ct to 
invalidate a legislatively proposed amendment or ballot question only when it 
is clearly incompatible with a statutory or constitutional mandate.  See id. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26 therefore consider whether this standard is met by the ballot 
question: “Shall the legislature be authorized to establish, as 
provided by law, a surcharge on investment real property to be 
used to support public education?”   In making this 
determination, we consider how the average lay voter would 
17interpret the ballot question
.  W. Petroleum Importers, Inc. v. 
Friedt, 127 Wash.2d 420, 424, 899 P.2d 792, 794-95 (1995) 
(quoting Estate of Turner v. Dep ’t of Rev., 106 Wash.2d 649, 
654, 724 P.2d 1013, 1015  (1986)). 
1. The Ballot Question I s Unclear and Inherently Misleading in 
That It Does Not Disclose the Nature of the Proposed Change to 
the Constitution. 
  It is fundamental that, to provide a voter “ with 
sufficient information to make an informed decision about the 
true nature of the proposed constitutional amendment ,” a ballot 
question must “ at least put [voters] on notice of the changes 
being made ” to the constitution.  In re Initiative Petition No. 
409, 376 P.3d 250, 252, 254 (Okla. 2016) (addressing 
requirements for the “ statement of the gist of the proposition ” 
included in the header of an initiative petition proposing a 
constitutional amendment); see also  HRS § 11-118.5 (“The 
language and meaning of a constitutional amendment shall be 
                                                           
 17 Based on the declaration by the Chief Election Officer, the full 
text of the amendment at issue in this case would have been available to 
voters upon request. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 clear . . . .” (emphasis added)).  “When the major effect of a 
proposed measure would be a substantive change in existing law, 
the ballot [] should inform the reader of the scope of the 
change.
”  Rasmussen v. Kroger, 351 Or. 195, 198 (2011). 
  In some instances, this necessary information will not 
be self-evident.  For example, a proposal to establish a new 
governmental power or limitation suggests by negative 
implication that no such power  or limitation exists under 
current law.  Cf. Sprague v. Cortes , 636 Pa. 542, 564 (2016) 
(opinion of Todd, J.) (“By omitting any indication that there is 
a current mandatory retirement age in the Constitution, the 
plain import of the unadorned ballot question language is that a 
brand new provision requiring all judges of the Commonwealth to 
retire at age 75 is being added.”  (e mphases added) ).  When this 
implication creates an inaccurate or incomplete impression of 
the law, the failure of the ballot to correct the misconception 
will render it unclear, misleading, and deceptive.  As stated by 
Justice Todd of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, 
In everyday human interaction, in the arts and literature, 
as well as in legal documents, statutes, and constitutional 
provisions which govern our day- to-day affairs, there is a 
categorical difference between the act of creating 
something entirely new and altering something which already 
exists.  Language which suggests the former while, in 
actuality, doing the latter is, at the very least, 
misleading, and, at its worst, constitutes a ruse.  
Id. at 556– 57. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28   A number of courts from other jurisdictions have drawn 
such a distinction when considering the validity of ballot 
measures aimed at amending existing law.  In Askew v. Firestone, 
for example, the Supreme Court of Florida considered a 
legislatively proposed change to a provision of the state 
constitution that prohibited elected officials from lobbying for 
two years after leaving office.  
421 So.2d 151, 152- 53 (Fla. 
1982).  The proposal would have amended the provision to instead 
permit such lobbying when the 
former public official first file d 
a full public disclosure statement.  Id.  at 153.  The 
legislative description of the amendment to be placed on the 
ballot would have informed voters that the amendment prohibited 
“former legislators and statewide elected officers from 
representing other persons or entities for compensation before 
any state government body for a period of 2 years following 
vacation of office, unless they file full and public disclosure 
of their financial interests. ”  Id. 
  In holding the ballot description invalid, the Florida 
Supreme Court observed that  the “ballot summary neglect[ed]  to 
advise the public that there [was]  presently a complete two- year 
ban on lobbying before one’ s agency.”  Id. at 155.  The A skew 
court explained that, although the ballot accurately stated that 
the amendment would “require the filing of financial disclosure 
before anyone may appear before any agency for the two years ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 after leaving office ,” the description did not disclose the 
“amendment’s chief effect,” which wa s “to abolish the present 
two-year total prohibition. ”  Id. (emphasis omitted).  The court 
thus stated, “T he problem . . . lies not with what the summary 
says, but, rather, with what it does not say. ”  Askew, 421 So.2d 
at 156.   
  T he Florida Supreme Court held that the description 
failed “to give fair notice ” that it would establish  “an 
exception to a present prohibition. ”  Id.  The ballot was 
therefore “misleading to the public concerning material changes 
to an existing constitutional provision,” the court concluded.  
Id.; see also Wadhams v. Bd. of Cty. Comm 'rs of Sarasota Cty., 
567 So.2d 414, 416 (Fla. 1990) (holding that a ballot that 
informed voters solely of how the amended constitutional 
provision would read if the amendment was approved was invalid 
for failing to disclose the language or effect of the provision 
prior to amendment); Lane v. Lukens , 48 Idaho 517 (1929) 
(holding that a ballot question that asked whether the state 
constitution should be amended 
such that the terms of office of 
various officials “ shall be limited to four years ” was invalid 
for failing to disclose that terms were already limited to two 
years under then-existing law). 
  Such is the case with the S.B. 2922 ballot question.  
By asking the voter only whether “ the legislature [shall] be ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30 authorized to establish, as provided by law, a surcharge on 
investment real property to be used to support public 
education,” the ballot question suggests surcharges on 
investment real property are
 not authorized under current law.18  
But this implic ation provides an  inaccurate picture of the law 
as it stands and the manner in which it would be altered by the 
proposed amendment.  
  
Under article VIII, section 3 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution, the counties currently have the exclusive 
authority to tax real property within the State of 
Hawai‘i.  As 
stated, the ballot question reads  as follows: “Shall the 
legislature be authorized to establish, as provided by law, a 
surcharge on investment real property to be used to support 
public education?”   The question contains no information from 
which a voter could ascertain that the counties already have the 
constitutional authority to impose the property tax at issue 
and, consequently, that the “chief effect” of the amendment 
would be to allow two different government entities to tax the 
same property.  Askew, 421 So.2d at 155.  Thus, as in Askew, the 
amendment does not give notice that it would establish “an 
                                                           
 18 Alternatively, as discussed below, a voter could read the phrase 
“as provided by law” to imply that specifically the state legislature is 
already empowered to establish the surcharge at issue and therefore infer 
that a vote in favor of the provision would preserve the status quo.  See 
infra section II.B.2.c .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31 exception to a present prohibition,” --namely, the current 
prohibition on the State taxing real property.  421 So.2d at 
156; see also Kahalekai, 60 Haw. at  338 n.7, 590 P.2d at  553 n.7 
(“[T]he ballot should contain a description of the proposition 
submitted in such language as to constitute a fair portrayal of 
the chief features
 of the proposition, in words of plain 
meaning, so that it can be understood by persons entitled to 
vote.”  (emphasis added) (quoting Wright v. Bd. of Trustees of 
Tatum Indep. Sch. Dist., 520 S.W.2d 787, 792 (Tex. Civ. App. 
1975))).   
  Indeed, to fully appreciate the scope of the proposed 
change, a voter would need to know that the Hawai ‘i Constitution 
provides independent taxing power to the counties; that the 
constitution currently allows only the counties to tax real 
property to the exclusion of all other government entities; and 
that the proposed amendment would make an exception to this 
exclusive authority of the counties by granting the State 
concurrent authority to tax what is presumably a subset of real 
property.  None of this information is conveyed by the ballot 
question, which is instead likely to leave the average lay voter 
with the false impression that a vote in favor of the amendment 
would allow investment real property to be taxed in the first ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 instance.19  The ballot question is thus “misleading to the 
public concerning material changes to an existing constitutional 
provision.”20  421 So.2d at 156. 
  If the legislature 
believes that an exception should 
be made to the constitutional prohibition placed upon the State 
as to the imposition of property taxes in order to fund public 
education, it is appropriate for the legislature “ to ask the 
citizens to modify that prohibition.  But such a change must 
stand on its own merits . . . . ”  Id.  The dearth of information 
contained in the S.B. 2922 ballot question does not reveal the 
true effect of the proposed amendment, and the average lay voter 
may be duly misled as a result.  This alone would be sufficient 
to hold that the ballot question is clearly incompatible with 
                                                           
 19 The necessary context could have been concisely conveyed  by 
asking, for example: “Should the exclusive authority of the counties to tax 
real property provided in  the constitution be amended to  also provide 
authority to the State legislature to establish  a surcharge on investment 
real property?” 
 20 The State alternatively contended in the circuit court and during 
oral argument that, because the fee contemplated by the proposed amendment 
would be a surcharge on the property taxes collected by the counties rather 
than an independent tax imposed directly upon real property, the State is 
already constitutionally authorized to enact such a fee pursuant to its 
general taxation power.  Assuming arguendo that the State’s interpretation is 
accurate, it would appear to render the proposed amendment superfluous as it 
would grant no powers to the State that it does not currently have.  Further, 
it would make the language of the amendment, which states the surtax is to be 
imposed on “real property” rather than on real property taxes, inaccurate.  
And, the discussed implication of the ballot question--that the State is not 
authorized to impose the discussed surcharge under current law--would also be 
incorrect.  Given the difficulties and inconsistencies that arise under the 
State’s argued interpretation, we again can  hardly say that the ballot 
question is sufficient to inform the average voter of the scope of the 
proposed change. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 the requirements of HRS § 11 -118.5 and article XVII of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution.  The deficiency is even more pronounced 
when viewed in light of the multiple other incidental ways in 
which the language of the ballot question is unclear or 
confusing. 
2. The Language and Effect of the Ballot Question is Potentially 
Confusing in a Number of Other Ways.  
  T here are a number of additional ways in which the 
amendment and its corresponding ballot question , “Shall the 
legislature be authorized to establish, as provided by law, a 
surcharge on investment real property to be used to support 
public education?”  are likely to confuse or mislead the average 
lay voter.  When these ambiguities and concerns  of potential 
misapprehension are considered together and in conjunction with 
the ballot question’s failure to disclose the overarching nature 
of the change it would enact,  the problematic nature of the 
ballot question is only magnified.  
a. “Surcharge”  
  Relying on Boyd v. Jordan , 35 P.2d 533 (Cal. 1934), 
the Counties argue that it is misleading to ask voters to 
authorize a new tax without ever using the term “tax.”  In Boyd, 
a constitutional amendment was proposed by citizens’ initiative 
that would have overhauled California’s tax system by, inter 
alia, allowing the State to impose a tax on all gross receipts.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 Id. at 471- 72.  In considering the validity of the initiative’s 
short title, “Initiative Measure Providing for Adoption of Gross 
Receipts Act,” the California Supreme Court noted that “[t] he 
essential features . . . and the sole purpose of the proposed 
measure, is to levy a tax to maintain the state and its 
political subdivisions. ”  Id. at 471-72.  Because “[t] he short 
title used in this petition ma[de]  no reference to a tax or to 
the fact that the proposed amendment [was]  a revenue measure ,” 
the court held that the title demonstrated neither the nature 
nor subject of the petition, and it was therefore likely to 
mislead the electors who were asked to sign the initiative.  Id.  
at 472; see also Walton v. McDonald, 97 S.W.2d 81, 82 (Ark. 
1936) (invalidating a ballot entitled “ An Act to provide for the 
assistance of aged and/or blind persons and funds therefor, the 
administration and distribution of same, penalties for the 
violation of Act, and for other purposes ” for failing to 
disclose that the measure would impose a series of taxes).
 
  In this case, the parties dispute whether the 
amendment would in fact authorize the imposition of a tax on 
real property.  The State argues that, because the additional 
charge would be levied
 on the real property taxes imposed by the 
counties, it was appropriate for the legislature to use the word 
“surcharge”--a commonly used term meaning “[a]n additional tax, 
charge, or cost.”  (Citing Surcharge, Black’s Law Dictionary  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 (10th ed. 2014).)  But this is contrary to the plain text of the 
amendment and ballot question, which ask voters to authorize the 
legislature to establish “ a surcharge on investment real 
property”--not on real property taxes imposed by the counties.  
If the amendment would indeed allow the State to
 impose an 
independent tax on real property, it is apparent  that the term 
surcharge does not obviously convey this meaning.  See Boyd, 35 
P.2d at 534 .  If, instead, the amendment would authorize only a 
dependent, supplemental charge added to an existing tax , the 
ballot question fails to accurately state upon what basis the 
surcharge will be calculated and levied.  In either event, the 
language and effect of the amendment and ballot question cannot 
be said to be clear in this regard as HRS § 11 -118.5 requires. 
b. “Investment Real Property”  
  The Counties also challenge the legislature’s failure 
to define the term “investment real property” in the ballot 
question and amendment.  Pointing out that earlier versions of 
S.B. 2922 specifically limited the provision to property “for 
which the owner does not qualify for a homeowner’s [tax] 
exemption,” the Counties contend that virtually any real 
property can be considered a form of investment in the absence 
of such a limitation.   (Citing S.B. 2922, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. 
(2018) and S.B. 2922, S.D.1, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2018).)   The 
amendment and ballot question is therefore mislead ing and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
36 deceptive, the Counties argue, in that it falsely conveys to 
voters that the surcharge would be limited to a subset of real 
property that does not include personal residences when in 
reality the amendment
 would permit the legislature to tax all 
real property. 
 
 This court has specifically stated that “ real estate 
may be purchased with an intent to reside on the parcel of 
property and, concurrently, with an intent to hold the property 
in anticipation of an appreciation in the parcel’ s resale 
value.”  Cieri v. Leticia Query Realty, Inc., 80 Hawai i 54, 67, 
905 P.2d 29, 42 (1995) .  We accordingly held that “ the plain and 
obvious meaning of the term ‘personal investment’  includes real 
estate or residences. ”  Id.  It would thus appear that the plain 
language of the amendment, considered in isolation, would allow 
21the legislature to tax virtually any real property.   Indeed, 
the State contended during oral argument that, if the amendment 
were enacted, determining what real property qualified as an 
                                                           
 21 In practice, this court interprets a constitutional provision in 
harmony with other constitutional provisions and “in the light of the 
circumstances under which it was adopted.”  Hanabusa v. Lingle, 105 Hawai ‘i 
28, 32, 93 P.3d 670, 674 (2004) (quoting Blair v. Harris, 98 Hawai ‘i 176, 179 , 
45 P.3d 798, 801 (2002)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
37 investment subject to the surcharge would fall within the 
discretion of the legislature.22  
  
Yet this is not the impression conveyed by the 
amendment’s and ballot question’s use  of the term “investment 
real property.”  If the amendment was meant to grant the 
legislature the unrestrained discretion to tax any real 
property, it could have achieved this effect without employing 
the word “investment. ”  By qualifying the “real property”  that 
the surcharge would apply to with the term “investment,” the 
amendment and ballot question suggest that the legislature would 
be empowered to impose the surcharge on only some real property-
-namely, non- owner-occupied real estate acquired solely to 
generate revenue for the property owner.  To the extent this 
implication is inaccurate, the ballot question is unclear and 
misleading. 
c. “As Provided By Law”  
  The Counties further argue that the ballot question’s 
and amendment’s use of the phrase “as provided by law” is 
deceptive and misleading in that the average lay voter is likely 
to believe the legislature is already authorized under current 
law to impose the contemplated surcharge.  The State responds 
                                                           
22  Oral Argument at 00:34:27 -00:34:34, City & Cty. of Honolulu v. 
State of Hawai‘ i (No. SCPW- 18-733), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/18/SCOA_101818_SCPW_18_733.mp3.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
38 that the phrase merely indicates that the provision is not self-
executing and would require implementing legislation once 
enacted.   
  The expression “as provided by law” appears throughout 
the Hawai‘ i Constitution , and this court has in the past 
recognized that the construction is inherently ambiguous.  In 
some instances, “a refere nce to a right being exercised ‘ as 
provided by law’ may reflect an intent that implementing 
legislation is anticipated .”  Cty. of Hawai ‘i v. Ala Loop 
Homeowners, 123 Hawai ‘i 391, 412, 235 P.3d 1103, 1124 (2010).  In 
State v. Rodrigues, for example, this court considered article 
I, section 11, which provides that “[w] henever a grand jury is 
impaneled, there shall be an independent counsel appointed as 
provided by law” whose term and compensation are “as provided by 
law.”  63 Haw. 412, 414, 629 P.2d 1111, 1113 (1981).  Upon 
review, we held that
 the framers had used the phrase “as 
provided by law” to indicate “ further legislation was 
required 
to implement the amendment. ”  Id. at 416, 629 P.2d at 1114. 
  In other contexts, however, the use of “as provided by 
law” in a constitutional provision may be “ simply referring to 
an existing body of statutory and other law on a particular 
subject.”  Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai ‘i at 412, 235 P.3d at 
1124.  In United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL- CIO v. 
Yogi, for instance, this court held that, in guaranteeing the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
39 right of public employees “to organize for the purpose of 
collective bargaining as provided by law ,” the provision now 
codified as article XIII, section 2 was intended to incorporate 
the body of “pre- existing federal and state statutes, 
constitutional provisions, and court cases which give meaning to 
the term ‘collective bargaining.’”  101 Hawai ‘i 46, 51, 62 P.3d 
189, 194 (2002). 
 
 To determine in which sense the phrase was intended, 
this court considers the history of the provision in addition to 
its plain language.  Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai ‘i at 412–13, 
235 P.3d at 1124– 25.  The average lay voter, however, does not 
have the benefit of reviewing the legislature’s or framers’  
committee reports while in the voting booth and must rely on the 
language of the amendment and ballot question to determine the 
words’ intended meaning. 
  In general, the phrase “as provided by law” follows 
the portion of the constitutional provision that is defined by 
some other sources of law.  When article I, section 11 specifies 
that “[w]henever a grand jury is impaneled, there shall be an 
independent counsel appointed as provided by law
,” for instance, 
it is the appointment process of the independent counsel that is 
implemented through legislation.  Similarly, in article XIII, 
section 2’s  guarantee of the right to “ collective bargaining as ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
40 provided by law,” it is the collective bargaining that is 
defined through the body of relevant statutes and case law.23 
  
Thus, based on the natural reading of the question 
“Shall the legislature be authorized to establish, as provided 
by law, a surcharge on investment real property to be used to 
support public education?”  it is not the surcharge on investment 
real property that is defined by some other source of law, but 
rather the legislature’s authorization to establish such a 
surcharge.  In other words, the placement of the phrase within 
the ballot question may  lead the average lay voter to believe 
that the legislature is already authorized by some other source 
of law to impose the surcharge at issue and that a vote in favor 
of the amendment maintains the status quo.24  Given this likely 
confusion, the Counties are correct that the language of the 
amendment and ballot question is unclear and misleading in this 
respect. 
                                                           
 23 See also, e.g., Haw. Const. art. IX, § 3 (empowering the State to 
provide social services to “persons who are found to be in need of and are 
eligible for such assistance and services as provided by law”); Haw. Const. 
art. XVI, § 3.5 (calling for “a commission on salaries as provided by law”).  
 24 This misconception is further reinforced because the concept of 
implementing legislation is already embodied in the ba llot question’s 
reference to “the legislature” “establish[ing]” the contemplated surcharge.  
In other words, had the ballot question simply read, “Shall the legislature 
be authorized to establish a surcharge on investment real property to be used 
to support public education?” it would have wholly conveyed that the 
amendment would allow the legislature to enact subsequent legislation 
imposing the surcharge in question.  The phrase “as provided by law” is 
redundant in achieving this result, and the average lay voter may assign 
other significance to its inclusion in order to make the clause non -
superfluous.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
41 d. “To Support Public Education”  
  Lastly, the Counties contend that the ballot 
question’s reference to “support [ing] public education” is 
likely to mislead the average lay voter into believing s tate 
spending on public education will necessarily increase if the 
amendment is enacted,  when in actuality the amendment does not 
require a net increase in education spending.  The State 
responds that the funds raised through the surcharge would be 
required to be used to fund public education, as the ballot 
question indicates.  But, as the Counties aptly argue, 
“[m]oney,” including the legislat ure’s budgetary expenditures, 
“is fungible.”  Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. 1, 
31 (2010).  An increase in funding from one source, including 
the proposed surcharge, can be offset by a decrease from other 
sources.  Indeed, the State acknowledged during oral argument 
that, should the amendment be enacted, nothing would prevent the 
legislature from funding public education entirely through 
revenues raised through the surcharge while repurposing all 
25other funds.    
  An entreaty “ to support public education ” is “an 
appeal to all humane instincts ,” and a voter would not be 
                                                           
 25 Oral Argument at 00:45:54, City & Cty. of Honolulu v. State of 
Hawai‘i  (No. SCPW- 18-733), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/18/SCOA_101818_SCPW_18_733.mp3.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
42 unreasonable in assuming that such a measure would in fact 
result in an increase in funding for public education.  Walton, 
97 S.W.2d at 82.  Yet by its plain text, the ballot question and 
amendment make no such guarantee, and no explanatory materials 
were provided that would dispel this misconception.   
  The legislature in  its wisdom enacted HRS § 11- 118.5 
to ensure that the language of a proposed amendment and ballot 
question clearly conveys the amendment ’s meaning when feasible.  
When it becomes apparent, however, that practical textual 
constraints in stating the ballot question may prevent it from 
being set forth with the specificity or clarity necessary to 
prevent the average voter from forming 
an incorrect  impression, 
the legislature should consider whether comple mentary materials 
may aid in clarifying the decision voters are to be tasked with 
making.26 
                                                           
 26 This court has in the past noted that supplemental materials 
similar to those that the Chief Election Officer was formerly tasked with 
preparing are an effective method of  informing the electorate of the details 
of proposed amendments.  See supra note 15; Kahalekai, 60 Haw. at 340 n.9, 
590 P.2d at 554 n.9 (“We think the ‘Con -Con Summary’ was an excellent method 
of informing the voter of the proposed amendments.  The Convention, however, 
could have devoted more space than it did to a comparative analysis of the 
substantive effect of the proposed amendments. ”).  However, when the ballot 
question fails to appropriately disclose the scope and effect of the proposed 
change, even providing  supplemental voter materials will not serve to cure 
the deficiency as may be possible in instances where optimum specificity  or 
clarity is not present.  See supra section II.B.1. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
43 III. CONCLUSION 
  The Hawai ‘i Constitution vests “broad authority” in the 
legislature to propose amendments to its provisions to be 
ratified by the electorate.  Kahalekai v. Doi, 60 Haw. 324, 338, 
590 P.2d 543, 552-53 (1979).  “But such a change must stand on 
its own merits
” and “cannot fly under false colors .”  Askew v. 
Firestone, 421 So.2d 151, 156 (Fla. 1982).  As the legislature 
recognized in enacting HRS § 11- 118.5, the provisions of our 
constitution are of such foundational importance that the utmost 
care must be taken to apprise citizens of the effect of their 
vote on a proposed constitutional amendment.  When the language 
or effect of a proposed amendment or its corresponding ballot 
question is unclear, misleading, or deceptive, the ballot is 
not 
capable of generating the “ knowing and deliberate expression of 
voter choice” necessary for ratification.  Kahalekai, 60 Haw. at 
333, 590 P.2d at 550.  The ballot question in the present case 
is flawed in not presenting the information necessary to produce 
such a choice, and this court thus invalidated the ballot 
question in accordance to our law.  
Donna Y.L. Leong 
Robert M. Kohn 
Nicolette Winter 
for petitioner 
City and County of Honolulu 
 
Brian A. Bilberry  
for petitioner  
County of Maui  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
44 Laureen L. Martin 
for petitioner 
County of Hawai‘ i 
 
Matthew M. Bracken 
For petitioner 
County of Kaua ‘i 
 
Russell A. Suzuki 
Valri Lei Kunimoto 
Patricia Ohara 
for respondent 
 
Thomas Yamachika 
for amicus curiae 
Tax Foundation of Hawai ‘i 
 
 