                                                            
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
         
         
         
           
         
            
         
        
         
  
         Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-20-0000509 27-AUG-2020 03:49 PM 
SCPW-20-0000509  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
IN  THE  MATTER  OF  INDIVIDUALS  IN  CUSTODY  
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
ORIGINAL  PROCEEDING  
ORDER  RE:  
PETTY  MISDEMEANOR,  MISDEMEANOR,  AND  FELONY  DEFENDANTS  
(By:  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  J.,    
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  with  
McKenna,  J.,  and  Wilson,  J.,  each   
concurring  and  dissenting  separately )  1
On August 12,
 2020, the Office of the Public Defender 
filed a petition for extraordinary writ pursuant to HRS §§ 602-
4,
 602-5(5), and 602-5(6) and/or a writ of mandamus 
(“Petition”). The Petition seeks, among other things, a 
reduction of the inmate populations at the State’s correctional 
centers and facilities in an effort to mitigate the harm that 
the COVID-19 pandemic may inflict upon inmates, the correctional 
staff, and the people of Hawai‘i. In this regard, the Petition 
seeks the expedited release of certain categories of inmates 
from the State’s correctional centers and facilities, without 
the filing and hearing of individualized motions for release. 
1 A concurrence and dissent by Wilson, J., is forthcoming.  2 
   
         
        
          
       
  
 
          
     
 
         
       
       
       
      
 
            
      
   
 
        
            
         
         
         
          
          On  August   17,  2020,  answers  to  the  Petition  were  filed  
by:   (1)  Nolan  P.  Espinda,  Director  of  the  Department  of  Public  
Safety,  State  of  Hawai‘i  (“DPS”)  and  Edmund  (Fred)  K.B.  Hyun,  
chairperson  of  the  Hawaiʻi  Paroling  Authority;  (2)  Mitchell  D.  
Roth,  Prosecuting  Attorney  for  the  County  of  Hawaiʻi;  (3)  Donald  
S.  Guzman,  Prosecuting  Attorney  for  the  County  of  Maui;   
(4)  Dwight  D.  Nadamoto,  Prosecuting  Attorney  for  the  City  and  
County  of  Honolulu;  and  (5)  Justin  F.  Kollar,  Prosecuting  
Attorney  for  the  County  of  Kauaʻi.   The  answers  addressed  the  
OPD’s  requested  relief,  stated  objections  and  concerns,  and  
provided  alternative  considerations.    
To date,
 the court has entered several orders to 
address the issues raised in the Petition: 
(1) Amended Order Re: Petty Misdemeanor and Misdemeanor 
Defendants, filed on August 17, 2020 (“Misdemeanor 
Order”); 
(2) Amended Order Re: Felony Defendants, filed on August 
18, 2020 (“Felony Order”); 
(3) Order Re: Petty Misdemeanor, Misdemeanor, and Felony 
Defendants at the Maui Community Correctional Center, 
the Hawai‘i Commu nity Correctional Center, and the 
Kauai Community Correctional Center, filed on August 
24, 2020 (“Neighbor Island Order”); and 
(4) Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion for 
Clarification and/or Reconsideration, filed on August 
26, 2020. 
The
 COVID-19 pandemic has caused a public health 
emergency. Since July 2020, Hawai‘i has seen a surge of COVID-19 
cases in Hawai‘i, including at the correctional centers and 
facilities, with record numbers of positive cases and increased 
hospitalizations being reported. Given the virulent spread of 
the virus within close quarters, any spread of COVID-19 within 
any of the correctional centers and facilities also has the  3 
            
          
          
        
        
        
        
         
          
        
        
           
     
      
         
       
       
        
         
          
       
      
         
  
        
    
         
    
           
   
         
          potential to tax the capacities of the health care systems on 
each of the islands and the limited resources of Hawai‘i’s 
community health care providers. Responding to the impact of 
this crisis in Hawai‘i’s community correctional centers and 
facilities requires a careful consideration of interests, both 
for public health and public safety. 
Upon
 consideration of the submissions and record in 
SCPW-20-0000509, and the current state of the COVID-19 pandemic 
in our community, including the rising numbers in the State’s 
correctional centers and facilities, and pursuant to this 
court’s authority under Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§ 602
-
5(3) & (6) and § 706-625, Governor David Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, and HRS § 601-1.5, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED as follows: 
1. To the extent there are individuals serving 
intermittent sentences, the custodial portion of such 
defendants’ intermittent sentence shall be suspended while 
Governor Ige’s Emergency Proclamations remain in effect, or 
alternatively the sentences may be deemed satisfied at the 
discretion of the sentencing judge. The trial courts are 
discouraged from imposing intermittent sentences while Governor 
Ige’s Emergency Proclamations remain in effect. 
2. For purposes of this order, the following are 
"excluded offenses": 
a. all felony offenses in HRS chapter 707, 
including sexual assault; 
b. burglary in the first or second degree (HRS 
§§ 708-810, 708-811); 
c. robbery in the first or second degree (HRS §§ 
708-840, 708-841); 
d. abuse of family or household members (HRS § 
709- 906(7) & (8)), violation of a temporary restraining order  4 
            
       
       
     
        
              
      
        
         
 
        
        
          
         
          
           
         
            
      
          
        
           
          
         
         
    
          
         
           
         
        
          (HRS § 586-4), violation of an order for protection (HRS § 586-
11), or any other family court crimes; 
e. violation of a restraining order or 
injunction (HRS § 604-10.5); 
f. unauthorized entry in a dwelling in the 
first degree or in the second degree as a class C felony (HRS §§ 
708-812.55, 708-812.6(1) & (2)); 
g. violation of interstate or intrastate travel 
quarantine requirements, as ordered pursuant to HRS ch. 127A; 
and 
h. attempted commission of the offenses (HRS §§ 
705-500, 705-501) specified in a through g above. 
3. With regard to individuals who have been arrested 
or detained solely on petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor offenses 
that are not "excluded offenses" since the Misdemeanor Order or 
the Neighbor Island Order were filed and through the filing date 
of this order, such individuals shall expeditiously be released 
subject to the terms and conditions of release set forth in the 
Misdemeanor Order or Neighbor Island Order. 
4. With regard to individuals who are arrested and 
detained solely on petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor offenses 
after the filing date of this order that are not "excluded 
offenses," the respective trial court shall not set bail but 
shall release such individuals on their own recognizance or 
supervised release, and may impose conditions of release under 
HRS § 804-7.1. 
5. With regard to individuals who are arrested and 
detained solely on felony offenses that are not "excluded 
offenses" after the filing date of this order, the trial courts 
are encouraged to regularly employ the practice of releasing 
defendants without imposing bail, including the release of 
inmates on their own recognizance, on signature bonds, or on  5       
      
      /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
         
          
          
           
     
             
          
            
          
         
            
     
         
          
         
          
      
          
           
            
           
           
       
             
 
           
     
      
                  supervised  release, unless the defendant poses a significant 
risk to public health or safety, and should consider other 
conditions of release under HRS § 804-7.1, including but not 
limited to, confinement to a home or other location with or 
without electronic monitoring. 
6. With regard to the Neighbor Island Order, it is 
clarified that an inmate who received a positive COVID-19 test 
result may be released without a re-test so long as the inmate 
is determined to no longer be infectious pursuant to the 
guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
and subject to the terms and conditions of release set forth in 
the Neighbor Island Order. 
7. With regard to defendants for whom motions for 
revocation or modification of probation have been filed based on 
convictions that are not "excluded offenses," judges should not 
issue bench warrants unless a defendant poses a significant risk 
to public health or safety. 
8. This order does not preclude any party from 
taking any other steps as may be deemed appropriate to obtain 
the release of an inmate during this time of emergency or stay 
any pending motions seeking the release of inmates. This order 
also does not affect DPS’s authority under the law to release 
inmates on its own accord. 
9. This court reserves its authority to order other 
measures. 
10. This order shall remain in effect until further 
order of this court. 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai‘i, August 27, 2020. 