***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
NICK GRUBE,  Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
THE HONORABLE ROM A. TRADER,  Judge of the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit, State of Hawai i, Respondent Judge,  
 
and 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I; ALAN AHN; and TIFFANY MASUNAGA, Respondents. 
 
 
SCPW-17-0000927 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
(CR. NO. 15- 1-1338) 
 
JUNE 5, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE VIOLA, IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  Petitioner Nick Grube filed a petition for writs  of 
prohibition and mandamus (petition) to obtain access to judicial 
records and documents related to a circuit court criminal Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCPW-17-0000927
05-JUN-2018
09:49 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 2 proceeding held on September 9, 2016.  These court documents and 
records were sealed, and have remained sealed, by a series of 
circuit court orders.  The petition also seeks an order 
prohibiting the circuit court judge from requiring Grube to 
retain an attorney in order to assert a constitutional right of 
access to judicial records
. 
  Upon our review of the procedures employed by the 
circuit court, we conclude that the court did not provide 
adequate notice and opportunity for interested persons objecting 
to the sealing 
to be heard prior to issuing its order  and failed 
to sufficiently  articulate the reasoning supporting the order in 
its findings.  In addition , upon reviewing the sealed records 
and documents, we hold that the substantive requirements for 
sealing were not met in this case because the record fails  to 
demonstrate a compelling need sufficient to overcome the 
public’s constitutional right of access.   
 
 We further hold that, because the constitutional right 
of access inheres in every member of the public and Grube 
asserted this interest as an individual, Grube had a right to 
represent himself in the unsealing proceedings.  The circuit 
court therefore also erred by refusing to allow Grube to appear 
pro se and requiring him to obtain counsel. 
  Accordingly, we grant the petition and order that the 
circuit court unseal the documents-- provided,  however, that the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 3 effective date of our directive shall be ten days after the 
filing of this opinion
, unless within the ten days the State 
requests a hearing to provide additional evidence to  demonstrate 
that the documents or some portion thereof must remain sealed to 
serve a governmental interest of sufficient gravity to overcome 
the public’s constitutional right of access .  Following any such 
hearing, the circuit court shall promptly prepare specific 
findings in conformance with t he substantive requirements set 
forth in this opinion if these requirements have been met;  
otherwise our order shall take immediate effect.  We further 
order that Grube be permitted to represent himself in any 
further proceedings on this matter. 
I. BACKGROUND  
A. The Criminal Case 
  Alan Ahn, a Honolulu police officer, and Tiffany 
Masunaga, his girlfriend, were charged 
by indictment in the 
Circuit Court of  the First Circuit (circuit court) with multiple 
drug-related offenses on August 26, 2015.1  Ahn has since pleaded 
no contest and been  sentenced to a sixty -day jail term as a 
condition of a four -year probationary term.  By  contrast, the 
                                                           
 1 In deciding this case, we take judicial notice of all records, 
sealed and unsealed, in the underlying criminal case.  See State v. Akana , 68 
Haw. 164, 165, 706 P.2d 1300, 1302 (1985) (“This court has validated the 
practice of taking judicial notice of a court’s own records in an 
interrelated proceeding where the parties are the same.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 4 public record indicates that Masunaga’s case is still pending as 
of this filing,  and no disposition of the charges is reflected.   
1. Sealing of Records, Files, and Proceedings Relating to the 
September 9, 2016 Hearing 
  On Friday, September 9, 2016, the circuit court held a 
hearing scheduled to begin at 4:00 p.m.,  the nature and scope of 
which is not discernible from the public record.2  Following the 
proceeding, the circuit court entered an order sealing the 
entire legal file in the case.  On September 16, the court filed 
a second order superseding its September 9 sealing order.   
Then, o
n October 11, 2016, the circuit 
court issued a 
third order setting aside its September 9 and September 16 
sealing orders.  T
he court concluded that “[u] pon further review 
. . . the prior orders were overly broad in that they resulted 
in the sealing of the entire legal file pertaining to both 
Defendants.”
  The court redefined the scope of the previous 
order to seal “those documents, court minutes, transcripts and 
other information relating to the September 9, 2016 proceeding, ” 
including the two previous orders that it had set aside.   
  In its October 11 order, the circuit court stated that 
it had been advised that the proceedings in this case related to 
potentially one or more ongoing investigations.  Without 
                                                           
 2 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 5 providing further details, the court conclude d that public 
disclosure of the September 9, 2016 proceeding wa s substantially 
likely to interfere with these ongoing investigations and that 
less drastic alternatives to partially sealing the record were 
not viable to maintain the integrity of the law enforcement 
operations.  The court thus held that the “the public’s right of 
access must yield to the compelling investigatory needs of law 
enforcement.”  The court further directed the State and Masunaga 
to timely inform it when circumstances change such that 
rescinding the order would be appropriate. 
  
As a result of the court’s order, all documents and 
information relating to the September 9, 2016 hearing remained 
fully sealed and inaccessible to the public , including the two 
previous sealing orders.3 
2. Motion to Unseal Records 
  On September 29, 2017, Grube, a reporter for Honolulu 
Civil Beat, Inc. (Civil Beat),  filed a motion to unseal 
                                                           
 3 The public docket entries for the sealed documents now read in 
some variation as follows:  
Other 
Converted DOC ID: SEAL, DOC Name: (SEALED) DOCUMENT (PER 
ORDER REMOVING DOCUMENTS FILED ON SEPTEMBER 9, 2016 & 
SEPTEMBER 16, 2016 FROM DOCKET & SEALING) (CALL LDB), 
Comments: NOTE: REFER TO DOCKET NO 59 – DOCUMENT SEALED AS 
PART OF DOCKET NO 59)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 6 “whatever documents were sealed” by the October 11, 2016 order.   
The motion was based on the “constitutional right of access 
provided by the First A mendment of the U.S.  Constitution and 
article I, section 4 of the Hawai i Constitution.”    
a. October 31, 2017 Hearing 
  A hearing 
on the motion to unseal was held on October 
31, 2017.  At the opening of the hearing, Grube identified 
himself as 
“Nick Grube, Honolulu Civil Beat .”  When the court 
then asked if he was representing Civil Beat’s interest in the 
matter, Grube responded “Uh -huh.”  The court explained to Grube 
that under Hawai i law, business entities must be represented by 
an attorney.  Grube objected, stating that he made the motion on 
his own and would like to proceed pro se.  Citing the manner in 
which the motion had been captioned,4 the court declined to allow 
Grube to represent himself: “[A] lthough you, yourself, may be 
                                                           
 4 In the space at the top left of the center of the first page of 
the motion to unseal, the following was indicated:  
NICK GRUBE  
Honolulu Civil Beat Inc.  
[address]  
[City, State, zip code]  
[phone] 
[fax number]  
[email address]  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 7 partially making this request, it was filed under the caption 
you, as representing Civil Beat. ”  The court continued the 
hearing to November 7, 2016, instructed  Grube to make inquiries 
as to whether Civil Beat would retain an attorney, and ordered 
the State and the defendants to file responses to Grube’s motion 
to unseal. 
b. Responses to Motion to Unseal 
  Masunaga and Ahn filed statements of no opposition to 
Grube’s motion.  Masunaga indicated that she had  not been fully 
advised by her prior counsel regarding the motion to seal and 
had not given  prior counsel permission to make representations 
regarding the motion on her behalf.  She also stated that she 
believes the sealing request was made to protect certain 
individuals related to the prosecutor  then assigned to the case,  
whom her prior counsel was also represent ing in a separate  
criminal matter in federal court.  
  The State filed an opposition to Grube ’s motion , 
arguing that the circuit court properly identified the State’s 
compelling interest in preserving the integrity of 
investigations and sufficiently tailored its order to serve that 
interest.  The opposition included a declaration by  a deputy ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 8 prosecuting attorney averr ing that the investigations identified 
in the sealing order remained ongoing.5 
c. November 7, 2017 Hearing on the Motion to Unseal 
  On November 7, 2017, the court held the continued 
hearing on the motion to unseal.  At the outset of the hearing, 
Grube, through his counsel, again objected to the circuit court 
requiring him to retain counsel.  Counsel clarified that he was 
representing Grube in his personal capacity and not Civil Beat, 
and he further stated that Grube was asserting his personal 
constitutional right of access.  The court responded that the 
contents of the motion and the manner in which it was captioned 
led the court to believe Grube was representing Civil Beat’s 
interests, which only a licensed attorney was permitted to do 
under relevant Hawai i law. 
  Regarding the unsealing motion, the court engaged the 
deputy prosecuting attorney appearing for the State in the 
following colloquy: 
 THE COURT:  . . . [F]irst of all, is the 
-- is -- are 
there one or more investigations that are currently active 
and ongoing that relate to the instant case?  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  Yes, your Honor.  
                                                           
 5 The prosecutor initially assigned to Masunaga’s case, whom 
Masunaga’s prior defense counsel represented in a separate federal criminal 
case, did not sign the submissions or enter  court appearance s related to 
Grube’s unsealing motion, including the petition currently before this court.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 9  THE COURT:  And the information and documents that 
were previously sealed by virtue of th e Court’s October 11, 
2016 order, do these materials and information, do they 
relate to these one or more investigations?  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  Yes, your Honor.  
 THE COURT:  All right.  And in your view, would 
disclosure of those sealed materials substantially 
interfere with or have an adverse impact on any of these 
investigations?  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  Potentially very serious and adverse, 
your Honor.  
 THE COURT:  All right.  And I’m going to ask you: In 
what way or how?  I’m not asking you right now for the 
specifics as far as that goes, but I need to understand a 
little bit more in terms of how you believe -- if you can 
explain how disclosure would detrimentally impact those 
investigations.  And, basically, without getting into the 
specifics, for example, I think Mr . Grube’s filing and the 
case authority is fairly clear.  
 . . . [D]o you have any concerns about potential 
targets of these -- this or these investigations becoming 
informed about this information?  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  Yes, your Honor.  Generally, yes.  
 THE COURT:  And how would that pose a problem?  I 
don’t want to presume anything.  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  Your Honor, they could either flee or 
destroy evidence.  We would also be concerned about safety 
of witnesses.  
 THE COURT:  And do you have any -- any sense for how 
much longer these investigations or an investigation is 
anticipated to take, if you know?  
 [PROSECUTOR] :  I do not know, your Honor.  All I can 
say is that it is ongoing.  
  Grube then argued through his attorney that the mere 
assertion of an ongoing investigation is not sufficient to 
override the public’s constitutional right of access to judicial ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 10 records and proceedings.6  Rather, Grube explained, the State 
must provide evidence demonstrating an active investigation to 
which disclosure would pose clear potential harm , which the 
court may then verify through in-camera review.   
  
Grube urged the court to examine more carefully the 
State’s justifi cation for sealing in this case, pointing to 
Masunaga’s statement of no opposition in which she disclaimed 
any interest in sealing the documents and stated her belief that 
the motion was intended to protect individuals associated with 
the previously assigned prosecutor.  Given Masunaga’s  personal 
indifference to the disclosure, Grube argued, the safety of 
witnesses in the case was not a valid concern.  Grube also 
requested that the court take judicial notice of the federal 
criminal case against the prior prosecutor , in which the U.S. 
Attorney had argued that the prosecutor and Masunaga’s prior 
counsel had a history of improperly  exchanging confidential 
investigatory information.  Grube contended that, in light of 
this alleged history of misused  confidential information, the 
court should not accept at face value the State’s  general 
assertions that secrecy is needed to protect an investigation. 
                                                           
 6 All further arguments and filings attributed to Grube were made 
through his retained counsel.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 11   Lastly, Grube  argued that sealing the entirety of the 
sealed documents and their corresponding docket entries was not 
narrowly tailored inasmuch as any information deemed to be a 
threat to ongoing investigations  could be redacted, preserving 
the public’s right of access to the remainder of the documents .   
  At the conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court 
orally denied the motion to unseal, stating that it “accept[ed] 
the prosecutor’s representations” and was not going “to attempt 
to inject the Court’s nose into the investigations that are 
ongoing.”   The court emphasized that the State and Masunaga were 
required to inform the court should circumstances change such 
that the sealing order was no longer needed.   
d. Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying the 
Motion to Unseal 
  On November 24, 2017, the circuit court entered its 
findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order denying the 
motion to unseal.  The court found that there were legitimate 
concerns that disclosure of the documents would adversely impact 
one or more ongoing investigations and the safety of 
individuals.  The court then reaffirmed all the prior rulings 
made in the sealing order, stating that “the public’s qualified 
right to access must defer to the State’s compelling and 
substantial interest in sealing the subject records ” because the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 12 sealing was “essential to preserve higher values ” and narrowly 
tailored. 
B. Proceedings Before this Court 
1. Grube’s P etition for Writ of Prohibition and Writ of 
Mandamus   
  On December 29, 2017, Grube filed a petition with this 
court seeking a writ of prohibition (1) prohibiting 
the circuit 
court from enforcing any order to seal records and (2) 
prohibiting the circuit court from requiring him to retain an 
attorney in order to assert his public access claim.  Grube also 
sought a writ of mandamus directing the circuit court to comply 
with the standards for sealing set forth in Oahu Publications  
Inc. v. Ahn, 133 Hawai i 482, 331 P.3d 460 (2014).7 
  Grube argues that, under Ahn, vague statements that 
records in a criminal case may interfere with a separate law 
enforcement investigation are not sufficient to overcome the 
strong constitutional presumption that criminal proceedings and 
judicial records are open to the public.  (Citing 133 Hawai i at 
507, 331 P.3d at 458.)  While Grube acknowledges that, under the 
right circumstances, harm to an active criminal investigation 
may overcome the public’s  constitutional right of access,  he 
                                                           
 7 Because unsealing the currently sealed documents will require an 
order by the circuit court, we interpret Grube’s mandamus petition to also 
request an order directing the circuit court to unseal the documents.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 13 maintains that proof of such a compelling interest requires  more 
than an unsubstantiated assertion by the State.  The circuit 
court therefore erred
, Grube argues, by deferring to the State’s 
asserted justifications and failing to insist on evidence to 
support specifically identified threats to the investigation.  
  Grube also  contends that the scope of the circuit 
court’s order was excessive because the court did not attempt to 
learn the nature of the ongoing investigation in order to assess 
whether redaction would sufficiently serve law enforcement’s 
compelling interest.  The sealing order was therefore not 
narrowly tailored, Grube argues, and 
erasing all re ferences to 
the scope and nature of the September 9, 2016 proceeding 
deprived the public of any meaningful opportunity to contest the 
sealing or suggest viable alternatives.  
  Lastly
, Grube contends that he had asserted his 
personal constitutional right of access and thus should have 
been permitted to represent himself under Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 605- 2 (1993).8  Grube explains that “Civil Beat” 
                                                           
 8 HRS § 605 -2 provides in relevant part as follows: 
Except as provided by the rules of court, no person shall 
be allowed to practice in any court of the State unless 
that person has been duly licensed so to do by the supreme 
court; provided that nothing in this chapter shall prevent 
any person, plaintiff, defendant, or accused, from 
appearing in person before any court, and there prosecuting 
or defending that person ’s, plaintiff’ s, defendant ’s, or 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 14 was included in the caption of his motion in order to comply 
with Hawai i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 2.2(d)(1) 
(2012),9 which requires a litigant to list an office address on 
all filings.  The circuit court therefore erred, Grube contends, 
by requiring him to retain an attorney in order to object to the 
sealing of judicial records. 
2. Responses to Grube’s Petition  
  By order entered on January 25, 2018, this court 
directed an answer to the petition.  Judge Trader notified the 
court of his intent not to submit a response.  Ahn and Masunaga 
each filed a response of no position.  Masunaga ’s answer 
reiterates that she was never fully advised by her prior counsel 
regarding the motion to seal and did not authorize any 
representations regarding the motion .  Masunaga further restate s 
her belief that the sealing request was made to protect the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
accused’s own cause, without the aid of legal counsel . . . 
. 
 9 HRPP Rule 2.2(d) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(d) Form of First Page of a Document.   Except as provided 
in paragraph (f), the first page of each document shall be 
in the following form:  
(1) The space at the top left of the center of the 
page shall contain the name, attorney number, office 
address, telephone number, facsimile number (if any), 
and electronic mail address of the attorney for the 
party in whose behalf the document is filed, or of 
the party if appearing pro se[.]  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 15 attorney prosecuting her, whom her prior counsel was 
simultaneously representing  in a separate proceeding, and  that 
her prior counsel did not properly consider whether the sealing 
would be in her best interest. 
  T he State filed an  answer opposing Grube’s petition  in 
which it argues that Grube’s contention s amount to assertions  
that the circuit court erred .  Mere error , the State contends, 
does not constitute a flagrant and manifest abuse of discretion 
such that issuance of a writ of mandamus or prohibition is 
appropriate.  The State also argues that the circuit court’s 
October 11, 2016 order properly identifie
d the State’s  
compelling interest in preserving the integrity of ongoing 
investigations.  The order was also narrowly tailored to serve 
that interest, the State maintains, because it was limited to 
one day of proceedings rather than the entire file.  
The State 
further contends that the court rightly declined to allow Grube, 
a non-attorney, to appear in a representative capacity for Civil 
Beat because HRS § 605- 1410 prohibits the unauthorized practice 
of law.   
                                                           
 10 HRS § 605 -14 (1993 & Supp. 2017) provides in relevant part as 
follows: 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or 
corporation to engage in or attempt to engage in or to 
offer to engage in the practice of law, or to do or attempt 
to do or offer to do any act constituting the practice of 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 16   Attached to the State’s answer is the declaration of a 
deputy prosecuting attorney.   The prosecutor avers that he has 
reviewed the records and files relating to this case.   
Substantively, the prosecutor ’s declaration states only that 
“[i]nvestigations into matters related to information presented 
at the September 9, 2016 proceeding are still ongoing.  Because 
the investigation is ongoing, the Circuit Court’s order to seal 
the proceedings remains valid. ” 
II. DISCUSSION 
A. The Motion to Unseal 
  The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and 
article I, section 4 of the 
Hawaii Constitution grant the public 
a right of access to court proceedings in c riminal cases .11  Oahu 
Publ’ns Inc. v. Ahn , 133 Hawai i 482, 494, 496, 331 P.3d 460, 
472, 474 (2014).  The right is not limited to merely observing 
criminal trials.  See In re The Herald Co. , 734 F.2d 93, 98 (2d 
Cir. 1984) (“It makes little sense to recognize a right of 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
law, except and to the extent that the person, firm, or 
association is licensed or authorized so to do by an 
appropriate court, agency, or office or by a statute of the 
State or of the United States.   
 11 Article I, section 4 of the Hawai i Constitution safeguards the 
right of public access to criminal trials at least  to the extent of the First 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and it may afford greater protections.  
Oahu Publications Inc. v. Ahn , 133 Hawai i 482, 494, 331 P.3d 460, 472 (2014).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 17 public access to criminal courts and then limit that right to 
the trial phase of a criminal proceeding, something that occurs 
in only a small fraction of criminal cases.”).  Rather, this 
court has indicated that the public has a constitutional right 
of access to criminal proceedings generally, as well as the 
records thereof.12  See Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 498- 99, 331 P.3d at 
476-77 (applying qualified right to sealed transcript of court 
proceedings). 
  The right of public access corresponds with our 
system’s “deeply ingrained ” traditional mistrust for secret 
trials, which has led “the general policy of open trials [to] 
become firmly embedded in our system of jurisprudence. ”  Gannett 
Pac. Corp. v. Richardson , 59 Haw. 224, 228, 580 P.2d 49, 54 
(1978).  The right of access thus functions not only to protect 
the public’s ability to obta in information --a requisite  “to the 
enjoyment of other First Amendment rights ”--but also “ as a 
safeguard of the integrity of our courts. ”  Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 
494-95, 331 P.3d at 472-73 (quoting Globe Newspaper Co. v.  
                                                           
 12 The constitutional right of access does not extend to parti cular 
documents and proceedings that have been traditionally closed to the public 
and for which public access would not logically have a positive e ffect on the 
functioning of the process at issue.  Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 494, 331 P.3d at 
472.  The State does not  argue that the constitutional  right of public access 
is wholly inapplicable to the September 9 proceeding and the records thereof, 
and our review of the sealed materials confirms that the hearing and 
documents fa ll within the scope of  the constitutional right.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 18 Superior Court for the Cty. of Norfolk, 457 U.S. 596, 604 
(1982); State v. Hashimoto , 47 Haw. 185, 200, 389 P.2d 146, 155 
(1963)).  “The corrective influence of public attendance at 
trials for crime” serves to limit “ unfairness, discrimination, 
undue leniency, favoritism, and incompetence ” in our 
administration of justice.  Id. at 495, 331 P.3d at 473  (quoting 
Territory v. Scharsch , 25 Haw. 429, 436 (1920)); Gannett Pac. 
Corp., 59 Haw. at 230, 580 P.2d at 55.  In short, open courtroom 
proceedings are “ important to the liberty of the people. ”  
Scharsch, 25 Haw. at 436. 
  Notwithstanding these serious considerations, the 
public’s constitutional right of access is not absolute.  Ahn , 
133 Hawai i at 496, 331 P.3d at  474.  In “rare and compelling 
circumstances, ” court proceedings may be closed to protect an 
interest “that outweighs the value of openness .”  Id. at 495-96, 
331 P.3d at 473-74 (quoting Honolulu Advertiser, Inc. v. Takao , 
59 Haw. 237, 238, 580 P.2d 58, 60 (1978); Press–Enter. Co. v. 
Superior Court of Cal., Riverside Cty.  (Press-Enter. Co. I), 464 
U.S. 501, 510 (1984)) ; cf. In re Knight Pub. Co. , 743 F.2d 231, 
234 (4th Cir. 1984) (“Nonetheless, there is a strong presumption 
in favor of openness .”).  We held in Ahn that, when a party or 
trial court seeks to prevent public access to criminal 
proceedings or the records thereof, both procedural and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 19 substantive requirements must be satisfied to overcome the right 
of public access.  133 Hawai i at 497, 331 P.3d at 475.  We now 
consider each requirement with regard to the sealed documents in 
this case.   
1. The Procedural  Requirements to Seal Documents or Close 
Court Proceedings 
  As set forth in Ahn, the “procedural prerequisites to 
entry of an order closing a criminal proceeding to the public 
are (1) those excluded from the proceeding must be afforded a 
reasonable opportunity to state their objections; and (2) the 
reasons supporting closure must be articulated in findings.”   
133 Hawai i at 497 -98, 331 P.3d at  475-76 (quoting United States 
v. Brooklier , 685 F.2d 1162, 1167- 68 (9th Cir. 1982)) .  These 
“requirements are not mere punctilios, to be observed when 
convenient.”  Phoenix Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. Dist. Court for 
Dist. of Ariz. , 156 F.3d 940, 951 (9th Cir. 1998).  As the 
responses to the petition in this case demonstrate, often 
“parties to the litigation are either indifferent or 
antipathetic to disclosure requests. ”  Id.  Thus, these 
procedures “provide the essential, indeed only, means by which 
the public’s voice can be heard.”  Id.  Further, the procedures 
ensure that the trial judge is apprised of the relevant 
interests at stake in order to render an informed decision, and 
they provide a basis for the public and reviewing courts to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 20 fairly assess the judge’s reasoning, thus protecting trust in 
the judicial process.  Id. 
  Under the first requirement, the public must be 
afforded both notice of the closure and an opportunity to be 
heard.  Id.  The notice must be “ calculated to inform the public 
that its constitutional rights may be implicated in a particular 
criminal proceeding. ”  United States v. Criden , 675 F.2d 550, 
559 (3d Cir. 1982).   As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second 
Circuit has stated, it is “ entirely inadequate to leave the 
vindication of a First Amendment right to the fortuitous 
presence in the courtroom of a public spirited citizen willing 
to complain about closure. ”  Application of The Herald Co. , 734 
F.2d 93, 102 (2d Cir. 1984).  Thus, motions requesting closure 
must be docketed a reasonable time before they are acted upon.13  
Brooklier , 685 F.2d at 1168.  What constitutes a reasonable time 
is “dictated by circumstances,” Criden, 675 F.2d at 559, but it 
must generally be sufficient to afford the public a n opportunity 
                                                           
 13 The moving party may request leave to file supporting evidence 
for its sealing motion ex parte and under seal pending the court’s 
disposition of the motion.  See Washington Post v. Robinson , 935 F.2d 282, 
290 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  In the event the motion to seal is denied, the party 
may request to withdraw the supporting evidence prior to disclosure.  See 
State v. McEnroe , 174 Wash. 2d 795, 804 -05 (2012).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 21 to intervene prior to the sealing.14  See In Re The Herald, 734 
F.2d at 102.   
  Once notice is provided, a hearing must be held under 
procedures adequate to afford the public a meaningful 
opportunity to object or offer alternatives to the closure.  
Phoenix Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 949.  Even when the public by 
necessity lacks full knowledge of the basis of the motion to 
seal, its participation in the hearing allows the judge to 
consider other relevant interests and possible alternatives to 
sealing, thus providing a more informed basis for the 
determination.  See id. at 951; Criden, 675 F.2d at 560. 
  Here, the circuit court did not fulfill the procedural 
requirements of providing notice and an opportunity to be 
heard.15  It does not appear that the court provided notice to 
the public of the in-court motion to seal the entire legal file, 
                                                           
 14 In very limited circumstances , a compelling interest may require 
a court to immediately close proceedings or seal documents.  Even when an 
immediate closure or sealing order is necessary, public notice and an 
opportunity to be heard should follow as promptly as feasible, with the 
judge’s reasons for departing from the normal procedure “set forth, under 
seal if appropriate, for eventual appellate scrutiny.”  In Re The Herald , 734 
F.2d at 102 n.7; accord Oahu Publ’ ns Inc. v. Takase , 139 Hawai i 236, 247, 386 
P.3d 873, 884 (2016)  (holding that a court may immediately seal filed 
documents to protect wrongfully included personally identifying information 
provided that notice and an opportunity to request a  hearing promptly 
follow).  
 15 We also note that neither the circuit court’s signed Sept ember 9 
sealing motion nor the superseding September 16 sealing order was accompanied 
by written findings, as procedurally required under Ahn.  See 133 Hawai i at 
497-98, 331 P.3d at 475 -76.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 22 nor did it permit the public an opportunity to be heard before 
it ordered that the records of the September 9 proceeding be 
sealed.   
  The September 9 proceeding was also scheduled near the 
end of the business day late on a Friday afternoon, and the 
order to seal was entered after the normal close of business.
  
The court subsequently removed all entries associated with the 
September 9 proceeding and the motion to seal from the docket 
entirely, leaving only the October 11 order to seal as evidence 
that the proceeding and sealing took place.  “ Under these 
circumstances, even the most vigilant of reporters could not 
have known that their right of access was being denied. ”  
Criden, 675 F.2d at 560.  It is thus unsurprising that nearly a 
year elapsed before an interested member of the public became 
sufficiently aware of the events to file a motion to unseal. 
  As we have stated, “the standards promulgated by the 
United States Supreme Court place the responsibility on the 
trial court to provide notice that a compelling interest may 
necessitate closure of a proceeding, and afford an opportunity 
for the public to be heard. ”  Ahn, 133 Hawaii at 498, 331 P.3d 
at 476.  The procedures employed by the circuit court were 
plainly insufficient to fulfill this 
responsibility. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 23 2. The Substantive Requirements to Seal Documents or Close 
Court Proceedings 
  The right of access protect ed by the First Amendment 
and article I, section 4 of the Hawai i Constitution can only be 
overcome by findings  that “the closure is essential to preserve 
higher values” and that the closure is “narrowly tailored” to 
serve that interest.  Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 498, 331 P.3d at 476; 
see also Globe Newspaper Co. , 457 U.S. at 606 –07 (“Where .  . . 
the State attempts to deny the right of access in order to 
inhibit the disclosure of sensitive information, it must be 
shown that the denial is necessitated by a compelling 
governmental interest, and is narrowly tailored to serve that 
interest.”).  Thus, the substantive factors that the trial court 
must consider in its written findings are “(1) [the] closure 
serves a compelling interest; (2) there is a substantial 
probability that, in the absence of closure, this compelling 
interest would be harmed; and (3) there are no alternat
ives to 
closure that would adequately protect the compelling interest. ”  
Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 497–98, 331 P.3d at 475 –76. 
  In Ahn , we emphasized that, to find that the strong 
presumption of openness has been overcome, a court must make a 
record of “specific  findings” that the se substantive 
requirements have been met.  133 Hawai i at 507, 331 P.3d at 485 
(emphasis added).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 24 The trial court may not rely on generalized concerns , but 
must indicate facts demonstrating compelling interest 
justifying the continued sealing of the documents.  
Additionally, the court must specifically explain  the 
necessary connection between unsealing the transcript and 
the infliction of irreparable damage resulting to the 
compelling interest.  
Id. (emphases added) (quotes and citations omitted); see also  
Moana v. Wong , 141 Hawai i 100, 113, 405 P.3d 536, 549  (2017) 
(rejecting the use of vague assertions and requiring specific 
details when identifying “compelling circumstances” sufficient 
to overcome the strong presumption that the standard time 
limitation in Hawai i Rules of P enal Procedure Rule 5(c)  
applies).  The trial court’s findings, which may themselves be 
partially filed under seal when necessary, must contain 
sufficient detail for a reviewing court to evaluate each of the 
criteria, including the strength of the interest weighing toward 
closure or sealing, the potential that disclosure will cause 
irreparable harm to that interest, and the feasibility of 
protecting the interest through alternate methods.  See Phoenix 
Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 949- 50.   
a. Identifying a Compelling Interest Served by Closure or 
Sealing 
  Under the first substantive requirement to close court 
proceedings or seal court records,  the asserted government 
interest served by nondis closure must be “compelling.”  Ahn, 133 
Hawaii at 497–98, 331 P.3d at 475–76.  To qualify as compelling, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 25 the interest must be of “such gravity as to overcome the strong 
presumption” in favor of openness .  See Moana, 141 Hawai i at 
111, 405 P.3d at 547.  Although privacy rights may in some 
instances rise to the level of compelling, simply preserving the 
comfort or official reputations of the parties is not a 
sufficient justification.  In re McClatchy Newspapers, Inc. , 288 
F.3d 369, 374 (9th Cir. 2002) (“Who could or would deny that 
reputation is a valuable asset? . . .  But injury to official 
reputation is an insufficient reason “for repressing speech that 
would otherwise be free.” (quoting Landmark Commc ’ns, Inc. v. 
Virginia, 435 U.S. 829, 841 –42 (1978)) ); Doe v. Univ. of  
Montana, No. CV 12- 77-M-DLC, 2012 WL 2416481, at *4 (D. Mont. 
June 26, 2012) (“Reduced to its essence, the joint request to 
keep this case file sealed reflects a determination by the 
parties, based on their respective individual interests, that 
they will mutually benefit from maintaining the secrecy of this 
federal proceeding. . . . But lost in all of this is the valid 
and compelling interest of the people . . . .”).   Rather, t o 
warrant departing from the “tradition of public access . . . 
firmly embedded in our system of jurisprudence, ” the asserted 
interest must be of such consequence as to outweigh both the 
right of access of individual members of the public and the 
general benefits to public administration afforded by open ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 26 trials.  See Ahn , 133 Hawai i at 495, 331 P.3d at  473 (internal 
quotes and citations omitted).    
  Here, the circuit court’s October 11 , 2016 sealing 
order and November 24, 2017 order denying the motion to unseal 
cite law enforcement’s interest in  preserving the integrity of 
ongoing investigations and assert that disclosure would 
interfere with these operations.   The November 24 order also 
cites a concern that disclosure of the information may adversely 
impact the safety of individuals.  As Grube  acknowledges and 
other courts have held, these concerns  may be compelling 
interests sufficient to overcome the strong access presumption 
under the right circumstances.16   
                                                           
 16 Because this jurisdiction has not yet addressed when preserving 
the integrity of an ongoing investigations constitutes a compelling interest, 
the State analogizes the present case to Times Mirror Co. v. United States , 
873 F.2d 1210, 1214 (9th Cir. 1989), and In re The Macon Telegraph Publishing 
Co., 900 F. Supp. 489, 491 (M.D. Ga. 1995), in which federal courts denied 
motions by the media to unseal search warrant documents associated with 
ongoing investigations.  The courts in Times Mirror and Macon Telegraph  did 
not reach the question of whether the sealing served a compelling government 
interest, however,  because they determined that the First Amendment qualified 
right of public access did not extend to warrant applications  and affidavits 
in support thereof.  Times Mirror, 873 F.2d at 1216; Macon Tel., 900 F.  Supp. 
at 491-92; contra  In re Search Warrant for Secretarial Area Outside Office of 
Gunn, 855 F.2d 569, 573 (8th Cir. 1988) (concluding that the right of access 
does extend to search warrant applications and supporting materials, but 
holding the right was overcome by a compelling interest because the 
“documents describe [d] in considerable detail the nature, scope and direction 
of the government's investigation and the individuals and specific projects 
involved.”).  T his case involves neither a search warrant application nor a n 
affidavit in support thereof, and thus we do not address  whether the 
constitutional right of public access would apply to such documents.  See 
supra, note 12. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 27   The circuit court’s findings  here, however, are fully 
lacking in the specificity required to demonstrate a compelling 
interest.  The findings, which could have been entered partially 
under seal if necessary to preserve truly confidential matters,  
provide no details of any ongoing investigations and their 
relation to the September 9 proceeding.  In the absence of such 
details, there is nothing by which the court could have 
determined that the asserted interest was of sufficient gravity 
to displace the strong presumption in favor of openness.17  
Similarly, the findin
gs contain no information regarding how 
disclosure would impair these investigations or pose a danger to 
specific individuals.18   
  Th ese indefinite  findings are nearly identical to 
those the Ninth Circuit expressly rejected in Phoenix 
Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. District Court for District  of Arizona , 
156 F.3d 940, 950 (9th Cir. 1998), which this court cited with 
approval in Ahn.  133 Hawai i at 498, 331 P.3d at 476.  In  
                                                           
 17 There is nothing in the sealed documents to demonstrate on their  
face that disclosure would pose a threat to an interest of adequate gravity 
to overcome the public’s constitutional right of access.  
 18 The State responded to a series of questions during the November 
7 hearing by expressing nonspecific  concerns that disclosure might allow a 
suspect to learn of an investigation and flee, destroy evidence, or harm a 
witness.  T he circuit court’s findings did  not include these details, which 
would have been too generalized and unsupported to warrant closure in any 
event. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 28 Phoenix Newspapers , the trial court entered findings prior to 
sealing a court transcript indicating only that the court  had 
“been advised that [a jury tampering] investigation is ongoing 
and . . . in a posture that the disclosure of the transcript 
would constitute a serious risk of compromi sing the 
investigation.”   156 F.3d at 950.  Holding that the substantive 
requirements for sealing had not been met, the Ninth Circuit 
stated, 
At no time did the [trial] court specifically explain the
necessary connection between unsealing the transcript and 
 
inflicting irreparable damage upon the security concerns  it 
invoked as a compelling interest. . . . [N]either in the 
written closure orders nor in the hearings themselves did 
the court specify just how security would be thwarted[.] . 
. . Far from allowing meaningful appellate review of the 
closure order, these general statements , which simply 
stated that security interests compelled closure, . . . 
reveal nothing about the specific character of the risk to 
the jury tampering investigation that would result  from 
unsealing the transcript . . . . Simply put, there was no 
evidence in the record, nor were any satisfactory findings 
entered, establishing why release of the transcripts would 
endanger juror safety.  
Phoenix Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 950 (emphases added) (quotes and 
citations omitted).  
  Just as in Phoenix Newspapers, t he circuit court here 
simply asserted that a security risk existed without 
meaningfully identifying  the connection between specific 
individuals or investigations and the particular irreparable 
harm that would result from disclosure of the sealed documents.  
We held in Ahn that specific findings are necessary to satisfy 
the first substantive requirement for sealing or closure , and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 29 this requirement was unmet in this case.  133 Hawai i at 504, 331 
P.3d at 482. 
b. The Substantial Probability of Damage 
  Under the second substantive requirement set forth in 
Ahn, a court must find that disclosure 
is sufficiently likely to 
result in irreparable damage to the identified compelling 
interest.  133 Hawai i at 507, 331 P.3d at  485.  It is not enough 
that damage could possibly result from disclosure, nor even that 
there is a “reasonable likelihood” that the compelling interest 
will be impeded; there must be a “substantial probability” that 
disclosure will harm the asserted interest.  Press-Enter. Co. v. 
Superior Court of Cal.  for Riverside Cty. ( Press-Enter. Co. II ), 
478 U.S. 1, 15 (1986) (rejecting the lesser “reasonable 
likelihood” standard as violating the First Amendment).  
Further, the potential harm cannot be fleeting or readily 
curable through remedial measures; it must be irreparable  in 
nature.  Ahn, 133 Hawai i at 507, 331 P.3d at 485 ; Phoenix  
Newspapers, Inc. v. U.S. Dist. Court for Dist. of Ariz. , 156 
F.3d 940, 949-50 (9th Cir. 1998). 
  The findings included with the circuit court’s October 
11 order stated only that “[t]he Court finds and concludes that 
public disclosure of the September 9, 2016 proceedings, is 
substantially likely to interfere with and have an adverse ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 30 impact on potentially one or more of . . . ongoing 
investigations. ”19  This bare  recitation of the legal standard is 
not adequately specific to support that harm to the State’s 
asserted interest would be the substantially likely outcome if 
the sealed documents were disclosed.  Indeed, as discussed 
above, the court’s findings did not include specific details 
demonstrating that interference with an ongoing investigation 
was a possible  result of disclosure, much less a substantially 
probable one.  The findings also did not address whether the 
posited potential harm would be irreparable.  Because the 
circuit court did not make any such specific findings, the 
second substantive requirement for sealing was also not 
satisfied in this case. 
c. Narrow Tailoring 
  Under the third substantive requirement for sealing, a 
court must make findings demonstrating that “there are no [less 
restrictive] alternatives to closure that would adequately 
protect the compelling interest .”  Oregonian Pub. Co. v. U.S. 
Dist. Court for Dist. of Or. , 920 F.2d 1462, 1466 (9th Cir. 
1990) (citing Press-Enter. Co. II, 478 U.S. 1,  13–14 (1986)); 
accord Ahn , 133 Hawai i at 504, 331 P.3d at 482.   “Even where 
                                                           
 19 The probability of harm from disclosure was not addressed in the 
circuit court’s order denying Grube’s motion to unseal.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 31 denial of access is appropriate, it must be no greater than 
necessary to protect the interest justifying it .”  United States 
v. Brooklier , 685 F.2d 1162,  1172 (9th Cir. 1982).  Thus, w here 
a feasible alternative exists that would protect the compelling 
interest while avoiding or minimizing impairment of the public’s 
constitutional right of access, total sealing is inappropriate.  
Id. at 1169; see also Oregonian Pub. Co. , 920 F.2d at 1467 n.1 
(“The district court did not consider alternatives to closure 
that might protect Wolsky ’s interests. . . . The district court 
might have considered redacting portions of the plea agreement, 
or disclosing the agreement but placing Wolsky in a witness 
protection program, or recommending that Wolsky be placed in 
protective custody while in prison. ”).   
  As with the first two substantive requirements, the 
trial court’s findings must be made with adequate specificity 
for a reviewing court to ascertain the court’s reasoning, and 
the trial court may not “base its decision on conclusory 
assertions alone .”  Oregonian Pub. Co. , 920 F.2d at  1466 (citing 
Press-Enter. Co. II , 478 U.S. at 13 –14).  The court should 
therefore make findings regarding specific alternatives and set 
forth its reasons for rejecting each.  Id.; United States v. 
Criden, 675 F.2d 550, 560 (3d Cir. 1982) (“There is a fairly 
broad consensus that, before a court closes a pretrial criminal 
hearing, it must at least consider alternatives to closure and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 32 explicitly state its reasons on the record for rejecting such 
alternatives.”).  
  Here, the circuit court’s October 11 order stated only 
that the court “considered whether less drastic alternatives” 
would “preserve law enforcement ’s compelling need to conduct its 
investigations” and concluded “ that there are no other less 
restrictive alternatives which are viable. ”  The November 24 
order denying Grube’s motion to unseal made no further reference 
to alternatives except to state the court’s belief that its 
order was narrowly tailored.  Neither order specifically 
discussed any alternatives and thus did not consider the 
feasibility of any possible alternatives.  Assuming a compelling 
interest was present in this case and irreparable harm was 
substantially likely  to result, such alternatives might have 
included, for example, redaction of specific information in a 
document or sealing limited to a very restricted time period 
when true risk was present.20   
                                                           
 20 At a minimum, the circuit court should also have considered the 
risks from disclosure with respect to each of the individual  documents to 
justify its sealing .  And, even assuming that procedural and substantive 
requirements to seal any of the documents had been met, the court should have  
scheduled periodic review hearings to determine whether the reasons 
justifying the sealing continued to apply.  It was not sufficient to simply 
order the parties to alert the court when circumstances change  because all 
too often “parties  to the litigation are either indifferent or antipathetic 
to disclosure requests.”  Phoenix Newspapers , 156 F.3d at 951.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 33   A  trial court ’s pro forma  statement that alternatives 
were considered and rejected “does not afford a basis for 
determining whether the court applied the correct standard .”  
Brooklier, 685 F.2d at 1169.  There is nothing in the circuit 
court’s findings from which we can judge if the sealing was “ no 
greater than necessary to protect the interest [assertedly] 
justifying it.”  Id. at 1172.  Accordingly, the third 
substantive requirement for sealing was also not fulfilled in 
the present case. 
3. Mandamus is Warranted 
  Because 
the right of the public to access c riminal 
proceedings is constitutionally protected, firmly established in 
our tradition, and crucial to the functioning of our justice 
system, there is a strong presumption that court proceedings and 
the records th
ereof shall be open to the public.  Ahn, 133 
Hawaii at 508, 331 P.3d at 486.  In light of these weighty 
concerns, this court held in Ahn that the strong presumption may 
be overcome only when strict procedural and substantive 
requirements have been met.  Id. at 497, 331 P.3d at 475.  
Because one of these procedural requirements and all three of 
the substantive requirements were not satisfied in this case, 
the circuit court erred by ordering all documents related to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 34 September 9 proceeding sealed from the public.  Grube is 
therefore entitled to the writ of mandamus he seeks.21 
B. Grube’s Right to Proceed Pro Se  
  Grube also challenges the circuit court’s directive 
that he retain counsel to assert his objections to the sealing 
of the documents.  Grube contends that, throughout his motion to 
unseal, he used the first person and personally signed all the 
pleadings.  Grube explains that the Civil Beat address 
referenced in the motion appears in the “office address” portion 
of the caption to comply with HRPP Rule 2.2(d)(1).   
  The public’s constitutional right of access is not 
unique to the news media.  See Gannett Pac. Corp. v. Richardson , 
59 Haw. 224, 229-30, 580 P.2d 49, 54 (1978) (“The right of media 
representatives to be present is derived from their 
status as 
                                                           
 21 The State argues that, notwithstanding any error in the circuit 
court’s ruling, the grant of a writ of mandamus is an inappropriat e remedy.  
(Citing Kema v. Gaddis , 91 Hawai i 200, 204, 982 P.2d 334, 338 (1996).)  
Assuming that Grube, a non -party to the underlying criminal case, would be 
able to directly appeal the circuit court’s order, contra Gannett Pac. Corp. , 
59 Haw. at 235, 580  P.2d at 58, the delay inherent in the appellate process 
would render the eventual release of the documents untimely.  Because the 
right of public access exists to provide members of the public with 
contemporary information about matters of current public interest so that 
they may effectively exercise their First Amendment rights, the belated 
release of records to which the public is rightfully entitled is not an 
adequate remedy.  In light of these considerations, we hold the circuit 
court’s order satisfies  the standards for mandamus.  See Breiner v. Takao , 73 
Haw. 499, 502, 835 P.2d 637, 640 (1992) (“[M]andamus is the appropriate 
remedy where the order of the court imposed a restraint on free speech rights 
unrelated to the merits of the criminal trial and thus could not be raised on 
appeal.”); CBS, Inc. v. U.S. Dist. Court for Cent. Dist. of Cal ., 765 F.2d 
823, 825 (9th Cir. 1985) (“Mandamus is the appropriate procedure for CBS to 
seek review of the orders denying it access to the sealed documents.”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 35 members of the general public.”).   Any member of the public may 
assert a personal right to access judicial proceedings and 
records.  Oahu Publ’ns Inc.  v. Ahn, 133 Hawai i 482, 496, 331 
P.3d 460, 474 (2014) .   
  Additionally, the right of self- representation exists 
in both criminal and civil proceedings.  State v. Hutch , 75 Haw. 
307, 318, 861 P.2d 11, 18 (1993); In re Ellis , 53 Haw. 23, 29, 
487 P.2d 286, 290 (1971).  This is reflected in Hawai i statutes 
regulating the practice of law, which expressly preserve the 
right of every natural person to “ appear[] in person before any 
court, and there prosecut[e]  or defend [] that person ’s, 
plaintiff’s, defendant ’s, or accused ’s own cause, without the 
aid of legal counsel .”  HRS § 605- 2.   
  Here, there was nothing in Grube’s motion that was 
clearly inconsistent with the filing being an assertion of 
Grube’s personal constitutional right of access to court 
proceedings and records.  The inclusion of “Civil Beat” in the 
caption of the motion was consistent with HRPP Rule 2.2(d)(1)’s 
requirement that litigants include an office address with all 
filings.  Therefore, under Hawai i statute and precedent, Grube 
was permitted to prosecute his own cause before the circuit 
court, and the court erred by requiring him to retain counsel to 
enforce his personal right.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 36 III. CONCLUSION 
  Neither the procedures nor the substantive reasons 
employed by the circuit court fulfilled the requirements to 
overcome the public’s constitutional right of access to court 
proceedings and records that this court set forth in Oahu 
Publications Inc. v. Ahn , 133 Hawai i 482, 497 -98, 331 P.3d 460, 
475-76 (2014).  Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court 
erred in denying Grube’s motion to unseal.  
We also hold that,  
because the constitutional right of access inheres in all 
members of the public and Grube asserted this interest as an 
individual, the circuit court erred in refusing to allow Grube 
to appear pro se an
d requiring him to obtain counsel.  
  Accordingly, we grant Grube’s petition for  a writ of 
mandamus and order that the circuit court unseal the documents.  
The effective date of our directive shall be ten calendar days 
after the filing of this opinion, unless within the ten days the 
State requests a hearing to provide additional evidence to 
demonstrate that the documents or some portion thereof must 
remain sealed to serve a governmental interest of sufficient 
gravity to overcome the public’s  constitutional right of access.   
Upon such request, the circuit court shall promptly set, docket, 
and hold a hearing, then expeditiously prepare specific findings 
in conformance with the substantive requirements set forth in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 37 this opinion if these requirements have been met; otherwise, our 
order shall take immediate effect.  We further grant Grube’s 
petition for a writ of prohibition in part and order that Grube 
be permitted to represent his own interests in all further 
matters related to this proceeding.  We deny Grube’s petiti on 
for a writ of prohibition insofar as it seeks an order 
prohibiting the circuit court from enforcing its sealing order 
because we deem it unnecessary in light of our disposition.    
Robert Brian Black  
for petitioner  
 
Robyn B. Chun  
for respondent  judge 
the Honorable Rom A. Trader  
 
Duane M. Kokesch  
for respondent  
State of Hawai i 
 
Andrew T. Park  
for respondent  
Alan Ahn  
 
William A. Harrison  
for respondent  
Tiffany Masunaga  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
/s/ Matthew J. Viola  
 
