                                                             
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
          
         
         
           
         
            
         
 
             
           
            
           
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-20-0000509 17-AUG-2020 05:47 PM 
SCPW-20-0000509  
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
IN  THE  MATTER   OF  INDIVIDUALS  IN  CUSTODY  
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI  
ORIGINAL
  PROCEEDING 
AMENDED  ORDER
  RE:   
PETTY  MISDEMEANOR  AND  MISDEMEANOR  DEFENDANTS  
(By:
  Recktenwald,  C.J.,  Nakayama,  and  McKenna  JJ.,   
and  Chief  Judge  Ginoza,  assigned  by  reason  of  vacancy,  with 
Wilson,  J.,  concurring  and  dissenting)  1 
On August 12,
 2020, the Office of the Public Defender 
(“OPD”) filed a petition for extraordinary writ pursuant to HRS 
§§ 602-4, 602-5(5), and 602-5(6) and/or a writ of mandamus 
(“Petition”). The Petition seeks, among other things, a 
reduction of the inmate populations at the State’s correctional 
centers and facilities in an effort to mitigate the harm that 
the COVID-19 pandemic may inflict upon inmates, the correctional 
staff, and the people of Hawai‘i. In this regard, the Petition 
seeks the expedited release of certain categories of inmates 
1 This amended order amends Paragraph 1.g., herein, to require 
contact information to be provided to the OPD, Prosecuting Attorney Dwight 
Nadamoto, and the Administrative Director of the Courts. The amended order 
also includes a new subsection 1.j. regarding the conditions of release.  2 
         
          
        
            
          
        
          
          
        
           
          
         
           
             
        
        
           
        
           
           
          
           
            
          
         
      
        
          
    
 
 from the State’s correctional centers and facilities, without 
the filing and hearing of individualized motions for release. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a public health 
emergency. Since July 2020, Hawai‘i has seen  a surge of COVID-19 
cases in Hawai‘i, with record numbers of positive cases and 
increased hospitalizations being reported. Since the Petition 
was filed, there have been one hundred seventy inmates and 
thirty staff members that have tested positive for COVID-19 at 
the O‘ahu Community Correctional Center (“OCCC”), and mass 
testing of all inmates at OCCC continues. Given the rising 
number of COVID-19 cases at OCCC and the difficulties with 
social distancing, there is urgent and immediate concern in 
reducing the inmate population at OCCC to protect those who work 
at or are detained at OCCC, their families, and the community. 
This court recognizes
 the impact of COVID-19 on 
Hawaiʻi’s  community correctional  centers and facilities –- and 
the urgency by which suitable yet balanced action is required. 
The COVID-19 outbreak at OCCC, where appropriate physical 
distancing is not possible, has the potential to not only place 
the inmates at risk of death or serious illness, but also 
endanger the lives and well-being of staff and service providers 
who work at OCCC, their families, and members of the community 
at large. Because of the virulent spread of the virus within 
close quarters, the COVID-19 outbreak at OCCC also has the 
potential to tax the limited resources of Hawai‘i’s community 
health care providers. 
This court
 also recognizes, however, public safety and 
health concerns regarding the release of inmates at OCCC into 
the community.  3 
          
        
         
   
        
         
           
         
         
         
     
         
         
        
          
         
          
          
           
          
      
        
            
         
       
         
       
       
         
                                                           
             
       Responding to the impact of this crisis in our 
community correctional centers and facilities requires a careful 
consideration of interests, both for public health and public 
safety. 
Upon consideration of the submissions and record in 
SCPW-20-0000509, the arguments presented at the August 14, 2020 
hearing, and the surge in COVID-19 positive test results in our 
community, including at OCCC, and pursuant to this court’s 
authority under Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§  602-5(3) & 
(6) and § 706-625, Governor David
 Y. Ige’s Emergency 
Proclamations, and HRS § 601-1.5, 
IT  IS  HEREBY  ORDERED  as  follows:   
1. With regard to pretrial detainees
 charged with a 
petty misdemeanor or a misdemeanor offense,2 the respective court 
orders for detaining the individuals are temporarily suspended 
and, by Wednesday, August 19, 2020, the Department of Public 
Safety (“DPS”) shall release from OCCC such pretrial detainees, 
except those charged with abuse of family or household members 
(HRS § 709-906), violation of a temporary restraining order (HRS 
§ 586-4), violation of an order for protection (HRS § 586-11), 
or violation of a restraining order or injunction (HRS § 604-
10.5) subject to the following conditions: 
a. The inmate has not received a positive 
COVID-19 test result, is not pending the result of a test that 
has been taken, and is not exhibiting COVID-19 symptoms. 
b. Additional inmates who later meet these 
criteria shall be expeditiously released as set forth herein. 
c. Before being released, the inmate shall 
provide to DPS current contact information, including 
residential address and/or telephone number, if available. 
2 The category of felony defendants as identified in the Petition will 
be addressed by a separate order.  4 
        
            
       
         
          
       
         
         
          
           
          
     
         
         
         
         
          
             
          
        
         
          
 
       
          
   
        
        
           
          
         
        d. The inmate shall self-isolate for fourteen 
days and will wear a mask when within six feet of others. 
e. The inmate shall immediately report the 
development of COVID-19 symptoms to the Department of Health 
(“DOH”) and shall thereafter follow directives from the DOH. 
f. Each pretrial detainee released under this 
provision is ordered to appear at Honolulu District Court, 
Kauikeaouli Hale, 1111 Alakea Street, Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813,  on 
February 17, 2021, in Courtroom 7C at 8:30 a.m., unless 
otherwise ordered. Failure to comply with court orders or to 
appear may result in further charges, including but not limited 
to, criminal contempt. 
g. DPS
 shall provide a list of all inmates 
released under this provision, as well as the contact 
information provided by those inmates, to the OPD, Prosecuting 
Attorney Dwight Nadamoto, and the Administrative Director of the 
Courts no later than the next day following the inmate’s 
release. The list shall include the name of the inmate and the 
criminal case number(s) for which the inmate has held. 
h. All inmates under this category who have 
tested positive should be retested in accordance with guidance 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and/or the 
DOH. 
i. All inmates released under this provision 
shall maintain contact with their attorneys and appear at all 
future court hearings. 
j. When an inmate is released, all conditions 
of release originally imposed, if applicable, other than in-
person reporting, shall remain in full force and effect. DPS 
shall inform all inmates, prior to their release, of their 
continuing obligation to abide by conditions of deferral or 
probation or pretrial release to promote public safety.  5 
         
       
          
        
      
        
          
          
         
        
          
 
        
        
        
        
          
          
          
          
           
     
          
           
            
           
           
       
 
  k. Any no-contact order shall remain in force. 
l. All inmates released under this provision 
shall comply with any federal, state, or local laws, directives, 
orders, rules, and regulations regarding conduct during the 
declared COVID-19 pandemic emergency, including “social 
distancing” mandates and any proclamations issued by Governor 
David Y. Ige or the Governor’s designee during the COVID-19 
emergency, as well as any mandates or proclamations issued by 
the Mayor of the City and County of Honolulu. 
m. All inmates released under this order shall 
further comply with all specific directives provided to them by 
DOH. 
2. With regard to individuals incarcerated solely 
due to petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor convictions, the 
respective court orders for incarcerating or imprisoning the 
individual are temporarily suspended and the provisions provided 
under Paragraph 1 above shall also apply except for those 
convicted of abuse of family or household members (HRS § 709-
906), violation of a temporary restraining order (HRS § 586-4), 
violation of an order for protection (HRS § 586-11), violation 
of a restraining order or injunction (HRS § 604-10.5), or any 
other crime in family court. 
3. This order does not preclude any party from 
taking any other steps as may be deemed appropriate to obtain 
the release of an inmate during this time of emergency or stay 
any pending motions seeking the release of inmates. This order 
also does not affect DPS’s authority under the law to release 
inmates on its own accord.  6 
           
     
       
     
      
   
              
   
    /s/ Mark E. R
/s/ Paula A. 
/s/ Sabrina S
/s/ Michael D
/s/ Lisa M. G    
  
   
 
  
  
 ecktenwald 
Nakayama . McKenna 
. Wilson 
4. This court reserves its authority to order other 
measures based on changed circumstances. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, August  17, 2020. 
inoz a 