 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCPW-24-0000537 10-OCT-2024 09:57 AM Dkt. 49 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
---o0o---
HAWAIʻI POLICE DEPARTMENT, COUNTY OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
THE HONORABLE PETER K. KUBOTA, 
Judge of the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, 
State of 
Hawaiʻi, Respondent Judge, 
 
and 
 
ALBERT IAN SCHWEITZER; SHAWN SCHWEITZER; STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Respondents. 
SCPW-24-0000537 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
(CASE NOS. 3CSP-23-0000003 and 3CSP-23-0000017) 
 
OCTOBER 10, 2024 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, GINOZA, AND DEVENS, JJ., 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
I. 
Brothers Albert Ian (Ian) Schweitzer and Shawn Schweitzer 
seek compensation for being wrongfully imprisoned. Under  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaiʻi’s wrongful conviction compensation law, Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 661B, the Schweitzers must show that they 
are “actually innocent.” To do that, the Schweitzers demand 
that the Hawaiʻ i County Police Department (HPD) and the County of 
Hawaiʻi Office of the Prosecuting Attorney (CHOPA or county 
prosecutors) turn over investigative materials relating to the 
crimes for which they were imprisoned. The records may contain 
evidence that they did not commit those crimes, the brothers 
say. 
In 2023, Ian Schweitzer filed a Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 petition. He requested release from 
prison and to have his conviction vacated. 
The county 
prosecutors stipulated to new evidence, including the DNA 
evidence. That evidence pointed to someone else. Circuit Court 
of the Third Circuit Judge Peter K. Kubota concluded that a jury 
considering the new evidence would likely reach a different 
outcome. He granted Ian’s petition. 
After decades behind bars, Ian walked out of court a free 
man. 
Then Shawn moved to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate his 
convictions. The court vacated his convictions, too. 
Their convictions lifted, the Schweitzers sought monetary 
compensation under HRS Chapter 661B. However, the Attorney General informed the Schweitzers that to begin their 
2  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compensation case, the criminal court must have found that they 
are “actually innocent.” As a result, the Schweitzers filed a 
“Joint Petition for Relief Pursuant to HRS Chapter 661B” in 
their criminal, Rule 40 proceedings. They asked the court to 
find them “actually innocent,” so they can commence their civil 
claim for compensation. 
To establish their innocence, the Schweitzers turned to 
discovery. They demanded that HPD and CHOPA hand over investigatory records. HPD and CHOPA refused. They said that 
HPD is still investigating the case. Until that investigation 
is complete, the law enforcement agencies maintained, no 
investigatory materials could be provided. 
The circuit court instructed the Schweitzers to file a 
motion compelling HPD to produce the materials. Then, it 
granted the motion and directed the Schweitzers to prepare a 
subpoena duces tecum directed to HPD. Next, HPD filed a motion 
to quash the court’s subpoena. And then, after the court denied that motion, HPD filed a writ of mandamus petition to this 
court. 
Confronted by a complex and baffling legal landscape, the 
parties and the court inadvertently made significant procedural 
missteps. We correct those missteps. We reorient the 
proceedings and set the Schweitzers on a more straightforward 
3  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
path to the discovery they seek. And the compensation they feel 
is deserved. 
Here, we exercise our authority to issue a writ of 
mandamus. The circuit court had no discretion to act on the 
civil claims in the post-conviction proceeding, because under 
HRPP 40(c)(3) the only correct outcome was to transfer the civil 
claims to a new civil case. We order the circuit court to quash 
the Schweitzers’ subpoena. We also order it to transfer the Schweitzers’ joint petition for relief under HRS Chapter 661B to 
a new civil proceeding. 
The new civil case must follow the procedures prescribed by 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 26 and HRS § 661B-2 
(2016). Rule 26 sets forth the appropriate framework for the court to balance the Schweitzers’ compelling interest in 
obtaining information necessary to establish their claims, while 
protecting legitimate law enforcement interests in the 
confidentiality of investigative materials relating to a pending 
matter. 
With discovery in hand, the Schweitzers can then fully 
litigate their entitlement to compensation under Chapter 661B. 
II. 
A. Legal Background 
In 2016, the Hawaiʻi legislature passed a law that allowed 
an exoneree to seek $50,000 for each year lost while serving 
time for a crime they did not commit. An actionable claim under 
4  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 661B-1(b)(1) (2016) alleges that “[t]he judgment of 
conviction was reversed or vacated because the petitioner was 
actually innocent of the crimes for which the petitioner was 
convicted, and the court decision so states[.]” 
This court recently identified a possible flaw in the law. 
No wrongs may ever right. If the words “actual innocence” were 
compulsory to HRPP post-conviction relief orders, petitioners 
“would rarely, if ever, be eligible for compensation.” Jardine
v. State, ___ P.3d ____, 2024 WL 4314979, at *10 (Haw. 2024). 
We reasoned that “actual innocence would be nearly impossible to 
satisfy.” Id. at *11. 
Why? Actual innocence is just not something a criminal 
court thinks about when it reverses or vacates a conviction. 
Post-conviction relief – a Rule 40 win – depends on whether “the 
evidence is of such a nature as would probably change the result 
of a later trial.” State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 268, 588 P.2d 
438, 445 (1978), overruled on other grounds by Raines v. State, 
79 Hawaiʻ i 219, 900 P.2d 1286 (1995).  Thus, Jardine explained, 
“it is unlikely that an HRPP Rule 40 court will use the words 
‘actually innocent,’ because that is not the legal standard 
under which it vacates a conviction or orders a new trial.” 
Jardine, 2024 WL 4314979, at *11. 
To activate Hawaiʻ i’s wrongful conviction compensation law, 
and honor the legislative intent to “identify deserving 
5  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
individuals who are innocent of crimes from those who are 
not[,]” we provided a path to relief. Id. at *12-*13 (quoting 
H. Stand. Rep. No. 411-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 903). We 
held “that HRS § 661B-1’s requirement that a vacatur or reversal 
of a conviction ‘so state’ that a petitioner is ‘actually 
innocent’ means that such order must set forth facts supporting 
the petitioner’s actual innocence, but need not use the words 
‘actually innocent.’” Id. at *8. 
We interpreted HRS § 661B-1 based on its plain meaning. 
“[A]ctually innocent” simply means that a person “did not commit the crime.” Id.
 at *1. Thus, there is no need for a criminal 
court to write those two words in an order for an exoneree to have an actionable 661B claim. Rather an order that finds facts 
to support actual innocence, and “make[s] clear that the basis 
for the reversal or vacatur is factual innocence, or innocence 
of the crime,” provides the necessary pleading requirement a 
petitioner must allege to present an actionable claim. Id. at 
*10. 
Jardine ensured access to the justice system for those who 
seek redress for wrongful conviction and imprisonment. We 
described chapter 661B litigation as a “two-stage process.” 
“First, under HRS § 661B-1 a petitioner must allege an 
actionable claim. Second, under HRS § 661B-3 (2016), a 
petitioner must prove that they are ‘actually innocent.’” Id.
6  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at *13. Thus, if a vacatur order provides a basis for factual 
innocence, then a petitioner may prove their “actual innocence” 
by a preponderance of the evidence at a trial. 
Like any civil case, the Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure 
tee up a wrongful conviction compensation trial. Id.
 at *18 
(“[t]hese trials will proceed under the Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil 
Procedure”). Then at trial, the court “will admit relevant 
evidence as necessary to make determinations as to a 
petitioner’s eligibility for compensation under the statute.” 
Id. In the end, the court (unless all parties consent to a jury 
trial) will decide whether a petitioner has proved the HRS 
§ 661B-3 elements of their claim, and whether the State has 
proved any affirmative defenses under that law. B. Underlying Criminal Cases 
On December 25, 1991, Dana Ireland died from injuries that 
she sustained the day before. 
On October 9, 1997, brothers Ian Schweitzer and Shawn 
Schweitzer were indicted for the murder, sexual assault, and 
kidnapping of Dana Ireland. 
But after DNA test results of crime 
scene evidence excluded them as the source of the DNA, the county prosecutors dismissed all charges on October 20, 1998. 
Based on testimony from an in-custody informant, county 
prosecutors reindicted the Schweitzers in May 1999. Because of a Bruton issue related to Shawn’s “confession,” the court 
7  
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
severed the brothers’ cases. After a trial, on February 16, 
2000 the jury found Ian guilty of second degree murder, 
kidnapping, and sexual assault in the first degree. In April 
2000, the court sentenced Ian to life imprisonment with the 
possibility of parole. 
On May 9, 2000, per a plea agreement, Shawn pled guilty to 
manslaughter and kidnapping. That day, the court sentenced him to 
one year in jail and probation. 
C. The Schweitzers’ Post-Conviction Proceedings 
On January 23, 2023, Ian petitioned the circuit court under 
HRPP Rule 40 to vacate his conviction, order his release from 
custody, and dismiss his indictment with prejudice. Ian and the 
county prosecutors stipulated to a set of facts. 
Those facts pointed to a different trial outcome. The 
parties agreed that post-conviction DNA testing connected 
“Unknown Male #1” to the crime, and excluded the Schweitzers. 
They also agreed that bitemark evidence used at trial was unreliable. 
There was more. At trial the prosecution theorized that 
Ian was driving his 1953 Volkswagen Beetle and hit Ireland while 
she rode her bicycle. Turns out, the crime scene’s tire tread 
evidence did not match Ian’s bug; rather, a much larger vehicle 
had produced the tire tracks at the crime scene. The parties 
also mentioned in the stipulated facts that Shawn Schweitzer had 
8  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recanted his prior confession, maintained his innocence, and 
passed a polygraph examination. 
The parties stipulated that the DNA and bitemark evidence 
was newly discovered evidence that could not have been presented 
at trial and that the tire tread evidence was newly presented 
evidence. 
Per HRPP Rule 40(a)(1), newly discovered evidence is one 
reason for relief from a criminal judgment. Newly presented evidence is evidence that could have been presented in the 
original trial, but was not. See Griffin v. Johnson, 350 F.3d 
956, 961 (9th Cir. 2003). Here, the court concluded that the newly presented tire tread evidence was “highly probative and 
highly reliable” to determining the outcome, so the court 
included that evidence in its consideration. 
The day after the parties stipulated to facts supporting 
HRPP Rule 40 post-conviction relief, the circuit court held an 
evidentiary hearing. The court orally granted the petition, vacated Ian’s convictions, and dismissed the indictment without 
prejudice. Ian walked out of court, a free man for the first 
time in decades. 
About nine months later, on October 20, 2023, Ian’s 
attorneys submitted a proposed order granting the HRPP Rule 40 
petition. It included extensive findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. The FOFs largely reflected the parties’ 
9  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stipulated facts. That same day, the court adopted Ian’s FOFs 
and COLs. The new evidence, the order announced, “conclusively 
proves that in a new trial a jury would likely reach a verdict 
of acquittal.” The court vacated Ian’s convictions and 
dismissed the indictment without prejudice. 
Four days later, Shawn and the county prosecutors submitted 
a “Stipulation to Allow Withdrawal of Guilty Plea and to Vacate 
Judgment of Conviction.” The court approved the stipulation and vacated Shawn’s conviction. Then it granted the prosecutor’s 
oral motion to dismiss his criminal case without prejudice. 
When Shawn left court, he no longer had convictions for 
manslaughter and kidnapping. 
On March 7, 2024, Ian filed a “Motion for Finding of Actual 
Innocence.” Ian asked the court to make a finding that, for 
purposes of HRS § 661B-3, he was convicted and imprisoned but 
“actually innocent” of the crimes he was incarcerated for “so he 
can seek compensation pursuant to HRS § 661B-3(c).” 
Ian attached to the motion a February 27, 2024 letter 
signed by Attorney General Anne E. Lopez. The letter stated that Ian did not meet the requirements to seek compensation 
under HRS § 661B-1. The Attorney General wrote that because the 
court’s findings vacating the conviction did not say Ian was 
“actually innocent” and because the court dismissed the charges 
without prejudice, Ian did not meet the statutory requirement 
10  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the post-conviction order “so states” a person is “actually 
innocent.” 
On March 15, 2024, the county prosecutors opposed Ian’s 
motion for a finding of actual innocence. CHOPA took a 
different position than the Attorney General. It argued, “the 
determination of ‘actual innocence’ as part of the Rule 40 
petition is improper and that Petitioner can address this issue 
through Section 661B.” 
Actual innocence is not the standard a Rule 40 court uses 
to make its decision, CHOPA explained. HRPP Rule 40(a)(1) provides five reasons for a petitioner to obtain relief from a 
criminal judgment. Ian used the fourth reason, newly discovered 
evidence. This court has adopted a four-part test to decide if 
newly discovered evidence warrants a new trial: 
(1) the evidence has been discovered after trial; (2) such 
evidence could not have been discovered before or at trial 
through the exercise of due diligence; (3) the evidence is 
material to the issues and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of 
such a nature as would probably change the result of a 
later trial. 
McNulty, 60 Haw. at 267–68, 588 P.2d at 445. Thus, CHOPA 
argued, the Rule 40 court considers only whether newly 
discovered evidence could change the jury’s verdict, not whether 
the petitioner is actually innocent.   
The Attorney General and the county prosecutors took 
incompatible positions. Ian only gets a 661B proceeding, the AG 
11  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
said, if his Rule 40 order states that he is actually innocent. 
But a Rule 40 judge would never say that, the County counters, 
because actual innocence isn’t the standard to decide Rule 40 
petitions. 
Trapped by this quandary, on June 4, 2024, Ian and Shawn 
filed a “Joint Petition for Relief Pursuant to HRS Chapter 661B” 
in the two Rule 40 dockets. The brothers sought “a finding from 
the Court that they are both actually innocent and [an] order that they be compensated pursuant to HRS § 661B-3(c).” They 
styled the joint petition as a civil complaint in the criminal 
dockets, citing civil laws to establish venue and a right of 
action. 
The county prosecutors opposed the Schweitzers’ joint 
petition. 
Meanwhile, a forensic genealogy expert had identified a 
suspect believed to be Unknown Male #1. That person was Albert 
Lauro, Jr. A DNA sample clandestinely collected from Lauro’s discarded disposable fork matched the DNA found at the crime 
scene. 
On July 19, 2024, HPD collected Lauro’s DNA from a cheek 
swab without arresting him. On July 24, testing revealed that 
the cheek sample matched the fork sample and the DNA from the 
crime scene. On July 26, 2024, the Schweitzers’ lawyers 
12  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requested an emergency chambers conference with the court. 
Reportedly, Lauro had died by suicide. 
The next day, the circuit court held the emergency 
conference. It instructed the Schweitzers’ counsel to file a 
motion to compel discovery from the Hawaiʻ i County prosecutors 
and police department requiring them to produce any relevant 
information regarding Ireland’s murder and their investigation 
into Lauro. The court set a hearing on the motion for July 30, 
2024. 
On July 28, 2024, the Schweitzers filed the court-suggested 
motion to compel discovery. The Schweitzers cited Brady v.
Maryland
, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), HRPP Rule 16, and Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Professional Conduct Rule 3.8(b) to support their motion. 
The next day, CHOPA filed their memorandum in opposition. 
It argued that 
Brady and the HRPP didn’t apply to the 
Schweitzers, because they were no longer criminal defendants. 
On July 30, 2024, the circuit court held a hearing where it 
ruled that the Lauro investigation was highly relevant to 
determining the Schweitzers’ actual innocence. The court 
granted the Schweitzers’ motion to compel and invited them to 
submit a subpoena duces tecum due in two days, August 1, 2024 at 
9:30 a.m. It also ordered HPD to produce documents for in 
camera review. The court would decide whether those materials should be disclosed to the Schweitzers. 
13  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On August 1, HPD filed a motion to quash the subpoena. 
After the court continued the matter, HPD filed a new motion to 
quash on August 2. 
Citing to the Uniform Information Practices Act, HRS 
§§ 92F-13 (2012) and 92F-22 (2012), HPD argued that the 
Schweitzers “are not entitled to the requested records at this 
time because release of the records would frustrate a legitimate 
government purpose and could upend the integrity of the ongoing and open criminal investigation” into Ireland’s death. HPD said 
that it was still completing its investigation “related to the 
new developments involving the identification of Unknown Male #1 
as Albert Lauro, Jr. (deceased)” and that “[i]t has been 
approximately one week” since HPD learned of Lauro’s death and 
“the ongoing investigation is currently incomplete.” An HPD 
Captain declared that releasing police records publicly might 
interfere with witness testimony or other evidence. 
HPD further argued that the Schweitzers reliance on Brady 
is misguided. Brady only applies to accused criminal 
defendants, HPD explained, but both Schweitzers were no longer 
defendants; their convictions had been vacated and their cases 
dismissed without prejudice. 
If the court insisted on allowing the subpoena, HPD 
requested in camera review and a protective order. 
14  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
That same day, the circuit court declined to grant the 
motion to quash and granted the Schweitzers’ motion to compel. 
The next day, HPD filed another motion to quash, making similar 
arguments. 
On August 5, 2024, the court reconvened for a hearing on 
the Schweitzers’ motion for finding of actual innocence, their 
petition for Chapter 661B relief, and HPD’s motion to quash 
subpoena duces tecum. 
The circuit court ruled that even though the Schweitzers 
were no longer accused in a criminal prosecution, Brady’s principles still apply. CHOPA opposed the Schweitzers actual 
innocence, the court reasoned, so evidence tending to exonerate 
them is relevant to the Schweitzers’ actual innocence claim. 
The court ordered HPD to submit its investigative materials for 
in camera review. Then the court would decide whether to 
release documents to the Schweitzers. 
On August 6, 2024, HPD filed an emergency motion to stay 
the subpoena pending review by this court. 
On August 7, the circuit court held a hearing on releasing 
the HPD documents. 
The court asked the Hawaiʻi County deputy 
corporation counsel, representing HPD, why the investigation was 
still ongoing, given Lauro’s death. Counsel mused that HPD 
might be able to identify someone that was with Lauro and was 
complicit in Ireland’s death. 
15  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The court remarked that it didn’t see what further 
investigation would be necessary, and that the public’s right to 
understand the investigation into Lauro greatly outweighed the 
value of a continuing investigation. But, recognizing the 
mandamus petition pending before us, the court paused the case. D. Writ of Mandamus Petition and Arguments 
On August 7, 2024, HPD filed a petition for writ of 
mandamus. 
HPD sought an order to vacate the August 5, 2024 
denial of its motion to quash, and to order the circuit court to 
maintain the confidentiality of the requested law enforcement 
records. HPD argued that UIPA supported its demand to keep the 
records confidential. And it said Brady doesn’t apply. 
On August 8, this court issued an order staying the 
subpoena. We ordered briefing. 
Ian opposes HPD’s writ. He makes five main arguments. First, Ian argues that UIPA is “not a shield against 
discovery.” Just because a document falls within a UIPA 
exception, does not mean it’s undiscoverable. See State of
Hawaiʻi
 Org. of P
olice Officers v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 
149 Hawaiʻi 492, 508-09, 494 P.3d 1225, 1241-42 (2021). Rather, 
the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure govern discovery, Ian says. 
There is no UIPA privilege in HRCP’s discovery rules. 
16  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Second, Ian argues that the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
govern privileges, and HRE 501 requires a privilege to be 
“expressly provided by law.” 
UIPA does not create a privilege. 
Third, Ian attacks HPD’s assertion of an ongoing 
investigation as “conclusory” and “unsupported by any specific evidence or factual detail.” Ian argues that HPD’s suspicions 
fail to justify withholding records, citing 
Grube v. Trader
, 142 
Hawaiʻi 412, 426, 420 P.3d 343, 357 (2018) (nonspecific 
assertions insufficient to justify keeping records 
confidential). Courts need something more concrete, Ian 
contends. 
Fourth, Ian argues that 
Brady’s principles obligate the 
police to turn over exculpatory material in HRS Chapter 661B 
cases. 
Fifth, Ian claims that a prosecutor’s professional 
responsibility also requires the county to turn over records. 
See
 Hawaiʻi Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 3.8 Cmt. 1 
(prosecutor has ethical duty to rectify the conviction of 
innocent people). 
For his part, Shawn argues that HPD failed to meet the high 
threshold for a writ of mandamus: an indisputable right to 
relief. See Womble Bond Dickinson (US) LLP v. Kim
, 153 Hawaiʻ i 
307, 319, 537 P.3d 1154, 1166 (2023). 
17  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
First, Shawn contends there is no absolute privilege that 
shields police records from discovery in civil or criminal 
cases. Shawn says that the subpoena, in a Rule 40 case, is a 
criminal, not civil, matter. 
Second, Shawn argues that HPD’s justifications for 
concealing information were unfounded. So, no UIPA exception 
applies to HPD’s investigation into Lauro. 
Third, Shawn urges that the appropriate safeguard to 
protect confidential information is for the circuit court to review the documents in chambers. 
In their supplemental brief, the brothers further argue 
that a Rule 40 court is the appropriate forum to determine 
actual innocence. A Rule 40 court must decide actual innocence, 
they say, because HRS § 661B-1 refers to a Rule 40 court 
decision that “so states” actual innocence. 
The brothers argue that HRPP Rule 40(c)(3) does not require 
moving the actual innocence question to civil court. That rule reads: 
(3) Separate Cause of Action. If a post- conviction 
petition alleges neither illegality of judgment nor 
illegality of post- conviction “custody” or “restraint” but 
instead alleges a cause of action based on a civil rights 
statute or other separate cause of action, the court shall 
treat the pleading as a civil complaint not governed by 
this rule. However, where a petition seeks relief of the 
nature provided by this rule and simultaneously pleads a 
separate claim or claims under a civil rights statute or 
other separate cause of action, the latter claim or claims 
shall be ordered transferred by the court for disposition 
under the civil rules. 
18  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRPP Rule 40(c)(3) (emphasis added). The brothers say that 
their HRS Chapter 661B joint petition does not allege a separate 
cause of action. Rather, it just requests a finding in the 
criminal case that is a precondition to enter civil court. 
Third, the brothers argue that because the joint petition 
is criminal, Hawaiʻi’s civil discovery rules don’t apply.  
Fourth, the brothers believe there is no absolute privilege 
for police records, citing 
Tighe v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 55 
Haw. 420, 422, 520 P.2d 1345, 1346 (1974). And, they say, HPD’s 
purported UIPA privilege is unsupported. 
CHOPA and HPD each filed supplemental briefs. Those briefs 
argue that the orders granting Ian’s Rule 40 petition and 
Shawn’s plea withdrawal, and vacating the brothers’ convictions, 
ended the Rule 40 matter. The Schweitzers’ joint petition 
invoked HRS Chapter 661B, so it should be treated as a separate 
civil action under HRPP 40(c)(3). And, the county entities note, the Schweitzers didn’t complete procedural requirements to 
kickstart a 661B action, like serving the AGs. 
The county prosecutors also argue that HPD’s records are 
privileged law enforcement records per Mehau v. Gannett Pac. 
Corp., 66 Haw. 133, 156, 658 P.2d 312, 327 (1983). CHOPA 
explains that law enforcement needs to keep investigating this 
case, and to do that effectively, confidentiality is important. 
19  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It even floats the possibility that the Schweitzers are guilty 
after all, insisting there is “no evidence to conclusively show” 
that the Schweitzers were not involved in Ireland’s death. 
CHOPA also says it needs time to follow up on the new DNA 
evidence pointing to Lauro. 
Had the Schweitzers properly filed their 661B petition as a 
separate civil action, HPD adds, then HRCP discovery rules would 
apply. HPD relies on the law enforcement privilege that it thinks this court created in Mehau. Because that case 
purportedly grounded this putative privilege in UIPA, HPD argues 
it satisfies HRE 501’s requirement that evidentiary privileges 
arise from a statute. 
III. 
The Hawaiʻi Constitution and HRS § 602-5(a) (2016) empower 
the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court to issue writs.  
Rivera v. Cataldo
, 153 
Hawaiʻi 320, 324, 537 P.3d 1167, 1171 (2023). HRS § 602-5(a)(3) 
gives this court original jurisdiction to consider writs 
directed to lower courts. Id.HRS § 602-5(a)(5) authorizes us 
to issue writs or orders to aid jurisdiction. Id.
More broadly, HRS § 602-5(a)(6) empowers this court to do 
justice. Id.This court may “make and award such judgments, 
decrees, orders and mandates, issue such executions and other processes, and do such other acts and take such other steps as 
may be necessary to carry into full effect the powers which are 
20  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or shall be given to it by law for the promotion of justice in 
matters pending before it.” HRS § 602-5(a)(6). 
This court also has general supervisory powers to prevent 
and correct errors in our state’s lower courts. Rivera
, 153 
Hawaiʻi at 324, 537 P.3d at 1171.  “The supreme court shall have 
the general superintendence of all courts of inferior 
jurisdiction to prevent and correct errors and abuses therein 
where no other remedy is expressly provided by law.” HRS § 602
-
4 (2016). 
Here, we exercise our authority to issue a writ of 
mandamus. The circuit court had no discretion to act on the civil claims in the post-conviction proceeding, because under HRPP 40(c)(3) the only correct outcome was to transfer the civil 
claims to a new civil case. We order the circuit court to quash 
the Schweitzers subpoena. We also order the court to transfer 
the Schweitzers’ joint petition for relief under HRS Chapter 
661B to a new civil proceeding. 
The new civil case must follow the procedures prescribed by 
HRCP Rule 26 and HRS § 661B-2. The Schweitzers must serve the Department of the Attorney General (AG). Their discovery 
request must wait until after the AG answers the petition. 
Then, the parties should follow HRCP Rule 26’s discovery 
procedures: a conference, a discovery plan, and initial 
disclosures. The civil court should also take steps to protect 
21  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any constitutionally or statutorily protected information from 
disclosure. 
The civil court should evaluate the Schweitzers’ discovery 
request under HRCP Rule 26. Brady and UIPA are not relevant to 
the analysis: Brady applies to criminal defendants, and UIPA does not apply to civil litigation or create an exception to 
discovery. 
We also clarify that there is no qualified law enforcement 
privilege in Hawaiʻ i. This court’s two cases recognizing that 
privilege, Mehau and Kaneshiro v. Au
, 67 Haw. 442, 690 P.2d 1304 
(1984), concerned a matter that predated the Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Evidence. HRE 501 has since abrogated the qualified privilege, leaving only HRE 510, the informant identity privilege, in its 
place. 
Law enforcement agencies have an alternative remedy, 
though. 
They may seek a protective order per HRCP Rule 26(c) to 
ensure the appropriate confidentiality of sensitive information. 
Last, we comment on the circuit court’s timeline in this 
case. The court’s extremely tight deadlines were not 
appropriate under the circumstances. A. The Circuit Court Should Not Have Compelled Civil Discovery 
in a Criminal Proceeding 
We issue a writ of mandamus because the circuit court had 
no discretion to act on the civil claims in the post-conviction 
22  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceeding. Under HRPP Rule 40, the only correct outcome was to 
transfer the civil claims to a new civil case. 
This court grants writs only in extraordinary 
circumstances. Womble, 153 Hawaiʻ i at 319, 537 P.3d at 1166. 
Exceeding jurisdiction, flagrantly and manifestly abusing discretion, and refusing to act when it has a legal duty to act 
are court actions and inaction that may constitute extraordinary 
circumstances to issue a writ. Id.This court has also granted 
a writ of mandamus when lower courts persistently misapplied discovery rules in excess of their jurisdiction. State ex rel.
Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 306, 788 P.2d 1281, 1283 (1990). 
To obtain a writ, a petitioner must “demonstrate a clear 
and indisputable right to the relief requested and a lack of 
other means to redress adequately the alleged wrong or to obtain 
the requested action.” Womble
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 319, 537 P.3d at 
1166 (cleaned up). 
Here, HPD has established a clear and indisputable right to 
the relief requested, and the appeal remedy is inadequate in the 
extraordinary circumstances raised by this case where HPD was 
compelled by the circuit court to disclose information related 
to a pending criminal investigation on an expedited basis. See
Brende v. Hara
, 113 Hawaiʻi 424, 429, 153 P.3d 1109, 1114 (2007) 
(holding that petitioner was entitled to mandamus relief where 
the circuit court entered an order that allowed the release of 
23  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
confidential information obtained in discovery). Further, 
sometimes lower courts require immediate need of direction from 
this court on a procedural and substantive matter of public 
importance. See Rivera
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 325, 537 P.3d at 1172. 
The parties and the circuit court confronted a blurry 
situation. 
(This case preceded Jardine.) Others too may have 
head-scratched over 661B. Because no order “so states” that the 
Schweitzers were “actually innocent,” Attorney General Lopez, in 
her February 2024 letter, opined that the Schweitzers did not 
meet HRS § 661B-1’s precondition to begin a civil action for 
compensation. 
The Schweitzers therefore reasonably believed that they 
needed to press on in the HRPP Rule 40 proceeding to obtain an “actual innocence” finding. Only then could they begin their 
civil 661B claim. 
But, adjudicating an extra finding of actual innocence for 
a 661B claim defies HRPP Rule 40(c)(3). HRPP Rule 40 enables a 
convicted defendant to obtain relief from a criminal judgment or 
criminal custody. HRPP 40(c)(3) says: 
(3) Separate Cause of Action. If a post- conviction 
petition alleges neither illegality of judgment nor 
illegality of post- conviction “custody” or “restraint” but 
instead alleges a cause of action based on a civil rights statute or other separate cause of action, the court shall 
treat the pleading as a civil complaint not governed by 
this rule. However, where a petition seeks relief of the nature provided by this rule and simultaneously pleads a 
separate claim or claims under a civil rights statute or 
other separate cause of action, the latter claim or claims 
24  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shall be ordered transferred by the court for disposition 
under the civil rules.  
Rule 40(c)(3) addresses two situations. The rule’s first 
sentence says if a petitioner mistakenly files only a civil 
claim without including a claim for relief from a criminal 
judgment or custody, the court should consider the matter a 
civil case. Id. The second sentence says that if a petitioner files claims for both post-conviction criminal relief and civil 
remedies, then the court shall transfer the civil claims to a 
separate proceeding governed by the HRCP. Id.
Here, the Schweitzers’ “Joint Petition for Relief Pursuant 
to HRS Chapter 661B” arises “under a civil rights statute or 
other separate cause of action,” so it is a civil claim. See
id. The circuit court – invoking criminal jurisdiction in the post-conviction relief proceeding – was required by HRPP 
40(c)(3) to transfer the joint petition to a new civil 
proceeding. 
We order the court to transfer the Schweitzers’ joint 
petition for relief under HRS Chapter 661B to a new civil case. 
The transfer matters because Rule 40 proceedings are criminal 
and 661B proceedings are civil. 
The Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal Procedure control the 
Schweitzers’ post-conviction proceedings. Grindling v. State
, 
144 Hawaiʻi 444, 453, 445 P.3d 25, 34 (2019). In contrast, the 
25  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Schweitzers’ Joint Petition for HRS Chapter 661B Relief is a 
civil matter against the State. See HRS § 661B-1 (authorizing a 
wrongfully convicted person to seek “an award of damages against the State”); Jardine, 2024 WL 4314979, at *13 (explaining “in a 
HRS chapter 661B civil claim, the petitioner then has the burden 
to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that they are 
‘actually innocent of the crimes at issue’”). A Rule 40 
proceeding, Jardine recognizes, occurs in criminal court, while a 661B proceeding happens in civil court: “Jardine’s HRPP Rule 
40 petition was adjudicated in criminal court using the McNulty 
standard . . . . [I]n his HRS chapter 661B proceeding, Jardine 
must show by a preponderance of the evidence in civil court that 
he was actually innocent.” 2024 WL 4314979, at *19. 
Criminal and civil proceedings are governed by different 
procedural rules. The HRPP guide criminal proceedings. HRPP 
Rule 1(a). The HRCP govern civil proceedings. HRCP Rule 1(a). 
Therefore, we clarify that the discovery the Schweitzers seek to support their joint petition must be handled under the civil 
rules, not the penal rules. 
HPD has an indisputable right to relief. We grant HPD a 
writ of mandamus. We order the circuit court to quash the 
Schweitzers’ subpoena in the Rule 40 case and transfer their 
petition to a new civil case. 
26  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. The Court Must Transfer Discovery to the New Civil Court 
for It to Evaluate 
As part of our writ of mandamus, we order the court not to 
release the discovery produced to it in the completed post-
conviction proceedings. Any further determination on the release of those records should come from the presiding judge in 
the new civil case. The circuit court should transfer the 
discovery it holds to the new civil court judge (which may also 
be Judge Kubota, sitting in his civil capacity). The civil 
court will decide whether documents should be returned to HPD or 
produced and under what conditions or protections. 
We provide some guidance about what should happen in the 
civil proceeding. As this court did in Kaneshiro, we exercise 
our HRS § 602-4 powers because resolving the conflict between a party’s discovery rights and a law enforcement agency’s desire 
for confidentiality is of considerable public importance. 
Kaneshiro, 67 Haw. at 446, 690 P.2d at 1308. As in Kaneshiro, 
we provide instructions to the circuit court. Id.We address 
legal issues raised by the parties and those implicit in the situation faced by a circuit court judge. Id.
And, because HPD may continue to resist producing 
information to the Schweitzers, we lay out a blueprint for how the new civil court should evaluate the Schweitzers’ discovery 
request. 
27  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In the civil court, the Schweitzers’ discovery demand must 
proceed under HRCP Rule 26 and HRS § 661B-2. Thus, the new 
civil judge may not release the materials until four things have 
happened. 
First, the Schweitzers must serve the Department of the 
Attorney General. Second, their discovery request must wait 
until the AGs file an answer per HRS § 661B-2. Third, the 
parties must follow the conference, discovery plan, and disclosure steps required by HRCP Rule 26. Fourth, the court 
should take steps to protect any constitutionally or statutorily 
protected information from disclosure. 
In the new civil case, the Schweitzers must serve the 
Department of the Attorney General. 
Under HRCP 4(a), “[u]pon 
the filing of the complaint the clerk shall forthwith issue a summons” directed to the defendant. In a Chapter 661B case, the 
defendant is the State of 
Hawaiʻi.  So, service must follow HRCP 
4(d)(4)’s and HRS § 661B-2(a)’s commands. HRCP 4(d)(4) says 
that service of process on the State is made by “delivering a 
copy of the summons and of the complaint” to the attorney general, the assistant attorney general, or their designee. HRS 
§ 661B-2(a) provides, “[t]he petitioner shall serve the petition 
upon the attorney general, and if the prosecuting authority was 
other than the attorney general, upon the prosecuting 
authority.” 
28  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Here, the Schweitzers’ petition has not commenced 
correctly. In the new civil case, the Schweitzers must serve 
the Department of the Attorney General and the County of Hawaiʻi 
Office of the Prosecuting Attorney. 
Second, discovery must wait until after the answer. 
HRS 
§ 661B-2(b) requires the Attorney General to file “an answer 
that shall either admit that the petitioner is entitled to 
compensation or deny the petitioner’s claim.” If the Attorney 
General “denies that the petitioner is entitled to compensation, 
then the court shall conduct a trial to determine if the 
petitioner is entitled to compensation and the amount, if any.” 
Id. If the Attorney General enters a complete denial, then 
liability and damages are both at issue. If the Attorney 
General concedes liability, “the court shall conduct a trial to 
determine the amount of compensation.” Id.In this scenario, 
the relevant issues narrow to damages. 
Discovery is only relevant when it relates to a party’s 
claim or defense. HRCP Rule 26(b)(1)(A). The Schweitzers’ requested discovery is only relevant so long as the Attorney General continues to deny the Schweitzers’ entitlement to 
compensation. If the AG concedes that the Schweitzers are due 
compensation, there is no need for future discovery to prove 
that the Schweitzers are actually innocent - the civil case 
advances to the calculation of damages. Until the AG answers, 
29  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
though, who knows whether further discovery is relevant. 
Relevance depends on the Attorney General’s position. 
Third, discovery should proceed under Rule 26’s framework. 
A party in a civil case is generally prohibited from seeking 
discovery from any source before the parties confer at the 
discovery conference required by HRCP 26(f), produce a discovery 
plan per HRCP 26(f)(3), and release their initial disclosures 
per HRCP 26(a). HRCP Rule 26(d)(1) provides: 
(d) Timing and Sequence of Discovery. 
(1) Timing. A party may not seek discovery from any source 
before the parties have conferred as required by Rule 26(f) 
of this Rule, except in a proceeding exempted from initial 
disclosure under Rule 26(a)(1)(B) of this Rule, or when 
authorized by these rules, by stipulation, or by court order. 
HRCP Rule 26(f) requires a discovery conference. It 
provides that the parties must generally confer “as soon as 
practicable.” HRCP Rule 26(f)(1). The parties should arrange 
for their disclosures and develop a discovery plan. HRCP Rule 
26(f)(2). Rule 26(f)(3) outlines the contents of a discovery 
plan. HRCP Rule 26(a) lists the items required in initial 
disclosures. 
The Schweitzers sought civil discovery in the post-
conviction proceeding. The circuit court erred by allowing the 
civil discovery in the criminal case and by allowing civil discovery outside the order provided by HRCP Rule 26. The new 
civil judge and the parties need to go through this process 
30  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
before the court decides whether a motion to compel discovery is 
needed. 
Fourth, the new civil judge must take appropriate steps to 
protect privileged and legally protected information. 
The Hawaiʻ i Constitution’s right to privacy protects a non-
party’s medical information from discovery. Pac. Radiation
Oncology, LLC v. Queen’s Med. Ctr., 138 Hawaiʻ i 14, 20, 375 P.3d 
1252, 1258 (2016). 
It also protects a party’s private medical 
information from public disclosure. Brende, 113 Hawaiʻ i at 426, 
153 P.3d at 1111. 
And, certain public records are protected by 
statute from public disclosure. See, e.g., HRS § 338-18 (Supp. 
2021) (protecting vital statistics records from disclosure). 
On the current record, it is unclear whether any of these 
privileges or legal protections are at issue or apply. 
The 
civil court should consider and take necessary steps to restrict the production or disclosure of protected information. The 
civil court may decide to solicit briefing from the parties or 
from non-parties possessing protected information on these issues. 
C. The Civil Court Should Consider Whether to Compel the 
Discovery Per HRCP Rule 26 Balancing 
1. Brady and UIPA Are Not Relevant 
Brady does not support or justify the circuit court’s 
decision to allow discovery to proceed in the post-conviction 
31  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceeding. Brady requires prosecutors to turn over exculpatory 
evidence to criminal defendants. It does not apply to civil 
proceedings like the Schweitzers’ 661B compensation claim. The 
court’s order denying HPD’s motion to quash, while referencing 
due process principles, does not rely on any Hawaiʻ i or federal 
cases to extend Brady in this context. 
As the Ninth Circuit reasoned: 
The extent to which Brady- like obligations extend to civil 
cases is an open question. As the government acknowledges, 
Brady  has been applied in the civil context when a 
substantial private interest is at stake,  . . .  or a civil 
matter is jointly investigated with a criminal prosecution  .  .  .  .   But courts have only in rare instances 
found Brady  applicable in civil proceedings,  .  .  .  such as 
when a person’s liberty is at stake
. 
Kashem v. Barr
, 941 F.3d 358, 386-87 (9th Cir. 2019) (cleaned 
up). Brady has been applied in some quasi-criminal contexts. 
For instance, at least one state court has applied Brady-like 
obligations to civil forfeiture cases. Foor v. Smith, 416 P.3d 
858, 863 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2018). But the Schweitzers’ 661B case is not quasi-criminal, like these examples. Ian and Shawn want 
monetary damages for a wrong they assert was done to them. 
Their compensation case is like ordinary civil litigation. 
On this point, we agree with HPD. The Schweitzers are no 
longer criminal defendants and their 661B petition is a civil 
matter. Brady is sidelined. HRCP Rule 26 controls. 
Hawaiʻi’s Uniform Information Practices Act, HRS Chapter 92F 
is also inapplicable to civil discovery. HRS § 92F-3 (2012) 
32  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
exempts “nonadministrative functions of the courts of this 
State” from UIPA. UIPA does not create the equivalent of a 
discovery privilege to prevent disclosure of government records 
in a lawsuit. 
In a civil lawsuit the HRCP control discovery of any 
matter, including government records. A party may obtain 
discovery of any relevant evidence that is not privileged. HRCP 
26(b)(1)(A). Hawaiʻi law only recognizes evidentiary privileges 
spelled out in the 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 501, 
codified at HRS § 626-1 (2016). That rule reads: 
Rule 501. Privileges recognized only as provided 
Except as otherwise required by the Constitution of the United 
States, the Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻ i, or provided 
by Act of Congress or Hawaiʻ i statute, and except as provided 
in these rules or in other rules adopted by the Supreme Court of the State of Hawaiʻ i, no person has a privilege to: 
(1) Refuse to be a witness; or 
(2) Refuse to disclose any matter; or 
(3) Refuse to produce any object or writing; or 
(4) Prevent another from being a witness or disclosing 
any matter or producing any object or writing.  
HRS § 626-1, Rule 501. 
33  There are only five sources of an evidentiary privilege in 
Hawaiʻi. The federal and Hawaiʻ i  Constitutions, federal and 
Hawaiʻi statutes (including the HRE), and Hawaiʻ i court rules.  
Id. Rule 501’s commentary explains that the rule “closely 
resembles” its California counterpart, and quotes the commentary  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to California’s rule: “privileges are not recognized in the 
absence of statute.” However, unlike California, HRE 501 
recognizes the authority of this court to adopt privileges by 
rule. 
HRE 501 reflects an understanding that privileges run 
counter to the basic goal of discovery – uncovering the truth. 
See, e.g., DiCenzo v. Izawa, 68 Haw. 528, 534-35, 723 P.2d 171, 
175 (1986). 
Nowhere does HRS Chapter 92F provide for any evidentiary 
privilege. Accordingly, absent an evidentiary privilege, any relevant evidence must be produced to the requesting party, and 
exceptions in the UIPA are not valid grounds to object to 
otherwise relevant discovery sought by a party in a civil case. 
Exceptions to disclosure under the UIPA do not double as 
exceptions to discovery. This court has held that statutes and 
regulations governing public disclosure have no bearing on the 
scope of discovery in civil litigation. See Tighe, 55 Haw. at 
424, 520 P.2d at 1348. Exceptions under one scheme do not 
simply port to the other. 
This separation mirrors the distinct interests that UIPA 
and the rules of discovery are designed to serve. Under UIPA, 
the public interest in disclosure is weighed against competing 
interests in nondisclosure. See, e.g., Peer News LLC v. City &
Cnty. of Honolulu
, 138 Hawaiʻi 53, 61, 376 P.3d 1, 9 (2016). But 
34  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under the HRCP, discovery is driven by the case’s needs, taking 
into account the benefit and burden to each party. See HRCP 
Rule 26(b)(2)(iii). Here, the Schweitzers want to remedy injuries personal to them – it makes little sense to govern 
their discovery request according to UIPA. 
We conclude that UIPA neither creates an evidentiary 
privilege nor applies to civil litigation. Therefore, it does 
not protect information from discovery under HRE 501 and HRCP Rule 26(b)(1)(A). 
2. There Is No Qualified Law Enforcement Investigatory 
Privilege 
“[T]here is no absolute privilege for police records that 
would insulate such records from discovery process under the 
H.R.C.P.” Tighe, 55 Haw. at 428, 520 P.2d at 1351. Similarly, 
“[n]o absolute privilege insulates police records from 
discovery” in a criminal case. State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 
216, 738 P.2d 812, 821 (1987). Tighe discussed the policy 
considerations at play: 
Public interest in preservation of confidentiality and 
secrecy may be sufficient reason for insulation of police 
or other governmental records from discovery in special, 
individual cases, but such claims of privilege for such records on this basis require documentation and argument by 
the governmental agency asserting the privilege, and 
subsequent judicial evaluation of the claim of privilege. 
Tighe, 55 Haw. at 422, 520 P.2d at 1346-47. 
Following Tighe and Mehau, this court recognized a 
“qualified privilege” for law enforcement investigatory 
35  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
materials. Kaneshiro, 67 Haw. at 446, 690 P.2d at 1308. We 
clarify that HRE 501 abrogated this privilege. For cases 
beginning after 1980, there is no qualified privilege. 
Mehau repeated Tighe’s statements that (a) there is no 
absolute law enforcement privilege (b) the public interest may 
support secrecy in special cases, and (c) claims for 
confidentiality require documentation and judicial evaluation. 
Kaneshiro identified a conflict “between the right of parties to litigation to discover the facts through the production of 
documents not privileged from discovery, . . . and the 
legitimate concerns, of governmental agencies charged with the 
investigation of criminal activities, that the effectiveness of 
those investigations not be impeded.” 67 Haw. at 446, 690 P.2d 
at 1308. To address these concerns, Kaneshiro recognized a 
“qualified privilege” for law enforcement agencies to withhold 
their investigatory files. Id.Kaneshiro limited its reach to 
“the unique factual situation” it faced. Id.
We clarify that this qualified privilege exists only for 
cases that began before 1981. From 1981 forward, HRE 501 
abrogated the common law qualified privilege that Mehau and 
Kaneshiro recognized. The underlying proceedings in these two 
cases, which this court decided in 1983 and 1984 respectively, 
began before 1981. Mehau, 66 Haw. at 141, 658 P.2d at 319; 
Kaneshiro, 67 Haw. at 445, 690 P.2d at 1307. So, they were in 
36  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the pipeline of existing cases that could still be decided under 
the former evidentiary rules. See HRS § 626-2 (2016). But for 
cases post-1980, the HRE controls. See HRS § 626-3 (2016). As 
of 1981, there is no qualified privilege for law enforcement 
investigatory records in Hawaiʻ i law.  
The HRE took effect on January 1, 1981 and apply to all 
actions beginning after that day. HRS § 626-2. The Rules 
govern proceedings in our courts, with some exceptions not 
relevant here. HRE 101. 
By adopting the HRE, the Hawaiʻi legislature “disclaimed all 
common law privileges that were not codified by statute.” Peer
News
, 143 Hawaiʻi 472, 484 n.20, 431 P.3d 1245, 1257 n.20 (2018). 
That includes 
Kaneshiro’s qualified privilege. 
The HRE recognizes only one privilege related to law 
enforcement agencies. HRE 510 establishes an identity of 
informant privilege. HRE 510(a) provides a privilege for 
government agencies “to refuse to disclose the identity of a 
person who has furnished information relating to or assisting in an investigation of a possible violation of law to a law 
enforcement officer or member of a legislative committee or its 
staff conducting an investigation.” This privilege is narrow. 
HRE 510(c) provides three exceptions, including when the 
informant may give testimony relevant to a material issue in the 
case. 
37  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Rule 510 does not imply a general investigatory privilege. 
The rule applies only to “the identity of a person” and not 
investigatory materials generally. Id.Its tight scope matches 
the common law privilege it codified, which protects a specific law enforcement interest: the effective use of informers. See
McCray v. Illinois, 386 U.S. 300, 307 (1967). The specificity of its text and its common law ancestor, counsel against 
extending HRE 510’s reach. HRE 510’s slimness suggests the legislature took a narrower view of law enforcement privilege 
than Kaneshiro did. HRE 501 and 510 signal that there is no 
qualified law enforcement privilege. 
Because there is no privilege, law enforcement 
investigatory records are fully discoverable, subject to HRE 
510. See HRCP Rule 26(b). But that doesn’t mean they are 
unprotected. A party may request, and a judge shall consider, whether a protective order balances a party’s right to 
discoverable information with a law enforcement agency’s legitimate need for confidentiality in an ongoing investigation. 
3. Courts May Use Protective Orders to Guard Confidential 
Law Enforcement Investigatory Information 
HRCP Rule 26 provides the tools for a trial court to 
consider a law enforcement agency’s legitimate interests. The 
lack of an investigatory privilege does not mean that discovery 
will be unconcerned with the interest in effective law 
38  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
enforcement. Per Rule 26(c), a trial court may issue a 
protective order to fulfill law enforcement needs. 
The HRCP “reflect a basic philosophy that a party to a 
civil action should be entitled to the disclosure of all 
relevant information in the possession of another person prior 
to trial, unless the information is privileged.” Mehau, 66 Haw. 
at 155, 658 P.2d at 326. Rule 26(b) defines the scope of discovery. It provides that, “[p]arties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the 
subject matter involved in the pending action.” HRCP Rule 
26(b)(1)(A). 
This broad discovery right is limited by the needs of the 
case. A court may constrict discovery because it is cumulative, 
available elsewhere, or the burden of producing it outweighs its 
likely benefit, taking into account the needs of the case. HRCP 
Rule 26(b)(2). Rule 26 requires “balanc[ing] the requesting 
party’s need for information against the injury that might result if uncontrolled disclosure is compelled.” See Brende
, 
113 Hawaiʻi at 431, 153 P.3d at 1116 (balancing interests).  
Effective law enforcement is one interest the trial court should 
consider in its balancing. 
By way of a protective order, a trial court has broad 
discretionary powers to balance discovery interests and protect 
39  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
confidential information. HRCP Rule 26(c), “Protective Orders” 
allows the trial court, upon a motion, to: 
[M]ake any order justice requires to protect a party or 
person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue 
burden or expense, including one or more of the following: (1) that the disclosure or discovery not be had; (2) that 
the disclosure or discovery may be had only on specified 
terms and conditions, including a designation of the time 
or place; (3) that the discovery may be had only by a 
method of discovery other than that selected by the party seeking discovery; (4) that certain matters not be inquired 
into, or that the scope of the disclosure or discovery be 
limited to certain matters; (5) that discovery be conducted 
with no one present except persons designated by the court; 
(6) that a deposition, after being sealed, be opened only by order of the court; (7) that a trade secret or other  
confidential  research, development, or commercial 
information  not be revealed or be revealed only in a 
designated way; and (8) that the parties simultaneously file specified documents or information enclosed in sealed envelopes to be opened as directed by the court.  
HRCP Rule 26(c) (emphases added). Rule 26 provides judges 
flexibility to craft an appropriate solution for each case. In 
camera review is another appropriate tool. Estrada, 69 Haw. at 
216, 738 P.2d at 821. As is a privilege log-type document. See
Kaneshiro, 67 Haw. at 449, 690 P.2d at 1310 (addressing indices 
or synopses). 
Rule 26(c) guides which law enforcement interests get a 
spot on the discovery balancing scale. It directs courts to limit discovery when necessary “to protect a party or person  
from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense” (emphasis added). Its primary concern is for harm to 
parties or others whose interests are at stake, not the public 
generally. 
40  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Applied to this case, the court should consider the 
Schweitzers’ discovery rights against HPD’s interests in 
completing this particular investigation. The circuit court 
should also consider the privacy interests of non-parties. See,
e.g., Pac. Radiation Oncology
, 138 Hawaiʻi at 20, 375 P.3d at 
1258. But it may not consider a more generalized or conclusory 
law enforcement interest in confidentiality to prevent 
disclosure. 
For instance, the general interest in maintaining the 
confidentiality of a police officer’s internal disciplinary file 
is not sufficient to override a party’s discovery rights. See
Estrada
, 69 Haw. at 217, 738 P.2d at 822. In Estrada, a 
defendant convicted of attempted murder for shooting a police officer appealed, in part, because the trial judge withheld the 
officer’s internal disciplinary file from discovery. Id. at 
206, 738 P.2d at 816. This court ruled that the incidents described in the file were relevant to the defendant’s case. 
Id. at 217, 738 P.2d at 822. So, this court summarized the 
file’s contents and directed the trial judge to produce the entire file to both parties. Id.
A party seeking a protective order must advance specific 
facts and compelling reasons why protection is needed. Vague, 
imprecise, or boilerplate assertions are not enough. 
41  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
What HPD has offered here will not do. HPD argued that the 
Schweitzers are not entitled to the release of records at this 
time because a release would “frustrate HPD’s legitimate 
criminal investigative purpose and compromise the integrity of 
the open criminal investigation” in which the Schweitzers are 
still possible suspects. HPD worries, in a general way, that 
disclosure might lead to witness tampering and loss of evidence. 
At oral argument, the county prosecutors could not provide an estimate of when HPD would finish its investigation. 
In the civil case, HPD will have the opportunity to request 
a protective order and augment its justifications for that 
order. If HPD does not provide additional specificity, a 
protective order is unwarranted. As this court has said, 
“[p]ublic interest in preservation of confidentiality and 
secrecy may be sufficient reason for insulation of police or 
other governmental records from discovery in special, individual 
cases, but such claims of privilege for such records on this basis require documentation and argument by the governmental 
agency asserting the privilege.” Tighe
, 55 Haw. at 422, 520 
P.2d at 1346-47. If the ongoing investigation bars discovery of potentially exonerating evidence, the Schweitzers are stymied in 
pursuing their case. They may be denied the compensation 
Hawaiʻi’s wrongful conviction compensation law promises.  
42  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The balance of a party’s right to discoverable information 
and a law enforcement agency’s needs will shift over time. 
Mehau, 66 Haw. at 156, 658 P.2d at 327. Mehau explained that 
the need to maintain law enforcement confidentiality is “seldom one of indefinite duration, for the underlying inquiry usually 
has a reasonable terminus.” Id. (cleaned up). An investigation 
cannot go on forever, and a party cannot indefinitely wait to get documents related to its case. A law enforcement agency must articulate a reasonable time constraint on the duration of 
its proposed protective order. A judge must evaluate whether 
the proposed time frame adequately balances the parties’ needs. 
D. The Circuit Court’s Timeline Was Too Short 
Last, we comment on the circuit court’s timetable for this 
discovery dispute. For sure “trial courts have broad powers to 
control the litigation process before them.” Weinberg v.
Dickson-Weinberg
, 123 Hawaiʻi 68, 75, 229 P.3d 1133, 1140 (2010). 
But here, the circuit court’s timeframe was overly 
compressed. 
The Schweitzers informed the court about Lauro’s 
death on Friday, July 26, 2024. The court instructed the Schweitzers to file a motion to compel discovery and set a 
hearing on that motion for Tuesday, July 30. That gave the 
Schweitzers’ counsel roughly 48, mostly-weekend hours, until 
Sunday, July 28, to file the motion. Then, the County had only 
one day to respond. 
43  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
At the July 30 hearing, the court invited the Schweitzers 
to submit a subpoena duces tecum due in two days, on August 1. 
This gave HPD and CHOPA only 48 hours to collect and review the 
requested materials. It gave the County’s lawyers only two days 
to file a motion to quash. The County filed a motion to quash 
on August 1. It filed a second motion to quash the next day, in 
anticipation of an August 5 hearing. 
We fail to see the reason for the circuit court’s breakneck 
pace. Unlike the earlier petition for post-conviction relief – which released Ian from custody – the Schweitzers’ discovery 
request was only pertinent to their civil claim. While we 
appreciate the circuit court’s commitment to a prompt 
resolution, the rush was unnecessary under the circumstances. 
Although circuit courts have broad discretion to control 
the litigation process, a court should hesitate before ordering 
very short deadlines on matters and motions raising major 
issues. A slightly longer timeframe in this case would have made things more manageable for the attorneys and law 
enforcement, and allowed more time for the presentation of 
important issues. The timelines the circuit court set in this 
case between July 26 and August 1 were unreasonable. 
44  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. 
Petitioners must pursue their HRS Chapter 661B claims as a 
separate civil case, and not within a HRPP Rule 40 post-
conviction proceeding. 
We order the circuit court to quash the subpoena in the 
Rule 40 case and transfer the Schweitzers’ HRS Chapter 661B 
petition to a new civil case. The circuit court is directed to 
vacate: (1) As to 3CSP-23-0000003, the “Court Order Denying 
Hawaiʻi Police Department’s Motion to Quash Subpoena Duces Tecum, 
Filed on August 2, 2024,” filed on August 15, 2024; and, the 
“Order Granting Motion to Compel Discovery Re: Joint Petition 
for Relief Pursuant to HRS Chapter 661B,” filed on August 1, 
2024; (2) as to 3CSP-23-0000017, the “Court Order Denying Hawaiʻ i 
Police Department’s Motion to Quash Subpoena Duces Tecum, Filed 
on August 2, 2024,” filed on August 15, 2024; and, the “Order 
Granting Motion to Compel Discovery Re: Joint Petition for 
Relief Pursuant to HRS Chapter 661B” filed on August 1, 2024. 
The circuit court is further ordered to transfer the Joint 
Petition for Relief Pursuant to HRS Chapter 661B filed in 3CSP-
23-0000003 and 3CSP-23-0000017 to a new civil case. The court 
may not release the discovery in the completed post-conviction 
proceedings, and any further determination on the release of 
such records should be made by the presiding judge in the new civil case. The circuit court shall also transfer all produced 
45  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
material held in its possession to this new civil case for 
future decision on whether that discovery should be returned to 
HPD, produced to the Schweitzers under protective conditions, or 
produced to the Schweitzers and made available publicly. 
E.  Britt Bailey  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
for petitioner /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
Jennifer L. Brown, L. Richard /s/ Todd W. Eddins Fried, Jr., and William Harrison /s/ Lisa M. Ginozafor respondent Albert Ian Schweitzer /s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
 
Keith S. Shigetomi 
for respondent Shawn Schweitzer  Shannon M. Kagawa 
for respondent  State of Hawaiʻ i   
46 