 
 
 
 
 
 
SCPW-20-0000200 and SCPW- 20-0000213  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
 
 
SCPW-20-0000200 
 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER, Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
CLARE E. CONNORS, Attorney General of the State of Hawaiʻi;  
DONALD S. GUZMAN, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui;  
MITCHELL D. ROTH, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Hawaiʻi;  
JUSTIN F. KOLLAR, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Kauaʻi;  
DWIGHT K. NADAMOTO, Acting Prosecuting Attorney, City and County 
of Honolulu, Re spondents. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------- 
 
SCPW-20-0000213 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER, Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
DAVID Y. IGE, Governor, State of Hawaiʻi; NOLAN P. ESPINDA, 
Director, State of Hawaiʻi Department of Public Safety; 
EDMUND (FRED) K.B. HYUN, Chairperson, Hawai ʻi Paroling Authority, 
Respondents. 
 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
 
 
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCPW-20-0000200
05-JUN-2020
12:21 PM2 
 ORDER CONCLUDING MATTERS IN THIS CONSOLIDATED PROCEEDING 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, McKenna, and Pollack, JJ., 
with Wilson, J ., dissenting) 
 
On May 28, 2020, Special Master Daniel R. Foley 
(“Special Master”) filed his  Fifth Summary Report and 
Recommendations  with five exhibits  (“Fifth Summary Report”) .  
The Fifth Summary Report provides  an update on implementation of 
this court’s orders as well as other efforts  and progress in 
this consolidated proceeding.   Upon consideration of the Fifth 
Summary Report, including the exhibits, and the record, we note 
and conclude that: 
(1)  In late March, in the early days of the 
unprecedented public health emergency, the Office of the Public 
Defender (“OPD”) s ought emergency action by this court to 
address the threat of the COVID- 19 pandemic on inmates and staff 
at Hawai‘ i’s correctional centers and  facilities.  At the time, 
the potential catastrophic impact of the pandemic on our State, 
the community, our citizens, and our correctional centers and 
facilities was not determinable.  There were lockdowns across 
the nation , the death toll was rising, an d numerous other states 
had taken steps towards releasing inmates from correctional 
facilities.   In response to the petitions for emergency action 
resulting from the pandemic, this court de clined to order a 
blanket release of certain categories of inmates and, instead, 
appointed a Special Master to work with the parties in a 3 
 collaborative and expeditious manner to address the issues 
raised in the two petitions and to facilitate a resolution while 
protecting public health and public safety.  As part of the 
process, this court instituted procedures for expedited 
consideration by the courts of individual release motions,  which 
included an opportunity for objection to the release based on 
public safety and other considerations.  Today, although the 
pandemic continues, the rate of new infections in Hawai‘i remains 
at very low levels.   
(2)  Much of the urgent relief requested in the two 
petitions has  been addressed .  All of the OPD motions for early 
release filed pursuant to this Court’s April 15, 2020 order were 
adjudicated by April 28 , 2020.   
(3)  For inmates who were released, whether  pursuant 
to this expedited review process  or otherwise,  the State 
continues to have the option of fil ing individual motions 
seeking to modify the release status of any  defendant .  
Similarly, the OPD or defense counsel may file individual 
motions seeking the release of any inmate.  
(4)  Further issues regarding inmate populations at 
correctional facilities may be addressed through alternative 
means, including collaboration with the Hawai‘i Correctional 
Systems Oversight Commission, which was established by the 
Hawai‘i State Legislature pursuant to Act 179, Session Laws 4 
 
Hawai‘i 2019, to, among other things, establish maximum inmate 
population limits for each correctional facility and formulate 
policies and procedures to prevent the inmate population from 
exceeding the capacity of each correctional facility.    
This court extends its deep appreciation to the 
Special Master for working on this matter during this difficult 
and unprecedented time, as well as  the efforts that have been 
undertaken by the parties, the amici, and the many stakeholders 
in this consolidated proceeding .        
Accordingly,   
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that th is consolidated proceeding  
is concluded.  As a result, the service of the Special Master is 
completed as of the date of this order.   This order constitutes 
the final order of this consolidated proceeding.    
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, June 5, 2020. 
      /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
      /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
      /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
      /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
       