 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCPW-20-0000200  and SCPW- 20-0000213 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCPW-20-0000200 
 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER, Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
CLARE E. CONNORS, Attorney General of the State of Hawai ‘i; 
DONALD S. GUZMAN, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui; 
MITCHELL D. ROTH, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Hawai ‘i; 
JUSTIN F. KOLLAR, Prosecuting Attorney, County of Kaua ‘i; 
DWIGHT K. NADAMOTO, Acting Prosecuting Attorney, 
City and County of Honolulu, Respondents. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
SCPW-20-0000213 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEF
ENDER, Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
DAVID Y. IGE, Governor, State of Hawai‘i; NOLAN P. ESPINDA, 
Director, State of Hawai‘i Department of Public Safety; 
EDMUND (FRED) K.B. HYUN, Chairperson, Hawai‘i Paroling Authority; 
Respondents. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING 
 Electronically Filed  
Supreme Court
SCPW-20-0000200
08-JUN-2020
02:12 PM2 AMENDED 
DISSENT RE: ORDER CONCLUDING MATTERS
IN THIS CONSOLIDATED PROCEEDING 
(By: Wilson, J.)  
I. Introduction
The Novel coronavirus (“COVID -19” or “the virus”) is 
spreading around the world at an alarming rate.  On March 11, 
2020, the World Health Organization declared a global COVID- 19 
pandemic and called for countries to take “urgent and aggressive 
action.”1  As of March 27, 2020, the date of our initial order in
this case,2 the United States surpassed China in its number of
reported COVID-19 cases, with 93,568 reported cases and over 
1,400 deaths.3  The number of repor
ted cases in the United States 
has since grown at a staggering rate.  As of June 5
, 2020, the 
Center for Disease Control reported 1,842,101  total c ases in the 
United States—14,676 cases more than the day before.4  The virus
1WHO Director -General’s Opening Remarks , WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (Mar. 
11, 2020), https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who -director -general-s-
opening- remarks- at-the-world-health-assembly  (last visited June 5, 2020).  
2Interim Order filed Mar 27, 2020.  
3Coronavirus Map: Tracking the Global Outbreak, N.Y. Times (updated Mar. 
27, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/world/coronavirus -
maps.html?action=click&pgtype=Article&state=default&module=styln -
coronavirus&variant=show&region=TOP_BANNER&context=storyline_menu?action=clic
k&pgtype=Article&state=default&module=styln -
coronavirus&variant=show&region=TOP_BANNER&context=storyline_menu; Donald G. 
McNeil Jr., The U.S. Now Leads the World in Confirmed Coronavirus Cases, T HE 
NEW YORK TIMES (Mar. 26, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/26/health/usa -
coronavirus- cases.html . 
4Cases in the U.S., C TRS. FOR DISEASE CONTROL &  PREVENTION (June 5, 2020), 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/cases- updates/cases -in-us.html. 3 (. . . continued)  5has killed at least 103,700 people in the United States. 
Science and statistics constitute unequivocal evidence that  
COVID-19 is a growing lethal threat to citizens in the United
States.6 
As a result of the grave nature of this public health 
threat, Hawai ‘i is now in an officially declared state of 
emergency.  To protect Hawai  ‘i’s citizens from the present threat 
to human life, Hawai‘i Governor David Ige, and all four county 
mayors in Hawai‘i, impose d a state of emergency and issued rules 
and orders restricting daily activities of residents and 
businesses.7
5COVID-19 has killed more  than twice the number of American s killed in 
the Vietnam War.  David Welna, Coronavirus Has Now Killed More Americans Than 
Vietnam War, N ATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO (Apr. 28, 2020), 
https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus -live-updates/2020/04/28/846701304/  
pandemic- death-toll-in-u-s-now-exceeds-vietnam- wars-u-s- fatalities. 
6Approximately twenty percent of people infected experience life -
threatening complications requiring hospitalization, and according to World 
Health Organization director Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the death rate for 
those infected is  3.4%.  Brian Resnick and Christina Animashaun, Why COVID- 19 
Is Worse Than The Flu, IN ONE CHART, VOX (Mar. 18, 2020), 
https://www.vox.com/science -andhealth/2020/3/18/21184992/coronavirus -covid-
19-flu-comparison -chart.
7COVID-19 Emergency Proclamation, O FFICE OF THE G OVERNOR, STATE OF H AW. (Mar. 
4, 2020), https://governor.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/03/2003020 -GOV-
Emergency- Proclamation_COVID -19.pdf (last visited June 5, 2020); 
Supplementary Proclamation, O FFICE OF THE GOVERNOR,  STATE OF HAW. (Mar. 16, 2020), 
https://governor.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/03/2003109 -ATG_COVID- 19-
Supplementary- Proclamation -signed.pdf  (last visited June 5, 2020); Second 
Supplementary Proclamation, O FFICE OF THE GOVERNOR,  STATE OF HAW. (Mar. 21, 2020), 
https://governor.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/03/2003152 -ATG_Second-
Supplementary- Proclamation -for-COVID-19-signed.pdf (last visited June 5, 
2020); Third Supplementary Proclamation,  OFFICE OF THE G OVERNOR, STATE OF H AW. (Mar. 
23, 2020), 4 On March 23, 2020, following the guidance of the 
Hawai‘i
 Department of Health, Governor Ige issued an emergency 
proclamation “Stay -at-Home Order” (“Order”) that provided 
mandatory guidance to individuals, businesses, and operations 
within the State of Hawai‘i.  The Order carries “the force and 
effect of law” pursuant to HRS § 127A -25, mandating that the 
people of Hawai ‘i follow strict social distancing guidelines in 
order to prevent the spread of COVID-19.8 
 In Governor Ige’s Third Supplementary Proclamation, 
issued March 23, 2020, he warns of “unmanageable strains on our 
healthcare system and other catastrophic impacts to the State” 
posed by “the dangers of COVID -19.”  Third Supplementary 
Proclamation at 1.  The Governor ordered the State “to mandate 
and effectuate social distancing measurers throughout the State 
in order to reduce the spread of COVID- 19.”  Id.  “All persons 
                                                                              
(continued. . . )  
 
https://governor.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/03/2003162 -ATG_Third-
Supplementary- Proclamation -for-COVID-19-signed.pdf (last visited June 5, 
2020)  [hereinafter Third Supplementary Proclamation]; Public Health 
Emergency Rules, Amended March 22, 2020, OFFICE OF THE M AYOR, CTY. OF MAUI (Mar. 
22, 2020),  
https://www.mauicounty.gov/DocumentCenter/View/121462/Amended -2020-3-22-
Mayors-Public-Health-Emergency- Rules (last visited June 5, 2020); Mayor’s 
Emergency Rule #5, O FFICE OF THE M AYOR, CTY. OF KAUA‘I (Mar. 24, 2020),  
http://www.kauai.gov/Portals/0/Civil_Defense/Emergency%20Proclamations/Mayor%
27s%20Emergency%20Rule%20%235_20200324.pdf; Mayors COVID -19 Second 
Supplementary Emergency Proclamation, OFFICE OF THE M AYOR, CTY. OF HAW. (Mar. 24, 
2020), 
http://records.hawaiicounty.gov/WebLink/PDF/pfhqbtbqdexu2nzhtx1gt2nn/77/Mayor
s%20COVID- 19%20Second%20Supplementary%20Emergency%20Proclamation.pdf . 
 
8  Third Supplementary Proclamation , supra note 7. 5  
(. . . continued)  shall maintain a minimum of six
-feet of physical separation from
all other persons to the fullest extent possible.”  Id. at 7.   
Likewise, the Order requires that “businesses and operations 
shall make hand sanitizer and sanitizing products readily 
available for employees and customers.”  Id.   
 In the week preceding the March 4, 2020 emergency 
declaration by Governor Ige, a total of 106 cases were 
confirmed.  Since March 2, 2020, the number of cases has grown 
to 652 statewide and seventeen people have died.9  The Department 
of Health for the State of Hawai‘i warned Hawai ‘i’s residents on 
its website on June 1, 2020 that “Covid -19 is spreading 
globally, nationally, and now locally.”10  To contend with the 
emergency and prevent further spread of the virus among the 
community, tourism has essentially been halted by the 
requirement of a fourteen day quarantine for those who visit 
Hawai‘i, restaurants are closed to all but take-out service, and 
people are requested to stay at home whenever possible.11   
                     
9  Latest Cases in Hawai‘i, DISEASE OUTBREAK CONTROL DIV., STATE OF HAW. – DEP’T OF 
HEALTH, https://health.hawaii.gov/coronavirusdisease2019/(last visited June 5, 
2020). 
 
10  Current Situation in Hawaii, DISEASE OUTBREAK C ONTROL DIV., STATE OF H AW. – 
DEP’T OF HEALTH, https://health.hawaii.gov/coronavirusdisease2019/what -you-
should-know/current -situation- in-hawaii/ (last visited June 5, 2020). 
 
11  The dire nature of the measures taken to protect Hawai ‘i’s people from 
the COVID
-19 emergency has caused unprecedented unemployment, with March 2020 
unemployment claims increasing by 3,766.4% from the same month in 2019.   
 6  Preeminent among the protections identified as 
emergency measures by the Governor t
o prevent the hyper-
contagious virus from rampantly spreading from person- to-person 
is social distancing.  All persons are directed to stay at a 
distance of six feet from one another whenever practicable.12  
Our community has rallied behind this common
-sense method of 
preventing infection,  practiced by all branches of the Hawai ‘i 
State Government.  To protect Hawai‘i’s elected leaders and the 
members of the public from in- person contact at the Hawai ‘i State 
Capitol, the Hawai ‘i State legislature suspended its current 
session.13  The Hawai‘i State Judiciary has also instituted 
practices of social distancing to protect judiciary employees 
and the public from the spread of the COVID-19 infection.14  
                                                                              
(continued. . . )  
 
Olivia Peterkin, Hawaii unemployment reaches historic highs, P ACIFIC B USINESS 
NEWS (Apr. 3, 2020) . https://www.bizjournals.com/pacific/news/2020/04/03/  
hawaii-unemployment -reaches- historic- highs.html. 
 
12  Third Supplementary Proclamation , supra note 7. 
 
13  After state Senator Clarence Nishihara tested positive for COVID -19, 
the Hawai‘ i legislature immediately closed and suspended the legislative 
session.  Senate President Ron Kouchi stated that “In an abundance of 
caution, we just thought it would be better to send everybody home and then 
let the Department of Health start its process[.]”  State Capitol building 
closes after senator tests positive for coronavirus, H AW. NEWS NOW (Mar. 19, 
2020), https://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/2020/03/19/state -senator-tests-positive -
coronavirus- first-known-case-linked-state-capitol- building/ . 
 
14  On March 16, 2020, Chief Justice Mark Recktenwald issued an Order 
limiting in- person court proceedings and directing “[e]ach judicial circuit 
[to] issue orders and adjust court operations as warranted to address the  
urgent and rapidly evolving public healt h conditions[.]”  In the Matter of 
the Judiciary’s Response to the COVID -19 Outbreak, SCMF- 20-0000152, at 2.  7 Nevertheless, the Majority order assumes that 
the emergency 
conditions that caused this court to appoint a special master 
to 
act proactively to avoid the spread of COVID- 19 in Hawaii's 
incarcerated community have passed.15  Majority Order at 3. 
The incarcerated citizens of Hawai ‘i are powerless to
 
comply with the Governor’s social-distancing directive.  In 
particular, the women and men held in custody within the O ‘ahu 
Community Correctional Center (“OCCC”) face a potential COVID-19 
catastrophe due to overcrowding that prevents social 
distancing.16  Three incarcerated people are often crowded into 
                     
15  The Majority reaches the conclusion that, “the rate of new infections 
in Hawai‘i remains at very low levels”, presumably to make the point th at an 
emergency no longer exists.  As noted, our state is in the grip of a 
collapsing economy and state -wide social distancing that directly contradicts 
the underlying assumption of the Majority’s order. The June 1, 2020 
Department of Health warning that “ Covid-19 is spreading globally, 
nationally, and now locally,”  recognizes that Covid -19 continues to spread as 
the state awaits the eventual return of tourists from a world community in 
the throes of the COVID- 19 pandemic.  The majority ignores the projections of 
a second wave of COVID -19 infections emerging as communities begin to relax 
the precautions taken in response to the first wave of COVID -19 infection.  
 
Chelsea Davis, The struggle between reopening and preventing a second 
wave of COVID- 19 cases, Hawaii News Now (May 22, 2020), 
https://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/2020/05/23/struggle -between-reopening-
preventing- second-wave-covid-cases/. 
 
Len Strazewski, Harvard epidemiologist:   Beware COVID -19's second wave 
this fall, American Medical Association (May 8, 2020), https://www.ama-
assn.org/delivering -care/public- health/harvard -epidemiologist -beware-covid-
19-s-second-wave-fall. 
 
16  Although this dissent focuses only on OCCC, the issue of achieving 
social distancing  applies to all correctional facilities in each of Hawai ‘i’s 
counties.
 
 
 8 cells designed for two.17  The crowding is so extreme that one 
prisoner must often sleep on the floor with his head next to the 
toilet.18  
According to the 2018 Final Report of the House 
Concurrent Resolution Task Force on Prison Reform to the Hawai ‘i 
Legislature: 
Hawai‘i’s prisons are old, dilapidated, and severely 
overcrowded. Hawai ‘i C
ommu nity Correctional Center is 
currently operating at 185% of capacity, Maui Community 
Correctional Center is operating at 151% of capacity, Kaua ‘i 
Community Correctional Center is operating at 196% of 
capacity, and OCCC is operating at 127% of capacity.  At 
OCCC, three prisoners are crowded into cells designed for 
two.  As a result, one of the prisoners must sleep on the 
floor with his head next to the toilet.  Faced with the 
lack of available cells, OCCC has so many prisoners crowded 
into one module that it is known as “Thunderdome.”  
Conditions are so bad throughout the State that most 
facilities probably do not meet minimum constitutional 
standards.19 
 
OCCC now contains approximately 823  incarcerated 
citizens in a building designed to accommodate 628 incarcerated 
people who are not facing the threat of the coronavirus.20  The 
conditions posed by the level of crowding within the inmate 
population are described by a doctor working within its 
                     
17  Final Report of the House Concurrent Resolution Task Force on Prison 
Reform to the Hawaii Legislature  (2019 Regular Session) 5 -6, available at 
https://www.courts.state.hi.us/wp -content/uploads/2018/12/HCR -
85_task_force_final_report.pdf  (last visited Mar. 30, 2020) . 
 
18  Id. 
 
19  Id. 
 
20  Id. 
 9  
(. . . continued)  confines.  Doctor Pablo Stewart describes two or three inmates 
in a cell: 
I have observed that the vast  majority of people 
detained in OCCC are still triple -or at least double -
bunked in each cell,
 which remain dangerously filthy.  
Making matters worse, correctional staff themselves 
do not practice social distancing or adhere to proper 
hygiene protocols.21 
 
In his capacity as a doctor providing care in OCCC 
since July 2019,  Dr. Stewart visits OCCC four times a week. He 
has become “intimately familiar” with OCCC and the response of 
the Department of Public Safety to the virus.  It is his 
conclusion that, notwithstanding reports of a decrease in prison 
population, “people are still crammed two or three to a cell, 
and hygiene conditions remain abysmal.”22 
                     
21  Declaration of Pablo Stewart, M.D., filed April 13, 2020 in 
SCPW-20-213 at 5.  
 
 
22  The Declaration of Pablo Stewart states in relevant part:  
 
I am intimately familiar with DPS correctional 
facilities.   Since July 2019, I  have been working as 
the attending psychiatrist supervising psychiatric 
residents from the John  A. Burns School of Medicine 
Department of Psychiatry, where we provide 
psychiatric care to  people detained at  [OCCC].  Also, 
since the middle of March 2020, I have been visiting 
and providing care at OCCC at least four times per 
week.  I thus have become familiar with the jail’s 
conditions and DPS’s response to the novel 
coronavirus .  
 
. . . . 
 
It is from this unique vantage point -as someone who 
has over three decades of  correctional health care 
experience, who serves as a court -appointed monitor 
in a prison  conditions lawsuit, and who has been 
inside OCCC as recently as this morning —that I share  
 10 As an experienced court
-appointed monitor of prison 
conditions, Dr. Stewart states that the inmates are not able to 
practice social distancing.  The incarcerated population of OCCC 
at the time of his April 13 , 2020 observations was approximately 
the same as it is now.23   As a consequence of the failure to 
achieve a population reduction sufficient to permit social 
distancing, Dr. Stewart warns “the present efforts to safeguard 
against a COVID- 19 outbr eak within DPS facilities are 
dangerously inadequate.”  Thus, he specifically rejects the  
conclusion of the Majority that the emergency threat of 
coronavirus within OCCC has ended: 
                                                                              
(continued. . . )  
 
my observations about DPS’s efforts to a ddress COVID -
19 within its correctional facilities.   
 
. . . . 
 
[W]hile I have heard of DPS reports stating that the 
OCCC population is smaller than it was a month ago, 
one would not know that from visiting the facility.  
As a clinician who moves throughout the facility 
almost daily, I have not observed any appreciable 
reduction in the jail population.  The end result is 
that detainees are no more able to maintain social 
distance and proper hygiene today than they were one 
month ago.  
 
Id. at 3-6.   
 
23  The April 8, 2020 Population Report stated that OCCC housed 942 
inmates. Initial Summary Report of the Special Master at 27 (Apr 9, 2020).  
By contrast, the May 28 Fifth Summary Report and Recommendation of the 
Special Master stated that the population at OCCC was 823, a population of 
195 above the design capacity.  Fifth Summary Report and Recommendations of 
the Special Master  at 4 (May 28, 2020).  [hereinafter Fifth Summary Report].  
 11 DPS’s April 9, 2020 advisory notes that OCCC saw a 
295-person reduction in its jail population between 
March 2, 2020 and April 9, 2020 ( i.e., from 1201 to 
906).  See https://twitter.com/HawaiiPSD/status/  
1248441500901335041.  But, based on my OCCC visit  
this morning —i.e., on April 13, 2020— this reduction 
comes nowhere near to allowing for  adequate COVID -19 
protocols to be implemented.  People are still 
crammed two or three to a  cell, and hygiene 
conditions remain abysmal.  
 
  . . . .   
 
In short, the present efforts to safeguard against a 
COVID-19 outbreak within DPS facilities are 
dangerously inadequate.  I urge the Court not only to 
take action to reduce the jail and prison 
populations, but to do so immediately.  
 
Id. at 8. (emphasis in original).  
 
 To protect the inmate population from “the likelihood 
of a devastating outbreak” and achieve social distancing Dr. 
Stewart concluded that a population reduction to design capacity 
is necessary:  
It is clear to me that a much more significant 
population reduction must be  achieved within DPS 
facilities.  I spent time over the past week 
reviewing the relevant data on  DPS jails and prisons.   
Based on that review, and my thirty -plus years of 
expertise in  correctional health care oversight, it 
is my opinion that the first step that the Court 
should take  is to impose on all stakeholders the 
mandatory goal of reaching 100% of design bed 
capacity.  
 
Id. (emphasis in original). 
Consistent with the recommendation of Dr. Stewart, 
reduction of the incarcerated population at OCCC to design 
capacity of 628 has been endorsed by this court.  To achieve 
social distancing, this 
court appointed a special master on 
April 2, 2020; his scope of work was to “include setting forth 12 guidelines to ensure that the State’s correctional centers and 
facilities are in compliance with social distancing mandates.”24  
Consistent with the purpose of achieving social distancing 
within the inmate population, on April 15, 2020 this court  
ordered that “[e]fforts shall be underta ken to reduce the inmate 
population of correctional centers and facilities to design 
capacity.”   Second Interim Order filed April 15, 2020.  Nine days 
later, we again ordered that “efforts shall continue to be 
undertaken to reduce the inmate population of correctional centers 
and facilities to design capacity.”  Third Interim Order filed 
April 24, 2020.  
 Meaningful progress toward achieving the design capacity 
of 628 inmates at OCCC did not occur by April 24, 2020.25  To date, 
the inmate population remains over the design capacity.   As 
                     
24  Order of Consolidation and for Appointment of Special Master (By: 
Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, McKenna, Pollack, and Wilson JJ.)  April 2, 
2020.  
 
25  “There has not been a meaningful decrease in the number of inmates held 
at the Oahu Community Correctional  Center since the initial report of the 
special master was filed on April 9, 2020.   On April 13, 2020, the head count 
was 909 and the assigned count was 993.  One week later, on April 20, 2020, 
the population had increased to a head count of 916 and an assigned count of 
1018.” Department of Public Safety weekly population report April 13, 2020 
and April 20, 2020.  A chart in the April 23, 2020 report of the special 
master lists the inmate population on April 23, 2020 as 838 at OCCC —a number 
that is not identified as either a head count or an assigned count.  
 
This court has ordered: “Efforts shall continue to be undertaken to 
reduce the inmate population of correctional centers and facilities to design 
capacity.” The design capacity of OCCC is 628 inmates. Id. As noted, on April 
13, 2020, the head count for OCCC was 909 and, utilizing the chart in the  
most recent special master’s report, the population has decreased no more 
than seventy- one incarcerated citizens since April 13, 2020. ”  Concurrence 
Re: Interim Order (By: Wilson J.), April 24, 2020. 
 13 de
scribed by Dr. Stewart’s declaration , the population at OCCC 
remains dangerously overcrowded.  In the 21 days, from May 8 to May 
29, 2020, the population increased by 58 inmates for a total of 8 23 
incarcerated women and men.  Crowding of cells with up to three 
inmates has continued.  On May 13, 2020, with a population of less 
than the present population of 823, the Department of Public Safety 
acknowledged conditions “with up to 3 inmates per cell  depending on 
the daily population.”26 
In the most recent May 28, 2020 Fifth Report of the 
Special Master, the special master acknowledged that “this process 
as mandated by t he court has been difficult for all involved”.  The 
special master noted that communications between the parties had 
broken down and achievement of design capacity at OCCC to 
accomplish social distancing among inmates would not be 
successfully resolved through mediation.27  The Hawai‘i State Public 
Defender and the Oversight Commissi on28 consider attainment of 
design capacity to be essential, while the Attorney General and 
                     
26  The incarcerated population on May 13, 2020 was 758.  Exhibit 1 Fourth 
Summary Report and Recommendations of the Special Master, letter of Public 
Safety Director Nolan Espinda to Special Master (May 15, 2020).  
 
27  “As of this date, the parties’ attempts to resolve this matter through 
mediation have not been successful”.   Fifth Summary Report, supra 23 at 3. 
 
28  Hawai‘i Correctional Systems Oversight Commission, which was established 
by the Hawai‘ i State Legislature pursuant to Act 179, Session Laws Hawai ‘i  
2019, to, among other things, establish the capacities for all Hawai ‘i 
correctional facilities and policies and procedures to prevent the inmate 
population from exceeding the capacity of each correctional facility.   
   14 c
ounty prosecutors from O‘ah
u, Maui and Hawai‘i oppose any further 
r
eduction in population through further release.  
 No
tably, the special master describes a process that, 
through the innovative collaboration between parties, has already 
achieved a reduction of the inmate population with an unusual and 
promising level of protection to public safety: 
The criticism of the recidivism rate on early 
releases has not taken into  consideration what the 
recidivism rate was prior to the COVID -19 early 
releases.  According to a report of the State of 
Hawai‘i Interagency Council on Intermediate  Sanctions 
(July 2018), the average recidivism rate for those 
released on probation, parole and upon the completion 
of their sentences is around 50%. Whereas it is too 
soon to judge the recidivism rate of COVID -19 early 
releases, about 650 inmates were released  and, 
according to some news outlets, 50 to date have been 
returned with new charges.  That is about an 8% 
recidivism rate to date, assuming all new charges 
result in  convictions.
 
 
Fifth Summary Report at 7 . 
 The special master describes the successful attainment 
of an eight percent recidivism rate for the over 650 inmates 
released from incarceration state
-wide.  The result of the 
process of release ordered by this court,29 as calculated by the 
special master, is a dramatic reduction from the normal 
recidivism rate of fifty percent to an eight percent recidivism 
rate–a change that represents far greater protection of the 
public from repeat criminal activity by the 650 released 
                     
29  Every release occurred only after judicial review of the circumstances 
and facts pertaining to each case —with every adjudication being made only 
after input from defense counsel and the prosecutor.  15 citizens as compared to the normal reoffending rate for the 
population of released inmates.  The reason for this un
usually 
low recidivism rate is al luded to by the special master as being 
a result of constructive collaboration: 
The parties and stakeholders have acted 
admirably under difficult circumstances in carrying 
out this Court’s orders.   Differences among them have 
been great at times, but all have done their best to 
work in a collaborative fashion as encouraged by this 
Court, despite their differences.  
  
Id. at 12. 
 
  The thorough, informed process of review that preceded 
the successful release of 650 inmates state- wide is a 
demonstrated means by which the population of OCCC can be 
further reduced —safely-- to design capacity. 
II. The Special Master Must Be Permitted to Make Recommendations 
In Accordance with the Order of this Court that Are Not 
Conditioned on the Agreement of the Parties.  
 
 It is apparent from the special master ’s observations  
and accomplishments in reducing the inmate population thus far, 
that achieving the original intent of this court’s order is 
attainable.  The special master recommends “the parties to 
continue to work in a collaborative manner to reduce and 
maintain inmate population levels set by this Court, or by the 
Oversight Commission should this Court defer to the Commission 
on this matter”.   Id. at 12.  However, the special master notes 
that an impasse to achieving inmate population levels has arisen 
and he is prevented from recommending necessary solutions by his 16 perception that 
his recommendations can only be based on 
consensus.  As a consequence, he has thus far declined to 
provide recommendations to this court with which the parties do 
not agree: 
Because the Special Master has been  mandated to work 
in a collaborative manner with the parties and 
stakeholders, and  conduct mediation among the parties 
when appropriate, the Special Master cannot pick a  
side in these proceedings when  the parties differ, 
while continuing to work  collaboratively with the 
parties consistent with the orders of this Court. The 
Special Master has endeavored to work with the 
parties in an evenhanded manner while carrying  out 
the orders of this Court.  
 
Fifth Summary Report at 12.   
 Thus, the special master is not aware that he does in 
fact have the authority and duty to provide this court with his 
independent recommendations regardless of whether the parties 
agree.  His appointment purpose as stated in this court’s 
original order appointing the special master is to “effectuate 
the goals of these consolidated proceedings, even without 
agreement of all parties.”30  The special master has an important 
responsibility to provide this court with independent 
recommendations not conditioned on consensus.   Informed by  his 
two months of active service, the recommendations of the special 
master could be of great benefit to the court and the community 
                     
30  Order of Consolidation and for Appointment of Special Master (By: 
Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, McKenna, Pollack, and Wilson JJ.) (Apr. 2, 2020)  
at 7. 
 17 to counter the threat of 
COVID-19 posed by (1) present 
conditions of incarceration and (2) an increased likelihood of 
infection among incarcerated citizens from the return of 
visitors from the rest of the United States and abroad.    
 The special master’s constructive communication with 
problem solving community groups and vigilant concerned 
community leaders31 uniquely positions him to provide innovative 
candid recommendations —recommendations that could prove critical 
to resolving the COVID -19 emergency in our correctional 
institutions.  The special master ’s commitment to  overcome the 
present impasse and achieve conditions of incarceration 
permitting social distancing is reflected in his recommendation 
that he submit a further report on June 11, 2020.  It is evident 
that to forego the special master ’s report  and his independent 
recommendations that will be forthcoming in only seven days 
would be a rush to judgment at great sacrifice to achieving 
constitutionally safe conditions for incarcerated citizens.    
  
                     
31  The Fifth Master’s report recounts active input and communication with 
the State House Committee on Public Safety, Veterans & Military Affairs, the 
Attorney General, prosecutors from Honolulu, Maui, and Hawai ʻi, the Hawaiʻ i 
State Public Defender, the Hawai ʻi Correctional  System Oversight Commission, 
and the Emergency Reentry Project.   18 III. Reduction of the Population of Incarcerated Citizens at 
OCCC is Necessary to Prevent the Spread of the COVID-19 , Remedy 
Constitutional Violations, and Protect the Community. 
 
 Incarcerated citizens have a constitutional right to 
be free from cruel and unusual punishment.  U.S. Const. amend. 
VIII; Haw. Const. art. I, § 8 (incorporating the same).  To 
establish a violation of the Eighth Amendment, an inmate must 
show that prison officials are “knowingly and unreasonably 
disregarding an objectively intolerable risk of harm, and that 
they will continue to do so . . . into the future.”  Farmer v. 
Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 846 (1994). 
  The “deliberate indifference” needed to establish an 
Eighth Amendment violation must be examined “in light of the 
prison authorities' current attitudes and conduct,”  Helling v. 
McKinney, 509 U.S. 25, 36 (1993), which means “their attitudes 
and conduct at the time suit is brought and persisting 
thereafter[.]”  Farmer, 511 U.S. at 845.  The U.S. Supreme Court 
has held that overcrowding in a prison that deprives “prisoners 
of basic sustenance, including adequate medical care[,]” 
violates a prisoner’s right to be free from cruel and unusual 
punishment under the Eighth  Amendment.  Brown v. Plata , 563 U.S. 
493, 511 (2011) (“Just as a prisoner may starve if not fed, he 
or she may suffer or die if not provided adequate medical 
care”).  Courts have a responsibility to remedy Eighth Amendment 
violations when jails are overcrowded and inmates are not 19 receiving adequate medical care.  Id.   (“If government fails to 
fulfill this obligation, the courts have a responsibility to 
remedy the resulting Eighth Amendment violation”).  Although 
courts must consider public safety in ordering inmate releases, 
“[c]ourts may not allow constitutional violations to continue 
simply because a remedy would involve intrusion into the realm 
of prison administration.”  Id. at 511.  Additionally, courts 
and state officials “must bear in mind the need for a timely and 
efficacious remedy for the ongoing violation of prisoners’  
constitutional rights.”  Id. at 543.  
 In Plata, the Court concluded that the overcrowding of 
inmates bred unconstitutional conditions within the prison: 
inadequate medical care that resulted in death, the increased 
incidence of infectious disease, and needless pain and 
suffering.  563 U.S. at 519 -20.  Thus, the Court held that 
remedial measures to cure the cruel and unusual conditions in 
the California prisons were warranted.  Id.   To remedy the 
violation of the incarcerated populations’ right to be free from 
cruel and unusual punishment, the United States Supreme Court 
upheld the lower court’s order placing a cap on the prison’s 
population.  Id. at 545.  The Supreme Court concluded that 
courts may enter an order placing limits on prison populations 
when medical care cannot adequately meet the demands of an 
overcrowded inmate population.  Id.   The Court capped the prison 20 population to cure and prevent Eighth Amendment violations, and 
thus had the “effect of  reducing or limiting the prison 
population” by up to “46,000 persons.”  Id. at 510-11.  
 The threat to the incarcerated citizens of OCCC is 
more dire than the threat to California’s incarcerated citizens 
in Plata.  As in Plata where the correctional facilities in 
California were operating in excess of their design capacity and 
therefore exposing inmates to overcrowding that caused death and 
harm, 563 U.S. at 502, OCCC is  also operating significantly in 
excess of its capacity, thus creating similar unconstitutional 
conditions; inmates are crowded two to three in a cell and 
unable to social distanc
e.  However, in this case, the current 
COVID-19 pandemic is a more lethal threat —an officially declared 
state and national emergency —that eclipses the cruel and unusual 
conditions of overcrowding and inadequate medical care at issue 
in Plata.  The conditions in Plata did not include the 
potentially lethal threat of  Covid-19. 
 Incarcerated citizens are exposed to the threat of 
contracting COVID- 19 at a rate significantly higher than someone 
in the general community.32  The speed with which the virus moves 
through prisons and jails is rapid, with many infected people 
                     
32  See, e.g., COVID- 19 infection rate on Rikers Island is 7 times higher 
than citywide according to the Legal Aid Society, CBS N.Y. (Mar. 20, 2020) 
https://newyork.cbslocal.com/2020/03/26/coronavirus -rikers-island/.   
 21 spreading the virus before ever showing symptoms.  For example, 
the virus spread through Rikers Island jail (“Rikers”) in New 
York from one inmate to 167 in just ten days.33  In the same 
period of time, the virus infected 137 Rikers staff members.34  
Jails and prisons are “basically a system designed to spread 
communicable disease,”35 unless corrective and preventative 
action is taken.  Whether the state of Hawai ‘i is acting with 
deliberate indifference to the threat of COVID- 19 is a threshold 
issue dependent in part on the recommendations and observations 
of the special master. 
 Courts throughout the United States have acted 
promptly in response to 
the threat the coronavirus poses to 
incarcerated people.  Cuyahoga County, Ohio, dropped the county 
jail population from nearly 1,900 to less than 1,300 “in a 
matter of days”, with Cuyahoga County Presiding Judge Brendan J.
Sheehan noting that “[w]e really compacted the time frame.”   
Likewise, New Jersey released  as many as 1,000 people from its 36 
                     
33   Jennifer Gonnerman, How Prisons and Jails Can Respond to the 
Coronavirus, N EW YORKER (Mar. 14, 2020), https://www.newyorker.com/news/q -and-
a/how-prisons- and-jails-can-respond- to-the-coronavirus. 
   
34  Id. 
 
35  Id. 
 
36  Kimberly Kindy, Disaster waiting to happen:  Thousands of inmates 
released as jails and prisons face coronavirus threat , WASH. POST (Mar. 25, 
2020), https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/disaster -waiting- to-happen-
thousands- of-inmates-released- as-jails-face-coronavirus-
threat/2020/03/24/761c2d84 -6b8c-11ea-b313-df458622c2cc_story.html.  
 22 jails to address the risks of the highly contagious coronavirus 
spreading among the incarcerated population.37  New Jersey’s 
chief justice, Stuart Rabner, signed an order releasing inmates 
jailed for probation viola
tions as well as those convicted in 
municipal courts or sentenced for low- level crimes in Superior 
Court.38   
IV.  Reduction of OCCC Population to Design Capacity.  
 Releasing
 incarcerated nonviolent citizens to achieve 
numbers sufficient to reduce the population of OCCC to its 
design capacity of 628 is straightforward.  With a present 
inmate population of 823 people, the release of approximately 
194 women and men can be achieved with due consideration for 
public safety by:  (1) releasing low-risk pretrial detainees and 
placing them on court supervised release; (2) releasing low- risk 
inmates who are close to finishing their sentences either by 
modifying their sentence to end without further incarceration; 
(3) modifying the remaining sentence of nonviolent offenders to 
be served as a period of probation; and/or (4) transfer ring 
inmates to other custodial settings.   
                     
37   Tracey Tully, 1,000 Inmates Will Be Released From N.J. Jails  to Curb 
Coronavirus Risk, N.Y. TIMES (Mar. 23, 2020),  
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/23/nyregion/coronavirus -nj-inmates-
release.html?smid=em -share. 
 
38   Id. 23  The length of sentence for nearly every inmate in OCCC 
is presently less than 
twelve months.  With rare exceptions, all 
sentences being served are either as a result: (1) of a 
conviction for a nonviolent Class C felony with no more than a 
year remaining on a probationary sentence; (2) a misdemeanor 
punishable for no more than a year in jail,39 or; (3) a petty 
misdemeanor punishable by no more than thirty days in jail.40  
Thus, each inmate currently serving a sentence at OCCC will have 
finished their sentence within twelve months, even without an 
early release in the face of the threat of COVID
-19.   
 Low -risk nonviolent offenders should be released 
and/or be subject to an alternative probationary sentence.  To 
subject citizens presently serving terms for petty misdemeanors, 
misdemeanors, or non- violent class C felonies to the lethal 
threat of COVID-19,  notwithstanding the availability of an 
alternative probationary sentence, is an unconstitutional 
violation of their right to be free from cruel and unusual 
punishment.   
 Faced with the threat to their lives, and the 
inability to engage in social distancing amidst the coronavirus 
                     
39  See HRS § 701 -107(3) (providing that misdemeanors are punishable by a 
maximum imprisonment of one year). 
 
40  See HRS § 701 -107(4) (providing that petty misdemeanors are punishable 
by a maximum imprisonment of thirty days).   24 pandemic, no benefit to the community is achieved from continued 
incarceration of those serving time for a petty misdemeanor, a 
misdemeanor, or a nonviolent class C felony.  Commission of a 
petty misdemeanor, a misdemeanor, or a nonviolent class C felony 
does not warrant as punishment the exposure to a virus that will 
possibly kill the incarcerated citizen, and will likely require 
expenditure of valuable life-saving medical resources.  Inmates 
serving terms for petty misdemeanor, misdemeanors, or nonviolent 
class C felonies can have their sentences modified to allow 
completion of the remaining sentence on court supervised 
probation, or to be released based on the time served on the 
sentence.  Protection of the public is provided by adjudication 
of every proposed release.   
 The remaining incarcerated citizens at OCCC are 
pretrial detainees who have not been convicted of a crime; they 
are citizens presumed to be not guilty,  who are awaiting trial 
in jail because they could not afford to post bail.  To subject 
citizens arrested for, but not convicted of, petty misdemeanors, 
misdemeanors, or nonviolent class C felonies to the lethal 
threat of COVID- 19 because they are unable to post bail is an 
unconstitutional violation of their right to be free from cruel 
and unusual punishment. 
 The jailing of (1) citizens awaiting trial for 
nonviolent offenses and (2) nonviolent offenders with less than 25 a year remaining on their sentences
 not only contributes  to the 
vast overcrowding in Hawai ‘i corre
ctional facilities and 
increases the risk to inmates of contracting COVID- 19, their 
incarceration also threatens:  (1) the health and safety of 
correctional workers and public defenders who share the company 
of the incarcerated citizens; (2) the state’s limited medical 
teams whom would have to respond to a coronavirus outbreak 
emergency in the correctional facilities and hospitalize 
inmates; and (3) the state’s limited medical supplies and 
testing kits.   
V.  CONCLUSION 
 
   The special master recognizes the impasse to resolving 
the coronavirus emergency at OCCC, and nonetheless recommends 
that the parties continue to work to reduce and maintain 
population levels set by this court.  In so doing he notes the 
difficulty of resolving the COVID- 19 threat if he is constrained 
to offer only recommenda tions arrived at by consensus.  
Fortunately, the special master was provided just the authority 
he mistakenly laments that he is without —the authority to 
“effectuate the goals of these consolidated proceedings, even 
without agreement of all parties. ”  So empowered, and with the 
experience of two months of hard and productive work, he should 
be permitted to submit his independent recommendations about how 
to resolve the emergency faced by Hawai ‘i’s incarce
rated women 26  
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
Associate Justice  and men.  Perhaps the reaffirmation of th e importance of  
independent authority will be reason for a future special 
master--faced with the present emergency and the increased risk 
of infection from an imminent influx of tourists
--to perform an 
independent site visit of OCCC to see first- hand the crowding 
and social distancing, if any, employed by inmates and 
correctional workers. 
 The alternative chosen by the Majority-- to declare 
success and claim contrary to the evidence and the Governor’s 
emergency orders that the emergency is at an end-- perpetuates 
without justification the lethal risk of infection to those who 
are held sometimes three to a cell during the coronavirus 
pandemic emergency.  The emergency identified by the Governor 
and specifically described within OCCC by Dr. Stewart requires 
this court to maintain jurisdiction at least until the special 
master is granted the opportunity to make independent 
recommendations about how to reduce population levels 
sufficiently to achieve social distancing. 
 Dated: Honolulu, Hawaii, June 8 , 2020. 
    
    
 
