*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
IN THE SUPREME  COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
---o0o--- 
FLORES-CASE ‘OHANA, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
vs. 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘ I, 
Defendant
-Appellee.  
SCRQ-22-0000118 
RESERVED QUESTION FROM  THE CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 3CCV -20-0000255)  
MARCH 15, 2023 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., AND WILSON, J., WITH McKENNA, J.,
CONCURRING IN PART AND  DISSENTING IN PART  
OPINION BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 1 
I.INTRODUCTION
In this case, a Native Hawaiian  family challenge s the 
1Chief Justice Recktenwald,  joined by Justices  McKenna and Wilson, 
writes for a majority  of the court in Parts II, III, IV(A), IV(B), and IV(D).  
Justice McKenna does not join Chief Justice Recktenwald  as to Parts I and 
IV(C). Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCRQ-22-0000118
15-MAR-2023
10:32 AM
Dkt. 52 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
2 constitutionality  of administrative  rules governing  access to 
Mauna Kea’s summit under article XII, section 7 of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution .  The Circuit Court of the Third Circuit reserved  
the following  question s to us pursuant  to Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate  Procedure  (HRAP) Rule 15 (2018), which we accepted : 
In a challenge  to the constitutionality  of 
administrative  rules based on a violation  of Article XII, 
Section 7 of the Hawai‘i State Constitution,  does the burden 
of proof shift to the government  defendant  to prove that 
the rules are reasonable  and do not unduly limit the 
constitutional  rights conferred  in Article XII, Section 7?  
If so, what standards  govern its application?  
 
In answering  reserved  questions,  we apply the same 
principles  we utilize in answering  certified  questions from 
federal courts.  Specifically , “[t]his court may reformulate  the 
relevant  state law questions  as it perceives  them to be, in 
light of the contentions  of the parties. ”  See Pac. Radiation  
Oncology,  LLC v. Queen’s Med. Ctr., 138 Hawai‘i 14, 16, 375 P.3d 
1252, 1254 (2016) (quotation  marks omitted)  (quoting  Allstate  
Ins. Co. v. Alamo Rent–A–Car, Inc., 137 F.3d 634, 637 (9th Cir. 
1998)).  We see no reason why the framework  applied to certified  
questions  from federal courts would not apply to reserved  
questions  from “circuit  court, the land court, the tax appeal 
court [or] any other court empowered  by statute.”  See HRAP Rule 
15(a). 
Accordingly,  we “reformulate  the question  so that a 
negative  answer to the first [reserved]  question  will not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
3 preclude  us from answering  the second [reserved]  question .”  See 
Pac. Radiation  Oncology,  LLC, 138 Hawai‘i at 16, 375 P.3d at 
1254.  We also “reformulate  the question”  to remove any 
confusion  about what standard  applies to constitutional  
challenges  arising from article XII, section 7.  See id.  As we 
explain,  the standard  does not require, as the circuit court’s 
reserved  question s imply, that plaintiffs  must “prove that the 
rules are [un]reasonable  and [] unduly limit the constitutional  
rights conferred  in Article XII, Section 7.”   
Therefore,  the reformulated  reserved  questions  are as 
follows: (1) In a challenge  to the constitutionality  of 
administrative  rules based on a violation  of article XII, 
section 7 of the Hawai‘i Constitution,  does the burden of proof 
shift to the government  defendant?   (2) What standard  governs a 
challenge  to the constitutionality  of an administrative  rule 
based on an alleged violation  of article XII, section 7? 
First, in Part IV(A), we hold that the burden does not 
shift to the government  agency, and instead remains with the 
challenging  party, in constitutional  challenges  to 
administrative  rules arising from article XII, section 7.  In 
general,  the party challenging  the constituti onality of an 
administrative  rule bears the burden of proof.  This 
longstanding  general rule governs absent an exception,  which we 
do not make today.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
4 Second, in Part IV(B), we determine  that the Ka Pa‘akai 
framework  applies to rulemaking  in addition  to contested  case 
hearings.   See Ka Pa‘akai O Ka‘Aina v. Land Use Comm’n, 94 Hawai‘i 
31, 7 P.3d 1068 (2000), as amended (Jan. 18, 2001).  There is no 
principled  basis to exempt agency rulemaking  from the State’s 
constitutional  obligations  under article XII, section 7.  In Ka 
Pa‘akai, we recognized  that article XII, section 7 of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution  “places an affirmative  duty on the State and its 
agencies  to preserve  and protect traditional  and customary  
native Hawaiian  rights” during contested  case hearings .  Id. at 
45, 7 P.3d at 1082 (emphasis  added).  That “affirmative  duty” 
applies during rulemaking  as well.  See id. 
Third, in Part IV(C) and consistent  with the Ka Pa‘akai 
framework,  we hold that agencies  must engage in a 
contemporaneous  analysis  of the relevant  factors prior to 
adopting  a rule.  That analysis  should identify  Native Hawaiian  
traditional  and customary  rights or practices  affected  by the 
proposed  rule, if any, consider  the scope and extent to which 
those rights or practices  will be impaired,  and explain how the 
proposed  rule reasonably  protects those rights and practices  as 
balanced  with the State’s own regulatory  right.  
Fourth, in part IV(D), we hold that to succeed in an 
article XII, section 7 constitutional  challenge  to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
5 administrative  rules, a plaintiff  must show: (1) the agency 
failed to adequately  consider  “the identity  and scope of” Native 
Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  rights affected  by the rule, 
if any; or (2) the agency failed to adequately  consider  “the 
extent to which” Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  
rights “will be affected  or impaired  by the [rule]”;  or (3) the 
rule failed to “reasonably  protect” Native Hawaiian  traditional  
and customary  rights, “if they are found to exist,” as balanced  
with the State’s own regulatory  right.  See id. at 47, 7 P.3d at 
1084 (emphasis  added).  The test sets forth both the steps 
agencies must take prior to promulgating rules and the standard 
by which rules will be judged under article XII, section 7 .  
This test necessarily  requires  agencies  to consider  a rule’s 
impact on Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  rights so 
that a court may determine  whether that analysis  and the rule 
passes constitutional  muster. 
As we explained in Ka Pa‘akai, “[r]equiring  these 
minimal prerequisites  facilitates  precisely  what the 1978 
Constitutional  Convention  delegates  sought: ‘badly needed 
judicial  guidance ’ and the ‘enforcement  by the courts of these 
rights[.] ’”  Id. at 50, 7 P.3d at 1087 (quoting Stand. Comm. 
Rep. No. 57, in 1 Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  
of Hawai‘i of 1978, at 640 (1980)).   We apply the Ka Pa‘akai 
framework  and its requirement  of contemporaneous  consideration  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
6 (continued . . .) 
 of Native Hawaiian  rights to administrative  rulemaking  because,  
if not, an agency’s  “promise of preserving and protecting 
customary and traditional rights would be  illusory absent 
[consideration of] the extent of their exercise, their 
impairment, and the feasibility of their protection .”  Id.  Put 
simply, today we hold the State and its agencies  to the promise 
made in 1978: “The State reaffirms  and shall protect all rights, 
customarily  and traditionally  exercised  for subsistence,  
cultural  and religious  purposes  and possessed  by ahupua‘a tenants 
who are descendants  of native Hawaiians  who inhabited  the 
Hawaiian  Islands prior to 1778, subject to the right of the 
State to regulate  such rights.”  Haw. Const. art. XII, § 7 
(emphasis  added). 
II. BACKGROUND  
In 2009, the legislature passed Act 132 ,2 which 
empowered the University of Hawai‘i (UH) to promulgate 
administrative rules governing access to the summit of Mauna 
Kea.3  2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 132, § 1 at 362 -65.  Act 132 
                                                 
 2  Act 132 is codified  at Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes  (HRS) §§ 304A-1901 
to -1905 (2020). 
 
3  Specifically,  Act 132 granted UH rulemaking  authority  over “Mauna 
Kea lands” – that is: 
 
the lands that [UH] is leasing from the board of land 
and natural resources,  including  the Mauna Kea Science 
Reserve,  Hale Pōhaku, the connecting  roadway corridor   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
7 sought to “clarify and add certainty to the law relating to” 
UH’s stewardship of Mauna Kea “by granting express authority to 
[UH] to adopt rules relating to public and commercial activities 
permitted o r occurring on the Mauna Kea lands.”  Id. at 362.  
The law provided that “[a]ccess for traditional and customary 
native Hawaiian cultural and religious purposes shall be 
accommodated.”  Id.   
UH did not formally  draft administrative  rules 
governing  access to the summit of Mauna Kea until 2018.  That 
August, UH circulated  a notice of proposed  rulemaking  and, in 
September,  held public hearings  on O‘ahu, Maui, and the Island of 
Hawai‘i.  After receiving  comments,  UH circulated  a new draft of 
the rules for comment.4  A second round of public hearings  took 
place in April 2019.5  The final administrative rules were 
adopted by a unanimous vote of the UH Board of Regents on 
November 6, 2019.  And on January 13, 2020, Governor David Ige  
signed the administrative rules into law.   See Hawai‘i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 20 -26, et seq.  (2020) (hereinafter 
                                                                                                                                                             
(. . . continued)   
between Hale Pōhaku and the Mauna Kea Science Reserve,  and 
any other lands on Mauna Kea that [UH] leases or over which 
the University  of Hawai‘i acquires  control or jurisdiction.  
 
4  According  to UH, the rules received  406 written submissions  
during the comment period (August 19 to September  28) and ninety-two oral 
comments.  
 
5  During this round of comments  (April 28 to June 7), UH received  
332 written submissions  and 133 oral comments.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
8 “Chapter 20 -26”). 
On June 29, 2020, Plaintiff -Appellant  Flores-Case 
‘Ohana (FCO)6 filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive 
relief against UH in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, 
seeking invalidation  of the rules.7  The circuit court certified  
to us the following  reserved  question s: 
In a challenge  to the constitutionality  of 
administrative  rules based on a violation  of Article XII, 
Section 7 of the Hawai‘i State Constitution,  does the burden 
of proof shift to the government  defendant  to prove that 
the rules are reasonable  and do not unduly limit the 
constitutional  rights conferred  in Article XII, Section 7?  
If so, what standards  govern its application?  
 
As noted above, we reformulated  the reserved  question s 
as follows:  (1) In a challenge  to the constitutionality  of 
administrative  rules based on a violation  of article XII, 
section 7 of the Hawai‘i Constitution,  does the burden of proof 
shift to the government  defendant?   (2) What standard  governs a 
challenge  to the constitutionality  of an administrative  rule 
based on an alleged violation  of article XII, section 7? 
III. STANDARD  OF REVIEW 
                                                 
 6  The complaint  identified  FCO as:  
 
an unincorporated  association  of a Kanaka Maoli (also 
identified  as a Native Hawaiian)  family who descends  from 
the aboriginal  people who occupied  and exercised  
sovereignty  in the area that is now occupied  by the State 
of Hawai‘i prior to 1778, resides on Hawai‘i Island, and 
engages in traditional  and cultural  practices  throughout  
Mauna Kea, including  on lands managed by the University  of 
Hawai‘i. 
 
7  The Honorable  Robert D.S. Kim presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
9 A reserved question that presents a question of law is 
“reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard of review.”  
State v. Jess , 117 Hawai‘i 381, 391, 184 P.3d 133, 143 (2008) 
(quoting Roes v. FHP, Inc. , 91 Hawai‘i 470, 473, 985 P.2d 661, 
664 (1999)).   “On a reserved question we are required to answer 
a question of law based on facts reported to this court by the 
circuit judge.  We may not express an opinion on a question of 
law by assuming certain facts as to which the circuit judge has 
made no findin g.”  Cabrinha v. Am. Factors , Ltd., 42 Haw. 96, 
100 (Haw. Terr. 1957).  
IV. DISCUSSION  
A.  The Burden of Proof Does Not Shift to the Government  
Defendant  in Constitutional  Challenges  Arising from Article 
XII, Section 7 of the Hawai‘i Constitution  
  
The “general  rule [is] that one seeking relief bears 
the burden of demonstrating  that [they are] entitled  to it.”  
Clark v. Cmty. for Creative  Non-Violence , 468 U.S. 288, 293 n.5 
(1984) (declining  to deviate from the general rule in a First 
Amendment  constitutional  challenge).   We decline to deviate from 
the general rule here.8  We therefore  hold that the burden of 
proof rests with the challenging  party, not the government  
                                                 
8  We note however that the burden of proof does shift to the 
government  defendant  in certain types of constitutional  challenges.   For 
example,  in Nagle v. Bd. of Educ., we held that strict scrutiny  applies to 
challenges  that involve suspect classifications  or fundamental  rights.  
63 Haw. 389, 392, 629 P.2d 109, 111 (1981).  “Under the strict scrutiny  
standard,  the State carries a heavy burden in arguing for the validity  of a 
statute.”  Id. (emphasis  added). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
10 defendant,  when challenging  the constitutionality  of an 
administrative  rule under article XII, section 7.  See Westlawn  
Cemeteries,  L.L.C. v. La. Cemetery  Bd., 339 So. 3d 548, 560 (La. 
2022) (“[It is] proper to place the burden of proving 
unconstitutionality  on the party challenging  the administrative  
rule, as is clearly the case with statutes  or ordinances .”).  We 
agree with the Louisiana  Supreme Court that “[p]lacing  the 
burden of proof on the party challenging  a rule is consistent  
with other situations  whereby the moving party has the burden of 
proof (e.g., summary judgment  motions and exceptions). ”9  Id.   
                                                 
9  In Westlawn , the Louisiana  Supreme Court examined  the principles  
governing  constitutional  challenges  to statutes  and administrative  rules.  
339 So. 3d at 552-62.  The court explained  that “[a]ll statutory  enactments  
are presumed  constitutional”  and that “[t]his presumption  is based on the 
premise that legislators  are presumed  to have weighed the relevant  
constitutional  considerations  in enacting  legislation .”  Id. at 559 (emphasis  
added) (quotation  marks omitted).   Administrative  rules “on the other hand, 
[are] not one enacted by a legislative  body,” and accordingly,  the Louisiana  
Supreme Court declined  to “apply a presumption  of constitutionality  to an 
administrative  rule.”  Id. 
Westlawn  is consistent  with our own case law.  We have previously  
explained  that in constitu tional challenges  to statutes,  there is a 
“presumption  that every enactment  of the Legislature  was adopted in 
accordance  with the Constitution.”   League of Women Voters of Honolulu  v. 
State, 150 Hawai‘i 182, 194, 499 P.3d 382, 394 (2021), as corrected  (Nov. 4, 
2021).  But we have never extended  that presumption  to administrative  rules.  
We agree with the Westlawn  court that “[u]nlike  an elected legislature,  an 
administrative  agency is not presumed  to have weighed principles  of 
constitutionality  in promulgat ing its rules and regulations.”   339 So. 3d at 
560.  Accordingly,  we decline to extend a presumption  of constitutionality  as 
to administrative  rules. 
We do not, however,  agree with or adopt Westlawn ’s formulation  of 
the standard  of review for facial challenges: “To establish  that a statute,  
or as here, an administrative  rule, is facially  unconstitutional,  the party 
challenging  it ‘must establish  that no set of circumstances  exists under 
which [it] would be valid, that is, that the law is unconstitutional  in all 
its applications. ’”  Id. at 561 (footnote  omitted)  (alteration  in original).   
As we explain infra, the relevant  constitutional  test is not Salerno’s “no 
set of circumstances”  test.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
11 Westlawn
 is also consistent with our own precedents.   
For example,  in our previous  cases addressing  the burden of 
proof in constitutional  challenges  arising from article XII, 
section 7 in the criminal  context, we held that the burden rests 
on the challenging  party in the criminal  context.  In State v. 
Hanapi, we determined  that the initial burden of proof rests 
with the defendant  claiming  a privilege  based on article XII, 
section 7.  89 Hawai‘i 177, 184, 970 P.2d 485, 492 (1998) (“[I]t 
is the obligation  of the person claiming  the exercise  of a 
native Hawaiian  right to demonstrate  that the right is 
protected .”).  We see no reason to shift the burden in 
challenges  to administrative  rules in the civil context.  
B.  The State’s Affirmative  Duty to Protect Native Hawaiian  
Rights Applies to Administrative  Rulemaking  in Addition  to 
Contested  Case Hearings  
We next examine whether the Ka Pa‘akai framework  should 
be applied outside of the contested  case hearing context.   FCO 
contends  that “an agency’s  duty to identify  traditional  [and] 
customary  practices,  determine  how those interests  will be 
affected  by a proposed  rule, and to take feasible  action to 
reasonably  protect them, applies not only when it sits in a 
quasi-judicial  capacity;  it bears the same obligations  when it 
acts to adopt rules.”  We agree.  Our decisions  have made clear *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
12 that Native Hawaiian10 traditional  and customary  rights and 
practices  have broad-ranging protections  under article XII, 
section 7.  These protections  are flexible  and must be adapted 
to the particular  context or situation  where they are 
implicated , whether during administrative  adjudications,  like 
contested  case hearings,  or administrative  rulemaking,  like the 
promulgation  of Chapter 20-26. 
We hold that the Ka Pa‘akai framework  for contested  
case hearings  applies to administrative  rulemaking .  We 
reiterate  that agencies  “may not act without independently  
considering  the effect of their actions on Hawaiian  traditions  
and practices.”   94 Hawai‘i at 46, 7 P.3d at 1083 (emphasis  
added).  When agencies  act prospectively,  by promulgating  rules, 
instead of retrospectively,  by adjudicating  individual  rights or 
claims in contested  case hearings , they are no less obligated  to 
abide by their duties under article XII, section 7.  There is no 
principled  basis to exempt agency rulemaking  from the State’s 
constitutional  obligations.  
Administrative  rules are potentially  far-reaching  
statements  of policy with the force and effect of law.  See HRS 
§ 91-1(4) (Supp. 2021) (defining  a rule in relevant  part as an 
                                                 
10  Where quoted language  in this opinion uses “native Hawaiian”  or 
“Hawaiian,”  we clarify those references  to encompass  all Native Hawaiians , 
which refers to descendants  of the indigenous  peoples who inhabited  the 
Hawaiian  Islands prior to 1778, regardless  of blood quantum.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
13 “agency statement  of general or particular  applicability  and 
future effect that implements,  interprets,  or prescribes  law or 
policy”).   Rules are no less significant,  nor less susceptible  
to constitutional  challenges,  than are specific  agency actions 
like contested  case hearings .  See HRS § 91-7 (Supp. 2021) 
(providing  that “[a]ny interested  person” may seek to invalidate  
a rule, inter alia, based on conflict  with a constitutional  
provision).  
Our cases analyzing  article XII, section 7 emphasize  
two competing  principles:  first, that the State is “obligated  to 
protect the reasonable  exercise  of customarily and traditionally  
exercised  rights of Hawaiians ;” and second, that the State is 
“authorized  to impose appropriate  regulations  to govern the 
exercise  of native Hawaiian  rights.”   See Pub. Access Shoreline  
Haw. v. Haw. Cnty. Plan. Comm’n (PASH), 79 Hawai‘i 425, 450-51, 
450 n.43, 903 P.2d 1246, 1271-72, 1271 n.43 (1995).  Thus, while 
agencies  have the power to regulate  “traditionally  exercised  
rights of Hawaiians”  in contested  case hearings  or through 
administrative  rulemaking,  that regulatory  power is constrained  
by the State’s obligation  to protect those rights when 
exercising  that power.  Id. at 450 n.43, 903 P.2d at 1271 n.43.  
In PASH we made clear that the State’s authority  to 
regulate  Native Hawaiian  rights, although  substantial,  is not 
unfettered.  In that case, the plaintiffs  challenged  the Hawai‘i *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
14 County Planning  Commission’s  (HPC) decision  to grant a 
development  permit for a resort on the Kona coast while denying 
Native Hawaiian  practitioners’  request for a contested  case 
hearing.   Id. at 429-30, 903 P.2d at 1250-51.  We reiterated  
that “the State retains the ability to reconcile  competing  
interests  under article XII, section 7” and that the provision  
“accords  an ample legal basis for regulatory  efforts by the 
State.”  Id. at 447, 451, 903 P.2d at 1268, 1272.  This 
authority  “necessarily  allows the State to permit development  
that interferes  with . . . [traditional  and customary]  rights in 
certain circumstances,”  for example,  where the “protection  of 
such rights would result in ‘actual harm.’”  Id. at 450 n.43, 
903 P.3d at 1271 n.43 (quoting  Kalipi v. Hawaiian  Tr. Co., 66 
Haw. 1, 12, 656 P.2d 745, 752 (1982)). 
  However,  we also held that “the State does not have 
the unfettered  discretion  to regulate  the rights of ahupua‘a 
tenants out of existence.”   Id. at 451, 903 P.2d at 1272.  This 
is because “legitimate  customary  and traditional  practices  must 
be protected  to the extent feasible  in accordance  with article 
XII, section 7.”  Id. (emphasis  added).  Thus, we held that, “to 
the extent feasible , . . . HPC must protect the reasonable  
exercise  of customary  or traditional  rights that are established  
by PASH on remand.”   Id.  
  Following  up on PASH, we recognized  in Ka Pa‘akai that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
15 in contested  case hearings,  the State and its agencies have an 
“affirmative  duty . . . to preserve  and protect traditional  and 
customary  native Hawaiian  rights” and provided  a framework  “to 
effectuate  the State’s obligation  to protect native Hawaiian  
customary  and traditional  practices  while reasonably  
accommodating  competing  private interests.”   94 Hawai‘i at 45-47, 
7 P.3d at 1082-84.  There, community  groups challenged  the Land 
Use Commission’s  (LUC) decision  to grant a developer’s  petition  
to reclassify  over 1,000 acres from conservation  to urban use.  
Id. at 34, 7 P.3d at 1071.   
We held that in order to fulfill its “affirmative  
duty,” the LUC was required  to “at a minimum — make specific  
findings”  regarding  (1) “the identity  and scope of” traditional  
resources  and customary  rights in the impacted  area; (2) the 
extent to which those rights and resources  would be “affected  or 
impaired  by the proposed  action;” and (3) “the feasible  action, 
if any, to be taken by the LUC to reasonably  protect native 
Hawaiian  rights if they are found to exist.”  Id. at 45, 47, 7 
P.3d at 1082, 1084 (emphasis  in original).   We concluded  that 
the LUC’s findings  were “insufficient  to determine  whether it 
discharged  its duty to protect customary  and traditional  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
16 practices  of native Hawaiian s to the extent feasible.”11  Id. at 
48, 7. P.3d at 1085.  In sum, these cases establish  that the 
State bears an “affirmative  duty” to protect the reasonable  
exercise  of Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  practices,  
but this duty is qualified  by the State’s right to accommodate  
competing interests .  See id. at 45, 7 P.3d at 1082. 
None of our cases suggest that agencies  are bound by 
these protections  only in contested  case hearings .  To the 
contrary,  article XII, section 7 protects  “the broadest  possible  
spectrum  of native rights” and was not intended  to be narrowly  
construed.   Pele Def. Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 619-20, 837 
P.2d 1247, 1271 (1992) (quoting  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57, in 1 
Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  of Hawai‘i of 1978, 
at 640 (1980)).   And, as we explained  in Ka Pa‘akai in the 
contested  case hearing context, “[r]equiring  these minimal 
prerequisites  facilitates  precisely  what the 1978 Constitutional  
Convention  delegates  sought: ‘badly needed judicial  guidance ’ 
and the ‘enforcement  by the courts of these rights[.] ’”  94 
Hawai‘i at 50, 7 P.3d at 1087 (quoting  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57, 
in 1 Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  of Hawai‘i of 
                                                 
 11  We also held that the reclassification’s  condition that the 
developer  protect the gathering  and access rights of Native Hawaiian  
practitioners  granted it “unfettered  authority  to decide which native 
Hawaiian  practices  are at issue and how they are to be preserved  or 
protected,”  and thus invalidly  delegated the LUC’s obligation  to protect 
those practices  to a private party.  Id. at 51, 7 P.3d at 1088. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
17 1978, at 640 (1980)).   That same reasoning  applies to 
administrative  rulemaking  because,  if not, an agency’s  “promise 
of preserving and protecting customary and traditional rights 
would be illusory absent [consideration of] the extent of their 
exercise, their impairment, and the feasibility of their 
protection .”  Id.  
Applying the Ka Pa‘akai framework  to rulemaking  is 
consistent  with the intent of the framers of article XII, 
section 7.  That provision  “grew out of a desire to ‘preserve  
the small remaining  vestiges  of a quickly disappearing  culture 
[by providing]  a legal means by constitutional  amendment  to 
recognize  and reaffirm  native Hawaiian  rights.’”  Id. at 45, 7 
P.2d at 1082 (alteration  in original)  (quoting  Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 57, in 1 Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  of 
Hawaiʻi of 1978, at 640 (1980)).   The framers recognized  that 
“[s]ustenance,  religious  and cultural  practices  of native 
Hawaiian s are an integral  part of their culture,  tradition  and 
heritage,  with such practices  forming the basis of Hawaiian  
identity  and value systems,” id. (quoting  Comm. Whole. Rep. No. 
12, in 1 Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  of Hawaiʻi 
of 1978, at 1016 (1980)),  and accordingly  “did not intend to 
have the section narrowly  construed .”  Pele Def. Fund, 73 Haw. 
at 620, 837 P.2d at 1271 (quoting  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57, in 1 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
18 Proceedings  of the Constitutional  Convention  of Hawaiʻi of 1978, 
at 640 (1980) (emphasis  in orginal) ).  Native Hawaiian  
traditional  and customary  rights do not exist at the sufferance  
of the State and its agencies.  
In sum, the Ka Pa‘akai framework  applies to 
administrative  rulemaking  in addition  to contested  case 
hearings.  Requiring  the State and its agencies  to consider  
Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  rights in these 
contexts  “effectuate[s]  the State’s obligation  to protect native 
Hawaiian  customary  and traditional  practices[.]”   Ka Pa‘akai, 94 
Hawai‘i at 47, 7 P.3d at 1084. 
C.   Agencies  Must Engage in a Contemporaneous  Ka Pa‘akai 
Analysis  When Promulgating  Administrative  Rules 
 
Having determined  that the Ka Pa‘akai framework  applies 
to administrative  rulemaking,  we now elaborate  on what is 
required  of an agency under that framework  when promulgating  
administrative  rules.  In Ka Pa‘akai, we explained  that “[i]n 
order for native Hawaiian  rights to be enforceable,  an 
appropriate  analytical  framework  for enforcement  is needed” for 
contested  case hearings.   Id. at 46, 7 P.3d at 1083.  We now set 
forth the “appropriate  analytical  framework”  for administrative  
rulemaking  so that “native Hawaiian  rights [are] enforceable.”   
See id. 
 In its amicus brief, the Attorney General (AG) argues  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
19 that while  “[r]equiring findings of fact regarding the 
assessment of traditional and customary rights may work in the 
contested -case setting, [] it does not in the rule -making 
setting.”  According  to the AG, “[t]he resolution  of the Ka 
Pa‘akai analysis  and the making of factual findings  depends on 
record evidence,”  whereas rulemaking  produces  no evidentiary  
record.  The AG asserts that it is “fundamentally  unreasonable”  
to apply Ka Pa‘akai “where there is no evidentiary  record and 
nobody’s  rights, duties, or privileges  are judicially  
determined.”   The AG’s argument fails because it does not 
acknowledge that the requirements of Ka Pa‘akai can be adapted to 
the rulemaking context.  
Just because Ka Pa‘akai may not apply in the same way 
to rulemaking  as it does to contested  case hearings  does not 
mean that its principles  do not apply.  To the contrary,  Ka 
Pa‘akai spoke about agency action in broad terms.  94 Hawai‘i at 
46, 7 P.3d at 1083.  And its framework  can and should be broadly 
applied to rulemaking;  the State has an “affirmative  duty . . . 
to preserve  and protect traditional  and customary  native 
Hawaiian  rights,”  and doing so requires  identifying  the scope 
and extent of impacted  rights and the feasible  steps taken to 
protect them.  Id. at 45, 47, 7 P.3d at 1082, 1084.   
At its core, Ka Pa‘akai concluded  the State’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
20 constitutional  duty means that its agencies  “may not act without 
independently  considering  the effect of their actions on 
Hawaiian  traditions  and practices.”   Id. at 46, 7 P.3d 1083 
(emphasis added).  This procedural requirement, that agency 
action must be preceded by consideration  of Native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary rights, should apply equally when 
agencies act in a quasi -judicial manner  (contested case 
hearings) and in a quasi -legislative manner (administrative 
rulemaking).  State agencies perform different functions and 
roles when exercising their quasi -judicial and quasi -legislative 
powers and as such, the process by which agencies demonstrate 
they have met their affirmative duty under the constitution may 
necessarily differ depending on which power is exercised.  See 
Green Party of Haw. v. Nago, 138 Hawai‘i 228, 238, 378 P.3d 944, 
954 (2016) (“This court has recognized  that rule-making is 
essentially  legislative  in nature because it operates  in the 
future; whereas,  adjudication  is concerned  with the 
determination  of past and present rights and liabilities  of 
individuals  where issues of fact often are sharply 
controverted.”   (internal  quotation  marks omitted)).    
In contested case hearings, where agencies wear a 
quasi-judicial hat, Ka Pa‘akai requires  that agencies  “at a 
minimum” issue “specific  findings  and conclusions”  on: *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
21 (1) the identity  and scope of “valued cultural,  
historical,  or natural resources”  in the petition  area, 
including  the extent to which traditional  and customary  
native Hawaiian  rights are exercised  in the petition  area; 
(2) the extent to which those resources —including 
traditional  and customary  native Hawaiian  rights—will be 
affected  or impaired  by the proposed  action; and (3) the 
feasible  action, if any, to be taken by the LUC to 
reasonably  protect native Hawaiian  rights if they are found 
to exist. 
 
94 Hawaiʻi at 47, 7 P.3d at 1084 (footnote omitted)  (emphasis in 
original) .   
In a contested case hearing appeal, the State agency 
acts like a court.  It makes sense then to require the agency, 
acting in a quasi -court capacity, to issue findings of fact and 
conclusions of law similar to the manner in which courts issue 
findings of fact and conclusions of law.12  This permits courts 
to review the agency’s decisions to determine if the agency, 
prior to acting, properly “ consider[ed]  the effect of their 
actions on Hawaiian  traditions  and practices”  as required  by 
article XII, section 7.  Id. at 46, 7 P.3d at 1083 (emphasis 
added). 
When rulemaking,  an agency does not sit as a quasi -
judicial body whose work must be reviewed.  The agency need not 
issue findings of fact or conclusions of law as in contested 
case hearings  because it does not sit as a quasi-court.  
                                                 
12  Indeed, the Hawai‘i Administrative  Procedures  Act requires  that 
“[e]very decision  and order . . . rendered  by an agency in a contested  case . 
. . be in writing or stated in the record and . . . be accompanied  by 
separate  findings  of fact and conclusions  of law.”  HRS § 91-12. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
22 Different  roles require different  methods of review to hold the 
State accountable  to its constitutional  duties.   
Therefore,  applying the Ka Pa‘akai framework  to 
rulemaking,  we hold that before adopting  rules, agencies  must 
consider : (1) “the identity and scope of” Native Hawaiian 
traditional and  customary rights affected by the rule, if any;13 
(2) “the extent to which” Native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary rights “will be affected or impaired by the [rule]”; 
and (3) whether the proposed rules  “reasonably protect ” Native 
Hawaiian traditional and customary rights, “if they are found to 
exist,” as balanced with the State’s own regulatory right.  See 
id. at 47, 7 P.3d at 1084 (emphasis  added).   
Although  formal findings  of fact and conclusions  of 
law are not required,  agencies  must prepare a written statement  
summarizing  the above analysis  prior to adopting  a proposed  
rule, and make that analysis  available  to the public.  When 
                                                 
13  If an agency determines  that a proposed  rule will not impact any 
Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  practices,  the analysis ends there 
and the agency will have met its constitutional  obligations .  Compare In re 
Conservation  Dist. Use Application  HA-3568, 143 Hawaiʻi 379, 396-98, 431 P.3d 
752, 769-71 (2018) (holding the agency complied  with Ka Paʻakai because it 
identified  no Native Hawaiian  cultural  resources  or traditional  or customary  
practices  within the project area and found that no traditional  and customary  
rights would be affected  or impaired  by the proposed  action) with In re ʻIao 
Ground Water Mgmt. Area High-Level Source Water Use Permit Applications , 128 
Hawaiʻi 228, 248, 287 P.3d 129, 149 (2012) (finding  the agency failed to 
properly  apply the Ka Paʻakai framework  because although  it identified  and 
documented  the project area’s Native Hawaiian practices,  the agency did not 
demonstrate  the effect of the project on the identified  Native Hawaiian  
practices  or make any findings  about the feasibility  of protecting  the 
identified  practices).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
23 undertaking this  analysis, the agency is not required to 
“negative  any and all native Hawaiian rights claims regardless 
of how implausible the claimed right may be.”14  Hanapi, 89 
Hawai‘i at 184, 970 P.2d at 492 .  Where no Native Hawaiian right 
or practice is identified or implicated, the agency may say so 
in a short statement  and the need for analysis ends there . 
Requiring  a contemporaneous,  written analysis  will not 
unduly burden agencies.   Agencies are already required  to 
provide reasoned  justifications  for the decisions  they made 
during the rulemaking  process.   The procedures agencies must 
follow when adopting, amending, and repealing administrative 
rules are set forth in HRS § 91-3.  The agency must first 
“[g]ive at least thirty days’ notice for a public hearing. ”  HRS 
§ 91-3(1).  That notice must clearly indicate  the topic of the 
proposed  rule or amendment,  must offer to mail a copy of the 
                                                 
14  In cases where there is no readily apparent  impacted  Native 
Hawaiian  traditional  or customary  right or practice,  we suggest making the 
analysis  public when the agency notices a public hearing under HRS § 91-3(1).  
The agency can provide a simple statement  with its notice saying it 
identifie d no impacted  rights or practices.   Interested  parties can then 
review the agency’s  analysis  and bring forth any rights or practices  the 
agency failed to identify  during a public hearing or through written and oral 
submissions.   See HRS § 91-3(2).  The agency, if it receives  any comments  
raising impacted  rights or traditions,  can then engage in the analysis  
outlined  above and issue a revised analysis  reflecting  public input prior to 
promulgating  a rule. 
In cases, such as this one, where Native Hawaiian  traditional  and 
customary  rights and practices  are plainly implicated,  the agency can wait to 
issue its analysis  until after the notice-and-comment period so it can 
appropriately  conduct the required  analysis.   We require only that prior to, 
or contemporan eously with, adopting  administrative  rules, agencies  engage in 
and make public the required  analysis.   Agencies  have discretion  to determine  
when during the rulemaking  process to make public the required  analysis,  but 
the context of the rulemaking  should guide that decision.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
24 (continued  . . .) 
 rule or amendment  to interested  parties,  must indicate  where and 
when a copy is available  for review, and must give the time and 
place of the public hearing.   HRS §§ 91-3(1)(A)-(D).  The agency 
must afford any interested  party an opportunity  to submit “data, 
views, or arguments”  and shall “fully consider  all written and 
oral submissions.”   HRS § 91-3(2); see also Aguiar v. Haw. Hous. 
Auth., 55 Haw. 478, 487 –88, 522 P.2d 1255, 1262 (1974)  (“[A]n 
agency must consider the views of interested  persons where it 
seeks to promulgate a rule, no matter how complex is the data 
that goes into the rule ’s formulation.”  (internal quotations 
omitted)).   Upon taking its final action, the agency must “issue 
a concise statement  of the principal  reasons for and against its 
determination”  to any interested  party.  HRS § 91-3(2).  The 
agency’s  final decision  is then subject to approval  by the 
governor,  who can require a statement  of the agency’s  reasons 
for adopting  the rule.  HRS § 91-3(2).   
In sum, it would not unduly burden an agency 
promulgating  a rule that potentially  impacts Native Hawaiian  
customary  and traditional  rights or practices  to engage in this 
analysis because agencies  must already be prepared  to provide 
justifications  for their proposed  rules.15  Our holding today 
                                                 
15  We note that under the Administrative  Procedure  Act, federal 
agencies  are required  to provide reasoned  justifications  when rulemaking . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
25 only requires  agencies  to show that they met their obligations  
under the constitution  so that the public can evaluate  an 
agency’s decision,  and courts have a basis to review that 
decision  if subsequently  challenged  in court.16 
After the agency has prepared and made public a 
written statement of the analysis described above and the rule 
has been adopted, plaintiffs may challenge the c onstitutionality 
of the rule under article XII, section 7.  As we explain, the 
burden then rests on the plaintiff to show that agency did not 
adequately consider or reasonably protect  Native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary rights  or practices  as balanced with 
the State’s own right to regulate.  
                                                                                                                                                             
(. . . continued)   
See, e.g., SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 196 (1947) (holding  that 
agencies  must provide a clear basis for their determinations  in order for 
those determinations  to withstand  judicial  review);  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n 
of U.S., 463 U.S. 29, 42-43 (1983) (invalidating  an agency’s  decision  to 
rescind a rule because it failed to provide a “reasoned  analysis”  for 
changing  its course);  FCC v. Fox Television  Stations,  Inc., 556 U.S. 502, 515 
(2009) (holding an agency must provide a reasoned  explanation  for departing  
from a prior policy and show that there are “good reasons”  for the new 
policy, though these reasons need not be “better than the reasons for the old 
one”). 
 
16  Our holding here does not apply to the legislature  or to 
constitutional  challenges  to statutes  enacted by the legislature .  We hold 
administrative  agencies  to different  standards  because “[u]nlike an elected 
legislature,  an administrative  agency is not presumed  to have weighed 
principles  of constitutionality  in promulgating  its rules and regulations. ”  
Westlawn , 339 So. 3d at 560.  While agencies  may act as quasi-legislative  
bodies, they are not directly  responsible  to voters.  Cf. Citizens  Ass’n of 
Georgetown,  Inc. v. Zoning Comm’n of D.C., 477 F.2d 402, 409 n.28 (D.C. Cir. 
1973) (explaining  that courts apply a different  standard  of review to agency 
rulemaking  and legislative  enactments because Congress  is responsible  to 
voters and agencies  are not).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
26 D. To Succeed in an Article XII, Section 7 Challenge  to an 
Administrative  Rule, a Plaintiff  Must Show the Agency 
Failed to Adequately  Consider  or Reasonably  Protect Native 
Hawaiian  Traditional  and Customary Rights 
 
Having determined  that the Ka Pa‘akai framework  applies 
to rulemaking,  we also conclude  that the framework  provides  the 
relevant  test for determining  whether an administrative  rule is 
constitutional  under article XII, section 7.  And as we 
explained,  different  contexts  require different  approaches.   
Accordingly , we hold that to succeed in an article XII, section 
7 constitutional  challenge  to administrative  rules, a plaintiff  
must show: (1) the agency failed to adequately  consider  “the 
identity  and scope of” Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  
rights affected  by the rule, if any; or (2) the agency failed to 
adequately  consider  “the extent to which” Native Hawaiian  
traditional  and customary  rights “will be affected  or impaired  
by the [rule]”;  or (3) the rule failed to “reasonably  protect” 
Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  rights, “if they are 
found to exist,” as balanced  with the State’s own regulatory  
right.17  See id. at 47, 7 P.3d at 1084 (emphasis  added).   
This test set s forth both the steps agencies must take 
prior to promulgating rules and the standard by which rules will 
be judged under article XII, section 7 .  This test places the 
                                                 
17  We note the use of “or” in this test.  If the plaintiff  meets its 
burden as to any one of the three prongs, the rule is unconstitutional.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
27 burden on a plaintiff  challenging  an administrative  rule under 
article XII, section 7, to show that the analysis  undertaken  
during rulemaking  did not adequately  consider  the scope or 
impact of a rule on Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  
practices  or that the rule did not reasonably  protect those 
rights as balanced  with the State’s right to regulate.   This 
test requires  courts to balance an agency’s  “affirmative  duty” 
to protect these rights with “the right of the State to regulate 
such rights.”   See id. at 45, 7 P.3d at 1082; Haw. Const. art. 
XII, § 7.  
Balancing the State’s “affirmative duty” with its 
“right” to regulate  is consistent with our past precedents.  
From the outset, we have interpreted article XII, section 7 to 
require a contextual balancing approach that weighs Native 
Hawaiian rights against other State interests.  In Kalipi, the 
first case to interpret article XII, section 7, William Kalipi  
asserted a right to gather traditional agricultural products on 
land belonging to the defendant in accord with his family’s 
longstanding practice.  66 Haw. at 3-4, 656 P.2d at 747.  Chief 
Justice Richardson, writing for the court, held “that the 
retention  of a Hawaiian tradition should in each case be 
determined by balancing the respective interests and harm once 
it is established that the application of the custom has 
continued in a particular area.”  Id. at 10, 656 P.2d at 751.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
28 For example, traditional and customary  usage may continue “so 
long as no actual harm is done thereby.”  Id.  However, the 
court held that these rights may be reasonably regulated, for 
example by preventing gathering on “fully developed property.”  
Id. at 8-9, 656 P.2d at 750.    
The same balancing principles articulated in Kalipi 
are also relevant here .  When courts review the 
constitutionality of administrative rules under article XII, 
section 7, they should look to  the process by which the rules 
were adopted.  Did the agency adequatel y consider whether its 
proposed rule would impact Native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary rights or practices?  If the agency identified 
impacted right s or practice s, did it adequately consider the 
extent to which those rights or practices  would be impaired?  
And finally, did the agency reasonably protect th ose rights or 
practice s as balanced with the State’s right to regulate?   
We reiterate  that the burden of showing the agency 
failed to adequately consider or reasonably protect Native 
Hawaiian traditional and customary rights or practices remains 
with the plaintiff.  The plaintiff must make affirmative 
arguments as to why the agency’s analysis fails to pass 
constitutional muster.   It is the plaintiff’s burden to show the 
rule is unconstit utional.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
29  At bottom, the constitution requires that  agencies  
“may not act without independently  considering  the effect of 
their actions on Hawaiian  traditions  and practices.”   Ka Pa‘akai, 
94 Hawai‘i at 46, 7 P.3d 108 3 (emphasis added).   Thus, when 
agencies fail to adequately consider or reasonably protect 
Native Hawaiian traditional or customary rights or practices  
during rulemaking , the rule is unconstitutional.  
1. Salerno’s “No Set of Circumstances”  Test Does Not 
Apply to Constitution al Challenges  Arising from 
Article XII, Section 7 
   
In its amicus brief, the Attorney General (AG) argues 
that FCO brings a facial challenge and that “[w]hen an 
administrative rule is subject to a facial constitutional 
challenge, the challenger must establish that no set of 
circumstances exists under which the rule would be valid.”  The 
AG argues that Salerno’s “no set of circumstance s” test “is the 
national standard” for reviewing facial challenges and should be 
applied to constitutional challenges arising from article XII, 
section 7 .18  This is incorrect ,19 and even if it were, the U.S. 
                                                 
18  In United States  v. Salerno, the U.S. Supreme Court initially 
explained that facial challenges are “the most difficult challenge to mount 
successfully, since the challenger must establish that no set of 
circumstances exists under which the Act would be valid.”  481 U.S. 739,  745 
(1987).  But a s the Tenth Circuit explained in Doe v. City of Albuquerque : 
 
The [U.S.] Supreme Court has repeatedly entertained 
facial challenges without engaging in th[e] hypothetical 
exercise [required by Salerno].  Instead, the Court has  
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
30 Supreme Court’s determination in Salerno would not control how 
this court interprets the Hawai‘i Constitution.   See State v. 
Hoey, 77 Hawai‘i 17, 36, 881 P.2d 504, 523 (1994)  (explaining 
that the Hawai‘i Supreme Court i s “the ultimate judicial tribunal 
with final, unreviewable authority to interpret and enforce the 
Hawai‘i Constitution ”).  We hold that the relevant constitutional 
test for determining the constitutionality of an administrative 
rule for the purposes of article XII, section 7  is not Salerno’s 
“no set of circumstances” test .  We reiterate that the relevant 
constitutional test is as follows: to succeed in an article XII, 
section 7 constitutional challenge to administrative rules, a 
plaintiff must show: (1) the agency failed to adequately 
consider  “the identity and scope of” Native Hawaiian traditional 
and customary rights affected by the rule, if any; or (2) the 
agency failed to adequately consider  “the extent to which” 
Native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights “will be 
                                                                                                                                                             
(. . . continued)  
properly applied the appropriate constitutional test to the 
restriction at issue; for example, the Ward test to a 
content-neutral restriction on free speech rights.  Thus, 
Salerno is correctly understood not as a separate test 
applicable to facial challenges, but a description of the 
outcome of a facial challenge in which a statute fails to 
satisfy the appropriate constitutional framework.  
 
667 F.3d 1111, 1123 (10th Cir. 2012).  
 
19  Salerno “is accurately  understood  not as setting forth a test for 
facial challenges,  but rather as describing  the result of a facial challenge  
in which a statute fails to satisfy the appropriate  constitutional  standard.”   
Doe, 667 F.3d at 1127 (emphasis added). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
31   affected or impaired  by the [rule]”; or (3) the rule failed to 
“reasonably protect ” Native Hawaiian traditional and customary 
rights, “if they are found to exist,” as balanced with the 
State’s own regulatory right.  See Ka Pa‘akai, 94 Hawai‘i at 47, 
7 P.3d at 1084 (emphasis added). 
V. CONCLUSION  
Native Hawaiian  traditional  and customary  rights do 
not exist at the sufferance  of the State and its agencies.   
These rights must be protected  and indeed, the State and its 
agencies  have a constitutional  obligation  to do so.  For the 
foregoing reasons, we remand this matter to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
Ashley K. Obrey   
Daylin-Rose H. Heather   
David Kauila Kopper  
for Plaintiff-Appellant
Flores-Case ‘Ohan
a   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
   
 
Joseph F. Kotowski, III
for Defendant-Appellee 
University of Hawai ‘i  
 
David D. Day 
Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Amicus Curiae, 
Attorney General of
Hawai‘i  
