    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
                                                                 
                                                                 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-29352 14-FEB-2014 08:56 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, ex rel. DAVID M. LOUIE, Attorney General, and
DEAN H. SEKI, Comptroller of the State of Hawai
'i,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants, Cross-Appellees,
 
vs.
 
HAWAII GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, AFSCME LOCAL NO. 152,
AFL-CIO; UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME LOCAL NO. 646, AFL-CIO;
ROYAL STATE CORPORATION; ROYAL STATE NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
LIMITED; THE ROYAL INSURANCE AGENCY, INC.; VOLUNTARY EMPLOYEES’
BENEFIT ASSOCIATION OF HAWAII; MANAGEMENT APPLIED PROGRAMMING,
INC., Respondents/Defendants-Appellees, Cross-Appellants.
 
SCWC-29352
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29352; CIV. NO. 02-1-0685)
 
FEBRUARY 14, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., ACOBA, and McKENNA, JJ., WITH
NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM POLLACK, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case arises out of the Hawaii Public Employees
 
Health Fund’s “porting” program. Under the program, state and
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
county employees could choose to enroll in health benefits and 
long-term care benefits plans offered by their respective employee unions, rather than Health Fund-sponsored plans. For employees who chose a union-sponsored plan, the Health Fund would transfer or “port” to the unions the government employers’ contributions to the cost of providing insurance. See Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 87-4, 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23 (repealed).
1 The instant action centers on the State’s 
contention that public funds ported to certain unions exceeded the amounts allowed by law.
2
 
Specifically, the Health Fund statutes provided that 
amounts ported to the unions would be either the public employer’s contribution as determined in relevant collective bargaining agreements, or the “actual monthly cost of the coverage,” whichever was less. HRS §§ 87-4, 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23. The State alleged that public funds ported to the Hawai' i 
Government Employees Association (HGEA) and the United Public 
1 HRS chapter 87 was repealed in 2001, effective July 1, 2003.  2001
 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, §§ 3, 10 at 150-51.  Reference to chapter 87’s repeal
 
is not repeated with each citation.  Chapter 87 was replaced by chapter 87A,
governing the Hawaii Employer-Union Benefits Trust Fund.  See id.  § 1 at 138;
 
HRS ch. 87A.  
This suit was initially brought by former Attorney General Earl I. 
Anzai, and former Comptroller Glen M. Okimoto, on behalf of the State.  The present petitioners/plaintiffs-appellants/cross-appellees were substitutedautomatically pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
43(c)(1) (2010). 
-2­2    
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Workers (UPW) exceeded the “actual [monthly] cost of coverage.”3
  
The circuit court ultimately bifurcated the case, requiring the
 
State to seek a declaratory judgment with regard to the
 interpretation of the statutory phrase “actual monthly cost of
 the coverage” before allowing litigation on the State’s remaining
 claims. The State then argued that the phrase means 
(1) premiums paid to insurance carriers in arm’s
length transactions, less any refunds, rate credits,
and reimbursements, where the carrier is independent
of HGEA and UPW, meaning, not controlled by, related
to, or conspiring with leaders of HGEA and UPW to
circumvent statutory limits on amounts ported by the
Health Fund, or (2) allowable claims paid or incurred,
plus reasonable administrative fees and profits where
the carrier is not independent of HGEA and UPW. 
 
The circuit court rejected the State’s interpretation 
and concluded that the term means “the premium charged by and
 
paid to the carrier.” Because there was no dispute that the
 ported amount equaled the premium charged and paid, the circuit
 court’s declaratory ruling essentially ended the State’s case,
 and the circuit court entered judgment against the State.
4
 
The State appealed, arguing, inter alia, that (1) the
 
circuit court erred when it interpreted the phrase “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage” to mean “the premium charged by and
 paid to the carrier,” and (2) the circuit court erred when it
 
3
 The respondents/defendants-appellees/cross-appellants in the 
instant case include the Hawaii Government Employees Association (HGEA);
United Public Workers (UPW); Royal State Corporation (Royal State), RoyalState National Insurance Company, Ltd.; The Royal Insurance Agency, Inc.;Voluntary Employees’ Benefit Association of Hawai 'i; and Management Applied 
Programming, Inc. 
4
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
-3­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
denied the State leave to file a second amended complaint and
 
“rewrote” the State’s complaint. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed the circuit
 
court’s judgment with respect to its interpretation of “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage.” The ICA further determined, inter
 alia, that in light of its affirming the circuit court’s
 interpretation, the issue of whether the circuit court erred when
 it denied the State leave to file a second amended complaint and
 “rewrote” the State’s complaint was no longer justiciable. The
 ICA thus declined to reach that issue. 
In its application for writ of certiorari, the State
 
raises the following questions:
 
1. Did the [ICA] gravely err when it interpreted the
phrase “actual monthly cost of the coverage” from
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5 and
87-23 to mean the premium set by an insurance carrier,even if the State of Hawaii alleges that (a) theinsurance carriers had extraordinarily high grossprofits, (b) the insurance carriers hadextraordinarily high administrative fees, and (c) theamount charged for the premium was grossly inflatedand did not reflect the “actual cost” of the coveragein a legitimate arm’s-length business transaction? 
2. Did the ICA gravely err when it failed to vacate
the circuit court’s orders denying the State leave to
amend its complaint, when the circuit court (a) denied
leave to amend even though the court had previously
granted leave to file similar causes of action, (b)
interpreted Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)
[Rule] 9 incorrectly to conclude that the State’s
civil conspiracy to defraud claim was insufficiently
precise, (c) misused HRCP [Rule] 12(f) in order to
edit the State’s complaint itself, and (d) precluded
the State from amending its definition of “actual cost
of coverage” to make the definition consistent with
the complaint as amended by the court?
 
(Emphasis in original). 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We hold that the circuit court did not err in
 
interpreting “actual monthly cost of the coverage” in chapter 87
 
to mean “the premium charged by and paid to the [insurance]
 carrier.” We recognize that the State has raised serious and
 troubling allegations regarding improper financial dealings
 amongst the defendants. However, the State chose to tie its
 allegations to the statutes, and conceded at oral argument that
 its claims, including conspiracy to defraud the State, depended
 entirely on its interpretation of the statutory phrase “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage.” We cannot rewrite the State’s
 complaint to allege causes of action the State did not pursue. 
Nor can we rewrite the statutes to include prohibitions that the
 legislature never contemplated. Even if the State could have
 asserted a claim for conspiracy to defraud wholly apart from the
 provisions of chapter 87, it did not do so. The question here,
 as framed by the State, is a narrow one: do the factual
 allegations constitute a violation of the provisions of chapter
 87? The answer to that question is no. 
The State concedes that such a disposition would render
 
moot its second argument regarding the pleadings process. Thus,
 we do not reach that issue. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment
 of the ICA. 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
A. Health Fund
 
In 1961, the Legislature established the Health Fund
 
for the purpose of providing public employees and their
 
dependents with a health benefits plan. 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 146, § 1 at 191. The Health Fund was defined to consist of
 “contributions, interest, income, dividends, refunds, rate
 credits and other returns.” Id. at 192. Act 146 required the
 
State to make monthly contributions to the Health Fund for health
 benefits for employees and their dependents. Id. at 192-93. 
Employees also were required to make a monthly contribution to
 the Health Fund for “the difference between the monthly charge of
 the health benefits plan selected by the employee-beneficiary and
 the State’s contribution to the fund.” Id. at 193. The Health
 
Fund board was authorized to contract with carriers to provide
 health benefits plans. Id. at 194. During the life of the
 
Health Fund, which was replaced by the Hawaii Employer-Union
 Health Benefits Trust Fund (EUTF) on July 1, 2003, the Health
 Fund expanded the benefits provided to public employees to
 include plans such as prescription drug, vision, dental, and
 group life insurance plans. See 1965 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 235,
 
§ 2 at 393; 1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 110, § 3 at 101; 1985 Haw.
 
-6­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sess. Laws Act 304, §§ 1-2 at 816-17. Initially, the public
 
employer’s contribution was a specific dollar amount determined
 
by statute. See, e.g., 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, § 1 at 192. 
However, effective July 1, 1985, the legislature amended the
 
Health Fund statute to require government employers to contribute
 amounts as set forth in “the applicable public sector collective
 bargaining agreement” or as established under HRS chapter 89C,
 which pertains to public officers and employees excluded from
 collective bargaining. 1984 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 254, §§ 4, 9 at
 570-71, 573; HRS § 87-4(a) (1985 & 1993).
 
Beginning at various times during the existence of the
 
Health Fund, the applicable statutes were amended to allow state
 and county employees to choose to enroll in union-sponsored
 insurance plans, in lieu of Health Fund-sponsored plans. See
 
1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 110, § 3, at 101; 1984 Haw. Sess. Laws
 Act 71, § 1, at 123. For employees who chose a union-sponsored
 plan, the Health Fund would pay or “port” to the unions the
 government employers’ contributions to the cost of providing
 insurance. See HRS §§ 87-4, 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23. 
Under the statutory scheme at the time of the instant
 
case, the Health Fund was to provide health benefits to public
 employees in the following manner:
 
(1)	 For those employee-beneficiaries who are not
participating in a health benefits plan of an
employee organization . . . , the [Health Fund]
shall establish health benefits plans and the
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requirements for eligibility under the health
benefits plans; or
 
(2)	 For employee-beneficiaries who participate in
the health benefits plan of an employee
organization, the [Health Fund] shall pay a
monthly contribution for each employee-
beneficiary, in the amount provided in section
5
[ ] 87-4(a),  or the actual monthly cost of the
cover
age, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of health benefits under the health
benefits plan of an employee organization.
 
HRS § 87-22.3 (Supp. 2002) (emphasis added).
 
Similar language appeared in HRS § 87-22.56
 
7
(determining dental plan benefits) and HRS § 87-23  (determining
5	 See infra note 8. 
6 HRS § 87-22.5 (Supp. 2002) required the Health Fund to provide
 
dental plan benefits to the children of employee-beneficiaries younger than 19
in the following manner, in relevant part:
 
(1)	 For those children of employee-beneficiaries who
are not participating in a dental program of an
employee organization . . . , the [Health Fund]
shall determine a dental plan and eligibility
requirements for such benefits based upon a
statutory monthly contribution per enrolled
child;
 
(2)	 For those children of employee-beneficiaries who
participate in the dental program of an employee
organization, the [Health Fund] shall allot the
statutory monthly contribution per enrolled
child or the actual monthly cost of the child’s
coverage, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of dental plan benefits under the
dental program of an employee organization[.]
 
(Emphasis added).
 
7 HRS § 87-23 (Supp. 2002) required the Health Fund to provide
 
benefits under a group life benefit program or group life insurance program to
employees, in relevant part:
 
(1)	 For those employees who are not participating in
a group life benefit program or group life
insurance program of an employee organization
. . . , the [Health Fund] shall determine a
group life insurance benefit plan and
eligibility requirements for such benefits based
upon the amount to be contributed per employee
(continued...)
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
group life benefits). Under this statutory scheme, the Health
 
Fund’s contribution ported to the union would be either (1) the
 public employer’s contribution for the cost of insurance, as
 determined by the applicable collective bargaining agreement, see
 
8
HRS § 87-4;  or (2) the actual monthly cost of the coverage,
7(...continued)
under section 87-4(c);
 
(2)	 For those employees who participate in a group
life benefit program or group life insurance
program of an employee organization, the [Health
Fund] shall pay a monthly contribution for each
employee, in the amount determined under section
87-4(c), or the actual monthly cost of the
coverage, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of benefits under the group life
benefit program or group life insurance program
of an employee organization[.]
 
(Emphasis added).
 
8 HRS § 87-4 (1993) provided, in relevant part, that the State and
 
the several counties pay to the Health Fund a monthly contribution equal to:
 
(a) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C
[governing public officers and employees excluded from
collective bargaining] or specified in the applicable
public sector collective bargaining agreement,
whichever is appropriate, for each of their respective
employee-beneficiaries and employee-beneficiaries with
dependent-beneficiaries, which shall be used toward
the payment of costs of a health benefits plan;
provided that the monthly contribution shall not
exceed the actual cost of a health benefits plan.
. . .
  
(b) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C or
specified in the applicable public sector collective
bargaining agreement, whichever is appropriate, for
each child who has not attained the age of nineteen of
all employee-beneficiaries who are enrolled for dental
benefits.  The contributions shall be used towards the
 payment of costs of dental benefits of a health
benefits plan. . . .
(c) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C or
specified in the applicable public sector collective
bargaining agreement, whichever is applicable, for
each of their respective employees, to be used towards
the payment of group life insurance benefits for each
employee. 
-9­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
whichever was less. As aptly explained by the ICA majority
 
opinion:
 
First, say the applicable collective bargaining
agreement provided that the public employer would pay
60% of the monthly health premiums for the unionized
employees.  This calculation was based on the monthly
premium of the medical plan sponsored by the Health
Fund, which in turn was defined as the plan with the
largest number of active employee enrollments as of
9
[ ] December 31st of the previous fiscal year.  If the
 
most popular plan’s monthly premium was, say, $100,
the a
mount ported to the union would be, at the most,
$60.  If, however, the “actual cost of coverage” of
the union’s health benefits plan was $50, then the
maximum amount that could be ported under this
statutory provision would be $50.
 
Before participating in the Health Fund’s porting
 
program, unions were required to submit to the Health Fund a copy
 
of their charters and by-laws and a letter that:
 
(1) 	Identifies the name and address of the person
who is authorized to represent the employee
organization;
 
(2)	 Certifies that its health benefits plan complies
with all applicable State laws; and
 
(3)	 Agrees that its health benefits plan complies
and will continue to comply with the following
requirements:
(A)	 Maintain reasonable accounting and
enrollment records and furnish such
 records and reports as may be requested by
the board, its administrator, or the State
comptroller;
 
(B)	 Permit representatives of the board and
State comptroller to audit and examine its
records that pertain to its health
benefits plan at reasonable times and
places as may be designated by the board
or the State comptroller; and
 
(C)	 Accept adjustments for error or other
reasons as may be required under chapter
87, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and chapters
30 through 36 of title 6, administrative
rules.
 
9
 The aforementioned language appeared in the State’s collective
 
bargaining agreements with UPW and HGEA for July 1, 1999 through June 30,
2003, which were attached to the State’s motion for summary judgment. 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6-34-9; see also HAR §§ 6­
35-5 (dental plan) & 6-36-7 (life insurance plan). 
In June 1989, HGEA submitted a letter to the Health
 
Fund that certified that its plans complied with state laws, and
 
agreed to, inter alia, permit the Health Fund and state
 comptroller to audit and examine its records. UPW submitted
 similar certifications to the Health Fund in June 1989 and June
 1990. Both HGEA and UPW identified Melvin Higa, chief executive
 officer of Royal State Corporation (Royal State) and Mutual
 Benefit Association of Hawaii, as HGEA’s and UPW’s representative
 regarding their benefit plans. 
In 1999, the State Auditor conducted an operational
 
audit of the Health Fund and reported that the Health Fund board
 never audited the union benefit plans and thus “[fell] short of
 fulfilling its fiduciary responsibility to carry out the purposes
 of the health fund.”
10 The State Auditor’s report stated that
 
“in spite of the significant increases in premiums ported to
 union health plans, the current board [had] not requested the
 unions to provide information on their health benefit plans’
 operations until this study.” The Auditor’s report further
 stated that:
 
By statute, the amount ported is determined by
collective bargaining agreements or the actual monthly
cost of the coverage, whichever is less. However,
without auditing the union health benefit plans, the
 
10
 A copy of a portion of the State Auditor’s report was attached as
 
Exhibit 7 to the State’s motion for a preliminary injunction. 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
board has no way of verifying the actual monthly cost
of the coverage.  Beyond the unions’ assertion, the
board has no assurance that the ported funds are used
for purchasing health benefits for union plan
enrollees.  At least one union that was about to
 receive a premium refund from a health insurance
carrier has contacted the health fund inquiring about
the disposition of the refund.  None of the union
 plans has ever returned any difference between what it
cost to provide coverage and what was ported to them.
 
As a result of the State Auditor’s report, the State
 
Comptroller sent notices to public employee unions, including
 
HGEA and UPW, requesting that they make their records available
 for an audit. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On March 15, 2002, the State filed a complaint against
 
HGEA, UPW, and Royal State, alleging that the State sought to
 
audit the public employee unions’ welfare benefit plans, and that
 every union except for HGEA and UPW produced or agreed to produce
 their records for audit. According to the complaint and
 correspondence attached as exhibits to the complaint, UPW
 responded by requesting, inter alia, copies of the Health Fund’s
 administrative rules authorizing the audit, a specific list of
 records requested “in order for the UPW to determine whether the
 records you require are subject to the audit and to retrieve the
 records from storage[,]” and a list of names of the people who
 would be conducting the audit. The comptroller sent UPW a letter
 that, inter alia, provided copies of applicable sections of the
 Health Fund’s administrative rules and identified Ernst & Young
 LLP as conducting the audit. On February 8, 2002, the
 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
comptroller sent letters to the unions, including HGEA and UPW,
 
with a description of the scope of the audit and a list of the
 required financial records for the audit. In a memo dated
 February 11, 2002, UPW’s state director requested copies of “the
 state and federal laws” that, inter alia, “require audits of the
 UPW Health.” In a letter dated March 1, 2002, the comptroller
 stated that the Hawaii Administrative Rules authorizing the audit
 were already provided to UPW, and stated that unless UPW stated
 in writing that it would “unconditionally make the previously
 described records available[,]” the comptroller would seek a
 court order requiring UPW to make its records available. In a
 letter dated February 27, 2002, but time-stamped as received by
 the comptroller on March 5, 2002, UPW stated its “willingness to
 fully cooperate” with the audit “if such an audit is permissible
 by law.” UPW stated that “fundamental issues of authority,
 purpose, scope and objectives of the independent audit have not
 been satisfactorily resolved between the parties[,]” and
 requested a copy of the “RFP used in the procurement of an
 independent auditor and the contract with Ernst & Young to
 perform the independent audit.” In response, the comptroller
 stated, inter alia, that copies of the “RFP used to select E&Y
 and the E&Y engagement letter” would be made available for
 examination, but that such information was unnecessary “for UPW
 to honor its certified and unconditional commitment to make the
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
subject records available for audit[.]” The comptroller further
 
stated that unless UPW sends a written “commitment to make the
 subject records available” for the audit, “we will assume that
 UPW has no intention of honoring its agreement without a court
 order[.]” The State alleged that HGEA and HGEA’s representative,
 Voluntary Employees’ Benefit Association of Hawaii (VEBAH), also
 did not cooperate with the State’s audit. 
The State’s complaint against UPW, HGEA, and Royal
 
State alleged five claims for relief, including violation of the
 Health Fund’s administrative rules, right to an accounting,
 breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, and promissory
 estoppel. The State sought an order granting a preliminary and
 permanent injunction requiring the defendants and their officers
 and agents to fully comply with the audit. The State also sought
 “an accounting of the payments made by the [Health] Fund since
 July 1, 1994 through June 30, 2001 and the actual cost of
 providing health, dental and group life insurance benefits to
 those enrolled in Defendants’ Welfare Benefit Plans, including
 any premium credits or refunds received by the Defendants.” The
 State also requested a decree of specific performance requiring
 HGEA and UPW to honor their certification to make their records
 available for inspection. 
On March 22, 2002, the State filed a motion for
 
preliminary and permanent injunction requiring HGEA and UPW to
 
-14­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
make records available for the audit, and restraining defendants
 
from obstructing the audit or destroying or altering records
 within the scope of the audit. On April 23, 2002, the circuit
 court granted the State’s motion for a preliminary injunction,
 and ordered HGEA, UPW, and their agents to make their records
 available to the State for review and audit. 
On April 26, 2002, HGEA filed a motion for
 
clarification or instructions regarding the circuit court’s
 injunction order, stating that although HGEA wanted to comply
 with the order, the records at issue were physically possessed by
 VEBAH, which asserted that it was not an “agent” bound by the
 order. UPW joined HGEA’s motion. On May 31, 2002, the circuit
 court granted HGEA’s motion for clarification, and ordered UPW
 and HGEA to serve subpoenae duces tecum on VEBAH, the Royal
 Insurance Company, and Management Applied Programming, Inc. (MAP)
 for the required documents. 
On October 1, 2003, the State moved for leave to file a
 
first amended complaint. The proposed first amended complaint
 
11 12
 added VEBAH  and MAP  as defendants, and county finance
 
officials as “Necessary Party Defendants.” 
The proposed first
 
amended complaint asserted nine causes of action: (1) conspiracy
 
11
 The proposed first amended complaint described VEBAH as a Hawai 'i 
mutual benefit society affiliated with Royal State and alleged that VEBAH was
“subject to the control of persons affiliated with HGEA and UPW.” 
12
 The proposed first amended complaint alleged that MAP was a 
Hawai'i corporation “engaged in the business of providing data processing
services that is affiliated with Royal State Corp.” 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to defraud the State, (2) interference with contract, (3)
 
assumpsit, (4) restitution and constructive trust, (5) equitable
 accounting, (6) specific performance, (7) injunction, (8) unjust
 enrichment, and (9) breach of fiduciary duty. The proposed first
 amended complaint alleged, inter alia, that the defendants
 “purchased” contracts for insurance from various third-party
 insurers, under which the insurers were required to reimburse
 amounts paid by the defendants if the amounts paid exceeded
 allowable claims plus an agreed profit. The proposed first
 amended complaint further alleged that the defendants received
 reimbursements from insurers under such contracts that should
 have been returned to the Health Fund, but were not. The
 proposed first amended complaint also alleged that the Health
 Fund ported funds to provide insurance for HGEA and UPW members
 under plans that supplemented a spouse’s health insurance, and
 that the actual cost of providing coverage under these
 supplemental plans was less than the ported amount. The proposed
 first amended complaint further alleged that the difference
 should have been returned to the Health Fund, but was not. 
According to the proposed first amended complaint, the defendants
 “used or allowed the use of Welfare Benefit Plan funds to
 improperly make payments to or for the benefit of insiders” such
 as then-UPW executive director Gary W. Rodrigues and Rodrigues’
 daughter Robin Sabatini. 
-16­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On November 18, 2003, the circuit court granted the
 
State’s motion for leave to file a first amended complaint “on
 
condition that (1) there is specificity regarding alleged fraud
 and alleged civil conspiracy to defraud as required by [HRCP]
 Rule 9 and as interpreted by the Court, and (2) Plaintiffs make
 clear which defendants did certain things or failed to do certain
 things, rather than referring generically to ‘Defendants.’” 
However, the State did not file the proposed first amended
 complaint. On June 10, 2004, the parties stipulated, inter alia,
 that VEBAH would disclose the requested records and the State
 would “withhold” filing the first amended complaint. 
More than a year later, on January 18, 2006, the State
 
filed a motion for leave to serve and file a second amended
 complaint and supplemental summons. The proposed second amended
 complaint (January 2006 proposed second amended complaint) was
 based on a December 1, 2005 report from the California accounting
 firm Biggs & Co., which reviewed VEBAH’s records. The Biggs
 
13
 (Biggs report) concluded, inter alia, that it
 Summary Report  appeared that premiums received for benefit coverage underwritten
 by “independent insurance companies such as HMSA, Kaiser and
 Kapiolani” were “being used to cover the cost of insurance at an
 estimated break even basis, after excluding administrative fees
 and risk charges assessed by Royal State and VEBAH.” The Biggs
 
13
 The Biggs report was attached to the State’s motion to file a
 
second amended complaint.
 
-17­    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
report also concluded that “self insured programs maintained by
Royal State and VEBAH generated extremely high gross profits
calculated on the amount of premiums collected less the cost of
related claims paid.”  In particular, the Biggs report discussed
the high profitability of supplemental health programs
underwritten by Royal State and VEBAH.  The Biggs report stated
that such programs were “believed to generate high profitability
and low risk to Royal State” for two principal reasons:
First, these are both supplemental health care
programs which generally provide excess health care
coverage over and above the medical benefits provided
under basic medical care programs such as HMSA,
Kaiser, and Kapiolani.  In other words, the
supplemental health care programs provide coverage for
the insured’s deductible portions and medical care
costs beyond the limits of coverage of the basic
medical programs.  Since the basic medical care
programs are structured to provide coverage for the
majority of the health care costs, the supplemental
programs inherently provide coverage for the less
risky portion of medical care.
Second, the amounts ported (i.e. porting rates)
from the Health Fund for coverage of the supplemental
programs are the same as for the major medical
programs under HMSA, Kaiser, Kapiolani, etc.  For
instance, the medical coverage porting rates for HGEA
AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO Unit single and family are
$79.80 and $239.40 respectively, regardless of whether
the employee maintains [supplemental or basic medical
care programs].  A basic premise of insurance is that
risk and cost are directly related in that the higher
the risk, the higher the cost.  In this instance, the
cost of the programs (i.e. the premium received) is
the same but the supplemental programs are less risky
and, correspondingly, more profitable.
(Emphases added). 
According to the Biggs report, the gross profit
generated by Royal State and VEBAH on their self insured programs
“was excessively high compared to that realized by independent
-18-       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
insurance companies providing similar products.”14 For example,
 
the Biggs report stated that the gross profit – calculated as
 
premiums less the cost of related claims paid – on Royal State’s
 supplemental programs averaged 58.7 percent between July 1994 to
 June 2003. According to the Biggs report, the “gross profit
 realized by Royal State on its self insured life program was
 significantly lower than for the other self insured programs but
 was still a healthy 36.1% for [fiscal year 1999-2000] and
 averaged 35.2% over the three fiscal years from July 1998 through
 June 2001. The Biggs report further stated that while some
 administrative fees and costs assessed by Royal State and VEBAH
 “appeared reasonable and were consistent with contractual
 allowances, the totality of all the fees assessed appeared
 excessive, particularly in consideration of the high gross profit
 realized on self insured programs.” 
The January 2006 proposed second amended complaint,
 
which added as defendants Royal State National Insurance Company,
 Ltd. (RSN) and The Royal Insurance Agency (TRIA), alleged that
 HGEA and UPW transferred ported funds to VEBAH, Royal State, and
 TRIA to purchase or provide insurance coverage or related
 services for HGEA and UPW members. The January 2006 proposed
 second amended complaint further alleged, inter alia, that
 between July 1, 1994 and June 30, 2003, the Health Fund ported
 
14
 The Biggs summary report did not state the gross profits “realized
 
by independent insurance companies providing similar products.” 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
funds to HGEA and UPW for supplemental health plans known as
 
Comprehensive Health and Medical Plan (CHAMP), supplemental adult
 dental, drug, and vision plan (DDV), and Supplemental Health Plan
 (SHP).
15 CHAMP and SHP were underwritten by RSN, and DDV was
 
underwritten by VEBAH. The January 2006 proposed second amended
 complaint also alleged that the Health Fund ported funds to HGEA
 and UPW for life insurance underwritten by RSN. The January 2006
 proposed second amended complaint further alleged that the ported
 amounts for the foregoing plans exceeded the “actual cost of
 providing coverage[.]” For example, the January 2006 proposed
 second amended complaint alleged:
 
27. . . . During the period from July 1, 1994 to
June 30, 2003, [the Health Fund] ported to HGEA over
$68 million in employer contributions for [CHAMP, DDV
and SHP] and almost $15 million to UPW. The actual
 
cost of providing coverage under HGEA’s plans did not
exceed, however, $36 million, and under UPW’s plans,
it did not exceed $7 million.  The difference,
approximately $40 million, should have been returned
to [the Health Fund], but it was not.
28. Amounts that [the Health Fund] ported to
HGEA and UPW were used to provide life insurance
underwritten by RSN.  Premiums contributed by State
and County employers for the three years ended June
30, 2003 were almost $22 million, while the actual
cost of providing coverage did not exceed $16 million. 
The difference, approximately $6 million, plus any
excess porting for other years, should have been
returned to [the Health Fund], but it was not.
 
15 Attached as Exhibit L to the Biggs report were documents
 
describing CHAMP, DDV, and SHP programs offered to HGEA and UPW members who
were covered under their spouse’s private sector or federal government medical
plans.  CHAMP was described as a “high deductible benefit plan” that works
with coverage under the spouse’s plan to reduce costs of catastrophic illness
or injury.  DDV was described as a supplemental benefit plan that pays a
benefit on a claim for a covered dental, prescription drug, and vision
expense.  Finally, SHP was described as paying a benefit on a claim for a
covered expense regardless of any other plan coverage.  CHAMP, DDV, and SHP
premiums were fully paid for by public employers; in other words, employees
were not required to contribute. 
-20­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
29. Defendants HGEA, UPW, and VEBAH, either
directly or through others, purchased insurance
contracts from various third parties that required the
insurer to refund or credit premiums that exceeded
allowable claims plus an agreed profit.  Defendants
 received reimbursements or rate credits under such
 contracts that should have been returned to [the
Health Fund], but they were not.
30. Defendants HGEA and UPW used or permitted
others to use amounts ported by [the Health Fund] to
pay unreasonable administrative expenses and fees.
Those amounts should have been returned to the Health
 Fund, but they were not.
31. Defendants RSC, RSN, TRIA, VEBAH, and MAP
retained or received, or allowed the use of ported
funds by others for, unreasonable administrative
expenses and fees.  Those funds exceeded the actual
 
cost of insurance coverage and should have been
returned to [the Health Fund], but they were not.
32. Defendants HGEA, UPW, RSC, TRIA, and VEBAH
used, or allowed the use of, ported funds to make
payments to themselves or to related parties for
Welfare Benefit Plans in amounts that exceeded the
 actual cost of coverage.  Such excessive payments
should have been returned to [the Health Fund], but
they were not.
 
(Emphases added). 
The January 2006 proposed second amended complaint also
 
alleged, inter alia, that at various times, VEBAH executives
 
representing HGEA, a Royal State Group executive representing
 HGEA and UPW, and UPW director Gary Rodrigues requested that the
 Health Fund port monthly employer contributions for certain
 employee or retiree health and group life plans, and that such
 requests “certified falsely that the amounts specified therein
 did not exceed the 
actual monthly cost  of covering” employees,
 
dependents and/or retirees under those plans. (Emphasis added). 
The January 2006 proposed second amended complaint alleged ten
 causes of action, including conspiracy to defraud the State,
 interference with contract, assumpsit, false claims, restitution
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and constructive trust, equitable accounting, specific
 
performance, injunction, unjust enrichment, and breach of
 fiduciary duty. 
HGEA, Royal State, and UPW opposed the State’s motion
 
to file a second amended complaint. On June 2, 2006, the circuit
 court denied without prejudice the State’s motion for leave to
 file a second amended complaint and bifurcated the case. 
Specifically, the circuit court ruled as follows:
 
1. The motion is denied without prejudice as to
the proposed First Cause of Action (Conspiracy to
Defraud the State) on the grounds that it fails to
comply with Rule 9(b) of the Hawaii Rules of Civil
16
 Procedure. [ ]  Failure to comply with Rule 9(b) in
 
any further proposed amended complaint will result in
denial of the fraud and conspiracy claims with
prejudice;
2. [The State] may move to amend its complaint
to seek a declaratory ruling as to the meaning of the
term “actual monthly cost of the coverage,” as used in
former Sections 87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23 of the
Hawaii Revised Statutes;
3. The motion is denied in all other respects
at this time.  If [the State] amends the complaint as
provided in paragraph numbered 2 above, and the court
issues a ruling that is consistent with the theory
underlying the proposed Second Amended Complaint, then
[the State] may further seek leave to amend to assert
its remaining causes of action .
 
(Emphases added). 
On June 26, 2006, the State filed a second motion for
 
leave to file a second amended complaint. The second proposed
 
second amended complaint (June 2006 proposed second amended
 complaint) asserted only one cause of action, a “Claim for
 
16
 HRCP Rule 9(b) (2000) provides:  “In all averments of fraud or
 
mistake, the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake shall be stated with
particularity.  Malice, intent, knowledge, and other condition of mind of a
person may be averred generally.” 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Declaratory Judgment[,]” and sought a declaratory judgment that
 
the term “actual monthly cost of the coverage” as used in HRS
 §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23 means 
(1) premiums paid to insurance carriers in arm’s
length transactions, less any refunds, rate credits,
and reimbursements, where the carrier is independent
of HGEA and UPW, meaning, not controlled by, related
to, or conspiring with leaders of HGEA and UPW to
circumvent statutory limits on amounts ported by the
Health Fund, or (2) allowable claims paid or incurred,
plus reasonable administrative fees and profits where
the carrier is not independent of HGEA and UPW.
 
Although the June 2006 proposed second amended
 
complaint asserted only a declaratory judgment claim, it included
 
many of the factual allegations asserted in the January 2006 
proposed second amended complaint, including allegations that
 ported amounts exceeded the actual cost of coverage and that HGEA
 and UPW representatives “certified falsely” that requests for
 ported funds did not exceed the actual monthly cost of the
 coverage. 
On September 15, 2006, the circuit court issued an
 
order granting in part and denying in part the State’s second
 motion for leave to file a second amended complaint. 
Specifically, the circuit court allowed the State to file a
 second amended complaint “consistent with” an attached version of
 the State’s June 2006 second proposed second amended complaint as
 edited by the circuit court. The circuit court denied the
 State’s motion “in all other respects.” On the first page of the
 attached proposed second amended complaint was a handwritten note
 
-23­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stating: “Per Rule 12(f) HRCP [ 17
 ] – Edited/stricken per minute
order granting in part [Plaintiff’s] second [motion] to file
 
[second amended complaint].” The circuit court’s edited version
 struck most of the factual allegations from the State’s June 2006
 proposed second amended complaint, including the allegations that
 HGEA, UPW, and VEBAH failed to cooperate with the audit; that the
 actual cost of providing coverage under HGEA’s and UPW’s plans
 were less than the ported amounts; that the defendants used
 ported funds to make improper payments; and that the defendants’
 requests for ported funds falsely certified that the amounts
 requested did not exceed the actual monthly cost of the coverage. 
The circuit court’s edited version left intact the declaratory
 judgment claim. 
Ten days later, on September 25, 2006, the State filed
 
a motion for reconsideration of (1) the circuit court’s June 2,
 2006 order denying without prejudice the State’s motion for leave
 to file a second amended complaint, and (2) the circuit court’s
 September 15, 2006 order granting in part and denying in part the
 State’s second motion for leave to file a second amended
 
17
 HRCP Rule 12(f) (2000) provides:
 
Motion to strike. Upon motion made by a party before
responding to a pleading or, if no responsive pleading
is permitted by these rules, upon motion made by a
party within 20 days after the service of the pleading
upon the party or upon the court’s own initiative at
any time, the court may order stricken from any
pleading any insufficient defense or any redundant,
immaterial, impertinent, or scandalous matter.  
-24­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
complaint. The circuit court denied the motion for
 
reconsideration. 
On November 20, 2006, the State filed a second amended
 
complaint that eliminated the factual allegations that the
 circuit court struck in the court’s September 15, 2006 order. 
The State’s declaratory judgment claim sought a new definition of
 the phrase “actual monthly cost of the coverage”; that is, the
 proposed definition differed from that in the complaint approved
 by the circuit court in the court’s September 15, 2006 order. 
The second amended complaint filed November 20, 2006 sought a
 declaratory judgment that the term “actual monthly cost of
 coverage,” means “(1) premiums paid to insurance carriers in bona
 fide transactions at arm’s length, less any refunds, rate
 credits, and reimbursements, or (2) allowable claims paid or
 incurred, plus reasonable administrative fees and profits, in
 transactions that are not bona fide and at arm’s length.”
 (Emphasis in original). 
Royal State, UPW, and HGEA filed motions to strike the
 
second amended complaint, arguing that the declaratory judgment
 claim in the second amended complaint was “distinctly different”
 from what the circuit court had approved. The circuit court
 granted the motions to strike the second amended complaint.
18
 
18
 The circuit court denied the motions to strike as to HGEA’s, Royal
 
State’s, and UPW’s request for an award of attorney’s fees incurred in
relation to the motion. 
-25­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, the circuit court ruled sua sponte that the State be
 
granted leave to file a third amended complaint consistent with
 the circuit court’s edited version that was attached to the
 court’s September 15, 2006 order. 
On April 5, 2007, the State filed the operative third
 
amended complaint. The third amended complaint asserted a single
 claim for declaratory judgment, seeking a declaratory judgment
 that the term “actual monthly cost of [the] coverage,” as used in
 HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23 means
 
(1) premiums paid to insurance carriers in arm’s
length transactions, less any refunds, rate credits,
and reimbursements, where the carrier is independent
of HGEA and UPW, meaning, not controlled by, related
to, or conspiring with leaders of HGEA and UPW to
circumvent statutory limits on amounts ported by the
Health Fund, or (2) allowable claims paid or incurred,
plus reasonable administrative fees and profits where
the carrier is not independent of HGEA and UPW.
 
Royal State, RSN, TRIA, VEBAH, and MAP (collectively,
 
Royal State Group) moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing, inter
 
alia, that any claim for excess porting belonged to the EUTF, and
 thus the state attorney general needed the authorization of the
 EUTF to bring the instant action. Royal State Group also argued
 that the county defendants were neither necessary nor proper
 parties. UPW and HGEA also filed motions to dismiss, adopting
 Royal State Group’s arguments. The circuit court denied the
 motions to dismiss, except as to the counties, which were
 dismissed. 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On August 14, 2007, the State filed a motion for
 
summary judgment regarding the meaning of the phrase “actual
 
monthly cost of the coverage” in HRS chapter 87. The State
 argued that “actual cost” means:
 
the cost negotiated with insurers in a bona fide
transaction at arm’s length, which is:
 
premiums paid to insurance carriers in arm’s length
transactions, less any refunds, rate credits, and
reimbursements, where the carrier is independent of
HGEA and UPW, meaning, not controlled by, related to,
or conspiring with leaders of HGEA and UPW to
circumvent statutory limits on amounts ported by the
Health Fund.
 
The State further argued that where, in the case of 
HGEA and UPW, “the carriers were not independent, ‘actual cost’ 
means allowable claims paid or incurred, plus reasonable administrative fees and profits.” The State argued that construing “actual cost” to mean premiums paid would “frustrate” the legislature’s purpose “by allowing insiders to inflate premiums and then skim off windfall profits.” The State argued that equating “actual cost” with “premiums” would render the word “actual” meaningless and that other Hawai' i statutes use the term 
“actual cost” to “avoid deceptive or unfair trade practices and misuse of public funds” and the term “usually refers to the fair market value of goods and services.” The State also argued, inter alia, that a 1993 management review report of the Health Fund indicated the Health Fund understood “actual cost of coverage” included health benefits and reasonable administrative expenses but excluded surplus or experience gains, and that in a 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1994 response to the report, HGEA and UPW leaders “did not
 
disagree” with that understanding. 
Royal State Group provided a lengthy response to these
 
arguments in its opposition to the State’s summary judgment
 motion, arguing, inter alia, that there was no admissible
 evidence that HGEA and UPW controlled, were related to, or
 conspired with any defendant, and that thus, “even under the
 statutory interpretation urged by the State, the ‘actual monthly
 cost of [the] coverage’ means the premiums paid to RSN and
 VEBAH[.]” Royal State Group also argued, inter alia, that there
 was no evidence that HGEA, UPW or their officers had any
 ownership interest in or obtained any payment from any defendant,
 that the opinions in the Biggs report were “incompetent,
 deliberately misleading and irrelevant,” and that the statutory
 language and legislative history are contrary to the State’s
 interpretation of “actual monthly cost of the coverage.” Royal
 State Group further argued that the State’s summary judgment
 motion mischaracterized the 1993 report regarding the Health Fund
 as well as the union’s responses, and that the State’s
 interpretation of “actual monthly cost of the coverage” was not
 supported by or conflicted with prior state Attorney General
 advisory opinions regarding the Health Fund. 
HGEA and UPW adopted the arguments made in Royal State
 
Group’s opposition to the State’s motion for summary judgment. 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
UPW further argued, inter alia, that the State failed to present
 
any admissible evidence of HGEA or UPW’s control over VEBAH,
 Royal State or Royal State entities, and that as such, the
 State’s definition of “actual monthly cost of the coverage” as it
 related to HGEA and UPW controlling or conspiring with insurance
 carriers should be disregarded. UPW also argued that the
 legislative history did not support the State’s definition of
 “actual monthly cost of the coverage.” Finally, UPW argued that
 the Health Fund had understood “actual monthly cost of the
 coverage” to mean premiums. UPW pointed to a March 24, 1994
 memorandum from the Health Fund administrator to “Executive
 Director, Employee Organization Plan,” instructing the unions on
 the information required in submitting porting requests.
19 The
 
memorandum provided, inter alia:
 
2.	 On each schedule, enter the following
information by benefit plan and enrollment type
in the appropriate box:
 
A.	 Name and Cost – enter plan name and
monthly premium for that benefit plan
 
B.	 Port – enter the public employer
contribution amount requested
 
The form letter included with the memorandum, which was
 
to be prepared on the union’s stationery and returned to the
 
Health Fund, stated:
 
Gentlemen:
 
19
 Royal State Group pointed to the same memorandum in its opposition
 
to the State’s motion for summary judgment. 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Re:	 REQUEST FOR TRANSMITTAL OF FY 1994-95 EMPLOYER
CONTRIBUTIONS
 
Effective July 1, 1994, please transmit or “port”
monthly employer contributions to our employee
organization plan in accordance with Sections 87-4,
87-22.3, 87-22.5 and 87-23, HRS, and our collective
bargaining agreements.
 
I certify that our Plan’s requested contributions as
shown on the attached Schedule(s) No. []______ are the
proper amounts to purchase benefits for our eligible
members under Sections 87-4(a), (b), and (c) or the
actual monthly cost of the coverage, whichever is
less.
 
UPW argued that therefore, “in practice the [Health
 
Fund] for years instructed the unions to provide schedules that
 
stated ‘the proper amounts to purchase benefits for their members
 . . . or the actual monthly cost of [the] coverage’ which meant
 the premiums charged.” 
In reply, the State disputed, inter alia, the
 
defendants’ contention that there was a lack of admissible
 evidence, and stated that in any event, the issue to be resolved
 was the definition of “actual cost” rather than factual issues. 
On July 9, 2009, the circuit court issued an Order
 
Denying Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and Granting
 Summary Judgment Against Plaintiffs. The order stated, in
 relevant part, the following:
 
4.	 . . . [T]he Court has before it, as admissible
evidence, prior Attorney General interpretations
of the law which referred to cost as the premium
and, among other things, the forms that the
Administrator of the [Health Fund] required the
Defendants to use to certify the cost every
year, indicating that the cost referred to the
premium;
 
5.	 In addition, in interpreting a statute, the
Court must give meaning that appears clear from
 
-30­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Legislative history and the language of the
statute itself, in a common sense approach;
 
6.	 The Court finds and concludes that the Alleged
Meaning asserted by Plaintiffs is NOT correct;
 
7.	 Based upon Flint v. MacKenzie, 53 Haw. 672[, 501
P.2d 357] (1972) and Cordero v. Burns, 7 Haw.
App. 463[, 776 P.2d 411] ([] 1989), there being
no genuine issue of material fact in this Rule
56 HRCP motion to interpret statutory language,
no good purpose would be served by requiring a
cross motion for summary judgment and instead,
in the interest of judicial economy, efficiency
and integrity and consistency of ruling, the
Court GRANTS summary judgment AGAINST Plaintiffs
and in favor of all of the Defendants, that the
term “actual monthly cost of [the] coverage” as
used in HRS Sections 87-22.3, -22.5, and -23
(repealed 2003) means the premium charged by and
paid to the carrier.
 
The circuit court entered judgment against the State on
 
September 29, 2008.20
 
C.	 ICA Appeal
 
On September 11, 2008, the State timely filed its
 
notice of appeal to the ICA.21 On appeal, the State raised five
 
points of error. Relevant to the issues before this court, the
 
State argued that the circuit court erred when it interpreted the
 term “actual monthly cost of the coverage” from HRS §§ 87-22.3,
 87-22.5, and 87-23 to mean “the premium charged by and paid to
 the carrier[.]” The State asserted that the definition of
 “actual monthly cost of the coverage” should “require an arm’s­length transaction and consideration of refunds, rate credits,
 
20
 Royal State Group, UPW, and HGEA sought attorney’s fees, which the
 
circuit court denied.  The State moved to require Royal State Group and UPW to
pay Samuel Biggs reasonable fees for preparing and appearing at Biggs’
deposition.  The circuit court denied the State’s motion. 
21
 Royal State Group cross-appealed, arguing that the circuit court
 
erred in denying them an award of attorney’s fees and costs.  Fees and costs
 are not at issue before this court.
 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and reimbursements, and reasonable administrative costs, in
 
determining the actual cost of coverage.” The State also argued
 that the circuit court erred when it denied the State leave to
 file a second amended complaint and “rewrote” the State’s
 complaint. 
The ICA affirmed in part and vacated in part the
 
circuit court’s judgment. Relevant to the issues before us, the
 ICA majority concluded that the circuit court did not err when it
 interpreted “actual monthly cost of the coverage” to mean “the
 premium charged by and paid to the [insurance] carrier” for the
 union-sponsored coverage. (Alteration in original). The ICA
 majority first noted that there was no statutory definition of
 “actual cost of the coverage” in chapter 87, and thus relied on
 the dictionary definitions of “actual” as “[e]xisting in fact;
 real” and “cost” as “[t]he amount paid or charged for something;
 price or expenditure.” (Alterations in original). The ICA
 majority also stated that “coverage” plainly referred to the
 insurance coverage provided to the state employee participating
 in the union’s plan. Although the ICA majority found no
 ambiguity in “actual cost of coverage,” it looked to the
 legislative history of chapter 87 and stated that nothing in the
 legislative history “even remotely suggests that the Legislature
 intended a meaning other than the plain meaning of ‘actual
 cost.’” The ICA majority acknowledged the State’s argument that
 
-32­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the premiums charged did not reflect the “actual value” of the
 
coverage provided, but stated that “[a]lthough the State’s money-
saving goal is laudable, this court simply cannot rewrite the
 Health Fund statute in order to drive down the State’s expense
 stemming from the union-sponsored coverage.” The ICA majority
 also stated:
 
The State is not alleging that the ported funds
exceeded the cost of Health Fund-provided coverage. 
Nor is the State alleging that the ported funds
exceeded the actual amounts that the unions paid to
the insurance carriers.  Instead, the State is
suggesting that the unions paid too much for the
coverage because of the close ties between the unions
and the insurers.  The State’s theory of legal
liability based on a violation of Chapter 87, however,
is untethered from the plain language of the statutes
and the State’s suggested interpretation is
unsupported by the legislative history, except for the
general aspiration that the union-sponsored plans
might be less expensive than the Health Fund-sponsored
plans.  Additional limitations, checks, and/or
restraints certainly could have been written into the
statute, but they were not.
 
The ICA majority further stated that in light of its
 
rejection of the State’s interpretation of the “actual cost of
 
coverage,” the issue of whether the circuit court erred when it
 denied the State leave to file a second amended complaint and
 “rewrote” the State’s complaint was no longer justiciable. The
 ICA majority therefore affirmed the circuit court’s judgment with
respect to its interpretation of the term “actual monthly cost of
the coverage,” and declined to reach the issues raised with
 regard to the State’s proposed second amended complaint. 
  
In his concurring and dissenting opinion, Chief Judge
 
Nakamura disagreed with the majority’s interpretation of “actual
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
monthly cost of the coverage.” Judge Nakamura stated that the
 
circuit court’s interpretation that “actual monthly cost of
 coverage” meant “the premium charged by and paid to the carrier”
 was too restrictive because it did not allow for “the possibility
 that the premium charged and paid could be tainted by bad faith,
 collusion, or fraud.” Judge Nakamura stated that the circuit
 court’s interpretation “should have been qualified by the proviso
 that ‘actual monthly cost of coverage’ means ‘the premium charged
 by and paid to the carrier,’ except if the premium charged was
 determined in bad faith or through fraud.” Judge Nakamura stated
 that the background and history of the Health Fund showed that
 the legislature intended to “provide public employees with health
 and life insurance benefits in a manner that was economical and
 cost-effective to both public employers and employees.” Judge
 Nakamura also stated that the legislative history of the Health
 Fund did not suggest a legislative intent that public funds be
 “wasted or spent to cover amounts determined fraudulently or in
 bad faith[,]” and that thus, interpreting the phrase “actual
 monthly cost of coverage” to mean “the premium charged by and
 paid to the carrier” without an exception for premiums charged
 and paid as a result of “bad faith, collusion, or fraud, would
 lead to an absurd and unjust result.” 
Judge Nakamura also noted that at the time the
 
legislature adopted the phrase “actual monthly cost of coverage,”
 
-34­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Black’s Law Dictionary defined “actual cost” to mean: “The
 
actual price paid for goods by a party, in the case of a real
 bona fide purchase, which may not necessarily be the market value
 of the goods. It is a general or descriptive term which may have
 
varying meanings according to the circumstances in which it is
 used.” Black’s Law Dictionary at 33 (5th ed. 1979) (emphases in
 
original). Judge Nakamura further noted that the term “bona
 fide” was defined as “[i]n or with good faith; honestly, openly,
 and sincerely; without deceit or fraud.” Id. at 160. Judge
 
Nakamura stated that therefore, considering the above dictionary
 definitions and the purpose of the Health Fund statute, the
 circuit court’s interpretation of “actual monthly cost of
 coverage” was too restrictive because it did not account for the
 possibility that the premium charged by and paid to the carrier
 could be the result of bad faith or fraud. 
While expressing no opinion on the validity of the
 
State’s allegations, Judge Nakamura also concluded that the State
 should be permitted to amend its complaint “to pursue its
 allegations of fraud and to provide the proper context and
 background for evaluating the ‘actual monthly cost of coverage’
 limitation and the State's claims for relief.”
22
 
22
 In response to Judge Nakamura’s dissent, the ICA majority stated
 
that while it shared Judge Nakamura’s concern that the legislature did not
intend to pay for the cost of fraudulently set premiums, that was not an
accurate or fair characterization of the issues before the ICA.  The ICA
 majority noted that chapter 87 established limits on ported funds using the
lesser of either the amount determined by collective bargaining, or the actual
(continued...)
 
-35­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ICA entered its judgment on appeal on April 26,
 
2013. The State timely filed an application for writ of
 
certiorari. 
III. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Statutory Interpretation
 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai' i 53, 67, 
283 P.3d 60, 74 (2012) (citation omitted). 
B.	 Motion for Leave to Amend the Complaint
 
“Orders denying motions for leave to amend a complaint 
are reviewed for an abuse of discretion.” Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal 
State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai' i 159, 163, 172 P.3d 471, 475 (2007) 
(citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion
 
A.	 “Actual monthly cost of the coverage” means the premium
charged by and paid to the insurance carrier
 
The State argues that the ICA erred when it interpreted
 
“actual monthly cost of the coverage” to mean the premium charged
 
by and paid to the insurance carrier. The State argues that
 “actual [monthly] cost of coverage” must be interpreted as a
 “bona fide transaction,” or premiums paid in “arm’s length
 
22(...continued)
month
ly cost of the coverage.  The ICA majority stated that “nothing in the
statute or legislative history [] required [] unions to seek the hoped-for
savings, or prohibited any particular level of fees and/or profit by the
unions’ insurers, or prohibited related-party transactions, or required ‘bona
fide negotiations,’ bidding, or other procurement procedures.”  (Emphases in
 original).
 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
transactions, less any refunds, rate credits, and reimbursements,
 
. . . plus reasonable administrative fees and profits[.]” In
 other words, “actual monthly cost of the coverage” means “the
 real cost for the coverage, that is, the cost in a legitimate
 arm’s-length business transaction.” The State contends that the
 ICA erred in two ways. First, “the ICA acted as if the statute
 had used the word ‘premium’ and gave the phrase ‘actual cost’ no
 meaning.” Second, the State argues that the ICA’s result is
 “illogical” because “[i]t is absurd to suggest that the price set
 by the purveyor of something always and necessarily reflects its
 actual value.” As set forth below, the ICA majority did not err.
 
It is well-established that the “fundamental starting 
point for statutory interpretation is the language of the statute itself.” State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 
1177 (2009) (quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of the City & County of Honolulu, 114 Hawai' i 184, 
193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)). “[W]here the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning.” Id. Moreover, “implicit in the task 
of statutory construction is our foremost obligation to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.” Id. “[A] rational, sensible and practicable 
interpretation of [a statute] is preferred to one which is 
-37­   
shall pay a    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unreasonable or impracticable[.]” Haw. Gov’t Emps. Ass’n, AFSCME 
Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai' i 197, 207 n.16, 239 P.3d 
1, 12 n.16 (2010) (citation omitted) (brackets in original). 
As stated above, HRS § 87-22.3 required the Health Fund
 
to provide health benefits to public employees in the following
 
manner: 
(1) For those employee-beneficiaries who are not
participating in a health benefits plan of anemployee organization . . . , the [Health Fund]shall establish health benefits plans and therequirements for eligibility under the healthbenefits plans; or 
(2) 
For e
mployee-beneficiaries who participate in
the health benefits plan of an employeeorganization, the [Health Fund] 
monthly contribution for each employee-beneficiary, in the amount provided in section87-4(a), or the actual monthly cost of the
coverage , whichever is less, towards the
purchase of health benefits under the healthbenefits plan of an employee organization. 
(Emphases added).
 
Similar language appeared in HRS § 87-22.5 (determining
 
dental plan benefits) and HRS § 87-23 (determining group life
 
benefits). Under this statutory scheme, the Health Fund’s
 contribution ported to the union would be either (1) the public
 employer’s contribution for the cost of insurance, as determined
 by the applicable collective bargaining agreement, see HRS § 87­
-38­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4;23 or (2) the actual monthly cost of the coverage, whichever is
 
less. 
As a preliminary matter, HRS chapter 87 did not define
 
“actual monthly cost of the coverage.” 
However, “it is well-
settled that, when a term is not statutorily defined, this court
 
may resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one
 way to determine its ordinary meaning.” State v. Jing Hua Xiao,
 
123 Hawai' i 251, 259, 231 P.3d 968, 976 (2010); 
 see also Gillan 
v. Gov't Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai' i 109, 115, 194 P.3d 1071, 
1077 (2008). The word “actual” is defined in part as “existing
 in fact or reality” or “existing or occurring at the time[.]” 
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 13 (11th ed. 2009). 
23 HRS § 87-4 (1993) provided, in relevant part, that the State and
 
the several counties pay to the Health Fund a monthly contribution equal to:
 
(a) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C or
specified in the applicable public sector collective
bargaining agreement , whichever is appropriate, for
each of their respective employee-beneficiaries and
employee-beneficiaries with dependent-beneficiaries,
which shall be used toward the payment of costs of a
health benefits plan; provided that the monthly
contribution shall not exceed the actual cost of a
 health benefits plan. . . . 
(b) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C or
specified in the applicable public sector collective
bargaining agreement , whichever is appropriate, for
each child who has not attained the age of nineteen of
all employee-beneficiaries who are enrolled for dental
benefits.  The contributions shall be used towards the
 payment of costs of dental benefits of a health
benefits plan. . . .
(c) . . . the amount established under chapter 89C or
specified in the applicable public sector collective
bargaining agreement , whichever is applicable, for
each of their respective employees, to be used towards
the payment of group life insurance benefits for each
employee.
 
(Emphases added). 
-39­   
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“Cost” is defined as “the amount or equivalent paid or charged
 
for something; price[.]” Id. at 282. “Coverage” is defined in
 
the insurance context as “inclusion within the scope of an
 insurance policy or protective plan[.]” Id. at 288. 
Accordingly, the foregoing ordinary meanings support the circuit
 court’s and the ICA’s interpretation; that is, that “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage” means the monthly premium that was
 in fact charged and paid for insurance.
24
 
Moreover, the plain language of the statute is
 
completely devoid of any of the restrictions or requirements
 regarding the monthly cost of coverage that the State advocates
 for, such as express limits on the reasonableness of profits or
 administrative expenses. As the ICA majority pointed out, the
 legislature could easily have written such express limitations,
 checks, and/or restraints into the Health Fund statutes. 
However, lawmakers did not do so. 
Nonetheless, the State argues that the circuit court’s
 
interpretation is contrary to the legislature’s intent, and that
 the legislative history of the phrase “actual monthly cost of the 
coverage” was meant to decrease the public employers’ cost of
 providing insurance. 
24
 This interpretation does not render the word “actual” superfluous. 
See dissenting opinion at 6.  The word “actual” indicates that the ported
amount constituted the cost that was, in fact , charged and paid for the
insurance.
 
-40­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, upon close inspection, the legislative history 
of the Health Fund and the statutory phrase “actual monthly cost 
of the coverage” does not support the State’s interpretation. Rather, an examination of the relevant history of the Health Fund supports the view that the legislature intended for “actual monthly cost of the coverage” to mean the premium charged. Indeed, as set forth below, this interpretation is supported by viewing the statutory language “in the context of the entire statute and constru[ing] it in a manner consistent with its purpose.” Lingle v. Haw. Gov’t Emps. Ass’n, AFSCME, Local 152, 
AFL-CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (citation 
omitted). 
The Health Fund was established in 1961 via Act 146 to
 
provide employee-beneficiaries and dependents with a health 
benefits plan. 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, § 1 at 191-92. As
 shown in Act 146 and subsequent amendments to the Health Fund
 law, the legislature had anticipated that the insurance policies
 would generate refunds. Indeed, Act 146 provided that the health
 trust fund “shall consist of contributions, interest, income,
 dividends, refunds, rate credits and other returns.” Id. at 192
 
(emphasis added). The State’s monthly contribution to the Health
 Fund was $3 for each employee-beneficiary and $10 for each
 employee with a dependent. Id. Each employee-beneficiary was to
 
make a monthly contribution equal to the “difference between the
 
-41­    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
monthly charge of the health benefits plan selected by the
employee-beneficiary and the State’s contribution to the fund.” 
Id. at 193.  
In 1967, the Health Fund added group life insurance
benefits.  See 1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 110, § 3 at 101.  This
legislation, enacted as Act 110, also introduced the concept ofporting, and began the porting program with respect to group lifeinsurance.  Id.  Specifically, Act 110 provided that the HealthFund would provide group life insurance benefits to employees inthe following manner:
   (a) For those employees who are not participating
in a group life insurance program of an employeeorganization (hereafter “nonparticipating employees”),the board shall determine a group life insurancebenefit plan and eligibility requirements for suchbenefits based upon the contribution of $2.25 permonth per employee.  Any rate credit or reimbursement
from any carrier of any earnings or interest derivedfrom the group life insurance plan of nonparticipatingemployees shall be used to improve the group lifeinsurance benefits of nonparticipating employees.
   (b) For those employees who participate in a grouplife insurance program of an employee organization,the board shall allot $2.25 per month towards thepurchase of group life insurance benefits under thegroup life insurance program of an employeeorganization, provided that no employee shall havemore than one allotment of $2.25 per month.
Id. (emphases added).
In approving the above legislation, the Senate Ways and
Means Committee explained that for employees not participating in
union group life insurance programs, the Health Fund would “allot$2.25 each month for each employee towards the cost of employees’premiums.”  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 922, in 1967 Senate Journal,at 1256 (emphasis added).  Act 110 also required that “[a]ny rate
-42-       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
credit or reimbursement” from the insurance carrier for the
 
Health Fund group life insurance plan be used to “improve the
 group life insurance benefits” of employees not participating in
 a union plan. 1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 110, § 3 at 101. 
Notably, although the above language demonstrates the
 legislature’s awareness that refunds or reimbursements could be
 realized from certain insurance contracts, lawmakers did not
 insert any requirements or restrictions with regard to any
 refunds or reimbursements associated with union plans. 
In 1970, the legislature amended chapter 87 to increase
 
the State’s contributions to the Health Fund, “provided, that the
 monthly contribution shall not exceed the actual cost of a health
 benefits plan.” 1970 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 154, § 1 at 277
 (emphasis added). The legislative history of this measure
 contains several references to “premiums.” In passing this
 legislation, lawmakers noted that with raises in insurance rates,
 some employees were paying about “two thirds of the premiums[,]”
 a result that was contrary to the intent of the program, which
 began with the government and employees sharing the premium cost
 on a “50-50 basis[.]” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 661-70, in 1970
 House Journal, at 1121 (emphasis added); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
 728-70, in 1970 Senate Journal, at 1322 (emphasis added). Early
 drafts of the bill required the State to make monthly
 contributions equal to 50 percent of “the total cost of the
 
-43­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
premium” for health plans, “provided that the State shall pay as
 
its share . . . not more than 50 percent of the premium of the
 lowest available medical plan.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 93-70,
 in 1970 Senate Journal, at 1054 (emphases added). Accordingly,
 the legislative history of the 1970 amendment suggests that the
 legislature equated the “cost” of a plan with the premiums
 charged for it.
 
The legislature first added the phrase at issue in the
 
instant case – actual monthly cost of the coverage – to chapter
 87 in 1980, with regard to children’s dental benefits. This
 legislation, enacted as Act 61, introduced the concept that the
 porting amount for certain plans would equal the lesser of either
 the collectively bargained-for amount or the actual monthly cost
 of the coverage. See 1980 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 61, § 1 at 77. 
The State relied heavily on the legislative history of
 
Act 61 in its opening brief. Specifically, the State argued that
 the legislative history demonstrates that the “‘actual [monthly]
 cost of coverage’ limitation on the amount of ported funds was
 intended to lower the cost of providing insurance.” (Emphasis in
 original). However, upon close examination, the legislative
 history of the phrase “actual monthly cost of the coverage”
 suggests that the legislature had several purposes in mind and
 that its cost savings considerations were more modest than the
 State suggests.
 
-44­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The purpose of Act 61 was to allow the Health Fund to
 
port funds for children’s dental benefits to a union plan. See
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 463, in 1979 House Journal, at 1359; H.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 195, in 1979 House Journal, at 1233; S.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 893-80, in 1980 Senate Journal, at 1448. 
Specifically, Act 61 required the Health Fund to provide dental
 plan benefits to employees’ children in the following manner, in
 relevant part:
 
(1)	 For those children of employees who are not
participating in a dental program of an employee
organization (hereafter called “nonparticipating
employees”), the [Health Fund] shall determine a
dental plan and eligibility requirements for
such benefits based upon a statutory monthly
contribution per enrolled child.  Any rate
credit or reimbursement from any carrier of any
earnings or interest derived from the dental
plan of nonparticipating employees shall be used
to improve the dental plan benefits of
25
 [ ]
 nonparticipating employees.
(2)	 For those children of employees who participate
in the dental program of an employee
organization, the [Health Fund] shall allot the
statutory monthly contribution per enrolled
child or the actual monthly cost of the child’s
coverage, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of dental plan benefits under the
dental program of an employee organization;
provided that no enrolled child shall have more
than one allotment a month.
 
25 In 1997, the legislature deleted provisions requiring that rate
 
credits or reimbursements with regard to Health Fund children’s dental plans
and life insurance plans be used to improve the benefits of such plans.   
1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 276, §§ 3-4, at 610-11.  The legislature instead
provided that rate credits or reimbursements from carriers or self-insured
plans may be used to “stabilize health benefits plan or long-term care
benefits plan rates[.]”  Id. § 1, at 609.  The legislature further provided
that any rate credits or reimbursements in excess of funds used to stabilize
such plans must be returned to the State or county if the moneys are returned
from, inter alia, a plan that provides health benefits to employees, so long
as “the amount returned to the general fund shall be only that portion
financed by the State or by the county on behalf of the employee.”  Id. § 1,
 at 609-10.
 
-45­   
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. (emphases added).
 
The Senate Ways and Means Committee expressly stated
 
that the purpose of the bill was “to allow the public employees’
 
health fund to transmit employer contributions for a public
 employee’s child . . . to the dental plan of an employee
 organization if the employee participates in the employee
 organization’s dental plan.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 893-80, in
 1980 Senate Journal, at 1448. This was necessary because the
 Health Fund at that time provided dental benefits to children of
 public employees, but not to public employees themselves, which
 prompted some unions to offer dental plans for their employee
 members. Id. As a result, employees and their children had
 
separate dental plans. The Senate Ways and Means Committee
 stated that authorizing the porting of “employers’ statutory
 contributions for children to the dental plan of their employee-
parents” would facilitate both employee-parents and their
 children to be covered by the same dental plan. Id. 
The Senate Ways and Means Committee report then stated
 
that the legislation “may also have the effect of lowering
 employer contributions.” Id. (emphasis added). The committee
 
noted that the legislation provided that,
 
the contributions to the employee organizations’
dental plans must be the lesser of the statutory
contribution amount or the actual cost.  If the actual
 cost is lower than the statutory amount, the employer
contributions will be lower.  The bill provides that
employer contributions cannot exceed the statutory
amount even if the actual cost  is higher.
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id.
 
The committee further noted testimony from, inter alia,
 
the Health Fund board that “this method of distributing employer
 
contributions for dental benefits is similar to the method
 presently used under the fund’s group life insurance plan.” Id.
 
At the time, the Health Fund was required to port to the unions
 $2.25 a month – the public employers’ monthly contribution – for
 employees participating in a union life insurance plan. HRS
 § 87-23 (1985). 
The committee also noted testimony from one employee
 
union that “employer contributions may in fact be reduced if a
 family dental plan, instead of an exclusively parent plan, could
 be organized.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 893-80, in 1980 Senate
 Journal, at 1448. Ultimately, the committee found the
 legislation “favorable” because: (1) it may be “economically
 beneficial to public employees”; (2) it does not significantly
 impact upon the Health Fund’s operations; and (3) “[i]t does not
 require additional employer contributions and may potentially
 decrease employer contributions.” Id. (emphases added).
 
According to the State, the Senate Ways and Means
 
Committee report “shows that the Legislature clearly contemplated
 an ‘actual cost’ that was less than [the] amount for porting set
 by statute — an impossibility if the ‘actual cost’ is deemed to
 always equal a premium set to match the porting amount.” This
 
-47­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasoning, however, is flawed. First, as stated above, the
 
committee reports, including that of the Senate Ways and Means
 Committee, demonstrate that the primary purpose of the
 portability concept in Act 61 was not to reduce employer
 contributions, but to allow employees and their children to be
 covered under the same plan. See, e.g., S. Stand. Comm. Report
 
No. 893-80, in 1980 Senate Journal, at 1448. The potential
 reduction in employer contributions was considered a secondary,
 possible result. See id. (“The bill may also have the effect of
 
lowering employer contributions. . . . [I]t does not require
 additional employer contributions and may potentially decrease
 employer contributions.” (emphases added)). Second, the Senate
 Ways and Means Committee report contemplated not only that the
 actual monthly cost of the coverage could be lower than the
 statutory amount, but that the actual monthly cost could in fact
 be higher than the employer contribution. Id. (“The bill
 
provides that the employer contribution cannot exceed the
 statutory amount even if the actual cost is higher.” (emphasis
 added)). Indeed, the statute provided that the ported amount
 would equal the lesser of the statutory employer contribution or
 the “actual monthly cost of the child’s coverage[.]” 1980 Haw.
 Sess. Laws Act 61, § 1, at 77.
 
The State also quoted a House Public Employment and
 
Government Operations Committee report supporting the above
 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legislation as stating that “providing the ported funds would
 
allow employees to access children’s dental coverage ‘at a much
 lower cost than would otherwise be possible.’”
26 (Citing H.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 195, in 1979 House Journal, at 1233). This
 language in the committee report, however, does not support the
 State’s position because it does not relate to the “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage,” but rather refers to the
 anticipated effect that the ported employer contribution would
 have on a potential family dental plan. Indeed, the committee
 report, read in its proper context, does not support the State’s
 interpretation and in fact includes a reference to premiums:
 
Your Committee finds that the aforesaid proposal
will make available through the unions a family dental
plan at a reasonable cost.  Since the premium  relating
to the children’s portion will be contributed by the
employer, insurance companies will be willing to offer
a lower rate, thereby providing employees with a
single plan at a much lower cost than would otherwise
be possible.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 195, in 1979 House Journal, at 1233
 
(emphasis added). 
The legislative history of other provisions in chapter
 
87 that employed the phrase “actual monthly cost of the coverage”
 also does not support the State’s position. Specifically, the
 history of subsequent legislation adding “actual monthly cost of
 
26
 The State also relies on language from legislative committee
 
reports stating that the foregoing legislation would have “no significant
impact in terms of cost or program operations . . . as the amount of dental
contributions is limited by statute.”  (Citing H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 463,
 in 1979 House Journal, at 1359).  This language, however, is unpersuasive. 
Indeed, nothing in this language indicates that dental contributions would
decrease; rather, Health Fund officials expected “no significant” change. 
-49­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the coverage” language elsewhere in chapter 87 does not suggest
 
that the legislature intended a meaning other than the monthly
 premiums paid for such coverage. In 1984, the legislature
 incorporated similar “actual monthly cost of the coverage”
 language into legislation that established porting for health
 benefits plans.
27 1984 Haw. Sess. Laws. Act 71, § 1 at 123. The
 
House Finance Committee stated that the purpose of that
 legislation was to authorize the Health Fund to port monthly
 contributions “towards the purchase of health benefits” under
 union plans. H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 734-84, in 1984 House
 Journal, at 1224. The legislative history does not indicate that
 the purpose of the legislation was to reduce employer
 contributions; rather, the legislature’s intent appeared to focus
 
27 Specifically, Act 71 required the Health Fund to provide health
 
benefits to employees in following manner:
 
(1) 	For [employees not participating in a union
health benefits plan], the [Health Fund] shall
establish health benefits plans and the
requirements for eligibility under the health
benefits plans.   Any rate credit or
reimbursement from any carrier of any earnings
or interest derived from the health benefits
 plans of nonparticipating employee-beneficiaries
shall be used to improve the respective health
benefits plans of nonparticipating employee-
beneficiaries or to reduce the employee­beneficiary’s respective share of monthly
contributions to a health plan .
 
(2) 	For [employees participating in a union health
benefits plan], the [Health Fund] shall pay a
monthly contribution for each employee-
beneficiary, in the amount provided in
section 87-4(a), or the actual monthly cost of
the coverage, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of health benefits under the [union]
health benefits plan[.]
 
1984 Haw. Sess. Laws. Act 71, § 1 at 123 (emphases added).
 
-50­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on providing public employees a variety of health benefits plans
 
to choose from. See, e.g., id. (concurring with “the intent of
 
this bill to allow employee[-]beneficiaries a choice of health
 benefit plans, other than those sponsored by the . . . Health
 Fund, to meet their medical care needs”); S. Stand. Comm. Rep.
 No. 352-84, in 1984 Senate Journal, at 1150 (“Your Committee
 finds that this bill will expand the options of employee-
beneficiaries by making available a wider variety of health
 benefits plans. Your Committee considers the expansion good
 public policy.”).
 
Finally, in 1987, the legislature incorporated the
 
“actual monthly cost of the coverage” language to the existing
 life insurance plan porting program. 1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 32, § 1 at 49. Act 32 deleted the specific dollar figure of
 $2.25 for the employer contributions for life insurance plans,
 and instead provided that employer contributions for employees
 participating in union plans total the collective bargained
 amount “or the actual monthly cost of the coverage, whichever is
 less[.]”
28 Id. 
28 Specifically, Act 32 required the Health Fund to provide group
 
life insurance to employees in the following manner:
 
(1)	 For those employees [not participating in a
union group life plan], the [Health Fund] shall
determine a group life insurance benefit plan
and eligibility requirements for such benefits
based upon the based upon the amount to be
contributed per employee under section 87-4(c).  
Any rate credit or reimbursement from any
carrier of any earnings or interest derived from
(continued...)
 
-51­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Again, the legislative history does not reflect an
 
understanding by lawmakers that “actual monthly cost of the
 
coverage” meant anything other than premiums. Rather, the
 purpose of Act 32 was to “conform the language pertaining to
 group life insurance benefits . . . to other sections on employee
 benefit plans governing” health benefits and dental plan
 benefits.
29 See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1163, in 1987 House
 
Journal, at 1655; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 386, in 1987 Senate
 Journal, at 1050. 
Accordingly, contrary to the State’s contention, the
 
legislative history of the phrase “actual monthly cost of the
 coverage” does not suggest that the legislature intended a
 
28(...continued)
the g
roup life insurance plan of
nonparticipating employees shall be used to
improve the group life insurance benefits of
nonparticipating employees.
 
(2)	 For those employees [participating in a union
group life insurance plan], the [Health Fund]
shall pay a monthly contribution for each
employee, in the amount determined under section
87-4(c), or the actual monthly cost of the
coverage, whichever is less, towards the
purchase of the group life insurance benefits
under [the union plan].
 
Id. (emphases added).
 
29 The House Finance Committee noted that eliminating the fixed-
dollar contribution amounts
 
enables the Board to purchase group life insurance
under a pooled concept for basic benefits and a
supplemental plan for excess benefits as may be
required by future collective bargaining negotiations. 
By providing the Board with greater flexibility, this
bill will facilitate the more efficient administration
 of group life insurance programs for public employees.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1163, in 1987 House Journal, at 1655.
 
-52­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meaning other than the monthly insurance premium. Although the
 
legislature hoped that savings would result if the union plans
 were priced lower than the Health Fund’s plans, it did not
 mandate that result or include provisions requiring the unions
 and insurers to achieve it. 
As stated above, the State essentially contends that
 
“actual monthly cost of the coverage” was meant to be a
 restriction on the profits and administrative expenses of the
 insurers that provided the coverage. However, such a reading is
 not supported by the plain language of the statute or the
 legislative history, which this court is bound to follow. As the
 ICA majority noted, the legislature could have written express
 restrictions, qualifiers and/or limitations in chapter 87, but
 did not do so. For example, the legislature could have defined
 “actual monthly cost of the coverage” as excluding a certain
 level of profits and administrative fees of insurers. However,
 the legislature did not. Moreover, the language of the statutes
 in chapter 87 demonstrates an awareness by the legislature that
 certain types of insurance plans could generate rebates and
 reimbursements, see, e.g., 1980 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 61, § 1 at
 77, but the legislature chose not to require their return with
 respect to the union plans. 
This court has stated that 
[w]e cannot change the language of the statute, supply
a want, or enlarge upon it in order to make it suit a
certain state of facts.  We do not legislate or make
 
-53­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
laws.  Even when the court is convinced in its own
 
mind that the [l]egislature really meant and intended
something not expressed by the phraseology of the
[a]ct, it has no authority to depart from the plain
meaning of the language used.
 
State v. Klie, 116 Hawai' i 519, 525, 174 P.3d 358, 364 (2007) 
(brackets in original) (quoting State v. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai' i 
409, 413, 70 P.3d 635, 639 (2003)); Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co. 
Ltd., 76 Hawai' i 454, 467, 879 P.2d 1037, 1050 (1994) (Klein, J., 
concurring and dissenting) (“[W]e are not at liberty to interpret a statutory provision to further a policy that is not articulated in either the language of the statute or the relevant legislative history, even if we believe that such an interpretation would produce a more beneficent result, for ‘[t]he Court’s function in the application and interpretation of such laws must be carefully limited to avoid encroaching on the power of [the legislature] to determine policies and make laws to carry them out.’” (brackets in original) (citation omitted)). Accordingly, the State’s proposed interpretation fails. 
Moreover, adopting the State’s interpretation would
 
lead to illogical results. The statutory language at issue is
 “actual monthly cost of the coverage” rather than simply “actual
 cost of coverage.”
30 See HRS § 87-22.3. The inclusion of the
 
word “monthly” supports the understanding that the legislature
 intended “actual monthly cost of the coverage” to mean premiums
 
30
 The State’s arguments largely appear to use the phrase “actual
 
cost of coverage” rather than “actual monthly cost of the coverage.” 
-54­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
charged. Indeed, it would appear illogical to apply the State’s
 
definition – for example, allowing for “reasonable administrative
 fees and profits” – on a monthly basis, since the amount of such
 items may not be known until the completion of the relevant
 fiscal year.
31
 
We recognize that the State has raised serious and
 
troubling allegations regarding improper financial dealings
 amongst the defendants. However, the State chose to tie its
 allegations to the statutes, and conceded at oral argument that
 its claims, including conspiracy to defraud the State, depended
 entirely on its interpretation of the statutory phrase “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage.”
32 If, as the State suggests, the
 
defendants conspired to charge inflated premiums in order to make
 improper payments to individuals, these facts could constitute a
 
31 Moreover, the State’s reliance on case law for the proposition
 
that the phrase “actual cost” does not mean “premium” in the insurance context
also fails.  For example, the State cited United States v. Am. Bar Endowment,
477 U.S. 105, 108 (1986), for the proposition that “if, as is uniformly true,
the insurance company’s actual cost of providing insurance to the group is
lower than the premium paid in a given year, the insurance company pays a
refund of the excess[.]”  However, this reasoning is unpersuasive insofar as
the “actual cost” in the aforementioned case refers to the insurer’s cost of
 providing insurance.  In the instant case, however, the statutory phrase at
issue – “actual monthly cost of the coverage” – contemplates the cost to the
policyholder, not the insurer.  Additionally, the case law the State relied
on, such as American Bar Endowment, describes so-called “experience-rated”
insurance contracts, in which “the cost of insurance to the group is based on
that group’s claims experience, rather than general actuarial tables.”  Am.
 
Bar Endowment, 477 U.S. at 107-08.  It is undisputed that the supplemental
plans at issue in the instant case are not experience-rated.
 
32
 Moreover, at oral argument, the State was unwilling to confirm
 
that there was a good faith basis for the allegations in the complaint that
might support a common law fraud claim.
 
-55­   
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
claim for conspiracy to defraud, irrespective of the statutory
 
definition of “actual monthly cost of the coverage.”33
 
However, that is not the theory that the State chose to
 
pursue here, and we cannot rewrite the State’s complaint to
 allege causes of action the State did not assert. The sole
 question here, as framed by the State, is a narrow one: do such
 allegations constitute a violation of the provisions of chapter
 87? The answer to that question is no. 
Chapter 87 limited the porting of funds to the lesser
 
of either the cost of Health Fund-provided coverage pursuant to
 collective bargaining agreements, or the “actual monthly cost” of
 the coverage under the union benefits plans. The State has not
 alleged that the ported funds exceeded this statutory limit. 
Rather, the State’s allegations hinge on the suggestion that the
 unions paid too much for the insurance coverage. However,
 neither the statutory language nor legislative history suggested
 that the union plans were required to result in cost savings, or
 that a certain amount of administrative fees or profits were
 prohibited. Again, the legislature was free to impose
 restrictions or limits addressing the issues that the State
 complains of, but such restraints and requirements were not
 
33
 A claim for fraud involves “a knowing misrepresentation of the 
truth or concealment of a material fact to induce another to act to his or her 
detriment.”  Fisher v. Grove Farm Co., Inc., 123 Hawai 'i 82, 116, 230 P.3d 
382, 416 (2009).  Conspiracy to defraud requires a concerted action to defraud
by two or more persons or entities.  Id.
 
-56­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
written into the statutes, and the legislative history does not
 
reflect an intent to impose them. Indeed, the proper remedy with
 respect to the State’s concerns about the implementation of
 chapter 87 was legislative action, which ultimately occurred in
 2001 with the repeal of the Health Fund. See 2001 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 88, § 3, at 150.
 
Finally, we note that the dissent’s position that the
 
phrase “actual monthly cost of the coverage” must be interpreted
 as a prohibition against fraud is divorced from both the context
 in which the porting program arose and the procedural posture of
 this case. The dissent thereby constructs an argument that
 chapter 87 was designed to be an enforcement mechanism by which
 the State could police the relationships between employee
 organizations and insurers.
 
However, as explained in detail above, both the plain
 
language of the statute and its legislative history support the
 view that the legislature intended the phrase “actual monthly
 cost of the coverage” to mean the premium charged by and paid to
 the insurer. Certainly, the legislature would not have intended
 for the porting program to “embrace” fraud, collusion,
 embezzlement or bad faith. See dissenting opinion at 7-9. At
 
the same time, nothing in chapter 87 or its legislative history
 indicates this statute was intended to punish any such abuses by
 allowing the State to recover funds that were actually paid by
 
-57­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the unions for employee health benefits plans, but which the
 
State retrospectively viewed as excessive. Instead, the
 legislature imposed reasonable cost control measures by limiting
 the ported amount to the actual monthly cost of coverage or the
 amount negotiated through collective bargaining, whichever was
 less. HRS § 87-22.3. Additionally, the legislature presumably
 assumed that other remedies -- such as a common law fraud claim
 or criminal prosecution -- would deter further abuse. It is a
 cardinal canon of statutory interpretation that “this court
 cannot change the language of the statute, supply a want, or
 enlarge upon it in order to make it suit a certain state of
 facts. This is because we do not legislate or make laws.” State
 
v. Smith, 103 Hawai' i 228, 233, 81 P.3d 408, 413 (2003) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). Thus, it is not for this court to incorporate into HRS chapter 87 a prohibition against fraud, collusion, embezzlement or bad faith that does not otherwise exist. 
Similarly, the dissent’s reliance on HAR § 6-34-9 is
 
misplaced. Dissenting opinion at 9-11. That provision required
 the unions to “[m]aintain reasonable accounting and enrollment
 records,” and to “[p]ermit representatives of the board and the
 state comptroller to audit and examine its records that pertain
 to its health benefits plan.” HAR §§ 6-34-9(3)(A)-(B). The
 focus on “reasonable accounting and enrollment records” indicates
 
-58­   
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the Health Fund board was primarily concerned with whether
 
the ported funds were actually used to enroll employees in
 benefits plans. Additionally, although this provision allowed
 the board to audit the union’s records, it made no mention of the
 board’s ability to audit the insurer’s records to determine
 whether the “actual monthly cost of the coverage” was excessive,
 or fraudulently or collusively set. 
Additionally, article VII, section 4 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution does not support the dissent’s conclusion. See 
dissenting opinion at 11-13. Article VII, section 4 provides: “No tax shall be levied or appropriation of public money or property made, nor shall the public credit be used, directly or indirectly, except for a public purpose. . . . No grant of public money or property shall be made except pursuant to standards provided by law.” Respectfully, there are no allegations in the instant case that the porting program did not serve a public purpose, or that the legislature’s funding of that program did not comply with standards provided by law. Additionally, allowing the government to recover from the unions and the insurers on the ground that the porting expenditures ultimately did not serve a “public purpose” would indicate that the State is entitled to recover funds any time it concludes, post hoc, that an expenditure was ill conceived or did not achieve its intended goal of serving the public. 
-59­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Finally, we note again that, at oral argument, the
 
State was unable to articulate a cause of action for fraud
 
independent of its proffered interpretation of the phrase “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage” or to confirm that there was a good
 faith basis for the factual allegations of fraud contained in its
 complaint. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the circuit
 
court did not err in interpreting “actual monthly cost of the
 coverage” to mean the premium charged by the carrier.
 
B. Leave to Amend
 
The State argues that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by denying the State leave to file its second amended
 
complaint and by essentially “rewrit[ing]” the State’s complaint. 
Specifically, the State contends that this abuse of discretion
 occurred over the course of four developments in the proceedings,
 namely, when the circuit court 
(1) denied leave to file the second amended complaint
even though leave had been granted earlier to file a
broader complaint premised on the same central
allegations, (2) read the particularity requirement
incorrectly in HRCP [Rule] 9, (3) misused HRCP [Rule]
12(f) to rewrite the State’s complaint itself, and (4)
refused to allow the State to align its definition of
“actual cost of coverage” with the amendments the
court made to the complaint.
 
(Emphasis in original). 
Royal State Group, on the other hand, argues that the
 
circuit court acted within its discretion and that the court’s
 
orders throughout the litigation were a result of “persistent bad
 
-60­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
faith” by the State. Royal State Group also stated that even if
 
the circuit court abused its discretion, any errors would be
 harmless because the issue in the instant case was the
 interpretation of the statutes. 
As stated above, on January 18, 2006, the State sought
 
leave to file a second amended complaint. The proposed January
 2006 second amended complaint asserted ten causes of action,
 including conspiracy to defraud the State, interference with
 contract, assumpsit, false claims, restitution and constructive
 trust, equitable accounting, specific performance, injunction,
 unjust enrichment, and breach of fiduciary duty. On June 2,
 2006, the circuit court denied without prejudice the State’s
 motion for leave to file the second amended complaint. 
Specifically, the circuit court’s June 2, 2006 order (1) denied
 the motion without prejudice as to the proposed conspiracy to
 defraud the State claim on grounds that it failed to comply with
 HRCP Rule 9(b); (2) allowed the State to amend its complaint to
 seek a declaratory ruling regarding the meaning of “actual
 monthly cost of the coverage”; and (3) stated that if the State
 seeks a declaratory ruling, and the circuit court ruled
 “consistent with the theory underlying the proposed Second
 Amended Complaint,” the State may further seek leave to amend to
 assert its remaining claims. 
-61­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the circuit court’s
 
rulings with regard to amendment of the pleadings constituted an
 
abuse of discretion, the State cannot show that it was prejudiced
 as a result. Specifically, the State concedes that its remaining
 causes of action in its proposed second amended complaint would
 not have survived the circuit court’s declaratory judgment
 ruling.
34 Indeed, the State has not identified any of its claims
 
as being viable independent from the statutory interpretation
 issue, nor has the State urged this court to remand any of its
 remaining claims even in the event that the circuit court’s
 statutory interpretation is upheld.
 
Therefore, in light of our affirming the circuit
 
court’s interpretation of “actual monthly cost of the coverage,”
 we do not address the State’s second question presented.
35
 
V. Conclusion
 
In sum, the circuit court did not err in interpreting
 
the term “actual monthly cost of the coverage,” as it appeared in
 HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23, to mean “the premium charged
 
34 The State acknowledged during oral argument that the claims in its 
proposed second amended complaint were based on the interpretation of actual
monthly cost of the coverage and further stated:  “[T]he ICA ruled that if theState lost on the statutory interpretation issue that the leave to amend ismoot, and we agree with that statement.”  Oral Argument, Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court, at 1:00:32-1:01:21 (Oct. 17, 2013), available athttp://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc29352.html. 
35
 We note that in declining to address the State’s argument, we are
 
not expressing any opinion as to the merits of the State’s allegations. 
However, as stated above, the State chose to tether its causes of action to
the statutory language “actual monthly cost of the coverage” as it appeared in
Chapter 87.  Thus, as the State concedes, in light of our interpretation, the
issue of whether the State should have be granted leave to amend is moot. 
-62­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
by and paid to the carrier.” Accordingly, the judgment of the
 
ICA is affirmed.
 Deirdre Marie-Iha
 
for petitioner
 
Paul A. Schraff
 
for Royal respondent
 
Charles A. Price 
for respondent HGEA
 
Adrian W. Rosehill
 
for respondent UPW
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
-63­