*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000592 14-FEB-2014 
02:25 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
ERWIN E. FAGARAGAN, Petitioner/Petitioner-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Respondent-Appellee.
 
SCWC-11-0000592
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000592; SPP NO. 11-1-0005(1) (CR. NOS. 04-1-0595(1) and
05-1-0090(1)))
 
February 14, 2014
 
ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J. JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
Petitioner/Petitioner-Appellant Erwin E. Fagaragan
 
(Fagaragan) seeks review the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (ICA)
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
October 18, 2012 Judgment on Appeal (ICA Judgment) filed pursuant
 
to its September 19, 2012 Summary Disposition Order (SDO), which
 affirmed the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit’s (circuit
 court) July 18, 2011 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order Denying the Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
 (Order Denying Rule 40 Petition). 
For the reasons set forth herein, we vacate the ICA 
Judgment, and remand the case to the circuit court to enter an order (1) vacating its Order Denying Rule 40 Petition, and (2) directing the Hawaii Paroling Authority to hold a new minimum term hearing under Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (HRS) 706-669 (Supp. 
2011). 
I.
 
A. Prior Underlying Criminal Proceedings and Appeals
 
1. Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1)
 
In Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1), Fagaragan was convicted of
 
unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle, HRS § 708-836 
1
 (Supp. 2005)  (Count I); promoting a dangerous drug in the first
1
 HRS § 708-836 (Supp. 2005) Unauthorized control of propelled
vehicle provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized control of a
propelled vehicle if the person intentionally or knowingly
exerts unauthorized control over another’s propelled vehicle
by operating the vehicle without the owner’s consent or by
changing the identity of the vehicle without the owner’s
consent.
 
-2­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2
 degree, HRS § 712-1241(1)(a)(i) (Supp. 2005) (Count II); 
prohibited acts relating to drug paraphernalia, HRS § 329.43.5(a)
 
3
 (Supp. 2005)  (Count IV); and promoting a detrimental drug in the
4
 third degree, HRS § 712-1249(1) (Supp. 2005)  (Count V).  The
 
charges stemmed from Fagaragan’s arrest for driving a stolen
 vehicle and his possession of 33 grams of methamphetamine,
 marijuana, and paraphernalia. The circuit court sentenced him to
 twenty years imprisonment in Count II, five years imprisonment in
 Counts I and IV, and thirty days imprisonment in Count V, all
 terms to run concurrently to one another. 
2 HRS § 712-1241 (Supp. 2005) Promoting a dangerous drug in the
first degree provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous
drug in the first degree if the person knowingly:
 
(a) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of:
 
(i) 	One ounce or more, containing heroin,
morphine, or cocaine or any of their
respective salts, isomers, and salts of
isomers; 
3 HRS § 329-43.5 (Supp. 2005) Prohibited Acts Related to Drug
Paraphernalia provides in relevant part: 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
 introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter.
 
4
 HRS § 712-1249 (Supp. 2005) Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the
Third Degree provides in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a detrimental
drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any
marijuana or any Schedule V substance in any amount.
 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fagaragan appealed the convictions. The ICA issued an
 
SDO affirming the circuit court’s judgment of conviction. 
2.	 Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1)
 
In Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1), Fagaragan was found guilty of
 
promoting a dangerous drug in the first degree, HRS § 712­
1241(1)(a)(i) (Supp. 2005) (Count I); attempted promoting a
 dangerous drug in the first degree, HRS § 712-1241(1)(b)(ii)(A)
 
5
 (Supp. 2005)  (Count II); and prohibited acts relating to drug
paraphernalia, HRS § 329.43.5(a) (Supp. 2005) (Count III). 
The
 
charges arose out of a traffic stop in which Fagaragan’s vehicle
 was searched and two bags were recovered that contained 28
 packets of methamphetamine totaling 5.46 ounces and
 paraphernalia. The circuit court sentenced Fagaragan to twenty
 years imprisonment in Counts I and II, and five years
 imprisonment in Count III, all terms to run concurrently with
 
5 HRS § 712-1241(1)(b)(ii)(A) (2005 Supp.) provides in relevant
part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous
drug in the first degree if the person knowingly:
 
. . . .
 
(b) 	
Distributes, except for methamphetamine:
 
. . . .
 (ii) 	One or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate
weight of:
(A)
 One-eighth ounce or more, containing
heroin, morphine, or cocaine or any of
their respective salts, isomers, and
salts of isomers[.]
 
-4­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
each other and concurrently with the prison terms imposed in Cr.
 
No. 04-1-0595(1). 
Fagaragan appealed the convictions. The ICA held that
 
Fagaragan’s convictions in Counts I and II constituted multiple
 punishments for the same conduct, as the attempted distribution
 offense was based solely on possession of the same contraband
 that formed the basis of the possession offense. State v.
 
Fagaragan, 115 Hawai' i 364, 370, 167 P.3d 739, 745 (2007). 
In order to remedy the “improper imposition of multiple
 
punishments,” the ICA reversed the conviction in Count II because
 the circuit court had failed to instruct the jury upon a
 requisite state of mind for an element of the attempted
 distribution offense in Count II. Id. at 372, 167 P.3d at 747. 
The ICA affirmed the convictions in Counts I and III. Id. 
B. HPA’s Minimum Term Hearings
 
On May 21, 2007, Fagaragan and his counsel appeared
 
before the Hawaii Paroling Authority (HPA) for a consolidated
 hearing to set his minimum terms of imprisonment for Cr. No. 04­1-0595(1) and No. 05-1-0090(1). On the same day, the HPA issued
 its Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment
 (HPA Order 1), which included the offenses from both criminal
 numbers. The minimum terms ordered by the HPA were as follows:
 
-5­Crime Number 
04-1-595(1)04-1-595(1)04-1-595(1)05-1-0090(1) 05-1-0090(1) 05-1-0090(1) 05-1-0090(1) 05-1-0090(1)  Count Offense 
6
Maximum Minimum
 
 I UCPV 5 yrs 5 yrs
 II  IV 
   I    II    III    II    III PDD-1 Paraphernalia PDD-1 Att. PDD-1 Paraphernalia Att. PDD-1 Paraphernalia 20 yrs 
5 yrs 
20 yrs 
20 yrs 5 yrs 20 yrs 5 yrs 20 yrs
5 yrs
20 yrs
20 yrs
5 yrs
20 yrs
5 yrs
 
 Count 
   I 
   III *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The HPA categorized Fagaragan as a Level III offender
 
based on the criteria of “Nature of Offense.”7
 
On April 23, 2008, following the reversal by the ICA of
 
Fagaragan’s conviction in Count II in Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1), the
 
HPA held a second hearing to reset Fagaragan’s minimum terms. 
The hearing only pertained to Fagaragan’s convictions in the Cr.
 No. 05-1-0090(1) case. On April 26, 2008, the HPA issued a
 Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment (HPA
 Order 2) resetting Fagaragan’s terms in Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1) to
 the identical terms that had previously been imposed:
 
Crime Number Offense Maximum Minimum
 
05-1-0090(1) PDD-1 20 yrs 20 yrs
05-1-0090(1) Paraphernalia 5 yrs 5 yrs
 
6 The abbreviations used by HPA are stated as follows: UCPV for
“unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle”; PDD-1 for “promoting a
dangerous drug in the first degree”; Paraphernalia for “prohibited acts
related to drug paraphernalia”; and Att. PDD-1 for “attempted promoting
dangerous drug in the first degree.” 
7
 The HPA utilizes six criteria in determining the level of
punishment for a Level III offender in any given case. The three primary
criteria that generally receive the greatest weight include: Nature of
 Offense, the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property, and the Offender’s
Criminal History. The HPA Guidelines require the Order Establishing Minimum
Terms of Imprisonment to include the significant criteria upon which the
decision was based.
 
-6­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The HPA continued to categorize Fagaragan as a Level
 
III offender, despite the ICA’s reversal of Fagaragan’s
 
conviction in Count II, again based on the sole criteria of
 “Nature of Offense.” 
A May 5, 2008 date-stamp on HPA Order 2 indicates that
 
a copy was “served to the prisoner” by mail. 
C. Fagaragan’s Rule 40 Petitions
 
1. S.P.P. No. 08-1-0009(1): First Petition
 
On June 18, 2008, Fagaragan, pro se, filed a Petition
 
For Post-Conviction Release Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure Rule 40 (First Petition), alleging five grounds as a
 
basis for relief in connection with Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1).8
 
8 In his First Petition, Fagaragan alleged the following five
grounds:
 
1. Illegal Search and Seizure conducted by officers without
first obtaining a search warrant prior to entering the
vehicle received into evidence. This illegal search of
vehicle by K-9 Unit raises a Fourth Amendment violation
protected by the United States Constitution. 
2. Petitioner had been charged and convicted by a jury for
the same alleged offense or offenses twice, thereby
violating petitioner’s Fifth Amendment right which protects
an accused of being charged twice for the same offense.
 
3. In petitioner’s first jury trial the State presented
someone else[’]s evidence to the court. The question
presents itself, did the Maui Police Department mixed up the
evidence held, and convicted petitioner on grounds of false
evidence? An accused has to be found guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt prior to this person receiving a guilty
verdict. This is not the case herein, thereby the court
stands in violation of a Due Process violation which is
 guaranteed an accused under the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution.
 
4. Conviction of Attempted Promotion of Controlled Substance
is over reaching and without merit in this case.
 
(continued...)
 
-7­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Petition did not reference or challenge HPA Order
 
2, which had reset the minimum terms of imprisonment in Count I
 
at 20 years and Count III at 5 years. Fagaragan’s return address
 on the First Petition indicates he was incarcerated in Eloy,
 Arizona. 
On June 25, 2008, the circuit court issued its Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Post-Conviction
 
Relief Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 
(Order Denying First Petition). The circuit court concluded: the
 
illegal search issue was previously raised before the trial court
 on a motion to suppress; the double jeopardy issue was raised on
 appeal (and Fagaragan prevailed on that point, making it moot);
 and every other issue Fagaragan raised in his Rule 40 petition
 could have been raised on appeal but was not, and was thus
 waived. The circuit court therefore denied the First Petition
 without a hearing.
 
Fagaragan appealed the Order Denying First Petition to
 
the ICA. Fagaragan’s arguments on appeal were largely identical
 
8(...continued)
5. There was no foundation laid as to the proper working
order of the instruments used by the Maui Police Department
in the testing of alleged uncontrolled substance)s) which
ultimately were used to convict petitioner herein.
 
6. The entire conviction herein is illegal, as petitioner
had to be found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, which has
not been the case in this jury trial and said conviction
must be remanded for the overturning of said sentence, and
petitioner must be released from custody at once.
 
-8­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to his arguments in his First Petition, with the exception of a
 
newly raised claim for ineffective assistance of appellate
 counsel (IAC). The ICA held that because Fagaragan did not
 initially raise the ineffective assistance claim in the First
 
Petition, the issue would be disregarded pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 28(b)(4). Fagaragan v. 
State, No. 29281, 121 Hawai
'i 178, 2009 WL 2608463, at *1, *3 
(App. Aug. 26, 2009) (SDO). With respect to the other issues 
raised, the ICA affirmed the Order Denying First Petition. Id.
 
at *2-*3. Fagaragan filed an application for writ of certiorari,
 which this court denied. Fagaragan v. State, No. 29281, 2010 WL
 
374737 (Haw. Jan. 20, 2010). 
2. 
S.P.P. No. 11-1-0005(1): Second Petition
 
On May 11, 2011, Fagaragan, pro se, filed a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 for (sic) Custody (Second Petition) with respect to Cr. Nos. 04­1-0595 and 05-1-0090. The return address of the Second Petition
 indicates that Fagaragan was incarcerated in “CCA-Saguaro” Eloy,
 Arizona. In the Second Petition, Fagaragan contended that the HPA had violated the 5th, 6th, 8th, and 14th Amendments to the 
United States Constitution as well as the State of Hawai' i 
Constitution. 
In response to question 11(e) of the Second Petition,
 
“If you did not appeal from the adverse action on any petition,
 
-9­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
application or motion, explain briefly why you did not,”
 
Fagaragan responded that he “thought that HPA would grant me a
 new hearing based that they violated others rights which the ICA
 and Supreme Court stated but they would not listen to them[.]” 
In response to question 13 of the Second Petition, “If
 
any of the grounds listed 12A, B, C, and D were not previously
 presented, state briefly what grounds were not so presented, and
 your reasons for not presenting them,” Fagaragan answered that he
 “thought that HPA would correct their errors but did not even
 though the ICA-Supreme Court ordered that the prior sentences
 were illegal.” 
Fagaragan continued, “HPA should have corrected their
 
erros [sic] violations without me submitting this but they
 continue to violate my rights.” 
In his Memorandum in Support of his Rule 40 petition,
 
Fagaragan asserted that the HPA acted arbitrarily and
 capriciously in: (1) failing to follow their guidelines by not
 including the “Degree of Injury/Loss To Person or Property” and
 “Criminal History” criteria; (2) categorizing him as a Level III
 offender, in light of an absence of criminal history; and (3)
 subsequently setting his minimum term at 20 years, in violation
 of equal protection. Fagaragan argued that he should not have
 received Level III punishment as “no-one during trial testified
 that he sold or did any such act” of being involved in the
 
-10­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“manufactor [sic], importation or distribution of drugs.” 
Fagaragan attached both the First and Second HPA Order as
 exhibits to the Second Petition and contended that HPA
 “[a]rbitrarily and [c]apriciously” violated petitioner’s rights
 not once, but twice.” Fagaragan’s requested relief was for the
 HPA to categorize him as a Level I or II offender and correctly
 reset a new minimum term.
 
On June 14, 2011, the State filed its Answer to
 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
 Petitioner From Custody (Response). The State argued that
 Fagaragan waived the issues presented in his Second Petition for
 failing to raise them in his First Petition. The State noted
 that Fagaragan had not submitted any evidence of “extraordinary
 circumstances to justify his failure to previously raise the
 issues.” 
In response to Fagaragan’s claim that the HPA violated
 
his procedural and substantive due process rights, the State
 argued that Fagaragan received all the process that he was due
 because the HPA held a fair hearing to reset his minimum term,
 and Fagaragan had no constitutional right to parole or a
 reduction of a minimum term of imprisonment and release from
 custody. 
Moreover, the State argued that the HPA properly
 
categorized Fagaragan as a Level III offender and had not acted
 
-11­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“arbitrarily or capriciously so as to give rise to a due process
 
violation.” In support of its position, the State pointed out
 that: (1) Fagaragan’s actions fit the significant criteria under
 Level III, “Nature of Offense,” in the HPA Guidelines For
 Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment, July 1989 (HPA
 Guidelines); (2) Fagaragan was previously convicted and sentenced
 under FC No. 02-1-0995; and (3) the HPA’s findings indicated that
 Fagaragan fit the significant criteria of “Character and Attitude
 of Offender With Respect to Criminal Activity or Lifestyle;” and
 he “deserved the category of Level III.” 
Fagaragan filed a reply brief (Rule 40 Reply). As to
 
the State’s argument that he waived his claims, Fagaragan stated
 that HPA had not “corrected their errors prior to him filing his
 initial petition”:
 
As to the States [sic] first argument as to why his petition
should be denied is because he failed to properly argue this
on his initial HRPP Rule 40 petition. However this is not
 
so. HPA failed to correct their errors prior to him filing
his initial petition. Had HPA fixed the problem in the
first place he would not have argued this . . . The
 Intermediate Court of Appeals and Supreme Court State of
Hawaii ordered HPA to correct their errors which they refuse
to do.
 
(Emphasis added). 
In addition, Fagaragan argued that he did not waive his
 
challenge to his minimum term for having failed to raise the
 
issue in the First Petition because the “grossly inadequate law
 
library” did not have a copy of Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai' i 
181, 172 P.3d 493 (2007), in the legal books or on LEXIS at the
 
-12­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
time Fagaragan filed his First Petition. Fagaragan also
 
reiterated that he was a Level I (or II) offender because,
 contrary to what the State argued, the instant drug offenses were
 Fagaragan’s “first ever criminal conviction,” FC No. 02-1-0995
 having been previously dismissed. 
The circuit court, without holding a hearing, issued
 
its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order denying Rule
 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relef.
9 The circuit court
 
concluded that Fagaragan waived his claims in the Second Petition
 for not including them in his First Petition, failed to “prove
 the existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify [his]
 failure to raise the issues previously,” and therefore “failed to
 rebut the presumption and has waived the claims” in the Second
 Petition. Additionally, the court held that Fagaragan’s
 allegations even if taken as true, do not entitle him to relief. 
Therefore, the circuit court concluded that Fagaragan failed to
 present a colorable claim, the claims were “patently frivolous,”
 and were without support in the record. Fagaragan timely
 appealed. 
D. Intermediate Court of Appeals
 
1. Opening Brief
 
Fagaragan raised, inter alia, the following points of
 
error:
 
9
 The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.
 
-13­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a.) Whether the courts erred in denying petitioner his Rule
40 without a hearing which he did have colorable grounds for
relief.
 
b.) Whether HPA did violate petitioner’s 5 th , 6 th , 8th
 and
 
14th Amendments to the US Constitution when HPA failed to
 
comply with their own statutorily required procedural
requirements/guidelines when they failed to list all the
special criteria’s as mandated by HRS § 706-669(8).
 
c.)
 Whether HPA violated petitioner’s 5 th, 6 th, 8th  and 14
 th
Amendments to the US Constitution when they illegally
assessed him as a Level III Offender which per guidelines he
should have been assessed as a Level I or at the most Level
 II Offender due to this being his first ever conviction and
imprisonment and due to his offenses not being classified as
serious which no person received any type of injuries for
 
crimes of drugs
.10
 
In support of his first and second points of error,
 
Fagaragan argued that he had a colorable claim for Rule 40 relief
 
because he demonstrated that HPA utilized only one criteria
 (“Nature of Offense”) in setting his minimum term rather than all
 three significant criteria, the other two criteria being
 “Criminal History” and “Character and Attitude of Offender With
 Respect to Criminal Activity or Lifestyle,” in violation of
 
Coulter, 116 Hawai' i 181, 172 P.3d 493 (2007). 
 Further, 
Fagaragan argued that HPA should have utilized all six
 
10 Fagaragan also presented two additional points of error:
 
d.) Whether HPA acted arbitrarily or capriciously when they
failed to properly follow their guidelines thus violating
his 5 th, 6 th, 8 th , and 14th
 Amendments under the Equal
Protection Clause which others had received lesser prison
sentences which they were convicted of 4-5-6 times for the
same offenses and the being petitioner’s first ever
conviction.
 
e.) Whether petitioner’s claims warrents [sic] Habeas
Relief which HPA and the courts violated his US
 
Constitutional rights under the 5 th, 6 th, 8 th , and 14
th
Amendments.
 
-14­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
significant criteria when establishing his minimum term, and it
 
did not. 
In support of his third point of error, Fagaragan
 
argued that he did not fit the criteria for categorization as a
 Level III Offender and was, at most, a Level I or II Offender. 
This was because, according to Fagaragan, as to the nature of the
 offense, his crimes were not “cruel and callous” or “against the
 elderly, handicap and or minor,” and he “did not distribute or
 import or cultivate drugs[.]” As to the degree of injury and/or
 loss, Fagaragan asserted that he did not rape or murder or
 otherwise cause injury to anyone. As to his criminal history,
 Fagaragan argued he had “no prior convictions.” 
In conclusion, Fagaragan requested that the ICA “grant
 
him his petition and order HPA to conduct a new hearing” before
 the HPA to have his minimum term reset as a Level I or II
 Offender. 
2. Answering Brief
 
In its Answering Brief, the State argued that Fagaragan
 
waived the claims raised in his Second Petition by knowingly and
 understandingly not raising them in his First Petition without
 submitting any evidence of extraordinary circumstances to justify
 his failure to raise those claims. Specifically, the State
 argues that Fagaragan had “ample opportunity to raise any
 challenges to his May 21, 2007 minimum term order or his April
 
-15­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
23, 2008 minimum term order therein, but waited until the instant
 
Petition, filed on May 11, 2011, to make his claims.” 
The State nonetheless went on to address the merits of
 
Fagaragan’s points of error. As to Fagaragan’s first and second
 points of error (that the HPA was required to utilize three
 criteria or six significant criteria), the State countered that
 the case law Fagaragan cited did not support his argument that
 the HPA had to point to more than just the “Nature of Offense”
 significant criteria to justify its Level III categorization. 
The State explained that Hopkins v. State, No. 29816
 
(App. Apr. 29, 2010)(SDO), and DeWayne Asuega v. State, S.P.P.
 
No. 09-1-0012 (available on Ho' ohiki under Case ID 1PR091012 
under “Court Minutes,” entries 5 through 8), involved cases where 
the HPA could not have just relied on one factor, “Degree of Injury and/or Loss,” in determining that an inmate was a Level III Offender, because the degree of injury and/or loss is the same in any case involving theft of over $20,000 (Hopkins) or negligent homicide (Asuega); therefore, the HPA must have used other criteria in determining Level III status that it did not specify. 
Additionally, the State argued that Coulter did not
 
hold that the HPA’s failure to indicate the level of punishment
 and significant criteria in a minimum term order is a
 constitutional violation. 
-16­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to Fagaragan’s third point of error (that he should
 
not be categorized as a Level III Offender), the State responded
 
that Fagaragan met Level III criteria under “Nature of Offense”
 based on the amount of drugs he possessed, and the other prongs
 under that criteria (that the crime was callous and cruel or that
 it was against a certain class of victims) were irrelevant. 
Further, the State argued that, under “Nature of Offense,”
 Fagaragan fared poorly with regard to his “Character and Attitude
 of Offender With Respect to Criminal Activity,” justifying a
 Level III categorization. Additionally, the State argued that
 Fagaragan also fared poorly under the categories “Efforts Made to
 Live a Pro-Social Life Prior to Commitment to Prison” and
 “Involvement of the Offender in the Instant Offense(s).” Lastly,
 the State argued that Fagaragan was previously convicted and
 imprisoned in FC No. 02-1-0995 and asked the ICA to take judicial
 notice of those court records. The State asserted that all of
 these factors justified the HPA’s determination that Fagaragan
 fit the characterization of a Level III Offender. 
3. Reply Brief
 
In Fagaragan’s Reply Brief, Fagaragan argued that he
 
did not waive his claim that the HPA erred in its Order resetting
 his minimum terms by failing to raise the issue in his First
 Petition. He explained that, “HPA failed to correct their errors
 prior to him filing his initial petition.” Fagaragan stated that
 
-17­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he had never received HPA’s Order until after filing his First
 
Petition:
 
The State argues at pg 21 that petitioner did not object to
HPA’s decision. How absurb!! Ridoulas!! HPA saw petitioner
April-May 2008. HPA did not give their decision until 90
plus days later. How could he object the same day of
hearing?
 
Had petitioner receive response same day, he would have
objected and argued this in his First Petition. Now the
 State says, “Hey you failed to raise this issue on First
Petition and now it should be dismissed.”
 
Petitioner’s Added New Claim Against HPA for the Violation
of His Due Process Rights
 
HPA and State prosecutors violated petitioner’s due process
rights when they did not give full notice of Petitioner’s
sentence on the on the day of hearing, thus denying him the
right to appeal HPA’s decision on a timely matter.
 
Facts: HPA and the State violated petitioner’s rights to
further appeal H.P.A.’s decision when they illegally imposed
a sentence of 20 yrs out of 20 yrs. HPA saw petitioner on
April 2008, then serving him their response 90 plus days
later, thus denying him the right to add this claim on his
first Rule 35-40 Petition.
 
Fagaragan also pointed to a grossly inadequate law library as an
 
extraordinary circumstance justifying his failure to previously
 raise the illegal procedures which HPA conducted during the
 setting of his minimum term of imprisonment. 
Fagaragan reiterated his earlier contentions that: (1)
 
HPA deviated from its Guidelines by failing to list all three
 criteria on his minimum term order; and (2)
Coulter,  Asuega,
 
Hopkins, and Williamson all stand for the proposition that a new
 hearing is required if HPA lists anything less than all three (or
 six) criteria. 
-18­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fagaragan responded to the points made in the State’s
 
Answering Brief. Fagaragan first disputed the State’s claim that
 
he has a prior conviction in FC No. 02-1-0995, asserting that the
 case was dismissed. Fagaragan next argued that the State cannot
 use “Character and Attitude of Offender with Respect to Criminal
 Activity,” “Efforts to Live a Pro-Social Life Prior to Prison,”
 and “Involvement of Offender” as justifying his Level III status,
 as none of these criteria were listed on HPA’s minimum term
 order. 
4. Summary Disposition Order
 
In its SDO, the ICA affirmed the trial court’s Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Rule 40 Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief. The ICA found that Fagaragan “could
 have, but did not, challenge the HPA’s fixing of the minimum
 terms of imprisonment on his convictions.” Thus, the ICA
 concluded that Fagaragan “waived all the issues he raises in his
 Petition” for failing to raise them in his prior Rule 40 Petition
 without any showing of extraordinary circumstances justifying his
 failure, and the “Circuit Court did not err in denying his
 Petition without a hearing.” The ICA further concluded that “in
 any event,” Fagaragan’s arguments on appeal “lack merit,” as
 Fagaragan’s promoting dangerous drug in the first degree
 convictions involved the manufacture, importation, distribution
 or cultivation of substantial quantities of drugs:
 
-19­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The HPA’s “Guidelines for Establishing Minimum Terms of
Imprisonment” (Guidelines) include under the criteria
“Nature of Offense” for a level III level of punishment that
“[t]he offense involved the manufacture, importation,
distribution, or cultivation of substantial quantities of
drugs.” Fagaragan’s Promoting Dangerous Drug I convictions
fit this description. There is support in the record for
the HPA’s determination that under its Guidelines, Fagaragan
fell within a Level III level of punishment with respect to
his Promoting Dangerous Drug I convictions based upon the
criteria of “Nature of the Offense.” 
(Emphasis added). 
Accordingly, the ICA concluded that the HPA did not act
 
arbitrarily or capriciously in setting Fagaragan’s minimum terms
 
for his convictions, and Fagaragan failed to show a colorable
 claim that the HPA’s actions violated his constitutional rights.
 
E. Application for Writ of Certiorari
 
On Oct. 22, 2012, Fagaragan filed an Application for
 
Writ of Certiorari (Application). Fagaragan presented seven
 
questions. Question Presented E and G are stated as follows: 
E. The court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
petitioner should have appealed H.P.A.’s decision when he
received notice of the 20 yrs minimum sentence, which has
stated that he did not receive the notice[] until some 90
days after decision, ineffective assistance.
 
G. The court[]s erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
H.P.A. did not act arbitrarily and capriciously; when
petitioner’s sentence was over-turned in part. H.P.A. did
 not reset his original sentence they let it stand at 20 yrs,
they should have reduced it.
11
 
11
 The remaining questions presented are as follows:
 
A. Whether the court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
HPA does not have to follow Hawaii Revised Statutes (H.R.S.)
§ 706-669 which states H.P.A. shall list (1) nature of
offense; (2) degree of injury and or loss; and (3) criminal
history of offender which is mandated by law when assessing
(continued...)
 
-20­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Question Presented E asserts that Fagaragan did not
 
receive notice that the HPA reset his minimum term to the same
 
twenty-year minimum term after remand in time for him to have
 raised the issue in his First Petition. In explaining why he did
 not contest the HPA’s decision in his First Petition, Fagaragan
 explains that “H.P.A. did not serve notice on Petitioner until 90
 plus days later, thus Petitioner not arguing HPA’s decision.” 
“Had H.P.A. served Petitioner the same day when they let minimum
 term stand he would have added this claim.” Additionally,
 Fagaragan responds to the ICA’s finding that he waived the issue: 
It did not take the same day to hand out a prison sentence
when he saw HPA in April-May 2008.  He received response past
 
11(...continued)
minimum term sentences.
 
B. Whether the court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
H.P.A. does not have to list all six special criteria’s when
assessing inmates level of punishments as required per case
law in Hopkins v. State; Asuega v. State.
 
C. Whether the court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that a
“first-time” offender shall serve the full maximum sentence
 twenty (20) years out of twenty (20) years while other who
have 2-3-4 priors serve less time when they had double-
triple amount of drugs than petitioner, thus denying him
parole.
 
D. Whether the court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
rapist-murders shall receive lesser minimum term sentences
than a first-time drug offender.
 . . . .
 F. The court[] erred in denying petition for post-
conviction pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40 when stating that
petitioner does not fit the criteria under Article 1, § 5 of
the Hawaii Constitution and pursuant to the 5th, 6th, and
14th amendments to the U.S. Constitution which states: “All
 persons in similarly situated situations should be treated
alike.”
 
-21­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the 90 day period to appeal.  HPA caused the delay when
 
mailing said decision. It was counsel and HPA who violated
 Petitioner’s rights not Petitioner waiving said issue.
 
In Question Presented G, Fagaragan asserts that the HPA
 
arbitrarily and capriciously reset his minimum sentence at the
 
same twenty-year minimum term after his original sentence was
 overturned in part. Fagaragan argues that the HPA’s deviation
 from its Guidelines for Establishing Minimum Terms of
 Imprisonment, without explanation, constitutes “arbitrary or
 capricious action that violates a prisoner’s right.” 
Specifically, Fagaragan points to the HPA’s use of only one
 significant criteria, “Nature of Offense,” in establishing his
 minimum terms of imprisonment as inconsistent with the
 requirements of HRS § 706-669(8) that minimum sentences be
 determined on a uniform basis. 
Fagaragan requests that this court 1) order the HPA to
 
conduct a new minimum term hearing; and 2) instruct the HPA to
 reset his level of punishment in conformance with the HPA
 Guidelines at Level I, or at most Level II. 
The State did not file an opposition to the
 
Application. 
II.
 
This court reviews a trial court’s denial of an HRPP
 
Rule 40 petition without a hearing for failure to present a
 
-22­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
colorable claim de novo. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai 'i 423, 427, 879 
P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
With respect to HPA decisions establishing a minimum 
term, this court has stated that “judicial intervention is 
appropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise violated the prisoner's constitutional rights.” Coulter, 116 Hawai
'i at 184, 172 P.3d at 
496 (2007) (quoting Williamson v. Hawai 'i Paroling Auth., 97 
Hawai'i 183, 195, 35 P.3d 210, 222 (2001)); De La Garza v. State, 
129 Hawai 'i 429, 439, 302 P.3d 697, 711 (2013). 
With respect to claims of procedural violations, the 
court will assess whether the HPA complied with the procedural protections of HRS § 706–669 and complied with its own guidelines, which the HPA was required to establish by statute under HRS § 706–669(8). Coulter, 116 Hawai
'i at 184, 172 P.3d at 
496.
 
III.
 
A.
 
Fagaragan contends it was error to deny his Second
 
Petition on the basis that he “should have appealed H.P.A.’s
 decision when he received notice[] of the 20 yrs minimum
 sentence, [but] which . . . he did not receive . . . until some
 90 days after decision.” The ICA, however, found that in filing
 
-23­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
his First Petition, Fagaragan “could have, but did not, challenge
 
the HPA’s fixing of the minimum terms of imprisonment on his
 convictions.” Consequently, the ICA concluded that in the
 absence of a showing of extraordinary circumstances, “Fagaragan
 waived the issues presented in his [Second] Petition, and the
 Circuit Court properly denied his [Second] Petition without a
 hearing.” 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides as follows:
 
Rule 40 proceedings shall not be available and relief
thereunder shall not be granted where the issues sought to
be raised have been previously ruled upon or were waived.
Except for a claim of illegal sentence, an issue is waived
if the petitioner knowingly and understandingly failed to
raise it and it could have been raised before the trial, at
the trial, on appeal, in a habeas corpus proceeding or any
other proceeding actually conducted, or in a prior
proceeding actually initiated under this rule, and the
petitioner is unable to prove the existence of extraordinary
circumstances to justify the petitioner's failure to raise
the issue. There is a rebuttable presumption that a failure
to appeal a ruling or to raise an issue is a knowing and
understanding failure.
 
(Emphases added).
 
Thus, “an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly
 
and understandingly failed to raise it” (a rebuttable presumption
 
of knowing and understanding failure arises from such omission),
 “and it could have been raised before the trial, at the trial, on
 appeal, . . . [in] any other proceeding actually conducted, or in
 a prior proceeding actually initiated under [Rule 40], and the
 petitioner is unable to prove the existence of extraordinary
 circumstances to justify . . . failure to raise the issue.” 
-24­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fragiao v. State, 95 Hawai' i 9, 15-16, 18 P.3d 871, 877-78 
(2001). 
This court has held that a claim of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel is not considered “waived” for the purposes
 
of an HRPP Rule 40 petition if there was “no realistic
 opportunity” for the petitioner to raise the claim in the
 proceedings specified by the rule. See Briones v. State, 74 Haw.
 
442, 459-60, 848 P.2d 966, 975 (1993) (holding that petitioner
 was unable to raise ineffective assistance of counsel issue on
 direct appeal where petitioner was represented by same counsel at
 
trial and on direct appeal); Fragiao, 95 Hawai' i at 16, 18 P.3d 
at 878 (2001) (finding no waiver of claim asserting trial 
counsel's conflict of interest where petitioner was unaware of conflict until new appellate counsel was appointed). 
In De La Garza, we held that a petitioner seeking post-
conviction relief under HRPP Rule 40 presented sufficient
 evidence to rebut the presumption that he knowingly and
 
understandingly waived the issue. 129 Hawai' i at 443, 302 P.3d 
at 711. In that case, De La Garza asserted that he did not 
receive evidence containing adverse information in an HPA file prior to his second hearing and was thus deprived of a “meaningful opportunity to be heard on the issue of the minimum term.” Id. at 441-42, 302 P.3d at 709-10. The ICA held that De 
La Garza had waived the issue by failing to raise it in the Rule 
-25­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
40 Petition. Id. at 442, 302 P.3d at 710. This court vacated
 
the ICA’s holding and held that “a claim . . . is not considered
 
‘waived’ for the purposes of a HRPP Rule 40 petition if there was
 ‘no realistic opportunity’ for the petitioner to raise the
 
claim[.]” Id. at 442-43, 302 P.3d at 710-11.
 
In this case, Fagaragan’s Second Petition and his Rule
 
40 Reply should have alerted the circuit court that there was a
 
significant question as to whether Fagaragan had received HPA
 Order 2 prior to filing his First Petition. 
Fagaragan explained
 
the reason for not previously presenting the claims for relief,
 “I thought that HPA would correct their errors but did not even
 though the ICA-Supreme Court ordered that the prior sentences
 were illegal. HPA should have corrected their errors violations
 without me submitting this but they continued.”
 
That Fagaragan “thought HPA would correct their errors
 
but did not” and HPA “should have corrected their errors without
 me submitting this” was an express statement by Fagaragan to the
 circuit court that he had no knowledge of HPA Order 2 or its
 terms at the time he filed his First Petition. In his Rule 40
 Reply, Fagaragan reiterated this assertion: “HPA failed to
 correct their errors prior to him filing his initial petition. 
Had HPA fixed the problem in the first place he would not have
 argued this.” (Emphasis added). If the court considered
 Fagaragan’s statements unclear or lacking in detail, HRPP Rule
 
-26­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12
40(e)  requires the court to give the petitioner an opportunity
to clarify the petition prior to dismissing it for want of
 particularity. 
In support of Fagaragan’s contention that he was
 
unaware of HPA Order 2 at the time he filed the First Petition
 was the timing between (1) HPA Order 2, (2) the date stamped on
 HPA Order 2 that indicated when it was mailed, and (3) the filing
 date of Fagaragan’s First Petition. All three events occurred
 within a fairly narrow time frame, making any overlap between
 mailing, receiving, and filing dates more probable. HPA Order 2
 is dated April 26, 2008; the date of mailing was May 5, 2008;
 and, Fagaragan filed his Second Petition on June 18, 2008. 
Therefore, the proximity of the timing between the documents,
 together with Fagaragan’s statements that he was unaware of HPA’s
 Order at the time he submitted his first petition, should have
 caused the circuit court, at a minimum, to seek clarification as
 
12 HRPP Rule 40(e) provides the following:
 
Amendment and withdrawal of petition. The court may grant
leave to amend or withdraw the petition at any time.
Amendment shall be freely allowed in order to achieve
substantial justice. No petition shall be dismissed for
want of particularity unless the petitioner is first given
an opportunity to clarify the petition.
 
(Emphasis added). “[A] pro se petitioner ‘should not suffer for his inability 
to articulate his claim.’” Garringer v. State, 80 Hawai' i 96, 904 P.2d 1142, 
1150 (1996) (holding that before the court dismissed the petition without
holding a hearing, petitioner should have been given an opportunity to clarifyhis petition by amending it to include specific factual allegations relevantto his claim). 
-27­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to whether Fagaragan intentionally or knowingly waived the claims
 
in his Second Petition.
 
Additionally, the contents of Fagaragan’s First
 
Petition did not reflect knowledge of the contents of HPA Order
 2. Instead, the First Petition included a reference to
 
“Conviction of Attempted Promotion of Controlled Substance” as an
 issue for review even though HPA Order 2 only included two
 offenses: “Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree” and
 “Prohibited Acts Relating to Drug Paraphernalia.” The offense
 Fagaragan raised in his First Petition, “Attempted Promoting a
 Drug in the First Degree[,]” only appeared in HPA Order 1. 
Relatedly, after the ICA reversed Fagaragan’s most
 
serious conviction (Count II), Fagaragan presumably anticipated a
 reduction in his minimum terms of imprisonment after HPA held its
 second hearing. Had Fagaragan received HPA Order 2 with the
 identical minimum term, it would appear likely that there would
 have been a reference to it in the First Petition. Instead, the
 absence of any reference to HPA Order 2 substantiates Fagaragan’s
 contention that he was not aware of its existence at the time he
 filed the First Petition.
 
B.
 
In contrast to the evidence pointing to Fagaragan as
 
having not received notice of the Order, the only countervailing
 evidence is a May 5, 2008 date that is stamped on HPA Order 2
 
-28­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
indicating that a copy was “served” by mail to Fagaragan. 
Assuming HPA Order 2 was mailed on May 5, 2008, there is,
 however, no prison log, receipt of service, or other
 documentation indicating when the mail was received or forwarded
 to Fagaragan. The only record as to mailing or receiving is the
 stamped signature by the HPA Secretary with a stamped date on the
 order itself. 
In Setala v. J.C. Penney Co., 97 Hawai' i 484, 489, 40 
P.3d 886, 891 (2002), this court acknowledged the unique circumstances pro se prisoners face because “a prisoner has no choice but to turn over his or her notice of appeal to prison authorities for forwarding to court clerks, [and] the pro se prisoner is not similarly situated with other civil litigants.” 
97 Hawai' i at 487, 40 P.3d at 889 (quoting Houston v. Lack, 487 
U.S. 266, 275, 108 S.Ct. 2379 (1988)). As a result, the court
 
adopted a “mailbox rule” holding that a pro se prisoner’s notice
 of appeal is deemed filed on the day it is tendered to prison
 
officials. Setala, 97 Hawai' i at 485, 489, 40 P.3d at 887, 889. 
The rationale behind the rule was that “[b]ecause ‘the prisoner 
confined to his [or her] cell . . . can usually only guess the prison authorities, the Postal Service, or the court clerk is to blame for any delay[,]’ the prison may be the only entity that has evidence of the date of mailing.” Id. at 489, 40 P.3d at 891 
-29­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(citation omitted) (quoting Houston, 487 U.S. at 276). The
 
Setala court held that where there is no evidence of mailing,
 “appellate courts may remand the case to the trial court for a
 determination of when the notice was given to the prison
 
authorities by the pro se litigant.” Setala, 97 Hawai' i at 489, 
40 P.3d at 891. 
While Setala primarily dealt with notices of appeal,
 
the holding is relevant in outlining the unique difficulties
 
associated with pro se prisoners and the prison mailing system. 
Just as pro se prisoner litigants cannot personally travel to the
 courthouse to ensure their notice of appeal is filed by the
 clerk, pro se prisoner litigants cannot personally receive their
 own mail at the facility to ensure that mailed documents are
 actually received and timely delivered by the facility staff to
 the inmate. 
As noted, Fagaragan’s return address indicates he was
 
incarcerated in Eloy, Arizona when he filed his First and Second
 Petitions. Fagaragan’s physical location left him no other
 choice than to rely on the mail system as the only means of
 litigating his claim. Therefore, being subject to both the mail
 system and the prison authorities’ delivery of his mail,
 Fagaragan’s claim of having not received HPA’s Order 2 prior to
 filing the First Petition merits is owed due consideration by the
 
-30­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court, especially in light of the time proximity of the relevant
 
documents.
 
C.
 
The record of this case raises a significant question
 
as to whether Fagaragan had a realistic opportunity to contest
 HPA Order 2 in the First Petition, and consequently whether
 Fagaragan intelligently and knowingly waived the claims set forth
 in the Second Petition. 
As noted, HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides that there is a
 
rebuttable presumption that a failure to raise an issue that
 could have been raised in a prior proceeding is a knowing and
 intelligent failure. If the presumption is not rebutted, then a
 court must determine whether the petitioner has proven the
 existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the failure
 to raise the issue. If the petitioner is unable to prove the
 existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the failure
 to raise the issue, then the issue is waived.
 
However, in this case, the circuit court made the
 
following conclusion of law: 
Petitioner’s allegations in the present Petition have been
waived by Petitioner’s failure to include them in the prior
HRPP Rule 40 Petition, S.P.P. No. 08-1-0009, and Petitioner
has failed to aver any facts that would “prove the existence
of extraordinary circumstances to justify the petitioner’s
failure” to raise the issues previously. HRPP Rule
 40)a)(3). Therefore, under HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) Petitioner
has failed to rebut the presumption and has waived the
claims in the present HRPP Rule 40 petition.
 
-31­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Emphases added). 
The circuit court erred by concluding that a failure to
 
prove the existence of extraordinary circumstances is a failure
 
to rebut the presumption and a “waive[r] of claims.” To
 reiterate, a court must first determine whether a petitioner has
 rebutted the presumption of a knowing and intelligent failure to
 raise an issue. If the presumption is not rebutted, then the
 court determines whether the existence of extraordinary
 circumstances justifies the failure to have previously raised the
 claim. 
On the other hand, if sufficient evidence is presented
 
to rebut the presumption, then the court is not required to
 assess whether petitioner had proved the existence of
 
extraordinary circumstances. See De La Garza, 129 Hawai' i at 
443, 302 P.3d at 711 (2013) (holding that petitioner presented
 
sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption and therefore the
 court was not required to evaluate the existence of extraordinary
 
circumstances); Fragiao, 95 Hawai' i at 15-16, 18 P.3d at 877-78 
(2001).
13
 
13
 See also Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 232, 900 P.2d 1293, 
1299 (holding that “where trial and appellate counsel are the same, no
realistic opportunity exists for a defendant to raise the issue of whether
that attorney usurped defendant’s right to testify[,]” and not evaluating for
extraordinary circumstances); Briones, 74 Haw. at 459, 848 P.2d at 968-69
(holding that “[w]here petitioner has been represented by the same counsel
both at trial and on direct appeal, no waiver of the issue of trial counsel’sperformance occurs because no realistic opportunity existed to raise the issueon direct appeal[,]” and not evaluating for extraordinary circumstances);
(continued...)
 
-32­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Accordingly, once Fagaragan made a showing that the
 
failure to raise his claims in the First Petition was not an
 
intelligent and knowing failure, then it was unnecessary for the
 circuit court to reach the question of the existence of
 extraordinary circumstances, and the Second Petition should not
 have been denied without a hearing on the basis that the claims
 had been waived. 
IV. 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(2) provides that “[a]ny person may seek
 
relief under the procedure set forth in this rule from custody
 based upon a judgment of conviction . . . .” In the First
 Petition, Fagaragan sought relief from the judgment of conviction
 in Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1) only. Consequently, even assuming that
 the waiver doctrine of HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) applied to the Second
 Petition, the waiver would have applied only to claims that could
 have been brought in the First Petition that related to Cr. No.
 05-1-0090(1). 
In contrast, claims in the Second Petition that
 
pertained to the minimum terms that HPA had imposed in Cr. No.
 04-1-0595(1) had not been previously raised in any prior
 proceeding, nor could they have been raised, as no prior Rule 40
 petition or other proceeding had challenged the setting of the
 
13(...continued)
Matsuo v. State, 70 Haw. 573, 577, 778 P.2d 332, 334 (1989) (finding no
realistic opportunity for a defendant to raise an ineffective assistance of
counsel claim, and not evaluating for extraordinary circumstances).
 
-33­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
minimum terms. The minimum terms in Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1) were
 
set by the HPA after the appeal of the judgment of conviction had
 been filed on April 10, 2006, and no Rule 40 petition had been
 previously filed with respect to the judgment of conviction in
 Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1).
 
Therefore, the circuit court erred in concluding that
 
“the allegations in the present Petition have been waived by
 [Fagaragan’s] failure to include them in the prior HRPP Rule 40
 Petition.” Similarly, the ICA erred in finding that Fagaragan
 “could have, but did not, challenge the HPA’s fixing of the
 minimum terms of imprisonment on his convictions,” and Fagaragan
 “waived all the issues he raises in his Petition” for failing to
 raise these issues in his prior Rule 40 Petition.
 
Accordingly, the waiver doctrine prescribed by HRPP
 
Rule 40(a)(3) was not applicable to the claims in the Second
 Petition that related to Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1). For this reason
 also, the Second Petition should not have been denied by the
 circuit court without a hearing premised upon a determination
 that all of Fagaragan’s claims had been waived. 
V.
 
The legislature required the HPA to establish
 
guidelines for the “uniform determination of minimum sentences
 which shall take into account both the nature and degree of the
 offense of the prisoner and the prisoner’s criminal history and
 
-34­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
character.” HRS § 706-669(8). Although the guidelines do not
 
have the force of statutory law, “compliance with such rules is
 required to serve the legislature’s goal of uniform determination
 
of minimum sentences.” 
Coulter, 116 Hawai' i at 185, 172 P.3d at 
497 (quotation marks omitted). As stated by the Coulter court, 
“[t]he proposition that the government must follow the rules it sets out for itself is not controversial.” Id. “Where the 
legislature has delegated the creation of guidelines for the uniform determination of minimum sentences to the HPA, the HPA is not free to ignore the guidelines it has established.” Id. 
The availability of the HPA Guidelines to prisoners 
serves as a procedural protection to safeguard prisoners’ rights. 
See Williamson
, 97 Hawai' i at 194, 35 P.3d at 221 (holding that 
“the procedural protections are adequate to safeguard prisoners’ 
rights and ensure that the HPA does not arbitrarily set minimum sentences”). Therefore, deviating from minimum sentencing guidelines, without explanation, constitutes arbitrary or capricious action that violates a prisoner’s right to uniform determination of his or her minimum sentence. Coulter, 116 
Hawai'i at 184-85, 172 P.3d at 496-97; see Williamson, 97 Hawai' i 
at 194-95, 35 P.3d at 221-22. 
In establishing the minimum term, the HPA considers a
 
variety of factors including the prisoner’s characteristics and
 
-35­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the nature of the underlying offense. See State v. Bernades, 71
 
Haw. 485, 490, 795 P.2d 842, 845 (1990). Section III of the HPA
 
Guidelines requires the Order Establishing Minimum Terms of
 Imprisonment to include the “specific minimum term(s) established
 in years and/or months, the level of punishment (Level I, II, or
 III) under which the inmate falls, and the significant criteria
 upon which the decision was based.”
14 (Emphasis added).
 
In HPA Order 2, Fagaragan was determined by the HPA to
 
have met the criteria for Level III Punishment. The HPA
 identified “Nature of Offense” as the sole significant criterion
 as the basis for its determination. To satisfy the “Nature of
 Offense” criteria for Level III classification, it is required
 that the offender meets the criteria of at least one of the
 following:
 
a. The offense was against a person(s) and the offender
displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety
and welfare of others; or
 
b. The offense involved the manufacture, importation,
distribution, or cultivation of substantial quantities of
drugs. Paragraph 4, subparagraph (a) or (b) of this section
may be used to substantiate the level of involvement of the
person in the offense(s);
 
c. The offense was committed against the elderly, a
handicapped person, or a minor, and the conviction was for
 
14
 The criteria to designate a defendant for Level III punishment are
as follows: 
(1) the nature of offense; (2) the degree of injury/loss to
person or property; (3) the criminal history; (4) the
character and attitude of Offender with respect to criminal
activity or lifestyle; (5) the efforts made to live pro-
social life prior to commitment to prison; and (6) the
involvement of offender in the instant offense(s).
 
-36­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
murder, sexual assault, robbery, assault, or kidnapping; and
. . . [.]
 
(Emphasis added). Since the entirety of the HPA’s explanation
 
for its determination of Fagaragan’s level of punishment was
 “Nature of Offense,” the relevant subsection was not identified. 
However, it may be presumed that the HPA intended subsection (b)
 to serve as the applicable subsection, as Fagaragan’s offenses
 manifestly do not fall within subsections (a) or (c) of the
 Nature of Offense criteria for a Level III classification.
15
 
Under subsection (b), the offense must involve “the
 
manufacture, importation, distribution, or cultivation of
 substantial quantities of drugs.” However, Fagaragan was
 convicted of offenses involving possession of unlawful
 contraband. None of the offenses in either Cr. No. 04-1-0595 or
 Cr. No. 05-1-0090(1) involved acts of manufacturing, importing,
 distributing or cultivating substantial quantities of drugs. 
Thus, the offenses for which minimum terms were imposed do not
 appear to fit the HPA’s defined criteria under subsection (b) for
 Level III punishment.
16
 
15 “Nature of Offense” as defined in subsection (a)(callous offense
against a person) and in subsection (c) (offense against the elderly) do not
relate, even superficially, to Fagaragan’s offenses and therefore are not
applicable. 
16
 The dissent places great weight on the contention that: “although
the attempted distribution count was reversed, . . . [t]he two counts involved
exactly the same conduct; therefore, Fagaragan’s culpability remained exactly
the same.” Dissent at 9, 11. Respectfully, there is a significant difference
in culpability between a distribution conviction and a conviction based on
possession, even if the prescribed sentence is the same. There is also a
 
(continued...)
 
-37­  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Nevertheless, the State contends that subsection (b)
 
provides a basis to find that an offender manufactured, imported,
 
distributed, or cultivated substantial quantities, despite the
 fact that there has been no adjudication that the offender
 actually did so. The State reaches this conclusion by its
 reading of the second sentence of subsection (b):
 
b. The offense involved the manufacture, importation,
distribution, or cultivation of substantial quantities of
drugs. Paragraph 4, subparagraph (a) or (b) of this section
may be used to substantiate the level of involvement of the
person in the offense(s);
17
 
According to the State, Paragraph 4, subparagraph (a)
 
(the circumstances show criminal activity is a major source of
 
person’s livelihood) or subparagraph (b) (the person has
 
16(...continued)
significant difference in culpability when the conduct results in the
commission of one Class A possessory drug conviction as compared to a Class Apossessory and a distribution drug conviction. Moreover, a conviction for distribution, by definition, involves an act of distribution. A conviction for possession does not. And, even if the counts “involved exactly the sameconduct,” there was no valid conviction for attempted distribution, as thecircuit court failed to instruct the jury upon a requisite state of mind foran element of the attempted distribution offense, which the State conceded was 
plain error. State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai' i 364, 371-72, 167 P.3d 739, 746­
47 (2007). 
17 Section C titled “Level III,” Paragraph 4, subparagraphs (a) and
(b) provide as follows: 
4. Character and Attitude of Offender With Respect to Criminal
Activity or Lifestyle: Based on the person’s character,
attitude, and/or criminal history (both juvenile and adult),
future criminal activity remains probable; or
 
a. The circumstances of the crime show that the
 convicted person has knowingly devoted himself or
 herself to criminal activity as a major or primary
source of livelihood; or
 
b. The convicted person has substantial income or
 
resources not explained to be derived from a source
 other than criminal activity[.]
 
-38­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unexplained substantial income) can establish that the offense
 
involved manufacturing, importing, distributing or cultivating
 large quantities of drugs and thereby satisfy the criteria for
 Level III punishment criteria.
18 The State further contends that
 
Fagaragan met Level III criteria under “Nature of the Offense”
 based on the amount of drugs he possessed. 
In evaluating the State’s contentions, it is necessary to apply
 
general principles of statutory construction. With respect to
 interpreting the HPA Guidelines:
 
The general principles of construction which apply to
statutes also apply to administrative rules. As in
 statutory construction, courts look first at an
administrative rule’s language. If an administrative rule’s
 language is unambiguous, and its literal application is
neither inconsistent with the policies of the statute the
rule implements nor produces an absurd or unjust result,
courts enforce the rule’s plain meaning.
 
Int’l Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co., 68
 
Haw. 316, 323, 713 P.2d 943, 950 (1986) (emphasis added)
 (citations omitted). 
Again, turning to the language of the HPA Guidelines,
 
the “Nature of Offense” definition under subsection (b) of the
 Level III classification expressly provides: 
The offense involved the manufacture, importation,
distribution, or cultivation of substantial quantities of
drugs.
 
18
 The ICA found that there “was support in the record for the HPA’s
determination that under its Guidelines Fagaragan fell within a Level III
level of punishment with respect to his Promoting Dangerous Drug I convictions
based on the criteria of ‘Nature of Offense.’” 
-39­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, the offense must involve manufacturing, importing,
 
distributing, or cultivating of substantial quantities of drugs. 
The next sentence provides:
 
Paragraph 4, subparagraph (a) or (b) of this section may be
used to substantiate the level of involvement of the person
in the offense(s)[.] 
(Emphasis added). Read in isolation, the second sentence is
 
deprived of meaning and effect without allusion to the
 “offense(s)” being referred to. However, when read in reference
 with the first sentence, it is clear that the circumstances that
 may be used to “substantiate the level of involvement of the
 person in the offense(s)” are with respect to those offenses
 listed in the preceding sentence. 
In contrast, the State’s interpretation would mean that
 
any person who was found in possession of substantial quantities
 of drugs could be found to have been involved in acts of
 manufacturing, importation, distribution, or cultivation. This
 interpretation is problematical for several reasons.
 
First, this construction is contrary to the plain
 
meaning of subsection (b), which states Paragraph 4, subparagraph
 (a) or (b) of this section may be used to substantiate the level
 of involvement of the person in the offense(s). Since the first
 sentence requires that the offense involve the manufacture,
 importation, distribution, or cultivation of substantial
 quantities of drugs, it is evident that Paragraph 4 subparagraphs
 
-40­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(a) or (b) may be used to determine “the level of involvement” of
 
the offender in manufacturing, importing, distributing, or
 cultivating substantial quantities of drugs. This is because the
 fact that an offender, for example, is involved in cultivating
 large quantities of drugs does not necessarily mean that the HPA
 will classify the person for Level III punishment.
 
Consequently, in the example given, an offender’s level
 
of involvement in cultivation of large quantities of contraband
 will affect HPA’s determination regarding whether the offender is
 to be classified as a Level III offender. However, the level of
 involvement in the offense under paragraph 4 subparagraphs (a) or
 (c) is not relevant if the offense does not involve manufacture,
 importation, distribution or cultivation.
 
Second, the acts of manufacturing, importing,
 
distributing, or cultivating substantial quantities of drugs
 would invariably involve possession. “Possession” in criminal
 law is broadly understood to include both actual and constructive
 possession. Black’s Law Dictionary defines “possession” as: 
“The fact of having or holding property in one’s power; the
 exercise of dominion over property.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1281
 
(9th ed. 2009).
19 Consequently, the enumerated acts of
 
19
 “Constructive possession” involves a person “who, although not in
actual possession, knowingly has both the power and the intention, at a given
time, to exercise dominion or control over a thing for a sufficient period toterminate his/her possession of it, either directly or through another person
or persons[.]” Hawai' i Standard Jury Instructions Criminal (HAWJIC) 6.06,
reprinted in Hawai' i Court Rules, State 866-67 (2013). 
-41­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
manufacturing, importing, distributing or cultivating would
 
essentially be rendered superfluous, as possession of substantial
 quantities of drugs would be able to meet the Level III criteria,
 regardless of the offender’s underlying activity. 
When construing a statute or administrative rule,
 
courts are “bound to give effect to all parts of a statute, and .
 . . no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as
 superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be
 legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all
 
words of the statute.” Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85 Hawai' i 217, 
221, 941 P.2d 300, 304 (1997) (quotation marks omitted). The HPA 
demonstrated a level of certainty and precision in purposefully selecting the enumerated categories of acts in subsection (b) and to interpret this section in a way that would essentially allow the enumerated terms to be treated as surplusage is inconsistent with this purpose. Id. at 223, 941 P.2d at 306. 
Third, Level III offenses are reserved for the most
 
egregious conduct. It includes, for example, offenses against
 those most vulnerable in society, offenders who display a callous
 and cruel disregard for the safety of others, offenders with
 extensive criminal history, offenders who commit the most serious
 violent felonies, and offenders where “future criminal activity
 is determined to be probable.” 
-42­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Included in Level III classification are offenses that
 
involve manufacturing, importation, distribution or cultivation
 
of substantial quantities of drugs. The State would essentially
 expand this list to include “possession” offenses in order to
 allow the HPA to makes an inference that the offender was
 manufacturing, importing, distributing, or cultivating
 substantial quantities of drugs, despite the fact that the
 offender was never charged, much less, convicted of such
 activity. 
Indeed, the offender could have been acquitted of the
 
enumerated acts, or had their conviction reversed as Fagaragan
 did, and yet be found by the HPA (as Fagaragan was) to have
 distributed substantial quantities of drugs.
 Fourth, the canon of construction expressio unius est
 
exclusio alterius, holds that “to express or include one thing
 implies the exclusion of the other, or of the alternative.” 
Black’s Law Dictionary 661 (9th ed. 2009). Under this principle,
 subsection (b) provides that the four specified offenses are
 exclusive and limit the category of applicable offenses to those
 expressly enumerated. 
This canon applies “only where in the natural
 
association of ideas the contrast between a specific subject
 matter which is expressed and one which is not mentioned leads to
 an inference that the latter was not intended to be included
 
-43­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
within the statute.” Int’l Sav. and Loan Ass’n v. Wiig, 82 
Hawai'i 197, 201, 921 P.2d 117, 121 (1996). In this case, there 
exists a “natural association of ideas” between the type of 
specific offenses expressed in subsection (b) and the more
 general offense of “possession” because both offenses involve
 activities related to drug use. The distinction, however, lies
 in the HPA’s deliberate use of specific offenses characterized as
 involving especially egregious activities under Level III “Nature
 of Offense.”
 
As stated, the criteria for Level III punishment do not
 
appear to apply to possession offenses, and unequivocally
 possession is not enumerated. Fagaragan stated in his Second
 Petition that he did not fit the Level III offender
 classification: “no one during trial testified that he sold or
 did any such act [of manufacturing, importation or distribution
 of drugs],” reflecting Fagaragan’s understanding and a natural
 reading of the criteria. 
The legislature specifically provided in HRS § 706­
669(8) that “[t]he guidelines shall be public records and be made
 available to the prisoner.” (Emphasis added). Thus, the
 legislature contemplated that the HPA Guidelines would be an
 informational tool for the prisoner. The applicable statute, HRS
 § 706-669, is entitled “Procedure for determining minimum term of
 
-44­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
imprisonment,” and clearly stated guidelines are an essential
 
part of the process. 
The importance of an offender being adequately informed
 
of the applicable criteria cannot be overstated. The
 determination of whether the offender is classified for Level II
 punishment as opposed to Level III punishment for a Class A
 felony is a potential difference of 10 years of incarceration
 based upon the range of punishment established by the HPA.
20 In
 
this case, the actual difference was 10 years of imprisonment, as
 Fagaragan’s minimum term was set at 20 years. 
In D’Ambrosio v. State, 112 Hawai' i 446, 146 P.3d 606 
(App. 2006), the court considered the critical nature of the
 minimum term hearing and the “significant discretionary power”
 exercised by the HPA in setting the minimum term of imprisonment.
 Id. at 464-66, 146 P.3d at 624-26. The court explained that
 under the statutory scheme, “it is the HPA, not the courts, that
 exercises most of the State’s felony sentencing discretion.” Id.
 
at 464, 146 P.3d at 624.
 
In De La Garza, we held that a defendant in a minimum
 
term hearing has a right to disclosure of adverse materials. 129
 
Hawai'i 429, 302 P.3d 697 (2013). We noted that “[s]uch 
disclosure ensures that the HPA will set the inmate’s minimum
 
The range in years of a minimum term for a Level II offender for a
class A felony offense is 5 - 10 years, while the range in years for a Level
III offender for such an offense is 10 - 20 years.
 
-45­20 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
term of imprisonment based on accurate information and that the
 
inmate is given reasonable notice and a meaningful opportunity to
 be heard on the issue of the minimum term.” Id. at 442, 302 P.3d
 
at 710 (citing HRS § 706-669(3)) (emphasis added). 
Meaningful opportunity to be heard in the context of a
 
minimum term hearing includes the right to be informed in a clear
 manner of the criteria that the HPA will use to set the minimum
 term. A clear statement of the criteria provides the offender
 with a meaningful opportunity at the HPA hearing to contest or
 adduce evidence that the offense did not involve distribution,
 manufacturing, importation or cultivation. Therefore, to comport
 with the requirements of a fair hearing, the HPA Guidelines
 should be readily understandable to accomplish their purpose in
 “be[ing] made available to the prisoner.” See HRS § 706-669(8).
 
VI.
 
According to the HPA Guidelines, “[t]he Hawaii Paroling 
Authority may deviate from the guidelines, either above or below, but all deviations shall be accompanied by written justification and be made a part of the Order Establishing Minimum Terms of 
Imprisonment.” (Emphasis added). In Coulter, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court examined whether the HPA’s actions were arbitrary
 
and capricious when it set Coulter’s minimum terms without
 stating in the order Coulter’s level of punishment or providing
 any written criteria upon which the HPA based its decision. 116
 
-46­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawai'i at 183, 172 P.3d at 495. The court held that deviating 
from the rules established by the HPA for the uniform 
determination of minimum sentences, without explanation, constitutes arbitrary or capricious action that violates a prisoner’s right to uniform determination of his or her minimum sentence. Id. at 185, 172 P.3d at 497. 
In this case, HPA Order 2 identified Fagaragan as a
 
Level III offender based on the criteria of “Nature of Offense.” 
The HPA Guidelines provide three criteria under Level III “Nature
 of Offense,” none of which, as discussed supra, are applicable to
 Fagaragan’s offenses. Inasmuch as Fagaragan’s offenses do not
 meet the prescribed criteria and no further “written
 justification” is provided explaining HPA’s decision in HPA Order
 2, HPA’s action of classifying Fagaragan as a Level III offender
 was in violation of the HPA Guidelines and therefore, under the
 circumstances, arbitrary and capricious.
 
VII.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA Judgment,
 
and the case is remanded to the circuit court to enter an order
 (1) vacating its Order Denying Rule 40 Petition, and (2)
 directing the HPA to hold a new hearing to determine Fagaragan’s
 
-47­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
minimum terms of imprisonment in Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1) and Cr. No.
 
05-1-0090(1) pursuant to HRS § 706-669.21
 
Erwin E. Fagaragan /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
pro se
 
Lisa M. Itomura and
 
Diane K. Taira for respondent
 
21 The minimum terms for Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1) and Cr. No. 05-1­
0090(1) were set in HPA Order 1, and were based upon the consolidated evidence
for both cases at the first minimum term hearing (“the [HPA] shall . . . on
the basis of the hearing make an order fixing the minimum term of imprisonment
to be served before the prisoner shall become eligible for parole.” HRS §
706-669(1) (emphasis added)). That hearing included the evidence of
Fagaragan’s attempted distribution conviction, which was subsequently
reversed. Inasmuch as the only possible basis for the HPA in HPA Order 1 to
determine Fagaragan was a Level III offender based on “Nature of Offense” was
the reversed attempted distribution conviction in Cr. No. 05-1-0590(1), the
new hearing setting the minimum terms must also include Cr. No. 04-1-0595(1).
See HPA Guidelines at *1 (“The purpose of minimum sentencing guidelines is to
provide a degree of uniformity and consistency in the setting of minimum
terms[.]”).
 
-48­