***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000595 10-MAY-2013 
10:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
CHEYNE DE LA GARZA, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
SCWC-11-0000595 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-11-0000595; CR. NO. 08-0421(4); S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0021(4))
 
MAY 10, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, MCKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
Petitioner Cheyne De La Garza (Petitioner) seeks review 
of the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (ICA) August 23, 2012 
judgment, affirming the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit’s (circuit court) July 28, 2011 order dismissing Petitioner’s Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 petition for 
post-conviction relief.         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner asserts that the ICA gravely erred in 
affirming the circuit court’s order because the manner in which 
the Hawai' i Paroling Authority (HPA) “amended” his minimum term 
of imprisonment from eighteen months to five years was in violation of his constitutional right to due process. 
We hold that the ICA erred in concluding that
 
Petitioner waived his due process claim relating to the HPA’s
 nondisclosure of adverse materials in Petitioner’s HPA file and
 
accordingly vacate the ICA judgment and circuit court order, and
 
remand to the circuit court for a HRPP Rule 40 evidentiary
 
hearing consistent with this opinion.
 
I.
 A.
 
On May 1, 2009, Petitioner pleaded no contest to one 
count of assault in the first degree in violation of Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-710(1) and one count of kidnapping as a Class B felony in violation of HRS § 707-720(3). Petitioner’s conviction arose out of an incident in which Petitioner restrained the complainant (Complainant), whom he had previously been romantically involved with, in his vehicle and assaulted her, causing serious bodily injury to her. The circuit 
-2­        
           
     
           
          
           
            
           
            
       
   
         
          
            
          
           
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1
 sentenced Petitioner on June 26, 2009 to ten years
court
imprisonment for each count, with the terms to run concurrently.2
 
On October 12, 2009, the HPA held a hearing to set
 
Petitioner’s minimum term of imprisonment (first hearing),
 pursuant to HRS § 706-669.
3 Prior to the hearing, the HPA was
 
required to obtain Petitioner’s presentence report, which
 
included Complainant’s victim impact statement as an addendum to
 
the report.4 The prosecutor also submitted a written letter to
 
the HPA with his recommendation for Petitioner’s minimum term. 
Petitioner and defense counsel were present at the October 12
 hearing. Neither the prosecutor nor Complainant attended the
 hearing. 
On the same day as the first hearing, the HPA issued a
 
notice and order (First Minimum Term Order) setting Petitioner’s
 minimum term of imprisonment at eighteen months for each count,
 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided over the circuit 
court proceedings in this case. 
2 Petitioner was also ordered to pay restitution and fees.
 
3 The HPA is charged with determining the minimum term of
 
imprisonment that a person sentenced to an indeterminate or an extended term
of imprisonment must serve before becoming eligible for parole. HRS § 706­669(1) (1993). The guidelines upon which these determinations are made are
established by the HPA. HRS § 706-669(8). See HPA’s Guidelines for
 
Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment (1989), available at
http://dps.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/HPA-Guidelines-for ­
Establishing-Minimum-Terms-of-Imprisonment.pdf [hereinafter HPA Guidelines].
 
4
 HRS § 706-669(2) (1993) provides that “[b]efore holding the
 
[minimum term] hearing, the authority shall obtain a complete report regarding
the prisoner's life before entering the institution and a full report of the
prisoner's progress in the institution.” HRS § 806-73(b)(3)(B) (Supp. 2009)
 provides that “[a] copy of a presentence report or investigative report shall
 be provided” to the HPA.
 
-3­        
 
 
          
            
            
          
           
    
          
           
          
   
             
          
            
           
              
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to expire on December 20, 2010. The HPA set Petitioner’s level
 
of punishment at Level II and identified “Degree of Injury to
 Person” as the significant factor used in determining
 Petitioner’s level of punishment.
5 A Level II punishment for a
 
ten year maximum term of imprisonment will generally result in a
 
minimum term of three to five years under the HPA Guidelines. 
HPA Guidelines at 2. In Petitioner’s case the HPA deviated
 downward from its guidelines based on his “Character and Attitude
 With Respect to Criminal Activity and/or Lifestyle.”
6
 
Over a month after issuing the First Minimum Term
 
Order, the HPA received a letter from the prosecutor, dated
 November 23, 2009, advising the HPA that Complainant and her
 family had not been notified about the first hearing “due to an
 error in communication” by the prosecutor’s office.
7 The
 
prosecutor requested that Complainant and her family “be
 permitted to appear before the [HPA] and submit oral and written
 statements addressing the [Petitioner].” However, the prosecutor
 
5 The HPA Guidelines provide that the minimum term of imprisonment
 
will generally fall within one of three levels, with the level of punishment
based on the maximum term of imprisonment imposed by the sentencing court and
subjective criteria including the nature of the offense, the degree of
injury/loss to person or property, and the offender’s criminal history. HPA
 Guidelines at 2-3.
 
6 The HPA Guidelines provide that “all deviations [from the
 
guidelines] shall be accompanied by written justification and be made a part
of the Order Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment[. ]” HPA Guidelines
 
at 1.
 
7
 The HPA later explained to Petitioner in a letter dated July 27,
 
2010 that unless the complainant requested direct notification from the HPA,
the HPA’s practice was to notify the prosecutor’s office of the minimum term
hearing date. The prosecutor’s office would then notify the complainant of
the hearing date through a victim advocate. In this case, it appears that no
 request for direct notification was made.
 
-4­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
acknowledged that “a minimum term has already been set and that
 
the prisoner has been transferred to the Maui Community
 Correctional Facility.” The prosecutor did not request
 invalidation, reconsideration, or amendment of the minimum term. 
A notation on the letter indicated that a copy of the letter was
 sent to defense counsel. 
Thereafter, in a letter dated December 15, 2009,
 
Complainant’s aunt (Aunt) wrote to the HPA requesting that the
 HPA “reconsider” the minimum term. Aunt’s letter stated, “We do
 not wish to burden the Board with an additional hearing and the
 Board’s time and expense that comes with it, but we do
 respectfully ask that you accept the enclosures as
 [Complainant’s] testimony and we respectfully ask that you
 reconsider the minimum that was set of 1.6 years.” Aunt enclosed
 a copy of Complainant’s victim impact statement and a portion of
 the transcript from the circuit court’s sentencing proceedings. 
The letter concluded with Aunt’s request that the “Board
 reconsider a minimum term of at least 3.4 years.” Aunt’s letter
 did not contain a notation indicating that Petitioner, defense
 counsel, or the State was provided with a copy of the letter and
 the attachments. 
In a letter dated January 20, 2010, the HPA wrote to
 
Aunt acknowledging receipt of her letter. The HPA advised Aunt
 that the information she had provided had been made a part of
 Petitioner’s case file and would “be reviewed when we undergo the
 
-5­        
  
           
          
            
              
          
             
             
             
             
          
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parole process in October 2010.” The HPA wrote, “The minimum
 
sentence of one year, six months does not mean that the defendant
 
[8]
 will be released on parole at that time.  We encourage you and
 
your niece to resubmit a letter prior to his parole hearing.” 
The letter does not contain a notation indicating that a copy of
 the letter was provided to Petitioner, defense counsel, or the
 State.
 
In a second letter to the HPA dated March 10, 2010,
 
Aunt wrote, “Below please find my testimony for the minimum term
 hearing scheduled for Friday, 3/19/10 at Maui Community
 
Correctional Facility.” Along with her written testimony
, Aunt
 
included a map of the locations where Petitioner had driven
 
Complainant on the day of the incident, and photographs of the
 injuries Complainant sustained. 
Aunt’s five-page, single-spaced statement recounted the
 
nature of Petitioner and Complainant’s relationship as well as
 the events of the day of the incident.
9 Aunt stated that
 
“[Petitioner] has already started on work furlough because of the
 1.6 minimum,” and that “a 1.6 month minimum term is a slap in the
 
8 Pursuant to HRS § 706-670(1) (Supp. 2010), a “person sentenced to
 
an indeterminate term of imprisonment shall receive an initial parole hearing
at least one month before the expiration of the minimum term of imprisonment
determined by the [HPA].” If the HPA does not grant parole at that initial
hearing, additional hearings are held at “twelve-month intervals or less until
 parole is granted or the maximum period of imprisonment expires.” Id. The
 
HPA may decline to set a parole date, and release becomes mandatory only upon
expiration of the maximum term of imprisonment. HRS § 706-670(5) (1993).
 
9
 At the March 19, 2010 hearing, Aunt did not read verbatim from her
 
written statement. Significant portions of her written statement were not
orally conveyed at the hearing.
 
-6­        
 
    
            
             
            
           
          
          
           
           
           
             
            
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
face to the victim.” She further claimed that “[a]fter
 
sentencing, [Petitioner] made statements like ‘my attorney is in
 with the parole board, lucky if I even do a year,’” and that
 Petitioner “new [sic] his statements would get to [Complainant],
 which was his plan.” Aunt concluded by asking the HPA to
 “consider that [Petitioner’s minimum term] should not be less
 
than a minimum of 3.8 years of his 10 year sentence[.]”
 
Aunt’s second letter also does not indicate that the
 
letter or its enclosures were provided to Petitioner, defense
 
counsel, or the State. 
B.
 
On March 19, 2010, the HPA held a second minimum term
 
hearing (second hearing).
10
 
At the hearing,  Petitioner, Complainant, Aunt, a victim
 
witness counselor, and a Maui County deputy prosecuting attorney
 were present.
11 Defense counsel was not able to attend the
 
hearing and instead appeared by telephone. He explained, “You
 know, I had some surgery, I just got the stitches out the other
 
10 The HPA is composed of three members who are appointed by the
 
governor for four-year terms, one of whom serves as chairperson. HRS § 353-61
 
(Supp. 2010). At the first hearing, all three HPA members, Chairman Albert
Tufono and members Dane Oda and Roy Reeber, were present and determined
Petitioner’s minimum term of imprisonment. At the second hearing, only
 
Chairman Tufono and member Oda were present. Pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Administrative Rules § 23-700-2(b) (1992), formal decisions of the HPA are not
“conclusive and final unless at least two members are in agreement.” 
11
 The prosecutor who appeared for the second hearing was not the
 
same prosecutor who sent the letter to the HPA recommending a minimum term for
the first hearing and who notified the HPA about the failure to notify
Complainant about the first hearing.
 
-7­        
 
 
           
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
day. And I’m going to court this morning, I start a trial. It’s
 
not that I didn’t want to be there.” Petitioner was not asked
 
whether he was previously aware of or agreed to counsel’s
 
participation through speaker phone.
 
Chairman Albert Tufono began the hearing by explaining
 
that the HPA had scheduled the second hearing because “the first
 
time we set this minimum, we did not give the family the
 opportunity to be heard in this area.”
12 Defense counsel
 
responded, “I understand. We went through all of their
 statements and all the reports and everything else [at the first
 hearing], but, I mean, I’m sure they have a right to talk.” 
Chairman Tufono continued, “Yeah. So we’re giving them the right
 to talk.” 
Before proceeding, the prosecutor stated that he was
 
present at the hearing “in a capacity to assist” Complainant, to
 “answer any questions that the Board might have,” and “maybe make
 a brief statement as well.” Defense counsel responded, “I’m a
 little uncomfortable with that”; nevertheless, the hearing
 proceeded. 
The victim counselor began by reading a letter written
 
by Complainant. The letter was shorter in length than
 Complainant’s victim impact statement, which the HPA had
 
available at the first hearing, but focused more on the
 
12
 However, there is no indication in the record that the HPA
 
foreclosed anyone from appearing or being heard at the first hearing.
 
-8­        
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
underlying incident and the effect it had, and continued to have,
 
on Complainant’s life. 
Next, Aunt was given the opportunity to make a
 
statement. Aunt stated that Petitioner’s “actions clearly show a
 
lack of remorse.” She also alluded to certain statements that
 
Petitioner had allegedly made to a cellmate after he was
 
sentenced. Defense counsel objected, “I don’t know if she’s
 allowed to make this statement. Where is this coming from? I
 object to this kind of stuff. Confessions from cellmates? What
 is that?” Aunt continued to attempt to explain that she included
 this information in her letter and that the cellmate was “a
 person who worked with [Complainant] who did weekends for DUI.” 
Aunt argued, “[Petitioner] knew this and [Petitioner] found a way
 to get uncomfortable statements back to [Complainant]. And
 that’s what he did by saying that, you know, his attorney is
 tight with the parole board and lucky he --” At that point, Aunt
 was again interrupted by defense counsel, whose statement was
 partially marked as “inaudible.” 
Aunt also addressed the HPA’s initial minimum term: 
“This defendant clearly believes that he is above the law. 
Please make it clear to him that he cannot do what he did to
 [Complainant] and walk out of jail in 1.6 months, although that
 is even more time than he thought he would do.” Aunt concluded,
 “Please don’t let this heinous crime get a slap on the hand. A
 
-9­        
 
  
           
           
            
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1.6 minimum is a slap on the hand for [Petitioner] and a slap in
 
the face for [Complainant].” 
When the prosecutor began his statement, he referenced
 
the circuit court judge’s comments during Petitioner’s sentencing
 
and stated that he knew the judge.13 Defense counsel interrupted,
 
objecting, “This is an improper argument. You want to do
 
something, you should get a transcript, or bring in (inaudible)
 the Deputy.” The prosecutor responded, “I have a transcript of
 the Judge.” Defense counsel again interjected, “This is an
 outrageous argument.” 
After Chairman Tufono told the prosecutor to continue,
 
the prosecutor argued that Petitioner had “basically tricked”
 Complainant into meeting with him on the day of the incident. 
Defense counsel objected, “This is unbelievable. How does this
 come in?” The prosecutor then referenced his nineteen years of
 experience as a prosecutor and stated that in his opinion the
 previously set minimum term “does not feel right” and “[i]t does
 not feel as though just punishment for this incident is . . .
 being meted out.” The prosecutor concluded by asking the HPA to
 “reconsider the previously set minimum.” 
Defense counsel then spoke, noting that the first
 
hearing had lasted an hour and that the “worst of [Petitioner]
 
13
 The prosecutor stated, “I was present in the courtroom during the
 
sentencing. And the Judge’s comments at the time of sentencing, absolutely
 
astounding. Because this was the individual –- and I’m talking about Judge
 Richard Bissen –- this is an individual who I have known for most of --”
 
-10­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
came out” during that hearing. Defense counsel pointed out that
 
the prosecutor’s office sent the HPA a recommendation letter for
 the first hearing, and the HPA rejected the prosecutor’s
 recommendation for the minimum term. He continued, “They just
 don’t like the mandatory minimum.” Defense counsel further
 expressed his frustration in regards to Aunt’s statements,
 saying, “Then you talk about . . . some jail mate. I wish I
 could be over there. (Inaudible.) Shame on you,” and “I wish I
 was there to ask you a few questions.”
 
Following defense counsel’s statement, Chairman Tufono
 
asked Petitioner if he wanted to make a statement. Petitioner’s
 response is denoted on the transcript as an “inaudible” “10­second statement.” After defense counsel stated, “Can’t hear,”
 Petitioner made a longer statement also described as “inaudible.”
 Chairman Tufono then twice stated to Petitioner that he had an
 opportunity to address Complainant. Petitioner made a statement
 that is marked as “inaudible” “40-second statement.” 
After Petitioner’s comments, Chairman Tufono concluded
 
the hearing and addressing defense counsel, stated, “[W]e’re
 gonna go ahead and we’ll take a look at this case. And if we
 need to reset the minimum, then that’s what we’ll do.” Defense
 counsel responded, “I hope you won’t reconsider this.” Chairman
 Tufono only noted that the HPA would “let everybody know in a
 couple weeks what the decision is.” 
-11­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
At no point during the hearing was Petitioner given an
 
opportunity to speak privately with defense counsel. 
On March 24, 2010, the HPA issued a second notice and
 
order (Second Minimum Term Order), imposing a minimum term of
 
five years imprisonment on each count, to expire on June 22,
 2014. The new minimum term was more than three times the initial
 term that had been set after the first hearing. The order
 identified the level of punishment as “Level III,” and “Nature of
 Offense” and “Degree of Injury to Person” as the significant
 factors used in determining the level of punishment. The order
 did not reference the First Minimum Term Order. 
Subsequently in July and August 2010, the HPA parole
 
administrator responded to Petitioner’s letters regarding the
 second hearing and increased minimum term. The administrator
 informed Petitioner that the HPA had decided to “reopen your
 minimum term hearing to accept the victim’s testimony.” 
Petitioner wrote two more letters to the HPA requesting an
 explanation for the Second Minimum Term Order. On both
 occasions, the HPA responded that no action would be taken and
 that the parole board’s “decision remains appropriate.” 
On February 10, 2011, Petitioner again wrote to the
 
HPA, arguing that the HPA had exceeded its statutory authority in
 holding the second hearing and requesting that the HPA restore
 his original minimum term and hold an immediate hearing to
 
-12­        
         
         
         
       
        
           
         
         
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
consider him for parole. He informed the HPA that he had filed a
 
HRPP Rule 40 petition with the circuit court. 
The HPA administrator responded to Petitioner by letter
  
dated February 22, 2011. The letter stated that “[u]pon receipt
 of [Petitioner’s February 10, 2011] letter, a review of your
 concerns, our records, and consultations with the Department of
 the Attorney General were conducted.” The administrator wrote
 
that the HPA had acted appropriately, explaining that “victims .
  
. . have the right to be present at minimum sentencing hearings
 
and provide testimony . . . to the parole board.” The
 
administrator then explained that the HPA had decided to “amend”
  
the first minimum term as a result of the information provided by
 
the prosecutor’s office and the victims at the second hearing: 
In this case, neither the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney
nor the victims . . . attended the minimum sentencing
hearing held on October 12, 2009. Therefore, the parole
board appropriately allowed them to provide testimony and/or
statements at the subsequent re-opened hearing held on March
19, 2010. As a result of the information provided by both ,
the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney, and the victims at
the March 19, 2010 hearing, the parole board amended their
[sic] previous decision of October 12, 2009 .
 
(Emphases added). 
The administrator wrote  that “the actions of the parole
 
board in this matter do not violate your rights and/or any
 
statutory authority. In fact, the actions of the parole board
 were appropriate and ensured that the parties involved were
 provided the opportunity to exercise their right to be present
 and to be heard.” 
-13­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
C.
 
Petitioner filed his HRPP Rule 40 petition for post-
conviction relief on December 27, 2010, representing himself pro
 
se. Petitioner argued that the HPA had violated his
 
constitutional rights to due process and equal protection based
 
upon the following claims: (1) the HPA exceeded its statutory
 authority by holding a second hearing to allow Complainant to
 testify after Petitioner had already been imprisoned for six
 months, and by subsequently increasing his minimum term from
 eighteen months to five years; (2) the HPA acted arbitrarily in
 sentencing Petitioner to a Level III punishment rather than a
 Level I punishment under the HPA Guidelines, despite the fact
 that he had no prior criminal history. Petitioner argued that it
 was arbitrary and capricious for the HPA to reopen his minimum
 term hearing to accept Complainant’s testimony and that he should
 not be penalized for any miscommunication between the
 prosecutor’s office and Complainant. 
The State filed an answer to the petition on March 17,
 
2011. Although the State argued that Petitioner and his counsel
 appeared at the second hearing “after receiving proper notice,”
 the nature of the “proper notice” was not identified or
 described.
 
Petitioner filed a reply to the answer on April 4,
 
2011. 
-14­        
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On May 3, 2011, the circuit court granted Petitioner’s
 
motion to add a new ground of ineffective assistance of counsel
 
to his petition (Amended Petition). As part of his ineffective
 assistance of counsel claim, Petitioner explained that defense
 
counsel participated in the second hearing via HPA member Dane
 
Oda’s cell phone, which was placed on speaker phone. Petitioner
 
argued that defense counsel’s participation by telephone was
 insufficient, that counsel was absent during a “critical stage”
 of the criminal proceeding, and that prejudice was therefore
 presumed. 
The State filed a response to the ineffective
 
assistance of counsel claim on July 20, 2011 (State’s Response to
 Amended Petition). The State argued that Petitioner was not
 denied effective assistance of counsel at the second hearing
 because counsel appeared via telephone and “ensure[d] that the
 minimum sentence imposed by the HPA [was] not predicated on
 misinformation or misreading of court records.” (Quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
The State attached as exhibits to its response, a copy
 
of Aunt’s December 15, 2009 letter to the HPA with enclosures
 
(Exhibit “D”), a copy of the HPA’s January 20, 2010 letter to
 Aunt (Exhibit “E”), and a copy of Aunt’s March 10, 2010 written
 testimony for the second hearing, with enclosures (Exhibit “F”). 
Exhibits E and F reflected that the prosecutor’s office received
 
-15­        
       
         
        
          
          
        
       
   
         
      
        
       
          
       
         
      
        
         
       
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
those documents on July 12, 2011, eight days prior to the filing
 
of the State’s Response to Amended Petition. 
On July 28, 2011, eight days after the State’s Response
 
to Amended Petition was filed, the circuit court issued its
 findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order denying
 Petitioner’s petition. 
The court’s conclusions of law provided in relevant
 
part:
 
26. Nothing in the record indicates Petitioner’s rights to
“reasonable notice of the hearing”, “to be heard by the
authority”, and to consult with and enjoy the representation
of counsel for the minimum term hearing were violated by the
HPA. See HRS § 706-669(3). Petitioner was represented by
[defense counsel], who was physically present at the first
hearing, and represented Petitioner in the second hearing
via telephone conference.
 
In regard to Petitioner’s claim of ineffective assistance of
 
counsel, the circuit court concluded that the claim was “patently
 
frivolous.” The court concluded that counsel’s appearance by
  
phone was sufficient and did not demonstrate “the withdrawal or
 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense”:
 
46. To accuse [counsel] of being merely “unprepared” is not
 
sufficiently specific for establishing a claim of
ineffective assistance of counsel. The only specific acts
or omissions to which Petitioner does point, [counsel’s]
appearance by phone and not having a conference prior to the
commencement of the hearing, do not demonstrate [counsel]
lacked skill, judgment, or diligence , as to result in the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense, or any other argument that should have
been presented to the HPA. Further, [counsel] made numerous
objections to testimonies submitted by the victim’s family,
the victim counselor, and prosecutor[.]
 
(Quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted) (Emphasis
 
added). 
-16­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court concluded that “the facts alleged in the
 
Petition, even when taken as true, do not entitle Petitioner to
 
relief under HRPP Rule 40.” The court denied an evidentiary
 hearing on the grounds that the claims submitted by Petitioner
 were “patently frivolous” and “without [a] trace of support
 either in the record or from other evidence submitted by the
 petitioner.” 
On August 1, 2011, Petitioner, apparently unaware of
 
the court’s order dismissing the petition, filed a reply to the
 State’s Response to Amended Petition. 
II.
 
On August 8, 2011, Petitioner filed a Notice of Appeal
 
from the court’s order denying his Rule 40 petition. 
Petitioner argued before the ICA that the circuit court
 
erred in denying his petition “prematurely” without reviewing his
 reply to the State’s Response to Amended Petition. Petitioner
 also argued that the circuit court violated his due process
 rights by failing to hold an evidentiary hearing to determine
 whether the HPA exceeded its authority by holding the second
 hearing and whether his counsel was ineffective in attending the
 hearing via telephone. 
On the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel,
 
Petitioner claimed that at the second hearing, he “asked where
 his attorney was at and that he wanted to review all records
 before beginning.” Petitioner cited Van Patten v. Deppisch, 434
 
-17­        
 
          
            
 
           
             
              
            
             
           
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
F.3d 1038 (7th Cir. 2006), in support of his argument that
 
counsel’s participation via speaker phone was ineffective and
 also amounted to a denial of the assistance of counsel. 
Petitioner contended that the HPA hearing should have been
 continued or at a minimum, Petitioner should have been asked if
 he wished to continue without counsel present. 
Petitioner also contended that the HPA violated his
 
rights by withholding certain evidence from him prior to the
 second hearing.
14 Specifically, Petitioner claimed that he had
 
not received the letters attached as Exhibits D, E, and F to the
 State’s Response to Amended Petition.
15 According to Petitioner,
 
he saw the letters for the first time when they were attached to
 the State’s Response. 
The State filed its answering brief on January 30,
 
2012.
16
 
On Petitioner’s first point, the State argued that the
 
HRPP does not provide for the filing of a reply to an answer to a
 Rule 40 petition. 
In response to Petitioner’s second point, the State
 
14 Petitioner’s remaining points of error on appeal before the ICA
 
are not pertinent to the resolution of this Application and will not be
addressed.
 
15
 Petitioner also stated that he was unaware of the prosecutor’s
 
letter to the HPA on November 23, 2009, attached as Exhibit “C,” but a
 notation on the letter indicated that a copy was sent to defense counsel.
 
16
 On November 3, 2011, the Department of the Attorney General of the 
State of Hawai 'i filed a Notice of Intent Not to File Answering Brief, which
explained that the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney for the County ofMaui would respond on behalf of the State as to all claims. 
-18­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
argued that the HPA did not abuse its discretion in holding a
 
second minimum term hearing because the HPA has “broad discretion
 in establishing minimum terms” and Complainant had a right to be
 heard under HRS § 706-669(7). The State acknowledged that HRS §
 706-669 “does not specifically . . . allow[] for a second hearing
 after a minimum term is set, other than for a reduction” of the
 minimum term. Nevertheless, the State argued that “there is no
 provision specifically prohibiting what happened in this case,”
 and that “[g]iven the facts of this case, the HPA did the right
 thing in . . . allowing the victim to participate.” The State
 concluded that Petitioner therefore did not raise a “colorable
 claim.” 
The State further argued that Petitioner’s due process
 
rights were not violated by the HPA’s holding of the second
 minimum term hearing, as Petitioner was given the opportunity to
 provide input at the hearing, and was assisted by counsel via
 speaker phone. The State also argued that the HPA “gave proper
 notice [of the second hearing] to the parties.” However, the
 State did not provide a citation to the record on appeal for such
 notice and did not describe the nature, type or content of the
 notice given. The State concluded that “there was no due process
 violation amounting to a colorable claim.” 
On Petitioner’s ineffective assistance of counsel
 
claim, the State argued that counsel was able to sufficiently
 represent Petitioner by participating in the second hearing via
 
-19­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
speaker phone. The State distinguished this case from the 
situation in D’Ambrosio v. State, 112 Hawai' i 446, 146 P.3d 606 
(App. 2006), where counsel failed to appear before the HPA, “personally or otherwise.” The State maintained that in this case, counsel “ably represented” Petitioner by appearing by speaker phone, as evidenced by counsel’s numerous objections during the hearing. 
The State did not address Petitioner’s third argument
 
that the HPA wrongfully withheld evidence from him prior to the
 
second hearing, including the letters attached as Exhibits D-F to
 
the State’s Response to Amended Petition. 
Petitioner filed a reply to the State’s answer.
 
Petitioner responded that the legislature had not set out a
 
procedure under HRS § 706-669 for increasing a minimum term
 sentence and that the HPA was obligated to abide by the
 procedural protections afforded to inmates. Petitioner also
 argued that the victim’s input and presence were not “essential
 element[s]” for the HPA to set a minimum term under HRS § 706­669. 
In regard to Petitioner’s ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claim, he argued that “the HPA did not give the
 Petitioner the opportunity to speak privately with his attorney
 over the phone as Petitioner wanted to discuss various important
 matters pertaining to his defense.” 
-20­        
 
 
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s order dismissing
 
the Rule 40 petition, concluding that “[Petitioner’s] arguments
 
regarding the [HPA’s] fixing of his minimum term after the second
 hearing were patently frivolous and without merit.”
17 De La Garza
 
v. State, No. CAAP-11-0000595 (App. Jul. 20, 2012) (SDO) at 2.
 
The ICA reasoned that the “[Complainant] was not given notice of
 
the first hearing and, therefore, was not afforded the
 opportunity to appear at the first hearing and present a written
 statement or oral comments, in violation of [HRS] § 706-669(7)
 (Supp. 2011).” De La Garza, SDO at 2. 
The ICA further held that the circuit court did not err
 
in concluding that Petitioner failed to raise a colorable claim
 of ineffective assistance of counsel. Id. at 3-4. The ICA
 
determined that Petitioner failed to cite and it could not find
 any authority for the proposition that “an inmate’s counsel may
 not appear by telephone at a minimum term hearing.” Id. The
 
court held that Petitioner “fail[ed] to argue how counsel’s
 appearance by phone, per se, constituted a specific error or
 omission reflecting his lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, or
 the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 
meritorious defense.” Id. at 4 (quotation marks omitted).
 
17
 The Honorable Daniel R. Foley, the Honorable Katherine G. Leonard,
 
and the Honorable Lawrence M. Reifurth, presiding.
 
-21­        
  
        
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The ICA concluded that “[Petitioner] waived his
 
remaining arguments by failing to raise them in the Petition or
 
[Amended Petition].” Id. (citing HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)). 
III.
 
On September 10, 2012, Petitioner timely filed an
 
application for writ of certiorari (Application) with this court. 
Petitioner maintains on this appeal that the ICA erred by 1)
 denying his claim that the HPA violated his rights by holding the
 second hearing to accept Complainant’s testimony; and 2) holding
 that he waived his claim that the HPA withheld evidence prior to
 and during the second hearing because he did not raise the issue
 in his Rule 40 petition.
18
 
IV.
 
A “HRPP Rule 40 petition is an appropriate means to 
challenge a minimum term of imprisonment set by the HPA.” Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai' i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007). 
“The disposition of an HRPP Rule 40 petition is based on [findings of fact] and [conclusions of law].” Raines v. State, 
79 Hawai' i 219, 222, 900 P.2d 1286, 1289 (1995). “Accordingly, we 
review the circuit court’s conclusions of law de novo and 
findings of fact for clear error.” Coulter, 116 Hawai' i at 184, 
172 P.3d at 496. 
18
 The remaining questions presented in Petitioner’s Application will
 
not be addressed in light of our disposition of the Application.
 
-22­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“[J]udicial intervention is appropriate where the HPA
 
has . . . acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise
 
to a due process violation, or otherwise violated the prisoner’s
 constitutional rights.” Id. (quotation marks omitted).
 
V.
 
Petitioner argues that the ICA erred by holding that he
 
waived his claim that the HPA violated his right to due process
 by withholding evidence from him prior to the second hearing. 
Petitioner argued before the ICA that he did not receive a copy
 of the three letters sent between Aunt and the HPA prior to the
 second hearing, and that he was not aware of these documents
 until they were attached as Exhibits D-F to the State’s Response
 to Amended Petition. The ICA held that this issue was among the
 
arguments Petitioner “waived . . . by failing to raise them in
 
the Petition or [Amended Petition].” De La Garza, SDO at 4. 
A.
 
Article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides in relevant part that “[n]o person shall be deprived of 
life, liberty or property without due process of law[.]” Procedural due process claims are addressed in two steps: “First, we must determine whether a ‘liberty’ or ‘property’ interest has been interfered with by the State; second, we must determine what specific procedures are required to satisfy due process.” State 
v. Bani, 97 Hawai' i 285, 293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001). 
-23­        
         
        
         
          
       
         
          
      
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1.
 
The HPA is responsible for “fixing the minimum term of 
imprisonment to be served before the prisoner shall become 
eligible for parole” based on the minimum term hearing. HRS § 706-669(1). The HPA minimum term hearing is “a critical stage of the criminal proceeding” that “undoubtedly affects [the convicted] person’s substantial rights.” D’Ambrosio v. State, 
112 Hawai' i 446, 464-66, 146 P.3d 606, 624-26 (App. 2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). This court has held that due process protections apply to the HPA’s determination of the minimum term. 
[T]he determination of a prisoner’s minimum term is part of
the parole process. Therefore, the same standards should
apply to judicial review of both an HPA decision denying
parole and an HPA decision establishing a minimum term. In
 both cases, judicial intervention is appropriate where the
HPA has failed to exercise any discretion at all, acted
arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due
process violation , or otherwise violated the prisoner’s
constitutional rights.
 
Williamson v. Hawai' i Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai' i 183, 195, 35 P.3d 
210, 222 (2001) (footnote omitted) (emphases added).  Therefore,
 
the HPA was obligated to comply with the due process clause of
 
the Hawai' i Constitution in determining Petitioner’s minimum term 
of imprisonment. 
2.
 
“Once it is determined that due process applies, the
 
question remains what process is due.” Morrissey v. Brewer, 408
 
U.S. 471, 481 (1972). Hawai' i courts have “repeatedly recognized 
-24­        
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that due process is not a fixed concept requiring a specific 
procedural course in every situation. Instead, due process is flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the 
particular situation demands.” Bani, 97 Hawai' i at 296, 36 P.3d 
at 1266 (internal quotation marks, brackets and citations 
omitted). However, “[a]t its core, procedural due process of law requires notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation of a significant liberty interest.” Id. at 293, 36 P.3d at 1263. 
In Morrissey v. Brewer, the U.S. Supreme Court
 
determined that in the context of parole revocation, the minimum
 requirements of due process include “written notice of the
 claimed violations of parole,” as well as “disclosure to the
 parolee of [the] evidence against him” and “a written statement
 by the factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for
 
revoking parole.” 408 U.S. at 488-89 (emphasis added).  
Specifically in the context of minimum term hearings,
 
the Utah Supreme Court has held that due process “requires that
 
the inmate know what information the [Parole] Board will be
 considering at the [original parole grant] hearing and that the
 inmate know soon enough in advance to have a reasonable
 opportunity to prepare responses and rebuttal of inaccuracies.” 
Labrum v. Utah State Bd. of Pardons, 870 P.2d 902, 909 (Utah
 
-25­        
 
         
            
             
            
            
               
            
             
           
     
         
         
         
         
        
         
          
           
        
 
             
             
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1993).19 In Labrum, the parole board did not disclose to the
 
petitioner any of the adverse materials and information it would
 
be considering at the hearing. Id. at 904. These materials
 
included letters from the victim’s family and “other information
 Labrum and his counsel believed would have been helpful in
 preparing rebuttal to the allegations against him.” Id. Based
 
on this nondisclosure of information, the court granted the
 petitioner’s petition for an extraordinary writ directing the
 board to disclose the board’s file on the petitioner, vacate its
 determination of his release date, and rehear his parole request. 
Id. at 903, 914. 
In reaching its decision, the Labrum court emphasized
 
the importance of the minimum term hearing, explaining that “an
 
19 Utah, like Hawai 'i, has in place an indeterminate sentencing 
scheme in which the Board of Pardons determines at the “original parole grant 
hearing” the actual term that the inmate will serve in prison. Labrum, 870 
P.2d at 906-09. The trial judge imposes the statutorily prescribed range of
time of imprisonment and the Board of Pardons “determines the actual number of 
years a defendant is to serve.” Foote v. Utah Bd. of Pardons , 808 P.2d 734, 
735 (Utah 1991). The Board of Pardons has adopted sentence and releaseguidelines that are “widely used . . . to estimate the time a particulardefendant should be imprisoned based on the circumstances of the case.”Labrum, 870 P.2d at 907.
The Utah statute that refers to “original parole grant hearings”
is substantially similar to HRS § 706-669(1), and provides:
 
The Board of Pardons and Parole shall determine within six
 
months after the date of an offender’s commitment to the
 
custody of the Department of Corrections, for serving a
sentence upon conviction of a felony or class A misdemeanor
offense, a date upon which the offender shall be afforded a
hearing to establish a date of release or a date for a
rehearing, and shall promptly notify the offender of the
date.
 
U
TAH CODE ANN. § 77-27-7(1). After the board makes its initial determination of
 
the actual term of imprisonment the inmate is to serve, the “Board retains the
 flexibility to reassess its original decision” based on factors such as the
 
inmate’s behavior in prison. Labrum, 870 P.2d at 908-09.
 
-26­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inmate has a reasonable expectation that the term decided upon at
 
the . . . hearing will turn out in fact to be his or her actual
 prison term,” or “[a]t the very least, [that] it will operate as
 a benchmark to assess future status.” Id. at 909. The court
 
reasoned that the timely disclosure of information to the inmate
 relates to “fundamental fairness” and has the effect of
 “minimizing error and preserving the integrity of the process
 itself.” Id. In addition, “[a]ccurate sentencing and parole
 
decisions . . . further society’s interest in ensuring that
 offenders will be returned to society neither sooner nor later
 than is appropriate.” Id. at 910 (quoting Note, A Proposal to
 
Ensure Accuracy in Presentence Investigation Reports, 91 Y
ALE L.J.
 
1225, 1241-42 (1982)) (quotation marks omitted). 
The Washington Supreme Court has also held that “at the
 
setting of minimum terms, minimum due process requires that an
 inmate be advised of adverse information in his or her parole
 file.” In re Sinka, 599 P.2d 1275, 1281-82 (Wash. 1979) (en
 
banc). The court was primarily concerned with the possibility
 that the Parole Board would rely on inaccurate or erroneous
 information in the inmate’s file that the inmate did not have an
 opportunity to correct. Id. The court reasoned that because
 
“the data on which the Board acts is not developed through an
 open adversary confrontation, its accuracy cannot be assured
 unless the prisoner has access to the relevant information in his
 file,” and “[b]oth the inmate and the state have an interest in
 
-27­        
         
            
  
      
           
      
              
           
           
           
             
        
          
    
            
           
           
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
ensuring that the setting of minimum terms is based on accurate
 
information and informed discretion.”20 Id. at 1281 (quotation
 
marks omitted). 
Hawai'i cases related to sentencing, probation and 
minimum term hearings also reflect a concern that decisions are
  
predicated on accurate factual information of which the defendant
  
has adequate notice. 
In the context of probation revocation, this court has
 
held that “the minimum requirements of due process . . . require
 in relevant part that a probationer be given written notice of
 the claimed violations of probation, disclosure of evidence
 against him, and a written statement by the factfinder as to the
 evidence relied on and the reasons for revoking probation.” 
State v. Durham, 125 Hawai' i 114, 126, 254 P.3d 425, 437 (2011) 
(quotation marks, brackets, ellipses and citations omitted).   
The
 
Durham court explained that “[t]he disclosure of facts to the
 
20 The Sinka court considered the parole board’s procedures for
 
setting minimum terms pursuant to W ASH. REV. CODE (RCW) Chapter 9.95. 599 P.2d
 
at 1277.
 
Subsequently, the Washington legislature adopted the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1981 (SRA), codified in RCW Chapter 9.94A, “which replaced
Washington’s former indeterminate sentencing regime with determinate
sentencing.” State v. Clarke , 134 P.3d 188, 191 (Wash. 2006) (en banc).
The SRA redesignated the Board of Prison Terms and Paroles as the
Indeterminate Sentence Review Board (ISRB). RCW 9.95.001. The ISRB continues
 to have jurisdiction over “persons convicted of crimes committed prior to July
 1, 1984.” RCW 9.95.009(2). The ISRB is, however, required to “make decisions
 reasonably consistent with” the SRA’s “purposes, standards, and sentencing
 ranges” and “the minimum term recommendations of the sentencing judge and
prosecuting attorney.” Id.
 
In In re Whitesel , the Washington Supreme Court held that the due
process requirements established in Sinka “also apply when the [ISRB] sets and
 
redetermines minimum terms.” 763 P.2d 199, 203-04 (Wash. 1988) (en banc)
 (footnote omitted).
 
-28­        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parties is based on the proposition that the court must have
 
correct information to render a just sentence.” Id. at 124, 254
 
P.3d at 435. “In any system which vests discretion in the
 
sentencing authority, it is necessary that the authority have
 
sufficient and accurate information so that it may rationally
 exercise its discretion.” Id. (quoting State v. Lau, 73 Haw.
 
259, 262, 831 P.2d 523, 525 (1992)) (quotation marks omitted). 
Similarly, the court explained that the requirement
 
that the defendant be given “notice of the grounds upon which
 probation is sought to be revoked” is intended to give the
 defendant an “opportunity to object, rebut, or otherwise dispute
 the factual allegations.” Id. at 124-25, 254 P.3d at 435-36. 
See State v. Wong, 73 Haw. 81, 829 P.2d 1325 (1992) (holding that
 defendant was statutorily entitled to be informed of grounds for
 court’s revocation of probation under HRS § 706-625(b), vacating
 order revoking probation and remanding “for rehearing upon the
 State’s providing proper notice”). 
In State v. Paaaina, 67 Haw. 408, 410, 689 P.2d 754,
 
757 (1984), although the court held that a defendant does not
 have a constitutional or statutory right to examine a probation
 officer’s sentencing recommendation, the court concluded that the
 defendant is entitled to “have access to all factual information
 used in sentencing.” Thus, the court held that “it is incumbent
 upon the probation officer to carefully draft the recommendation
 
-29­        
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
letter” so that it is “based only on facts contained in the pre-
sentence report.” Id. (citing HRS §§ 706-602 and 706-604). “If
 
the judge finds new factual information in the recommendation
 letter, it is incumbent upon the judge to make it available to
 
the defendant.” Id. (emphasis added). 
This underlying concern for predicating sentencing
 
decisions on accurate information was also present in D’Ambrosio
 
v. State, 112 Hawai' i 446, 466, 146 P.3d 606, 626 (App. 2006), in 
which the court recognized that “the HPA minimum-term hearing is 
a critical stage of the criminal proceeding” at which a convicted person is constitutionally entitled to be represented by counsel. In so concluding, the court considered the critical nature of the minimum term hearing and the “significant discretionary power” exercised by the HPA in setting the minimum term of imprisonment. Id. at 464-66, 146 P.3d at 624-26. The court explained that 
under the statutory scheme, “it is the HPA, not the courts, that 
exercises most of the State’s felony sentencing discretion.” Id. 
at 464, 146 P.3d at 624. The court indicated that the 
significance of counsel’s presence at the minimum term hearing was based on the same concern for accuracy expressed in Durham and Paaaina: “a convicted person is constitutionally entitled to be represented at the hearing by counsel who can ensure that the minimum sentence imposed by the HPA is not predicated on misinformation or misreading of court records, which is a 
-30­        
  
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
requirement of fair play.” Id. (quotation marks omitted)
 
(emphasis added).
 
The considerations articulated by the D’Ambrosio court
 
demonstrate the need for the convicted person to have access to
 
all of the information considered by the HPA in making the
 critical “first determination of the actual term the inmate is to
 serve in prison.” Labrum v. Utah State Bd. of Pardons, 870 P.2d
 
902, 908 (Utah 1993). As recognized in D’Ambrosio, the HPA makes
 
this determination by considering a wide variety of
 circumstances, as set forth in the HPA Guidelines.  The HPA is
 also statutorily required to “obtain a complete report regarding
 
the prisoner’s life before entering the institution and a full
 
report of the prisoner’s progress in the institution” prior to
 holding the minimum term hearing. HRS § 706-669(2). Without
 access to the potentially wide range of information being
 considered by the HPA, the convicted person may be unable to
 prepare a response and rebuttal to any adverse information being
 considered. In addition, the convicted person may be unable to
 correct any errors contained in the “complete report” obtained by
 
the HPA. Thus, nondisclosure of such information may infringe on
 
the convicted person’s due process right to fairness and a
 
meaningful opportunity to be heard.
 
In light of the critical nature of the HPA’s
 
determination of the prisoner’s minimum term of imprisonment, due
 
-31­        
  
 
         
           
           
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
process under Article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
requires that the prisoner have timely access to all of the 
adverse information contained in the HPA file. The HPA must disclose such information “soon enough in advance” that the inmate has a “reasonable opportunity to prepare responses and rebuttal of inaccuracies.” Labrum, 870 P.2d at 909. In the 
event that the HPA file of the inmate includes sensitive, or confidential personal information, the inmate is entitled to disclosure of a reasonable summary thereof.
21
 
Such disclosure ensures that the HPA will set the
 
inmate’s minimum term of imprisonment based on accurate
 information and that the inmate is given reasonable notice and a
 meaningful opportunity to be heard on the issue of the minimum
 term. See HRS § 706-669(3). 
In this case, the record indicates that Petitioner did
 
not receive the evidence in the HPA file prior to the second
 
hearing. The copies of the letters attached as Exhibits D-F to
 
the State’s Response to Amended Petition did not contain
 
notations indicating that Petitioner, defense counsel, or the
 State received copies. The time stamps on the HPA’s January 20,
 2010 letter to Aunt (Exhibit E) and Aunt’s March 10, 2010 letter
 to the HPA (Exhibit F) indicated that the prosecutor’s office did
 
21
 Where the relevant case file contains sensitive, or confidential
 
personal information, the HPA may in its discretion take “suitable steps to
withhold the identity of sources and prepare summaries of the information for
the inmate’s use rather than providing copies of the actual documents.”
Labrum, 870 P.2d at 910.
 
-32­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not receive the documents until July 12, 2011, eight days prior
 
to the filing of the State’s Response to Amended Petition. In
 addition, the State did not claim in its Rule 40 pleadings or its
 answering brief to the ICA, that Petitioner or defense counsel
 had received copies of the documents. 
Furthermore, in Aunt’s two letters to the HPA, Aunt
 
requested that the HPA “reconsider” the eighteen month minimum
 sentence, and provided the HPA with a written statement of her
 anticipated testimony for the second hearing. The HPA
 specifically informed Aunt that her December 15, 2009 letter
 requesting a second hearing and the information provided therein
 had “been made a part of [Petitioner’s] case file.” However,
 there is no indication in the record that the HPA disclosed the
 contents of Petitioner’s case file to Petitioner prior to the
 second hearing. Additionally, at the hearing, when Aunt spoke
 and alleged that Petitioner had made certain statements to a
 cellmate, defense counsel expressed surprise, stating, “Where is
 this coming from?” Aunt’s response was, “I did put this in my
 letter.” These facts suggest that Petitioner may not have been
 provided all of the information in his HPA file. 
Despite Petitioner’s factual and legal basis for
 
asserting his due process claim, the ICA, citing HRPP Rule
 
40(a)(3), held that this issue was among the arguments Petitioner
 
“waived . . . by failing to raise them in the Petition or
 
-33­        
 
          
       
           
          
       
       
        
       
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Amended Petition].” De La Garza, SDO at 4.  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)
 
provides that “Rule 40 proceedings shall not be available and
 
relief thereunder shall not be granted where the issues sought to
 be raised . . . were waived.” The rule defines waiver as
 follows: 
Except for a claim of illegal sentence, an issue is waived
if the petitioner knowingly and understandingly failed to
raise it and it could have been raised before the trial, at
the trial, on appeal, in a habeas corpus proceeding or any
other proceeding actually conducted, or in a prior
proceeding actually initiated under this rule, and the
petitioner is unable to prove the existence of extraordinary
circumstances to justify the petitioner’s failure to raise
the issue.
 
Id. “There is a rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal
 
a ruling or to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding
 
failure.” Id. 
This court has held that a claim of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel is not considered “waived” for the purposes
 of a HRPP Rule 40 petition if there was “no realistic
 opportunity” for the petitioner to raise the claim in the
 proceedings specified by the rule. See Briones v. State, 74 Haw.
 
442, 459, 848 P.2d 966, 975 (1993) (petitioner unable to raise
 
ineffective assistance of counsel issue on direct appeal where
 
petitioner was represented by same counsel at trial and on direct 
appeal); Fragiao v. State, 95 Hawai' i 9, 16, 18 P.3d 871, 878 
(2001) (finding no waiver of claim asserting trial counsel’s conflict of interest where petitioner was unaware of conflict until new appellate counsel was appointed). 
-34­        
 
 
 
  
             
               
            
             
            
           
    
          
              
           
             
          
             
          
          
              
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In this case, Petitioner would not have had any
 
opportunity to raise the issue of the HPA’s nondisclosure of
 
evidence in “any other proceeding actually conducted,” if he was
 
not aware of the existence of the letters sent between Aunt and
 
the HPA prior to the second hearing until they were filed with
 
the State’s Response to Amended Petition as Exhibits D-F.22
 
Additionally, Petitioner did not have the opportunity to raise
 
this claim “in a prior proceeding actually initiated under this
 rule,” as Petitioner did not file a Rule 40 petition prior to the
 
instant petition. Thus Petitioner presented facts sufficient to
 
rebut the presumption that he knowingly and understandingly
 
waived the issue, and the ICA erred in holding that the issue was
 waived on appeal. 
“In the absence of sufficient evidence in the record on
 
appeal, an appellate court should remand for the development of
 such a record.” Briones, 74 Haw. at 466 n.17, 848 P.2d at 978
 
22 Petitioner also had a very limited time within which to amend his
 
petition after he became aware of the three letters. At the time of the Rule
 
40 proceedings, Petitioner was being held in custody at a facility in Arizona
and he was representing himself pro se. The circuit court filed its findings
of fact, conclusions of law and order denying the petition eight days after
the State filed its Response to Amended Petition and prior to receiving
Petitioner’s reply.
HRPP Rule 40 currently does not contain a provision allowing the
petitioner to file a reply to the respondent’s answer. It is noted that Rule 
28(d) (2010) of the Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) provides that
an appellant may file a reply brief within fourteen days after service of the
appellee’s answering brief. HRAP Rule 40.1(e) (2012) also provides that
within seven days after a response to an application for writ of certiorari isfiled, any party may file and serve a reply.
Thus we suggest that the Standing Committee on Penal Rules may
consider whether an amendment that allows for a reply to a HRPP Rule 40 answer
would be appropriate.
 
-35­        
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
n.17 (citation omitted). See D’Ambrosio v. State, 112 Hawai' i 
446, 466, 146 P.3d 606, 626 (App. 2006) (concluding that 
colorable claim of denial of the right to counsel was presented and remanding for evidentiary hearing where appellate court was unable to confirm petitioner’s claims due to lack of relevant record and transcripts). Thus, we remand for a Rule 40 evidentiary hearing in which the court is directed to address whether Petitioner’s due process right to disclosure of adverse 
materials was violated by the HPA. 
VI.
 
In light of our decision to remand the case for an 
evidentiary hearing, we also address the significant question of 
whether Petitioner received adequate notice of the nature and purpose of the second hearing. As stated, due process requires notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard. State v. Bani, 
97 Hawai' i 285, 293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001). See HRS § 706­
669(3) (providing that inmates have the right to “reasonable notice of the [minimum term] hearing” and the opportunity to be heard on the issue of the minimum term to be served). 
In this case, the record is unclear as to whether
 
Petitioner received adequate notice of the nature and purpose of
 the second hearing. Following the HPA’s decision to increase
 Petitioner’s minimum term from eighteen months to five years, the
 HPA explained in its February 22, 2011 letter to Petitioner that
 
-36­        
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the second hearing was a “re-opened” hearing to permit the
 
prosecutor, Complainant and her representative(s) to appear and
 give statements. The HPA informed Petitioner that “[a]s a result
 of information provided by both[] the Office of the Prosecuting
 Attorney, and the victims at the March 19, 2010 hearing, the
 parole board amended their previous decision of October 12,
 2009.” (Emphasis added). 
However, the purpose of the second hearing was not
 
clear prior to the hearing, as reflected in the statements of its
 
participants. 
The ambiguity concerning the purpose of the second
 
hearing began with the prosecutor’s November 23, 2009 letter to
 
the HPA, which requested that the second hearing be held for the
 purpose of permitting Complainant and her family to appear and
 submit statements addressing Petitioner. The prosecutor did not
 suggest that Petitioner’s minimum term should be reconsidered or
 
amended on the basis that Complainant and her family did not
 
appear or submit statements for the first hearing due to the
 
“error in communication” with the prosecutor’s office. To the
 contrary, the prosecutor acknowledged that the minimum term had
 already been set. 
In Aunt’s December 15, 2009 letter to the HPA, however,
 
Aunt acknowledged that the minimum term had been set but
 requested that the HPA “reconsider” the minimum term and
 
-37­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
specifically requested that the “reconsidered” minimum term be
 
“at least 3.4 years.” The HPA initially indicated that the first
 minimum term would not be reconsidered, as the HPA responded to
 Aunt by assuring her that the minimum sentence did not mean that
 Petitioner would be paroled at that time and informing her that
 she could resubmit a letter for consideration prior to
 Petitioner’s parole hearing. 
Even as the second hearing commenced, it was unclear
 
whether the second hearing was anything other than a procedural
 step to permit Complainant to appear and give testimony. 
Chairman Tufono opened the second hearing by explaining that it
 had been convened in order to give Complainant and Aunt an
 opportunity to be heard. Defense counsel agreed with this
 characterization, stating, “We went through all of their
 statements and all the reports and everything else, but, I mean,
 I’m sure they have a right to talk.” 
However, as the hearing developed, the primary focus of
 
the hearing became assessing the “fairness” of the initial
 minimum term. When Aunt testified, she asked the HPA to
 “[p]lease make it clear to [Petitioner] that he cannot do what he
 did to [Complainant] and walk out of jail in 1.6 months, although
 that is even more time than he thought he would do.” 
The prosecutor also made a statement attacking the
 
initial minimum term, arguing that based on his “19 years” of
 
-38­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
experience as a prosecutor, Petitioner’s minimum term “does not
 
feel right” and “does not feel as though just punishment . . . is
 being meted out.” The prosecutor concluded by asking the HPA to
 “reconsider the previously set minimum in this case.” This
 approach appears to have been a significant departure from the
 prosecutor’s November 23, 2009 letter to the HPA, which had
 focused on Complainant and her family’s desire to appear before
 
the HPA and did not suggest that the prosecutor’s office was
 
dissatisfied with either its participation in the first hearing
 
or with the First Minimum Term Order. 
Thus when the prosecutor stated at the beginning of the
 
second hearing that he was present “in a capacity to assist”
 Complainant and to answer any of the HPA’s questions, defense
 counsel commented that he was “uncomfortable” with that. Later
 when the prosecutor gave his statement, defense counsel expressed
 surprise and frustration at the prosecutor’s comments,
 interjecting, “This is an outrageous argument,” and “This is
 unbelievable. How does this come in?” 
Additionally, the ambiguity regarding the purpose of
 
the second minimum term hearing could not have been resolved
 based on a consideration of the governing statute, HRS § 706-669. 
The ICA held that “[t]he HPA did not err by holding the
 
second hearing because the victim was not given notice of the
 first hearing and, therefore, was not afforded the opportunity to
 
-39­        
 
 
 
 
 
          
           
            
 
             
           
           
           
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
appear at the first hearing and present a written statement or
 
oral comments, in violation of [HRS] § 706-669(7).” De La Garza,
 
SDO at 2 (emphasis added). This suggests that the first hearing
 
and the HPA’s First Minimum Term Order violated HRS § 706-669 as
 
a result of the apparent lack of notice to Complainant regarding
 
the first hearing. In addition, the ICA’s holding implies that
 
Petitioner and defense counsel had adequate notice, based on the
 
statute, that the second hearing was being held for the purpose
 
of re-opening and amending Petitioner’s initial minimum term.  
First, as the State concedes, HRS § 706-669 does not
 
expressly provide for the HPA to subsequently increase a minimum
 
term fixed by its order.23 Thus, Petitioner would not have had
 
notice of the nature or purpose of the second hearing under the
 express terms of the statute.
 
Second, while HRS § 706-669(7) (Supp. 2010) provides
 
that “[t]he [minimum term] hearing shall be opened to victims or
 their designees or surviving immediate family members who may
 present a written statement or make oral comments,”
24 the statute
 
does not provide that the victim’s non-appearance or lack of
 
23 HRS § 706-669(5) (Supp. 2010) only provides that “[a]fter sixty
 
days notice to the prosecuting attorney, the authority in its discretion may
reduce the minimum term fixed by its order pursuant to subsection (1).”
(Emphasis added).
 
24
 The statute was amended in 1996 to provide for victims or their
 
representatives to have the opportunity to comment at minimum term hearings.
Supplemental Commentary on HRS § 706-669 (Supp. 2010). The amendment was
 intended to codify the HPA’s existing practice of permitting victims or their
representatives to speak at the hearings. Id.
 
-40­        
 
            
             
          
            
            
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testimony at a hearing has the effect of invalidating actions
 
taken by the HPA pursuant to such hearing.25 Accordingly, the
 
fact that Complainant was not present at Petitioner’s first
 
hearing due to an “error in communication” did not render the
 hearing or the resulting minimum term order a “violation” of HRS
 § 706-669(7). 
Third, there is no indication that the first hearing
 
was closed to Complainant or her representatives in a manner that
 would amount to a “violation” of HRS § 706-669(7). Therefore,
 Petitioner and defense counsel had no reason to know, based on
 HRS § 706-669, that Petitioner’s initial minimum term was subject
 to being re-opened and “amended” due to Complainant’s apparent
 lack of notification of the first hearing. 
Based on the record, a question arises as to whether
 
Petitioner received sufficient notice of the purpose and nature
 of the second hearing. As noted, there was a lack of clarity as
 to the purpose of the second hearing and its relationship to the
 first hearing. Even on appellate review, it is unclear whether
 the second hearing should be characterized as an entirely new and
 separate hearing from the first hearing, a re-opened hearing, or
 a reconsideration of the first hearing. Accordingly, the circuit
 
25
 Petitioner noted in his reply brief to the ICA that the “victim’s
 
input and/or presence is not an essential element for the HPA” to determine an
 
inmate’s minimum term pursuant to HRS § 706-669. Otherwise, Petitioner
 argued, “the thousands of minimum term hearings held for defendants by the HPA
without the input or presence [of] the victim” resulted in minimum term orders
 that are not “final judgments” and are open to challenge at any time.
 
-41­        
 
 
 
          
             
          
           
         
           
         
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court is also directed on remand to address the issue of whether 
Petitioner received adequate notice of the nature of the second 
hearing. See Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 466 n.17, 848 P.2d 
966, 978 n.17 (1993); D’Ambrosio v. State, 112 Hawai' i 446, 466, 
146 P.3d 606, 626 (App. 2006).
 
VII.
 
As stated, the HPA minimum term hearing is a “critical
 
stage of a criminal proceeding” at which “a convicted person is
 constitutionally entitled to be represented . . . by counsel[.]”
26
 D’Ambrosio, 112 Hawai' i at 466, 146 P.3d at 626. 
Petitioner maintained throughout the Rule 40
 
proceedings and his appeal to the ICA that his constitutional
 right to effective assistance of counsel and his right to counsel
 were violated by defense counsel’s participation in the second
 hearing via telephone.
27 The ICA held that it was aware of no
 
authority “stating that an inmate’s counsel may not appear by
 telephone at a minimum term hearing” and affirmed the circuit
 court’s denial of this claim. De La Garza, SDO at 3-4. In
 
support of its determination, the ICA explained that defense
 
26 In addition, HRS § 706-669(3)(b) provides that the inmate shall
 
“be permitted to be represented and assisted by counsel at the hearing.”
 
27
 In Hawai 'i, in order to show ineffective assistance of counsel, 
the defendant has the burden of establishing “1) that there were specific
errors or omissions reflecting counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or
diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either thewithdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.”State v. Aplaca , 74 Haw. 54, 66-67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992) (footnote
omitted). 
-42­        
 
          
           
         
        
           
             
          
             
             
               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
counsel “actively participated in the proceedings, including
 
voicing numerous objections.” Id. at 4. 
However, active participation in the proceeding does
 
not itself demonstrate that counsel was not prevented by the
 phone arrangement from providing the full benefit of counsel’s
 skills. In Van Patten v. Deppisch, 434 F.3d 1038 (7th Cir.
 
2006), rev’d, 552 U.S. 120 (2008), the court articulated numerous
 
reasons for its determination that defense counsel’s
 
participation in a plea hearing via speaker phone, in the
 circumstances of that case, “made it impossible for [the
 petitioner] to have the ‘assistance of counsel’ in anything but
 the most perfunctory sense.”
28 434 F.3d at 1043. In particular,
 
the court emphasized that because of the phone arrangement,
 “[u]nlike the usual defendant in a criminal case, [the defendant]
 could not turn to his lawyer for private legal advice, to clear
 up misunderstandings, to seek reassurance, or to discuss any
 last-minute misgivings.” Id. 
In addition, the court noted that “[o]ver a phone line,
 
it would be all too easy for a lawyer to miss something.” Id. at
 
28 The Seventh Circuit’s decision to grant the petitioner’s writ of
 
habeas corpus was reversed by the Supreme Court, which found that the
petitioner failed to establish that the state court unreasonably applied
clearly established federal law by denying the petitioner’s ineffective
assistance of counsel claim pursuant to Strickland v. Washington , 446 U.S. 668
(1984). Wright v. Van Patten , 552 U.S. 120, 125-26 (2008). The Court
 
explained, “Our precedents do not clearly hold that counsel’s participation by
speaker phone should be treated as a ‘complete denial of counsel,’ on par with
 total absence.” Id. at 125. The Court expressly left its “consideration of
 
the merits of telephone practice . . . for another day.” Id. at 126.
 
-43­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1045. For example, counsel’s ability to represent the defendant
 
would suffer from counsel’s inability to “detect and respond to
 cues from his client’s demeanor that might have indicated he did
 not understand certain aspects of the proceeding, or that he was
 changing his mind.” Id. at 1043. Furthermore, the court was
 
concerned that due to the phone arrangement, “[i]f [the
 petitioner] wished to converse with his attorney, anyone else in
 the courtroom could effectively eavesdrop.” Id. The court noted
 
that “[n]o advance arrangements had been made for a private line
 in a private place, and even if one could ‘perhaps’ have been
 provided, it would have required a special request by [the
 petitioner] and, apparently, a break in the proceedings.” Id. 
The court thus concluded that “the arrangements under which the
 hearing was conducted, with defendant and counsel unable to see
 or communicate privately with each other,” prevented the attorney
 “by . . . design . . . from providing the full benefit of his
 skills[.]” Id. at 1044. 
Although we need not decide whether defense counsel’s
 
telephone participation in this case constituted a violation of
 Petitioner’s right to counsel or right to effective assistance of
 counsel, as the issue was not raised in the Application, we note
 that many of the concerns articulated by the Van Patten court
 were also present in this case. 
-44­        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
For instance, Petitioner was not asked whether he
 
objected to counsel’s participation by speaker phone or preferred
 
to reschedule the hearing to another date. Petitioner was also
 not informed that he had the option of conferring privately with
 
counsel during the hearing.
 
Furthermore, while Van Patten involved a plea hearing
 
with no witnesses, in this case witnesses were present at the
 
second minimum term hearing and the record indicates that
 counsel’s representation of Petitioner may have been affected
 because of his phone participation. Petitioner was not given an
 opportunity to confer privately with counsel at any time during
 the proceedings. When Aunt made several accusations regarding
 
Petitioner’s post-sentencing conduct, it appeared that defense
 
counsel was not expecting such accusations and considered the
 
remarks to be serious allegations. Counsel interjected
 objections and twice stated that he wished he could be present at
 the hearing to question Aunt regarding the accusations. Despite
 the potentially damaging nature of Aunt’s allegations of
 Petitioner’s post-sentencing conduct, Petitioner and defense
 counsel were not given an opportunity to privately discuss how to
 respond to the allegations. In addition, Petitioner was not
 given an opportunity to consult privately with counsel about
 whether to address Complainant at the end of the hearing and to
 discuss the subject matter of his statement. 
-45­        
          
          
              
           
              
           
           
         
        
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Moreover, the right to counsel includes the defendant’s 
right to confer with counsel. State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 
367, 219 P.3d 1126, 1154 (2009). In Mundon, the court held that 
“a criminal defendant has a constitutional right to confer with counsel at all stages of his case, including recesses taken during his testimony.” Id. Accordingly, “preventing a defendant 
from conferring with his counsel during a recess of any length would . . . deny his right to assistance of counsel[.]”
29 Id. 
See also State v. Ulestad,  111 P.3d 276, 278-79 (Wash. Ct. App. 
2005) (“defendant’s right to continuously consult with his counsel during trial” was violated, where counsel was in adjoining room with child witness and defendant was not provided with method of constant communication with counsel). 
Thus, while we need not address Petitioner’s right to
 
effective assistance of counsel or right to counsel claims in
 this case, nevertheless counsel’s representation of a client by
 phone at a critical stage of the criminal proceeding should not
 prevent counsel from providing the full benefit of counsel’s
 skills and guidance at a time when they may be most needed. 
29 The Mundon court clarified that the defendant’s right to confer
 
with counsel applies “during a routine recess taken during trial proceedings,
. . . except when a request for a non-routine recess for the purposes of
conferring with counsel would, in the discretion of the trial court, interfere
with the orderly and expeditious progress of the trial.” Id. at 368, 219 P.3d
 
at 1155 (italics in original) (footnote omitted). The dissenting opinion in
Mundon would have held that the right to counsel applies during routine
recesses, without inquiry into the “need” for attorney-client consultation and
without conditioning such consultation upon the defendant’s objection, request
 
or concern. Id. at 372, 219 P.3d at 1159 (Acoba, J., dissenting).
 
-46­        
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VIII.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the circuit
 
court erred in denying Petitioner’s HRPP Rule 40 petition without
 
an evidentiary hearing. Accordingly, the ICA erred in affirming
 the circuit court’s July 28, 2011 order denying the petition. 
The August 23, 2012 judgment of the ICA and the circuit court’s
 
order are vacated and the case is remanded to the circuit court
 
to conduct an evidentiary hearing consistent with this opinion. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
-47­