 
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
EDELMIRA SALAYES ARAIZA, 
Petitioner/Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Respondent/Respondent-Appellee. 
 
 
SCWC-17-0000695 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000695; CR. NO. 14-1-0162; S.P.P. NO. 15-1-0007) 
 
JANUARY 26, 2021  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE BROWNING, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Edelmira Salayes Araiza is a citizen of Mexico and a 
lawful permanent resident (LPR) of the United States.  She has 
lived in Hawaiʻi 
for more than twenty-two years and has two 
children, both of whom were born in the United States.  In 2014, Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000695
26-JAN-2021
08:22 AM
Dkt. 20 OP 
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
2 
 Araiza pleaded no contest in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit to Theft in the First Degree, an aggravated felony under 
federal immigration law, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43), and to Welfare 
Fraud.  Her attorney advised her that pleading no contest would 
make deportation “almost certain,” but that “[his office] had 
criminal defendants who were convicted of felonies who are not 
automatically deported” because immigration was “handled by 
federal authorities who do not oversee state courts.”   
Here, we are asked to determine whether counsel 
properly advised his client, Araiza, about the consequences of an aggravated felony conviction.  We hold he did not.  In order 
to be effective under the United States and 
Hawaiʻi 
Constitutions, criminal defense attorneys must advise their 
clients about adverse immigration consequences that may result 
from a plea of guilty or no contest.  Haw. Const. art. I, § 14; 
Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356, 368 (2010).  Despite her 
attorney’s reference to deportation being “almost certain,” when taken as a whole, his advice conveyed that there was a realistic 
possibility Araiza would not be deported.  In reality, Araiza was precluded from discretionary relief from deportation because 
of her conviction.  Budziszewski v. Comm’r of Corr., 142 A.3d 
243, 251 (Conn. 2016) (“If counsel gave the advice required under Padilla, but also expressed doubt about the likelihood of 
enforcement, the court must also look to the totality of the  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
3 
 immigration advice given by counsel to determine whether 
counsel’s enforcement advice effectively negated the import of 
counsel’s advice required under Padilla about the meaning of 
federal law.” (emphasis added)).  Araiza is therefore entitled 
to relief. 
In light of our resolution of this issue, we decline 
to determine whether the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
erred on the other points of error raised by Araiza.   However, 
we offer guidance on one of those issues relating to 
qualifications of interpreters.  When a lower court appoints an 
interpreter who has not been certified by the judiciary as 
proficient in the applicable foreign language, it must conduct a
brief inquiry to establish that the interpreter is qualified, as
required by Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 604 and 702, 
and the Hawaiʻ i Rules for Certification of Spoken-Language 
Interpreters (HRCSLI).   1
 
 
II.  BACKGROUND 
 
In March 2014, the State charged Araiza with Theft in 
the First Degree in violation of Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 708-830.5(1)(a) (2014) and with Welfare Fraud in violation of 
                     
 
1  On appeal, Araiza raised four additional issues: (1) her defense 
attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to negotiate 
an immigration- safe plea; (2) the circuit court’s plea colloquy was 
insufficient under State v. Ernes, 147 Hawaiʻi 316 (2020); (3) her Rule 40 
counsel had been ineffective; and (4) the circuit court committed plain error 
by appointing an unqualified interpreter for the Rule 40 hearing.    
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
4 
 HRS § 346-34(b) and/or (c) (2015), alleging she had failed to 
report income, which resulted in a substantial overpayment of 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits over 
the course of several years.  Araiza had no prior experience 
with the criminal justice system.   
At her arraignment, the circuit court2 advised Araiza 
pursuant to HRS § 802E-4 (2014)3: “[Y]our case may have severe 
and irreversible [immigration] consequences, including immediate 
detention, deportation or exclusion from admission or denial 
[of] naturalization to the United States.  Your attorney must 
advise you regarding the possible consequences this case may 
have on your immigration status.”   
 
                     
 
2  The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided over Araiza’s circuit 
court proceedings including her arraignment, no contest plea, and Rule 40 
petition.  
 
3   HRS § 802E- 4 provides:  
 
At the commencement of the court session for arraignment and plea hearings for an offense punishable as a crime 
under state law, except offenses designated as 
infractions 
under state law, the court shall administer the following 
advisement on the record to all defendants present: 
 
If you are not a citizen of the United States, whether or not you have lawful immigration status, your case may have severe and irreversible 
consequences, including immediate detention, 
deportation, or exclusion from admission or denial of 
naturalization to the United States.  Your attorney 
must advise you regarding the possible consequences this case may have on your immigration status.  You 
are not required to disclose your immigration or 
citizenship status to the court. 
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
5 
 A. Araiza’s No Contest Plea 
On October 10, 2014, Araiza, who was represented by a 
deputy public defender (trial counsel), pleaded no contest to 
both charges and moved for a deferred acceptance of her plea.  
The plea paperwork, which Araiza and her attorney both signed, 
specified, “[T]his document has been read to me or has been 
interpreted for me.”  It also contained an advisement about 
immigration consequences:  
If I am not a citizen of the United States, whether or not 
I have lawful immigration status, I have the right to receive advice from my lawyer about the specific impact 
that this case will have, if any, on my immigration status.  
The entry of a guilty or nolo contendre (no contest) 
plea, . . . may have the consequences of my immediate 
detention, deportation, exclusion from admission to the 
United States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the 
laws of the United States.  In some case[s], detention and 
deportation from the United States will be required.  My 
lawyer must investigate and advise me about the 
aforementioned issues prior to . . . entry of a guilty or 
nolo contendere (no contest) plea . . . and I acknowledge 
that I have been so advised.  I am not required to disclose 
my immigration or citizenship status to the court. 
 
(Emphasis added).   
The circuit court also read Araiza the immigration 
advisement from her plea paperwork, informing her that her plea
“may have the consequences of your immediate detention, 
deportation[,] . . . [e]xclusion from admission to the United 
States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the laws of the
United States,” and that “[y]our lawyer must investigate and 
advise you about these issues prior to the . . . entry of a  
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
6 
 guilty or no contest plea.”   Araiza told the court she did not 
need additional time to consider her plea, and that she had 
discussed immigration consequences with her attorney and was 
satisfied with his advice.  Accordingly, the circuit court found 
she “voluntarily entered a plea of no contest, with the 
understanding of the nature of the charges and the consequences 
of her plea.”   4
                     
 
4   Like the circuit court’s advisement at Araiza’s arraignment, this 
advisement was required by statute.  HRS § 802E- 2 (2014) provides:  
 
Prior to the commencement of trial, entry of a plea of 
guilty or nolo contendere, or admission of guilt or 
sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under 
state law, except offenses designated as infractions under state law, the court shall administer the following 
advisement on the record to the defendant:
 
 
If you are not a citizen of the United States, 
whether or not you have lawful immigration status, you have the right to receive advice from your 
attorney about the specific impact that this case 
will have, if any, on your immigration status.  The 
entry of a guilty or nolo contendere plea, admission 
of guilt or sufficient facts, or conviction, deferred 
judgment, or deferred sentence may have the 
consequences of your immediate detention, deportation, exclusion from admission to the United 
States, or denial of naturalization pursuant to the 
laws of the United States.  In some cases, detention 
and deportation from the United States will be 
required.  Your lawyer must investigate and advise you about these issues prior to the commencement of 
trial, entry of a guilty or nolo contendere [plea], 
or admission of guilt or sufficient facts to any 
offense punishable as a crime under state law, other 
than those offenses designated as infractions. You are not required to disclose your immigration or 
citizenship status to the court. 
 
Upon request, the court shall allow the defendant 
additional time to consider the appropriateness of the plea in light of the advisement as described in this section. 
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
7 
 The circuit court subsequently denied Araiza’s motion 
for a deferral and sentenced her to five years of probation on 
Count One (Theft in the First Degree), and one year of probation 
on Count Two (Welfare Fraud), with both terms of probation to 
run concurrently.  Araiza did not appeal her conviction.   
Four months later, the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security detained Araiza without bond and served her with a 
Notice to Appear, alleging that she was removable because her conviction for Theft in the First Degree was an aggravated 
felony conviction.   
B. Rule 40 Petition  
1. Rule 40 Petition and Hearing  
 
Five months after Araiza’s conviction, Araiza filed a 
Hawaiʻi
 Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 petition,5 
                     
 
5   HRPP Rule 40 provides in relevant part:  
 
(a) Proceedings and Grounds.
 The post- conviction 
proceeding established by this rule shall encompass all 
common law and statutory procedures for the same purpose, 
including habeas corpus and coram nobis; provided that the 
foregoing shall not be construed to limit the availability 
of remedies in the trial court or on direct appeal. Said 
proceeding shall be applicable to judgments of conviction 
and to custody based on judgments of conviction, as 
follows: 
 
(1) From Judgment.
 At any time but not prior to final 
judgment, any person may seek relief under the 
procedure set forth in this rule from the judgment of 
conviction, on the following grounds: 
  
 
         (continued . . .) 
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
8 
 asserting that her trial counsel’s failure to advise her of 
immigration consequences constituted ineffective assistance of
counsel and, in turn, prevented her no contest plea from being
knowing and intelligent.    
 
Initially, the circuit court summarily denied Araiza’s 
Rule 40 petition without a hearing, finding that her claim of ineffective assistance of counsel had been waived because she 
failed to raise it on appeal, and that Araiza had not been convicted of an aggravated felony, so “the consequences 
resulting from [Araiza’s] plea were truly unclear.”  But the ICA 
reversed and explained that “[c]ontrary to the Circuit Court’s 
assumption, []Araiza’s conviction for first-degree theft by 
deception in violation of HRS § 708-830.5(1)(a) is an aggravated 
felony under the immigration laws.”  Salayes-Araiza v. State, 
No. CAAP-15-0000934, 2016 WL 6948461, at *4 (Haw. App. Nov. 28, 2016).  Accordingly, citing Padilla, the ICA concluded that 
Araiza’s “petition sufficiently stated a colorable claim for 
relief” and remanded for a hearing.  Id. at *5.  
                     
 
(i) that the judgment was obtained or sentence 
imposed in violation of the constitution of the 
United States or of the State of Hawai‘ i; 
(ii) that the court which rendered the judgment 
was without jurisdiction over the person or the 
subject matter; 
(iii) that the sentence is illegal; 
(iv) that there is newly discovered evidence; 
or
 
(v) any ground which is a basis for collateral attack on the judgment.  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
9 
 At the hearing on remand, the parties stipulated to 
admitting State’s Exhibit 1, Araiza’s trial counsel’s 
declaration.  Araiza’s trial counsel stated in his declaration 
that he discussed immigration consequences with Araiza:  
[N]early every conversation with my client centered on 
immigration concerns, the looming and almost- certain 
possibility that she’d be deported, and the difficulty in 
presenting a defense in this case due to the language 
barrier, the severity of the charge, and the State’s 
evidence, and I remember that she burst into tears or 
became teary- eyed anytime I brought up this topic, which 
was every discussion we had prior to pre- trial. 
 
Trial counsel also advised Araiza and her husband that 
a plea of guilty or no contest “would result in an almost-
certain deportation,” and he strongly advised them to speak to an immigration attorney.  However, he also explained that 
sometimes defendants convicted of felonies were not deported:  
As part of this discussion, I informed her that I had 
discussed this issue with more senior attorneys in my office, and discovered that there were situations in our 
own office where people who were found guilty of felony 
offenses were actually not deported, despite their 
convictions, and for that reason I could not give her 100% confirmation that she’d be automatically deported for the very reason that the immigration is handled by Federal 
authorities who do not oversee the State courts and that 
certain defendants seemed to slip through the grasp of what 
would [] otherwise be an automatic deportation. 
 
(Emphases added).   
 Overall, trial counsel advised Araiza that she needed 
to weigh “risking automatic deportation with no jail (upon a 
plea agreement) versus going to trial and possibly being found 
guilty, serving jail and then being deported (which would be far  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
10 
 worse)[.]”6   
During the Rule 40 hearing, trial counsel testified on 
behalf of the State.  Consistent with his declaration, trial 
counsel testified that he advised Araiza she would be subject to 
almost-certain deportation if convicted.  Deportation was not 
certain because his office “had criminal defendants who were 
convicted of felonies who are not automatically deported.”   
When pressed about his advice on cross-examination, 
trial counsel conceded he did not know, and had never advised Araiza, that state criminal records were automatically forwarded 
to Immigration and Customs Enforcement.  Moreover, trial counsel 
did not tell Araiza she would be automatically detained after 
her plea, even though he knew that that would happen and had 
advised her she would not go to jail if she pleaded no contest.   
Trial counsel also admitted that he did not tell 
Araiza that her conviction would be for an “aggravated felony,” 
or that a conviction for an aggravated felony precluded any 
                     
 
6  Trial counsel also stated in his declaration that he had wanted 
to negotiate a dismissal if Araiza could raise “the full amount of 
restitution money,” but that Araiza and her husband were unable to do so.  
When he learned they did not have the money,  
 
I again explained that there could be immigration consequences, especially with a Theft in the First Degree 
conviction, and that deportation would be almost certain if 
convicted or put on probation.  I again proposed that we could just take our chances at trial and try for an 
acquittal and [Araiza] indicated she did not want to risk 
losing at trial and again was very emotional during the 
conversation.   
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
11 
 possible relief from removal.  
Although he did not tell Araiza 
she was pleading to an “aggravated felony,” he testified that he 
told her it was “a more serious felony,” and explained “the 
difference between a Class B and a Class C [felony.]”   
When asked, he also said that he knew that someone 
deported for an aggravated felony would never be able to 
naturalize, but that he did not tell Araiza that: “I didn’t go 
through the specifics of the law because almost certain deportation, a reasonable inference would be that once you’re 
deported, you’re not allowed to come back.  But that’s why I 
also requested that she seek the advice of an immigration 
attorney.”   
When Araiza’s attorney explained that inadmissibility 
and inability to naturalize were two different things, trial 
counsel conceded he did not advise Araiza of either consequence.   
Trial counsel testified that he was not aware of 
Padilla, and that he never contacted immigration attorneys about 
his cases “because of client confidentiality,” even though the 
public defender’s office “encouraged us to contact immigration 
attorneys personally.”  Finally, when asked if he had a duty to 
research immigration consequences, he replied, “I believe that 
this is an issue that keeps on coming up in courts and that 
keeps on changing, especially with the presidency. . . .  Back 
then I didn’t believe I had the duty to know immigration law as  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
12 
 much as an immigration attorney.”   
Araiza herself also testified at the hearing.  She 
testified that she had lived in Hawai‘ i for twenty-two years.  
She was married and had two children, both born in the United 
States.  She had a green card — and therefore was an LPR — and 
had hoped to become an American citizen.   
Araiza did not know what an aggravated felony was, and 
she testified that trial counsel had not advised her about 
possible immigration consequences:7   
What I’m seeing, that he wanted to finish the case fast, 
because he told me to plead guilty, to just get an 
agreement; that I had to give $3,000; I was going to -- I 
was not going to go to jail; I was going to get an approval 
for five years [deferral]; and that I should continue with 
the payments; and that everything was going to be all right.  So I felt relaxed on that sense. 
 
When asked if she would have gone to trial had she 
known about the immigration consequences of her plea, Araiza 
replied, “I would have gone and fight.”   
Araiza used a Spanish-speaking interpreter during the 
Rule 40 hearing.  Almost as soon as the hearing began, the 
circuit court interrupted the proceedings to instruct the 
interpreter twice that “[e]verything [Araiza] says you need to 
translate for us.”  Shortly after the first witness began 
                     
 
7   Araiza testified that trial counsel had not given her any legal 
advice, but immediately went on to explain the non- immigration legal advice 
he had given her.   
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
13 
 testifying, the circuit court interrupted again to ask if the 
interpreter was “getting all this,” to which the interpreter 
responded, “No. . . .  [I’m] getting a little behind.  But I’m 
getting the whole idea.”  The court said, “No,” and the 
interpreter said, “I can only translate ideas, no words.”  
During Araiza’s testimony, the court again instructed the 
interpreter to translate everything Araiza said.  However, when 
asked if Araiza wanted a different interpreter, Araiza’s attorney said, “No.”   
2. The Circuit Court’s Findings of Facts and Conclusions 
of Law   
 
The circuit court denied Araiza’s Rule 40 petition in 
a written order filed on September 6, 2017.  The circuit court found trial counsel credible and that he had advised Araiza a no contest plea or guilty conviction “would result in an almost 
certain deportation, but could not provide 100% confirmation 
that [Araiza] would be deported.”  The court also noted that it 
had advised Araiza that her case could have immigration 
consequences and that her attorney must advise her about them.  
By contrast, the circuit court found Araiza’s “claims that 
[trial counsel] did not give her any legal advice, including any 
advice pertaining to possible immigration consequences, are not 
credible.”   
Accordingly, the circuit court found that trial  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
14 
 counsel “adequately advised [Araiza] of the possible immigration 
and/or deportation consequences of her no contest pleas.”  The 
court further concluded that Araiza “had a full understanding of 
what her no contest pleas connoted, [and] their direct 
consequences; and therefore, [Araiza’s] no contest pleas were 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily entered.”   
In sum, the circuit court concluded “in light of all 
the circumstances, [Araiza] has failed to meet her burden of demonstrating that her counsel’s performance was not objectively 
reasonable,” and that “there were specific errors or omissions 
reflecting her counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or diligence.”  
The circuit court therefore “conclude[d] that [Araiza] was not 
provided ineffective assistance of counsel under the State of 
Hawai‘i or United States Constitutions[.]”   
B. ICA Memorandum Opinion 
Araiza appealed to the ICA, arguing that the circuit 
court erred in concluding that trial counsel did not provide 
ineffective assistance of counsel by providing deficient 
immigration advice
8 and, for the first time on appeal, that the 
circuit court did not provide Araiza with a qualified 
interpreter during her Rule 40 hearing.   
                     
 
8  Araiza also argued in her Rule 40 petition and application for 
writ of certiorari that she was prejudiced by trial counsel’s advice because 
she would not have pleaded no contest had she known that deportation was 
mandatory.  The State did not dispute this argument.  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
15 
 The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s denial of 
Araiza’s Rule 40 petition.  First, the ICA held that the circuit 
court’s factual finding that trial counsel advised Araiza she 
faced “almost-certain deportation” was not clearly erroneous 
because it was supported by evidence in the record and was based 
on the court’s credibility assessment.   
With respect to the sufficiency of trial counsel’s 
immigration advisement, the ICA decided that “the Supreme Court has not consistently characterized the immigration consequence 
of an aggravated felony conviction” and therefore “has not made 
it clear whether the immigration consequence for an aggravated 
felony is absolute or qualified.”  The ICA conducted its own 
analysis of the consequences of an aggravated felony.   
First, it held that the statutory language in 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii) and 8 U.S.C. § 1228(c) regarding aggravated 
felonies “does not support Araiza’s argument” because it “does 
not state that deportation is automatic, mandatory, or certain.”   
Second, the ICA concluded that removal is not 
automatic because “[t]here are also administrative proceedings and limited judicial review available,” since immigration judges 
conduct removal proceedings.  While the ICA recognized that 
federal courts have no appellate jurisdiction over final orders 
of removal where the basis for removal was an aggravated felony 
conviction, the ICA concluded that since federal courts retain  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
16 
 jurisdiction over questions of law, “even when removal 
proceedings are initiated, the result is not always automatic 
deportation.”   
Third, quoting Chacon v. State, 409 S.W.3d 529, 537 
(Mo. Ct. App. 2013), the ICA held that “Padilla does not require 
that counsel use specific words to communicate to a defendant the consequences of entering a plea.”  And it cited several 
decisions from state and federal courts that approved of qualifying language such as “virtual certainty” or “almost 
certainly will.”  Thus, “[t]rial counsel was not ineffective 
when he provided Araiza with correct advice, informing her that 
deportation was ‘almost certain’ if she pleaded no contest.”   
Finally, the ICA held that the circuit court did not 
plainly err by failing to provide Araiza with a qualified 
interpreter based on the presumption that an interpreter acted 
regularly in the course of their duty.  The ICA observed that 
Araiza did not prove the interpreter had not been certified when the Rule 40 hearing occurred in June 2017, and that there is no 
requirement an interpreter be formally certified, nor that a 
trial court “express[ly]” find an interpreter to be qualified.   
Thus, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s order in 
its entirety.  Araiza timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari.    
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
17 
 III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
 
A. 
Ineffective Assistance of Counsel  
“The proper standard for claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel on appeal is whether, ‘viewed as a whole, 
the assistance provided was within the range of competence 
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.’”  State v. DeLeon, 131 
Hawai‘i 463, 479, 319 P.3d 382, 398 (2014) (quoting Dan v. State, 
76 Hawai‘ i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994)).   
The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective 
assistance of counsel and must meet the following two- part 
test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions 
reflecting counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; 
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  
 
Id. at 478–79, 319 P.3d at 397–98 (quoting State v. Wakisaka, 
102 Hawai‘ i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003)). 
Unlike the federal standard, defendant need only show 
“a possible impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a 
potentially meritorious defense.  A defendant need not prove 
actual prejudice.”  Id. at 479, 319 P.3d at 398 (quoting 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai‘ i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327). 
B. Court Interpreters 
The court has discretion to appoint an “interpreter of 
its own selection[.]”  HRPP Rule 28(b).  Under HRE Rule 604, interpreters must be qualified to the same extent as an expert 
witness pursuant to HRE Rule 702.  Thus, as with an expert  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
18 
 witness, a trial court’s determination whether a witness is 
qualified to be an interpreter is reviewed for abuse of 
discretion.  HRE Rule 604 cmt. (“Under Hawaii law, preliminary 
determination of [an interpreter’s] qualifications is a matter 
within the discretion of the court[.]”).  
IV.  DISCUSSION 
 
A. 
Araiza’s Trial Counsel Provided Inadequate Immigration 
Advice  
 
According to trial counsel’s own testimony,9 he gave 
Araiza three pieces of advice regarding immigration 
consequences: (1) a no contest plea would result in “almost 
certain deportation,” but that (2) his office has had defendants 
“convicted of felonies who are not automatically deported,” and 
that (3) “immigration is handled by federal authorities who do not oversee state courts[.]”  He told Araiza, in sum, that she 
needed to weigh “risking automatic deportation” as the result of 
a plea, versus “going to trial and possibly being found guilty . . . and then being deported[.]”   
The ICA decided trial counsel’s advisement satisfied 
his professional duty to advise Araiza about the immigration 
consequences of her no contest plea.  For the following reasons, 
                     
 
9   The circuit court found trial counsel credible, and the ICA 
appropriately held that the circuit court’s finding regarding trial counsel’s 
credibility was not clearly erroneous because there was evidence in the 
record to support it.   
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
19 
 we disagree. 
1. 
The Right to Immigration Advice  
 
Under Padilla, the sixth amendment of the United 
States Constitution guarantees a defendant the right to receive 
immigration advice from their defense attorney.  559 U.S. at 368 
(mandating advice where “the terms of the relevant immigration 
statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in defining the 
removal consequence for [the defendant’s] conviction”).  Such advice is necessary to “ensure that no criminal defendant — 
whether a citizen or not — is left to the ‘mercies of 
incompetent counsel.’”  Id. at 374.  
This same right can be independently found in article 
I, section 14 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution since, “under Hawaii’ s 
Constitution, defendants are clearly afforded greater protection of their right to effective assistance of counsel.”  State v. 
Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 67 n.2, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 n.2 (1992). 
We note that the Hawai‘ i Legislature has also 
acknowledged that such advice is constitutionally required.  Indeed, it enacted HRS § 802E-4 and amended HRS § 802E-2
 to 
“conform [the statutes] to current federal court holdings,” including Padilla, and to ensure a defendant is “adequately 
advise[d] . . . of the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to competent and specific advice on immigration consequences of a criminal conviction.”  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1376, in 2013  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
20 
 Senate Journal, at 1518.   
Thus, by statute, the court must inform defendants 
that their attorneys will “investigate and advise” them about 
“the specific impact” the case will have on their immigration 
status, including “[1] detention, [2] deportation, [3] exclusion 
from admission to the United States, or [4] denial of 
naturalization pursuant to the laws of the United States.”  HRS 
§§ 802E-2, 802E-4.  Further, the court has to tell defendants that their attorney must advise them whether “detention and 
deportation from the United States will be required.”  HRS 
§ 802E-2.  
Accordingly, under Padilla, and independently, under 
article I, section 14 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution, defense 
counsel must adequately advise their clients regarding the immigration consequences of a plea.  The failure to do so 
renders counsel’s advice deficient under the United States and 
Hawai‘i
 Constitutions.  
2. The Immigration Consequences of an Aggravated Felony 
Conviction  
 
Trial counsel’s advice to Araiza did not capture the 
severity of a plea to an aggravated felony.  See Sessions v. 
Dimaya, 138 S. Ct. 1204, 1211 (2018) (“[R]emoval is a virtual 
certainty for an alien found to have an aggravated felony 
conviction, no matter how long [she] has previously resided  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
21 
 here.”).  Araiza’s conviction for Theft in the First Degree 
constitutes an aggravated felony under 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1101(a)(43)(M)(i) (“[A]n offense that . . . involves fraud or 
deceit in which the loss to the victim or victims exceeds 
$10,000[.]”).  “Aggravated felony” is a term of art: 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1101(a)(43) lists twenty-one categories of offenses that 
constitute aggravated felonies, and any immigrant convicted of 
an aggravated felony “shall . . . be removed.”  8 U.S.C. 
§ 1227(a) (emphasis added).   
Trial counsel explained that he told Araiza she was 
pleading to a “more serious felony,” and explained the 
difference between class B and class C felonies.  But contrary 
to trial counsel’s apparent belief, the term “aggravated felony” 
does not include all serious felonies, and designation as an 
aggravated felony does not depend on the class of felony.  Lopez 
v. Gonzales, 549 U.S. 47, 59-60 (2006) (holding that the 
“aggravated felony” classification turns on analogies to federal law and noting that state misdemeanors can constitute aggravated 
felonies).   
The consequences of an aggravated felony conviction 
are well-documented.  See, e.g., Richard D. Steel, Steel on 
Immigration Law § 13:16 (2020 ed.); Kathy Brady, Practice 
Advisory: Aggravated Felonies, Immigrant Legal Resource Center 
(Apr. 2017), https://perma.cc/N3WM-97W7.  And Congress has made  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
22 
 it clear that “a listed offense should lead to swift removal, no 
matter whether it violates federal, state, or foreign law.”  
Torres v. Lynch, 136 S. Ct. 1619, 1627 (2016).   
Such a conviction makes an immigrant removable (i.e., 
deportable) under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii), and unlike 
other grounds of removability, anyone convicted of an aggravated 
felony is “conclusively presumed to be deportable” under 8 
U.S.C. § 1228(c).  Removal is considered mandatory because 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a) provides that an immigrant falling under one of 
the listed categories “shall” be removed.  Further, an 
aggravated felony conviction makes an immigrant ineligible for 
relief from removal, including cancellation of removal, 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1229b(a)(3), adjustment of status, 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(b)(1)(C), 
asylum,
10 8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(2)(B)(i), or voluntary departure,11 8 
U.S.C. § 1229c(a)(1).  See Lopez, 549 U.S. at 50–51 (discussing 
these consequences).   
In addition, an aggravated felony conviction reduces 
an immigrant’s procedural protections during removal 
                     
 
10   Additionally, a conviction for an aggravated felony is grounds 
for termination of asylum status.  8 U.S.C. § 1158(c)(2)(B). 
 
11   “Voluntary departure” means choosing to leave voluntarily in lieu 
of being removed.  8 U.S.C. § 1229c(a)(1).  It enables immigrants to avoid 
certain grounds for inadmissibility that are contingent on having been 
deported for a crime.  See 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(9)(A)(i).  However, because it 
is not available to an immigrant convicted of an aggravated felony, it is 
impossible for someone with this type of conviction to avoid becoming 
permanently inadmissible after removal.    
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
23        (continued . . .) 
 proceedings.  They are subject to mandatory detention without 
bond.  8 U.S.C. § 1226(c)(1)(B); Demore v. Kim, 538 U.S. 510, 
517–18 (2003) (“Section 1226(c) mandates detention during removal proceedings for a limited class of deportable aliens — 
including those convicted of an aggravated felony.”).  But see 
Rodriguez v. Robbins, 715 F.3d 1127, 1138 (9th Cir. 2013) 
(holding a bond hearing must be held once detention lasts more 
than six months).  Further, immigrants convicted of an aggravated felony are subject to expedited removal proceedings 
and, under certain circumstances, can be deported without a 
hearing before an immigration judge.  8 U.S.C. § 1228(b); see 
also Richard D. Steel, Steel on Immigration Law § 14:5 (2020 
ed.).   
 Finally, the immigration consequences of an aggravated 
felony conviction go beyond removal: Such a conviction makes an 
immigrant permanently inadmissible, 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(9)(A)(i), 
and precludes that person from ever becoming an American citizen.  Elmakhzoumi v. Sessions, 883 F.3d 1170, 1172 (9th Cir. 
2018) (holding aggravated felony conviction makes an immigrant “permanently ineligible for naturalization”).
12   
                     
 
12   Advice about these consequences is required by HRS § 802E- 2, and at 
least one state has held that defense attorneys are constitutionally 
obligated to advise defendants of all clear statutory consequences of a plea, 
including inadmissibility and ineligibility for naturalization, noting that  
   
  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
24 
 Thus, trial counsel’s advice to Araiza on the nature 
of the felony to which she pleaded no contest failed to convey 
that “aggravated felony” is a term of art connoting severe and 
permanent consequences.  
3.  
Inconsistencies between the ICA’s Analysis and 
Existing Federal Law  
 
The ICA concluded that because the Supreme Court has 
not “made it clear whether the immigration consequence for an 
aggravated felony conviction is absolute or qualified,” 
deportation was not “certain” given the statutory language and 
procedural protections available.  This analysis is in tension 
with existing federal law.   
First, it is true that the Supreme Court sometimes 
uses qualifying language with respect to an aggravated felony conviction.  E.g., Dimaya, 138 S. Ct. at 1211 (“virtual 
certainty”); Chaidez v. United States, 568 U.S. 342, 352 (2013) 
(“nearly an automatic result”).  But the Court has not qualified 
the magnitude of risk a criminal defendant must understand when 
contemplating a plea to an aggravated felony.  In Padilla, the 
defendant pleaded guilty to transporting a large quantity of marijuana.  559 U.S. at 359.  The Supreme Court recognized that his plea “made his deportation virtually mandatory,” and 
                     
 
doing so is the “prevailing professional norm[]” for criminal defense 
attorneys.  Diaz v. State, 896 N.W.2d 723, 730- 31 (Iowa 2017) (citing ABA 
standards).   
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
25 
 therefore held that “constitutionally competent counsel would 
have advised him that his conviction for drug distribution made 
him subject to automatic deportation.”  Id. at 359-60 (emphases 
added).   
More recently, in Lee v. United States, 137 S. Ct. 
1958, 1968–69 (2017), the Supreme Court considered the significance of knowing deportation was “certain” versus “almost 
certain.”  In Lee, the defendant pleaded guilty to an aggravated 
felony after his attorney failed to advise him of immigration 
consequences, which the Court explained made the defendant 
subject to “mandatory deportation.”  Id. at 1963.  The 
government conceded that Lee’s attorney had been deficient but argued that Lee had not been prejudiced because he had no viable 
defense for trial.  Id. at 1964.  The Supreme Court rejected 
that argument, holding that while the difference between “certain” and “almost certain” deportation may seem slight, a 
defendant concerned about immigration consequences should know that deportation is “certain” because it may affect their 
decision:  
But for his attorney’s incompetence, Lee would have known 
that accepting the plea agreement would certainly lead to 
deportation.  Going to trial?  Almost certainly.  If 
deportation were the “ determinative issue” for an 
individual in plea discussions, as it was for Lee; if that 
individual had strong connections to this country and no 
other, as did Lee; and if the consequences of taking a chance at trial were not markedly harsher than pleading, as 
in this case, that “ almost” could make all the difference. 
 
Id. at 1968–69.  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
26 
 Thus, the ICA’s conclusion that “the Supreme Court has 
not consistently characterized this immigration consequence of 
an aggravated felony conviction,” overlooks the Court’s clear 
admonition that defendants must know if a plea will “certainly 
lead to deportation.”  Id.   
Second, the ICA’s conclusion that “[t]he relevant 
statutory language [in 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii)] does not state that deportation is automatic, mandatory, or certain,” conflicts with the plain language of the statute and 
misapprehends the meaning of “deportable.”  An earlier section 
of 8 U.S.C. § 1227 provides that “deportable” means an immigrant 
“shall . . . be removed.”  8 U.S.C. § 1227(a); see also Padilla, 
559 U.S. at 368-69 (explaining removal is “presumptively mandatory” because “the text of the statute . . . specifically 
commands removal”); Encarnacion v. State, 763 S.E.2d 463, 465 
(Ga. 2014) (“The [Immigration and Nationality Act] . . . defines ‘deportable’ to mean that the alien is subject to mandatory, rather than discretionary, removal. . . .  Thus, the applicable 
federal statutes make it clear that a conviction for an 
aggravated felony automatically triggers the removal consequence 
and almost always leads to deportation.” (citations omitted)).  
Consequently, the ICA’s reading of the statute puts Hawai‘ i at 
odds with other jurisdictions’ interpretations of “shall” in 8 
U.S.C. § 1227.    
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
27 
 Third, the ICA concluded removal is not automatic 
because “[t]here are . . . administrative proceedings and 
limited judicial review available to defendants convicted of an 
aggravated felony making deportation or removal less than 
automatic,” citing 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(a)(1) (an immigration judge 
(IJ) conducts proceedings deciding removability).  This is 
incorrect: While an IJ conducts most removal proceedings, they 
do not necessarily conduct expedited removal proceedings for aggravated felonies, which are governed by 8 U.S.C. § 1228, not 
8 U.S.C. § 1229a.  Moreover, under 8 U.S.C. § 1228, immigrants 
who are not LPRs or who have conditional LPR status can be 
removed automatically without a hearing.  8 U.S.C. § 1228; see 
also Richard D. Steel, Steel on Immigration Law § 14:5 (2020 
ed.).   
Accordingly, the ICA’s reasoning is erroneous.  We now 
address what immigration advice a defense attorney must convey 
to their clients to provide effective assistance of counsel 
under the United States and Hawai‘ i Constitutions.  
4. In Order to be Effective, a Criminal Defense Attorney 
Must Accurately Convey that Deportation will be 
“Required” 
 
In assessing the sufficiency of a defense attorney’s 
immigration advice, the court must determine whether the advice 
given accurately conveys the legal consequences of a plea and 
the magnitude of the risk.  United States v. Bonilla, 637 F.3d  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
28 
 980, 984 (9th Cir. 2011).  Rather than focusing solely on the 
defense attorney’s specific wording, “the focus of the court’s 
inquiry must be on the essence of the information conveyed to 
the client to ensure that counsel clearly and accurately 
informed the client of the immigration consequences under 
federal law in terms the client could understand.”  
Budziszewski, 142 A.3d at 250.  
Even technically-accurate immigration advice can be 
deficient if the advice as a whole “understates the likelihood that [a defendant] would be removed.”  United States v. 
Rodriguez-Vega, 797 F.3d 781, 791 (9th Cir. 2015); Encarnacion, 
763 S.E.2d at 466 (“In light of [the defendant’s] conviction for 
an aggravated felony, defense counsel had no reason to believe 
there was a realistic probability that his client would escape 
deportation.  It follows that defense counsel performed 
deficiently by failing to advise petitioner that he would be 
deported as a result of his guilty plea[.]” (emphasis added)); 
see also State v. Blake, 132 A.3d 1282, 1292 (N.J. Super. Ct. 
App. Div. 2016) (“[A]n attorney may fail to provide effective assistance if he or she minimizes the risk of removal, and 
thereby misleads a client.”).     
When defense counsel tells a defendant they might not 
be deported despite being removable, the Connecticut Supreme 
Court has set forth a two-step test:    
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
29 
 First, the court must determine whether counsel complied 
with Padilla by explaining to the client the deportation 
consequences set forth in federal law.  The advice must be accurate, and it must be given in terms the client could 
comprehend.  If the petitioner proves that counsel did not 
meet these standards, then counsel’s advice may be deemed deficient under Padilla.  If counsel gave the advice 
required under Padilla, but also expressed doubt about the 
likelihood of enforcement, the court must also look to the 
totality of the immigration advice given by counsel to 
determine whether counsel’s enforcement advice effectively negated the import of counsel’s advice required under 
Padilla about the meaning of federal law. 
 
Budziszewski, 142 A.3d at 251. 
In Budziszewski, the defense attorney customarily 
advised his noncitizen clients that “if the law is strictly 
enforced, it will result in deportation, but it’s been my 
experience that the law is not strictly enforced.  So you take a 
chance.”13  Id. at 247 (alterations omitted).  The Connecticut 
Supreme Court explained that “counsel is not required to provide 
the client with predictions about whether or when federal 
authorities will apprehend the client and initiate deportation 
proceedings,” but that if counsel does give such advice, 
“counsel must still impress upon the client that once federal 
authorities apprehend the client, deportation will be 
practically inevitable under federal law.”  Id. at 250-51.  
                     
 
13   The Connecticut Supreme Court remanded the case for a new hearing 
because while the attorney testified to “his usual practice,” “[t]he habeas 
court made no findings of fact regarding what [the attorney] actually told 
the petitioner about what federal law mandated or what [the attorney] might 
have stated about the likelihood of enforcement.”  Budziszewski, 142 A.3d at 
247, 251.  The court also noted that “there was no separate consideration by 
the habeas court about whether counsel’s advice regarding enforcement negated 
the import of counsel’s advice about what federal law mandated regarding 
deportation.”  Id. at 251.   
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
30 
 Other states have similarly recognized that while 
there is no magic phrase an attorney must use, “[c]ounsel . . . 
was obligated to provide to his client, in language that the 
client could comprehend, the information that presumptively 
mandatory deportation would have been the legal consequence of 
pleading guilty.”  Commonwealth v. DeJesus, 9 N.E.3d 789, 795 
(Mass. 2014).  In DeJesus, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial 
Court found advice that the defendant would “face deportation” and would be “eligible for deportation” insufficient because it 
did not advise the defendant “that all of the conditions 
necessary for removal would be met by the defendant’s guilty 
plea, and that, under Federal law, there would be virtually no 
avenue for discretionary relief once the defendant pleaded 
guilty and that fact came to the attention of Federal 
authorities.”  Id. at 796; see also Diaz v. State, 896 N.W.2d 
723, 732 (Iowa 2017) (finding ineffective assistance of counsel where “counsel never mentioned the crime constituted an aggravated felony, and never attempted to explain the sweeping 
ramifications of that classification” (citations omitted)).     
Further, HRS § 802E-2 requires a trial court to advise 
defendants that they have the “right” to be given specific 
immigration advice and that their attorney “must investigate and 
advise” them if their plea would mean that “detention and 
deportation from the United States will be required.”  HRS  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
31 
 § 802E-2 (emphasis added); see In re Yung-Cheng Tsai, 351 P.3d 
138, 143 (Wash. 2015) (explaining that the “plain language” of 
Washington’s immigration-advisement statute establishes an 
“unequivocal” right to immigration advice).   
Here, we hold that under the United States and Hawaiʻ i 
Constitutions, Araiza received inadequate immigration advice to 
meet the requirements of effective assistance of counsel.  That 
counsel used the phrase “almost certain deportation” does not 
end the inquiry; trial counsel’s statements must be considered 
as a whole.  “[A]lmost certain deportation” was not the extent 
of his advice — he also downplayed the severity of the risk of 
deportation by telling Araiza that his office had seen defendants convicted of felonies who were not deported and that 
immigration officials do not know about state court proceedings.  
These statements were very similar to the advice at issue in 
Budziszewski, and we find them concerning for the same reason as 
the Connecticut Supreme Court: The combined effect was to convey that deportation was very likely if Araiza pleaded no contest — 
and possibly more likely if she went to trial — but that there was a realistic possibility she would not be deported because it 
had not happened to other similarly-situated defendants.  
Indeed, the equivocal nature of trial counsel’s advice is 
evident from the fact that he told her a plea was “risking 
automatic deportation,” whereas being found guilty after a trial  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
32 
 meant she would be deported.   
These statements failed to accurately convey the 
serious legal consequence of Araiza’s plea: “that all of the 
conditions necessary for removal would be met by the defendant’s 
guilty plea, and that, under Federal law, there would be 
virtually no avenue for discretionary relief[.]”  DeJesus, 9 
N.E.3d at 796; Encarnacion, 763 S.E.2d at 466 (“In light of [the 
defendant’s] conviction for an aggravated felony, defense counsel had no reason to believe there was a realistic 
probability that his client would escape deportation.”).   
Moreover, since Araiza’s plea paperwork (and the 
court’s later oral advisement) informed her that trial counsel 
had to tell her if detention and deportation would be 
“required,” trial counsel’s advice that deportation was “almost” 
certain because some defendants were not deported created a 
misleading impression that deportation was not legally required.  
See Bonilla, 637 F.3d at 984–85 (concluding lawyer’s omission 
could mislead defendant into believing there would not be adverse immigration consequences).      
While the ICA is correct that, as noted in Chacon, 409 
S.W.3d at 537, “Padilla does not require that counsel use 
specific words to communicate to a defendant the consequences of entering a guilty plea,” HRS § 802E-2 promises that defense 
attorneys will advise their clients if “detention and  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
33 
 deportation from the United States will be required.”  Indeed, 
the ICA’s holding that trial counsel did not need to advise 
Araiza that deportation was “automatic, mandatory, or certain” 
renders HRS § 802E-2’s requirement meaningless.  Accordingly, we 
hold that defense attorneys must advise their clients using 
language that conveys that deportation “will be required” by 
applicable immigration law for an aggravated felony conviction.  
Since Araiza’s trial counsel failed to adequately advise Araiza of the immigration consequences of her plea, the circuit court 
erred in concluding he provided her effective assistance of 
counsel. 
B. 
When a Trial Court Appoints an Interpreter who has not been 
Certified by the Judiciary, the Court Must Conduct a Brief 
Inquiry on the Record to Establish that the Interpreter is 
Qualified  
 
Araiza alleges that the circuit court plainly erred 
during her Rule 40 hearing by appointing an interpreter who, 
according to Araiza, was not “certified and/or qualified.”  
Nothing in the record demonstrates the interpreter’s 
qualifications.  It appears Araiza’s interpreter was neither a  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
34 
 certified  interpreter nor a registered  interpreter for the 
Judiciary when the Rule 40 hearing was held in June 2017.  While
we decline to decide whether the appointment of this interpreter
constituted plain error in light of our disposition of this 
case, we offer some guidance on the procedures needed to ensure 
an interpreter is qualified. 15 14
 
 
  “All persons involved in proceedings before the Hawai‘ i 
State Courts, regardless of literacy or proficiency in the English language, have the right to equal access to the courts 
and to services and programs provided by the Hawai‘ i State 
Courts.”  HRCSLI Rule 1.2.
16  A trial court has the discretion to 
appoint an interpreter “of its own selection.”  HRPP Rule 28(b).  
And HRCSLI Rule 14.1 does not require formal certification, only 
that an interpreter be qualified under court rules.   
                     
 
14   “Certified” means that the interpreter has passed the applicable 
language exam from the National Center for State Courts.  Hawai‘ i’s  Office of 
Equality and Access to the Courts (OEAC) uses six tiers of designation for 
interpreters that range from “registered” to “certified master.”  In order to 
be deemed “certified” (tier 4), the interpreter must receive a score of 70% 
on the exam.  To be a “certified master” (tier 6), the interpreter must receive 80% on the exam.  Right now, there is no tier 5 designation for spoken-language interpreters.  HRCSLI Appendix A. 
 
15   “Registered” means that a person has fulfilled the minimum 
requirements necessary to be on the list of interpreters for the judiciary.  In order to be registered, the lowest available tier, an interpreter must pass a written English proficiency test and an ethics exam, attend a 2- day 
basic orientation workshop, and pass a criminal background check.  However, 
proficiency in the foreign language is not assessed.  HRCSLI Appendix A. 
 
16  In March 2019, this court ordered that the previous version of 
these rules, the Hawaiʻ i Rules for Certification of Spoken and Sign Language 
Interpreters, be vacated and replaced with the HRCSLI, effective July 2019.  
This change did not affect the substance of the relevant rules.  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
35 
 In 1995, the Chief Justice adopted policies for 
interpreted proceedings in the state courts, which were 
incorporated into the HRCSLI as Appendix B.  As relevant here, 
section I(D) governs qualifications of interpreters and provides 
that if an interpreter is not on the list of recommended 
interpreters, the court must conduct an inquiry:  
Courts should use interpreters who can (a) understand terms 
generally used in the type of proceeding before the court, 
(b) explain these terms in English and the other language 
being used, and (c) interpret these terms into the other 
language being used.  If a list of recommended interpreters 
is not available, or if it appears an interpreter cannot 
understand or interpret the terms used in the proceeding, the judge should conduct a brief examination of the 
interpreter to determine if the interpreter is qualified to 
interpret the proceeding.  When conducting the examination 
the judge should, if possible, seek the assistance of an 
interpreter whose qualifications have been established.  
 
HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(D) (emphases added).  
HRCSLI Appendix B comports with the HRE, which 
establishes that an interpreter is regarded as an expert under 
HRE Rule 702 “for the purpose of determining his qualifications 
to interpret or to translate in the matter at issue.”  HRE Rule 
604 cmt.  In other words, in accordance with HRE Rule 702, there 
must be evidence in the record that the interpreter was “qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, 
training, or education.”  The commentary to HRE Rule 604 notes 
that the rule is identical to the Federal Rules of Evidence Rule 
604.   
If an interpreter has been certified by the judiciary,  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
36 
 there is often no need for the court to conduct an inquiry 
because the interpreter has already been qualified through 
“training and education.”   27 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. 
Miller & Victor J. Gold, Federal Practice & Procedure § 6054 (2ded. 2020) (“As a practical matter, however, a court usually need
not exercise its power to reexamine the qualifications of a 
certified interpreter.”).  However, when an interpreter has not 
been certified, some other kind of foundation of their qualifications must be established: “Rule 604 does not establish
a specific procedure for the courts to follow in determining 
interpreter qualifications.  One way or the other, however, the 
record must reflect that the individual in question had the 
requisite ability to interpret.”  Id. 17
 
 
 
Accordingly, we hold that, if a court appoints an 
interpreter who is not certified by the judiciary as proficient 
in the foreign language, the court “should conduct a brief 
examination of the interpreter to determine if the interpreter  
  
                     
 
17   Because registered interpreters are not assessed for language 
proficiency, that designation may be insufficient to demonstrate expert 
qualifications under HRE Rules 604 and 702.  Similarly, certification in the 
applicable foreign language may be insufficient if the party needing an interpreter speaks a different dialect: “[W]here a language features multiple 
dialects, an interpreter certified for that language might not be sufficiently fluent in the specific dialect employed by a given witness.  In 
such a case, the certified interpreter would not qualify as an expert under 
Rule 702[.]”  27 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Victor J. Gold, 
Federal Practice & Procedure § 6054 (2d ed. 2020) (footnote omitted).  
 
***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
37 
 is qualified to interpret the proceeding.”  HRCSLI Appendix B, 
§ I(D).   
V.  CONCLUSION 
 
For the reasons set forth in this opinion, we vacate 
the ICA’s April 23, 2020 judgment on appeal and the circuit court’s findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order denying 
petitioner’s petition to vacate, set aside or correct illegal 
sentence through a writ of habeas corpus pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 filed on September 6, 2017, and remand to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Hayden Aluli 
for petitioner
     /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 /s/ R. Mark Browning 
      
   
    
  
  
 
Mark R. Simonds 
for respondent (Peter A. Hanano 
on the brief) 
    
 