*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000819 14-JUL-2017 
08:37 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
KRISHNA NARAYAN; SHERRIE NARAYAN; VIRENDRA NATH;
NANCY MAKOWSKI; KEITH MACDONALD AS CO-TRUSTEE FOR THE
DKM TRUST DATED OCTOBER 7, 2011; SIMON YOO; SUMIYO SAKAGUCHI;
SUSAN RENTON, AS TRUSTEE FOR THE RENTON FAMILY TRUST
DATED 12/3/09; STEPHEN XIANG PANG; FAYE WU LIU; MASSY MEHDIPOUR
AS TRUSTEE FOR MASSY MEHDIPOUR TRUST DATED JUNE 21, 2006;
G. NICHOLAS SMITH; TRISTINE SMITH; RITZ 1303 RE, LLC, a Colorado
Limited Liability Company; and BRADLEY CHAFFEE AS TRUSTEE OF THE
CHARLES V. CHAFFEE BRC STOCK TRUST DATED 12/1/99
AND THE CLIFFORD W. CHAFFEE BRC STOCK TRUST DATED 1/4/98,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellees,
 
vs.
 
THE RITZ-CARLTON DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC.;
THE RITZ-CARLTON MANAGEMENT COMPANY, LLC; JOHN ALBERT; EDGAR GUM,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants,
 
and 
MARRIOTT INTERNATIONAL INC.; MAUI LAND & PINEAPPLE CO., INC.;
EXCLUSIVE RESORTS, LLC; KAPALUA BAY, LLC;
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KAPALUA BAY CONDOMINIUM;
CAROLINE PETERS BELSOM; CATHY ROSS; ROBERT PARSONS;
RYAN CHURCHILL; THE RITZ-CARLTON HOTEL COMPANY, L.L.C.;
MARRIOTT VACATIONS WORDWIDE, CORPORATION; MARRIOTT OWNERSHIP
RESORTS, INC.; MARRIOTT TWO FLAGS, LP; MH KAPALUA VENTURE, LLC;
MLP KB PARTNER LLC; KAPALUA BAY HOLDINGS, LLC; ER KAPALUA
INVESTORS FUND, LLC; ER KAPALUA INVESTORS FUND HOLDINGS, LLC;
EXCLUSIVE RESORTS DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, LLC; and EXCLUSIVE RESORTS
CLUB I HOLDINGS, LLC, Respondents/Defendants.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
SCWC-12-0000819
 
ON REMAND FROM THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT
 
(CAAP-12-0000819; CIV. NO. 12-1-0586(3))
 
JULY 14, 2017
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE NAKASONE, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED1
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA , J.
 
I. INTRODUCTION
 
In Narayan v. Ritz-Carlton Development Co., 135 Hawai' i 
327, 350 P.3d 995 (2015) (Narayan I), this court held that the 
Plaintiffs, a group of individual condominium owners, could not be compelled to arbitrate claims arising from the financial breakdown of a Maui condominium project. In reaching this conclusion, this court determined that the arbitration clause was unenforceable because the Plaintiffs did not unambiguously assent to arbitration and because the terms of arbitration were unconscionable. 
On January 11, 2016, the Supreme Court of the United
 
States (Supreme Court) vacated and remanded Narayan I to this
 court for further consideration in light of its recent decision
 in DIRECTV, Inc. v. Imburgia, 136 S. Ct. 463 (2015). In
 Imburgia, the Supreme Court determined that state law must place
 
1
 At the time this case was originally pending before this court,
 
Associate Justice Simeon R. Acoba, Jr. was a member of the court; however, he
was recused from the case and Judge Nakasone sat in his place.  Justice Acoba
 retired on February 29, 2014.
 
2
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arbitration agreements “on equal footing with all other
 
contracts.” Id. at 471 (quoting Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v.
 
Cardegna, 546 U.S. 440, 443 (2006)).
 
Again recognizing this principle, we affirm our 
decision in Narayan I, concluding that, under long-standing Hawai'i contract law, the arbitration clause is unconscionable. 
As such, we vacate the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (ICA) October 28, 2013 judgment on appeal, affirm the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit’s (circuit court) August 28, 2012 order denying the Defendants’ motion to compel arbitration, and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
II. BACKGROUND
 
A. Factual History
 
2
The following facts  are summarized from this court’s
earlier opinion in Narayan I.
 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellees Krishna Narayan et al.
 
(collectively, the Homeowners) purchased ten condominium units
 
2 These facts, drawn from the pleadings, are taken as true for the 
limited purpose of reviewing the Defendants’ motion to compel arbitration. 
Douglass v. Pflueger Haw., Inc., 110 Hawai 'i 520, 524, 135 P.3d 129, 133
(2006) (“The standard [for a petition to compel arbitration] is the same asthat which would be applicable to a motion for summary judgment . . .”);Nuuanu Valley Ass’n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 96, 194 P.3d
531, 537 (2008) (“[In evaluating a motion for summary judgment,] we must viewall of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorableto the party opposing the motion.” (quoting Kahale v. City & Cty. of Honolulu,104 Hawai 'i 341, 344, 90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004))). 
3
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from Kapalua Bay, LLC, a joint venture owned by Marriot
 
International, Inc., Exclusive Resorts, Inc., and Maui Land &
 Pineapple Co., Inc. (collectively, the Defendants). These units
 were part of a Maui condominium development formerly known as the
 Ritz-Carlton Club & Residences at Kapalua Bay (the project).
3
 
The Homeowners entered into purchase agreements with 
the Defendants when they purchased their condominiums. The purchase agreements contain two clauses relating to dispute resolution: a jury waiver clause and an attorneys’ fee clause. While these clauses do not mention a binding agreement to arbitrate, the purchase agreement references another document, the Declaration of Condominium Property Regime of Kapalua Bay Condominium (declaration), which includes an arbitration clause. The Defendants recorded the declaration and the Association of Apartment Owners of Kapalua Bay Condominium Bylaws (AOAO bylaws) in the State of Hawai' i Bureau of Conveyances prior to the sale 
of the individual condominium units to the Homeowners. Additionally, the Defendants registered the Condominium Public Report (public report) with the Hawai' i Real Estate Commission. 
All of these documents are incorporated by reference through the 
3
 Respondents/Defendants-Appellants the Ritz-Carlton Development
 
Company, Inc. and the Ritz-Carlton Management Company, LLC were the original
development and management companies for the project, and were then wholly-
owned subsidiaries of Marriott.  Respondents/Defendants-Appellants John Albert
and Edgar Gum served on the board of directors of the AOAO while allegedly
being employed by either Marriott or Ritz-Carlton.
 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
purchase agreement. 
The arbitration clause is found towards the end of the
 
thirty-six page condominium declaration and provides, in its
 
entirety:
 
XXXIII. ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 
In the event of the occurrence of any controversy or
claim arising out of, or related to, this Declaration or to
any alleged construction or design defects pertaining to the
Common Elements or to the Improvements in the Project
(“dispute”), if the dispute cannot be resolved by
negotiation, the parties to the dispute agree to submit the
dispute to mediation by a mediator mutually selected by the
parties.  If the parties are unable to agree upon a
mediator, then the mediator shall be appointed by the
American Arbitration Association.  In any event, the
mediation shall take place within thirty (30) days of the
date that a party gives the other party written notice of
its desire to mediate the dispute.  If the dispute is not
resolved through mediation, the dispute shall be resolved by
arbitration pursuant to this Article and the then-current
rules and supervision of the American Arbitration
Association.  The duties to mediate and arbitrate hereunder
 shall extend to any officer, employee, shareholder,
principal, partner, agent trustee-in-bankruptcy, affiliate,
subsidiary, third-party beneficiary, or guarantor of all
parties making or defending any claim which would otherwise
be subject to this Article.
The arbitration shall be held in Honolulu, Hawaii
before a single arbitrator who is knowledgeable in the
subject matter at issue.  The arbitrator’s decision and
 award shall be final and binding and may be entered in any
court having jurisdiction thereof. 
 The arbitrator shall not
  
have the power to award punitive, exemplary, or
consequential damages, or any damages excluded by, or in
excess of, any damage limitations expressed in this
Declaration or any other agreement between the parties.  In
 
order to prevent irreparable harm, the arbitrator may grant
temporary or permanent injunctive or other equitable relief
for the protection of property rights.
Issues of arbitrability shall be determined in
accordance with the federal substantive and procedural laws
relating to arbitration; all other aspects of the dispute
shall be interpreted in accordance with, and the arbitrator
shall apply and be bound to follow, the substantive laws of
the State of Hawaii.  Each party shall bear its own
attorneys’ fees associated with negotiation, mediation, and
arbitration, and other costs and expenses shall be borne as
provided by the rules of the American Arbitration
Association.
 
If court proceedings to stay litigation or compel
 
5
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arbitration are necessary, the party who unsuccessfully
opposed such proceedings shall pay all associated costs,
expenses, and attorneys’ fees which are reasonably incurred
by the other party.
The arbitrator may order the parties to exchange
copies of nonrebuttable exhibits and copies of witness lists
in advance of the arbitration hearing.  However, the
arbitrator shall have no other power to order discovery or
depositions unless and then only to the extent that all
parties otherwise agree in writing.
Neither a party, witness, or the arbitrator may
disclose the facts of the underlying dispute or the contents
or results of any negotiations, mediation, or arbitration
hereunder without prior written consent of all parties,
unless and then only to the extent required to enforce or
challenge the negotiated agreement or the arbitration award,
as required by law, or as necessary for financial and tax
reports and audits.
No party may bring a claim or action, regardless of
form, arising out of or related to this Declaration or to
any construction or design defects claims pertaining to the
Common Elements or to the Improvements of the Project,
including any claim of fraud, misrepresentation, or
fraudulent inducement, more than one year after the cause of
action accrues, unless the injured party cannot reasonably
discover the basic facts supporting the claim within one
year.
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Article, in the event of alleged violation of a party’s
property or equitable rights, including, but not limited to,unauthorized disclosure of confidential information, that
party may seek temporary injunctive relief from any court ofcompetent jurisdiction pending appointment of an arbitrator.The party requesting such relief shall simultaneously file ademand for mediation and arbitration of the dispute, and
shall request the American Arbitration Association to
proceed under its rules for expedited procedures.  In no
 event shall any such court-ordered temporary injunctive
relief continue for more than thirty (30) days.




If any part of this Article is held to be
unenforceable, it shall be severed and shall not affect
either the duties to mediate and arbitrate hereunder or any
other part of this Article.
 
(Emphases added.) Significantly, the underlined portions above
 
indicate that the arbitration clause includes a limit on damages,
 a limit on discovery, and a confidentiality provision. 
In April of 2012, the Homeowners learned that the 
Defendants had defaulted on loans encumbering the project and
 
6
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that, as a result, the Defendants could not pay maintenance and
 
operator fees to Marriott’s management subsidiaries. The
 Defendants eventually defaulted on the AOAO assessments,
 abandoned the project, and revoked the Ritz-Carlton branding. 
Marriott or one of its subsidiaries withdrew approximately
 $1,300,000.00 from the AOAO operating fund and threatened to
 withdraw the remaining $200,000.00 from the fund. The AOAO board
 members, many of whom were employed by Marriott, Ritz-Carlton,
 and/or other interested entities, did not attempt to block
 Marriott from taking these actions but instead indicated that the
 multi-million dollar shortfall would have to be covered by the
 Homeowners.
 
B. Procedural History
 
On June 7, 2012, the Homeowners filed suit in the
 
circuit court
4
 asserting claims for breach of fiduciary duty,
access to books and records, and injunctive/declaratory relief. 
The circuit court denied the Defendants’ motion to compel
 arbitration, which the Defendants appealed. The ICA concluded
 that the parties had entered into a valid agreement to arbitrate,
 that the dispute fell within the scope of that agreement, and
 that the agreement was not procedurally unconscionable. Thus,
 the ICA held that the Defendants could compel the Homeowners to
 
4
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
7
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arbitration.
 
On June 3, 2015, this court issued an opinion in 
Narayan I, vacating the ICA’s judgment on appeal, affirming the 
circuit court’s order denying the Defendants’ motion to compel arbitration, and remanding the case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with the opinion. 135 Hawai' i at 
339-40, 350 P.3d at 1007-08. This court held that the Homeowners could not be compelled to arbitrate for two reasons. First, this court determined that “the arbitration provision contained in the condominium declaration is unenforceable because the terms of the various condominium documents are ambiguous with respect to the Homeowners’ intent to arbitrate.” Id. at 335, 350 P.3d at 1003. 
Second, this court determined that portions of the arbitration clause were unconscionable. Id. at 336-39, 350 P.3d at 1004-07. 
This court subsequently issued summary disposition
 
orders in line with its opinion for two related cases, Nath v.
 Ritz-Carlton Hotel Co., No. SCAP-13-2732 (Haw. June 30,
 2015)(SDO), and Narayan v. Marriott International, Inc., No.
 SCAP-13-3607 (Haw. June 30, 2015)(SDO), (collectively, the
 Narayan cases).
 
The Defendants filed petitions for writ of certiorari
 
for the Narayan cases and, on January 11, 2016, the Supreme Court
 entered orders granting the petitions and vacating and remanding
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Narayan cases: “The judgment is vacated, and the case is
 
remanded to the Supreme Court of Hawaii for further consideration
 in light of DIRECTV, Inc. v. Imburgia, [136 S. Ct. 463] (2015).” 
On remand, both parties filed supplemental briefs
 
addressing the impact of Imburgia on the Narayan cases.
 
C. The Imburgia Decision
 
The Imburgia lawsuit arose in 2008, when the
 
plaintiffs, DIRECTV customers, challenged DIRECTV’s early
 
termination fees on the grounds that the fees violated California
 law. 136 S. Ct. at 466. The service contract between the
 plaintiffs and DIRECTV included a binding arbitration provision
 and class action waiver. Id. The contract also provided that
 
“if the ‘law of your state’ makes the waiver of class arbitration
 unenforceable, then the entire arbitration provision ‘is
 unenforceable.’” Id. 
Prior to 2011, the class arbitration waiver clause was
 
unenforceable under California law pursuant to the California
 Supreme Court’s decision in Discover Bank v. Superior Court, 113
 P.3d 1100 (Cal. 2005). In Discover Bank, the California Supreme
 Court held that a waiver of class arbitration in a consumer
 contract of adhesion was unconscionable under California law and
 should not be enforced. Id. at 1110. However, in AT&T Mobility
 
LLC v. Concepcion, 563 U.S. 333, 352 (2011), the Supreme Court
 
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
held that the Discover Bank rule “stands as an obstacle to the
 
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives
 of Congress” and that the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) preempted
 and invalidated the rule. (Quoting Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S.
 52, 67 (1941)). Thus, after the 2011 Concepcion decision, class
 arbitration waiver clauses became enforceable under California
 law.
 
Following the Supreme Court’s decision in Concepcion,
 
DIRECTV requested that the matter be sent to arbitration pursuant
 to the arbitration clause. Imburgia, 136 S. Ct. at 466. The
 
trial court denied that request and DIRECTV appealed. Id. The
 
California Court of Appeal referenced two sections of
 California’s Consumers Legal Remedies Act in holding that “the
 law of California would find the class action waiver
 unenforceable.” Id. at 467. The California Supreme Court denied
 
discretionary review and the Supreme Court accepted DIRECTV’s
 petition for writ of certiorari. Id. at 467-68.
 
The Supreme Court stated that the issue before it was
 
“whether the decision of the California court places arbitration
 contracts ‘on equal footing with all other contracts.’” Id. at
 
468 (quoting Buckeye, 546 U.S. at 443). The Supreme Court
 concluded that “California courts would not interpret contracts
 other than arbitration contracts the same way” and offered six
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
bases for this conclusion. Id. at 469. Of relevance to this
 
case, the Supreme Court determined that “nothing in the Court of
 
Appeal’s reasoning suggests that a California court would reach
 the same interpretation of ‘law of your state’ in any context
 other than arbitration” and that “the language used by the Court
 of Appeal focused only on arbitration.” Id. at 469-70. 
Specifically, the Supreme Court noted that “[f]raming the
 question in [arbitration terms], rather than in generally
 applicable terms, suggests that the Court of Appeal could well
 have meant that its holding was limited to the specific subject
 matter of this contract–-arbitration.” Id. at 470. 
Given these considerations, the Supreme Court concluded
 
that “California’s interpretation of the phrase ‘law of your
 state’ does not place arbitration contracts ‘on equal footing
 with all other contracts.’” Id. at 471. As such, the Supreme
 
Court held that “the Court of Appeal’s interpretation is pre­empted by the Federal Arbitration Act.” Id. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The FAA states that “an agreement in writing to submit
 
to arbitration . . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and
 enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity
 for the revocation of any contract.” Federal Arbitration Act, 9
 U.S.C. § 2 (2012).
 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The FAA “creates a body of federal substantive law of
 
arbitrability, enforceable in both state and federal courts and
 
pre-empting any state laws or policies to the contrary.” Ticknor
 
v. Choice Hotels Int’l, Inc.
, 265 F.3d 931, 936 (9th Cir. 2001)
 
(quoting Cohen v. Wedbush, Noble, Cooke, Inc., 841 F.2d 282, 285
 (9th Cir. 1988)). “Despite the ‘liberal federal policy favoring
 arbitration agreements,’ . . . state law is not entirely
 displaced from federal arbitration analysis.” Id. at 936-37
 
(quoting Green Tree Fin. Corp.-Alabama v. Randolph, 531 U.S. 79,
 81 (2000)). “[A]s long as state law defenses concerning the
 validity, revocability, and enforceability of contracts are
 generally applied to all contracts, and not limited to
 arbitration clauses, federal courts may enforce them under the
 FAA.” Id. at 937; see also Concepcion, 563 U.S. at 339
 
(“[C]ourts must place arbitration agreements on an equal footing
 with other contracts . . . and enforce them according to their
 terms.”). Specifically, arbitration agreements, like all other
 contracts, “may be invalidated by ‘generally applicable contract
 defenses, such as fraud, duress, or unconscionability.’” Rent-A-
Center, W., Inc. v. Jackson, 561 U.S. 63, 68 (2010) (quoting
 Doctor’s Assocs., Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U.S. 681, 687 (1996)). 
A. Unconscionability
 
Under Hawai' i law, unconscionability is recognized as a 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
general contract defense:
 
Unconscionability has generally been recognized to include
an absence of meaningful choice on the part of one of the
parties together with contract terms which are unreasonably
favorable to the other party.  Whether a meaningful choice
is present in a particular case can only be determined by
consideration of all the circumstances surrounding the
transaction.
 
City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 62 Haw. 411, 418, 616 P.2d
 
213, 218 (1980) (quoting Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture Co.,
 350 F.2d 445, 449 (D.C. Cir. 1965)); see also Lewis v. Lewis, 69
 Haw. 497, 501, 748 P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988) (“The basic test is
 whether . . . the clauses involved are so one-sided as to be
 unconscionable under the circumstances existing at the time of
 the making of the contract. . . . The principle is one of the
 prevention of oppression and unfair surprise . . .”). 
In Midkiff, this court considered whether a general
 
issue of material fact existed as to whether a condemnation
 clause in a lease was unconscionable. 62 Haw. at 416-17, 616
 P.2d at 217. In analyzing the facts of the case under the
 doctrine of unconscionability, this court observed that the lease
 was a standard pre-printed form, which “may indicate that there
 was no arms-length bargaining between the two parties.” Id. at
 
417, 616 P.2d at 218. Additionally, this court noted that there
 could have been a disparity in bargaining power that left the
 petitioner in a “take-it-or-leave-it position regarding the
 lease.” Id. at 418, 616 P.2d at 218. As such, this court
 
13
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concluded that the petitioner did raise a genuine issue of
 
material fact and remanded the case to the trial court to hold a
 hearing on the issue of the unconscionability of the condemnation
 clause. Id. 
Recent Hawai' i decisions have defined unconscionability 
more specifically by articulating two principles that make up the doctrine: “Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one-sidedness and unfair surprise.” Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawai' i 
29, 41, 332 P.3d 631, 643 (2014); see also Lewis, 69 Haw. at 502, 748 P.2d at 1366 (“It is apparent that two basic principles are encompassed within the concept of unconscionability, one-
sidedness and unfair surprise.”). 
These principles are also characterized as procedural 
and substantive unconscionability.
5 See Balogh, 134 Hawai' i at 
41, 332 P.3d at 643. Procedural unconscionability, or unfair 
surprise, focuses on the “process by which the allegedly offensive terms found their way into the agreement.” 7 Joseph M. Perillo, Corbin on Contracts § 29.1 (Rev. ed. 2002). Substantive unconscionability, in contrast, focuses on the content of the agreement and whether the terms are one-sided, oppressive, or 
5
 Generally, both procedural and substantive unconscionability must 
be present in order to make a contract unconscionable; however, Hawai 'i courts 
“have recognized that, under certain circumstances, an impermissibly one-sided
agreement may be unconscionable even if there is no unfair surprise.”  Balogh, 
134 Hawai 'i at 41, 332 P.3d at 643.  Such an analysis is not necessary in this
case because the arbitration clause is both procedurally and substantivelyunconscionable. 
14
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“unjustly disproportionate.” Balogh, 134 Hawai' i at 41, 332 P.3d 
at 643; Perillo, supra, § 29.1. 
Thus, under the common law of Hawai' i, 
unconscionability is a generally applicable contract defense. We 
turn now to analyzing the facts of the case under this doctrine. 
1. Procedural Unconscionability
 
Procedural unconscionability “requires an examination
 
of the contract formation process and the alleged lack of
 
meaningful choice.” Gillman v. Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., 534
 
N.E.2d 824, 828 (N.Y. 1988). Courts consider such factors as
 “whether deceptive or high-pressured tactics were employed, the
 use of fine print in the contract, the experience and education
 of the party claiming unconscionability, and whether there was
 disparity in bargaining power” between the parties. Id.; see
 
also Perillo, supra, § 29.4 (noting that the following elements
 factor into a determination of procedural unconscionability: 
superior bargaining power, lack of meaningful choice for the
 weaker party, form contracts that are “heavily weighted in favor
 of one party and offered on a take it or leave it basis,” and
 where “freedom of contract is exploited by a stronger party”). 
Procedural unconscionability often takes the form of
 
adhesion contracts, where a form contract is created by the
 stronger of the contracting parties, and the terms “unexpectedly
 
15
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or unconscionably limit the obligations and liability of the 
weaker party.” Nacino v. Koller, 101 Hawai' i 466, 473, 71 P.3d 
417, 424 (2003) (quoting Leong v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 71 Haw. 240, 247, 788 P.2d 164, 168 (1990)). Although adhesion contracts are not unconscionable per se, they are defined by a lack of meaningful choice and, thus, often satisfy the procedural element of unconscionability. 
In this case, the contracting process for the 
arbitration clause exhibits elements of procedural unconscionability. The party with the superior bargaining strength, the Defendants, not only drafted the arbitration clause found in the declaration, but they also recorded the declaration in the Bureau of Conveyances prior to the execution of the purchase agreements. The Homeowners were required to conform to the terms of the declaration as recorded if they wanted to purchase a Ritz-Carlton condominium on Maui. Thus, the declaration is adhesive in the sense that it was “created by the stronger of the contracting parties” on a “take-it-or-leave-it” basis. Nacino, 101 Hawai' i at 473, 71 P.3d at 424; Midkiff, 62 
Haw. at 418, 616 P.2d at 218 (noting that a “disparity in bargaining position” and a “take-it-or-leave-it” position are factors in determining whether a contract is unconscionable). 
In addition to the inequality of bargaining power
 
16
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6
described above,  there is an element of unfair surprise in that
the arbitration clause is buried at the end of the declaration
 
and is ambiguous when read in conjunction with the other
 controlling documents, including the purchase agreement and the
 public report. For instance, the arbitration clause is on page
 thirty-four of the thirty-six page declaration and provides that,
 if a dispute cannot be resolved through negotiation or mediation,
 “the dispute shall be resolved by arbitration.” (Emphasis
 
added.)   In contrast, the purchase agreement does not provide for
 
mandatory arbitration but instead contains: 1) a waiver of jury
 
trial clause, which states that the parties “expressly waive
 their respective rights to a jury trial on any claim or cause of
 action that is based upon or arising out of this Purchase
 Agreement” and that “[v]enue for any cause of action brought by
 Purchaser hereunder shall be in the Second Circuit Court, State
 of Hawaii,” and 2) an attorneys’ fees clause, which provides for
 fees as a result of “any legal or other proceeding.” Similarly,
 the public report provides that “[t]he provisions of [the
 controlling documents, including the declaration] are intended to
 be, and in most cases are, enforceable in a court of law.” 
Thus, the controlling documents offer conflicting
 
6
 This court has noted that “inequality of bargaining power, in and 
of itself , does not transform an agreement to arbitrate . . . into an
unenforceable contract of adhesion.”  Brown v. KFC Nat’l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai 'i 
226, 248 n.27, 921 P.2d 146, 168 n.27 (1996). 
17
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
guidance on dispute resolution, with the declaration mandating 
arbitration for the parties, while the purchase agreement and public report allow for disputes to be litigated through traditional legal proceedings. Such ambiguity in the controlling documents has the potential to confuse or mislead the non-drafting parties, and deprives those parties from a full and adequate understanding of their rights under contract. See 
Balogh, 134 Hawai' i at 41, 332 P.3d at 643 (explaining that, in 
the context of postmarital and separation agreements, unfair surprise means that “one party did not have full and adequate knowledge of the other party’s financial condition when the . . . agreement was executed”). 
For these reasons, we conclude that the arbitration
 
clause satisfies the procedural element of unconsionability.
 
2. Substantive Unconscionability
 
Substantive unconscionability focuses on the one-
sidedness of the agreement. Lewis, 69 Haw. at 502, 748 P.2d at 
1366; Balogh, 134 Hawai' i at 41, 332 P.3d at 643; Earl M. 
Jorgensen Co. v. Mark Constr., Inc., 56 Haw. 466, 474, 540 P.2d 
978, 984 (1975); see also Gillman, 534 N.E.2d at 829 (“This question entails an analysis of the substance of the bargain to determine whether the terms were unreasonably favorable to the party against whom unconscionability is urged.”). Here, the 
18
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Homeowners argue that the arbitration clause is substantively
 
unconscionable because it eliminates rights to punitive,
 exemplary, and consequential damages, precludes discovery,
 imposes a confidentiality requirement, and imposes a one-year
 statute of limitations.
7 We agree, and affirm our earlier
 
decision that portions of the arbitration clause are
 substantively unconscionable. 
a. Damages Provision
 
“Punitive or exemplary damages are generally defined as 
those damages assessed in addition to compensatory damages for
 the purpose of punishing the defendant for aggravated or
 outrageous misconduct and to deter the defendant and others from
 similar conduct in the future.” Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp., 71
 
Haw. 1, 6, 780 P.2d 566, 570 (1989). “Since the purpose of
 punitive damages is not compensation of the plaintiff but rather
 punishment and deterrence, such damages are awarded only when the
 egregious nature of the defendant’s conduct makes such a remedy
 appropriate.” Id. Courts often look to the intentional,
 
deliberate, and outrageous nature of the defendant’s actions when
 considering punitive damages. Id.
 
Hawai'i law disfavors limiting damages for intentional 
7
 We do not decide whether the contractually shortened limitations
 
period is unconscionable because there has been no assertion that the
Homeowners’ claims are barred by that provision.
 
19
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and reckless conduct. In Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. 
(Oahu) Ltd. Partnership, 115 Hawai' i 201, 224, 166 P.3d 961, 984 
(2007), this court held that a contract provision limiting tort liability would violate public policy to the extent that it attempted to waive liability for criminal misconduct, fraud, or willful misconduct. Further, we have acknowledged that “[e]xculpatory contracts are not favored by the law because they tend to allow conduct below the acceptable standard of care.” Fujimoto v. Au, 95 Hawai' i 116, 155, 19 P.3d 699, 738 (2001) 
(quoting Yauger v. Skiing Enters., Inc., 557 N.W.2d 60, 62 (Wis. 1996)). Such provisions “are strictly construed against parties relying on them” and will be held void if the agreement is, inter alia, “gained through inequality of bargaining power.” Id. at 
156, 19 P.3d at 739. 
While not wholly exculpatory, the damages provision at
 
issue in this case similarly limits liability because it
 restricts the amount or type of recoverable damages. When
 coupled with “inequality of bargaining power,” such a limitation
 on liability will likewise be unenforceable. See Lucier v.
 
Williams, 841 A.2d 907, 912 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2004)
 (concluding that a limitation of liability provision was
 unconscionable because: 1) it was incorporated into a contract
 of adhesion, 2) the parties had “grossly unequal bargaining
 
20
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
status” and, 3) the limit on recoverable damages allowed the
 
drafting party to avoid almost all responsibility for his
 actions); Cook v. Pub. Storage, Inc., 761 N.W.2d 645, 668 (Wis.
 Ct. App. 2008) (“With respect to punitive damages, we conclude
 the limitation of liability clause is unenforceable because it is
 against public policy. Punitive damages serve the public policy
 purposes of punishing wrongdoers and deterring others.”).
 
In this case, there is a damages provision that was, as 
discussed in the previous section, gained through inequality of bargaining power. Additionally, the provision prevents an arbitrator from awarding “punitive, exemplary, or consequential damages,” thereby shielding a defendant from paying such damages to an aggrieved party, even upon a showing of egregious or outrageous conduct by the defendant. It would create an untenable situation if parties of superior bargaining strength could use adhesionary contracts to insulate “aggravated or outrageous misconduct” from the monetary remedies that are designed to deter such conduct. Masaki, 71 Haw. at 6, 780 P.2d 
at 570. Under Hawai' i law, such provisions, regardless of 
whether they are found in arbitration agreements or other contracts, are substantively unconscionable. 
b. Discovery Provision
 
Adequate discovery is necessary to provide claimants “a
 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
fair opportunity to present their claims.” Gilmer v. 
Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 500 U.S. 20, 31 (1991). In 
Hawai'i, discovery rules “reflect a basic philosophy that a party 
to a civil action should be entitled to the disclosure of all relevant information in the possession of another person prior to trial, unless the information is privileged.” Hac v. Univ. of 
Haw., 102 Hawai' i 92, 100, 73 P.3d 46, 54 (2003) (quoting 
Wakabayashi v. Hertz Corp., 66 Haw. 265, 275, 660 P.2d 1309, 1315 (1983)); see also Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
26(b)(1)(A) (2015) (“Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the subject matter involved in the pending action.”). 
In the arbitration context, limitations on discovery 
serve an important purpose because “the underlying reason many parties choose arbitration is the relative speed, lower cost, and greater efficiency of the process.” Kona Vill. Realty, Inc. v. 
Sunstone Realty Partners, XIV, LLC, 123 Hawai' i 476, 477, 236 
P.3d 456, 457 (2010). As such, limitations on discovery may be enforceable in the arbitral forum, so long as they are reasonable and do not hinder a party’s ability to prove or defend a claim. See Hac, 102 Hawai' i at 100, 73 P.3d at 54 (noting that Hawai' i 
law favors disclosure of all relevant, unprivileged information); Gilmer, 500 U.S. at 31 (determining that the discovery allowed in 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the arbitration proceeding - document production, information
 
requests, depositions, and subpoenas - was sufficient to allow
 plaintiff “a fair opportunity to present [his] claims”). 
In the current case, the discovery provision in the
 
arbitration clause provides:
 
The arbitrator may order the parties to exchange copies of
nonrebuttable exhibits and copies of witness lists in
advance of the arbitration hearing.  However, the arbitrator
shall have no other power to order discovery or depositions
unless and then only to the extent that all parties
otherwise agree in writing.
 
For two reasons, this provision is unenforceable. 
First, the discovery provision places severe 
limitations on the disclosure of relevant information and hinders 
the Homeowners’ ability to prove their claims. Except for “nonrebuttable” exhibits and witness lists, the Homeowners are hindered in their ability from discovering potentially relevant information for their claims against the Defendants. This restriction runs in direct contravention to Hawaii’s “basic philosophy” that a party is entitled to all relevant, unprivileged information pertaining to the subject matter of the action. Hac, 102 Hawai' i at 100, 73 P.3d at 54. On this basis 
alone, we hold the discovery provision unconscionable. 
Second, the discovery provision violates parts of 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A, which grant an arbitrator 
considerable discretion in permitting discovery. Specifically, 
23
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 658A-17 (Supp. 2001) provides:
 
(a) An arbitrator may issue a subpoena for the attendance of
a witness and for the production of records and other
evide
nce at any hearing and may administer oaths. A
 
subpoena shall be served in the manner for service of
subpoenas in a civil action and, upon motion to the court by
a party to the arbitration proceeding or the arbitrator,
enforced in the manner for enforcement of subpoenas in a
civil action.
 (b) I
n order to make the proceedings fair, expeditious, and
cost effective, upon request of a party to or a witness in
an arbitration proceeding, an arbitrator may permit a
deposition of any witness to be taken for use as evidence at
the hearing, including a witness who cannot be subpoenaed
for or is unable to attend a hearing.  The arbitrator shall
 determine the conditions under which the deposition is
taken.
 
(Emphases added.) Pursuant to HRS § 658A-4(b)(1) (Supp. 2001),8
 
the above subsections of HRS § 658A-17 cannot be waived by
 
parties to an arbitration agreement. As such, the discovery
 provision, which waives the requirements of HRS § 658A-17,
 violates HRS § 658A-4(b)(1). Additionally, the discovery
 provision undermines the discretion generally afforded
 arbitrators. See HRS § 658A-17(c) (“An arbitrator may permit
 
such discovery as the arbitrator decides is appropriate in the
 circumstances, taking into account the needs of the parties to
 the arbitration proceeding and other affected persons and the
 desirability of making the proceeding fair, expeditious, and cost
 effective.”) 
8
 HRS § 658A-4(b)(1) provides:  “(b) Before a controversy arises
 
that is subject to an agreement to arbitrate, a party to the agreement shall
not:  (1) Waive or agree to vary the effect of the requirements of section
658A-5(a), 658A-6(a), 658A-8, 658A-17(a), 658A-17(b), 658A-26, or 658A-28.”
(Emphases added.)
 
24
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although specific to arbitration, the referenced 
sections of HRS § 658A-17 reflect Hawaii’s “basic philosophy” on 
discovery, and mirror similar provisions found in the Hawai' i 
Rules of Civil Procedure. See HRCP Rule 45 (2015) (allowing 
courts to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses, production of documentary evidence, and taking of depositions); HRCP Rule 26 (2015) (allowing parties to obtain discovery of relevant information through a variety of methods). As such, the discovery provision is at odds with Hawaii’s long-standing legal precedent of allowing parties to access relevant information for their claims. Such an unreasonable limitation on discovery, in either a litigation or an arbitration context, is substantively unconscionable under Hawai' i law. 
c. Confidentiality Provision
 
As is the case with discovery limitations,
 
confidentiality provisions are not per se substantively
 unconscionable. However, where an agreement contains severe
 limitations on discovery alongside a confidentiality provision,
 the plaintiff may be deprived of the ability to adequately
 discover material information about his or her claim. See Ting
 
v. AT&T, 319 F.3d 1126, 1151 (9th Cir. 2003) (“Although facially
 neutral, confidentiality provisions usually favor companies over
 individuals. . . . [B]ecause companies continually arbitrate the
 
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
same claims, the arbitration process tends to favor the
 
company.”); Zuver v. Airtouch Commc’ns, Inc., 103 P.3d 753, 765
 (Wash. 2004) (“As written, the [confidentiality] provision
 hampers an employee’s ability to prove a pattern of
 discrimination or to take advantage of findings in past
 arbitrations. Moreover, keeping past findings secret undermines
 an employee’s confidence in the fairness and honesty of the
 arbitration process.”).
 
In Hawai' i Medical Ass’n v. Hawai' i Medical Service 
Ass’n, 113 Hawai' i 77, 94, 148 P.3d 1179, 1196 (2006), this court 
recognized that non-drafting parties to arbitration agreements are sometimes confronted with unfair limitations, and noted that the arbitration agreement at issue prevented the non-drafting party from “placing evidence of broad-based, systemic wrongs before an internal review panel.” This court concluded that such one-sided restrictions foreclosed parties from adequately pursuing their claims and therefore could not be upheld. Id. 
The confidentiality provision in the current case
 
provides: “Neither a party, witness, or the arbitrator may
 disclose the facts of the underlying dispute or the contents or
 results of any negotiation, mediation, or arbitration hereunder
 without prior written consent of all parties.” 
Similar to Haw. Med. Ass’n, the confidentiality
 
26
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
provision at issue here, especially when read in conjunction with
 
the discovery provision, impairs the Homeowners’ ability to
 investigate and pursue their claims. If the confidentiality and
 discovery provisions in this case were enforced as written, the
 Homeowners would only be able to obtain discovery by consent and
 would be prevented from discussing their claims with other
 potential plaintiffs because the confidentiality provision would
 make them unable to “disclose the facts of the underlying
 dispute.” See Pokorny v. Quixtar, Inc., 601 F.3d 987, 1002 (9th
 
Cir. 2010) (“The confidentiality provision in this case . . .
 unfairly favors Quixtar because it prevents Plaintiffs from
 discussing their claims with other potential plaintiffs and from
 
discovering relevant precedent to support their claims.”)
 
In addition to detrimentally affecting the Homeowners’
 
ability to investigate their claims, the confidentiality
 
provision insulates the Defendants from potential liability. See
 
Ting, 319 F.3d at 1152 (noting that, through a confidentiality
 provision, AT&T “placed itself in a far superior legal posture by
 ensuring that none of its potential opponents have access to
 precedent while, at the same time, AT&T accumulates a wealth of
 knowledge on how to negotiate the terms of its own unilaterally
 crafted contract” and that, furthermore, “the unavailability of
 arbitral decisions may prevent potential plaintiffs from
 
27
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
obtaining the information needed to build a case of intentional
 
misconduct or unlawful discrimination against AT&T”). We
 therefore hold that the confidentiality provision of the
 arbitration clause is substantively unconscionable because it
 impairs the Homeowners’ ability to investigate and pursue their
 claims. 
In sum, we affirm, on state contract grounds, that the
 
arbitration clause is both procedurally and substantively
 unconscionable.
9
 
3. Severability of Unconscionable Provisions
 
The Defendants argue that, if this court determines
 
that certain provisions in the arbitration agreement are
 
unconscionable, those provisions should be severed from the
 arbitration clause and the rest of the arbitration clause should
 be enforced. 
“[T]he general rule is that severance of an illegal 
provision of a contract is warranted and the lawful portion of the agreement is enforceable when the illegal provision is not central to the parties’ agreement.” Beneficial Haw., Inc. v. 
Kida, 96 Hawai' i 289, 311, 30 P.3d 895, 917 (2001). However, 
where unconscionability so pervades the agreement, the court may 
9
 Because we conclude that the arbitration clause is unconscionable,
 
it is unnecessary for us to address whether ambiguity existed as to the intent
to arbitrate, as we did in Narayan I.
 
28
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
refuse to enforce the agreement as a whole.10 See Gandee v. LDL
 
Freedom Enters., Inc., 293 P.3d 1197, 1999-1200 (Wash. 2013)
 
(“Severance is the usual remedy for substantively unconscionable
 terms, but where such terms ‘pervade’ an arbitration agreement,
 we ‘refuse to sever those provisions and declare the entire
 agreement void.’” (quoting Adler v. Fred Lind Manor, 103 P.3d
 773, 788 (Wash. 2004))); Cordova v. World Fin. Corp., 208 P.3d
 901, 911 (N.M. 2009) (“[W]e must strike down the arbitration
 clause in its entirety to avoid a type of judicial surgery that
 inevitably would remove provisions that were central to the
 original mechanisms for resolving disputes between the
 parties.”).
 
Here, unconscionability so pervades the arbitration
 
clause that it is unenforceable. As a starting point, the
 
10 The Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 208 (Am. Law Inst. 1981)
 
offers similar guidance on unconscionable contracts:
 
If a contract or term thereof is unconscionable at the time
 
the contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the
contract, or may enforce the remainder of the contract
without the unconscionable term, or may so limit the
application of any unconscionable term as to avoid any
unconscionable result.
 
Likewise, but in the commercial context, HRS 490:2-302(1) (2008) provides,
“[i]f the court as a matter of law finds the contract or any clause of the
contract to have been unconscionable at the time it was made the court may
refuse to enforce the contract . . .”  See also Unif. Commercial Code § 2-302
cmt. 2 1A U.L.A. 156 (2012) (“[T]he court, in its discretion, may refuse to
enforce the contract as a whole if it is permeated by the unconscionability ,
or it may strike any single clause or group of clauses which are so tainted or
which are contrary to the essential purpose of the agreement . . .” (emphasis
added)). 
29
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arbitration clause is part of an adhesion contract whose terms
 
were unilaterally determined by the stronger contracting party,
 and are ambiguous when read together with the other controlling
 documents. On a substantive level, the arbitration clause places
 a limitation on damages that would enable the Defendants to
 curtail liability for even the most outrageous and intentionally
 harmful conduct. The clause also hinders the Homeowners’ ability
 to pursue their claims through extreme discovery and
 confidentiality limitations. As written, the arbitration clause
 goes beyond designating a forum for dispute resolution by
 depriving the Homeowners of a meaningful ability to assert rights
 that they might legitimately hold. Because unconscionability so
 pervades the arbitration clause, it is unenforceable.
 
4. Unconscionability in Other Jurisdictions 
Other state jurisdictions have also invalidated 
arbitration clauses on general contract unconscionability
 
grounds. For instance, in Brewer v. Missouri Title Loans, 364
 S.W.3d 486 (Mo. 2012), the Supreme Court of Missouri, on remand
 from the Supreme Court of the United States, affirmed that the
 arbitration agreement at issue was unconscionable. Brewer
 borrowed $2,215 from the title company, which charged an annual
 percentage rate on the loan of 300 percent. Id. at 487. The
 
agreement between the parties provided that Brewer must resolve
 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any claim against the title company through arbitration, but that
 
the title company could enforce its right to repossess the
 collateral through the courts. Id. Additionally, no customer of
 
the title company had ever successfully renegotiated the terms of
 the contract. Id. 
When Brewer filed a class action petition against the
 
title company alleging violations of state statutes, the title
 company filed a motion to compel arbitration and argued that the
 arbitration agreement included a class arbitration waiver. Id.
 
at 488. The trial court found the class arbitration waiver
 unconscionable and unenforceable and, on appeal, the Supreme
 Court of Missouri agreed, holding that the class arbitration
 waiver was unconscionable and striking the arbitration agreement
 in its entirety. Id. 
The Supreme Court granted the title company’s petition,
 
and vacated and remanded Brewer to the Supreme Court of Missouri
 for further consideration in light of Concepcion. Id. 
On remand, instead of focusing on the enforceability of
 
the class arbitration waiver, the Missouri court looked to
 “whether the arbitration agreement as a whole is unconscionable.” 
Id. at 492. The Missouri court explained that “[t]he purpose of
 the unconscionability doctrine is to guard against one-sided
 contracts, oppression and unfair surprise” and that
 
31
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“unconscionability is linked inextricably with the process of
 
contract formation because it is at formation that a party is
 required to agree to the objectively unreasonable terms.” Id. at
 
492-93. 
The Missouri court then applied the doctrine to the
 
facts of the case:
 
The evidence in this case supports a determination
that the agreement’s arbitration clause is unconscionable. 
There was evidence that the entire agreement--including the
arbitration clause--was non-negotiable and was difficult for
the average consumer to understand and that the title
company was in a superior bargaining position.  Brewer could
 not negotiate the terms of the agreement, including the
terms of the arbitration clause.  Indeed, the evidence
further demonstrated that no consumer ever successfully had
renegotiated the terms of the title company’s arbitration
contract.
 
Id. at 493. The court also noted that the terms of the agreement
 
were “extremely one-sided,” and that the terms made it unlikely
 that a consumer like Brewer “could retain counsel to pursue
 individual claims.” Id. at 493-94. The Missouri court
 
determined that this “disparity in bargaining power,” coupled
 with the “disparity between Brewer’s remedial options and the
 title company’s remedial options,” was “strong evidence that the
 agreement [was] unconscionable.” Id. at 495. As such, the
 
Missouri court held that the entire arbitration clause within the
 agreement was unconscionable and unenforceable. Id. at 496. The
 
title company subsequently appealed this decision to the Supreme
 Court, which declined review of the case the second time. See
 
32
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mo. Title Loans, Inc. v. Brewer, 133 S. Ct. 191 (2012).
 
Similarly, in Brown v. Genesis Healthcare Corp., 729
 
S.E.2d 217 (W. Va. 2012), the Supreme Court of Appeals of West
 
Virginia, on remand from the Supreme Court of the United States,
 also considered if its earlier ruling invalidating the
 arbitration clause could be upheld under the doctrine of
 unconscionability. In Brown, three lawsuits arose from a nursing
 home’s attempt to compel plaintiffs to participate in arbitration
 pursuant to a clause in the nursing home admission contract. Id.
 
at 222. In two of the three cases, the West Virginia court ruled
 that the arbitration clauses were unconscionable. Id. 
Additionally, the court determined that the FAA could not be
 applied to personal injury or wrongful death actions. Id. 
On certiorari, the Supreme Court reversed the West
 
Virginia opinion on the grounds that the FAA requires courts to
 enforce arbitration agreements, with no exception for personal
 injury or wrongful death claims. Marmet Health Care Ctr., Inc.
 
v. Brown, 565 U.S. 530, 532-33 (2012). The Supreme Court noted
 that, on remand, the West Virginia court must determine whether
 the arbitration clauses were unenforceable under “state common
 law principles that are not specific to arbitration and pre­empted by the FAA.” Id. at 534.
 
On remand, the West Virginia court determined that the
 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Supreme Court’s decision did not alter their ultimate decision
 
regarding unconscionability because the “doctrine of
 unconscionability that we explicated in Brown I is a general,
 state, common-law, contract-law principle that is not specific to
 arbitration, and does not implicate the FAA.” Brown, 729 S.E.2d
 
at 223. Ultimately, the West Virginia court determined that
 further development of the factual record regarding
 unconscionability was proper, and reversed the circuit court’s
 prior orders and remanded for further proceedings on that issue. 
Id. at 229-30.
 
Thus, on remand from the Supreme Court, both Missouri 
and West Virginia determined that the unconscionability doctrine, as rooted in state, common-law contract principles, was a proper method for invalidating arbitration agreements. Likewise, we hold that, under the specific facts of this case, the arbitration clause was unconscionable pursuant to well-established Hawai' i 
contract law. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm our earlier 
decision in Narayan v. Ritz-Carlton Development Co., 135 Hawai' i 
327, 350 P.3d 995 (2015), on the grounds that the arbitration clause is unconscionable under common law contract principles. As such, the ICA’s October 28, 2013 judgment on appeal is vacated 
34
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and the circuit court’s August 28, 2012 order denying the
 
Defendants’ motion to compel arbitration is affirmed. This case
 is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion. 
Terence J. O’Toole,
Judith Ann Pavey, and
Andrew J. Lautenbach
 for petitioners
 
Bert T. Kobayashi, Jr.,
Lex R. Smith, Joseph A.
Stewart, Maria Y. Wang, and
Aaron R. Mun for respondents
The Ritz-Carlton Development
Company, Inc., The Ritz-
Carlton Management Company,
LLC, John Albert and Edgar
Gum and respondents Marriott
International, Inc., The
Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company,
LLC, Marriott Two Flags, LP,
Marriott Ownership Resorts,
Inc., MH Kapalua Venture,
LLC, and Marriott Vacations
Worldwide Corporation
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
 
35
 