 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
AND
  
 
SCWC-12-0001041
  
 
 
 
SCWC-12-0001042
  
 
AND
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0001040 21-JUN-2017 
08:09 AM 
---oOo--
-
SCWC-12-0001040
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
SEMISI NELSON, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO. 12-0001040; CR.  NO. 05-1-2446)
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KAREN TERUYA, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO. 12-0001041; CR.  NO. 02-1-1718)
  

 
AND
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
CONRADO CABIGON, JR., Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO.  12-0001042; CR.  NO. 08-1-1192)
   
 
 
  
 
AND
  
 
 
SCWC-12-0001046
  
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
  STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
JOHN PAUL LUNA, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO. 12-0001047; CR.  NO. 10-1-0621)
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
SCWC-12-0001043
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
STEVE D. FERRARIS, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP No.  12-0001043; CR.  NO. 11-1-0306)
  
 
AND
  
SCWC-12-0001044
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
DAVID K. BERRY, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO. 12-0001044; CR.  NO. 10-1-1289)
  
SCWC-12-0001045
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
JUSTIN NAKAMURA, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO.  12-0001045; CR.   NO. 09-1-1364)
  
 
AND
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
  
CEDRO MUNA, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee, and
  
INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY,
  
Petitioner/Real Party in Interest/Appellant.
  
(CAAP NO. 12-0001046; CR.  NO. 09-1-0616)
  
 
AND
  
SCWC-12-0001047
  
2

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
      
  
   
  
 
  
     
  
   
    
                         
    
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
SCWC-12-0001040
  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
 
JUNE 21, 2017
  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, JJ.,  AND CIRCUIT 
COURT JUDGE NAKASONE, IN PLACE OF WILSON, J., RECUSED 
  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT  BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I. Introduction 
In eight separate criminal cases,1 Real Party in Interest -
Appellant/Petitioner, International Fidelity Insurance Company 
(“International Fidelity ” or “International” ) had issued eight 
separate powers of attorney (“POA[s]”) to either Ida Peppers 
(“Peppers”) or Charles Fisher (“Fisher”) to execute a bail bond 
on behalf of a defendant in each case. In each criminal case, the bonded defendant failed to appear as required, and a 
Judgment and Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond (“Judgment and 
Order of Forfeiture” or “forfeiture judgment” ) was entered in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”). 
Within days of the entry of the forfeiture judgments, the 
court provided notice of those judgments to the surety listed on 
the bonds — either Peppers of Freedom Bail Bond (“FBB”) or 
Fisher of AAA Local Bail Bonds (“AAA”) . The court later issued 
letters to International Fidelity informing it of each Judgment 
  State v. Teruya,  Cr. No. 02-1- 1718; State v. Nelson ,  Cr. No. 05 -1-2446; 
State v. Cabigon, Cr. No. 08-1- 1192; State v. Muna , Cr. No. 09-1- 0616; State 
v. Nakamura,
 Cr. No. 09 -1-1364; State v. Luna , Cr. No. 10-1- 0621; State v. 
Berry, Cr. No. 10-1- 1289; State v. Ferraris, Cr. No. 11-1- 0306. 
3
 1 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
       
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
and Order of Forfeiture and demanding payment. Over thirty days 
after International Fidelity received those letters – in fact, 
in each of the cases except in State v. Ferraris,  Cr. No. 11-1
-
0306, it was several hundred days later — International Fidelity 
moved to set aside each of the forfeiture judgments, stating 
that it did not receive notice of the forfeiture judgments as 
required under HRS § 804-51 (2014).  
Upon consolidating the motions, the circuit court denied 
them, concluding that the requirements of HRS § 804-51 were satisfied when notice of the forfeiture judgments had been 
issued to Peppers of FBB or Fisher of AAA. The court also ruled 
that International Fidelity nevertheless received notice of the 
forfeiture judgments when it had received the Judiciary’s 
letters, and that International Fidelity’s motions to set aside 
were untimely. 
In a published opinion, the ICA affirmed the circuit 
court’s “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying 
International Fidelity Insurance Company’s Consolidated Motions 
to Set Aside Judgment Entered Against International Fidelity 
Insurance Company” based on the circuit court’s conclusion that 
due process and the requirements of HRS § 804-51 were satisfied 
when notice of the forfeiture judgments had been issued to 
Peppers or Fisher. The ICA did not address whether the State’s 
letters to Fidelity Insurance satisfied the statute’s notice 
4
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
      
 
  
  
 
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
requirements. See  State v. Nelson,  139 Hawai ʻi 147, 164  n.13, 
384 P.3d 923, 940 n.13   (App. 2016).  
International Fidelity 
timely filed an Application for a 
Writ of Certiorari (“Application”) on December 2 3, 2016.  
For the following reasons, the ICA correctly determined that 
notice to International Fidelity of the forfeiture judgments was 
not required by due process or under HRS § 804-51. 
Specifically, HRS § 804-51 requires that notice be issued to the 
“surety on the bond,” and the bonds at issue identify only FBB 
or AAA — and not International Fidelity — where the surety is 
required to be named pursuant to Criminal Administrative Order No. 2.1. Additionally, to the extent the forfeiture judgments may be ambiguous, we clarify that the forfeiture judgments were 
entered “against the . . . surety or sureties on the bond,” 
i.e., Peppers of FBB or Fisher of AAA. 
II.  Background 
To provide context to the proceedings below, we begin with 
a general overview of the bail process and observations regarding the at-issue bail bonds and powers of attorney, before discussing the circuit court and ICA proceedings and decisions 
in this consolidated matter. 
A. Bail Process and Governing Laws 
Bail, or the giving of bail, is “the signing of the 
recognizance by the defendant and the defendant’s surety or 
5
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
2 Depending on the punishment for the offense charged, a judge, justice of a 
court of record, including a district judge, or a sheriff, sheriff’s deputy, chief of police or any person named by the chief of police, “shall be 
competent to admit [an] accused to bail.” HRS § 804 -5 (2014).                         
 
   
  
 
 
  
      
 
      
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
sureties, conditioned for the appearance of the defendant at the 
session of a court of competent jurisdiction to be named in the 
condition, and to abide by the judgment of the court.” HRS § 
804-1 (2014).  The judge2 admitting a defendant to bail has the 
discretion to set the amount of bail; in doing so, the judge considers both “the punishment to be inflicted on conviction, 
and the pecuniary circum stances of the party accused.” HRS § 
804-9 (2014); Haw. Const. art I, § 12 (“Excessive bail shall not 
be required . . . . The court may dispense with bail if 
reasonably satisfied that the defendant or witness will appear 
when directed, except for a defendant charged with an offense 
punishable by life imprisonment.”) . 
1.	 Registering the Purchase of a Bail Bond from a Bail 
Bondsperson 
A person charged with a crime may purchase a bail bond from 
a professional bondsperson for five to fifteen
3 percent of the 
3	 (a) The amount of compensation which may be collected on 
any bail bond . . . by one or more persons acting as 
sureties thereon shall not exceed a one[ -]time only fee 
from five to fifteen per cent of the amount thereof, but 
need not be less than $50 in any event; provided that additional fees, subject to subsection (b), may be 
collected for: 
(1) The posting of a surety insurance bond as 
defined in section 431:1 -201(1); 
(2) The posting of a bond on behalf of a person 
whose case is pending appeal; or 
(3) The posting of a bond in which more than one 
(continued . . .) 
6
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
                                                                               
      
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
4As a present practical matter, the percentage of bail bondspersons who are 
self-funded is likely minimal due to a 1987 change in the law regarding the 
deposit of security for bail bonds. Prior to 1987, bail bondspersons could 
use the same security for multiple bonds.  See  Bail Study, at  34 (“The 
current law is ambiguous as to the assets which should be maintained by a bondsman. 
H.R.S. §804- 10[*] appears to require only that a bondsman have or 
be able to offer proof of assets totaling twice the face value of the 
individual bond posted. No provision is made for an accumulation of assets 
to secure a large number of outstanding bonds.”).   In 1987, the legislature 
clarified HRS chapter 804 to require a deposit of separate unencumbered property interests to secure each bail bond.  See 1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act  
139, § 9(3) at 315– 16; HRS § 804 -11.5(a),(f) (2014) (“Any person who is 
permitted to give bail . . . may secure the bail bond by a deposit . . . of [cash, credit or debit card authorization, or unencumbered interests in 
personal or real property] . . . . For the purposes of this section, an 
unencumbered interest in real property, stocks, or bonds, means that the 
interest is not encumbered by any lien or encumbrance or is not currently being used as security for a bail bond .” (emphasis added)).  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
total amount of bail set. See Hawaii Crime Commission, Study of 
Bail Forfeitures in Hawaii 3 (1984) (“ Bail Study”). Bail 
bondspersons who qualify as “sureties” are either self-funded4 or 
are licensed insurance producers pursuant to HRS chapter 431, 
article 9A. See HRS § 804-10.5(b)(2)– (3);5 HRS § 431:9A-102 
(. . . continued)  
year has passed since the filing thereof. 
(b) The compensation collected pursuant to sections 804 -
62(a)(2) and (a)(3), in any year after the first year, may 
be collected annually, and: 
(1) Shall be charged on a prorated basis; and  
(2) Shall not exceed the percentage charged in the  
     first year.  
HRS § 804- 62 (2014). 
* “No person shall be received as the surety for the appearance of the party 
accused, who does not own or possess property either real or personal within 
the State, to double the amount of the bail bond. . . .” HR S § 804- 10 
(1985). 
Sureties; qualification.  (a) In determining the 
sufficiency of a surety or sureties, the court shall 
consider the surety’s or sureties’: 
(1) Character; 
(2) Reliability; 
(3) Place of residence; and 
(4)
 Financial and employment circumstances. 
(continued . . .)  
7
 5  
 
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
(“‘Insurance producer’ or ‘producer’ means a person required to 
be licensed under the laws of this State to sell, solicit, or 
negotiate insurance.”).   Unlike self-funded bail bondspersons, 
bail bondspersons who are licensed insurance producers do not 
6 have to comply with single surety property requirements  or 
(. . . continued) 
(b) No person shall be [a] sufficient surety who: 
(1) Has been convicted of perjury for submitting a 
    false statement under section 804.11 -5; 
(2) Does not satisfy the requirements of section 804 -
11.5; or 
(3) Does not satisfy the requirements of article 9A,  
chapter 431, if posting an insurance bond as 
    defined in section 431:1 -210(1). 
HRS § 804- 10.5 (2014).  In 2005, HRS § 804 -10.5 (1993) was in effect, and is 
therefore applicable to the bond in Nelson, Cr. No. 05 -1-2446.  As noted by 
the ICA, the textual difference between the 1993 and 2014 versions of HRS § 804-10.5 is limited to a reference to “article 9” instead of “article 9A.” 
See Nelson, 139 Hawaiʻ i at 163 n.11, 384 P.3d at 939 n.11. In 2005, HRS 
chapter 431, article 9, concerned the licensing of insurance adjusters, independent bill reviewers, and limited service representatives. For the 
purposes of the issues raised in this case, this does not alter the scheme 
for the qualification of sureties with respect to the Nelson bond. 
Surety insurance defined. Surety insurance includes: 
(1) Bail bond insurance, which is a guarantee that any 
person, in or in connection with any proceedings in any court, will: 
(A) 	Attend in court when required, or 
(B) 	Will obey the orders of judgment of the court, 
as a condition to the release of the person from confinement, and the execution of bail bonds for 
any such purpose. The making of property or cash 
bail does not constitute the transacting of bail bond 
insurance. 
HRS § 431:1- 210(1) (2005). 
One surety sufficient; when. A single surety is 
sufficient, if the surety offers cash, a credit or debit 
card authorization, stocks, bonds, or real property in 
accordance with section 804 -11.5; otherwise, there shall be 
two or more sureties. 
HRS § 804- 11 (2014). 
8
 6  
 
 
                          
     
 
 
      
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
7 deposit any security with the court  if their bonds are 
guaranteed by a surety insurer. See  HRS 
§ 431:1-202 (2005)   
(“Insurer means every person engaged in the business of making 
contracts of insurance and includes reciprocal  or interinsurance 
exchanges.”);  HRS § 431:1-210(1) (defining surety insurance); 
supra note 5 (quoting text of HRS § 431:1-210(1)); HRS §  
431:10F-101 (2005) (surety’s requirements deemed met by surety 
8 insurer);  Bail Study , at 32 (citing HRS § 431 -636 (1976) 
(predecessor of HRS § 431:10F-101)).  
7	 Cash, credit and debit authorization, stocks, 
bonds, or real property as security for bail. (a) Any 
person who is permitted to give bail in accordance with 
sections 804 -7.4 may secure the bail bond by a deposit, 
with the clerk of the appropriate court, of: 
(1) 	Cash or credit or debit card authorization equal 
to the amount of the bail; 
(2) 	The unencumbered interest in personal property 
which as a marked value of not less than the 
amount of the bail bond; or 
(3) 	Deeds for real property: 
(A) Situated in this State; 
(B) Not exempt from attachment of execution     under section 651- 92; 
(C) Owned by the person depositing the bail; 
and 
(D) Consisting of an unencumbered interest the 
value of which is at least double the 
amount of the bail bond. 
. . . . 
HRS § 804- 11.5 (2014). 
8 Requirements deemed met by surety insurer. Whenever by 
law or by rule of any court, public official, or public 
body, a surety bond is required or is permitted to be 
given, provided the bond is otherwise proper and its 
conditions are guaranteed by an authorized surety insurer 
or by an unauthorized surety insurer pursuant to article 8, 
part II, the bond shall be approved and accepted and shall be deemed to fulfill all requirements as to number of 
sureties, residence or status of sureties, and other 
similar requirements, and no justification by the surety 
(continued . . .)  
9
  
 
 
  
 
                    
(. . . continued)                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
“[T]he bonds[person] does not actually post the bail with 
the court, but merely registers the bond purchase.” Bail Study, 
at 32.   From July 1, 2002 through  June 9, 2010, Criminal 
Administrative Order No. 2.1 was in effect and outlined 
procedures for registering or filing bail bonds.  Requirements 
included: (1) “[e]ach and every bail bond shall conform to the 
‘Sample Standard Form for Bail Bonds’ attached to this order”; 
(2) “[i]ndividuals and/or entities issuing bail bonds shall be 
responsible for ensuring that all information appearing on a 
bond is correct”; and (3) “[e]ach and every bail bond shall have 
attached to it a power of attorney indicating the insurance 
company that is insuring the bond.” See  Crim. Admin. Order No. 
2.1 at D-17A.    
After Criminal Administr
ative Order No. 2.1 was rescinded 
on June 9, 2010, there were no court rules or orders regarding bail until July 1, 2011, when HRPP Rule 46(b) took effect.
9 
shall be necessary. For the purpose of this section, 
surety bond shall also include a recognizance, obligation, stipulation or undertaking. 
HRS § 431:10F- 101 (2014).  
HRPP Rule 46(b) (2011) states: 
(b)
 Bond.
 A party seeking release on bail by posting bond shall 
submit the bond in a form that substantially complies with Form J annexed to these rules. If a bail bond is secured by insurance, a copy of the bail agent’s power of attorney 
shall be attached to  the bond, and shall be supported by 
the affidavit or declaration of the bail agent authorized 
(continued . . .) 
10
 9 
 
 
   
 By statute, the following language is deemed to be set 
forth in each and every bond or recognizance, whether actually 
set forth in the bond or recognizance, or not:  
 
                    
(. . . continued)                                                             
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
2. Bond Forfeiture Provisions 
Whenever the court, in any criminal cause, forfeits 
any bond or recognizance given in a criminal cause, the 
court shall immediately enter up judgment in favor of the State and against the principal or principals and surety or 
sureties
 on the bond,  jointly and severally, for the full 
amount of the penalty thereof, and shall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after the expiration of thirty 
days from the date that notice is given via personal 
service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the 
surety or sureties on the bond, of the entry of the 
judgment in favor of the State, unless before the 
expiration of thirty days from the date that notice  is 
given to the surety or sureties on the bond  of the entry of 
the judgment in favor of the State, a motion or application of the principal or principals, surety or sureties, or any 
of them, showing good cause why execution should not issue 
upon the judgment, is filed with the court.  If the motion 
or application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained, the court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, if 
the principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant to 
section 804 -14 or section 804- 41, return the bond or 
recognizance to the principal or surety, whoever shall have 
given it, less the amount of any cost, as established at 
the hearing, incurred by the State as a result of the 
nonappearance of the principal or other event on the basis 
of which the court forfeited the bond or recognizance.  If 
the motion or application, after a hearing held thereon, is 
overruled, execution shall forthwith issue and shall not be stayed unless the order overruling the motion or 
application is appealed from as in the case of a final 
judgment.  
HRS § 804-51 (emphases added); id.  (“This section shall be 
considered to be set forth in full in words and figures in, and 
to furnish bail for compensation. 
The declaration or 
affidavit shall identify the insurer, provide the agent’s and insurer’s license numbers, attest the agent a nd the 
insurer are currently licensed and in good standing with 
the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Hawai ʻi, and 
attest the agent and the insurer are in compliance with Hawaiʻi law governing bail bonds. 
11
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to form a part of, and to be included in, each and every bond or 
recognizance given in a criminal cause, whether actually set 
forth in the bond or recognizance, or not. ”). 
B.	 Bail Bonds Filed in Cr. Nos. 02-1-1718, 05-1-2446, 08-1-
1192, 09-1-0616, 09-1-1364, 10-1-0621, 10-1-1289, and 11-1-0306 
Except for the bail bond issued in State v. Ferraris , Cr. 
No. 11-1-0306, each of the remaining seven bonds were issued 
between October 27, 2005 and June 2, 2010, and were therefore 
required to conform with the “Sample Standard Form for Bail 
Bonds” attached to Criminal Administrative Order No. 2.1 , as 
that order was in effect from 2002 until June 9, 2010. The bond 
in Ferraris was issued on March 8, 2011, after Criminal 
Administrative Order No. 2.1 was rescinded, but before HRPP Rule 
46 was amended to provide procedures for the posting of bail 
bonds. In any event, the Ferraris 
bond appears to also conform 
to the “Sample Standard Form for Bail Bonds” attached to Criminal Administrative Order No. 2.1. 
The “Sample Standard Form for Bail Bonds” requires that the 
surety be identified at the top of the bail bond, together with the surety’s address and telephone number. Pursuant to that 
requirement, the surety listed on seven bail bonds is “Ida 
Peppers, Freedom Bail Bond,” where the bonds were signed by 
either Peppers or Linda Del Rio (“Del Rio”) . The surety listed 
on the remaining bail bond is “AAA Local Bail Bonds, Charles 
12
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Fisher General Agent, ”  and signed by Fisher.  International 
Fidelity is not identified on any of the bail bonds.  
Instead, International Fidelity  had issued the POAs that  
were attached to each of the bail bonds. Each of the POAs 
consisted of a pre-printed form that was filled in and signed by  
an “executing agent” or “atty in fact.” The pre -printed forms 
for each of the POAs were identical except for that used in 
State v. Nelson , Cr. No. 05-1-2446.  The seven identical pre-
printed forms read as follows:  
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY 
INSURANCE COMPANY, a corporation duly organized and 
existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey, has 
constituted and appointed, and does hereby constitute and 
appoint, [sic] its true and lawful Attorney -in-Fact, with 
full power and authority to sign the company’s name and 
affix its corporate seal to, and deliver on its behalf as 
surety, any and all obligations as herein provided, and the 
execution of such obligations in pursuance of these 
presents shall be as binding upon the company as fully and 
to all intents and purposes as if done by the regularly 
elected officers of said company at its home office in 
their own proper person; and the said company hereby 
ratifies and confirms all and whatsoever its said Attorney -
in-Fact may lawfully do and perform in the premises by 
virtue of these presents.  THIS POWER OF ATTORNEY IS VOID IF ALTERED OR ERASED, THE OBLIGATION OF THE COMPANY SHALL 
NOT EXCEED THE SUM OF [  ] THOUSAND . . . AND MAY BE 
EXECUTED FOR RECOGNIZANCE ON CRIMINAL BAIL BONDS ONLY.  . . 
. Authority of such Attorney -in-Fact is limited to the 
execution of appearance bonds and cannot be construed to guarantee defendant’s future lawful conduct, adherence to 
travel limitation, fines, restitution, payments or 
penalties, or any other condition imposed by a court not 
specifically related to court appearances. A separate 
Power of Attorney must be attached to each bond executed.  
The POA in  Nelson  reads: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY 
INSURANCE CORPORATION, a corporation duly organized and 
existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey has 
13
  
 
 
  
  
  
10                       
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
constituted an appointed, and does hereby constitute and 
appoint, [sic10] its true and lawful attorney -in-fact, with 
full power and authority to sign the company’s name and 
affix its corporate seal to, and deliver on its behalf as 
surety, any and all obligations as herein provided, and the 
execution of such obligations in pursuance of these  
presents shall be as binding upon the company as fully and 
to all intents and purposes as if done by the regularly 
elected officers of said company at its home office in 
their own proper person; and the said company hereby 
ratifies and confirms all and whatsoever its said attorney -
in-fact may lawfully do and perform in the premises by 
virtue of these presents.  THIS POWER OF ATTORNEY IS VOID IF ALTERED OR ERASED, THE OBLIGATION OF THE COMPANY SHALL 
NOT EXCEED THE SUM OF THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($30,000.00)  
AND MAY BE EXECUTED FOR RECOGNIZANCE ON CRIMINAL BAIL BONDS 
ONLY. . . .  The authority of such attorney -in-fact is 
limited to appearance bonds and cannot be construed to 
guarantee for failure to provide payments, back alimony 
payments, fines or wage law claims.  
 
Based on the contracts Peppers and Fisher (through Bryan 
Nester (“Nester”), partner of AAA) had with International 
Fidelity, Peppers and Fisher were required to send immediate 
notice to International of any forfeitures declared on any bonds 
written by them that were guaranteed by International.    
Specifically, Peppers’s contract stated: “ The Retailer [Peppers] 
will send, immediately, notice to the Company [International] of 
any forfeitures declared on any bonds written by him, since such 
may affect the Company. ” Similarly, Nester’s contract stated: 
“The Producer [Nester and any subproducers, including Fisher] will send immediately, notice to International of any defaults, 
  There was a space provided in the text for the insertion of the 
appointee’s name, but it was left blank. The same error appears in the other 
POAs, except there was no “blank space” for the insertion of a name. 
Regardless, none of the parties challenge the effectiveness of the POA.  
14
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
                         
  
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
forfeitures, or breaches declared on any bonds written by or on 
behalf of Producer. ” 
C. Licenses of Bail Bondspersons and International Fidelity 
The circuit court found that at all times relevant, 
Peppers, Del Rio, and Fisher were registered producers for 
[International Fidelity] in the State of Hawaii.  Indeed, the 
record contains the licensure certificates for both Peppers and 
Del Rio, which were issued by the Insurance Division of the 
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs (“DCCA”). The 
certificates identify Peppers and Del Rio as “resident 
producers” of surety insurance.  Although the record does not 
contain a copy of Fisher’s license, i t was represented in a 
court brief that at the time of the subject bail transaction, 
Fisher was “an appointed and authorized bail bond agent in the 
State of Hawaii under the comp any AAA Local Bail Bonds.”11 A 
“bail agent” is a type of insurance producer. See HRS § 431:9N -
101 (Supp. 2016). 
The circuit court made no specific finding, however, as to 
International Fidelity ’s license status . International Fidelity 
had consistently represented to the circuit court that it was a 
“duly licensed and authorized surety in the state of H awaii,” 
A review of the DCCA’s insurance license database confirms that both 
Charles R. Fisher and AAA Local Bail Bonds were each at one time licensed as 
a “resident producer” of surety insurance. See http://insurance.ehawaii.gov/ 
hils/info/301946/203113 (Charles R. Fisher); http://insurance.ehawaii.gov /hils/info/300930/201841 (AAA Local Bail Bonds). 
15
 11  
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
but did not specify whether it was a licensed insurance producer 
governed by HRS chapter 431, article 9A. 
D. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Issuance of Judgments and Orders of Forfeiture 
In each of the eight criminal cases, the defendant failed 
to appear before the court when required. The bail bond posted 
on behalf of each defendant was therefore forfeited, and the 
circuit court entered a Judgment and Order of Forfeiture in each 
case. The language used in each forfeiture judgment was 
similar, and substantially took one of the following two forms, 
with relevant language underlined.  The first form was used in 
Nelson, Teruya, Cabigon , and Nakamura: 
The above -entitled case having come . . . before the 
. . . Judge of the above -entitled court, on [said date], 
and the Defendant having failed to appear or to be present 
on the said date, and the Court, upon motion of the State 
of Hawaii, having on said date ordered and declared the 
forfeiture of the bail bond filed and posted in this case, 
executed by said Defendant, as principal, and INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY (FREEDOM BAIL BOND), through its 
agent and attorney in fact, IDA PEPPERS, as surety, in the sum of . . . ,  
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the foregoing order, IT 
IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the State of 
Hawaii does have and recovers from the principal and the 
surety above named, jointly and severally, the sum of . . . , and that execution issue herein according to law.    
The second form was used in Ferraris , Muna,  Berry  (where “this 
cause” is stated instead of “this case”),  and Luna  (where 
“Charles Fisher” is stated instead of “Ida Peppers (Freedom Bail 
Bond)”):   
The above -entitled case having come . . . before the 
. . . Judge of the above -entitled court, on [said date], 
16
  
 
 
  
 
 
In most of the cases, either FBB or AAA filed a motion to set 
aside the forfeiture judgments within thirty days of receiving 
notice of the judgments.12   The motions were typically continued 
to allow the bond companies more time to locate the defendants. 
Ultimately, none of the judgments were set aside.    
  
  
 
 
 Subsequent to the entry of Judgments and Orders of 
Forfeiture and any continuances that may have been granted to 
FBB or AAA to locate defendants, letters were sent by the 
Judiciary to International Fidelity by certified mail, return receipt requested. Each letter’s subject line read, “Re: 
Notification of Bail Bond Forfeiture,” and stated (or used similar language): 
 
                         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
and the Defendant having failed to appear or to be present 
on the said date, and the Court, upon motion of the State 
of Hawai[ʻ ]i, having on said 
date ordered and declared the 
forfeiture of the bail bond filed and posted in this case, 
executed by said Defendant, as principal, and INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY, through its agent and attorney 
in fact, IDA PEPPERS  (FREEDOM BAIL BOND), as surety, in the 
sum of . . . ,  
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the foregoing order, IT 
IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the State of 
Hawai
[ʻ]i does have and recovers from the principal and the 
surety above named, jointly and severally, the sum of . . . 
, and that execution issue herein according to law. 
2. Letters Sent to International Fidelity Subsequent to 
Entry of Judgments and Orders of Forfeiture and 
International Fidelity’s Motions to Set Aside 
12 A review of the record reveals that FBB did not file motions to set aside 
in State v. Nakamura,  Cr. No. 09 -1-1364, and State v. Ferraris, Cr. No. 11 -1-
0306. 
FBB filed an untimely motion to set aside in State v. Berry,  Cr. No. 
10-1-1289.  
17
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 Our records indicate that payment is due and owing. 
If payment is not immediately received, appropriate legal 
action will be taken, including but not limited to 
requesting the appropriate Court  to determine sufficiency 
of the surety and/or referring the matter to the State of Hawaii’s Department of the Attorney General to commence 
collection actions. If you have any questions, please contact the Cashier’s Office . . . .  
   
   
  
  
    
 Upon International Fidelity’s motion, International’s 
Motions to Set Aside filed in the eight criminal cases  were 
consolidated before the Hon. Richard K. Perkins  in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit.   International Fidelity asserted  
similar arguments in each case. Namely,  that International 
Fidelity was the “surety of record” according to the POAs *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
To Whom It May Con cern: 
Pursuant to Section 804 -51, Hawaii Revised Statutes, 
judgment has been entered on [date of relevant Judgment and 
Order of Forfeiture] that bail of [relevant amount] be 
forfeited in the following matter: 
Case Number:  
[relevant case number]
 
Case Name:  [relevant case name]
 
Name of Issuing General Agent:  [Freedom Bail Bond or 
AAA Local Bail Bonds] 
Policy No.:  [relevant “power number” imprinted on 
Power of Attorney] 
International Fidelity filed Motions to Set Aside in each 
case beyond thirty days from the date it received each of the 
Judiciary’s letters.  Specifically, in each case except 
Ferraris, International Fidelity’s motions were filed several 
hundred days — approximately one to three years — after the 
respective letters regarding the Judgment and Order of Forfeiture were sent. 
3. Consolidated Motions and Circuit Court’s Disposition 
18
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
attached to the registered bail bonds, and that it did not 
receive “[the] statutorily required notice of the entry of a 
judgment and order of forfeiture of bail bond as required under 
HRS § 804-51” in any o f the cases. Accordingly, it sought to 
set aside the Judgments and Orders of Forfeiture “as against  
International” because the circuit court “lacked jurisdiction 
over International when each of the judgments was ent ered” due 
to the court’s failure to prov ide Inte rnational with the 
requisite notice.  International Fidelity also argued that it 
would otherwise be deprived  of “its rights under HRS § 804 -51 
and to due process.” Further, according to International 
Fidelity, the notice that issued to either Peppers/FBB or 
Fisher/AAA did not constitute notice to it, and the letters it 
received from the State were “payment demands” that did not 
satisfy the notice requirements under HRS § 804-51.  Lastly, 
International argued that good cause existed to set aside the  
forfeiture judgments in at least five of the cases —  Berry, 
Muna, Ferraris, Luna , and Nakamura  —  as the defendants had been 
apprehended and returned to State custody “within months” from 
when the Judiciary issued its letters.    
 The circuit court disagreed with International Fidelity’s 
assertions. Instead, it  determined that International Fidelity 
was not entitled to notice pursuant to HRS § 804-51, and that because International’s consolidated motions were filed outside 
19

  
 
 
   
      
   
  
 
   
                         
   
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the time limit imposed by HRS § 804-51, the court was “without 
the power to consider them.” (citing State v. Ranger Ins. Co., 
83 Hawaiʻ i 118, 124 n.5, 925 P.2d 288, 294 n.5 (1996)). 
In arriving at 
its disposition, the circuit court first 
analyzed the text and legislative history of HRS § 804-51 to 
determine whether International Fidelity was entitled to notice 
pursuant to that statute. Relying on a Senate Judiciary 
Standing Committee Report that defined “bail bondsman” as “the 
surety [referred to] in Chapter 804, Hawaii Revised Statutes,”13 
the court concluded “the legislature intended the term ‘surety,’ as used in the notice provisions of HRS § 804-51, to apply to 
bondspersons such as Pepper and Del Rio of FBB and Fisher of AAA.” Because the notice requirements of HRS § 804-51 were 
satisfied when notice was given to FBB or AAA, absent the filing of a motion or application showing good cause within the thirty-
day period following receipt of notice by FBB or AAA, 
International Fidelit y was “subject[] . . . to execution on the 
bond.” 
13 The purpose of this bill is to change the present law by  
requiring that the courts give a written notice to the bail 
bondsman (referred to as the surety  in Chapter 804, Hawaii 
Revised Statutes) upon forfeiture of any bail bond. A bail 
bond is forfeited when a criminal defendant fails to appear 
for a scheduled court appearance. This bill would also 
allow a bail bondsman thirty days, instead of the present 
ten, to object to any forfeiture of a bail bond.  
(citing S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 857, in 1989 Senate Jou
rnal, at 1127 
(emphasis added)). 
20
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Based on the foregoing, the circuit court denied 
International Fidelity’s consolidated Motions to Set Aside 
Judgment Entered Against International Fidelity Insurance 
Company.  
   
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
The circuit court noted that HRS § 804-51 “requires nothing 
more than notice to the surety ‘of the entry of the judgment in 
favor of the State.’” Thus, for the sake of argument, the court 
concluded that even if the Judiciary was required to provide notice directly to International Fidelity, it did so by way of 
its mailed letters. Those letters were not “attempts to execute 
on the judgments,” but rather were “meant only to notify 
[International] of the entry of the forfeiture judgments, to 
demand payment, and to warn [International] of the possibility 
of further legal action.” Thus, “[t]o date, none of the 
judgments at issue in this proceeding have been exec uted upon.” 
B. Appeal to the ICA 
International Fidelity timely appealed the circuit court’s 
denial of its motions, and the ICA consolidated those appeals 
under CAAP-12-1040.  International reiterated its arguments that 
the forfeiture judgments should be set aside because it did not 
receive notice of the judgments as required by HRS § 804-51, and 
was therefore deprived of the opportunity to timely locate the 
defendants and an opportunity to be heard that is protected 
under procedural due process. 
21
  
 
 
   
  
     
    
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
The ICA chose to “not adopt either party’s position, but 
rather agree[d] with the circuit court to the extent it held 
that the term ‘surety’ in HRS § 804 -51 refers to the 
bondspersons (or bail agents) in these cases . . . .” Nelson, 
139 Hawaiʻ i at 160, 384 P.3d at 935. In addition to elaborating 
on the same legislative history behind the notice requirement that had been highlighted by the circuit court, the ICA 
carefully examined multiple provisions of both HRS chapters 804 
(governing bail) and 431 (governing insurance) to ensure that 
its interpretation of HRS § 804-51 was consistent with all 
statutory provisions. See 139 Hawaiʻ i at 160–63, 384 P.3d at 
936–39. 
In sum, the ICA explained that it was uncontested that 
Peppers, Del Rio, and Fisher were “insurance producers” governed 
by HRS chapter 431, article 9A . As “insurance producers,” they 
qualified as sureties under HRS § 804-10.5.   Moreover, they had 
signed the bond; HRS § 804-1 requires the surety  or sureties  to 
do so. The ICA also pointed out that the definition of “bail agent” set forth in HRS § 431:9N -101 (Supp. 2015), describes the 
distinct roles of a licensed “insurance producer under article 
9A” and an authorized “surety insurer.” 
See Nelson , 139 Hawai ʻi 
at 162–63, 384 P.3d at 938 –39; HRS § 431:9N-101 (Supp. 2015) 
(“As used in this article: ‘Bail agent’ means a licensed 
insurance producer under article 9A who is appointed by an 
22

  
 
 
      
 
 
   
  
 
   
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
authorized surety insurer, furnishes bail for compensation in 
any court in this State, and has the power of attorney to 
execute or countersign bail bonds in connection with judicial 
proceedings.”). 
The ICA went on to explain that International Fidelity’s 
due process rights were not violated because “the notice that 
was provided to Peppers . . . and Fisher -- as required under 
HRS § 804-51 -- was reasonably calculated to apprise 
International Fidelity of the bail forfeiture judgments” in 
accordance with Klinger v. Kepano , 64 Haw. 4, 635 P.2d 938 
(1981). Nelson, 139 Hawai ʻi at 165, 384 P.3d at 941. 
Additionally, the ICA ruled that the form of the forfeiture 
judgments was proper , and that the circuit court “properly 
declined to apply HRCP Rule 60(b) or any other civil procedure 
rule.” 139 Hawaiʻ i at 166, 384 P.3d at 942. 
For these reasons, the ICA a ffirmed the circuit court’s 
October 31, 2012, “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Denying International Fidelity Insurance Company’s 
Consolidated Motions to Set Aside Judgment Entered Against 
International Fidelity Insurance Company.” Id.   
C. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
International Fidelity timely applied for a writ of 
certiorari in each of the eight underlying criminal cases. This 
23
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
International Fidelity argues that  the ICA erred in its 
interpretation of HRS § 804-51, as the statute is unambiguous 
and should be plainly read.  According to International, the 
forfeiture judgments “clearly identify International as the 
surety, not  the Bondspersons,” and other jurisdicti ons require 
that the state provide notice of the judgments   to the surety 
instead of the bondsperson.  International appears to also suggest that only entities that “provide surety insurance for 
bail bonds” can act as a “surety” in Hawai ʻi. Because a bail 
bondsperson or bail agent is only authorized to “sell, solicit 
or negotiate surety insurance,” he or she cannot act as a 
“surety” as contemplated by Hawai ʻi law. Moreover, International 
Fidelity posits: “[i]f [the ICA’s interpretation of HRS § 804 -
51] is correct, the judgment is only enforceable against the 
Bondspersons as the sureties, and not International. The ICA *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
court consolidated those applications under SCWC-12-1040.  The 
following two questions were raised in its Application: 
1. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law in holding 
that Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes § 804 -51, the bail forfeiture 
statute, did not require the State to give a surety notice 
of bail forfeiture judgments before holding the surety 
liable, thereby depriving the surety of the 30 -day search 
period or right to show good cause to set aside the judgments under the statute. 
2. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law in holding 
that the failure to provide notice or an opportunity to be 
heard to a surety did not violate the surety’s rights to 
procedural due process where the surety did not receive any 
notice or an opportunity to be heard to contest the 
judgment. 
24

  
 
 
   
     
  
     
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
failed to explain how the judgment could then be enforced 
against International without notice, apparently as a second 
surety on the bonds.” International asks that if the ICA’s 
interpretation of HRS § 804-51 is upheld, the “judgments should 
be deemed void as against International and only enforceable 
against the Bondspersons.” 
International Fidelity also asserts the ICA erred in 
determining that its due process rights were not violated. The issuance of notice to the bail bondspersons does not amount to 
notice to International as: (1) the bail bondspersons were 
merely “special agents” of International and therefore notice 
provided to the bondspersons “cannot be imputed to 
[International],” (2) other jurisdictions would require notice 
to International as a matter of due process. 
III. Standard of Review 
“Interpretation of a statute is a question of law which 
[is] review[ed] de novo
.” Kikuchi v. Brown,  110 Hawaiʻ i 204, 
207, 130 P.3d 1069, 1072 (App. 2006) (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
The crux of International Fidelity’s Application is that it 
is a “surety” as that term is used in HRS chapter 804, and 
was 
therefore entitled to notice of the forfeiture judgments pursuant to HRS § 804-51. However, International wholly fails 
25
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
                         
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to engage with the ICA’s careful analysis regarding th at  court’s 
interpretation of the term “surety,” which is in accord with 
other provisions of  HRS chapters 804 and 431.   Instead, 
International Fidelity repeatedly asserts that because it is a surety insurer, and because its POAs refer to it as the 
“surety,” it is a “surety” as that term is used in HRS § 804 -51.  
These assertions lack any statutory basis.  
The following analysis underscores the correctness of the 
ICA’s decision.  
A.	 International Fidelity Fails to Demonstrate That It 
Qualifies As a Surety under HRS § 804-10.5 
Hawaiʻi law contemplates two types of sureties: property-
based and insurance-based.  A surety on a bail bond must secure 
the bail bond by a deposit with the court clerk of personal or 
real property.
14 If the surety is licensed by the insurance 
commission as an “insurance producer,”15 the surety may instead 
post an insurance bond. See HRS § 804-10.5.16 Based on a plain 
reading of this statute, any person, including a bail 
14 If depositing cash, credit or debit card authorization, or other personal 
property, the market value of which must not be less than the amount of the 
bail. See 
HRS § 804- 11.5(a).  If depositing deeds of real property, the 
market value of the unencumbered interest of which must be at least twice the 
amount of the bail. See  id. 
15  Or, with respect to the 2005 bond issued in Nelson, as an “adjuster, 
independent bill reviewer, or limited service representative.” See HRS § 
804-10.5 (1993); supra note 5. 
16  See supra  note 6 (quoted text). 
26
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
bondsperson or bail agent, can qualify as a “surety” so long as 
either of these requirements is met.     
It is undisputed that no property was deposited with the 
court clerk as security for bail 
in any of the criminal cases at 
issue here. Thus, each bail bo nd was secured by an “ insurance 
bond” that was posted by an “ insurance producer, ” such as 
Peppers or Fisher. In other words, a defendant, or others on 
behalf of the defendant, purchased from Peppers or Fisher a bail 
bond that was guaranteed by an insurance policy issued from 
International Fidelity. 
International Fidelity asserts that it posted the bail 
bonds directly with the court (through Peppers, Del Rio, or 
Fisher as its attorney-in-fact), and therefore was the “surety” 
on the bonds, as stated in the POAs.  However, International 
fails to explain how it qualifies as a surety under HRS § 804 -
10.5. Indeed, as noted supra Part II.C., the circuit court did 
not find, nor did International Fidelity represent, that it is a licensed “insurance producer ” authorized to sell insurance in 
Hawaiʻi. International Fidelity cannot satisfy the requirement 
by adopting the licensure status of Peppers, Del Rio, or Fisher, 
as they served as International’s attorney s-in-fact, and not the 
other way around. Moreover, nothing in HRS § 431:10F-101 (2014) 
(deeming many surety requirements fulfilled so long as the 
surety bond is guaranteed by a surety insurer), abrogates the 
27
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
ongoing requirement that insurance be sold only by those 
properly licensed. Accordingly, to qualify as a surety on a 
bail bond, given that it is not licensed to sell insurance in 
Hawaiʻi, International Fidelity would have been required to 
deposit the requisite personal or real property with the court 
clerk pursuant to HRS § 804-10.5(b)(2), which it did not do. 
B.	 The “Surety on the Bond” Was Either Peppers of FBB or 
Fisher of AAA 
International Fidelity argues that the ICA and the circuit 
court failed to construe HRS § 804-51 by its plain meaning, but 
rather supplanted a key term, “surety,” with “bail bondsperson ,” 
based on legislative history. As the ICA pointed out, however, further support beyond legislative history is provided by the 
representations made on the face of the bail bonds.  
For example, the ICA noted that the signatures of Peppers 
or Del Rio of FBB, or Fisher of AAA, were present on the bonds, which included language requiring the defendant to comply with 
the court’s conditions. See Nelson, 139 Hawai ʻi at 162, 384 P.3d 
at 938. The bonds do not contain a signature or seal of 
International Fidelity, and the signatures of Peppers, Del Rio, 
and Fisher do not indicate they had signed on behalf of 
International Fidelity. These facts support the conclusion that 
Peppers or Del Rio of FBB or Fisher of AAA were the sureties as 
HRS § 804-1 requires the signature of “a defendant’s surety or 
28
  
 
 
  
  
                         
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
sureties” on a recognizance that the defendant would comply with 
applicable conditions.       
Further, at the time the subject  bail bonds were issued, 
17Criminal Administrative Order No. 2.1 was in effect.   This 
order required that all bail bonds follow the “Sample Standard 
Form for Bail Bonds.” The Standard Form provided that the “Name 
of Surety” be identified in two separate places on the bond, and 
that the address and telephone number of the named surety be 
listed at the top of the form.   Additionally, Criminal 
Administrative Order No. 2.1 stated that those issuing bail bonds were “responsi ble for ensuring that all information 
appearing on a bond is correct.”      
The surety named on the bond is critical to applying HRS § 
804-51, as the statute requires that when a bond is forfeited, “the court shall immediately enter up judgment in favor of the 
State and against the principal or principals and surety or sureties 
on the bond ,” and notice be “given via personal service 
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the surety or 
sureties on the bond, of the entry of the judgment in favor of 
the State.” HRS § 804-51.  As noted 
supra Part II.B., a 
comparison of each of the bail bonds in this matter show that they conform to the Sample Standard Form for Bail Bonds, and 
17 Criminal Administrative Order No. 2.1 applies except to the bond in 
Ferraris , CR. No. 11-1- 0306.  See supra   Part II.B. 
29
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
that the “Name of Surety” identified on the bail bond was either 
“Ida Peppers, Freedom Bail Bond,” or “AAA Local Bail Bonds, 
Charles Fisher General Agent.” Accordingly, the “surety or 
sureties on the bond ” was either Peppers or Fisher, not 
International Fidelity. 
Thus, a plain language interpretation or strict 
construction of HRS § 804-51 leads to the same conclusion: that 
the statute required that judgment be entered against, and 
notice be given to, Peppers or Fisher, and not to International 
Fidelity. Based on the foregoing, see Parts IV.A.–B., 
International Fidelity’s reliance on the surety law of other jurisdictions is misplaced.  
C.	 International Fidelity’s Rights to Due Process Were Not 
Violated 
International presents two arguments as to why it was 
entitled, in accord with due process, to receive notice from the 
court of the forfeitures. First, International states that the 
ICA incorrectly concluded “that notice can be imputed” to 
International because “the Bondspersons were authorized attorneys-in-fact and registered producers for International.” 
Second, International cites to two foreign cases to support its 
contention that a surety has a due process right to receive 
notice of the forfeiture. 
30
  
 
 
  For its second argument, International  Fidelity relies on  
State v. Rosillo , 645 N.W.2d 735, 739 (Minn. Ct. App. 2002), and 
asserts that the ICA “did not correctly distinguish” the case. 
International argues that “[t]he fact that notice was not 
provided to either the surety or the bondsperson was not 
material to the Court’s holding because the rights to due 
process extends to both  the surety and the bondsperson.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
As to the first argument, International misunderstands the 
ICA’s decision. At no time did the ICA state that “notice [to the bail bondspersons] can be imputed” to International because  
of some kind of agency relationship. Rather, the ICA pointed out that by statute, the text of HRS § 804-51 is included in the 
provisions of each bail bond issued in Hawai ʻi.   See  Nelson, 139 
Hawai
ʻi at 164–65, 384 P.3d at 940 –41.   As such, when  
International executed the surety bonds  that secured the bail 
bonds (through its   limited attorneys-in -fact and registered  
producers), it was well aware that notice  of forfeiture would be 
given  to the “surety on the bond” pursuant to HRS § 804-51, 
i.e., to Peppers or Fisher.   The ICA concluded: “[u]nder these 
circumstances, therefore, the notice that was provided to 
Peppers, Del Rio, and Fisher -- as required under HRS § 804-51  
-- was reasonably calculated to apprise International Fidelity 
of the bail forfeiture judgments.”   See  139  Hawaiʻi  at 165, 384 
P.3d at 941.     
31

  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
International Fidelity fails to explain, however, why the due 
process right described in Rosillo  —  wh ich flows from Minnesota  
Rules of General Practice Rule 702(e)  (“Whenever a bail bond is 
forfeited by a judge, the surety and bondsman shall be notified 
by the court administrator in writing.”)  —  should have effect in 
Hawaiʻi, when the laws of this state require that notice issue 
only to the “surety or sureties on the bond.” HRS §  804-51.   
International’s reliance on People v. Wilshire Ins. Co., 46 
Cal. App. 3d 216, 119 Cal. Rptr. 917 (
Cal. Ct. App. 1975), and 
other California caselaw, is similarly misplaced. California’s 
bail statute is quite dissimilar from Hawaii’s bail statutes, as 
it “explicitly requires the clerk to mail notice of any declared forfeiture to the principal office of the corporate surety and 
to the bail agent who posted the bond.” 46 Cal. App. 3d at 220, 
119 Cal. Rptr. at 919 (citing Cal. Penal Code § 1305).  Hawai ʻi 
has no such explicit requirement. In any event, even under Cal. 
Penal Code § 1305, which requires notice to issue to the 
corporate surety only if “the bond plainly displays [its] 
mailing address,” notice to International would not be required 
as International’s name and mailing address were not “plainly 
display[ed]” on any of the bail bonds. 
D. International Fidelity’s Liability for the Judgment 
International Fidelity briefly presents two arguments as to 
why the forfeiture judgments 
are not enforceable against it. 
32
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
First, International Fidelity interprets the forfeiture 
judgments to have been entered against it, and argues that if 
HRS § 804-51 does not require that it be issued notice, then the 
entry of judgment against it violates due process. 
Alternatively, if Peppers or Fisher are the “sureties on the 
bond” who received notice and against whom judgment was issued, 
then the forfeiture judgments are enforceable only against 
Peppers or Fisher and should be “deemed void as against 
International [as a second surety]” because International was 
not given adequate notice. 
As to International Fidelity’s first argument , 
International is mistaken regarding against which party judgment was entered. The “surety on the bond” to whom notice was issued 
regarding the forfeiture judgments is the same “surety on the 
bond” against whom judgment was entered pursuant to HRS § 804 -
51, namely, Peppers  or Fisher.   
Again, the statute states: 
Whenever the court, in any criminal cause, forfeits 
any bond or recognizance given in a criminal cause, the 
court shall immediately enter up judgment in favor of the 
State and against the principal or principals and surety or 
sureties on the bond, jointly and severally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof, and shall cause execution to 
issue thereon immediately after the expiration of thirty 
days from the date that notice is given via personal 
service or certified mail, return receipt requested, 
to the 
surety or sureties on the bond,
 of the entry of the 
judgment in favor of the State 
. . . . 
33
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
18 HRS § 804-51 (emphasis added).  With minor exceptions,  the 
language used in the forfeiture judgments  in Nelson, Teruya , 
Cabigon, and Nakamura  was as follows:  
The above -entitled case having come . . . before the 
. . . Judge of the above -entitled court, on [said date], 
and the Defendant having failed to appear or to be present on the said date, and the Court, upon motion of the State 
of Hawaii, having on said date ordered and declared the 
forfeiture of the bail bond filed and posted in this case, 
executed by said Defendant, as principal, and INTERNATIONAL FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY (FREEDOM BAIL BOND), through its 
agent and attorney in fact, IDA PEPPERS, as surety
, in the 
sum of . . .  ,  
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the foregoing order, IT 
IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the State of Hawaii does have and recovers from the principal and the 
surety above named, jointly and severally, the sum of . . . , and that execution issue herein according to law.    
(Emphasis added.) The language used in Ferraris, Berry, Muna , 
and Luna was:   
The above -entitled case having come . . . before the 
. . . Judge of the above -entitled court, on [said date], 
and the Defendant having failed to appear or to be present 
on the said date, and the Court, upon motion of the State 
of Hawai[ʻ ]i, having on said date ordered and declared the 
forfeiture of the bail bond filed and posted in this case, 
executed by said Defendant, as principal, and INTERNATIONAL 
FIDELITY INSURANCE COMPANY, through its agent and attorney 
in fact, IDA PEPPERS  (FREEDOM BAIL BOND), as surety, in the 
sum of . . .  ,  
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the foregoing order, IT 
IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the State of 
Hawai
[ʻ]i does have and recovers from the principal and the 
surety above named, jointly and severally, the sum of . . . 
, and that execution issue herein according to law. 
(Emphasis added.)19 
18 The Teruya judgment did not indicate the date of the defendant’s required 
appearance. 
19  As previously noted, the Berry judgment used “this cause” instead of “this 
case,” and the judgment issued in Luna was directed at “Charles Fisher” 
instead of “Ida Peppers (Freedom Bail Bond).” 
34
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 “The general rule is that, like any other written 
instrument, a court order must ‘be construed reasonably and as a 
whole so as to give effect to the intention of the court.’” 
Wohlschlegel v. Uhlmann-Kihei, Inc., 4 Haw. App. 123, 130, 662  
P.2d 505, 511 (1983)    (citing Smith v. Smith , 56 Haw. 295, 301, 
535 P.2d 1109, 1114  (1975)). “‘Moreover, we must give effect 
not only to that which is expressed but also to that which is 
unavoidably and necessarily implied by the judgment or decree.’” 
Id. (quoting Ahuna v. Dep’t of Hawaiian Home Lands , 64 Haw. 327, 
333–34, 640 P.2d 1161, 1166 (1982)).   Applying these rules of 
interpretation, we construe the forfeiture judgments as having  
been entered in compliance with HRS § 804-51, i.e., entered 
against the defendant and either Peppers or Fisher, whomever was   
the “surety on the bond  .”      
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
It is perhaps unclear from the text of the judgments 
whether International, instead of Peppers or Fisher, was 
identified as the “surety” against which the judgments were 
entered. “As surety” can be interpreted to modify 
“International Fidelity Insurance Company” despite the long intervening clause. Alternatively, “as surety” might be viewed 
to modify the preceding noun, “Ida Peppers,” “Ida Peppers 
(Freedom Bail Bond),” or “Charles Fisher,” as the case may be. 
International asserts in its alternative argument that 
nothing in HRS § 804-51 permits the judgment to be enforced 
35
  
 
 
  
 
 
 against it “as a second surety on the bonds”  because it failed 
to receive notice of the judgments.  International therefore 
concludes that “the judgments should be deemed void against 
International and only enforceable against the Bondspersons.”  
  
 
   
                         
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
As a preliminary matter, International 
does not provide 
support for its assertion that it failed to receive notice of 
the judgments, which, in any event, is not supported by the 
record. The circuit court had concluded that International 
Fidelity “independently received notice from the Judiciary of 
the forfeiture judgment in each of these cases ” through the 
Judiciary’s letters to International.  On certiorari to this 
court, International did not contest the ICA’s decision to 
decline “reach[ing] International Fidelity’s challenge to the 
circuit court’s alternative holding, that the letters sent by 
the Judiciary to International Fidelity were sufficient notice 
[to International],” Nelson, 139 Hawai ʻi at 164 n.13, 384 P.3d at 
940 n.13, and otherwise failed to assert the circuit court’s 
underlying findings of fact and conclusions of law were error. 
Thus, these findings of fact20 and conclusions of law remain 
intact. 
20  Such findings include: (1) each letter issued by the Judiciary to 
International had indicated that it was a “Notification of Bail Bond 
Forfeiture,” stated that “judgment has been entered,” and provided “the date 
of the judgment and the amount forfeited, the case name and number, the name of the issuing general agent, and the policy number matching the power of 
attorney attached to the bail bond ,” and (2) the letters included a demand 
for payment, however, none of the judgments had been executed upon. 
36
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Moreover, as discussed supra Part IV.C., based on the 
statutorily mandated incorporation of the text of HRS § 804-51 
into each bail bond, International was well aware that notice of 
forfeiture would be given to the “surety on the bond,” i.e., to 
Peppers or Fisher, and therefore the notice that was provided to 
Peppers or Fisher was reasonably calculated to apprise 
International Fidelity of the bail forfeiture judgments. 
In sum, International received notice of the forfeiture 
judgments by the foregoing means and cannot now evade its obligations as the issuer (through licensed insurance producers, 
such as Peppers or Fisher) of the surety bonds that secured the 
defendants’ bail bonds . In other words, the defendants’ bail 
bonds were guaranteed by International Fidelity’ s contracts to 
insure. The forfeiture judgments, therefore, have effect as to 
International, the surety insurer, insofar as the judgments may 
support any payment demands or causes of action the State may 
have against International. 
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the ICA’s October 26, 
2016 Judgment on Appeal, filed pursuant to its September 29, 
2016 opinion, affirming the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s 
October 31, 2012 “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Denying International Fidelity Insurance Company’s 
37
  
 
 
     
   
          
 
 
                         
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Consolidated Motions to Set Aside Judgment Entered Against 
International Fidelity Insurance Company.”   
Matson Kelley and 
Michael C. Carroll  
for petitioner 
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
  /s/ Richard W. Pollack  
  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  Brian R. Vincent 
for respondent 
                   
38
 