 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 
 
 
         
SCWC-12-0000060 
                                 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000060 28-JUN-2016 
10:04 AM 
---o0o---
KARYN EILEEN HERRMANN, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
KENNETH ROSS HERRMANN, Respondent/Defendant-Appellant. 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0000060; FC-D NO. 95-0-0475) 

JUNE 28, 2016 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
I. Introduction 
This case involves child support and education 
expenses for the two children of Karyn Eileen Herrmann (Wife) 
and Kenneth Ross Herrmann (Husband): Son, born July 1, 1987, and Daughter, born June 16, 1991. The dispute revolves around the correct interpretation of the divorce decree and a subsequent amendment to that decree, which govern Husband’s child support obligations to Son and Daughter. The issue presented is whether  
   
 
  
 
  
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Husband overpaid child support per the terms of the divorce 
decree and the amendment and, if so, whether Husband should be allowed recovery of his overpayments. 
II. Background 
A. 1998 Divorce Decree 
On February 11, 1998, Husband and Wife were divorced 
by decree in the family court. The terms of the February 11, 1998 divorce decree (1998 Decree) included custody arrangements for Son and Daughter and terms of child support obligations for each child. Specifically, pursuant to Paragraph 4 of the 1998 Decree, the parties were each awarded joint legal custody and shared physical custody of Son and Daughter.
1 
The 1998 Decree, in Paragraph 5, provided that Husband 
was to pay child support payments to Wife in the amount of $1,600 per month for each child and that payments for each child were to continue until the child “attains the age of 18 years or graduates from or discontinues high school, whichever occurs last.” The Decree further stated that “[t]he issue of child support thereafter, if any, including the amount, duration, manner of payment, payor, and payee, shall be reserved for 
future agreement by the parties or future determination by the 
1 Husband subsequently moved to Indiana on October 1, 2003, after
which, as discussed infra, Husband filed a motion for sole custody of Son. 
2 
 
   
  
  
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Court, if necessary.” Pursuant to Paragraph 5, Husband was to 
make his child support payments through the Child Support Enforcement Agency (CSEA). 
B. Husband’s Motion for Post-Decree Relief 
Husband filed a Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree 
Relief (2003 Motion) seeking sole custody of Son. Thereafter, Wife made a settlement offer in an effort to resolve Husband’s 2003 Motion. Wife’s settlement offer proposed that, inter alia, Husband would have sole custody of Son beginning with Son’s upcoming school break and that child support would then be recalculated. Husband subsequently accepted Wife’s settlement offer, but Husband indicated that he wanted to “work together to 
draft a revision” of the terms. Wife filed a notice of 
acceptance of the settlement offer on December 1, 2003, and Son began living with Husband on December 18, 2003. 
Although Husband and Wife initially agreed on proposed 
substantive changes to the 1998 Decree, the family court returned the proposed amendments to the parties because the amendments were incomplete.
2 The parties were unable to reach 
agreement to incorporate the family court’s required changes. 
2 The family court indicated that the amendments failed to “address
that the change in custody [for Son] is in the child’s best interests,” did
not include a Child Support Guidelines Worksheet, and was not signed by an
attorney for the CSEA. 
3 
 
    
 
 
                     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wife then filed a motion to compel compliance with the accepted 
settlement offer, which the family court granted.3 The family 
court’s order granting Wife’s motion to compel (August 2004 Order) also stated that “child support shall be modified 
effective September 5, 2004,” and instructed Wife to submit a 
proposed order. 
On September 1, 2004, the amendment to the 1998 Decree 
was approved and filed by the family court (September 2004 Amendment). The September 2004 Amendment reflected that Son was now living with Husband and, thus, modified the amount of Husband’s child support obligation set forth in Paragraph 5 of the 1998 Decree. Specifically, under the September 2004 
Amendment, Paragraph 5 of the 1998 Decree was “withdrawn” and a 
new Paragraph 5 was “substituted,” which, in pertinent part, stated the following: 
5. [Husband] shall pay to [Wife] as and for
the support and maintenance of [Daughter] the sum of
[$2,630] per month commencing on the fifth day of
September, 2004. . . . [Wife] shall pay to [Husband] asand for the support and maintenance of [Son] the sum of[$50] per month commencing on the fifth day of January2004. . . . 
Child support for each child shall continue
until he or she attains the age of 18 years or graduatesfrom or discontinues high school, whichever occurs last.The issue of child support thereafter, if any, includingthe amount[,] duration, manner or payment, payor, and 
3 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided. 
4 
 
    
  
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
payee, shall be reserved for future agreement by the
parties or future determination by the Court, if necessary. 
On November 1, 2004, Husband received a letter from 
CSEA advising him that he had overpaid child support payments to 
Wife in the amount of $14,040 and that “[a]ny issues concerning the recovery of the above over payments should be handled between the custodial and non-custodial parents.”
4 Thereafter, 
according to Husband, he verbally asked Wife on numerous occasions to reimburse him for the overpayments, but he did not file an action with the family court. Wife did not repay 
Husband’s claimed overpayment, believing that she did not owe 
Husband any money. 
Four years later, in anticipation of Daughter’s high 
school graduation, Wife filed a Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief asking the family court for an order requiring Husband to pay Daughter’s college expenses. Husband stipulated to pay “all costs and fees for [Daughter] to attend [college] including tuition, books and student supplies, room and board 
and a reasonable allowance for clothing and student activities 
and/or additional fees” as long as Daughter was a fulltime 
4 According to Husband, the amount of the overpayment calculated by
CSEA in its letter was incorrect, and the correct amount is $14,400 ($1,600 a
month for nine months) rather than $14,040. Husband agreed during a hearingin the family court to seek only the amount represented in the CSEA letter,
i.e., $14,040. 
5 
 
    
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
student in good standing. The family court issued an order that 
reflected Husband’s agreement to pay Daughter’s college expenses. 
On June 16, 2009, Daughter attained the age of 
eighteen years old, and in September 2009, Daughter moved to Washington State to attend college. CSEA continued to assign Husband’s wages in the amount of $2,630 a month for child support for Daughter. Husband contacted CSEA starting in September 2009 to request that the child support payments for Daughter be terminated pursuant to the 1998 Decree and September 2004 Amendment, but Husband’s efforts to terminate payments were unsuccessful. 
C. Husband’s April 2011 Motion 
Unable to resolve his dispute with CSEA over 
Daughter’s child support payments, Husband filed a Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief (April 2011 Motion) in which he asked the family court to (1) retroactively terminate his child support obligation for Daughter to September 2010, when Daughter moved to Washington to begin college, and require Wife to reimburse him for the amount that he paid in child support for 
Daughter from September 2009 to the date the court terminates 
child support and (2) require Wife to reimburse him for the $14,040 he overpaid in child support for Son. 
6 
 
    
  
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wife filed an opposing memorandum responding to 
Husband’s contentions that he was entitled to relief. Wife 
argued that Husband did not overpay child support for Son because the August 2004 Order became effective on September 5, 
2004, and it did not apply retroactively. Wife alternatively 
argued that under the Hawai ʻi Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 
60(b) (2006), any reasonable time for Husband to seek relief had 
long passed as almost 7 years had passed since these 
overpayments were made.
5 Wife contended that Husband’s April 
2011 Motion included no explanation of why he waited to bring his action for reimbursement of overpaid child support. 
Next, in regards to Daughter’s support, Wife argued 
that the family court should not retroactively order reimbursement of support paid prior to the April 2011 Motion. Wife maintained that the 1998 Decree and the September 2004 
Amendment reserved the issue of Daughter’s child support 
payments beyond her eighteenth birthday, and Wife argued that it was appropriate for Husband to continue to pay child support for 
5 Pursuant to HFCR Rule 60(b), a motion to be relieved “from any or
all of the provisions of a final judgment, order, or proceeding” because of
mistakes, inadvertence, excusable neglect, newly discovered evidence, orfraud “shall be made within a reasonable time.” If the motion is based uponmistake, inadvertence, surprise, excusable neglect, newly discoveredevidence, or fraud, the motion must be made “not more than one year after the
judgment, order, or proceedings was entered or taken.” HFCR Rule 60(b). 
7 
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Daughter because Wife had been providing support for Daughter 
while she attended college. In addition, Wife argued that granting Husband’s requested relief would be a “horrendous financial problem” for her. Finally, Wife maintained that, 
pursuant to HRS § 580-47(a) (2007), the family “court has the 
ability to provide for the payment of child support for a child who is continuing his/her education even if the matter is raised subsequent to the time when the child becomes an adult.” In conclusion, Wife argued that there was no legal basis for Husband’s motion and that the child support payments were both reasonable and justified. Accordingly, Wife asked the family court to deny Husband’s April 2011 Motion. 
In his reply, Husband first responded to the 
overpayment of child support for Son, arguing that despite the language in the family court’s August 2004 Order stating that child support was modified effective September 2004, the subsequent September 2004 Amendment mandated a different result. Specifically, Husband argued that the September 2004 Amendment replaced provisions of the 1998 Decree and required Wife to commence paying child support for Son in January 2004, not 
September 2004. Husband contended that this modification was 
consistent with the fact that Son had starting living with Husband in December 2003. Husband argued that the September 
8 
 
    
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2004 Amendment, which was approved by the court and made an 
order of the court, superseded any contrary statement in the family court’s August 2004 Order. Accordingly, Husband argued that the CSEA correctly determined that there had been an 
overpayment of child support based on the September 2004 
Amendment in the amount of $14,040. 
Next, Husband argued that under the terms of the 1998 
Decree and September 2004 Amendment, his child support obligation to Daughter ended after June 2009 when she “attained the age of 18 years (and had already graduated from high school).” Husband argued that because there was no agreement by the parties or a determination by the Court that child support 
would continue, child support payments incorrectly were assigned 
to Wife by CSEA. Consequently, Husband argued that Wife should be ordered to pay back Husband’s overpayment of child support for Daughter from September 2009, when Daughter moved to college, to the time of the order terminating Husband’s child support obligation. 
Finally, Husband argued that he should not be required 
to continue to pay child support for Daughter. Husband asserted 
that because he was paying all of Daughter’s college education 
expenses and because Daughter was not living with Wife in Honolulu, there was no basis for Wife to continue receiving 
9 
 
    
  
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
$2,630.00 a month in child support. Accordingly, Husband asked 
the family court to terminate his child support obligation for Daughter retroactively to September 2009, when Daughter moved from Wife’s home to attend college. 
At the hearing on Husband’s April 2011 Motion, Husband 
and Wife each adopted as their direct testimony offers of proof made by their respective attorneys, after which each was cross-examined by opposing counsel.
6 Husband explained that he had 
been paying all of Daughter’s college, living, and healthcare expenses since she left for college in September 2009 and that Daughter had never asked him for more monies or claimed that she did not have sufficient funds for all of her living expenses. 
Husband additionally testified that although Son had begun 
living with him in December 2003 and that the parties had agreed that child support for Son would stop as of January 2004, he continued to pay child support for Son through August 2004. Thus, Husband testified that he overpaid child support for Son for nine months. 
Wife testified that Husband’s child support obligation 
for Son was to continue through September 5, 2004, and that she 
did not believe she owed Husband any amount of reimbursement. 
6 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided. 
10 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wife stated that she spends more in support of Daughter than she 
receives from Husband on a monthly basis, including transportation and keeping the home for Daughter, and that such funds are necessary in order to maintain her relationship with 
Daughter. Wife further explained that she had been experiencing 
physical challenges impeding her ability to work, she was receiving unemployment compensation because she had not been employed full time, her net income was low, and the variance between her financial situation and that of Husband’s made it inequitable for her to be required to repay Husband’s alleged child support overpayments. Finally, Wife testified that Husband’s attempt to try and recoup this alleged amount was not 
timely or appropriate. 
D. Decision and Order of the Family Court 
After the hearing on the April 2011 Motion, the family 
court issued its “Decision Re: Hearing on Order to Show Cause 
Filed 04/13/2011” (Decision) and “Order Denying Defendant’s Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief Filed 04-13-2011” (Order). The family court, in ruling against Husband, declined to reimburse Husband for claimed child support overpayments and 
determined that Daughter’s child support payments were to 
continue. In its subsequently issued Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, the family court found that the overpayment 
11 
 
   
  
                     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of child support for Son was “a result of the delay in the entry 
of the [September 2004 Amendment] caused by disagreements between the parties as to the form and content of the document,” during which time the amount due under the 1998 Decree 
“continued to be garnished from [Husband’s] income.” The court 
noted that “Husband waited for approximately 7 years before raising the issue of his claimed overpayment of child support.” Thus, the family court concluded that, “given the passage of time and opportunities to have previously raised” the overpayment of child support for Son, Husband “is now estopped from pursuing said claim.”
7 
The family court then considered Daughter’s child 
support. The court found that Husband paid Daughter’s college expenses and that such payments were separate from child support payments due under the 1998 Decree and September 2004 Amendment. The court further found that Wife had sent additional sums of money to Daughter after she moved to attend college. The court determined that the funds received by Wife from Husband are used 
7 It is not clear what the family court meant by “estopped.”
Estoppel was not raised by either of the parties in the family court, and the
court did not explain whether it was referring to equitable estoppel, quasi-estoppel, the doctrine of laches, or another legal principle altogether.Wife had specifically predicated her objection to Husband’s April 2011 Motionon HFCR Rule 60(b) and a statute of limitations challenge, neither of which
the family court ruled upon. 
12 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
by Wife to pay for expenses related to and necessary for 
Daughter’s support and maintenance. In addition, the court stated that Husband could have challenged the ongoing payment of Daughter’s child support during litigation between Husband and 
Wife from 2009 through 2011, but instead Husband waited 24 
months after “the triggering event” of Daughter leaving for college to contest ongoing child support payments. Based on these findings, the court concluded that it “would be inequitable to require [Wife] to reimburse for child support payments made with regard to [Daughter] for the period commencing in September of 2009.” The court further concluded that “[b]ased upon the credible evidence, [Husband] is not 
entitled to an order terminating his child support obligation to 
[Daughter],” and “[c]hild support for [Daughter] shall remain in effect until such time as [Daughter] graduates from college or reaches the age of 23, whichever comes first.” 
III. ICA Proceedings 
Husband timely appealed from the Decision and Order. 
In their briefs submitted to the ICA, Husband and Wife presented arguments that paralleled those that were made to the family 
court. Because the basis upon which the family court concluded 
that Husband was estopped from pursuing his claim is unclear, Husband asserted on appeal that the family court meant quasi-
13 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
estoppel when it ruled in favor of Wife. To the contrary, Wife 
contended that the family court was actually referring to laches in its decision. 
The ICA issued its memorandum opinion (Opinion) on 
February 17, 2015. As a general matter, the ICA concluded that, 
under Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-52.2(d) (2006), which 
governs child support payments collected through salary 
assignments, the individual receiving child support has the 
“primary” responsibility for terminating a salary assignment and that reimbursement is permitted in the event of overpayment of child support. The ICA next determined that the September 2004 Amendment provided that, effective as of January 2004, Husband was no longer required to pay $1,600 per month as child support for Son and that Wife had to pay Husband $50 monthly toward Son’s child support. 
The ICA noted that the family court denied Husband’s 
claim for reimbursement of overpayment for Son’s support on the sole ground that Husband, by waiting too long before contesting his alleged overpayments, was estopped from doing so. The ICA remarked that the family court was not clear as to the legal theory upon which it predicated its conclusion regarding estoppel. Hence, the ICA adopted Wife’s position and presumed that the family court based its Decision and Order on the 
14 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
doctrine of estoppel by laches--an equitable doctrine by which 
courts deny relief to a claimant who has unreasonably delayed or been negligent in asserting a claim. Citing 
Adair v. Hustace,  
64 Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982), the ICA held that 
estoppel by laches has two required elements: first, “a delay by 
the plaintiff in bringing his claim” and the “delay must have been unreasonable under the circumstances”; and, second, the “delay must have resulted in prejudice to defendant.” 
Id. 
Applying the elements of estoppel by laches in this 
case, the ICA noted that Husband’s delay in filing the April 2011 Motion is considerable, given that he waited over six years after CSEA notified him of the overpayment before taking action. 
However, the ICA also determined that Wife did not claim, nor 
did the family court make an independent conclusion, that Wife was prejudiced by the delay. 
Accordingly, the ICA concluded 
that “both elements of laches are not present,” the family court “failed to apply the applicable law,” and, by doing so, “abused its discretion” in concluding that Husband was precluded from seeking reimbursement for his overpayment of child support for Son. 
The ICA also addressed Husband’s argument that he 
overpaid child support for Daughter and that his obligation to pay child support for Daughter automatically terminated per the 
15 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
terms of the 1998 Decree and September 2004 Amendment. 
Construing Paragraph 5 of the September 2004 Amendment, the ICA concluded that its “plain language [] terminated child support for both children upon the attainment of age 18 or graduation 
from high school, whichever was later.” As to Daughter, the ICA 
found that both of these conditions were satisfied by June 2009. Accordingly, the ICA concluded that, pursuant to the 2004 Amendment, Husband’s obligation to pay child support for Daughter should have terminated in June 2009. The ICA, however, did not address Wife’s argument on appeal that “HRS 580-47(a) took precedence over a provision in a divorce decree that said that [Husband’s] obligation to provide support terminated at 18” 
and that the family court did not therefore err when it held, on 
Wife’s motion, that “it was appropriate and necessary that support should continue for [Daughter] past the age of 18 and graduation from high school.” 
Having concluded that Husband’s obligation to pay 
child support for Daughter ended in June 2009, the ICA then addressed whether and in what amount Husband should be reimbursed for his overpayment. The ICA noted that Husband’s 
agreement and obligation, separate from the issue of child 
support, to pay Daughter’s college expenses complicated the issue of reimbursement for three reasons. First, the ICA found 
16 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the record does not show whether “the amount of support 
Daughter was entitled to while she attended college was ever calculated using the appropriate Child Support Guidelines as required by HRS § 580-47.” Second, the ICA also found that 
Husband may have paid for items that would be considered a 
component of child support as part of the payments he made for Daughter’s college expenses; thus, there may have been duplicative payment for some items. The final complicating factor that the ICA noted was Wife’s contribution to Daughter’s college expenses and the amount Wife spent in order to allow 
Daughter to return to Hawai ʻi during semester breaks, some monies 
for which were drawn from Husband’s child support payments for 
Daughter. Consequently, the ICA reasoned that determining if and how much Husband overpaid in support for Daughter depends on “a determination of what amount was necessary to meet Daughter’s 
needs while in college,” as Husband was required to pay those 
expenses. Thus, the ICA concluded that the family court, on remand, must “determine whether offsets against the overpaid child support [for Daughter] might be appropriate.” Notably, the ICA did not address the family court’s finding--challenged by Husband on appeal--that it would be inequitable to allow Husband to recover overpayments of child support paid for Daughter since Husband waited two years before filing the April 
17 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2011 Motion and did not take advantage of several opportunities 
to raise the issue of overpayments. 
Based on the foregoing, the ICA vacated the Decision 
and Order of the family court and remanded the case to the 
family court for further proceedings. 
IV. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
In her Application, Wife challenges the ICA’s holding 
that HRS § 571-52.2(d) applies in this case and that Wife had 
the primary responsibility to terminate Husband’s salary assignment. Wife also asserts that the ICA erred in holding that Husband’s delay in filing his April 2011 Motion did not estop Husband from recovering child support overpayments made to 
Wife for Son. Further, Wife contends that the ICA erroneously 
held that Husband’s child support obligations to Son ended in January 2004 because the September 2004 Amendment did not take effect until September 2004. Wife also argues that the ICA erred in holding that Husband’s child support obligations to Daughter automatically terminated when she reached the age of 18. Relatedly, Wife maintains that it would be inequitable to 
permit Husband to recoup overpaid child support for Daughter 
because he waited approximately two years before raising his 
claim. 
18 
 
    
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
V. Standards of Review 
When the relief granted by the family court is 
equitable in nature and discretionary, it “will not be 
overturned on review unless the . . . court abused its 
discretion by issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds 
of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant.” Aickin v. Ocean 
View Invs. Co.,  84 Hawai ʻi 447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) 
(quoting AIG Haw. Ins. Co. v. Bateman, 82 Hawai ʻi 453, 457, 923 
P.2d 395, 398 (1996)). 
The family court’s findings of facts are reviewed on 
appeal under the clearly erroneous standard. In re Doe,  95 
Hawaiʻi 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). A finding of fact “is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made.” Id. (quoting State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai ʻi 383, 392, 894 
P.2d 80, 89 (1995)). “Substantial evidence is credible evidence 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” 
Id. 
(alteration omitted) (quoting State v. Doe , 84 Hawai ʻi 41, 46, 
928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996)). 
19 

 
   
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“The interpretation or construction of a judgment, 
decree, or order ‘presents a question of law,’” State v. Guyton, 
135 Hawai ʻi 372, 377, 351 P.3d 1138, 1143 (2015) (quoting 
Cain v. 
Cain, 59 Haw. 32, 39, 575 P.2d 468, 474 (1978)), and is 
“reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard of review,” 
Bank of Haw. v. DeYoung, 92 Hawai ʻi 347, 351, 992 P.2d 42, 46 
(2000) (quoting Ditto v. McCurdy, 90 Hawai ʻi 345, 351, 978 P.2d 
783, 789 (1999)). 
VI. Discussion 
A. Overpayment of Child Support for Son 
1.	 Husband’s Child Support Obligation to Son Terminated in
January 2004 
The September 2004 Amendment modified the respective 
parties’ child support obligations. The 1998 Decree, in 
Paragraph 5, provided that Husband was to make child support 
payments to Wife in the amount of $1,600 per child per month, for a total of $3,200 per month. The 2004 Amendment substituted Paragraph 5 of the 1998 Decree with the following: 
5. [Husband] shall pay to [Wife] as and for the
support and maintenance of [Daughter] the sum of [$2,630]
per month commencing on the fifth day of September, 2004. .
. . [Wife] shall pay to [Husband] as and for the support
and maintenance of [Son] the sum of [$50] per monthcommencing on the fifth day of January 2004. 
The ICA held that, based on the above language, Husband, 
“as of January 2004, would no longer pay [Wife] child support for Son.” 
20  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wife’s argument is that Husband’s obligation to 
continue paying $1,600 for Son’s child support did not end 
until September 2004, when the amendment was approved and adopted by the family court. However, this is not a 
reasonable construction of the terms of the September 2004 
Amendment relating to child support. 
See Cain v. Cain , 59 
Haw. 32, 39, 575 P.2d 468, 474 (1978) (stating that court orders and decrees must “be construed reasonably” (citing 
Smith v. Smith
, 56 Haw. 295, 301, 535 P.2d 1109, 1114 
(1974))). 
Prior to the September 2004 Amendment, under the 
1998 Decree, Wife was not required to pay any child support 
to Husband. 
Son began living with Husband in December 
2003. The plain language of Paragraph 5 of the September 
2004 Amendment states that Wife must pay Husband $50 per month for Son’s child support starting on January 5, 2004. 
State v. Guyton , 135 Hawai ʻi 372, 378, 351 P.3d 1138, 1144 
(2015) (reasoning that plain language governs if the decree is unambiguous). It would be incongruous to conclude that Husband was still required to pay Wife child support for Son at the same time that Wife was mandated to pay Husband for Son’s support. If Wife’s position were adopted, it would mean that Wife and Husband were concurrently 
21 

 
    
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
obligated to pay each other child support for Son from 
January to September 2004, a conclusion that would not be logical given that Son started living with Husband in January 2004. The most reasonable reading of the September 
2004 Amendment, therefore, is that at the point in which 
Wife was required to pay Son’s child support in January 2004, Husband’s child support obligations for Son terminated.
8 
The August 2004 Order, which stated that “child 
support shall be modified effective September 5, 2004,” is also consistent with the conclusion that Husband’s child support obligations to Son terminated in January 2004. The 
August 2004 Order is not controlling as to the issue of 
child support modification, for the subject matter of that order only compelled Husband to comply with Wife’s settlement offer and awarded Wife costs and fees; it did not directly modify the parties’ child support obligations under the 1998 Decree. As such, the August 2004 Order’s statement that “child support shall be modified effective 
8 The first sentence of Paragraph 5 of the September 2004 Amendment
is not contrary to this conclusion. The fact that Husband was obligated to
pay $2,630 per month as child support for Daughter beginning in September2004 means only that, from January 2004 to September 2004, Husband’s child
support for Daughter remained at $1,600 monthly based on the 1998 Decree. 
22 
 
   
  Estoppel by laches is an equitable doctrine with two 
components that must be satisfied in order to become applicable: 
                     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
September 5, 2004,” is reasonably construed as merely 
setting a prospective date at which the actual modification was to be effectuated.
9 Accordingly, the ICA did not err in 
holding that the September 2004 Amendment terminated 
Husband’s child support obligations to Son as of January 
2004. 
2. The Issue of Whether Laches Applies Requires Remand to the
Family Court 
First, there must have been a delay by the plaintiff in
bringing his claim, and that delay must have beenunreasonable under the circumstances. Delay is reasonableif the claim was brought without undue delay after
plaintiff knew of the wrong or knew of facts and
circumstances sufficient to impute such knowledge to him.Second, that delay must have resulted in prejudice todefendant. 
Adair v. Hustace, 64 Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982) 
(citations omitted) (emphases added); accord Ass’n of Apartment 
Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Dirs. v. Venture 
15, Inc., 115 Hawai ʻi 232, 284, 167 P.3d 225, 277 (2007). Thus, 
9 Even assuming that the August 2004 Order directly modified the
parties’ child support obligations under the 1998 Decree, the September 2004
Amendment, which was subsequently filed and entered, superseded any
conflicting terms of the August 2004 Order. See Okazaki v. Okazaki,  38 Haw.
148, 151 (1948) (holding that all orders inconsistent with a final decree are
superseded); Quanaim v. Frasco Rest. & Catering, 17 S.W.3d 30, 40 (Tex. App.2000) (holding that a subsequent order granting summary judgment modifies,corrects, or reforms a previous summary judgment order in favor of the same
party). 
23 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as to the first requirement of unreasonable delay, a court 
considers whether, under the circumstances, the delay in bringing the claim was unreasonable. 
Adair, 64 Haw. at 321, 640 
P.2d at 300. As to the second requirement of prejudice to the 
opposing party, a court may consider, for example, “loss of 
evidence with which to contest plaintiff’s claims, including the fading memories or deaths of material witnesses, changes in the value of the subject matter, changes in defendant’s position, and intervening rights of third parties.” 
Id. 
The ICA, in presuming that the family court applied 
the doctrine of laches to estop Husband’s claim for reimbursement, held that the “Family Court failed to apply the 
applicable law [on laches] and thereby abused its discretion in 
ruling [that Husband] was prevented from being reimbursed for his overpayments of support for Son.” 
The ICA determined that 
neither requirement of laches was present and that the family court abused its discretion in holding otherwise. However, while the family court did not expressly find “unreasonable delay,” it did so inferentially when it concluded that Husband was estopped from pursuing reimbursement for claimed overpayment 
of child support for Son “[b]ecause [Husband] waited for 
approximately 7 years before raising the issue . . . and did not avail himself of opportunities to raise the issue when the 
24 
 
                       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parties were before the court on other matters relating to the 
children.” 
The underlying factual findings of the court were 
correct because Husband had been aware of his claim against Wife 
since at least the time he received the letter from CSEA on 
November 1, 2004, advising him that he had overpaid child support to Wife in the amount of $14,040, but Husband waited until April 13, 2011, to move for reimbursement against Wife. As noted by the family court, Husband did not proffer a satisfactory excuse for the almost seven-year delay,
 see In re 
Kawai, 36 Haw. 533, 536 (1943) (holding that the party who waits for an unreasonably protracted period before commencing an 
action must provide a “satisfactory excuse”), despite having 
several opportunities to raise this issue to the family court during the intervening 
years.10 See Brown v. Bishop Trust Co.,  
44 Haw. 385, 394—400, 355 P.2d 179, 185-186 (1960) (concluding that the plaintiffs were barred by laches from commencing an action because they waited more than 18 years after they were apprised of “enough facts . . . to put them upon inquiry” of their claim against the defendant). Since the family court 
10 For example, Husband could have raised the issue of reimbursement
when Wife moved, on November 14, 2008, for post-decree relief asking the
family court to order Husband to pay Daughter’s college expenses. 
25 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
concluded that Husband was estopped from seeking reimbursement, 
the family court, based on its factual findings, implicitly concluded that Husband’s delay in moving for reimbursement for Son’s support payments was unreasonable. 
See Hayashi v. 
Hayashi, 4 Haw. App. 286, 293, 666 P.2d 171, 176 (1983) (noting that the family court did not specifically hold that the claim was barred by laches, but reasoning that the family court’s “finding was in fact equivalent to a determination that laches was a bar”). 
As to prejudice, the second element of laches, the ICA 
reasoned that “[Wife] did not claim and the [f]amily court did not find that [Wife] was prejudiced by the delay.” 
This ruling 
is not supported by the record. What qualifies as prejudice for purposes of the laches doctrine invariably depends on the facts and circumstances of a particular case, but it is ordinarily understood as anything that places the defendant “in a less favorable position.” 
See 27A Am. Jur. 2d Equity § 143 (2008). 
However, “the mere prospect that a defendant might 
lose a case does not suffice to warrant the imposition of laches as a barrier to a plaintiff’s action,” since “that sort of 
prejudice could be claimed by all defendants all of the time.” 
Wauchope v. U.S. Dep’t of State , 985 F.2d 1407, 1412 (9th Cir. 
1993) (quoting 
TransWorld Airlines, Inc. v. Am. Coupon Exch., 
26 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Inc., 913 F.2d 676, 696 (9th Cir. 1990)). Prejudice must be 
established by adducing evidence, and conclusory allegations of 
harm would not suffice. Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Newtown 
Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Dirs.
, 115 Hawai ʻi at 284, 167 P.3d at 
277. 
In determining whether prejudice exists in child 
support disputes, “[o]ne factor to be considered by the court . 
. . is whether ‘the defendant may have changed [his or her] 
position in a manner that would not have occurred but for plaintiff’s delay.’” 
Kerrigan v. Kerrigan , 642 A.2d 1324, 1326 
(D.C.
 1994) (quoting Gull Airborne Instruments, Inc. v. 
Weinberger, 694 F.2d 838, 844 (D.C. Cir. 1982)). In Kerrigan, the husband unilaterally reduced his child support payments when the child turned 21 years old. 
Id. The wife, without any 
explanation, waited almost eight years before taking action to 
challenge the husband’s reduction in his support payments. Id. 
at 1327. 
In defense, the husband contended that the wife was 
barred by laches from claiming arrearages in child support 
because (1) “he changed his financial position significantly in reliance upon the consent to modification implied” by the wife’s extended silence; (2) “he made medical and educational payments on behalf of his daughter and paid approximately $18,000 for her wedding, which he would not have done without a reduction in the 
27 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
monthly payments”; and (3) his advanced age and current 
financial difficulties should be factored in the balance of equities. Id. 
The District of Columbia Court of Appeals agreed 
with the husband that laches was an available defense, that 
these “factors must be taken into account as part of [the 
husband’s] laches defense,” and that the husband had established “a 
prima facie  showing of laches,” thereby shifting the burden 
to the wife to rebut it. Id. 
Here, Wife argued in her opposition papers that 
granting Husband’s requested relief would be a “horrendous financial problem” for her. 
In addition, in her testimony 
during the hearing in the family court, Wife related that “she 
has real challenges as far as her work,” “her net after all” of 
the expenses associated with her work in the summer as a scuba diving instructor “is really quite small,” her work as a yoga instructor had not been “a source of significant income,” she had been experiencing physical challenges impeding her ability to work, she was receiving unemployment compensation because she had not been employed full time, and “it would be inequitable to force her to pay” what Husband alleges is owed to him “given her 
financial situation as well as the huge disparity that exists 
between her situation and [Husband’s] situation.” We agree with the D.C. Court of Appeals in Kerrigan that the current personal 
28 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and financial circumstances of the defendant (here, the Wife) 
and the economic prejudice resulting from the plaintiff’s delay are relevant factors in determining whether laches bars the plaintiff’s claim. 
Kerrigan , 642 A.2d at 1327 (indicating that 
the husband’s age and “current financial difficulties should also be weighed in the balance” as part of the laches analysis). Hence, it was error for the ICA to find that Wife “did not claim” prejudice from Husband’s delay. 
On the other hand, because the family court did not 
address or make any findings of fact relating to the prejudice prong, which includes economic harm to Wife resulting from Husband’s delay in asserting his claim, the ICA’s statement that 
“the [f]amily court did not find that [Wife] was prejudiced by 
the delay” is not inaccurate. 
There appear to be three 
possibilities that could explain the absence of a specific finding by the family court as to prejudice. First, the family court may not have been applying the laches doctrine. Second, assuming that the family court applied the laches doctrine, the court implicitly found that the prejudice prong had been satisfied. Third, the family court failed to recognize that 
prejudice was a required prong for the application of laches 
and, consequently, did not make any finding as to prejudice. 
29 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In any event, the basis for the family court’s silence 
on whether the prejudice prong was satisfied is uncertain. 
Consequently, the family court’s conclusion that Husband is estopped from pursuing reimbursement is not supported, under a 
laches analysis, by findings of fact as to the presence or 
degree of prejudice to Wife resulting from Husband’s delay. Thus, the issue as to whether laches barred Husband from claiming reimbursement from Wife for his overpayment of Son’s child support must be remanded to permit the family court to consider whether Wife was prejudiced by Husband’s unreasonable delay and to render factual findings with respect to the prejudice prong of laches. 
See Gussin v. Gussin,  73 Haw. 470, 
836 P.2d 484 (1992) (holding that the ICA erred in not remanding the case to the family court for further fact finding where the family court did not make any findings as to donative intent or any other element bearing on whether a legal gift had been made). Alternatively, if the family court was applying another legal doctrine, the court’s findings and conclusions should so clarify. 
See id. As noted, the family court may have been 
applying a different legal doctrine or rule in concluding that 
Husband was “estopped from pursuing [his] claim.” 
But because 
the family court did not specify the legal theory upon which its 
conclusions were based, it is unclear whether the court’s denial 
30 
 
   
                     
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of Husband’s April 2011 Motion was based on equitable estoppel, 
estoppel by laches, quasi-estoppel, HFCR Rule 60(b), or another legal principle altogether.
11     
The ICA therefore erred by concluding that “both 
elements of laches are not present” and that Husband was not estopped from pursuing reimbursement for overpayment of Son’s child support, rather than remanding this issue to the family court for further consideration.
12  
B. Termination and Overpayment of Child Support for Daughter 
The family court denied Husband’s request to 
retroactively terminate Daughter’s child support to September 2009, when Daughter commenced her college education. In 
11 Equitable estoppel is a defense requiring “proof that one person
wilfully caused another person to erroneously believe a certain state of
things, and that person reasonably relied on this erroneous belief to his orher detriment.” Maria v. Freitas
, 73 Haw. 266, 273, 832 P.2d 259, 264
(1992). Quasi-estoppel, on the other hand, is a species of equitable
estoppel precluding one “from asserting to another’s disadvantage, a right
inconsistent with a position previously taken by him” or her. Id. at 274,
832 P.2d at 264 (quoting  Aehegma v. Aehegma,  8 Haw. App. 215, 234, 797 P.2d
74, 80 (1990)). 
12 As an additional basis for its decision that Husband should be 
reimbursed for his child support overpayments for Son, the ICA held that HRS§ 557-52.5(d) applies in this case and that Wife had primary responsibilityfor terminating the assignment of Husband’s income for child support.However, the ICA’s reference to HRS § 571-52.2(d) does not affect itsconclusion as to Husband’s overpayment of Son’s child support and was not
dispositive of its holding. And even though the ICA discussed the
applicability of HRS § 571-52.2(d) and Wife’s responsibility under thisstatute, the ICA’s ultimate holding as to Husband’s overpayment of Son’schild support was based on its finding that the family court erred inapplying the doctrine of estoppel by laches. As such, it is unclear why the
ICA discussed the application of HRS § 571-52.2(d). 
31 
 
                       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
addition, the family court declined to “halt the child support 
previously ordered until such a time that [Daughter] graduates or attains the age of 23, whichever comes first.” 
The September 2004 Amendment relating to child support 
provides as follows: 
Child support for each child shall continue until he or she
attains the age of 18 years or graduates from or
discontinues high school, whichever occurs last. The issue of child support thereafter, if any, including the amount,duration, manner of payment, payor, and payee, shall bereserved for future agreement by the parties or future
determination by the Court, if necessary. 
(Emphases added). 
Where the language of the decree is clear and 
unambiguous on its face, there is no room for interpretation and 
its plain language must control. Guyton, 135 Hawai ʻi at 378, 351 
P.3d at 1144; see Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 
Hawaiʻi 214, 259, 948 P.2d 1055, 1100 (1997) (according “plain 
meaning” to this court’s remand order in construing its scope). 
The language of the child support provision is clear 
and unambiguous. 
The conjunction “until” means “up to the time 
that” or “up to such time as.”13 Because “[c]hild support for 
13 Merriam-Webster, http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/until
(last visited May 18, 2016). 
A court may consult well-accepted dictionaries
in determining the meaning of words. In re Taxes, Hawaiian Pineapple Co.,
Ltd., 45 Haw. 167, 188, 363 P.2d 990, 1001 (1961); Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals
of Cty. of Haw., 109 Hawai ʻi 384, 393, 126 P.3d 1071, 1080 (2006) (using the
Webster’s Dictionary to find the meaning of “shall”). 
32 
 
                       
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
each child shall continue until he or she attains the age of 18 
years or graduates from or discontinues high school, whichever occurs last,” Husband’s child support obligation continues “up to the time that” or “up to such time as” the child turns 18, 
graduates from high school, or discontinues high school, 
whichever occurs last. 
The plain meaning of the first sentence of the 
September 2004 Amendment expressly obligates Husband to pay child support for a particular child until that child reaches the age of 18 years or graduates from or discontinues high school, whichever occurs last. Thus, when Daughter turned 18 on June 16, 2009, after graduating from high school, Husband’s 
child support obligation under the first sentence of the 
September 2004 Agreement for Daughter expired. Wife’s contrary argument--that “[t]here is nothing in the language of the Decree that provides that the support was to terminate on the later of the child’s 18th birthday or graduation from high school”--essentially disavows the plain meaning of the first sentence. 
However, we note that under HRS § 580-47(a),
14 the 
family court, at the time of granting a divorce or later, if 
14 In relevant part, HRS § 580-47(a) provides as follows: 
Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if . . .
jurisdiction of those matters is reserved under the decree 
(continued. . .)
33  
                                                                    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jurisdiction is reserved, has the authority to compel parties to 
provide child support “of an adult or minor child . . . whether or not the petition is made before or after the child has attained the age of majority.” HRS § 580-47(a). In this case, 
the family court reserved jurisdiction over the matter of child 
support in both the 1998 Divorce Decree and the September 2004 Amendment. As such, the family court had the authority, pursuant to HRS § 580-47(a), to order Husband to continue paying child support for Daughter after Daughter attained the age of 18 years
. See Richardson v. Richardson,  8 Haw. App. 446, 449, 808 
P.2d 1279, 1282 (1991) (noting that HRS § 580-47(a) “takes 
(. . .continued) 
by agreement of both parties or by order of court after
finding that good cause exists, the court may make any
further orders as shall appear just and equitable (1)compelling the parties or either of them to provide for thesupport, maintenance, and education of the children of theparties . . . . In making these further orders, the court
shall take into consideration: the respective merits of the
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, thecondition in which each party will be left by the divorce,the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit ofthe children of the parties, the concealment of or failure
to disclose income or an asset, or violation of a
restraining order issued under section 580-10(a) or (b), ifany, by either party, and all other circumstances of thecase. In establishing the amounts of child support, thecourt shall use the guidelines established under section
576D-7. Provision may be made for the support,
maintenance, and education of an adult or minor child andfor the support, maintenance, and education of anincompetent adult child whether or not the petition is madebefore or after the child has attained the age of majority. 
HRS § 580-47(a). 
34 
 
   
 
 
                     
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
precedence over [the provision] terminati[ng] . . . Father’s 
child support obligation when the children reach the age of 18”). Wife expressly argued this point in the family court and the ICA, but neither court addressed Wife’s contention. Thus, 
on remand the family court should address whether, pursuant to 
its authority under HRS § 580-47(a), it was appropriate to order child support payments for Daughter after the obligation for child support expired under the first sentence of the September 2004 Amendment.
15 
Additionally, under HRS § 580-47(b) (2007), the family 
court “at all times . . . ha[s] the power to grant any and all orders that may be necessary to protect and provide for the 
support and maintenance of the parties and any children of the 
parties to secure justice.” HRS § 580-47(b). Accordingly, the family court on remand also retains the discretionary authority provided by HRS § 580-47(b) to craft appropriate relief regarding child support.
16 
15 We note that HRS § 580-47(a) requires awards of child support to
be consistent with the child support guidelines. HRS § 580-47(a). The 
family court did not reference the child support guidelines in its Decision
and Order. 
16 Relatedly, under HRS § 580-47(c), 
[n]o order entered under the authority of subsection (a) or
entered thereafter revising so much of such an order asprovides for the support, maintenance, and education of the
children of the parties shall impair the power of the court 
(continued. . .)
35  
   
                                                                  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The family court’s decision not to allow Husband to 
recoup child support overpayments for Daughter was also based, 
at least in part, on the fact that it would be inequitable if Husband were allowed to do so. This is similar to the family 
court’s reasoning that Husband was estopped from recouping 
overpayments made for Son’s child support. Based on this perceived inequity, the family court concluded that Husband was not entitled to have his child support obligation to Daughter terminated. 
The ICA did not address this finding. Similar to the 
estoppel conclusion of the family court with respect to child support overpayments for Son, it is not clear from the family 
court’s Decision and Order what legal theory was utilized in 
order to reach the conclusion of inequity. Hence, upon remand, the family court must clearly state the basis for its conclusion of inequity and render sufficient findings of fact in support of that conclusion. 
(. . .continued) 
from time to time to revise its orders providing for the
support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties upon a showing of a change in the circumstances ofeither party or any child of the parties since the entry ofany prior order relating to the support, maintenance, andeducation. 
HRS § 580-47(c) (2007). 
36 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VII. Conclusion 
Accordingly, the ICA erred in determining that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in concluding that Husband 
was precluded from seeking reimbursement for his overpayment of 
child support for Son. Instead, for the reasons stated, the ICA 
should have remanded the case to the family court for a determination of whether Husband was estopped, under laches or other applicable legal principles, from seeking reimbursement for overpaid child support for Son. Additionally, the ICA erred by failing to address (1) the family court’s finding of inequity as to Husband’s reimbursement claim for overpaid child support for Daughter and (2) Wife’s argument that the family court was 
authorized under HRS § 580-47(a) to order Husband to continue 
paying Daughter’s child support. The ICA should have remanded the case in order for the family court (1) to consider in the first instance whether it was appropriate to order child support payments for Daughter after the obligation expired under the 2004 Amendment and (2) as necessary, to clarify the basis for its conclusion of inequity as to reimbursement of Daughter’s child support and to render adequate findings of fact to support 
this conclusion. For the foregoing reasons, we vacate in part 
the ICA Judgment on Appeal and affirm to the extent that it vacated the Decision and Order of the family court. This case 
37 
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
is remanded to the family court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. Francis T. O’Brien 
for petitioner 
Charles T. Kleintop and
Dyan M. Medeiros
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
38 
