     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
                                                                 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000393 10-DEC-2013 08:54 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
STANLEY S.L. KONG, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
                                                                 
SCWC-11-0000393
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000393; CR. NO. 09-1-0683(2))
 
DECEMBER 10, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, J., AND CIRCUIT JUDGE AYABE,
IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J., RECUSED, WITH ACOBA, J.,
DISSENTING SEPARATELY, WITH WHOM MCKENNA, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
Stanley S.L. Kong was charged with Promoting a
 
Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree and Prohibited Acts Related
 
to Drug Paraphernalia. He was admitted into the Maui Drug Court
 program, but subsequently self-terminated from the program. 
The
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit then found Kong guilty as
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
charged, and sentenced him to a ten year indeterminate term of
 
imprisonment and a five year indeterminate term of imprisonment,
 respectively.
1 The circuit court ordered that the terms run
 
consecutively, for a total of 15 years, due to Kong’s history of
 “extensive criminality.”
 
In his application, Kong argues that the circuit 
court’s statement regarding his “extensive criminality” was insufficient to justify his consecutive sentence based on the requirements set forth in State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 229 
P.3d 313 (2010). He also argues that his sentence constitutes plain error because it was based on crimes he did not commit. Finally, Kong argues that the colloquy conducted by the circuit court regarding his self-termination from the Drug Court program was insufficient to establish that he knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his right to a termination hearing. 
For the reasons set forth below, we reject each of
 
Kong’s arguments. We affirm the judgment of the Intermediate
 Court of Appeals, which affirmed the circuit court’s judgment of
 conviction and sentence.
 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 
-2­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Kong was charged with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 
Second Degree in violation of Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
2
§ 712-1242,  and Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia in
violation of HRS § 329-43.5.3
 
Kong subsequently petitioned for admission into the
 
Maui Drug Court program. Kong signed a petition for admission,
 
in which he waived his right to a trial, confirmed his
 understanding that the charges against him would be dismissed if
 he successfully completed the program, and confirmed his
 understanding that he would proceed to a stipulated facts trial
 
2 HRS § 712-1242 (Supp. 2007) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the second degree if the person
knowingly:
. . . .
 
(b) Possesses one or more preparations,
compounds, mixtures, or substances of an
aggregate weight of:
(i) One-eighth ounce or more, containing
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or
cocaine or any of their respective salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers[.]
 
. . . .
 (2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree
is a class B felony.
 
3 HRS § 329-43.5 (1993) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to
possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance
in violation of this chapter.  Any person who violates
this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section
706-660 and, if appropriate as provided in section
706-641, fined pursuant to section 706-640.
 
-3­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
if he was unsuccessful in the program. He also admitted to the
 
charges against him. 
That same day, the circuit court held a hearing, in
 
which it orally informed Kong of the legal rights that he would
 surrender if he chose to enter the Drug Court program. The
 circuit court also reviewed the petition with Kong and explained
 to Kong that he would be terminated from the program if he
 violated any of the rules set forth in the Drug Court Program
 Admission Agreement, which Kong also had signed. The circuit
 court conducted a detailed colloquy with Kong regarding the
 rights he was waiving by agreeing to enter the program, including
 his right to a trial on the charges and the rights associated
 with a public trial. The circuit court confirmed that Kong
 admitted to the charges and wanted to proceed. The circuit court
 found that Kong voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived
 his rights as indicated in the petition, and admitted Kong into
 the program. 
Kong subsequently attended numerous status hearings
 
over a period of approximately six months. However, at a January
 
4
26, 2011 status hearing,  Kong’s counsel, a Deputy Public
Defender (DPD) indicated her understanding that the Drug Court
 program was recommending that Kong be terminated from the
 program. The DPD stated that Kong instead wanted to self­
4
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
-4­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
terminate from the program. Kong’s Drug Court treatment team
 
confirmed that Kong had failed to appear for a urinalysis,
 treatment group, and scheduled status hearing, and recommended
 that the court set a termination hearing. The circuit court
 addressed Kong:
 
[Mr. Kong], although the treatment team has
recommended a termination hearing, I’m going to take
you through some questions that . . . are similar to
the questions I asked of someone else who indicated
they wanted to terminate, or that person wanted to
terminate.
 
You have the right to have a hearing on that.
  
Just because someone recommends termination, it
doesn’t mean it’s automatic.  And at that hearing the
Government would basically have to present an
appropriate basis for terminating you from the drug
court program.  If the Court determines that that’s
 not the appropriate course, then you can remain in the
program and participate in the program.  If, on the
other hand, it is determined that termination is the
appropriate result, then you would be terminated from
the program.
But what I want to emphasize is that what’s
important here is that you understand that you have a
right to have a hearing on that, and you have the
right to have your attorney present and represent you
during that hearing.  So in addition to what the
 
Prosecutor might do at the hearing and the burden that
the Prosecution would carry, you have the right to
have your attorney present whatever you would like
your attorney to present during the termination
hearing and have a fair hearing on that before that
decision is made.
 
Kong acknowledged that he understood what the circuit
 
court explained. The circuit court also explained to Kong the
 
consequences of termination:
 
And, now, at a termination hearing, if you are
terminated, you are a Track II participant, so what
would happen is your -- your case would proceed to
what’s called a stipulated facts trial, in other
words, where the facts are agreed on.  So if you get
past the point of termination, for example, if you
self-terminate, for example, or if it’s determined
that you should be terminated, then the stipulated
facts trial is basically a very short trial.  Because
 essentially what you will have done already is
admitted to all of the parts of the charge.  So that’s
 
-5­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
presented and the trial doesn’t even last a minute and
you are found guilty as charged.  You understand that?
 
Kong again acknowledged that he understood what the
 
circuit court explained. The circuit court then stated, “And the
 
reason I’m asking you that question is I want to make sure you
 
understand . . . what consequences flow from the decision to
 self-terminate.” (Emphasis added). The circuit court again
 asked Kong if he understood the consequences of a decision to
 self-terminate from the Drug Court program, and Kong responded,
 “Yeah, I understand in part. Yes, I do.” The circuit court then
 explained:
 
Okay.  So, basically there’s no hearing.  You
 
give up the right to a termination hearing, number
one, if you self-terminate; number 2, you move onto a
stipulated facts trial where it’s almost virtually
certain, unless your attorney files any
constitutionally based motions on your behalf, it’s
virtually certain that you will be found guilty as
charged.  And if the motions are filed, if there are
any motions that could be filed, then those are heard. 
But if those are not successful, then that leads to a
stipulated facts trial and that would . . .
essentially result in a finding of guilty.  Do you
 understand all of that?
 
Kong responded, “Yeah. Yeah.” Kong then stated, “I
 
want to self-terminate,” but indicated that “just for the record”
 
that “[u]p until this point the Public Defender’s Office was, to
 my understanding, was never allowed to represent me in any felony
 cases because of conflict of interest in the past. They
 represented people who testified against me.” The DPD stated:
 
I know [] Kong wanted to raise this to the Court
today to preserve the issue, just to have it be on the
record.  And we did have this conversation about what
 appears to be a prior conflict with the Public
Defender’s Office with [] Kong as a juvenile in First
Circuit on Oahu.
 
-6­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . . .
 
[I]n 
looking in our data base, closed and opened
files, there was no such conflict, and we were never
told of a conflict.  And I did raise the issue, and we
can continue to talk about whether [Kong] wants to
file a motion to withdraw, and that would be fine.
But further discussion can be had, and I do understand
that [] Kong still wanted to proceed with this self-
termination, but possibly maybe with a new attorney.
 
Kong then stated that he “wanted to state [the possible
 
conflict] on the record, and then still proceed with the
 
termination.” The circuit court was hesitant to proceed with
 termination in light of Kong’s desire to preserve for appeal the
 issue of a possible conflict of interest. Accordingly, the
 circuit court set a hearing for a motion to withdraw counsel for
 February 3, 2011, and a termination hearing for March 7, 2011. 
Kong ultimately did not file a motion for withdrawal
 
and substitution of counsel pertaining to any alleged conflict of
 interest in relation to the circuit court proceedings. At the
 
5
February 3, 2011 hearing,  the issue of withdrawal of counsel was
not addressed. 
Instead, the following exchange occurred at the
 
beginning of the hearing:
 
[DPD]: Good morning, your Honor.  [The DPD] on
behalf of [] Kong who is present, ready toself-terminate from the drug courtprogram.  Although he did benefit from theprogram and he would like to continue, heunderstands and would like to self-
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Kong], is that right? 
[Kong]: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: You want to self-terminate from the program? 
[Kong]: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: Is you mind clear today about saying that? termi
nate in order to speed up the
process. 
5
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 
-7­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[Kong]: Yes, it is.
 
THE C
OURT: Are you taking any medicines or drugs?
 
[Kong]: I’m not.
 
THE COURT: All right.
The Court finds the defendant
 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently
terminates from the adult drug court
program.
We can go ahead with the stip facts
trial then[.]
 
The circuit court determined that Kong was guilty as
 
charged on all counts. 
A sentencing hearing was held approximately two months
 
later. At the hearing, the DPD indicated, “[W]e are prepared to
 
proceed with sentencing. We have received the pre-sentence
 investigation [(PSI)] report. There are no changes at this
 
time.” (Emphasis added). The DPD requested that the circuit
 court consider sentencing Kong to “probation with long term
 treatment[.]” However, sentencing was continued because there
 was apparent confusion over whether one of the charges had been
 reduced. 
6
At the continued sentencing hearing,  the DPD indicated
that “Kong does not want to stipulate to the contents of the
 [PSI] report in this case[,]” to which the circuit court
 responded, “That’s fine.” 
The State then clarified that the
 
charges had not been reduced. The DPD requested a sentence of
 probation or, alternatively, concurrent sentences. 
The State then stated:
 
6
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 
-8­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We will ask the Court to impose the prison term.
[Kong] has previously served five and ten year prison
terms, and his parole was revoked repeatedly in ‘93,
‘99, 2001, 2002.  He was given a chance as a high risk
candidate for drug court, and he just skipped out.  So
 he’s not probation eligible and would just ask that
you impose the prison term at this point.
 
Kong stated:
 
. . . I would like to thank the Court for giving me
the opportunity to participate in drug court at that
time.  There’s only been two judges who has ever given
me a chance, Judge Marks and yourself, so that much
I’m grateful for.  Sorry I wasn’t able to complete it
and maybe waste the taxpayer’s money.  But, you know,
hopefully on the path that I take now I can make
better decisions, if the scenario like that presents
itself to me again.
 
The circuit court then sentenced Kong:
 
Taking into consideration all of the factors set
forth in [HRS §] 706-606, including the extensive
record of the defendant, which includes six burglary
convictions, . . . ten felonies, which represents a
lot of harm in our community.
The Court is going to impose the following
sentence in this matter.  The defendant will be
 
committed to the care and custody of the Director of
the Department of Public Safety for a period of ten
years on Count 1, five years on Count 2.
. . . .
 
In view of his extensive criminality, the Court
is going to make these counts run consecutive for a
total of fifteen years, mittimus forthwith, full
credit for time served.
 
I will order that he be given an opportunity to
participate in the Cash Box drug treatment program at
the earliest convenience of the Department of Public
Safety.
 
Thereafter, the circuit court entered its Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, and Kong timely filed a notice of
 
appeal. 
B. Appeal
 
On appeal, Kong raised three points of error: (1)
 
whether the circuit court erred in imposing consecutive terms of
 
imprisonment without adequately articulating a rationale; (2)
 
-9­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
whether the circuit court violated Kong’s due process rights by
 
basing its sentence on certain crimes set forth in the PSI
 report, specifically crimes in Cr. No. 92-0138 that Kong alleged
 were “vacated, remanded, and ultimately dismissed”; and (3)
 whether the circuit court erred by terminating Kong from the Drug
 Court program without conducting an on-the-record colloquy
 advising Kong of the rights he would relinquish by self-
terminating. 
In its answering brief, the State argued that the
 
circuit court “clearly stated the specific fact of Kong’s
 extensive criminal record was the reason for its imposition of
 consecutive sentencing for the protection of the community.” The
 State then argued that the circuit court properly considered the
 information contained in the PSI report. Specifically, the State
 argued that Kong did not challenge the information in the PSI
 report in the circuit court and, in any event, the circuit court
 did not plainly err in sentencing Kong based on his “extensive
 criminal record in general, and not specifically” the alleged
 inaccurate convictions. Finally, the State argued that the
 circuit court properly terminated Kong from the Drug Court
 program. 
In a published opinion, the ICA held that the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Kong to consecutive terms of imprisonment. State v. Kong, 129 Hawai' i 
135, 295 P.3d 1005 (App. 2013). The ICA determined: 
-10­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Here, the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion by sentencing Kong to consecutive terms of
imprisonment pursuant to HRS § 706-668.5 because it
considered the factors set forth in HRS § 706-606.
  
The Circuit Court explained its reasoning before
imposing its sentence, stating, “Taking into
consideration all of the factors set forth in [HRS]
Section 706-606, including the extensive record of the
defendant, which includes six burglary convictions
. . . ten felonies, which represents a lot of harm in
our community.”  The Circuit Court further stated, “In
view of [Kong’s] extensive criminality, the Court is
going to make these counts run consecutive for a total
of fifteen years[.]”
Kong’s “extensive record” and the fact that he
caused “a lot of harm in our community” are specific
circumstances that led the Circuit Court to conclude
 that a consecutive sentence was appropriate in this
case.  Given these circumstances, the Circuit Court
likely concluded that Kong was “dangerous to the
safety of the public, or poses an unacceptable risk of
re-offending[.]” 
 Hussein , 122 Hawai 'i at 509, 229 
P.3d at 327.  In fact, Kong had re-offended, admitting
that he had used drugs while participating in the MDC
program.  Kong had been given a second chance when he
was allowed to continue in the [Drug Court] program
after relapsing.  Yet, Kong decided to self-terminate
from the program, suggesting that “rehabilitation
appears unlikely due to his [] lack of motivation and
a failure to demonstrate any interest in treatment[.]” 
Hussein, 122 Hawai 'i at 509, 229 P.3d at 327.  These 
specific circumstances support the conclusion that the
Circuit Court’s “decision to impose consecutive
sentences was deliberate, rational, and fair.” 
Hussein, 122 Hawai 'i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328. 
Id. at 141, 295 P.3d at 1011 (footnotes omitted).
 
The ICA also held that the circuit court properly
 
considered Kong’s PSI report. Id. at 141-43, 295 P.3d at 1011­
13. Citing this court’s opinion in State v. Heggland, 118
 
Hawai'i 425, 439-40, 193 P.3d 341, 355-56 (2008), the ICA 
determined that Kong “conceded his prior convictions” because
 
“each conviction listed may be used against defendant except
 those as to which the defendant timely responds with a good faith
 challenge on the record that the prior criminal conviction was
 . . . not against the defendant.” Kong, 129 Hawai' i at 143, 295 
-11­        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.3d at 1013. The ICA further held that these circumstances “do
 
not rise to the level of plain error” inasmuch as the circuit
 court based its sentence on Kong’s “extensive criminality” and
 not specifically on the convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138. Id.
 
Finally, the ICA held that the circuit court properly
 
terminated Kong from the Drug Court program because, under the
 totality of the circumstances, Kong voluntarily and intelligently
 self-terminated from the Drug Court program, and waived his right
 to a terminating hearing. Id. at 143-45, 295 P.3d at 1013-15.
 
Kong timely filed an application for writ of
 
certiorari. The State did not file a response.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Sentencing
 
This court has stated,
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad
discretion in imposing a sentence.  The applicable
standard of review for sentencing or resentencing
matters is whether the court committed plain and
manifest abuse of discretion in its decision.
 Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse of
discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant’s
contentions.   And, generally, to constitute an abuse
it must appear that the court clearly exceeded the
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant.
 
State v. Rivera, 106 Hawai' i 146, 154-55, 102 P.3d 1044, 1052-53 
(2004) (format altered) (quotation marks, brackets, and citations 
omitted), overruled on other grounds by State v. Maugaotega, 115 Hawai'i 432, 442-43, 168 P.3d 562, 572-73 (2007); State v. 
Aplaca, 96 Hawai' i 17, 25, 25 P.3d 792, 800 (2001). 
-12­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“The weight to be given the factors set forth in HRS
 
§ 706-606 in imposing sentence is a matter generally left to the
 
discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration the
 circumstances of each case.” State v. Akana, 10 Haw. App. 381,
 
386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334 (1994).
 
B. Plain Error
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) 
(2012) states that “[p]lain errors or defects affecting 
substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.” Therefore, an appellate court “may recognize plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant.” State v. Staley, 91 
Hawai'i 275, 282, 982 P.2d 904, 911 (1999) (citation omitted). 
The appellate court “will apply the plain error 
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights.” State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 
327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 980 (2006) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai'i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998)). An appellate 
court’s “power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system –- that a party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel’s mistakes.” Nichols, 
-13­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
111 Hawai' i at 335, 141 P.3d at 982 (quoting State v. Kelekolio, 
74 Haw. 479, 515, 849 P.2d 58, 74-75 (1993)). 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing
Kong to consecutive terms of imprisonment
 
Kong argues that the circuit court’s statement
 
regarding his “extensive criminality” was insufficient to justify
 
the imposition of consecutive sentences and did not meet the
 requirements of Hussein. As explained below, the circuit court
 did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Kong to consecutive
 terms based on Kong’s “extensive criminality.” 
A sentencing court has discretion to order multiple
 
terms of imprisonment to run concurrently or consecutively. HRS
 § 706-668.5(1) (Supp. 2008) (“If multiple terms of imprisonment
 are imposed on a defendant . . . the terms may run concurrently
 or consecutively.”). “The court, in determining whether the
 terms imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
 consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in section
 706-606.” HRS § 706-668.5(2) (1993). HRS § 706-606 (1993)
 provides:
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to
be imposed, shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
-14­        
Hussein***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
“[A]bsent clear evidence to the contrary, it is
 
presumed that a sentencing court will have considered all factors
 
before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment
 under HRS § 706-606.” 
, 122 Hawai' i at 503, 229 P.3d at 
321 (citations and brackets omitted). Nevertheless, in  Hussein,
 
this court determined that “circuit courts must state on the
 record at the time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a
 consecutive sentence.” Id. at 510, 229 P.3d at 328 (emphasis
 
added). This court explained:
 
Such a requirement serves dual purposes.  First,
reasons identify the facts or circumstances within the
range of statutory factors that a court considers
important in determining that a consecutive sentence
is appropriate.  An express statement, which evinces
not merely consideration of the factors, but recites
the specific circumstances that led the court to
impose sentences consecutively in a particular case,
provides a meaningful rationale to the defendant, the
victim, and the public.
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by
the court from consideration of all the facts that
 pertain to the statutory factors.  It is vital, for
example, for the defendant to be specifically informed
that the court has concluded that he or she is
 dangerous to the safety of the public, or poses an
unacceptable risk of re-offending, or that
rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or her lack
of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any
interest in treatment, or that the multiplicity of
offenses and victims and the impact upon the victims’
lives warrant imposition of a consecutive term. 
Hence, reasons confirm for the defendant, the victim,
the public, and the appellate court, that the decision
to impose consecutive sentences was deliberate,
rational, and fair.
 
-15­        
 Kong characterizes the circuit court’s justification
 
for imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment as “terse,
 
conclusory, and last[ing] two words.” However, the sentencing
 court is not required to articulate and explain its conclusions
 with respect to every factor listed in HRS § 706-606. Id. at
 
518-19, 229 P.3d at 337-38. Rather, “it is presumed that a
 sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing
 concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706­606.” Id. at 503, 229 P.3d at 321 (citations omitted). Thus,
 
the sentencing court is required to articulate its reasoning only
 with respect to those factors it relies on in imposing
 consecutive sentences. Id. at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28.
 
In this case, the circuit court explained its reasoning
 
for imposing its sentence:
 
Taking into consideration all of the factors set
forth in [HRS §] 706-606, including the extensive
record of the defendant, which includes six burglary
convictions, . . . ten felonies, which represents a
lot of harm in our community.
The Court is going to impose the following
sente
nce in this matter.  The defendant will be
 
committed to the care and custody of the Director of
the Department of Public Safety for a period of ten
years on Count 1, five years on Count 2.
. . . .
 
In view of his extensive criminality, the Court
is go
ing to make these counts run consecutive for a
total of fifteen years, mittimus forthwith, full
credit for time served.
 
I will order that he be given an opportunity to
parti
cipate in the Cash Box drug treatment program at
the earliest convenience of the Department of Public
Safety.
 
(Emphasis added). 
-16­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hussein set forth two purposes served by requiring the
 
court to state on the record the reasons for imposing a
 
consecutive sentence: (1) identifying the facts or circumstances
 within the range of statutory factors that the court considered,
 and (2) confirming for the defendant, the victim, the public, and
 the appellate court that the decision was deliberate, rational,
 and fair. Id. Here, the circuit court’s rationale satisfied the
 
dual purposes set forth in Hussein.
 
First, the circuit court’s statement regarding Kong’s
 
“extensive criminality” identified the specific facts or
 circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the
 court considered in imposing a consecutive sentence. See id. at
 
509, 229 P.3d at 327 (requiring that the sentencing court state
 “the specific circumstances that led the court to impose
 sentences consecutively in a particular case”). Indeed, the
 circuit court’s statement regarding Kong’s “extensive
 criminality” relates directly to the first of the relevant
 statutory factors listed in HRS § 706-606(1): “the history and
 characteristics of the defendant[.]” 
Second, the circuit court’s statement regarding Kong’s 
extensive criminality also “provide[d] the conclusions drawn by the court from consideration of all the facts that pertain to the statutory factors[,]” and confirms for Kong, the public, and this court that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was deliberate, rational, and fair. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 509-10, 
-17­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
229 P.3d at 327-28. Put simply, Kong’s “extensive criminality”
 
provided a rational and fair basis within the range of statutory
 factors for the imposition of consecutive sentences. 
However, Kong also asserts that the ICA erred in
 
providing a “post hoc justification” for the circuit court’s
 rationale when it speculated as to what the circuit court “likely
 concluded[.]” Kong specifically refers to the following
 paragraph of the ICA’s opinion:
 
Given these circumstances, the Circuit Court likely
concluded that Kong was “dangerous to the safety of
the public, or poses an unacceptable risk of
re-offending[.]”  In fact, Kong had re-offended,
admitting that he had used drugs while participating
in the [Drug Court] program.  Kong had been given a
second chance when he was allowed to continue in the
 [Drug Court] program after relapsing.  Yet, Kong
decided to self-terminate from the program, suggesting
that “rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his []
lack of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any
interest in treatment[.]”  These specific
circumstances support the conclusion that the Circuit
Court’s “decision to impose consecutive sentences was
deliberate, rational, and fair.”
 
Kong, 129 Hawai' i at 141, 295 P.3d at 1011 (citations omitted) 
(emphasis added). 
In this paragraph, it appears that the ICA attempted to
 
relate the circuit court’s factual considerations to the examples
 
given in Hussein that would justify the circuit court’s
 imposition of a consecutive sentence:
 
It is vital, for example, for the defendant to be
specifically informed that the court has concluded
that he or she is dangerous to the safety of the
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending,
or that rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or
her lack of motivation and a failure to demonstrate
 any interest in treatment, or that the multiplicity of
offenses and victims and the impact upon the victims’
lives warrant imposition of a consecutive term.
 
-18­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 509, 229 P.3d at 327. 
The ICA’s determination that “the [c]ircuit [c]ourt
 
likely concluded that Kong was ‘dangerous to the safety of the
 
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending’” and that
 rehabilitation appeared unlikely arguably could be read as
 speculating as to the circuit court’s reasoning. Such
 speculation would be contrary to the holding in Hussein that the
 circuit court justify its decision “on the record at the time of
 sentencing.” However, when read in context, it appears the ICA
 was not speculating regarding the circuit court’s reasoning, but
 rather attempting to link the circuit court’s express reasoning
 to the examples given in Hussein.
 
To the extent doing so constituted error by the ICA,
 
such error does not warrant vacating Kong’s conviction. 
Hussein does not require the circuit court to address the
 specific “example[s]” discussed in the opinion. Indeed,
 requiring the sentencing court to address these “example[s]”
 would introduce sentencing factors in excess of the statutory
 factors set out by the legislature. Compare id. with HRS § 706­
606. Although Hussein required that the court articulate its
 
reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence on the record at the
 time of sentencing, the examples it provided were illustrative. 
Id. at 509, 229 P.3d at 327. The critical question remains
 whether the circuit court articulated a “meaningful rationale”
 
-19­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for the sentence in light of the factors set forth in HRS § 706­
606. In this case, the circuit court’s reason, i.e., Kong’s
 
“extensive criminality[,]” sufficiently justified the imposition
 of a consecutive sentence under HRS § 706-606.
7
 
Accordingly, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in imposing a consecutive sentence in this case.
 
B. The circuit court properly considered Kong’s PSI report
 
Kong contends that “[t]he circuit court based its 
sentence . . . on crimes that were vacated almost fifteen years 
earlier. The ICA affirmed the sentence by extending the presumption of validity to those non-existent convictions. The ICA gravely erred by upholding a consecutive prison sentence based on crimes that [] Kong did not commit.” Kong specifically argues that the procedure set out in State v. Sinagoga, 81 Hawai'i 421, 918 P.2d 228 (App. 1996), for challenging 
convictions contained in a PSI report should not “extend to cases where convictions did not exist at the time of sentencing,” and alternatively, that Sinagoga should be overturned. As explained below, Kong’s arguments are without merit. 
In Sinagoga, the ICA considered whether a defendant
 
bears the burden of challenging prior criminal convictions listed
 
7
 To be clear, we are neither overruling nor “upend[ing]” this 
court’s opinion in Hussein. See dissenting opinion at 20.  Hussein clearly
stands for the proposition that a sentencing court must provide a “meaningful
rationale” on the record to justify its imposition of a sentence.  122 Hawai 'i 
at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28.  We expressly reaffirm this holding.  Here, wemerely hold that, under the circumstances of this case, the circuit court didnot abuse its discretion in determining that Kong’s “extensive criminality”justified the imposition of a consecutive sentence. 
-20­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in the PSI report that the defendant contends are invalid. Id.
 
at 444, 918 P.2d at 251. 
The ICA concluded that a defendant does
 
bear such a burden in “ordinary sentencing situations.”8 Id. 
Specifically, the ICA held that any convictions contained in a
 
PSI report “may be used against the defendant except those as to
 which the defendant timely responds with a good faith challenge
 on the record that the prior criminal conviction was (1)
 uncounseled, (2) otherwise invalidly entered, and/or (3) not
 against the defendant.” Id. at 444-45, 918 P.2d at 251-52. The
 
ICA’s conclusion was based on the rationale that “the defendant,
 more than anyone else, knows whether or not his or her prior
 criminal conviction was uncounseled, otherwise invalid, or
 irrelevant.” Id. at 445, 918 P.2d at 252. Accordingly, “if the
 
presentence report states that the defendant has a prior criminal
 conviction, and the defendant does not respond to that report
 with a good faith challenge on the record . . . that prior
 criminal conviction is reliable for all sentencing purposes.” 
Id.
 
The ICA set forth the following procedure for trial
 
courts to follow in cases “where ordinary sentencing procedures
 are applicable and there is a possibility that the court may use
 
8
 “Ordinary sentencing situations” include mandatory minimums,
 
eligibility for probation, and consecutive sentences, but exclude extended
term sentencing.  Id. at 444, 918 P.2d 251.  
-21­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the defendant’s prior conviction(s) as a basis for the imposition
 
9
or enhancement of a prison sentence” : 
Step one, the court shall furnish to the defendant or
defendant’s counsel and to the prosecuting attorney a
copy of the presentence report, HRS § 706–604, and any
other report of defendant’s prior criminal
conviction(s).  Step two, if the defendant contends
that one or more of the reported prior criminal
convictions was (1) uncounseled, (2) otherwise
invalidly entered, and/or (3) not against the
defendant, the defendant shall, prior to the
sentencing, respond with a good faith challenge on the
record stating, as to each challenged conviction, the
basis or bases for the challenge. Step three, prior
to imposing the sentence, the court shall inform the
defendant that (a) each reported criminal conviction
that is not validly challenged by the defendant is
defendant’s prior, counseled, validly entered,
criminal conviction, and (b) a challenge to any
reported prior criminal conviction not made by
defendant before sentence is imposed may not
thereafter, absent good cause, be raised to attack the
court’s sentence.  Step four, with respect to each
reported prior criminal conviction that the defendant
challenges, the HRE [(Hawaii Rules of Evidence)] shall
apply, and the court shall expressly decide before the
sentencing whether the State satisfied its burden of
proving to the reasonable satisfaction of the court
that the opposite of the defendant’s challenge is
true.  Step five, if the court is aware of the
defendant’s prior uncounseled or otherwise invalid
criminal conviction(s), it shall not impose or enhance
a prison sentence prior to expressly stating on the
record that it did not consider it or them as a basis
 for the imposition or enhancement of a prison
sentence.
 
Id. at 447, 918 P.2d at 254 (emphasis added).
 
The Sinagoga framework is applicable to this case
 
because this is a case where “ordinary sentencing procedures are
 
applicable and there [was] a possibility that the court may use
 [Kong’s] prior conviction(s) as a basis for the imposition or
 enhancement of a prison sentence.” Id. at 447, 918 P.2d at 254. 
9
 This court adopted and applied the Sinagoga test in Heggland , with 
one modification, discussed infra.  118 Hawai 'i at 439-41, 193 P.3d at 355-57. 
-22­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Here, step one of the Sinagoga framework was satisfied because
 
Kong was provided with a copy of the PSI report, which contained
 a list of his prior convictions. Kong was then required to
 “respond with a good faith challenge on the record stating, as to
 each challenged conviction, the basis or bases for the
 challenge.” Id. 
However, Kong did not avail himself of the opportunity 
to controvert the PSI report, which he now argues listed convictions that were allegedly dismissed. At the April 7, 2011 sentencing hearing, Kong’s counsel stated, “We have received the [PSI] report. There are no changes at this time.” At the continued sentencing hearing on April 11, 2011, Kong’s counsel simply indicated that Kong did not want to stipulate to the contents of the PSI report. However, neither Kong nor his counsel objected to any of the convictions listed in the PSI report. See Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 432 n.4, 193 P.3d at 348 
n.4 (noting that the defendant must “respond with a good faith
 challenge on the record stating, as to each challenged
 conviction, the basis or bases for the challenge.” (emphasis
 added)); cf. State v. Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 55, 760 P.2d 670, 675
 (1988) (“Fairness to the trial court impels a recitation in full
 of the grounds supporting an objection to the introduction of
 inadmissible matters. Otherwise, the court would be denied the
 opportunity to give the objection adequate consideration and rule
 correctly.”). Because Kong failed to raise a good faith
 
-23­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
challenge to his convictions in the circuit court, the circuit 
court did not err in relying on the PSI report.10 Sinagoga, 81 
Hawai'i at 445, 918 P.2d at 252 (“[I]f the presentence report 
states that the defendant has a prior criminal conviction, and the defendant does not respond to that report with a good faith challenge on the record . . . that prior criminal conviction is reliable for all sentencing purposes.”). 
Nevertheless, Kong argues that Sinagoga is inapplicable 
because this court limited the applicability of the Sinagoga framework in State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i 219, 74 P.3d 575 
(2003), and Heggland. In Veikoso, this court considered whether a defendant may, in trial proceedings on a subsequent offense, collaterally attack a prior conviction that is the result of an allegedly invalid plea. 102 Hawai' i at 224-27, 74 P.3d at 581­
83. There, the defendant was convicted of habitually driving
 
under the influence (DUI) of intoxicating liquor, an offense
 which requires that the defendant be convicted of three or more
 prior DUI offenses within a specific period. Id. at 220, 219
 
P.3d at 576. The defendant sought to dismiss the habitual DUI
 charge on the ground that his prior, predicate DUI convictions
 were invalid because he had not received a proper colloquy prior
 
10
 In this case, the Sinagoga analysis ceased at step two because the 
defendant failed to raise a challenge to the convictions listed in the PSI
report.  Because Kong failed to challenge the PSI report, the circuit courthad no reason to proceed with the next steps in the Sinagoga  analysis.   See, 
e.g., Heggland, 118 Hawai 'i at 439-41, 193 P.3d at 355-57 (not reaching steps
three through five after concluding that defendant failed to raise a good-faith challenge to his prior conviction under Sinagoga).  
-24­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to entering his plea. Id. The defendant’s motion to dismiss was
 
denied, and he subsequently pled guilty to habitual DUI. 
On appeal, this court noted that none of the
 
defendant’s prior DUI convictions had been vacated at the time he
 
pled guilty to habitual DUI. Id. at 223, 74 P.3d at 579. This
 
court concluded that constitutional challenges to the validity of
 prior convictions must be raised either in a direct appeal or
 collaterally through a HRPP Rule 40 proceeding, rather than in
 proceedings on a subsequent offense. Id. at 226, 74 P.3d at 583. 
In a footnote, this court “recognize[d] the tension” between its
 holding and Sinagoga. Id. at 227 n.8, 74 P.3d at 583 n.8. This
 
court acknowledged that Sinagoga allowed a defendant to challenge
 three types of convictions in a PSI report, i.e., those that are
 “(1) uncounseled, (2) otherwise invalidly entered, and/or (3) not
 against the defendant.” Id. (emphasis in original) (brackets
 
omitted). This court stated, “Because the ‘otherwise invalidly
 entered’ language in Sinagoga may be construed as permitting
 collateral attacks whenever the validity of a conviction is
 challenged, we emphasize, in light of our holding today, that
 this language should be disregarded.” Id. at 227 n.8, 74 P.3d at
 
583 n.8.
 
Subsequently, in Heggland, this court adopted and 
applied the Sinagoga test to determine whether the defendant had raised a good-faith challenge to his prior conviction out of state on the ground the conviction was uncounseled. 118 Hawai' i 
-25­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 439-41, 193 P.3d at 355-57. This court acknowledged the bases 
for challenging a prior conviction recognized by Sinagoga and modified by Veikoso (i.e., the conviction being uncounseled or not against the defendant). Id. at 440-42, 193 P.3d at 356-58. 
However, this court concluded that the defendant had not, in the trial court, raised a good faith challenge on either of these bases, and instead affirmatively stipulated to his prior conviction. Id. Accordingly, this court concluded that the 
defendant’s arguments were without merit. Id. In a footnote, 
this court also quoted the ICA opinion in Heggland for the proposition that Veikoso had modified Sinagoga to “limit a defendant’s ability to collaterally attack a prior conviction[.]” Id. at 440, 193 P.3d at 356 (quoting State v. Heggland, 116 Hawai'i 376, 383 n.7, 173 P.3d 523, 530 n.7 (App. 2007)). 
Neither Veikoso nor Heggland supports Kong’s assertion
 
that Sinagoga is inapplicable in the instant case. First, claims
 that a conviction has been vacated would appear to fall within
 the provision allowing challenges for convictions that are “not
 against the defendant,” rather than those that are “otherwise
 invalidly entered.” Indeed, a conviction that has been vacated
 is void, see Black’s Law Dictionary 1688 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
 “vacate”), and thus is not a conviction “against the defendant.” 
Although Kong appears to argue that convictions “not
 
against the defendant” are only those in which identity is
 challenged, he cites no authority for this proposition. 
-26­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Moreover, there is no logical reason for requiring a defendant to 
raise an identity challenge pursuant to the Sinagoga framework, but relieving a defendant of this burden for convictions that are vacated. Indeed, in both instances, “the defendant, more than anyone else, knows whether or not his or her prior criminal conviction was . . . irrelevant.” Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i at 445, 
918 P.2d at 252. 
Second, the sole purpose behind the limitation on 
Sinagoga set forth in Veikoso is not implicated in the instant case. That purpose was to prohibit collateral attacks on the validity of a prior conviction in proceedings for a subsequent offense. Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i at 227 n.8, 74 P.3d at 583 n.8. 
Here, Kong claims that his convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138 have already been “vacated, remanded, and dismissed[.]” Accordingly, this court’s concerns regarding collateral attacks are not pertinent in the instant case. 
Moreover, nothing in Veikoso or Heggland indicates that 
this court intended to relieve a defendant of the burden of challenging prior convictions in these circumstances. See id.; 
see also Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 440, 193 P.3d at 356. Indeed, 
doing so would have the effect of requiring the State to prove the validity of each of the defendant’s prior convictions at the time of sentencing or run the risk of having the sentence vacated on appeal, a proposition which this court has already rejected. Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 441, 193 P.3d at 357 (“[T]he circuit 
-27­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court misinterpreted the five-step procedure outlined in Sinagoga
 
by requiring the prosecution to prove the validity of Heggland’s
 prior conviction in the absence of a good-faith challenge by
 Heggland.”). 
Accordingly, Kong was required to raise “a good faith 
challenge on the record stating, as to each challenged conviction, the basis or bases for the challenge.” Heggland, 118 
Hawai'i at 432 n.4, 193 P.3d at 348 n.4. Because he did not do 
so, the circuit court did not err in relying on the PSI report.
11 
Nor should this court utilize plain error review to 
address this issue despite Kong’s failure to raise it in the circuit court. Although this court “may recognize plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant,” Staley, 91 Hawai' i at 282, 982 P.2d at 911 (citation 
omitted); see HRPP Rule 52(b), the alleged inaccuracy in the PSI report does not rise to the level of plain error because the record indicates that the circuit court based its imposition of a consecutive sentence on Kong’s “extensive” criminal record as a whole and not solely on the specific convictions that Kong alleges are invalid (Cr. No. 92-0138). In addition, the PSI report, which the circuit court considered in imposing its 
11
 The dissent argues that the State and probation office would be 
“absolve[d]” of accountability and the defendant would “exclusively” bear the
responsibility of ascertaining the accuracy of his or her criminal record. Dissenting opinion at 28.  However, under the holding of Sinagoga , 81 Hawai 'i 
at 446, 918 P.2d at 253, once the defendant raises  a good faith argument
before the sentencing court, the prosecution still has the ultimate burden of“proving to the reasonable satisfaction of the court that the opposite of thedefendant’s challenge is true.” 
-28­        
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sentence, contained all of Kong’s prior charges and convictions
 
and not just those in Cr. No. 92-0138.12 Under these
 
circumstances –- particularly where Kong was given ample time to
 review the PSI report, where he or his counsel failed to provide
 a good faith challenge on the record stating the bases for
 challenging the convictions listed in the PSI report, and where
 there was sufficient evidence to support the circuit court’s
 determination that Kong had an “extensive” record of criminality
 -- it cannot be said that Kong’s substantial rights were affected
 by the circuit court’s use of the PSI report.
13
 
C.	 Kong voluntarily and intelligently self-terminated from the
Drug Court program, and waived his right to a termination
hearing
 
Finally, Kong asserts that he did not voluntarily and
 
intelligently waive his right to a termination hearing. 
Specifically, Kong asserts that the circuit court’s colloquy
 
12 The PSI report also indicates that Kong was convicted of seven
 
felony burglaries.  Thus, even excluding the burglary conviction in Cr. No.
92-0138, the circuit court would have been correct in noting that Kong’s
“extensive record” included “six burglary convictions.”  Although the vacated
convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138 would mean that Kong was convicted of 8 total
felonies, as opposed to the ten noted by the circuit court, the PSI report
nonetheless contained sufficient information for the circuit court to
 
reasonably conclude that Kong had a history of “extensive criminality.”    
13 The dissent argues that Kong’s due process rights were violated 
when the circuit court sentenced him using the convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138. 
Dissenting opinion at 34.  Kong, however, never asserted in his applicationthat his due process rights were violated by the circuit court’s use of theconvictions listed in the PSI report.  See Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate
Procedure Rule 40.1(d)(1) (“Questions not presented according to thisparagraph will be disregarded.”).  Nevertheless, and as explained supra, thecircuit court based its imposition of a consecutive sentence on Kong’s“extensive” criminal record as a whole and not on the specific convictionsthat Kong alleges are invalid.  Thus, on the record before us, it cannot besaid that Kong’s due process rights were violated. 
-29­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prior to his self-termination at the February 3, 2011 hearing was
 
not sufficient. Contrary to Kong’s argument, and as set forth
 below, under the totality of the circumstances Kong voluntarily
 and intelligently self-terminated from the Drug Court program.
 
In State v. Friedman, this court concluded that “[a] 
waiver is the knowing, intelligent, and voluntary relinquishment of a known right.” 93 Hawai' i 63, 68, 996 P.2d 268, 273 (2000) 
(citation omitted). Generally, the court will conduct a colloquy to ensure that the defendant’s waiver of his or her rights is knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently made. State v. Kaulia, 
128 Hawai' i 479, 495-96, 291 P.3d 377, 393-94 (2013). To 
determine whether a waiver is voluntary and intelligent, “this court will look to the totality of facts and circumstances of each particular case.”
14 Friedman, 93 Hawai' i at 68-69, 996 P.2d 
at 273-74. 
In this case, Kong was advised of his right to a
 
termination hearing, confirmed his understanding of that right,
 and repeatedly stated his decision to self-terminate from the
 Drug Court program. Specifically, at the January 26, 2011
 hearing, the circuit court informed Kong that he had a right to a
 termination hearing, at which the State would be required to
 present “an appropriate basis for terminating [him] from the drug
 
14
 This court has not previously determined that a personal on-the­
record colloquy is required when a defendant decides to self-terminate from
the Drug Court program.  We assume, without deciding, that such a colloquy is
 required. 
-30­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court program.” Kong was advised that he had a right to have his
 
attorney present at a termination hearing and to contradict the
 facts presented by the State. He also was advised that,
 following the hearing, the circuit court would determine whether
 he would remain in the program or would be terminated. 
Kong also was advised of the result of self-terminating
 
from the Drug Court program, or of being terminated following a
 termination hearing. Specifically, Kong was advised that his
 case would proceed to a stipulated facts trial “where it’s almost
 virtually certain, unless your attorney filed any
 constitutionally based motions on your behalf, it’s virtually
 certain that you will be found guilty as charged.”
15 During the
 
colloquy, Kong indicated several times that he understood that he
 had a right to a termination hearing and understood the
 consequences of self-termination. 
Approximately one week later, on February 3, 2011, Kong
 
again indicated that he wanted to self-terminate from the
 program. Following a brief colloquy in which Kong confirmed that
 his mind was clear and that he was not taking any drugs or
 medication, the circuit court accepted Kong’s self-termination
 from the program. 
15
 The circuit court previously found that Kong knowingly,
 
voluntarily and intelligently waived various trial rights upon his admission
to the Drug Court program, and Kong does not raise any arguments with respect
to these rights.  The only issue on appeal is whether Kong validly waived his
right to a termination hearing.    
-31­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although the extensive advisements regarding the right
 
to a termination hearing did not occur at the February 3, 2011
 
hearing, the fact remains that Kong was advised of his rights,
 acknowledged he understood those rights, and repeatedly, in two
 hearings over the course of eight days, reaffirmed his desire to
 self-terminate. Under these circumstances, Kong voluntarily and
 intelligently self-terminated from the Drug Court program. 
Accordingly, Kong’s self-termination was valid.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the March 1, 2013
 
judgment of the ICA, which affirmed the circuit court’s April 11,
 2011 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 Samuel G. MacRoberts 
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Bert I. Ayabe
 Renee Ishikawa Delizo
 
for respondent 
-32­