***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Respondent/Plaintiff
-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
KENTARU KRISTOPHER STONE, also known as KENTARO K. STONE, 
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant  
 
 
SCWC-17-0000078 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000078; 1PC161000543)  
 
JUNE 15, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I.  Introduction  
 This appeal arises from a jury trial in the First Circuit 
of the Circuit Court (“circuit court”)1 in which Kentaru 
Kristopher Stone (“Stone”) was convicted by a jury on the charge 
of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree.   
                         
1  The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000078
15-JUN-2020
08:38 AM***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
2 
  At around 3:45 a.m. on April 5, 2016, Stone was approached 
at Ala Moana Beach Park by Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) 
Officer Douglas Korenic II (“Officer Korenic”) .  Stone was  
seated on a picnic table with various items strewn around him, 
including one or more identification cards (“IDs”).  Based on 
discovery provided by the State of Hawai ʻi (“State” ), Officer 
Korenic’s testimony was anticipated to be that he approached 
Stone for a park closure
 or rules violation, that Stone would 
not provide information regarding his identity, and that Stone 
then threw a small “baggie” containing methamphetamine, which 
landed on the picnic  table.  
Based on provided discovery, defense counsel’s theory of 
the case during opening statement was that, because the only 
found property report related to an  iPhone, the other items on 
the picnic table shown in photographs  belonged to Stone  and 
included Stone ’s ID.  Defense counsel theorized that Officer 
Korenic’s testimony that  he had been unable to ascertain Stone’s 
identity would therefore be untruthful.  The defense theory was 
also that Officer Korenic had searched Stone’s bag and had 
strewn Stone’s belongings all over the table, as shown in  the 
photographic exhibits;  that Officer Koren ic must have planted 
the methamphetamine baggie  after rifling through Stone’s bag or 
that the methamphetamine baggie was already there but did not 
belong to Stone;  and that Officer Korenic did not seek  a search ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
3 (continued. . .)  
 warrant for the bag  because, based on his search, he already 
knew there was no drug paraphernalia therein.    
During trial, however, Officer Korenic, who was the only 
witness to Stone’s alleged methamphetamine possession, testified 
in cross-examination that in addition to the f ound property 
report regarding the iPhone, he had generated additional found 
property reports as to the other miscellaneous i tems on the 
picnic table, including other people’s IDs.  He also testified 
the IDs and other items on the picnic table did not belong to 
Stone.   
The circuit court therefore called a mid-trial recess .  The 
State procured and the defense reviewed  additional police 
reports referenced in Officer Korenic’s  incident report that had 
not been produced in discovery.   The additional reports 
referenced in the  incident report were , however, completely 
unrelated to Stone’s  case.  Yet, in his resumed testimony , 
Officer Korenic persisted in his testimony that additional found 
property reports existed pertaining to Stone's case.   
The jury found Stone guilty of promoting a dangerous drug 
in the third degree.  
Stone moved for a new trial pursuant to Hawai ʻi Rules of 
Penal Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 33 (2012) ,2 arguing he was deprived 
                         
2  HRPP Rule 33 states in relevant part: “A motion for a new trial shall 
be made within 10 days after verdict or finding of guilty or within such ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
4 
 of a fair trial because he 
had expect ed no dispute that the ID  
on the picnic table belonged to him.  This was because discovery 
had not indicated items other than the iPhone belonged to 
others.  On December 27, 2016, the circuit court denied Stone’s  
motion for new trial,  sentenced  Stone to a five-year term of 
imprisonment, and entered its judgment on January 18, 2017.   
 Stone appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(“ICA”), arguing that  the circuit court erred in denying his 
motion for new trial.  He asserted he met this court ’s four-part 
test for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence.  See 
State v. McNulty
, 60 Haw. 259, 588 P.2d 438 (1978), overruled on 
other grounds by Raines v. State, 79 Hawai ʻi 219, 9
00 P.2d 1286 
(1995).3  He also asserted he met the ICA's four-part test for a 
new trial based on false testimony from a material prosecution 
witness.  See State v. Teves , 5 Haw. App. 90, 679 P.2d 136 
                                                                              
(. . .continued ) 
further time as the court may fix during the 10 -day period.  The finding of 
guilty may be entered in writing or orally on the record. ” 
 
3  In McNulty, in relevant part, this court established a four -part test 
for granting motions for new trial based on newly discovered evidence:  
 
A motion for new trial based on newly discovered evidence 
will be granted only if all of the following requirements 
have been satisfied: (1) the evidence has been discovered  
after trial; (2) such evidence could not have been 
discovered before or at trial through the exercise of due 
diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues and 
not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of 
impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as 
would probably change the result of a later trial.  
 
60 Haw. at 267- 68, 588 P.2d at 445.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
5 
 (1984).4  Stone also argued  his right to a fair trial was 
violated. 
In its November 27, 2019 summary disposition order, the ICA 
rejected Stone’s arguments , ruling the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in den ying the motion for new trial because 
Stone failed to satisfy the McNulty and Teves tests.  See State 
v. Stone, CAAP-17-0 000078, 2019 WL 6359162  (App. Nov. 27, 2019) 
(SDO).  The ICA did not address this court’s o pinion in Birano 
v. State, 143 Hawaiʻi 163, 182, 426 P.3d 387, 406 (2018), which 
was issued after Stone’s 2017 reply brief , but before its SDO.   
 We hold the ICA erred in affirming the circuit court’s 
denial of the motion for new trial because Stone satisfied the 
Teves test.  Because the Teves test governs the circumstances of 
this case, we need not and do not address whether Stone 
satisfied the McNulty  test.   
 We also hold Stone’s right to a fair trial was violated 
because, as the ICA correctly noted, Officer Korenic testified 
                         
4  In Teves, the ICA set out a four-part test for granting a new trial 
based on a prosecution witness giving false testimony at trial:  
 
We hold that upon a proper and timely motion under Rule 33, 
HRPP, a new trial must be granted by the trial court when 
it decides that (1) it is reasonably satisfied that the 
testimony at trial of a material prosecution witness is 
false; (2) defendant and his agents did not discover the 
falseness of the testimony until after the trial; (3) the 
late discovery is not due to a lack of due diligence by 
defendant or his agent; and (4) the false testimony is not 
harmless because there is a reasonable possibility that it 
contributed to the conviction.  
 
5 Haw. App. at 96, 679 P.2d at 141 (footnote omitted).   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
6 (continued. . .)  
 falsely concerning the 
existence of other f ound property 
reports.  As there is a reasonable possibility the false 
testimony contributed to Stone ’s conviction, however, the ICA 
erred in ruling it harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s February 5, 2020 judgment 
on appeal and the circuit court’s January 18, 2017 judgment of 
conviction and sentence, and remand this case to the circu it 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
II. Factual and p rocedural background 
A. Circuit court proceedings 
 1. Charge and pretrial 
 On April 6, 2016, Stone was charged via felony information 
with promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree in violation 
of HRS § 712-1243 (2014).5   
                         
5  HRS § 712- 1243 states: “(1) A person commits the o ffense of promoting a 
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any 
dangerous drug in any amount.  (2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third 
degree is a class C felony.”  
 
 HRS § 712- 1240 (2014) states in relevant part:  “‘Dangerous drugs’  means 
any substance or immediate precursor defined or specified as a ‘Schedule I 
substance’ or a ‘Schedule II substance’ by chapter 329, or a substance 
specified in section 329 -18(c)(14), except marijuana or marijuana 
concentrate.” 
 
 HRS § 329- 16 (2010) provides in relevant part:  
 
(a) The controlled substances listed in this section are 
included in schedule II.  
 
 . . . . 
 
(e) Stimulants.  Any material, compound, mixture, or 
preparation which contains any quantity of the following ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
7 
  
The State provided five HPD reports to the defense in 
discovery.  These reports, identified as Court’s Exhibits A 
through E, were included in the record for appellate purposes 
only.  Court’s Exhibit A is Officer Korenic’s  April 5, 2016 
four-page incident re port numbered 16 -136877, which listed six 
“Related Reports/Comments” numbered 16 -121055, 16 -121057, 16 -
121058, 16-121059, 16 -121060, and 16 -121061 (“six relat ed 
reports”) on its face page, and two related reports numbered 16 -
136880 (park closure) and 16 -136878 (found property) in the 
narrative of the report .  Court’s Exhibit B  is Officer Koren ic’s 
follow-up report numbered 16 -136877.  Court’s Exhibit C is 
Officer Korenic ’s April 5, 2016 two -page incid ent report 
numbered 16-136880, which  listed related report s numbered  
16-136877 (Court’s Exhibit A) and 16 -136878 (Court’s Exhibit D ).  
Court’s Exhibit D is an April 5, 2016 found property report 
numbered 16-136878 that lists an iPhone.   Court’s Exhibit E is a 
one-page handwritten found property report (or receipt) numbered 
16-136878, listing only an iPhone (Court’s Exhibits D and E are 
collectively referred to as the “iPhone Found Property Report ”).  
                                                                              
(. . .continued ) 
substances having a danger or probable danger associated 
with a stimulant effect on the central nervous system:  
 
 . . . . 
 
 (2) Any substance which contains any quantity of  
     methamphetamine, including its salts, isomers,     
     and salts of isomers[.]  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
8 
  
2. Jury trial 
 The circuit court held a jury trial on October 27 and 28, 
2016.     
  a . Opening statements  
In its opening statement, the State described what the 
evidence would show:  
Knowingly possess.  Ladies and gentlemen, what the 
evidence is going to show us through the course of this 
trial is that on April 5th, 2016, the defendant knew that 
he possessed methamphetamine, and that he tried to hide it.   
On April 5th, 2016 at about 3:45 in the morning, 
Officer Douglas Korenic was on patrol, and we're going to 
meet him during this trial and he ’s going to tell us about 
how that day he was patrolling the Ala Moana Beach Park 
here in Honolulu, State of Hawaii,  and at that time he 
observed this defendant sitting at a park bench.  Well, not 
at a park bench, he was on the bench.  He was sitting on 
the table, on the picnic table, with his feet on the bench.  
There’s things on the table.   
And Officer Korenic is going to tell us how he 
approached the defendant.  He started asking him some 
questions and he ’s talking to the defendant, when all of a 
sudden the defendant makes a  arm gesture.  He uses his arm 
and he flicks away a small baggie, which Officer Korenic 
knows and recognizes from his training and experience as a 
Honolulu Police Department officer, it contains a white 
crystalline substance, and he recognizes this substance to 
possibly be crystal methamphetamine.  
 
. . . . 
 
And ladies and gentlemen, what the evide
nce is going 
to show you is that that substance was, in fact, crystal 
methamphetamine, and even more so, that on April 5th, 2016, 
this defendant knew he had it, and then he tried to hide 
it.  Thank you.  
 
In her opening statement, defense counsel explained the 
defense theory of the case:  
Now, at 3:45 in the morning, at Ala Moana Beach Park, 
I mean, it’s still dark, it’s not the safest place to be at 
that time.  You will see a picture, and in that picture it 
will show Mr. Stone’s belongings, including his 
identification, various debit cards, credit cards, store 
cards, strewn all over the table.  Use your reason and ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
9 
 common sense.  Would anybody have all of their property 
thrown all over the table at 3:45 in Ala Moana Beach Park 
all by himself?  He’s not the big gest guy.  You can see 
him. 
 The evidence will show that the very people charged 
with protecting us planted –-
 well, rifled through his 
belongings, and who knows, the baggie might have been there 
before, but it was not in Kentaru Stone’s possession.  He 
did not know it was there.  
 I ask you to pay specific attention to those pictures 
because the pictures are neutral; they don’t take any 
sides, they just show what is.  
 And the evidence will show that Mr. Stone, he 
probably upset the officers.  He has difficulty in hearing 
and in speaking, so when Officer Korenic approached him and 
asked for his identification, he probably didn’t respond.  
But Officer Korenic will testify that he was on bike 
patrol.  He came across Mr. Stone at approximately 3:45 in 
the morning.  He started asking him for his identification, 
and at approximately 10 minutes later, or 3:55 in the 
morning, that’s when he observes Mr. Stone throwing the 
baggie. 
Now, the baggie is the only evidence in this case, 
but I’d also take you –- I’d also ask you to look closely 
at those pictures, because on that bench table there’s a 
clearly visible Hawaii driver’s license with Mr. Stone’s –- 
identifying Mr. Stone, so if the Officer was questioning 
him on his identification for ten minutes, when his 
identification was clearly in view, because the ID is a lot 
bigger and you can see the scale of it, it’s a lot bigger 
than the little plastic baggie, which is approximately 1 
and a half inches by 1 and 1/4 inches, so, I mean, he 
would’ve surely seen his identificat ion on the table.  
And as you hear the evidence, also consider that 
after recovering the baggie –- I mean, ‘cause there were 
other items, there was a –- the bag.  The police officers 
did not request a search warrant to see if there were other 
drug paraphernalia or implementations.  They did not 
recover a lighter, they did not recover a scraper, they did 
not recover anything else related to that drug 
paraphernalia.  
And ask yourself why they didn’t get a search 
warrant.  Because they had already rifled through  his 
stuff, they knew that there wasn’t anything more, and 
Kentaru will testify to that.[6] 
 At the end of this case, there will be reasonable 
doubt, and we’ll ask that you find Mr. Stone not guilty.  
 
Thus, based on the discovery provided, defense counsel’s 
theory of the case during opening statement was that because the 
iPhone Found Property Report was the only found property report 
                         
6  Stone ultimately decided not to testify.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
10 
 produced in discovery, the other items on the picnic table shown 
in the photographic exhibits, which
 included an  ID, belonged to 
Stone, and that Officer Korenic would therefore not be 
testifying truthfully by testifying he was unable to ascertain 
Stone’s identity, when Stone’ s ID was visible right in front of 
him.  The defense theory was also that Officer Korenic had 
searched Stone’s bag and had strewn Stone’s belongings all over 
the table, as shown in the photographic exhibits, that Officer 
Korenic must have planted the methamphetamine baggie  after 
rifling through Stone’s bag or that the methamphetamine baggie 
was already there but did not belong to Stone, and that Officer 
Korenic did not seek a search warrant of the bag  because he 
already knew there was no drug paraphernalia contained therein 
because he had already searched Stone’s bag.     
  b . Officer Korenic’s te stimony 
 On October 27, 2016, Officer Korenic testified as follows. 
 On April 5, 2016, Officer Korenic was assigned to patrol 
Honolulu parks for park closure and rules violations.  At 
approximately 3:45 a .m., he was walking along the edge of the 
Ala Moana Beach Park when he saw a male, later identified as 
Stone, sitting on top of a picnic table approximately sixty feet 
inside the park boundary .  To address the park closure 
violation, he approached Stone, who was faced towards him.  
While approaching Stone, he  saw many  items on Stone’s lap and on ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
11 
 the picnic table, and  Stone was “[j]ust touching them, and I 
imagine he was maybe going through them or looking for 
something[.] ”  The area was well lit by lights from the walkway.  
 Officer Korenic stopped approximately six feet away from 
Stone.  Because the HPD typically issued  citations for park 
closure violations, but because it wa s also an arrestable 
offense, Officer Korenic asked Stone for his information.  Stone 
responded that he did not have identification, and when Officer 
Korenic asked “what his information was,” Stone stated he had 
the right to remain silent.  After ten minutes of trying to get 
Stone’s information , Officer Korenic told Stone that he would be 
arrested  if he did not provide his identity.  Stone remained 
uncooperative.   
 Stone then threw “like a press seal type baggie, maybe an 
inch by an inch, maybe inch and a half at the largest, with his 
right hand, ” which landed to Stone’s right on the picnic table.  
Inside the baggie was “a white crystalline substance that, due 
to [his] training and experience, ” Officer Korenic  “recognize[d]  
to be –- [] a narcotic.”  He clearly saw the baggie  because the 
area was well lit by lights from the walkway and his flashlight.  
Officer Korenic placed Stone under arrest,  and the baggie stayed 
on the table throughout  the entire investigation.   
 Officer Korenic identified State’s Exhibits 14  through 17, 
which were then admitted into evidence and published to the ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
12 
 jury.  
State’s Exhibit 16 is a photograph of the top of the 
picnic table with various IDs, membership cards, bank cards, and 
a bag strewn about on its surface.7  Stone was sitting in the 
area without  items in State’s Exhibit 16 .  Officer Korenic 
verified ownership of th e items depicted in State's Exhibit 16 
through a “found property policy ”; the items did not belong to 
Stone.  N one of the individuals who owned these items were 
present in the park, none of those individuals approached the 
table when he saw Stone, and “they had to come later .”   
 On cross -examination, Officer Korenic testified he could 
not have charged Stone for being in possession of other people’s 
confidential personal information because Stone was not in 
possession of the items on the picnic table , as they were on the 
table.  He generated multiple found property reports for th ose 
items, as he had been trained in the academy to detail 
everything recovered.  When defense counsel ask ed about the 
iPhone Found Property Report being the only such report,  Officer 
Korenic claimed there were several other f ound property reports 
for the other recovered items.   
 Defense counsel then showed Officer Korenic the five HPD 
reports that had been provided to the defense in discovery.  
                         
7  State’s Exhibit 14 is a photograph of the picnic table in relation to 
the sidewalk.  State’s Exhibit 15 is a photograph of the park bench at a 
closer view.  State’s Exhibit 17 is a photograph of the methamphetam ine 
baggie placed next to a penny for comparative size.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
13 
 After reviewing the report
s, Officer Korenic stated,  “There is a 
report number that’s not here.”  
The circuit court excused the jury, then held a bench 
conference regarding Officer Korenic’s testimony that t here was 
a missing report
.  Defense counsel stated that it appeared 
Officer Korenic was testifying to discovery that had not been 
provided to the defense.  T he State responded, “[T] he defense is 
in receipt of all reports received by the State from the police 
department.  In reviewing the reports as turned over, there is 
no reference to other report numbers.”  Defense counsel  then 
moved for mistrial:  
And generally in this situation, my understanding is if 
there are reports generated out of the same incident, there 
should be connecting reports referred to in the discovery, 
and there are not any. 
So I don’t know if the officer is deliberately trying 
to fabricate something at this point or hiding additional 
reports, I don’t know, but at this point, you know, we’d 
rely to our detriment in terms of questioning the officer.  
I mean, I feel  compelled to move for a mistrial.  I mean, I 
don’t think the officer’s been up front in –- or I mean HPD 
has been up front with disclosing everything to the defense 
at this point.  
 
 The circuit court did not rule on the oral motion for 
mistrial, instead stating:  
THE COURT: I mean, I understand your position. I ’m not -- I 
don’t think the record’ s there yet.  I think I need more 
information.   We can put the witness on the stand outside 
the presence of the jury, and you can try and establish a 
record for what you ’re arguing.   Right now we ’re just 
speculating.  He could just be wrong, we don ’t know.  I 
mean, I think --  personally I ’d like to know why does he 
think there ’s a report that's not here, and follow that 
trail wherever it leads.  
 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]:   Well, first, the State does 
acknowledge that usually if there is a connecting report, 
there’s a reference to it, the State would receive it, and ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
14 
 then turn it over in discovery.  All reports received by 
the State have been provided to the defense.  
 
THE COURT: I understand what you’re saying, [deputy 
prosecuting attorney], but the witness has said something 
that’s concerning, and I need to get to the bottom of it.  
 
 
Officer Korenic was brought back for defense counsel to 
conduct voir dire.  Defense counsel a sked, “So in the report 
that you submitted for this case, there is no mention of any 
connecting reports, correct?”  Having reviewed Court’s Exhibits 
A-E, Officer Korenic responded, “Incorrect,”  stating there were 
six related reports listed on the front page of the incident 
report.  Because the State had not receive d the six related 
reports from HPD, the circuit court recessed for the State to 
procure them for defense review.  
 During the mid- trial recess, the State procured, and 
defense counsel reviewed, the six related reports.  T he State 
indicated the missing related reports were irrelevant because 
they referred to another incident with another defendant.  
Defense counsel responded : 
Just so that the jury is not left with the belief that it 
pertains to my client, I would like the opportunity to at 
least clarify with the officer and –- because he had 
related that there were other reports that were, I guess, 
created with respect to the found property, and that these 
are not them basically.  
 
 . . . . 
 
And these are not them, and they don’t have to deal with my 
client. 
 
 
Upon resuming cross- examination,  Officer Korenic, having 
reviewed the six related reports procured during the mid- trial ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
15 
 recess, admitted th ey had nothing to do with Stone.  With 
respect to whether there were additional f ound property reports, 
however, the following exchange occurred: 
Q.  Also in your report, the last page of your report, 
there is a section entitled Related Reports, correct?  
A.  Yes, ma’ am.  
Q.  And there are two report numbers under that report, 
correct?  
A.  Can I see it?  (Reviewing.)   Yes, ma’ am.  
Q.  And those reports are for Park Closure under 16 -136880 
and Found Property, 16- 136878, correct?  
A.  Yes, ma’ am.  
Q.  And the f ound property report is the report that I had 
previously shown you, correct?  
A.  Yes, ma’ am, I remember that.  
Q.  And the only item that was detailed in that report is 
the iPhone, correct?  
A.  Yes, ma’ am.  
Q.  Other than that, there are no other found property 
reports in your –-  
A.  That’s correct.  
Q.  So there’ s no other itemization of any items that were 
recovered in your report, correct?   
A.  Not in that report, no.  
 
(Emphasis added.)  Thus, Officer Korenic ’s testimony i ndicated 
there were other found property reports containing itemization 
of the items.  Officer Korenic also conceded there was no 
mention in his report that Stone had other people’s  IDs around 
him.  
 Despite seeing other people’s  IDs around Stone, Officer 
Korenic did not obtain a search warrant to search Stone’s 
belongings.  He also did not obtain a search warrant to search 
for drug related paraphernalia
 after he saw the methamphetamine 
baggie.  There were no drug paraphernalia items on the picnic 
table, and there was
 no mention of drug paraphernalia, such as a ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
16 
 scraper, straw, lighter, or pipe, in his report; the only 
indication of a 
presence of drugs was the baggie.  
 
On redirect examination, Officer Korenic clarifi ed that the 
six related reports were not referenced in the narrative of his 
incident report, and only two related reports (park closure and 
iPhone Found Property Report ) were referenced in the narrative.   
Although he was trained to document things like his observations 
or the elements of a crime, there were times he did not document 
some details, either through oversight or mistake.  In this 
case, he had testified about what he did and observed from 
memory.  He also answered in the affirmative when the State 
said, “I think it would be fair to say at this point that maybe 
there’s some
 things that your report had that were mistakes.”   
He did not, however, correct  his previous testimony regarding 
the existence of other f ound property reports.   
 On recross- examination,  Officer Korenic stated there was 
“some form of ID” in State’s Exhibit 16 and  he did not document 
that it was not Stone’s ID and did not identify whose ID it was.   
  c. Officer Paclib’s testimony  
 HPD Officer Nichole Paclib (“Officer Paclib”) , a bike 
detail officer, testified as follows. 
 On April 5, 2016, at approximately 4:15 a .m., she responded 
to an incident at the Ala Moana Beach Park.  Upon arriv al, 
Officer Paclib saw  Stone sitting on the picnic table,  who was ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
17 
  with Officer Korenic.  
Officer Korenic informed her Stone was 
being arrested; he  pointed to the baggie on the picnic table and 
instructed her to recover it.  Officer Paclib placed the baggie 
into a manila envelope and sealed it with red evidence tape; she 
also took pictures of the scene.   
On cross-examination, Officer Paclib testified that had she 
seen IDs or other cards not belonging to Stone, it would have 
raised a “red flag” and she would have documented those 
circumstances in her police report “[i]f it was pertaining to 
the case[.] ”  She explained there were some personal items 
around the methamphetamine baggie, but she could not recall 
exactly what they  were.  Her report did not state anything about 
IDs.  She did not see what transpired between Stone and Officer 
Korenic before her arrival.  
On re-direct examination, Officer Paclib stated she did not 
spend time looking at the other items on the picnic table 
because her assignment was to recover the methamphetamine 
baggie.  
  d . Other  testimony  
 The State’s other witnesses testified as  to the chain of 
custody and identification of the substance in the baggie, which  
are not at issue in this case.    
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
18 
  
 e. Closing arguments and verdict 
In its closing argument, the State argued that whether 
Officer Korenic made mistakes i n the incident report did not 
matter: 
Now, the standard we know is beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  And you might be wondering in your mind, well, in 
order to know that the defendant was in possession of the 
baggie, we have to rely on Officer Korenic’s  testimony.  
And we do know that, you know, he made some mistakes in 
that report, so how can I believe what he said?  
You know, he admitted that there were some mistakes.  
He left out maybe some related report numbers for the stuff 
that was on the table, ma
ybe he didn’t fully describe in 
his report, you know, what was on the table, what IDs there 
were, who they belonged to, but remember he told us that 
the purpose of these reports, it’s meant to record the 
circumstances about what happened, what’s relevant f or that 
case.  And this is what Officer Paclib told us too, you 
know, the purpose of that part of the report is to talk 
about what is relevant for what the issue is.  
And this case is, and always has been, about the 
possession of methamphetamine.  And Officer Korenic told us 
that he was testifying from his memory, that he wasn’t 
relying on what he had written six months ago, because he 
remembered what happened.  But the report that he wrote 
recorded who the defendant was, where he was, what time it 
was, what  was going on, what he was doing, what the 
defendant was doing, what the circumstances were, all 
related to this baggie of methamphetamine.  
Now defense might get up here and they might want you 
to believe that, you know, Officer Korenic and HPD, maybe 
they planted it, maybe they have nothing better to do with 
their time than to plant evidence, that they’re not busy 
dealing with real crime, that they have to make up 
something, that Officer Korenic isn’t busy enough 
patrolling the gigantic area that is Ala Moana Beach Park, 
as well as the other city and county public parks that he 
patrols, that he carries around little baggies of meth to 
plant on people.  Seriously?  
They might want you to believe though that because 
there’s mistakes in his report, that you can’t believe 
anything that Officer Korenic said.  And, yeah, you know 
what, he admitted he made some mistakes.  He came back, he 
testified.  He seemed a little embarrassed, maybe a little 
sheepish that these mistakes were pointed out, but he was 
clear about what he remembered, and making a mistake in 
your report does not make a conspiracy.   
Let’s also talk a little bit about that other stuff 
on the picnic table.  Officer Korenic told us that they 
weren’t the defendant’s.  D efense might come up here and ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
19 
 say that we don’t really know whose it was.  But does it 
even matter? . . . . 
 
(Emphasis added.)   
In her closing statement, defense counsel maintained the 
defense theory of the case, emphasizing the lack of f ound 
property reports for the other items found  on the picnic table:  
 So let’s take a look at the evidence presented in 
this case.  One of the key pieces of evidence in this case 
is this picture, a picture of the bench that Kentaru Stone 
was sitting at on –- in the early morning of April 5th.  
Now, if we t ake Officer Korenic’s explanation as to where 
everything was positioned, Kentaru was sitting someplace 
around here, where there was no –- nothing on the table.  
Officer Korenic was positioned someplace over here, right 
in between the driver’s license and M r. Stone.  
 Now, the driver’s license is clearly visible in this 
picture, and it would’ve been right in front of Officer 
Korenic, and he was questioning Kentaru for approximately 
ten minutes.  And what you can see in the picture too is 
also the size of the ID versus the size of the little 
baggie, and there’s a clear difference in size.  And, 
basically, if you’re focused on getting someone’s 
identification at this point, I mean, and an ID is clearly 
in front of you, you’re going to see it.  It just doesn’t 
make sense.  
 It doesn’t make sense that Kentaru would basically 
empty his wallet in Ala Moana Beach Park at 3:45 in the 
morning.  I mean, it’s dark, it’s dangerous, it’s close to 
a bus stop.  He could get robbed at any time.  It just 
doesn’t make sense that he would do this at 3:45 in the 
morning.  
 It doesn’t make any sense that Officer Korenic 
testified that the various cards and ID belonged to other 
people, because there’s no inventory that was done, which 
would clearly have been relevant to this case or the other 
cases if he were going to return it.  There’s no police 
reports for any of the IDs.  There’s no mention of people’s 
IDs, bank cards or club cards mentioned anywhere in his 
police report.  
 And he did mention doing a found property receipt, 
and I questioned him, and you got to see his response on 
the record.  The only found property receipt that he put in 
his report was of the iPhone, nothing else.  
 And why do you think he did that?  He probably saw 
this ID after the fact and had to come up with an 
explanation as to why it was right there and he didn’t see 
it.  Officer Korenic basically went into Kentaru’s things 
and rifled through it and just –- it was on the table, he 
took a picture of it, and only after the fact did he ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
20 
 realize that the ID was right 
there.  After all, a picture 
does say a thousand words.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 Officer Korenic is not credible.  Officer Korenic 
knew he had to lie to tie Kentaru to the baggie and to 
establish knowing possession, and he distinguished that by 
–-
 in his testimony that  said that’s why they couldn’t 
arrest him for sitting in a pile of other people’s IDs, 
because he wasn’t in possession of it.  
 The empty baggie did not belong to Kentaru Stone.  It 
might have been on the table, it might have been someplace 
in the area, but  it’s not defense’s burden to say exactly 
where it came from.  It didn’t belong to Kentaru, and 
Kentaru wasn’t in knowing position [sic] of the meth 
residue in the bag.  
  
 . . . . 
 
 
 Officer Korenic’s  testimony is contradicted by his 
own report, the fact that it doesn’t mention that the IDs 
belonged to other people.  Officer Korenic’s testimony is 
contradicted by the picture which shows Kentaru’s ID 
clearly right in front of where he would’ve been –- 
 
 . . . . 
 
So you can consider the picture and where Officer Korenic 
would’ve been right in front of where the ID is.  
 Officer Korenic’s testimony is contradicted by his 
own actions, not obtaining a search warrant to search 
Kentaru’s belongings for other ID s and related drug 
paraphernalia.  
 And Officer Korenic’s testimony is contradicted by 
Officer Paclib, who testified that it would raise a red 
flag if she saw an ID that belonged to another individual.  
She took pictures of the picnic table with all of 
those IDs 
sprawled out.  Nothing about the IDs that were scattered on 
the table seemed to raise a red flag with her.  
 And in weighing credibility, you can consider whether 
they concern matters of importance or matters of 
unimportant detail, and whether they result from innocent 
error or deliberate falsehood.  Clearly, Officer Korenic’s 
testimony regarding the IDs present on the table are an 
important detail, and he deliberately lied on the stand 
about them.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 Hold the State to their burden in this  case, proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Not only do those discrepancies 
go to judging Officer Korenic’s credibility, they go to the 
lack of evidence as well.  And let’s talk a little bit 
about the lack of evidence.  
 Don’t fill in the holes for the State.  Require them 
to provide you with enough credible evidence.  Where are ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
21 
  these reports for these other IDs?  Where are they?  The 
State has not proven their case beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 
 In rebuttal, the State again 
argued that it did not matter 
who the items belonged to, and that Officer Korenic was credible 
despite the mistakes made in his incident report:  
 Ladies and gentlemen, the defense seems to revolve 
around this photograph, which is State’s Exhibit 16, and 
they’re asking you to look at what’s in it and identify 
what they are, who they belong to.  But the reality is it 
doesn’t actually matter, because even if the defendant had 
been sitting right next to his driver’s license, if an 
officer asks you for your identification, how’s he supposed 
to know that that’s yours without you picking it up and 
handing it to him?  
 All of that is to distract you from what the real 
question in this case was, is if the defendant possessed 
methamphetamine on April 5th, 2016.  No ques —- it’s not 
about if he possessed other IDs or if he possessed the bag 
that’s sitting on the bench, if he possessed any of the 
other cards that are depicted in State’s Exhibit 16, but 
it’s whether or not he did possess this little baggie.  And 
we do know exactly where it came from.  It came from the 
defendant’s hand, his hand attached to him.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 And if we believe what the defense is arguing, that 
Officer Korenic isn’t believable because he made some 
mistakes in his report, then we are actually holding him to 
a different standard, a hi
gher standard, a standard where 
his report would need to be flawless in order for us to 
believe him.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 Officer Korenic, you know, he made some mistakes in 
his report, he admitted that to you, but he’s human, and he 
is not to be held to a differen
t standard just because he 
wears a uniform.  
 
On October 28, 2016, the jury found Stone guilty of the 
charged offense.  
 
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
22 
 3. Motion for new trial 
  a . Motion  
 Stone  filed his  motion for new trial  under HRPP Rule 33.  
In relevant part, Stone argued he was entitled to a new trial 
because “‘justice’ was not served.”  He contended he did not 
have the benefit of newly discovered evidence, namely Officer 
Korenic’s found p roperty reports, or , in the alternative, 
information regarding the lack thereof .  He also argued trial 
courts have an affirmative duty to grant a new trial if they are 
convinced that a miscarriage of justice would result by allowing 
the verdict to stand.  
  
b. Memorandum in opposition  
 In her declaration attached to the State’s opposition 
memorandum, the deputy prosecuting attorney stated :  
Officer Korenic pointed out that on the face page of his 
report there were listed six (6) additional police report 
numbers that were not included in the body of Officer 
Korenic’s report and were not in the State’s possession.  
The State was not aware of these reports prior to Officer 
Korenic pointing them out.   
 
The deputy prosecuting attorney also stated: “Subsequent to 
trial, this Declarant looked for the alleged property reports 
and, as of this filing [November 23, 2016], has been unable to 
locate them.”  (Emphasis added.) 
The State contended , however, that the jury was the sole 
judge of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the 
evidence, and Stone did not present any new information  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
23 
 warranting a new trial.  The State maintained that after being 
cross-examined, Officer Korenic later retracted his position and 
admitted he may have made mistakes 
in his incident report.  
Stone then continued with his theory and, during closing 
argument, argued Officer Korenic was not credible because of the 
mistakes he made in his report, and the miscellaneous items 
belonged to him and that Officer Korenic could have easily 
looked at them when questioning him.8  According to the State, 
because Stone proceeded to trial with a specific theory centered 
on his ownership of the items on the picnic table and was able 
to fully present that defens e to the jury, there was no 
miscarriage of justice.9   
The State also asserted that ownership of the miscellaneous 
items and IDs was  not material or relevant to this drug 
possession case.  It  argued that it was only required to 
disclose material and relevant evidence and the six missing 
related reports were not material because they would not have 
affected the outcome of trial.    
The State also noted that in the  declaration of counsel in 
support of Stone’s motion for new trial, defense counsel stated 
                         
8  The State also asserted that had Officer Korenic examined the IDs on 
the picnic table, that examination may have raised possible privacy and 
suppression issues before trial.  
 
9  The State also ar gued Stone was not entitled to a new trial under    
HRS § 635- 56 (2016), as the jury’s verdict was not “manifestly against the 
weight of the evidence.”  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
24 
  “the miscellaneous IDs were not mentioned in Officer Korenic’s 
police report, no inventor
y of the ID[] s were included in the 
discovery provided to Defense, in fact the miscellaneous ID[]s  
were not mentioned anywhere in the discovery .”  The State noted 
that during the mid- trial recess, it  located the missing related 
reports and provided them to Stone.  It argued those reports 
proved to be irrelevant , that Stone acknowledged there was  no 
mention of any other reports in Officer Korenic’s incident 
report, and that Officer Korenic’s  incident  report neither 
confirmed nor denied S tone’s ownership of the miscellaneous 
items and IDs.  Instead, the State contended, the only evidence 
the other f ound property reports existed was Officer Korenic’s 
testimony, which he admitted could have been a mistake.  It  also 
noted Stone did not request additional discovery be conducted 
during trial.  
Arguing that ownership of the IDs  was irrelevant, the State 
contended Stone failed to establish how his mistaken belief 
impacted his right to a fair trial.  Although conceding Officer 
Korenic’s reports did not state who owned the miscellaneous 
items, the State argued 
that Stone making  an erroneous inference 
did not equate to the denial of a fair trial; his  choice to 
build his defense around a “belief” was his trial strategy.  
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
25 
  
 c. Hearing on m otion for new trial  
 On December 27, 2016, the circuit court heard  Stone’s 
motion for new trial.  Stone argued that Officer Korenic’s 
testimony “caught the defense quite off guard”  and came as 
“quite a shock to the defense” : 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, Your  Honor.  In light of the 
evidence that came out at trial, namely the testimony of –- 
 
THE COURT: The officer.  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  -- the officer, Officer [Korenic’s] 
testimony that, I guess, he had prepared these reports 
regarding the found property of other people that were 
located on the picnic table, I realized that we did take a 
recess in order to research the connecting reports that he 
had referenced on the front sheet of his report, and they 
were unrelated in nature.  
 This caught the defense quite off guard as it was not 
–- these found property reports were not disclosed in the 
discovery that was received.  In talking with my client and 
in preparation for trial, it was defense’s argument and 
belief and position that the IDs and the various cards that 
were on the picnic table belonged to him.  Officer 
[Korenic’s]  testimony on the stand was in direct contrast 
of –- with that – - with our –- with the argument that we 
were going to present.  It did come as quite a shock to the 
defense since we were provided  absolutely no notice.  
 In addition, I believe in the State’s response to our 
motion, they had indicated that there were no found 
property reports that the State could find when researching 
this particular case, which is significant for the jury 
because I believe that the State argued to the jury that 
these cards did not belong to the defendant.  
 Defense would be in a much stronger position if the 
defense could argue to the jury that there were actually no 
reports that were generated by the police officer that 
could be found within the HPD system.  I believe it 
directly goes to Officer [Korenic’s] credibility as he 
would have basically been caught in a lie in terms of his 
response to defense’s question regarding those found 
property receipts.   
 The defense did do a partial impeachment of him , but 
without the jury or without being able to establish to the 
jury that there were actually no reports generated, I 
believe that puts us at a disadvantage because I don’t know 
what the jury believed in terms of if they believed the 
officer that he actually did do these reports or –- and 
there was no way to establish at that point that these 
reports, in fact, did not exist.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
26 
  And I believe that it would be outcome determinative.  
I think it does go –-
 this is basically a credibility 
contest between the defense and the officer.  And I believe 
that his testimony contained a significant lie which was 
argued by the State in its closing argument to the jury in 
light of the fact that they did do the research afterwards 
and established that there was no found property reports 
that was ever prepared by this officer.  
 So for those reasons, defense is arguing for a new 
trial in this case because it was basically only 
established mid -trial after Officer [Korenic's]  response to 
defense’ s question that there was any reference to any of 
this found property reports.  
 
THE COURT : Okay.  It’s not that –- I mean, I understand 
that was –- 
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And there was no way for us to prepare.  
 
 The circuit court indicated its doubt  as to how the other 
found property reports would have impacted Stone’s case:  
[THE COURT]: Let me finish my thought, bear with me.  I 
understand things didn’t unfold the way I think anyone 
would want them to unfold.  But what I’m trying to get a 
grasp on is what 
difference would it really have made?  I 
mean, this case came down to the officer comes upon the 
defendant in the park, he’s asking him about ID.  The 
officer’s testimony is clear that he was getting resistance 
to his request for ID.  It was after hours so  he was – - 
whoever was there, regardless of ID or not, he was not 
supposed to be there so the officer had a legitimate basis 
to be asking for ID.  And then when he informed the 
defendant he was going to arrest him, he throws the packet 
away that has drugs in it.  
 So that’s a pretty simple story so I’m trying to see 
how the found property reports might have really had an 
impact on any of that.  
 
 Defense counsel responded that Officer Korenic’s testimony 
concerning the existence of other found property reports 
undermined the defense theory:  
And the defense’s whole theory of the case and its argument 
to the jury was premised on the fact that there was an ID 
that was right between where the defendant was seated and 
the officer, and he was asking my client for an  ID for a 
period of about ten minutes.  If the jury were to believe 
that the ID on the picnic table was my client’s ID, that 
would raise serious questions as to the credibility of the 
officer’s testimony that he was asking for –- my client for 
an ID and the ID was right in front of him.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
27 
  
. . . . 
 
 And, again, this all happened, you know, like midway 
through the trial, during questioning that happened.  I was 
unprepared for the officer’s response and they got the 
benefit 
of the fact that the State was able to argue that 
this property did not belong to the defendant and was 
unable –- and –- and defense was unable to establish that 
there was actually no report that was generated at all by 
this officer.  
 
 The State then responde d to Stone’s arguments : 
First, the State did not argue in closing argument that the 
property did, in fact, belong to the defendant.  The 
closing argument of the State in part was that we don’t 
actually know who the owner –- what the ownership of these 
IDs and other miscellaneous items truly was because Officer 
[Korenic]  testified at first it was the defendant, but upon 
being pointed out that may have been erroneous,  he did 
concede that his report does not contain, in fact, who it 
belonged to.  
 So his reports were, in fact, silent as to whether or 
not those items did or did not believe –- belong to the 
defendant.  Any inferences drawn therefrom is not the 
responsibility of the State.  
 Secondly, the defense did present argument during 
closing argument that the ID on the picnic table did, in 
fact, belong to the defendant.  She pointed to the 
photograph and asked the jury to draw their own conclusions 
as to who they truly belonged to.  So the defense was not, 
in fact, precluded from presenting their arguments as  
originally anticipated.  
 Furthermore, even if their argument had, I guess, 
relied on the fact that the ID on the table belonged to the 
defendant, Officer [Korenic]  would not have been in a 
position legally to simply just look at that ID out of 
privacy concerns for the items.  Under the law there are 
proper procedures for doing so.  
 Basically, what it comes down to is the defense does 
not point to any specific prejudice suffered as a result of 
the trial and, thus, the motion for new trial should not be 
granted. 
 
 In rebuttal, Stone argued that whether Officer Korenic 
filed other  found property reports was material because it went 
to Officer Korenic’s credibility,  whether Officer Korenic 
followed proper police procedure, and prevented Stone from fully 
presenting his defense to the jury.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
28 
 The circuit court denied the motion for new trial, stating:
 
THE COURT: But what ’s the big deal about whether or not 
there’s a found property report?  I mean, basically there 
was testimony that there was stuff on the table.  Whether 
there was a found property report or not might be of 
interest to –-  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Because he –-  
 
THE COURT: -- might be of interest to attorneys, but is the 
jury really going to care?  
 
. . . . 
 
THE COURT: All right.  All right, I’ve got it.  All right.  
The motion is denied.  I mean, I just don’t –-
 you know, an 
appellate court wants to correct me, that’s fine, I stand 
corrected.  But I’m just not seeing how this information 
would have changed the heart –- I mean, the heart of this 
trial was police officer comes across Mr. Stone in the 
park, it’s after hours, tries to get ID, testifies that Mr. 
Stone is resisting him, he tells him I’m going to arrest 
you, throws away the drugs.   
 It’s a very simple picture.  And, you know, whether 
he should have done a closing report or shouldn’t have done 
a closing report, I just do not –- I cannot find that it 
was –- there’s any reasonable possibility that that would 
have made any difference to the jury’s determ ination.  
Motion is denied.  
 
 4. Sentence and appeal 
 On January 18, 2017, the circuit court sentenc ed Stone to a 
five-year imprisonment term and filed its judgment of conviction 
and sentence.  On February 16, 2017, Stone appealed the circuit 
court’s judgm
ent of conviction and sentence to the ICA. 
B. ICA proceedings 
 In his appeal to the ICA, Stone raised a single point of 
error: 
The trial court erred in denying Stone’s motion for new 
trial based on the post -trial revelation that Officer 
Korenic had not written any “found property” reports for 
the several ID and credit -type cards shown in photo S -
Exh.16, contrary to his unrebutted trial testimony that (1) 
he had written such reports; (2) that the cards did not ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
29 
 belong to Stone; and (3) the cards w
ere reclaimed by their 
owners, because his credibility was critical to the State’s 
case, and Stone was prejudiced by his inability to marshal 
this information before the jury.  
 
 Specifically, Stone argued that he met the four-part test 
the ICA established in  Teves for granting a new trial based on a 
prosecution witness giving false testimony at trial:  
We hold that upon a proper and timely motion under Rule 33, 
HRPP, a new trial must be granted by the trial court when 
it decides that (1) it is reasonably satisfied that the 
testimony at trial of a material prosecution witness is 
false; (2) defendant and his agents did not discover the 
falseness of the testimony until after the trial; (3) the 
late discovery is not due to a lack of due diligence by 
defendant or  his agent; and (4) the false testimony is not 
harmless because there is a reasonable possibility that it 
contributed to the conviction.  
 
5 Haw. App. at 96, 679 P.2d at 141 (footnote omitted).  Stone 
also argued his right to a fair trial was violated because the 
State failed to correct Officer Korenic’s false testimony.10   
 In its November 27, 2019 SDO, t he ICA ruled in relevant 
part as follows. 
The ICA concluded Stone met the first  Teves requirement.  
Stone, SDO at 5.  The ICA noted Officer Korenic was a material 
prosecution witness, as he was the only witness to Stone’s 
possession of the methamphetamine.  Id.  The ICA concluded  
                         
10  Stone also argued he met the McNulty test, see supra note 3, which we 
do not further address due to applicability of the Teves test to the 
circumstances of this case.  
 For the first time on appeal, Stone also argued the evidence of the 
other people’s IDs was prejudicial evidence of other crimes under Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 404(b) (1994) that should have been excluded 
under HRE Rule 403 (1980).  Because we vacate Stone's conviction on other 
grounds, we do not address this argument.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
30 
 Officer Korenic’s testimony was false,11 as he testified to the 
existence of found property  reports which were not referenced in 
his reports.  Id.   Stating there was no evidence these reports 
existed other than Officer Korenic’s testimony, the ICA 
concluded Stone demonstrated a material prosecution witness 
provided false testimony.  Id.   
As to the second Teves  requirement, the ICA concluded the 
falsity of the testimony was discovered during trial.  Id.   The 
ICA stated that during a mid-trial recess, after Officer Korenic 
testified he had submitted f ound property reports for the IDs, 
the State caused a search for the related  reports Officer 
Korenic testified were missing,  but the related reports had 
nothing to do with Stone’s case.  Id.  The ICA noted  Stone 
cross-examined Officer Korenic on the fact that his written 
reports did not corroborate his assertion that f ound property 
reports were submitted for the IDs  found at the scene and the 
only found p roperty report mentioned in Officer Korenic’s report 
was for an iPhone.  Id.   As such, the ICA concluded Stone failed 
to meet the second Teves requirement, and the fact that the 
State conducted a further search and still found no reports did 
not change its conclusion.  Id.   
                         
11  The ICA stated that false testimony is “[t]estimony that is not 
true[,]” and is broader than perjury because it lacks a state of mind 
element.  Stone, SDO at 5 (alterations in original) (quoting False Testimony , 
Black’s Law Dictionary  (11th ed. 2019)).  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
31 
 As to the third Teves  requirement, the ICA concluded that 
even if the false testimony had not been discovered at trial, 
any failure of the defense to discover the false testimony may 
have been due to a lack of diligence.  Stone, SDO at 5 -6.  
Noting that although defense counsel seemed to be surprised by 
the lack of the f ound property reports, the ICA stated discovery 
provided to the defense clearly showed IDs  belonging to 
different people were found at the scene, and the i ncident 
report identified related  reports numbers for which no copies 
were provided.  Stone , SDO at 6.  The ICA stated that,  had the 
defense requested discovery of those missing reports, it would 
have discovered no f ound property reports regarding the IDs  were 
created, which would have  placed the defense in a better 
position to challenge Officer Korenic’s testimony that found 
property reports for the IDs  existed.  Id. 
As to the fourth Teves  requirement, the ICA conclud ed there 
was no reasonable possibility Officer Korenic’s  false testimony 
contributed to Stone’s conviction because Stone was able to 
fully cross- examine Officer Korenic on the absence of the found 
property reports.  Id.   The ICA reasoned Officer Korenic’s false 
testimony provided an avenue for attacking his credibility that 
otherwise would not have been open to Stone.  Id.   It noted that 
in closing argument, Stone “thoroughly attacked” Officer ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
32  
 Korenic’s testimony and the lack of reports supporting the 
existence of other people’s IDs.  Id. 
Accordingly, the ICA ruled that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion by denying Stone’s motion for new trial  and 
affirmed the circuit court’s  January 18, 2017 judgment.  Id.  
The ICA filed its judgment on appeal on February 5, 2020.   
C. Certiorari application  
 In his March 5, 2020 a pplication for writ of certiorari, 
Stone asks this court to vacate the ICA’s February 5, 2020 SDO.   
III.  Standard of review  
A. Motion for new trial 
 As a general matter, the granting or denial of a 
motion for new trial is within the sound discretion of the 
trial court and will not be disturbed absent  a clear abuse 
of discretion.  . . . .  The trial court abuses its 
discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.  
 
State v. Yamada
, 108 Hawai ʻi 
474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005). 
IV. Discussion  
A. The ICA erred in ruling that Stone failed to meet the Teves 
 test  
 
 As held by the ICA in Teves,  
upon a proper and timely motion under Rule 33, HRPP, a new 
trial must be granted by the trial court when it decides 
that (1) it is reasonably satisfied that the testimony at 
trial of a material prosecution witness is false; (2) 
defendant and his agents did not discover the falseness of 
the testimony until after the trial; (3) the late discovery 
is not due to a lack of due diligence by defendant or his 
agent; and (4) the false testimony is not harmless because 
there is a reasonable possibility that it contributed to 
the conviction.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
33 
 5 Haw. App. at 96, 679 P.2d at 141 (footnote omitted).   
 The ICA correctly concluded  that Stone satisfied  the first 
Teves requirement, that “[the trial court] is reasonably 
satisfied that the testimony at trial of a material prosecution 
witness is false[ .]”   
 As to the second Teves  requirement, that “defendant and his 
agents did not discover the falseness of the testimony until 
after the trial,” however, the ICA incorrectly concluded Stone 
discovered the falsity of Officer Korenic’s testimony during 
trial.  After Officer Korenic falsely testified, the circuit 
court took a mid- trial rec ess so the State could search for the 
six related reports that the HPD did not provide to the State 
after he asserted a report number was missing.  The six related 
reports were irrelevant to S tone’s case.  Stone cross -examined 
Officer Korenic regarding the inconsistency of his written 
reports with his testimony that other f ound property reports 
existed.  However, Officer Korenic persisted in his testimony 
that there was at least one additional f ound property report.  
Stone then filed a motion for new trial, indicating a lack of 
awareness of whether additional f ound property reports actually 
existed.  It was not until the State’s response to the motion 
for new trial that the lack of any additional f ound property 
reports was established.   Therefore, Stone discovered Officer ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
34 
 Korenic’s false testimony after trial, meeting the second Teves 
requirement.12   
 The ICA also incorrectly ruled as to the third Teves  
requirement, that “the late discovery is not due to a lack of 
due diligence by defendant or his agent. ”  The ICA stated that 
although defense counsel was apparently surprised by the lack of 
the found p roperty reports, discovery provided to the defense 
showed the IDs belonged to different people.  State’s Exhibit 
16, which showed the top of the picnic table and the various 
cards strewn about it, showed at least three IDs.  Noting that 
Officer Korenic’s incident report identified the six related 
reports not provided in discovery, the ICA concluded that had 
the defense requested discovery of those missing reports, it 
would have discovered that no found property reports regarding 
the IDs were created, and if the defense had done so, it would 
have been in a better position to better challenge Officer 
Korenic’s false testimony.   
The ICA’s analys is is misfocused.  The third Teves 
requirement pertains to whether the late discovery of Officer 
Korenic’s 
false testimony was due to a lack of due diligence by 
Stone or defense counsel.  Even if Stone had requested the six 
missing related reports, which had nothing to do with his case, 
                         
12  As the ICA also correctly stated, the fact that the State  conducted a 
further search and still did not find reports related to his case does not 
change this conclusion.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
35 
 and therefore assumed that there were no additional found 
property reports generated regarding the items on the table, he 
would not have been able to ascertain through due diligence that 
Officer Korenic would testify falsely at trial that he had 
generated additional f ound property reports for the other items.  
 The ICA also erred as to the fourth Teves requirement, that 
“the false testimony is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
because there is a reasonable possibility that it contributed to 
the conviction. ”  The ICA stated Officer Korenic’s false 
testimony “provided an avenue for attacking his credibility that 
otherwise would not have been open to Stone.”  Stone, SDO at 6.  
Yet, Officer Korenic’s persistence in his false testimony 
directly undermined the defense’s theory of the case.  
Therefore, there was a reasonable possibility that the false 
testimony could have c ontributed to Stone’s conviction.  Hence, 
Officer Korenic’s false testimony was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.   
 Therefore, the ICA erred in ruling Stone failed to meet the 
Teves test and in affirming the circuit court’s denial of his 
motion for new trial.  The circuit court abused its discretion 
because Stone was entitled to a new trial based on the Teves 
test.   
 
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
36 
 B. Stone’s due process right to a fair trial w as violated  
 
Stone also argues that his due process rights were violated 
because Officer Korenic’s false testimony deprived him of his 
right to fair trial.  In 2018, after Stone’s reply brief but 
before the ICA’s SDO and Stone’s certiorari application, we 
decided Birano.  Although Birano was decided after Stone’s reply 
brief, due process principles regarding Stone’s right to a fair 
trial are fundamental, and we address his contention that his 
right to a fair trial was violated.  
“A defendant’s right to due process is gua ranteed by the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution.”  Birano, 143 
Hawaiʻi at 181, 426 P.3d at 405.  “‘[I]t is established that a 
conviction obtained through use of false evidence, known to be 
such by representatives of the State, must fall under the’ 
constitutional dictates of due process.”  Id.  “The same result 
obtains when the State, although not soliciting false evidence, 
allows it to go uncorrected when it appears.”  Id.   
 Officer Korenic falsely testified that he had generated 
other found property reports for the miscellaneous items on the 
picnic table.  
During Stone’s cross-examination, Officer Korenic 
persisted in his false testimony that other f ound property 
reports existed for the other items on the picnic table.  
Although Officer Korenic later 
admitted upon State questioning ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
37 
 that 
“there’s some things that [his]  report had that were 
mistakes,” that t estimony related to the fact that he listed six 
completely unrelated police reports in his incident report 
regarding Stone.  Officer Korenic's cross -examination testimony 
that other found property reports existed was therefore never 
corrected. 
 
With respect to a prosecutor's obligations, we have noted 
that “[t]he most rudimentary of the access -to-evidence cases 
impose upon the prosecution a constitutional obligation to 
report to the defendant and to the trial court whenever 
government witnesses lie under oath. ”  143 Hawai ʻi 
at 189, 426 
P.3d at 413 (alteration in original).   “This principle ‘does not
cease to apply merely because the false testimony goes only to 
the credibility of witnesses.’”  Id.  We have stated:  
It is of no consequence that the falsehood bore upon 
the witness ’ credibility rather than directly upon 
defendant ’s guilt.  A lie is a lie, no matter what its 
subject, and, if it is in any way relevant to the case, the 
district attorney has the responsibility and duty to 
correct what he [or she] knows to be false and elicit the 
truth. . . . That the district attorney ’s silence was not 
the result of guile or a desire to prejudice matters 
little, for its impact was the same, preventing, as it did, 
a trial that could in any real sense be termed fair. 
 
Id. (ellipsis and alteration in original).  “‘[T]he crux’  of a 
due process violation arising from a prosecutor ’s failure to 
correct false testimony is the ‘deception ’ of the finder of 
fact[.]”  Id. (first alteration in original).  “[A] prosecutor’s 
constitutional duty to correct testimony is triggered even when ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
38 
 a witness’s testimony is ‘at best misleading.’”  143 
Hawaiʻi at 
190, 426 P.3d at 414.  
 
In this case, it appears the deputy prosecuting attorney 
did not know about the falsity of Officer Korenic’ s testimony 
that additional found property reports existed before trial 
concluded.  As we stated in Birano, however, “the good faith of 
the prosecutor in failing to correct false testimony  regarding 
impeachment material has no bearing on whether a defendant 
received a  fair trial as required by due process[ .]”  143 Hawai ʻi
at 189, 426 P.3d at 413.  Thus, Stone’s due process right to a 
fair trial was implicated by 
the lack of a correction of Officer 
Korenic’s false  testimony before conclusion of trial.   
 The violation of Stone ’s right to a fair trial is also 
subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt analysis .  
“[A] violation of a constitutional right is subject to the 
harmless-beyond-a -reasonable -doubt standard.  This standard 
requires a court to ‘examine the record and determine whether 
there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of 
might have contributed to the conviction. ’”  State v. Tetu , 139 
Hawaiʻi 207, 225, 386 P.3d 844, 862 (2016) (citation omitted).  
For the reasons discussed in  our analysis of the fourth  Teves 
requirement as applied in this case, there was a reasonable 
possibility that Office r Korenic’s false testimony contributed 
to Stone’
s conviction.  Hence, Officer Korenic’s false testimony ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    *** 
 
39 
 was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
, resulting in the 
violation of Stone’s due process right to a fair trial .  
     V. Conclusion  
 For the reason above, w e vacate the ICA’s February 5, 2020 
judgment on appeal and the circuit court's January 18, 2017 
judgment of conviction and sentence and remand to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.    
Shawn A. Luiz, 
for petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
     
Brandon H. Ito  
(on the briefs),
for respondent   
   
      
 
      
 
