***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
ARTHUR BIRANO, 
Petitioner/Petitioner- Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Respondent/Respondent- Appellee. 
 
 
SCWC-15-0000841 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000841; S.P.P. NO. 09- 1-0040; CR. NO. 01- 1-1154) 
 
AUGUST 31, 2018 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK , and WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM CIRCUIT JUDGE AYABE, IN PLACE OF 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., RECUSED, JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J . 
 
  In the latest chapter in this  long-running case 
arising from an alleged 2001 robbery, we consider a prosecutor’s 
disclosure obligations with respect to evidence relevant to the 
credibility of a government witness.  For his involvement in the 
incident, the petitioner in this case was convicted of a range 
of crimes based in part on the testimony of a codefendant who Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000841
31-AUG-2018
09:11 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 elected to testify for the State following an improper ex parte 
meeting between the judge, prosecutor, and codefendant’s 
counsel.  Petitioner now seeks post- conviction relief, alleging 
that an undisclosed, off -the-record agree ment existed between 
the codefendant and prosecutor under which the codefendant 
received a favorable recommendation at sentencing in exchange 
for his testimony. 
  On review, we hold that the credible testimony during 
petitioner’s post -conviction hearing clearly indicates that an 
arrangement existed in which the codefendant expected to benefit 
from his testiony, and that the nondisclosure of thi s 
arrangement deprived petitioner of a fair trial with respect to 
several of his convictions.   We also provide guidance as to a 
prosecutor’s constitutional obligations when a government 
witness provides testimony of a material fact that the 
prosecutor  knows to be false or misleading.  We vacate the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s order denying petitioner’s 
petition for post-conviction relief, as well as those 
convictions and sentences that may have been reasonably affected 
by the nondisclosure, and we remand the case for further 
proceedings.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. Circuit Court Trial 
  On May 24 , 2001, a grand jury of the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit (circuit court) indicted  codefendants Arthur 
Birano, Nicolas Nakano, and Bryce Takara on the following 
charges: robbery in the first d
egree in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §
 708-840(1)(b)(ii)  (count one);1 
kidnapping in violation of HRS § 707- 720(l)(e) (count two) ;2 and 
burglary in the first degree  in violation of HRS § 708- 810(1)(c) 
(count three).3  Birano was also indicted on five counts of 
                                                           
 1 HRS § 708 -840(1)(b)(ii) (1993 & Supp. 2000) provides as follows:  
A person commits the offense of robbery in the first degree 
if, in the course of committing theft:  
 . . .  
 (b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument 
and:  
  . . .  
  (ii) The person threatens the imminent use of 
force against the person of anyone who is present with 
intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping 
with the property.  
 2 “A person commits the offense of kidnapping if the person 
intentionally or knowingly restrains another person with intent to: .  . . 
[t]errorize that person or a third person[.]”  HRS § 707 -720(l)(e) (1993). 
 3 HRS § 708 -810(1)(c) (1993) provides as follows:  
A person commits the offense of burglary in the first 
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains 
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a 
crime against a person or against property rights, and:  
. . .  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 firearm-related offenses , including two counts of possession of 
a prohibited firearm in violation of HRS § 134- 8(a)4 (counts four 
and six); two counts of ownership or possession prohibited of 
any firearm or ammunition by a person convicted of certain 
crimes in violation of HRS § 134-7(b) and (h)5 (counts five and 
seven); and one count of carrying, u sing or threatening to use a 
firearm in the commission of a separate felony in violation of  
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the 
building is the dwelling of another, and the building is 
such a dwelling.  
 4 HRS § 134 -8(a) (1993) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(a) The manufacture, possession, sale, barter, trade, gift, 
transfer, or acquisition of any of the following is 
prohibited: assault pistols, except as provided by section 
134-4(e); automatic firearms; rifles with barrel lengths 
less than sixteen inches; shotguns with barrel lengths less 
than eighteen inches; . . . and any type of ammunition or 
any projectile component thereof designed or intended to 
explode or segment upon impact with its target.  
 5 HRS § 134 -7 (Supp. 2000) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(b) No person who is under indictment for, or has waived 
indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit court 
for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of 
having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an 
illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control any 
firearm or ammunition therefor.  
. . .  
(h) Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall be 
guilty of a class C felony; provided that any felon 
violating subsection (b) shall be guilty of a class B 
felony. . . .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5 HRS § 134-6(a) and (e)6 (count eight).   The charges involved an 
incident in which,  the State alleged,  Birano, Nakano, and Takara 
demanded property from Frederick Dumlao while threaten ing him 
with a firearm, walked Dumlao to his apartment and forced him to 
unlock it, and entered Dumlao’s  apartment  without his consent 
with the intent to take property from the apartment.   
  On July 26, 2002, Nakano pleaded no contest to the 
charges of robbery in the first degree, kidnapping, and burglary 
in the first degree.  The plea form stated that Nakano had not 
been promised “any kind of deal or favor or leniency by anyone 
for his plea.”7   
  Prior to Nakano’s sentencing  and approximately one 
month before Birano’s trial , on August 13, 2002, Lori Wada, the 
assigned prosecutor, filed a motion for extended terms  of 
                                                           
 6 HRS § 134 -6 (Supp. 2000), which has since been recodified, 
provided in relevant part as follows:  
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on 
the person or have within the person’s immediate control or 
intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while 
engaged in the commission of a separate felony, whether the 
firearm was loaded or not, and whether operable or not . . 
. . 
. . . 
(e) Any person violating subsection (a) . . . shall be 
guilty of a class A felony. . . .  
 7 Takara also pleaded no contest to the charges of robbery in the 
first degree, kidnapping, and burglary in the  first degree; on his plea form, 
Takara similarly indicated that there had been no promise of “any kind of 
deal or favor or leniency by anyone for [his] plea.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 imprisonment in Nakano’s case.  The motion sought extended term s 
of life imprisonment for Nakano as to counts I and II and twenty 
years of imprisonment as to count III.  In support of the 
motion, Wada declared the following: Nakano was a “multiple 
offender” within the mea ning of HRS § 706- 662(4)(a); Nakano was 
out on bail when he committed the charged offenses; Nakano had 
an extensive criminal history; Nakano’s criminality had 
continued despite his prior contacts with the criminal justice 
system; Nakano had demonstrated a total disregard for the rights 
of others and a poor attitude toward the law; the pattern of 
criminality demonstrated by Nakano indicated that he was likely 
to be a recidivist; and Nakano posed a serious threat to the 
public.   
  
A motion for extended term was  not filed by the 
prosecutor in Takara’s case, who would have qualified  for an 
extended term under the same statute.8  See HRS § 706 -662 (Supp. 
1999).  Trial in Birano’s case commenced on September 18, 2002 .9  
A summary of the relevant evidence adduced at trial follows.   
                                                           
 8 Takara was not called by the State as a witness in Birano’s 
trial. 
 9 The Honorable Sandra A. Simms presided over the trial and 
sentencing.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 1. Dumlao’s Testimony  
  Prior to commencement of Dumlao’s testimony, the court 
granted the State’s request to preclude defense counsel from 
asking Dumlao questions pertaining to the presence of drugs in 
the apartment in which Dumlao lived, the furnishing of drugs by 
Dumlao to a third person, and whether Dumlao was in debt for 
drug-related transactions.  The court 
concluded that these 
questions would lead Dumlao to 
assert his Fifth Amendment right 
against self-incrimination.   
 
 Dumlao
 testified that on May 16, 2001, a t 
approximately 6:20 a.m., he,  his then- girlfriend Cari- Ann Casil, 
and his friend Brian Enos were unloading laundry baskets from 
Dumlao’s vehicle in the parking lot of his  apartment when a red 
Camaro drove up behind the vehicle.  Dumlao stated that he saw 
three males, including Birano, exit the red Camaro.  One of t he 
two males with Birano was wearing a ski mask, Dum lao testified .10  
Dumlao said that Birano approached him , pointed a gun in his 
direction, and directed him to open his safe--at which time 
Casil and Enos ran off.   Birano was about an arm’s length from 
him, according to Dumlao, when Birano pointed the gun at him.  
                                                           
 10 Although Dumlao did not identify which of the men wore the mask, 
Nakano would later testify that he wore a ski mask during the initial parking 
lot confrontation.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 Dumlao stated that he told Birano he did not have a safe but 
nonetheless led the three men up to his apartment.   
  
Dumlao explained that from the parking lot to the 
front door of the apartment, he did not feel free to leave 
because he felt frightened by the fact that Birano 
was holding a 
gun.  While walking up the stairs to the apartment, Dumlao 
testified, he did not know where the gun was because Birano was 
behind him.  When they  reached the front door of the apartment, 
Dumlao stated, his neighbors Rei Kobayashi and Ruben Cruz came 
out of their apartment and asked if he was all right.  Dumlao 
responded that he was fine.11   
  Dumlao testified that he opened the door of the  
apartment because Birano told him to do so and he was afraid 
because Birano had a gun.  Birano directed him to enter the 
apartment, Dumlao stated, but Dumlao refused.  Dumlao related 
that he eventually complied because Birano said
 that he would 
shoot him if he did not enter the apartment.   
  Upon entering the apartment, Dumlao ran to  his 
balcony, climbed over to his neighbor’s balcony, and slid down 
to the first floor.  After he exited the apartment, Dumlao 
                                                           
 11 Kobayashi testified that she saw the  group of men when she opened 
her apartment door, but she did not see a gun drawn on Dumlao from where she 
was standing--fifteen feet away.  Cruz similarly testified that he did not 
see a gun.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 called the police.  Dumlao stated that he could not recall 
whether anything was taken from the apartment.   
  Dumlao initially testified that he did not know 
Birano, Nakano, or Takara prior to May 16, 2001.  However, 
Dumlao acknowledged on cross- examination that he had been  
introduced to Birano by his friend, Joseph Poomaihealani, prior 
to May 16, 2001.   Dumlao nonetheless maintained that he did not 
recognize Birano at the time of the incident.  In addition, 
Dumlao denied that there had been a drug transaction between 
Birano and himself prior to the incident in question in which  
Birano had given him $2,500 for drugs that he never delivered .   
  Dumlao testified that a  videotape, obtained from a 
video camera installed in his apartment, accurately  depicted the 
events that occurred on the day in question and that it did not 
show a gun in Birano’s hand until the point at which he entered 
the apartment.  Dumlao  acknowledged that the videotape showed 
him walking fairly casually; he also agree d that no one touched 
him as he walked from the parking lot to the front door of the 
apartment.   
  In response to questions regarding why he, Casil, and 
Enos were doing laundry early in the morning on May 16, 2001, 
Dumlao explain ed that he was not employed at the time and was  
accustomed to sleeping during the day and staying up through the 
night.  As  to Casil, Dumlao testified that she frequently work ed ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 nights, but she had not worked the evening before the incident.  
Dumlao also stated that  he did not know whether Casil had used 
drugs on the morning in question, although he was aware that she 
was a methamphetamine
 user.   
2. Nakano’s Testimony  
  While being sworn in as a witness, Nakano invoked his 
Fifth Amendment right to remain silent.  The deputy prosecutor , 
Lori Wada, expressed surprise, asked to approach the bench, and 
informed the court that she “had met with Mr. Nakano this 
morning, and it went fine.  He was suppose to testify.”12  The 
court responded that a short recess would be taken and 
instructed Wada to “
call [Nakano ’s counsel’s ] office.  I want 
him here immediately.  Absolutely.”  Wada informed the court 
that she could call Nakano’s counsel , Myles Breiner, on his 
cellular phone.  After Breiner appeared, Judge Simms met with 
Wada and Breiner 
in her chambers without Birano’s counsel  
present.  The meeting in chambers was not  recorded.    
  Following the conclusion of the in- chambers off- the-
record meeting with the prosecutor and Nakano’s counsel , the 
court reconvened without the jury.  Judge Simms stated  that she 
had met in chambers with Wada and Breiner regarding Nakano 
                                                           
 12 It was subsequently disclosed that Nakano and his counsel,  Myles 
Breiner, had met with Wada at the prosecutor ’s office nine days prior to 
Birano’s trial.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 invoking the Fifth Amendment and that Birano’s counsel, Nelson 
Goo, had objected to not being present during the in- chambers 
meeting.  Goo  again asserted his objections, strenuously  taking 
exception to what had occurred.  Goo requested a mistrial-- he 
stated that “not only was [ he] precluded from being there, [ he] 
did want to be there. ”  Goo also stated that he did not know 
“what kind of exparte communication Ms. Wada had in that 
conference.”    
  Judge Simms denied that the meeting  constituted an ex 
parte communication, explaining,  “This is not an exparte 
communication in that the Prosecutor was present.  Mr. Nakano is 
a defendant in this case, and he’s represented by counsel.”   Goo 
disputed this explanation,  emphasizing that he was the defense 
counsel in Birano’s trial .  Goo reiterated that he did not know 
what kind of ex parte communication took place without him being 
present in the meeting.  And e ven if there was no communication 
by Wada, Goo pointed out, “she’s privy to information about a 
witness that she’s calling that I have an absolute right to 
cross examine, and especially in the area of whether or not he 
has any self interest in this case.”  Goo further stated that he 
did not know “if there was any kind of deal struck”  and that he 
did not know what changed Nakano’s mind.    
  Judge Simms told Goo  that when she met with Wada and 
Breiner, she was not informed whether Nakano was going to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 testify.  Judge Simms added that if there was  “any question 
about any deals,” that was not part of the off -the-record 
discussion.   
  Goo further explained the basis for the motion for 
mistrial:  
this witness, Mr. Nakano, ha s pleaded no contest as charged  
to, I believe, not only in this case but in another case 
that he’s also been charged with without any kind of deal 
from the Prosecution and still faces sentencing from this 
Court.  With that set of factors, how can the Defense here 
for Mr. Birano not feel that  something is amiss?   
 We have a witness who gets up on the stand.  And, 
Your Honor, my opinion is that he wasn’t scared.  He seemed 
nervous being in front of all these jury people.[13
]  He was 
brought --
 shuttled over by the Prosecutor’s investigator 
through the back doors and in chains.  And then over the 
lunch break, there’s a secret meeting where no 
representative for Mr. Birano is present.  And next thing 
you know, he’s apparently g oing to testify now.   
When Judge Simms indicated that she still did not know whether 
Nakano would testify and sought to confirm that Nakano was no 
longer invoking his Fifth Amendment privilege, Goo informed her 
that this was his understanding based on his conversation with 
Wada and Breiner.    
  Judge Simms asked Wada whether she had a response to 
the motion for mistrial.  Wada replied that she thought the 
court “made it amply clear that it was not exparte.  And given 
the nature and sensitivity regarding . . . Mr. Goo’s client, it 
                                                           
 13 Judge Simms had stated that Breiner indicated during the 
conference meeting that Nakano was very afraid.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13 was clearly appropriate. ”  Wada argued against the mistrial and 
requested that the trial proceed.  In response, Goo again 
disputed that the meeting was appropriate, arguing that it 
violated the Hawai i Rules of Professional Conduct because “the 
defense was precluded from the in- chambers meeting while Wada 
was present in that meeting. ”   
  Judge Simms
 found that “the record speaks for itself” 
and denied Birano ’s motion for a mistrial .  Wada then orally 
moved to preclude Goo from making “any reference . . . if Mr. 
Nakano should take the stand, regarding his -- invoking  his 
Fifth Amendment earlier.”  Judge Simms granted Wada’s request, 
stating, “I think it’s improper to question him regarding that.”   
Goo then responded that he would “place a record objection”  to 
the court’s ruling .  Goo also requested “a 104[14] hearing outside 
the presence of the jury with  Mr. Nakano on the stand, ” adding, 
“I want to know what happened over the lunch hour.”  Judge Simms 
denied the request, saying that she did not think it was 
appropriate under the circumstances and that the trial would  
                                                           
 14 Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 104 (1984) governs “[p]reliminary 
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a witness, the 
existence of a privilege, or the admissibility of evidence.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 proceed.  Breiner then confirmed that Nakano was going to 
testify.15   
  Nakano returned to the witness stand and did not 
invoke his right to remain silent.  Nakano testified that he did 
not have a plea agreement with the State and was testifying to 
“tell the truth.”  Nakano indicated that he had plea ded no 
contest to robbery in the first d egree, kidnapping,  and 
burglary, but testified that his plea was not motivated by a 
desire to lighten his sentence.  
Nakano then denied that he 
“wanted to do well” in testifying in front of the judge and 
prosecution.  When pressed, he maintained that his decision to 
testify was not in any way motivated by a desire for leniency: 
Q. You’re hoping that by testifying favorably for the State 
against my client to make him look bad that perhaps the 
judge will be lenient with you at sentencing; right?  
A. No. 
Nakano admitted that he had initially asked the court for 
youthful offender sentencing-- where he could be sentenced to an 
eight-year term of imprisonment instead of twenty years to life-
-and then stated, “[b]ut now I’ m pleading No Contest .”  He 
finally acknowledged that he was hoping for youthful offender 
                                                           
 15 Immediately before Breiner’s announcement, the  court granted the 
State’s request to instruct the media not to show Nakano’s face on the news , 
presumably when he testified.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 sentencing but did not indicate his testimony was related to 
this hope.   
  As to the incident that took place on May 16, 2001, 
Nakano testified that he, Takara, and Birano decided to go to 
Dumlao’s house to “[g]et dope.”   Nakano first testified that t he 
three did not discuss whether they would “buy dope or rip off 
dope.”  However, Nakano  later stated that, because they had no 
money, he, Birano, and Takara planned to “take dope” and that 
the three of them had discussed this plan.  They drove to the 
parking lot of Dumlao’s apartment,  Nakano testified, where  
Birano exited the vehicle, approached Dumlao, and pointed a gun 
at Dumlao’s head.  At the time, Nakano was wearing a face mask.  
Nakano testified that Dumlao looked panicked.  Birano’s 
girlfriend, who was present, ran off screaming.  Birano told 
Dumlao to open the safe, Nakano recounted, after which Birano 
walked Dumlao up to the apartment, with Nakano and Takara 
following behind.   
  Nakano testified that w hile the four men were walking 
up the stairs to Dumlao’s  apartment, Birano’s gun was “ [i]n his 
hands,” and Dumlao was not free to leave.   When they reach ed 
Dumlao’s apartment, Nakano stated, Birano told Dumlao to open 
the door and Dumlao did not respond.  Nakano testified that 
Dumlao’s neighbor came out of her apartment and asked if 
everything was all right, and  Nakano responded in the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 affirmative.  According to Nakano, Dumlao , who still looked 
panicked, tried to walk away, but Birano “made him come back ” 
using the gun.  Nakano testified that Birano  told Dumlao that he 
would be shot if he  did not open the door to the apartment  and 
that Birano was pointing the gun at Dumlao.  Dumlao then 
unlocked the door and pushed it slightly open before Birano 
“jumped kicked it.”   
  After Dumlao exited the apartment, Nakano stated, 
Birano told Nakano to search the apartment , which he did.  
Nakano testified that Birano and Takara were  also searching  the 
apartment, “[p]ulling out the sheets and stuff, looking 
underneath the bed.”  Not finding anything of value, Nakano, 
Takara, and Birano ran out of the apartment to the car.  Nakano 
testified that he, Birano, and Takara did not take anything from 
the apartment because they were concerned that Dumlao was going 
to call the police.  After leaving the apartment, Nakano 
recounted that he told Birano that he was worried about the 
police; according to Nakano, Birano told him not to worry and 
that he would “ shoot [them] out of” the situation if the police 
showed up.   Nakano admitted that he was high on crystal 
methamphetamine when the incident occurred.    
3. Casil’s Testimony  
  Casil testified that while  she, Dumlao, and Enos were 
unloading laundry baskets from the  vehicle around 6:30 a.m. on ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 May 16, 2001, a red Camaro pulled up behind the vehicle.  The 
driver of the red Camar o, later identified as Birano, “came out 
pulling a gun” at Dumlao.  Casil could not confirm at which part 
of Dumlao’s body the gun was pointed  and stated that she ran 
away and went to a  neighbor ’s house and  called the police.   
  When asked why she was doing laundry at 4:00 a.m., 
Casil responded, “Maybe because I had a lot of clothes that had 
built up.”  Casil testified that she could  not recall whether 
she had used crystal methamphetamine on the morning of the 
incident but that she had tried it “a couple of times .”  Casil 
then testified that she previously used methamphetamine “a lot 
more”--as in “[m]ore frequently” --and that she probably did use 
it with Dumlao.  Casil also stated that Dumlao gave her drugs 
and that she did not know how Dumlao obtained money for drugs, 
adding that Dumlao had a lot of friends.  Casil further 
testified that Dumlao “sometimes” “ just had money.”    
4. Poomaihealani’s Testimony  
  Poomaihealani testified that he and Dumlao were close 
friends.  Poomaihealani spoke about a conversation he had with 
Dumlao that occurred about one or two days after the incident.  
In that conversation, Dumlao admitted to Poomaihealani that the 
incident was his fault, explaining that he and Birano 
participated in a drug transaction in which  he took 
approximately $2,000 from Birano.  Dumlao also informed  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 Poomaihealani that  he told police Birano robbed him because he 
did not want the police to know about the drug transaction.    
5. Birano’s Testimony  
  Birano testified that he and Dumlao had engaged in an 
agreed-upon drug transaction two days before the incident when 
he gave Dumlao $2,500 for cocaine.  Dumlao did not return with 
the cocaine , Birano stated, and he went to Dumlao’s apartment on 
the day of the incident to  recover his money  or to get the 
cocaine that Dumlao was supposed to provide.   
  Birano testified he was first introduced to Takara and 
Nakano on the day of the incident.  Birano related that,  in 
response to his request for help in finding Dumlao, Nakano said 
that he knew where Dumlao lived, and  the three of them then went 
to Dumlao’s apartment .  Birano explained that he had a gun that 
day because he did not know if Dumlao would be armed and he had 
been held at gunpoint on a prior occasion.  When he saw Dumlao, 
Birano testified,  he approached and demanded that Dumlao return 
his money.  Birano stated that he had his gun out but that  he 
was not pointing it at Dumlao.  H e put the gun away when he saw 
that Dumlao was unarmed, Birano testified, and he took it out 
again only when Dumlao refused to enter the  apartment after 
opening the door because Birano feared someone was waiting 
inside as part of a “setup.”  Birano testified that he did not 
intend to terrorize or kidnap Dumlao.   He added that he was in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 Dumlao’s apartment for less than one minute, he did not touch 
anything in the apartment, he did not threaten to shoot Dumlao, 
and he never fired his gun.   
  Bi rano stated that as he, Nakano, and Takara drove 
away from Dumlao’s apartment, Nakano was “tweaking” from 
“smoking drugs all morning with us.”  In addition, Birano 
testified that when the police found him later that day, he fled 
because he knew he had violated a condition of his parole and 
that he was in possession of a gun.16   
6. Jury Verdict 
  Following the conclusion of the evidence, the jury 
found Birano guilty as charged on seven of  the eight counts .17  
Birano was sentenced to extended terms  of life imprisonment with 
the possibility of parole in counts  one and eight; extended 
terms of twenty years of imprisonment in counts three , five, and 
seven; and extended terms of ten years of imprisonment in counts 
four and six.  The court ordered the extended terms to run 
                                                           
 16 An officer of the Honolulu Police Department testified that he 
recovered a black backpack from Birano on May 16, 2001.  The following,  inter 
alia, were found inside the backpack: an M -11 semiautomatic handgun, a 
magazine for the M -11 handgun, a ski mask, and a pair of sunglasses.   
 17 Count II, kidnapping, was dismissed because the jury found that 
the State did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Birano acted with 
separate and distinct intents in committing robbery in the first degree and 
kidnapping.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 concurrently and also imposed mandatory minimum terms in each of 
the counts.   
B. Nakano’s Sentencing  
  Following Birano’s trial and prior to Nakano’s 
sentencing, Nakano filed a motion for supervised release.  O n 
January 17, 2003, Judge Simms granted Nakano’s motion for 
supervised release and set aside bail.   
  Wada and Breiner appeared as counsel at Nakano’s 
sentencing proceeding, which  was held on June 9, 2003.   At the 
onset of the proceeding, Judge Simms indicated that she had 
received assurances from the Department of Public Safety (DPS) 
that Nakano’s concerns regarding his security as it related to 
his and Birano’s placement in prison were “given absolute 
priority” and would be addressed.   Judge Simms also stated that 
she would strongly recommend to the paroling authority that 
Nakano be released  at the earliest  possible date given how well 
he had done on supervised release and “because of the assistance 
that he provided to the State in the matters involving Mr. 
Birano.”   
  Breiner then  addressed the court .  Breiner informed 
Judge Simms that it was his understanding that Wada was going to 
withdraw the State’s motio n for extended term of imprisonment.  
Wada then orally moved to withdraw the motion for extended term 
of imprisonment.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21   As to her argument on sentencing, Wada indicated that 
the court had already noted “the tremendous assistance” that 
Nakano provided in Birano’s criminal case.  Wada added that, 
given Nakano’s progress and history, the State was recommending 
that “Nakano be sentenced as a youthful offender for eight years 
with applicable credit. ”  Wada further stated that she would  
appear at Nakano’s parol e hearing and would  “be recommending a 
low minimum and transfer to Kulani as well.”18   
  Judge Simms
 followed Wada’s recommendation and  stated 
to Nakano that “because of what you’ve done, and because of the 
help you’ve given the State, I’m going to give you the youthful 
offender.”  Judge Simms  thus sentenced Nakano pursuant  to the 
Youthful Offender Act , reducing the indeterminate term of twenty 
years’ imprisonment to eight years.   
C. Direct Appeal 
  Birano appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA) from the circuit court’s judgment filed on February 18, 
2003, challenging, inter alia, the ex parte chambers conference 
that took place
 among Judge Simms, Breiner,  and Wada, as well as 
the circuit court’s ruling precluding the defense from cross -
                                                           
 18 Kulani Correctional Facility is a minimum security prison located 
on the Big Island of Hawai i.  Kulani Correctional Facility , State of Hawaii 
Department of Public Safety, 
http://dps.hawaii.gov/about/divisions/corrections/about -corrections/kcf/ 
(last visited June 7, 2018).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 examining Nakano on his sudden change of heart regarding 
testifying after the ex parte meeting .  State v. Birano , 109 
Hawaii 327, 329-30, 331, 126 P.3d 370, 372 -73, 374 (App. 2005).   
 
 The ICA held that  Judge Simms improperly participated 
in an ex parte communication-- in violation of Canons 2(A) and 
3(B)(7) of the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct-- thereby raising 
a question as to the fairness of Birano’s trial.  Id. at 337-38, 
126 P.3d at 380-81.  Reasoning , however, that there was 
convincing evidence that the jury’s deliberations were not 
biased by the undisclosed communication, the ICA determined  that 
the ex parte meeting did not deprive Birano of his 
constitutional right to a fair trial.  Id. at 338, 126 P.3d at 
381.  The ICA accordingly affirmed Birano’s convictions.   Id. at 
342, 126 P.3d at 385 .   
  On certiorari, a three- member majority of t his court  
held that Birano ’s right to a fair trial was not unfairly 
prejudiced and affirmed his convictions.  State v. Birano  
(Birano I), 109 Hawai i 314, 322- 23, 126 P.3d 357, 365-66 (2006).  
Although the majority agreed that Judge Simms violated Canons 
2(A) and 3(B)(7) of the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct by 
improperly participating in an ex parte meeting, th e court found 
that there was nothing in the record indicating that Judge Simms 
made improper remarks or engaged in improper conduct during the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 trial.  Id. at 323, 126 P.3d at 366.  The majority also 
concluded that the court’s preclusion of the defense’s 
questioning of Nakano regarding his motive for changing his mind 
about testifying was harmless error, stating that the only 
difference between Birano’s testimony and the testimony of other 
witnesses was Birano’s  intent in going to Dumlao’s apartment .  
Id. at 325, 126 P.3d at 368.   
  Justice Duffy, w ith whom Justice Acoba joined, issued 
a strong dissent.   They agreed with the majority that the ex 
parte meeting between Judge Simms, Wada, and Breiner was 
improper and violated multiple  canons of the Revised Code of 
Judicial Conduct, but disputed that the impropriety was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id.  at 326-27, 126 P.3d at 369 -70.  
A “reasonable person using common sense ,” the dissent 
maintained, “would conclude that something happened in the 
improper ex parte  communication meeting which caused Nakano to 
change his mind about testifying against Birano .”  Id. at 327, 
126 P.3d at 370.  The tria l judge compounded its error, the 
dissent continued, “by (1) den ying Birano’ s motion for a 
mistrial based upon the improper meeting, and (2) granting the 
prosecutor’s motion in limine to prevent B irano’s counsel from 
cross-examining Nakano about the meeting and his reasons for 
changing his mind about testifying against Birano.”  Id.  “
[I]f 
a mistrial was not ordered, ” the dissent reasoned, “basic ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 fairness would require that Birano be allowed to cross- examine 
Nakano regarding what happened at the improper meeting.”  Id.  
The dissent thus concluded that the errors involving the trial 
judge’s improper ex parte meeting and the events that followed 
were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id.   
D. 2007 Petition  for Post- Conviction Relief 
  On April 3, 2007, Birano filed  a petition for post-
conviction relief pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawaii Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) (Petition I).  Petition I set forth  eight 
grounds for relief.   Grounds one through four asserted  that the 
trial court violated Birano’s right to be present  at every stage 
of trial and to have counsel present at every critical stage of 
trial under the HRPP , the Hawai i Constitution, and the United 
States Constitution.  Ground five alleged that the trial court 
violated Birano’s right to due process under the federal  
constitution by preventin g the disclosure of exculpatory and 
impeachment evidence from a key witness of the State.  Grounds 
six and seven asserted that the trial court violated Birano’s 
right to confrontation under the Hawai i and United States 
Constitutions by precluding him from cross- examining Nakano on 
the “improper” ex parte communication.19  The circuit court 
                                                           
 19 Ground eight contended that the trial court violated the Sixth 
and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution by imposing on 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 denied Petition I without a hearing, finding that Birano’s 
claims were “patently frivolous and without a trace of support 
either in the record or from other evidence submitted by the 
Petitioner.”20   
  Birano appealed
 the denial of Petition I and 
thereafter moved to supplement the record on appeal with a 
Declaration from Nakano , which was dated August 8, 2008.  In his 
Declaration, Nakano averred that in May 2001, he gave police a 
false statement that had been coerced and induced by a promise
 
of a reduction in bail.  Nakano also declared that he attempted 
to invoke the Fifth Amendment at Birano’s trial  because he did 
not want to lie under oath,  but Wada and Breiner informed him 
that if he did not testify he would receive a sentence of twenty 
years of imprisonment instead of eight years of imprisonment.  
Nakano stated that he requested that the agreement of the 
reduced sentence
 in exchange for his testimony be in writing , 
but Wada and Breiner said it could not be done.  Nakano averred 
that he testified at Birano’s trial because of pressure from 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
Birano extended terms of imprisonment without submitting to a jury the facts 
underlying these terms.   
 20 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 Wada and Breiner.  The ICA denied the motion to supplement the 
record on appeal.   
  On April 24, 2009, the ICA issued a summary 
disposition order,21 in which it determined that there was no 
evidence to support Birano’s claim of new evidence  that Nakano’s  
trial testimony was not truthful.22  This court deni ed Birano’s 
application for a writ of certiorari without prejudice to Birano 
filing another Rule 40 petition.  Birano v. State , No. 29050, 
2009 WL 2943170 (Haw. Sept. 4, 2009).  
E. 2009 Petition  for Post- Conviction Relief 
  On September 9, 2009, Birano , proceeding pro se, filed 
a second Rule 40 petition (Petition II), which set forth five 
grounds for relief.  In ground three
, Birano asserted  that the 
trial court conducted an improper ex parte meeting in chambers 
with the prosecutor, Nakano, and Nakano’s counsel and that 
Nakano’s trial testimony that followed the improper ex parte 
meeting had been induced by pressure from the prosecutor and was 
not truthful.  Birano  contended that by precluding the 
disclosure of exculpatory and impeachment evidence from Nakano, 
                                                           
 21 The ICA’s summary disposition order may be found at Birano v. 
State, No. 29050, 2009 WL 1102048 (Haw. App. Apr. 24, 2009).   
 22 The ICA vacated the circuit court’s order denying Petition I to 
the extent that it denied a hearing on ground eight, in which Birano 
challenged the imposition of the extended term sentences; the ICA  remanded 
the case for resentencing.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 the trial court violated his constitutional right to 
confrontation.23  Attached to Petition II was an Amended 
Declaration from Nakano.24   
  The circuit court denied Petition II without a 
hearing, ruling that Birano’s claims were previously ruled upon 
or waived.25  Birano appealed to the ICA.    
  I n a summary disposition order, the ICA determined 
that the circuit court erred in failing to conduct a hearing on 
ground three of Petition II, which challenged as 
unconstitutional the trial court’s preclusion of the disclosure 
of exculpatory and impeachment evidence from a key witness of 
                                                           
 23 The other grounds for relief in Petition II were as follows.  
Grounds one and two alleged that the trial court violated Birano’s right to 
be present at every stage of trial and to have counsel present at every 
critical stage of trial in violation of the HRPP, the Hawai i Constitution, 
and the United States Constitution.  Ground four challenged the trial court’s 
ruling precluding Birano from cross -examining the State’s “key witness” on 
the “improper” ex parte communi cation.  Ground five asserted that the 
prosecutor committed misconduct by engaging in the “improper” ex parte 
communication with Nakano.   
 24 In his Amended Declaration, Nakano restated what was set forth in 
his first Declaration and added that at some point after he invoked the Fifth 
Amendment at Birano’s trial, he met with Judge Simms, who confirmed that she 
would sentence him as a youth offender if he agreed to testify.  Nakano 
expressed that he testified against Birano because of pressure from not only 
Wada and Breiner, but also Judge Simms.  Nakano explained that his testimony 
at trial was false because the reason in going to Dumlao’s house was to 
recover money that Dumlao had owed Birano; Nakano stated that there was no 
prior discussion regarding robbing Dumlao.  Nakano also explained that Birano 
had a gun because Dumlao was a known armed drug dealer.   
 25 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 the State.26  The ICA found that Birano stated a colorable claim 
for relief on the grounds that his due process rights were 
violated because Nakano’ s testimony was untruthful and the 
result of coercion by the prosecutor.   The ICA accordingly  
remanded the case to the circuit court for a hearing on ground 
three of Petition II. 
  On remand, Birano was permitted to supplement Petition 
II to include the following additional grounds for relief: 
ground six, which cont ended that Birano’s right to confrontation 
and right to due process were violated because the State fail ed 
to provide discovery of impeachment evidence relating to an off-
the-record agreement between the State and Nakano; ground seven, 
which maintained that the State’s failure to correct or disclose 
Nakano’s untruthful testimony regarding the absence of a deal 
with the State 
violated Birano’s right s to a fair trial and due 
process; and ground eight, which asserted that Birano’s  
constitutional right to a fair trial was violated when the State 
improperly entered into an off -the-record agreement with Nakano 
that was purposely concealed from the defense.   
                                                           
 26 The ICA’s summary disposition order may be found at Birano v. 
State, No. 30480, 2013 WL 764880 (Haw.  App. Feb. 28, 2013).    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29   A hearing on grounds three, six, seven, and eight of 
Petition II commenced on January 7, 2015.27  Among those who 
testified at the hearing were Breiner, Judge Simms,28 Wada, and 
Nakano.   
  Breiner testified that he was Nakano’s counsel in the 
underlying criminal case.  He expressed that the State’s case 
against Nakano was “very solid” and that Nakano did not have a 
viable defense to the charges.  Prior to Birano’s trial, Breiner 
spoke to Nakano about youth offender treatment and the advantage 
of cooperating.  After  Nakano invoked the right to remain silent 
at Birano’s trial , Breiner received a telephone call and “had to 
rush over there.”  When he a rrived, he spoke to Nakano, 
reiterating to him that if he testified against Birano it would 
improve his chances of receiving youth offender treatment.   
  Breiner testified that there was an unwritten 
“understanding” that existed between Wada and himself .  Breiner 
drew a distinction between an  “understanding” and an “agreement” 
or “deal.”   
 Q: Okay.  And sometimes those are deals where the 
State’s going to make a recommendation for your client at 
                                                           
 27 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.  At the hearing, Birano was 
represented by counsel.   
 28 Although Judge Simms was no longer a judge at the time of the 
hearing, the hearing recounted events that took place while she was a judge, 
and therefore she is referred to in that capacity.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 sentencing but the judge is not bound by that 
recommendation, correct?  
 A: You’re using the word “deal.”  There’s an 
understanding .  If that’s what you mean by deal, that’s a 
little different.  There’s an understanding sometimes the 
prosecutor will make a recommendation . 
 Q. Well, you could have -- you talked about -- you 
know, you talked about there was no written agreement in 
this case?  
 A: Um-hum. 
 Q: Correct? 
 A: Correct. 
 Q: Okay. 
 A: There was no agreement, period.  
 Q: Well, are you saying there was no written 
agreement or you’re saying there was  no agreement at all?  
 A: There was no agreement at all.  There was an 
understanding that if he cooperated , then the court -- then 
the prosecutor, Ms. Wada, would take it into consideration 
and recommend, we were hoping, youth offender treatment.  
She coul dn’t get approval for it.  She couldn’t say that 
she had authority to do that and there was nothing in 
writing. 
(Emphases added.)  In response to whether there was a “deal” for 
Nakano to get youthful offender sentencing, Breiner again  stated 
that “there was no written agreement, there was no oral 
agreement”--simply
 his belief that if Nakano testified 
truthfully, “the court would be inclined to 
grant him youthful 
offender treatment.”   
  
Judge Simms testified that after Nakano invoked the 
Fifth Amendment at Birano’s trial , she met with Breiner and Wada 
to discuss whether Nakano was going to testify.  Judge Simms 
stated that, during the chambers conference, she “understood” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 Wada and Breiner had discussed between themselves a 
recommendation from the State of youthful offender sentencing in 
exchange for Nakano’s testimony.   
 Q. And is it your recollection that while there was 
no deal that would be -- that might be considered a Rule 11 
deal -- 
 A. Um-hum. 
 Q. -- that there nevertheless was an agreement  
between Mr. Breiner and Mr. Nakano and the State that 
Nakano would be testifying, if he did testify, in exchange 
for a recommendation at sentencing from the State ? 
 A. I’m -- I don’t know if I would characterize it as 
that.  I was not a party to that but I understood that 
that’s what they talked about, yes . 
. . .  
 Q. Okay.  But your recollection is that after Nakano 
took the Fifth, when Mr. Breiner came down to court, he and 
Ms. Wada were talking about this agreement that if Nakano 
testified truthfully against Mr. Birano, then the State 
would recommend at sentencing that he receive the youth 
act, it was still up to you whether or not he would get the 
youth act?  
 A. I -- I can’t talk about what they discussed among 
themselves, if that’s what they discussed, yeah.  
 Q. Okay.  But your recollection is that they were -- 
they were talking about that to some degree, that’s what 
you recall, you were not a party to it but --   
 A. They were talking about it but they were also 
talking about, you know, what happened as to why he 
wouldn’t testify at that particular time.  
. . . 
 Q. Okay.  But it’s fair to say that part of what was 
discussed was some agreement that you were not a party to?  
 A. That’s fair.  Yes . 
(Emphases added.)  Judge Simms  later in her testimony confirmed 
that there was a discussion between Wada and Breiner during the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 chambers conference about an agreement between Nakano and the 
State. 
 Q. Okay.  And you told us earlier there was some 
discussion  that you were not -- you weren’t privy to all  
the details but there was discussion about an agreement 
between Mr. Nakano, his lawyer, and Ms. Wada  representing 
the State, correct?  
 A. Yeah.  
 Q. Okay.  And would it be fair  to say that, again, 
you weren’ t privy to all the details but the gist of that 
agreement was that if he, Nakano, testified against Mr.
Birano, the State would recommend the Youthful  Offender 
 
Act?  
 A. I guess you could say that but yeah .  
(Emphases added.)   
  Wada , in her testimony, denied the existence of an 
agreement, explaining that she did not believe she needed 
Nakano’s testimony to successfully prosecute Birano.  Wada 
testified that, during the in-chambers meeting without Birano’s 
trial counsel, Breiner expressed his concern that
, after Nakano 
invoked the Fifth Amendment, Judge Simms would not sentence 
Nakano as a youthful offender.  Wada stated,  
 A. . . . Breiner was very concerned that Judge Simms, 
after taking the Fifth Amendment, would not consider his 
client a candidate for Youthful Offender, and he talked to 
us about that, and he asked her “Would you still consider a 
Youthful Offender if my client tes tifies?” 
. . . 
 Mr. Breiner’s concern was because his client had 
taken the Fifth, if he did testify, would the Court be 
inclined or open to entertain a Youthful Offender 
sentencing  . . . . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 Wada testified that Judge Simms responded that it depended on 
what the State ask
ed for and that she  was “inclined” to follow 
the State’s recommendation regarding Nakano’s sentence .  Wada 
testified as follows: 
[A]nd he asked her “ Would you  still consider a Youthful 
Offender if my client testifies ?” and she told him, “ Well, 
it’s clear that he’s very, very  afraid of Birano and that ’s 
why we have all these sheriffs. ”  She says, “Well, it’ s 
going to depend on what the State  asks.  If the State asks 
for it, then I ’m inclined to follow it ,” and I told him, “I 
cannot tell you anything.  I don’t know.  We don’t have any 
plea agreement. ”   
(Emphasis added.)  Wada later reiterated in her testimony that  
Judge Simms stated that Nakano’s sentence would depend on what 
the State asked for.  Wada said,   
Mr. Breiner’ s concern was because his client had taken the 
Fifth, if he did testify, would the Court be inclined or 
open to entertain a Youthful Offender sentencing, and Judge 
Simms’ reply was , “Well, I don’t know.  It depends on what 
the State asks ,” and I said, “I don’t know because we don’t  
have a plea agreement.  He hasn’t testified for me .”   
(Emphases added.)   
  Nakano testified that Wada had told him “that in 
exchange for [his] testimony against Birano [he] would get the 
youth act.”  Nakano explained that approximately a week and a 
half prior to Birano’s trial, he was brought to the prosecutor’s 
office, where he and Wada went over his testimony.  At that 
time, Nakano stated that he had asked for a written plea 
agreement, which Wada refused.  Nakano also stated that he was 
lying at trial 
when he denied the existence of an unwritten deal 
between himself and the State.  Further, Nakano explained  that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 he was coming forward about the off- the-record agreement because 
his untruthful testimony had gotten Birano convicted and this 
bothered his conscience.29   
  On  September 2, 2015, the court denied Birano’s 
Petition II, finding the State’s witnesses --including Breiner, 
Wada, and Judge Simms-- credible and finding Nakano not 
                                                           
 29 Terry Pennington, a private investigator assisting with Birano’s 
case, also testified.  Pennington related that he interviewed Breiner, whom 
he had worked for in a number of previous cases.  Pennington testified that 
Breiner told him there had been an agreement between Nakano and the 
prosecutor’s office that, in exchange for his truthful testimony, Nakano 
would be sentenced under the Youthful Offender Act.  Pennington also 
testified that Breiner explained that he and Wada spoke to Nakano after 
Nakano invoked the Fifth Amendment and “revisited the agreement with him, 
that he was going to have to testify to what they had discussed or [Wada] 
wasn’t going to ask for him to be sentenced under the Youth Act.”  According 
to Pennington, Breiner could not recall whether the agreement was in writing 
and stated that he did not believe so.   
  Pennington testified that he also interviewed Wada, who provided 
the same information Breiner did: that there was an agreement between the 
State and Nakano that Wada would ask for him to be sentenced under the 
Youthful Offender Act--eight years versus twenty--if he provided truthful 
testimony; that she and Breiner reviewed the agreement with Nakano after he 
invoked the Fifth Amendment; and that she could not recall whether the 
agreement was in writing but that “it must have been, it would have had to 
have been.”   
  Wada and Breiner were interviewed via telephone; the interviews 
were not recorded but were summarized by Pennington in written reports, which 
also contained the dates of the interviews and the dates of Pennington’s 
unsuccessful attempts to reach Breiner.   
  Breiner testified that he did not recall telling Pennington that 
a plea agreement had been negotiated in which Nakano would testify for the 
State in exchange for a recommendation of youthful offender sentencing.  In 
addition, Breiner testified that he did not believe he told Pennington that 
he and Wada informed Nakano, after Nakano invoked the Fifth Amendment, that 
Nakano would have to testify to be sentenced under the Youthful Offender Act.  
Wada, in her testimony, denied telling Pennington that there was an agreement 
between the State and Nakano that if Nakano testified the State would 
recommend youthful offender sentencing, that Breiner reminded Nakano about 
the agreement after Nakano invoked the Fifth Amendment, and that the subject 
matter of a plea agreement came up during the in -chambers conference.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
35 credible.30  The court also found that “there was no off -the-
record plea agreement that induced Nakano’ s cooperation to 
testify against [Birano]. ”  Because there was no plea agreement,  
the court stated that the prosecution had nothing to disclose to 
Birano or his trial counsel and no reason to correct Nakano’s 
trial testimony that he did not have a plea agreement with the 
State.  The court concluded that Petition II was  without merit.   
  Birano filed a notic
e of appeal to the ICA from the 
circuit court’s order denying Petition II.   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  In his o
pening brief, Birano asserted that the circuit 
court erred in denying Petition II.  Birano submitted that the 
crux of this case wa s whether there was an off- the-record 
agreement between Nakano and the State for Nakano to testify 
against Birano in exchange for a recommendation that Nakano be 
sentenced as a youthful offender.  Birano first challenged 
Wada’s assertion that she did not n eed Nakano’s testimony to 
convict Birano, arguing that the court minutes showed 
otherwise.31   
                                                           
 30 The court did not make a credibility finding as to Pennington’s 
testimony.   
 31 The minutes indicate, Birano argued, that the State made 
continuous efforts to have a codefendant--including both Takara and Nakano--
testify against him.  The series of court minutes to which Birano was 
referring were from proceedings that took place before his trial.  For 
example, Birano pointed to the minutes of a pretrial conference, which 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
36   Birano next contend ed that, while there was no written 
agreement, the record showed that Nakano relied on the State’s 
promise that he would receive a sentence recommendation of 
youthful offender if he cooperated by testifying.  This 
reliance, Birano maintained, was supported by the testimony of 
Breiner, who acknowledg
ed that there was an understanding that 
if Nakano cooperated,  Wada would take it into consideration at 
Nakano’s sentencing.  Birano argued that an “understanding” 
equates to an off-the-record agreement.  Birano added that 
Nakano’s reliance on the State’s promise  was also supported by 
the testimony of Wada, who stated that Breiner was concerned 
that Judge Simms w ould not consider Nakano a n appropriate 
candidate for youthful offender sentencing after Nakano invoked 
the Fifth Amendment and that Judge Simms had indicated that 
whether Nakano would be  sentenced as a youthful offender would 
depend on what the State recommended.  Birano concluded that the 
circuit court’s findings of fact were clearly erroneous and its 
conclusions of law were wrong.   
  In its answering brief, the State submitted that 
Birano was challenging findings of fact that  were based on 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
according to Birano “show that  the State was trying to work out a plea 
agreement with Nakano and the State may be willing to go with Youthful 
Offender sentencing.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 determinations of credibility by the trial  court and that , 
pursuant to caselaw, the appellate court’s role is not to weigh 
credibility or resolve conflicting evidence.   
  In the alternative, the State argued that Birano 
failed to demonstrate that Nakano’s testimony was credible while 
the testimony of Wada, Breiner, and Judge Simms were not.  The 
State contended that the court minutes
 do not show that Wada 
needed Nakano’s testimony and the change of plea form does not 
show the existence of an agreement between the State and Nakano.  
The State concluded that the circuit
 court properly denied 
Petition II as Birano’s claim that there was an off -the-record 
agreement between Nakano and the State lacked merit.   
  On January 26, 2017, the ICA entered
 a summary 
disposition order, affirming  the circuit court’s order deny ing 
Petition II.32  The ICA concluded that the circuit court’s 
finding that there was no off- the-record agreement between the 
State and Nakano that led  Nakano to testify against Birano was 
not clearly erroneous and that the court did not err in denying 
Petition II.   
                                                           
 32 The ICA’s summary disposition order can be found at Birano v. 
State, CAAP- 15-0000841, 2017 WL 374762 (Haw. App. Jan. 26, 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
38 III.  STANDARDS  OF REVIEW  
  Findings of fact are reviewed on appeal under the 
clearly erroneous standard.  Jones v. State , 79 Hawai i 330, 334, 
902 P.2d 965, 969 (1995).  “A finding of fact is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction in 
reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been 
committed.”  Id.  (quoting Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai i 226, 
231, 900 P.2d 1293, 1298 (1995)).  “A finding of fact is also 
clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to 
support the finding. ”  O’Grady v. State , 140 Hawai i 36, 43, 398 
P.3d 625, 632 (2017) (quoting In re Grievance Arbitration 
Between State of Haw. Org. of Police Officers , 135 Hawai i 456, 
461-62, 353 P.3d 998, 1003-04 (2015)).   
  “An appellate court may freely review conclusions of 
law and the applicable standard of review is the right/wrong 
test.”  Dan v. State , 76 Hawai i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 
(1994) (quoting Maria v. Freitas , 73 Haw. 266, 270, 832 P.2d 
259, 262 (1992)).   
IV. DISCUSSION  
  A  defendant ’s right to due process is guaranteed by 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai i Constitution.  “The due ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39 process guarantee of the . . . Hawaii constitution [] serves to 
protect the right of an accused in a criminal case to a 
fundamentally fair trial.”33  State v. Kaulia , 128 Hawai i 479, 
487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013) (alterations in original) (quoting 
State v. Matafeo , 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990)).   
  Two of the constituent rights encompassed by due 
process are relevant to this case.  First, under the rule 
adopted by the U.S. Supreme Court in Brady v. Maryland , 373 U.S. 
83, 87 (1963), which “has been incorporated into the Hawaii due 
process jurisprudence,” due process requires that the 
prosecution disclose “evidence favorable to the accused” that, 
if suppressed, would deprive the defendant of a fair trial.  
Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 185-86, 787 P.2d at 672.  Second, “it is 
established that a conviction obtained through use of false 
evidence, known to be such by representatives of the State, must 
fall under the” constitutional dictates of  due process.  Napue 
v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 269 (1959) (citations omitted).   “The 
same result obtains when the State, although not soliciting 
                                                           
 33 Though most often framed as a constitutional right of the 
defendant, the responsibility to provide a fair trial also inheres in the 
prosecutor’s duties as a “minister of justice,” which include “specific 
obligations to see that the accused is  accorded procedural justice and that 
guilt is decided upon the basis of sufficient evidence.”  American Bar 
Association Standards for Criminal Justice: Prosecution Function § 3 -3.11 
cmt. at 97 (3d ed. 1993); see also Brady v. Maryland , 373 U.S. 83, 87 (1963) 
(“Society wins not only when the guilty are convicted but when criminal 
trials are fair; our system of the administration of justice suffers when any 
accused is treated unfairly.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
40 false evidence, allows it to go uncorrected when it appears. ”  
Id. (citations omitted).  
  We consider each right as it applies to this case in 
turn. 
A. The Duty to Disclose Favorable Evidence 
1. Constitutional Principles 
  “[C]entral to the protections of due process is the 
right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a 
complete defense.”  State v. Tetu , 139 Hawaii 207, 219, 386 P.3d 
844, 856 (2016) (quoting Matafeo , 71 Haw. at 185, 787 P.2d at 
672).  Under this “well-established principle ,” “all defendants 
must be provided with the basic tool[s] of an adequate defense.”  
Id. (alteration in original) (quoting State v. Scott , 131 Hawai i 
333, 352, 319 P.3d 252, 271 (2013)).  One such basic tool is 
access to known favorable evidence on which a defense may be 
based.  Matafeo , 71 Haw. at 185- 86, 787 P.2d at 672.  Therefore, 
the prosecution has a constitutional obligation to disclose 
evidence that is material to the guilt or punishment of the 
defendant.34  Id. at 185, 787 P.2d at 672. 
                                                           
 34 This obligation is also set forth in Rule 16 of the HRPP, which 
provides in relevant part as follows:   
The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant or the 
defendant’s attorney the following material and information 
within the prosecutor’s possession or control:  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
41   The duty to disclose evidence that is favorable to the 
accused includes evidence that may be used to impeach the 
government’s witnesses by showing bias , self-interest, or other 
factors that might undermine the reliability of the witness’s 
testimony.  Giglio v. United States , 405 U.S. 150, 154 (1972).  
“The jury’s estimate of the truthfulness and reliability of a 
given witness may well be determinative of guilt or innocence, 
and it is upon such subtle factors as the possible interest of 
the witness in testifying falsely that a defendant ’s life or 
liberty may depend.”  Napue, 360 U.S. at 269.  The U.S. Supreme 
Court thus “has  rejected any . . . distinction between 
impeachment evidence and exculpatory evidence” in the context of 
Brady disclosure obligations.  United States v. Bagley , 473 U.S. 
667, 676 (1985).   
  In Giglio v. United States , the seminal case extending 
Brady to impeachment evidence, the defendant Giglio was 
convicted of passing forged bank notes based in large part on 
the testimony of a bank teller who allegedly participated in the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
 . . .  
 (vii) any material or information which tends to 
negate the guilt of the defendant as to the offense 
charged or would tend to reduce the defendant’s 
punishment therefor.  
HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii) (2012).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
42 scheme.  405 U.S. at 150.  At trial, the bank teller identified 
Giglio as the originator of the 
plan and, upon cross-
examination, denied 
that the prosecution had indicated that he 
might avoid indictment by testifying against Giglio.  Id. at 
151-52.   
  Following Giglio’s conviction, Giglio filed a motion 
for a new trial on the basis of newly discovered evidence, 
citing an affidavit by an  Assistant United States Attorney 
(AUSA) who had initially secured a grand jury indictment against 
Giglio.  Id. at 152.  The AUSA averred that he had, in fact, 
told the bank teller that he would not be indicted if he 
testified against Giglio.  Id.  In response to Giglio’s motion, 
the Government submitted two  affidavits.  The first, from the 
AUSA who had taken over the case for trial, averred that he had 
been assured by the first AUSA that no promises of immunity had 
been made to the bank teller.   Id.  In the second affidavit, the 
supervising U.S. Attorney averred that he  had personally met 
with the bank teller and his attorney before trial to emphasize 
that the bank teller “would definitely be prosecuted if he did 
not testify and that[,]  if he did testify[,]  he would be obliged 
to rely on the ‘good judgment and conscience of the Government’ 
as to whether he wou ld be prosecuted.”  Id. at 152-53.   
  On review, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously held 
that the government’s failure to disclose th at the bank teller ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
43 reasonably expected to benefit from his testimony violated due 
process and justified a new trial.  Id. at 154- 55.  The Court 
determined that the promise made by the first AUSA, regardless 
of his “authority []or his failure to inform his superiors or 
his associates,” must be attributed to the government.  Id. at 
154.  Of the supervising U.S. Attorney’s stat ement to the bank 
teller that he would simply have to rely on the Government’s 
good judgment and conscience, the Supreme Court 
stated that this 
“affidavit, standing alone, contains at least an implication 
that the Government would reward the cooperation of the witness, 
and hence tends to confirm  rather than refute the existence of 
some understanding for leniency .”  Id. at 153 n.4 (emphas es 
added).  “Evidence of any understanding or agreement” that 
conveyed a benefit, the Court reasoned, would be relevant to the 
witness’s credibility , “and the jury was entitled to know of 
it.”  Id. at 154.  
  Thus, although it is true that “[t]he prosecution  must 
reveal the contents of plea agreements with key government 
witnesses” because such evidence is relevant to impeach the 
witness by showing bias or interest , California v. Trombetta , 
467 U.S. 479, 485 (1984) (citing Giglio, 405 U.S. 150), 
disclosure obligations are not limited to formal written 
documents memorializing a quid pro quo between the government 
and the witness.  Rather, the duty to disclose is triggered, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
44 inter alia, when the government knows or should know that a 
witness expects to receive some benefit or avoid a detriment by
 
testifying.  The central inquiry is whether the government 
possesses information that may  have a potential negative impact 
on a key witness’s credibility , including that an incentive 
exists for the witness to deliver testimony that is biased 
against the defendant.  See Giglio , 405 U.S. at 154- 55 (“When 
the ‘reliability of a given witness may well be determinative of 
guilt or innocence ,’ nondisclosure of evidence affecting  
credibility  falls within [the]  general rule ” that “suppression  
of material evidence justifies a new trial ” (emphasis added) 
(quoting Napue, 360 U.S. at 269)).  This may often arise from an 
“agreement or understanding” that the witness may receive  a 
reduction of charges or leniency in  sentencing in exchange for 
testifying as a government witness.35  See id. 
at 152-55.   
                                                           
 35 The duty to disclose is not limited to evidence of promised 
benefits from the State, and it may be triggered by any admissible evidence 
affecting witness credibility, including a witness’s ulterior motive for 
testifying, a relevant sensory or mental defect, inconsistent past 
statements, or previous acts indicating dishonesty.  See, e.g. , Milke v. 
Ryan, 711 F.3d 998, 1001 (9th Cir. 2013) (holding disclosure of witness’s 
“long history of lying under oath and other misconduct” was required); United 
States v. Kohring , 637 F.3d 895, 907 (9th Cir. 2011) (holding disclosure of  
evidence that cast doubt upon witness’s memory and demonstrated witness had 
previously suborned perjury was required); see also Stockdale v. Helper , No. 
3:17-CV-241, 2017 WL 2546349, at *2 (M.D. Tenn. June 13, 2017) (explaining 
that, under Giglio , a prosecutor may be unlikely to call as a witness a 
police officer with a significant disciplinary history “because the 
prosecutor would be required to disclose to the defense existing information 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
45   The duty to disclose material impeachment evidence is 
compelled not only by due process, but also the constitutional 
right to confrontation.  This court has 
stated that “[a]n 
accused’s right to demonstrate the bias or motive of prosecution 
witnesses is protected by the sixth amendment to the United 
States Constitution, which guarantees an accused, inter alia, 
the right ‘ to be confronted with the witnesses against him [or  
her].’”  State v. Balisbisana , 83 Hawai i 109, 115, 924 P.2d 
1215, 1221 (1996) (second alteration in original) (quoting 
Alford v. United States , 282 U.S. 687 (1931)).  Article I, 
section 14 of the Hawai i Constitution contains a parallel 
provision, which we have held “includes a right to appropriate 
cross-examination.”  State v. Calbero , 71 Haw. 115, 124, 785 
P.2d 157, 161 (1989).  “It is well -settled that upholding a 
defendant’s rights under the confrontation clause is essential 
to providing a defendant with a fair trial.”  State v. Mattson , 
122 Hawai i 312, 325, 226 P.3d 482, 495 (2010).   
  The right to confrontation “provides the criminal 
defendant with the opportunity to defend himself [or herself] 
through our adversary system by prohibiting ex parte trials, 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
about the officer’s prior misconduct or other grounds to attack the officer’s 
credibility . . . which could compromise the prosecution”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
46 granting the defendant an opportunity to test the evidence in 
front of a jury, and guaranteeing the right to face- to-face 
confrontation.”  State v. Walsh , 125 Hawai i 271, 284, 260 P.3d  
350, 363 (2011) (alteration in original) (quoting Mattson, 122 
Hawaii at 325, 226 P.3d at  495).  In affording the defendant an 
opportunity to test the evidence, “[t]he right of confrontation 
affords the accused both the opportunity to challenge the  
credibility and veracity of the prosecution ’s witnesses and an 
occasion for the jury to weigh the demeanor of those witnesses.”  
Batalona v. State , 142 Hawai i 84, 102, 414 P.3d 136, 154 (2018)  
(quoting State v. Sua , 92 Hawaii 61, 70, 987 P.2d 959, 968  
(1999)). 
  “Indeed, the main and essential pur pose of 
confrontation is to secure for the opponent the opportunity of 
cross-examination[,] .  . . [and] the exposure of a witness’ 
motivation in testifying is a proper and important function of 
the constitutionally protected right of cross examination.”  
Balisbisana , 83 Hawai i at 115, 924 P.2d at 1221 (alterations in  
original) (quoting
 Delaware v. Van Arsdall , 475 U.S. 673, 678- 79 
(1986)).  “Cross-examination is the principal means by which the 
believability of a witness and the truth of his testimony are  
tested.”   
Davis v. Alaska , 415 U.S. 308, 316 (1974).  “ The 
partiality of a witness is subject to exploration at trial, and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
47 is ‘always relev ant as discrediting the witness and affecting 
the weight of his testimony.’”  Id. (quoting 3A J. Wigmore, 
Evidence § 940, p. 775 (Chadbourn rev. 1970)).   
  In light of these constitutional principles, we 
consider Birano’s arguments with regard to the Stat e’s 
disclosure obligations, together with the evidence adduced at 
the hearing on Petition II.   
2. Application to Birano’s Case  
a. Agreement Regarding a Sentencing Recommendation 
  On certiorari, Birano contends that there was an off-
the-record agreement between the State and Nakano that if Nakano 
testified against Birano, the State would recommend youthful 
offender sentencing.  In response, the State asserts that 
Birano’s claim that  there was such an agreement between the 
State and Nakano lacks merit.   
  In denying Petition II, the circuit court found that 
Breiner, Judge Simms, and Wada were credible while Nakano was 
not.  The court also found that there was no off- the-record plea 
agreement between the State and Nakano and thus there was 
nothing for the prosecution to disclose to Birano.  There is, 
however, overwhelming evidence in the record--including in the 
testimony the court found credible-- demonstrating that the State 
possessed material information relevant to Nakano ’s credibility 
that was required to be disclosed.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
48   First, the hearing testimony strongly contradicted the 
circuit court’s conclusion that no agreement existed between 
Nakano and the State.  Judg e Simms’s testimony expressly 
referenced the existence of an agreement in which Nakano would 
receive a benefit for his testimony.  Judge Simms stated  
repeatedly that, while she was not a party to some of the 
exchanges  between Breiner and Wada following Nak ano’s invocation 
of the Fifth Amendment, Judge Simms understood that Breiner and 
Wada discussed an agreement in which Nakano would testify in 
exchange for a favorable recommendation from the State at 
sentencing.  Specifically, Judge Simms confirmed upon 
questioning that it was “fair to say” that there was a 
discussion between Breiner and Wada about an agreement involving 
Nakano.  And she agreed that “the gist” of the arrangement 
discussed “was that if he, Nakano, testified against Mr. Birano, 
the State would recommend the Youthful Offender Act.”   
  E ven the testimony of Breiner , who ostensibly denied 
the existence of an  agreement, actually indicated that some 
arrangement existed in which Nakano’s testimony  at Birano ’s 
trial would be beneficial to Nakano.  Breiner testified that 
there was  an “understanding ” that if Nakano testified against 
Birano, Wada  would “take it into consideration ” with respect to 
her sentencing recommendation.  Breiner attempted to distinguish 
this understanding from an agreement, noting that Wada had ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
49 indicated she did not have the authority to enter into a formal 
arrangement on the subject: 
There was no agreement at all.  There was an understanding 
that if he cooperated, then the court -- then the 
prosecutor, Ms. Wada, would take it into consideration  and 
recommend, we were hoping, youth offender treatment.  She 
couldn’t get approval for it.  She couldn’ t say that she 
had authority to do that and there was nothing in writing.  
(Emphases added.)  There are further statements in Breiner’s 
testimony that suggest he considered any arrangement in which a 
prosecutor makes a non- binding recommendation at sentencing in 
exchange for testimony to be an “understanding” rather than a 
deal or agreement:   
Q. Okay.  And sometimes those are deals where the State’s 
going to make a recommendation for your client at 
sentencing but the judge is not bound by that 
recommendation, correct?  
A. You’re using the word “deal.”  There ’s an understanding.  
If that’s what you mean by deal, that’s a little different .  
There’s an understanding sometimes the prosecutor will make 
a recommendation . 
(Emphasis added.) 
  The purported distinction between an agreement and an 
understanding is spurious under the law, and it is irrelevant 
for purposes of the State’s constitutional 
disclosure 
obligations.  “Agreement” is defined as “[a] mutual 
understanding between two or more persons about their relative 
rights and duties regarding past and future performances.”  
Agreement, Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014) (emphasis 
added).  Conversely, an “understanding” i s “[a]n agreement , esp. 
of an implied or taci t nature.”  Understanding , Black’s Law  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
50 Dictionary (10th ed. 2014) (emphasis added).  The terms are 
legally equivalent in this context, as demonstrated by the lack 
of differentiation in the Supreme Court’s analysis in Giglio.  
See 405 U.S. at 154-55 (holding that “evidence of any 
understanding or agreement  as to a future prosecution would be 
relevant to his credibility and the jury was entitled to know of
it” (emphasis added)).    
  Thus, when  Breiner used “understanding” to refer to an 
unwritten, informal arrangement between Nakano and the State in 
which Nakano would receive a youthful offender recommendation in 
exchange for his testimony, the arrangement still amounted to an 
agreement that was required to be disclosed.36  “[T]he Supreme 
Court has never limited a Brady violation to cases where the 
facts demonstrate that the state and the witness have reached a 
bona fide . . . deal.”  LaCaze v. Warden La. Corr. Inst. for 
Women, 645 F.3d 728, 735 (5th Cir. 2011); accord United States  
v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 683 (1985) (holding disclosure is 
required despite the witness’s “ stake” not being “guaranteed 
through a promise or binding contract ”).  Given this evidentiary 
                                                           
 36 Wada’s lack of authority and inability to obtain approval to 
enter into an agreement were similarly immaterial to her disclosure 
obligations.  See  Giglio, 405 U.S. at 154 (“In the circumstances shown by 
this record, neither [the AUSA]’s authority nor his failure to inform his 
superiors or his associates is controlling. . . . The prosecutor’s office is 
an entity and as such it is the spokesman for the Government.  A promise made 
by one attorney must be attributed, for these purposes, to the Government.”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
51 record, we are “ left with the definite and firm conviction ” that 
the circuit court was mistaken in its finding that no agreement 
existed.  Jones v. State , 79 Hawai‘i 330, 334, 902 P.2d 965, 969 
(1995) (quoting Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai‘i 226, 231, 900 P.2d 
1293, 1298 (1995)).  Accordingly, this finding was clearly 
erroneous. 
  E ven had the circuit court ’s finding that no agreement 
existed between Nakano or his counsel and Wada not been clearly 
erroneous, however, it would not be the end of our inquiry into 
the State’s disclosure obligations.  When determining whether 
the disclosure of impeachment evidence is required, the relevant 
question “is not whether the prosecutor and the witness entered 
into an effective agre ement, but whether the witness ‘might have 
believed that the 
[S]tate was in a position to implement any 
promise of consideration.’”  LaCaze , 645 F.3d at 735  
(alterations omitted) (quoting Napue, 360 U.S. at 270).  The 
“possibility of a reward ” gives a witness “a direct, personal 
stake in [the defendant]’ s conviction. ”  Bagley, 473 U.S. at 683 
(emphasis added).  Thus, an i ndication by the State sufficient 
to make Nakano believe his testimony might be rewarded was 
sufficient to trigger Wada’s disclosure obligations, regardless 
of whether an agreement existed. 
  This is to say that an indication that the State  would 
simply take Nakano’s assistance “into consideration ”--which ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
52 Breiner testified was part of the “understanding” --was required 
to be disclosed even if it was not accompanied by a promise of 
the exact reward.  In Giglio v. United States , the supervising 
U.S. Attorney made a similarly noncommittal statement regarding 
the advantages of cooperation, telling 
the witness “that if he 
did testify he would be obliged to rely on the” Government’s 
“good judgment and conscience” as to whether he would be 
prosecuted.  405 U.S. 150, 153 n.4 (1972).  The U.S. Supreme 
Court concluded that the statement nonetheless carried an 
implication that the witness would receive a benefit from the 
Government in exchange for his cooperation and thus “tend[ed] to 
confirm rather than refute the existence of some understanding 
for leniency.”  Id. (emphasis added).  Subsequent cases have 
confirmed that an implication of consideration is sufficient to 
trigger disclosure and that “[a] promise is unnecessary. ”  
Tassin v. Cain, 517 F.3d 770, 778 (5th Cir. 2008).  
  Indeed, when a witness’s  stake in the outcome of the 
case is “not guaranteed through a promise or binding contract, ” 
but is instead “contingent on the Government ’s satisfaction with 
the end result, ” it “serves only to strengthen any incentive to 
testify falsely in order to secure a conviction .”  Bagley, 473 
U.S. at 683 (emphasis added).  This is because, when the State 
conveys only that it will take a witness’s testimony into 
account in determining whether to grant the witness favorable ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
53 treatment, it provides a motivation for the witness to testify 
so as to curry as much favor with the State as possible
.  The 
witness is then more 
likely to prioritize the State’s 
satisfaction over testifying truthfully, making this
 incentive 
structure highly relevant to the witness’s credibility .  The 
jury is therefore “entitled to know of it” in order to properly 
assess the veracity of the witness’s testimon y.  Giglio, 405 
U.S. at 154. 
  Thus, considered together, the testimony at the 
Petition II hearing that was found to be credible strongly 
evidenced that Nakano’s testimony at Birano’s trial was 
motivated by the possibility of a reward from the State.   
Notwithstanding any express denials of an agreement, Breiner’s 
testimony that there was an “understanding” that the State would 
provide a youthful offender recommendation 
if Nakano  were to 
testify, viewed in light of and in conjunction with Judge 
Simms’s testimony  expressly stating that such an arrangement 
existed, clearly indicated that an actual agreement existed  
between Nakano and the State.37  The circuit court therefore 
                                                           
 37 It is noted that the progression of events is consistent with the 
existence of such an agreement between Nakano and the State.  Nakano was 
indicted and pleaded no contest to charges of robbery in the first degree, 
kidnapping, and burglary in the first degree.  Although Wada later testified 
that she believed Nakano was “peripheral,” “barely involved in the incident,” 
and simply a “young kid” who “was in the wrong place at the wrong time ,” she 
filed a motion seeking extended terms of imprisonment against Nakano, 
including a life sentence for the kidnapping and robbery charges.  No similar 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
54 clearly erred in its factual findings  to the contrary.  See 
Jones, 79 Hawai i at 334, 902 P.2d at 969 (“A finding of fact is  
clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, 
the appellate court is left with the definite and firm 
conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has 
been committed.” (quoting Tachibana , 79 Hawaii at 231, 900 P.2d 
at 1298)).  Yet disclosure would have be en required even if such 
an agreement did not exist because an indication that a 
witness’s testimony will be taken into account is also strongly 
probative of the witness’s credibility, and the jury is entitled 
to know of it.  Bagley, 473 U.S. at 683.  The testimony adduced 
at the hearing on Petition II indisputably indicated that such a 
representation was made to Nakano or his counsel.   
  The  arrangement between Wada and Breiner was crucial 
evidence relevant to Nakano’s credibility because it provided an 
incentive for him to “slant” his testimony against Birano.  
State v. Levell , 128 Hawaii 34, 40, 282 P.3d 576, 582  (2012) 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
motion was filed against Takara, who was also eligible for an extended term 
but whom the State did not later call as a witness at Birano’s trial.  Prior 
to Birano’s trial, Nakano and Breiner met with Wada at the prosecutor’s 
office.  Nakano thereafter appeared at Birano’s trial and, following the 
unrecorded in- chambers meeting, declined to assert his Fifth Amendment 
privilege and testified for the State.  Wada then stated at Nakano’s 
sentencing hearing that he had provided “tremendous assistance” by testifying 
against Birano, withdrew the motion for extended terms of imprisonment, and 
recommended that Nakano  instead be sentenced as a youthful offender.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
55 (quoting Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 
609.1–[1][C] (2010 –11 ed.)).  Had the arrangement been 
disclosed, Birano would have been afforded the opportunity to 
explore this motivation and challenge the veracity of Nakano’s 
testimony.38  State v. Tetu, 139 Hawai i 207, 219, 386 P.3d 844, 
856 (2016).  In the absence of this evidence, the jury did not 
have “sufficient information from which to make an informed 
appraisal” of Nakano’s credibility.  Levell, 128 Hawai i at 40, 
282 P.3d at 582; accord State v. Acacio , 140 Hawai i 92, 100- 01, 
398 P.3d 681, 689- 90 (2017) ( concluding that the defendant’s 
right to confrontation was violated when he was prevented from 
cross-examining a witness about evidence tending to show motive 
or bias).  The State was thus required under due process and the 
Confrontation Clause to disclose this arrangement.  Tetu, 139 
                                                           
 38 It is of no consequence whether this arrangement  existed at the 
time of Nakano’s plea.  Under HRPP Rule 16(e)(2) (2012),  
If subsequent to compliance with these rules or orders 
entered pursuant to these rules, a party discovers 
additional material or information which would have been 
subject to disclosure pursuant to this Rule 16, he shall 
promptly notify the other party or his counsel of the 
existence of such additional material or information, and 
if the additional material or information is discovered 
during trial, the court shall also be notified.  
Thus, “HRPP Rule 16(e)(2) places a continuing duty to disclose on the 
parties.”  State v. Moriwaki , 71 Haw. 347, 354 -55, 791 P.2d 392, 396 (1990).  
Moreover, an arrangement  arising at any time prior to Nakano’s testimony was 
highly relevant to his credibility, and thus disclosure is required under 
constitutional due process.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
56 Hawaii at 219, 386 P.3d at  856; California v. Trombetta , 467 
U.S. 479, 485 (1984) (citing Giglio, 405 U.S. 150); 21A Am. Jur. 
2d Criminal Law  § 1171 (2018); State v. Baron , 80 Hawai i 107, 
117, 905 P.2d 613, 623 (1995).  And t he circuit court erred as a 
matter of law in determining that no disclosure was required. 
b. The Court’s Sentencing Inclination  
  
The uncontroverted evidence in the record also 
demonstrates that the circuit court made representations 
regarding its inclination to follow the State’s recommendation 
at Nakano’s sentencing .  Wada testified that, during the in-
chambers meeting between herself, Judge Simms, and Breiner, 
Breiner asked Judge Simms whether Nakano’s refusal to testify 
would preclude him from receiving the benefit of the Youthful 
Offender Act at sentencing.  In response, Wada testified, Judge 
Simms stated, “ Well, it ’s going to depend on what the State 
asks.  If the State asks for it, then I ’m inclined to follow 
it.”  Later in her testimony, Wada reiterated that Judge Simms 
had indicated that she would defer to the State in determining  
Nakano’s sentence  when Judge Simms stat ed, “Well, I don ’t know.  
It depends on what the State asks. ”39   
                                                           
 39 The dissent questions the reliability of this testimony, 
characterizing it as “indirect evidence” of Judge Simm s’s statement s that is 
“arguably hearsay -within-hearsay.”  Dissent at 15 -16 n.2.  As an initial 
matter, Judge Simms’s words would not themselves be barred by the rule 
against hearsay because, as statements of intention, they reflect her then -
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
57   This court considered the role of a court’s expressed 
sentencing inclination in State v. Sanney , 141 Hawai i 14, 404 
P.3d 280 (2017).  Analogizing a sentencing inclination to a plea 
agreement, we recognized that such a suggestion from the court 
is a powerful motivating force in inducing a defendant to plead 
guilty or no contest,  and we held that a court therefore must 
allow a defendant an opportunity to withdraw a plea if the court 
elects not to follow a previously expressed sentencing 
inclination.  Id.  at 22-23, 404 P.3d at 288-89.   
  A court’s expression of a conditional sentencing 
inclination brings a similar inducement to bear on a prospective 
witness.  In Tassin v. Cain , for instance, the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit considered a trial court ’s 
statement to a wife codefendant in a capital murder case that 
the court was inclined to sentence her to twenty to thirty 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
existing mental condition and are admissible pursuant to Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence Rule 803(b)(3) (2002).  See State v. Robinson, 79 Hawai i 468, 470, 
903 P.2d 1289, 1291 (1995).  Thus, Wada’s direct testimony based on personal 
knowledge of Judge Simm s’s expressed sentencing inclination was clearly 
admissible under the state of mind hearsay exception.  And, while  Wada also 
testified to Judge Simms’s sentencing inclination statement s in the context 
of recounting information she had previously related to Pennington,  the 
duplicative  nature of this testimony renders it unnecessary to consider 
whether it would be barred by the rule against hearsay.  
 
 Furthermore, neither recounting of Judge Simms’s statements by 
Wada garnered an objection from the State.  And the State did not question 
Wada’s testimony upon redirect or introduce any contrary evidence o n the 
matter.  Wada’s testimony on this point is therefore uncontroverted.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
58 years.  517 F.3d 770, 774 (5th Cir. 2008).  The trial court 
indicated, however, that it would consider reducing the wife’s  
sentence to fifteen years if she waived the marital privilege to 
testify against her husband and to ten years if her testimony 
was consistent with her previous statement to police.  Id.  The 
Fifth Circuit held that it was immaterial that the court’s 
statement of inclination did not amount to a “promise” ; the 
State was constitutionally required to reveal the arrangement to 
the defendant and the jury.  Id. at 779. 
  When , as here, a court states that it is inclined to 
make its sentencing contingent on a prosecutor’s recommendation, 
the inclination is no less a motivating force in inducing a 
witness’s favorable testimony  than the tiered sentencing 
inclination given in Tassin.40  Nakano knew that, if the State 
was satisfied with his testimony and recommended a more lenient 
sentence under the Youthful Offender Act, he was virtually 
certain to receive that sentence based on the court’s stated 
inclination.  Conversely, Nakano knew that,  if the State was  not 
satisfied with his  testimony  or his decision not to testify,  he 
                                                           
 40 This court also held in Sanney that a trial court should not use 
a sentencing inclination as a tool to bargain with a defendant.  141 Hawai i 
at 21, 404 P.3d at 287.  Additionall y, the “imposition of a sentence . . . is 
a core judicial function” that “cannot be delegated to nonjudicial officers.”  
United States v. Johnson , 48 F.3d 806, 808 –09 (4th Cir. 1995) (citing Ex 
Parte United States , 242 U.S. 27, 41 (1916)).  Thus, it would appear to be 
improper for a court to express an inclination to follow whatever sentence 
the prosecution recommends.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
59 was very likely to be sentenced as an adult offender and receive 
at least a twenty-year prison term.  Indeed, the court’s stated 
inclination to follow the State’s recommendation may have 
suggested to Nakan
o that the court would grant the State’s 
pending motion for extended term sentencing if the motion  was 
not withdrawn, giving  Nakano the impression that he would be 
subject to life imprisonment if he did not testify to the 
State’s satisfaction.  
  The coercive effect  of this carrot-and-stick 
arrangement should not be understated.  By expressing its 
inclination to follow the prosecution’s sentencing 
recommendation, the circuit court elevated and reinforced the 
unwritten bargain between Nakano and the State, granting it a 
status somewhat akin to a HRPP Rule 11(f)(1) plea agreement in 
which the court has agreed to be bound.41  Further still, the 
court’s inclination suggested a harsh forfeit not generally 
                                                           
 41 HRPP Rule 11(f)(1) provides as follows:  
(f) Plea agreement.  
 (1) In general.  The prosecutor and counsel for the 
defendant, or the defendant when acting pro se, may enter 
into plea agreements that, upon the entering of a plea of 
guilty or no contest to a charged offense or to an included 
or related offense, the prosecutor will take certain 
actions or adopt certain positions, including the dismissal 
of other charges and the recommending or not opposing of 
specific sentences or dispositions on the charge to which a 
plea was entered.  The court may participate in discussions 
leading to such plea agreements and may agree to be bound 
thereby.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
60 present in a binding plea agreement--the  certain imposition of 
the indeterminate twenty-year  prison term and the real 
possibility of an extended term sentence if Nakano did not 
cooperate and testify to the State’s sa tisfaction.  Under the 
circumstances, Nakano possessed a compelling incentive not only 
to testify against Birano but also 
to testify so as to curry 
favor with the State.   
  
In light of the circuit court’s sentencing 
inclination, which informed Nakano that the determination of his 
eventual sentence had essentially been delegated to the State, 
Nakano may have “consciously or unconsciously . . . slant[ed]” 
or biased his testimony to complement the State’s theory of the 
case.  State v. Levell
, 128 Hawai i 34, 40, 282 P.3d 576, 582 
(2012).  “The partiality of a witness is subject to exploration 
at trial, and is ‘always relevant as discrediting the witness 
and affecting the weight of his testimony.’”  Davis v. Alaska , 
415 U.S. 308, 316 (1974) (quoting 3A J. Wigmore, Evidence §  940, 
p. 775 (Chadbourn rev. 1970)).  The jury was thus “ entitled to 
know of” the court’s sentencing inclination, and disclosure was 
required prior to Nakano testifying
.  Giglio v. United States , 
405 U.S. 150, 155 (1972).  The State plainly failed to fulfill 
this constitutional obligation.  The circuit court therefore 
clearly erred as a matter of fact and law in concluding that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
61 there was no impeachment evidence that was required to be 
disclosed to Birano.   
B. The Duty to Correct False Testimony 
  Although not necessary to our decision today, we note 
that “[t]he most rudimentary of the access-to-evidence cases 
impose upon the prosecution a constitutional obligation to 
report to the defendant and to the trial court whenever 
government witnesses lie under oath. ”  California v. Trombetta , 
467 U.S. 479, 485 (1984).  This principle “does not cease to 
apply merely because the false testimony goes only to the 
credibility of the witness. ”  Napue, 360 U.S. at 269.  Further, 
the good faith of the prosecutor in failing to correct false 
testimony regarding impeachment material has no bearing on 
whether a defendant received a fair trial as required by due 
process: 
It is of no consequence that the falsehood bore upon the 
witness’  credibility rath er than directly upon defendant’ s 
guilt.  A lie is a lie, no matter what its subject, and, if 
it is in any way relevant to the case, the district 
attorney has the responsibility and duty to correct what he 
[or she] knows to be false and elicit the truth. . . .  That 
the district attorney’ s silence was not the result of guile 
or a desire to prejudice matters little, for its impact was 
the same , preventing, as it did, a trial that could in any 
real sense be termed fair.  
Id. at 269-70 (emphases added) (quoting People v. Savvides , 1 
N.Y.2d 554, 557 (1956)).  Thus, when  the State’ s witness denies 
the presence of an ulterior motive or other evidence bearing 
negatively on the witness’s credibility and the State is aware ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
62 the denial is false, the prosecution has a constitutional duty 
to correct the false testimony, and the failure to do so 
violates due process irrespective of the prosecutor’s intent . 
  In denying Petition II, the circuit court found that
 
because there was no off-the- record plea agreement between the 
State and Nakano,  there was no  need for the prosecution to 
correct Nakano’s testimony at trial .  As discussed supra, the 
arrangement between Nakano and the State was required to be 
disclosed even if it did not constitute a formal agreement.  But 
even in the absence of an arrangement, it would not obviate the 
prosecution’s duty to correct Nakano’s testimony.  
  “[T]he crux” of a due process violation arising from  a 
prosecutor’s failure to correct false testimony is the 
“deception” of the finder of fact and not whether any deal for 
leniency actually existed.  Tassin v. Cain, 517 F.3d 
770, 778 
(5th Cir. 2008) .  “A promise is unnecessary.”  Id.  The proper 
focus of such an inquiry is therefore “the extent to which the 
testimony misled the jury, not whether the promise was indeed a 
promise.”  LaCaze v. Warden La. Corr. Inst. for Women , 645 F.3d 
728, 735 (5th Cir. 2011) (quoting Tassin, 517 F.3d at 778) . 
  At  Birano’s  trial, Nakano testified not only that he 
had no plea arrangement with the State, but also that he was 
testifying simply “[t] o tell the truth .”  Nakano indicated that 
he had not pleaded no contest so that he “could get off easier .”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
63 He denied that he “wanted to do well” in testifying in front of 
the judge and prosecution and insisted he was not hoping that by 
testifying favorably for the State he would obtain a more 
lenient sentence.  And although Nakano admitted when pressed on 
cross-examination that he had initially asked the court for 
youthful offender sentencing and was still hoping to obtain it, 
he strongly indicated that  the possibility that his testimony 
would be accounted for in that determination played no part in 
his decision to testify.   
  The credible testimony at the hearing on Petition II 
indicated that these statements 
were very likely to mislead the 
jury regarding material facts.  As discussed supra, Breiner 
testified that an “understanding” existed between him and Wada 
in which Nakano’s testimony would be taken “into consideration” 
with respect to the State’s sentencing recommendation, and Judge 
Simms repeatedly stated that it was her understanding that an 
actual quid-pro-quo agreement existed.  Nakano’s testimony  at 
Birano’s trial that no agreement existed was therefore very 
likely to give the jury an inaccurate understanding of material 
facts.  Further, even the testimony of Wada, who denied the 
existence of an agreement,  indicated that portions of Nakano’s 
testimony were highly misleading because he was in fact 
motivated by a desire to obtain a lighter sentence
 under the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
64 Youthful Offender Act-- and not simply a moral obligation “to 
tell the truth.”  
  Wada testified that, prior to trial, Breiner “kept 
asking [her] for a deal.”  She stated that Breiner had 
“basically told [her]  his client had no case, he confessed and 
he implicated everybody, and the only chance he ha[d]  is a 
Youthful Offender sentencing .”  Wada testified that, during the 
off-the-record meeting in chambers, Breiner told Judge Simms in 
her presence that Nakano was afraid to testify against Birano 
but he was concerned that Nakano 
would not be considered a 
candidate for youthful offender sentencing if he did not do so.  
Breiner then inquired whether Judge Simms would still consider 
a youthful offender sentence if Nakano changed his mind and 
elected to testify despite his fear of Birano.  Wada stated 
that she was included in this conversation, that Judge Simms 
asked her whether the State would be recommending a youthful 
offender sentence
 after indicating the court would defer to her 
judgment, and that she responded by saying she did not know yet 
because they did not have a plea agreement and Nakano had not 
yet testified for her.    
  On this record, a prosecutor would have  good reason to 
be aware that Nakano’s purported  fear of Birano was overcome by 
his desire to obtain a youthful offender sentence and avoid the 
extended life term the State had requested.  Consequently,  a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
65 prosecutor would have reason to know that Nakano’s claims that 
he was testifying to tell the truth and that he was not hoping 
his testimony would earn him a more lenient sentence were 
likely to mislead the jury.  Similarly,  there was ample reason 
to surmise that Nakano’s assertion that he had no desire to “do 
well” in front of the judge and prosecution w as likely un true--
particularly in light of Judge Simms’s stated inclination to 
follow the State’s recommendation at sentencing.  
  
Although the jury was informed that Nakano could 
receive an extended term sentence that included life 
imprisonment, it had no knowledge that the State had a pending 
motion requesting such an extended term or that the court had 
indicated it was inclined to follow the prosecu tion’s 
recommendation.  Under the circumstances, Nakano’s testimony 
that he was not expecting or hoping for any sentencing benefit 
in exchange for his testimony was deceptive and gave the jury a 
highly inaccurate impression as to Nakano’s “ personal stake ” in 
Birano’s conviction.  United States v. Bagley
, 473 U.S.  667, 683 
(1985).   
  Because we hold that the State’s failure to disclose 
information material to Nakano’s credibility warrant s a new 
trial, we need not decide whether the failure to correct 
Nakano’s testimony would justify setting aside Birano’s 
convictions in its own right.  We note, however, that a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
66 prosecutor’s constitutional duty to correct testimony is 
triggered even when a witness’s testimony is “ at best 
misleading.”  United States v. Dvorin, 817 F.3d 438, 452 (5th 
Cir.), cert. denied , 137 S. Ct. 140 (2016).  Prosecutors should 
therefore err on the side of caution in future cases when faced 
with testimony of a government witness that they know may 
mislead the jury as to some material fact.  
C. The Error s Were Material and Not Harmless  
  “Violation of the constitutional right to confront 
adverse witnesses is subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard.”  State v. Balisbisana , 83 Hawai i 109, 113 -14, 
924 P.2d 1215, 1219- 20 (1996) (citing State v. Corella , 79 
Hawaii 255, 261, 900 P.2d 1322, 1328 (App. 1995)).  
Additionally, the failure of the prosecution to disclose 
impeachment evidence warrants a new trial if the evidence is  
“material.”42  State v. Arnold , 66 Haw. 175, 179, 657 P.2d 1052, 
1054 (1983) (citing Giglio v. United States , 405 U.S. 150,  154 
(1972); Napue, 360 U.S. at 264).  When the “reliability of a 
given witness may well be determinative of guilt or innocence,” 
                                                           
 42 Because materiality represents a higher standard than harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt, facts establishing materiality will necessarily 
establish a harmful error.  See Kyles v. Whitley , 514 U.S. 419, 435 -36 (1995) 
(“[O]nce a reviewing court . . . has fou nd constitutional error [from 
nondisclosure], there is no need for further harmless -error review.”).  We 
therefore analyze the issues together.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
67 the nondisclosure of evidence affecting that witness’s 
credibility is material.  Giglio, 405 U.S. at 154 (quoting 
Napue, 360 U.S. at 269).  Put another way, evidence is material 
“if there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence 
been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding 
would have been different. ”  State v. Moriwaki , 71 Haw. 347, 
356, 791 P.2d 392, 397 (1990) (quoting United States v. Bagley , 
473 U.S. 667, 676 (1985)).  Thus, the nondisclosure of 
impeachment evidence bearing on Nakano’s credibility warrant s 
granting Birano a new trial if Nakano’s testimony was material 
in the obtainment of Birano’s convictions.  
  T o convict Birano of the robbery offense with which he 
was charged, the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that Birano “threaten[ed]  the imminent use of force 
against” Dumlao  “with intent to compel acquiescence to the 
taking of or escaping with the property .”  See HRS § 708 -
840(1)(b)(ii).  Therefore, the State was required to prove that 
Birano intended to take property from Dumlao through the threat 
of force in order to convict Birano of robbery.   
  Birano’s burglary conviction, on the other hand, could 
be sustained only if the State proved beyond a reasonable doubt 
that Birano entered or remained in Dumlao’s apartment intending 
to commit a crime against persons or property.  See HRS § 708 -
810(1).  Although a claim of right is not an available defense ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
68 to robbery through the threat of force, State v. McMillen , 83 
Hawaii 264, 265, 925 P.2d 1088, 1089 (1996), such a defense is 
available to theft-- the crime the State argued Birano intended 
to commit when he entered Dumlao’s apartment , see HRS § 708-34 
(2014).  Thus, in order to convict Birano of burglary, the State 
was required to prove that Birano entered or remained in 
Dumlao’s apartment while intending to either take property from 
Dumlao through the threat of force or take property to which he 
had no claim of right.   Additionally, the indictment against 
Birano stated that one of the firearm offenses with which Birano 
was charged--carrying, using,  or threatening to use a f irearm in 
the commission of a separate felony-- was based on Birano’s 
carrying of a firearm during the commission of the burglary 
offense.  This charge was therefore  dependent on the State 
proving that the burglary occurred, and Birano could not be 
convicted for this firearm offense 
if he was not also convicted 
of the burglary.43  
  Birano 
testified that,  two days prior to the incident 
at Dumlao’s apartment , Dumlao stole $2,500 from him in a 
                                                           
 43 Birano did not dispute that he was in possession of the illegal 
firearm that formed the basis of the other charged firearm -related offenses, 
and the disclosure failures are thus harmless beyond a reasonable doubt with 
respect to those convictions.  Additionally, the jury acquitted Birano of the 
kidnapping charge, and we therefore need not consider the effect of the 
nondisclosures in regard to this offense.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
69 fraudulent drug transaction.  Birano stated that he, Nakano, and 
Takara went to Dumlao’s apartment on the day of the incident to 
get back his property.  Although Birano acknowledged that he had 
a gun with him at the time, Birano testified that he carried it 
only for self- defense because he had previously been kidnapped 
and held at gunpoint and he did not know if Dumlao was armed.   
Birano further testified that he did not point the gun at Dumlao 
and that he put the gun away when he saw that Dumlao did not 
himself have a gun.  Birano stated that, upon being confronted 
about the unfulfilled drug transaction, Dumlao voluntarily 
invited Takara, Nakano, and him up to the  apartment to retrieve 
Birano’s property.  Birano testified that he did not intend to 
terrorize Dumlao, that he never threatened Dumlao with the gun, 
and that he drew the gun again only when Dumlao refused to enter 
after opening the door to the apartment because Birano feared 
someone was waiting inside as part of a “setup.”  And Birano 
stated that he did not take anything from the apartment after 
Dumlao ran to the balcony and exited down the side of the 
building.   
  If the jury credited Birano’s testimony, it would not 
have convicted Birano of the robbery and burglary offenses 
because he did not have the requisite intent to take property 
from Dumlao or from his apartment through the threat of force , 
nor did he enter or remain in Dumlao’s apartment intending to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
70 take property to which he had no claim of right .  The State’s 
case against Birano with respect to these charges therefore 
turned on whether it offered evidence disproving Birano’s claim 
that he intended only to get his property back and neither 
threatened Dumlao with the gun nor intended to do so. 
  Birano’s account was corroborated by Poomaihealani , 
who testified that Dumlao had told him that he had taken $2,000 
from Birano in a fraudulent drug transaction and had falsely 
claimed Birano had robbed him to divert police attention from 
this exchange.  Birano’s testimony was also consistent with the 
surveillance video, which showed Dumlao walking casually up the 
stairs and did not show a gun in Biran o’s hands until just 
before he entered the apartment.  It was consistent with the 
testimony of Dumlao’s neighbors  Kobayashi and Cruz, who both 
stated that,  when they opened their doors to check on the 
disturbance they had heard, they did not see a gun and Dumlao 
assured them everything was alright.  And it was in accord with 
the investigating police officer’s testimony that numerous 
valuables were in Dumlao’s apartment during the incident, yet 
nothing appeared to have been taken.  The State’s case was 
therefore entirely dependent on the jury crediting the testimony 
of the three witnesses who claimed Birano had threatened Dumlao 
with the gun and demanded that he open his safe so that Birano ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
71 could take p roperty to which he had no claim of entitlement : 
Casil, Nakano, and Dumlao himself. 
  There is ample evidence in the record from which a 
reasonable juror could doubt the veracity of Casil’s and 
Dumlao’s account s.  As stated, Birano’s and Poomaihealani ’s 
testimonies suggested that Dumlao was a drug dealer and that he 
had stolen money from Birano through a sham drug transaction and 
was attempting to implicate Birano to allay suspicion.  In 
addition to Casil’s romantic relationship with Dumlao, she 
testified that she was a crystal meth user and that Dumlao had 
given her meth on previous occasions, which granted her multiple 
incentives to back up Dumlao’s version of events.   Casil also 
testified that she could not recall whether she had used crystal 
methamphetamine on the morning of the incident, that she could 
not confirm at which part of Dumlao’s body Birano pointed the 
gun, and that she ran away almost immediately when the incident 
began.   
  Nakano,  a confederate of Birano in the most serious of 
the charged offenses who from the jury’s point of view  had 
nothing to gain by lying, provided compelling testimony 
describing a key aspect of the State’s case against Birano --that 
Birano had threatened Dumlao with a gun for the purpose of 
taking property from him .  Nakano’s credibility was therefore an 
integral part of Birano’s conviction s on the robbery and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
72 burglary offenses.  Indeed, Nakano’s status as a codefendant 
allegedly testifying out of a moral obligation to tell the truth 
likely lent particular weight to his testimony, cementing the 
crucial details the State was required to prove in the mind of 
the jury.  Wada herself described the assistance Nakano rendered 
to the State as “tremendous” during Nakano’s sentencing hearing.   
  B y failing to disclose that Nakano possessed a 
significant incentive to curry favor with the State and was thus 
not actually disinterested in the outcome of the case, the State 
withheld highly relevant evidence to which the jury was entitled 
and thereby deprived Birano of a fair trial.  The error was 
therefore material and not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, 
and neither Birano’s robbery and burglary convictions nor the 
related carrying of a firearm conviction may stand.44 
V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s Ma rch 10, 2017 
Judgment on Appeal and the circuit court’s September 2, 2015 
Order Denying Petition To Vacate, Set Aside, Or Correct Judgment 
Or To Release Petitioner From Custody, Filed On September 9, 
2009 are vacated.  The circuit court’s February 18, 2003 
                                                           
 44 Although the State’s nondisclosure is harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt with respect to Birano’s four other convictions involving 
his possession of firearm, see supra note 43, Birano’s convictions that are  
herein vacated were an integral part of the sentencing of Birano to 
indeterminate and extended terms for the firearm possession convictions.  
Birano’s sentences for these firearm offenses must therefore be vacated with 
resentencing to occur following disposition of the vacated convictions.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
73 Judgment of Guilty Conviction and Sentence is vacated with 
respect to Birano’s convictions for violations of HRS § 134 -6(a) 
and (e), HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(ii),  and HRS § 708- 810(1)(c) .  
Birano’s sentences for his convictions for violations of HRS § 
134-8(a) and HRS § 134 -7(b) and (h) are also vacated, with 
resentencing to occur following disposition of the vacated 
convictions, and the case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
Keith S. Shigetomi  
for petitioner  
 
Stephen K. Tsushima  
for respondent  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
