***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
CYRINA L. HEWITT,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-16-0000460 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
(CAAP-16-0000460; CR IMINAL NO. 3DTA- 15-00745) 
 
MARCH 15, 2023  
 
McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.; AND NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING,
WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS
 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I.  Introduction  
 This appeal addresses Miranda rights arising o ut of police 
questioning of a person confined to a hospital bed.  Cyrina 
Hewitt (“Hewitt”) was charged in the District Court of the Third 
Circuit, Kona Division (“district court”) with operating a Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000460
15-MAR-2023
09:06 AM
Dkt. 21 OP 2 vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (“OVUII”) and 
driving without a license (“DWOL”).  Hewitt moved to suppress 
evidence based on a failure to provide Miranda warnings.  The 
district court denied Hewitt’s motion, and Hewitt was convicted 
of both offenses after a bench trial.  
On appeal to the Intermediate  Court of Appeals (“ICA”), 
Hewitt argued in part that she had been subjected to custodial 
interrogation without the requisite Miranda warnings.  In State 
v. Hewitt , 149 Hawai‘i 71, 481 P.3d 713 (App. 2021), a published 
opinion, the ICA held that Miranda warnings were not required 
because Hewitt was not in custody at the time of questioning.  
The ICA ruled Hewitt was not entitled to Miranda warnings 
because (1) her inability to leave the scene of questioning was 
not the result of detention by law enforcement ; (2) the officers 
did not have probable cause to arrest until Hewitt stated she 
had been driving a truck; and (3) the record did not reflect 
sustained and coercive questioning of Hewitt by the officers.  
Hewitt, 149 Hawaiʻi at 75, 481 P.3d at 717.  The ICA also held, 
however, that the district court e rred by (1) overruling 
Hewitt’s Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 621 -26 (1993) trial 
objection by failing to conduct a voluntariness hearing; and (2) 
denying Hewitt’s motion to suppress her blood test resu lt 
because a search warrant had not been obtained.  149 Hawaiʻi at 
76, 79, 481 P.3d at 718, 721.  On these grounds, the ICA vacated  3 Hewitt’s convictions and remanded.  
 Hewitt sought certiorari review of the district court’s 
motion to suppress denial  and the ICA’s Miranda analysis .  
Hewitt posited that, under the ICA’s rationale, anyone 
hospitalized but not under arrest need not be Mirandized because 
law enforcement did n ot prevent their ability to leave.  
 We agree with Hewitt that the district court and ICA erred.  
First, we hold that H ewitt was in custody when probable cause 
developed.  State v. Sagapolutele -Silva, 151 Hawaiʻi 283, 511 
P.3d 782 (2022), overruled the bri ght-line rule articulated i n 
State v. Ketchum , 97 Hawaiʻi 107, 34 P.3d 1006 (2001), underlined 
below, which clearly held:  
[A] person is “in custody” for purposes of article I, 
section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution if an objective 
assessment of the totality of the circumstances reflects  
either (1) that the person has become impliedly accused of 
committing a crime because the que stions of the police have 
become sustained and coercive, such that they are no longer 
reasonably designed briefly to confirm or dispel their 
reasonable suspicion or (2) that the point of arrest has 
arrived because  either (a) probable cause to arrest has 
developed or (b) the police have subjected the person to an 
unlawful “ de facto ” arrest without probable cause to do so.  
 
Ketchum, 97 Hawaiʻi at 126, 34 P.3d at 1025 (emphases added).  
The Sagapolutele-Silva majority said it was clarifying that, 
despite this holding, the existence of probable cause is not 
conclusive and is only a factor to consider in determining 
whether someone is in custody under a “totality of 
circumstances” and therefore entitled to Miranda warnings.  
Sagapolutele-Silva, 151 Hawaiʻi at 287, 511 P.3d at 786.    4 We now expressly overrule Sagapolutele -Silva’s abrogation 
of Ketchum’s bright -line rule and hold that the Ketchum rule 
remains in effect:  Miranda warnings are required by article I, 
section 10 of the Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻi when 
probable cause to arrest has developed.  And in Hewitt’s case, 
contrary to the ICA’s conclusion, probable cause had developed 
before she was asked whether she had been driving.  
 Second, we hold th at, based on the totality of 
circumstances, Hewitt was in custody and was therefore entitled 
to Miranda warnings even before probable cause developed.  In 
addition to Ketchum’s bright -line rule, w e have stated, 
“[W]hether the defendant was in custody or otherwise deprived of 
[their] freedom of action for Miranda purposes is to be 
determined from the totality of the circumstances, objectively 
appraised.”  State v. Patterson , 59 Haw. 357, 361, 581 P.2d 752, 
755 (1978).  “These would include the place and time of the 
interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature of 
the questions asked, the conduct of the police, and all other 
relevant circumstances.”  Id.   
 Police interrogation occurring in a medical tr eatment 
setting presents a special circumstance under the “totality of 
circumstances” test.  In United States  v. Infante, 701 F.3d 386, 
396 (1st Cir. 2012), t he United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit addressed whether the Fifth Amendment requ ires  5 Miranda warnings under these circumstances.  The court noted 
that when a person is unable to leave the place of an 
interrogation solely due to circumstances incident to medical 
treatment, it must be determined whether they  were at liberty to 
terminate  the interrogation and cause the officers to leave .  
701 F.3d  at 396.   
We generally adopt the First Circuit’s approach for 
purposes of our constitution’s article I, section 10 right 
against self -incrimination.  We hold that if a person is unable 
to leave a place of interrogation due to circumstances incident 
to medical treatment, determining whether the person is “in 
custody” under a totality of circumstances requires an inquiry 
into whether the person was at liberty to terminate the 
interrogation and caus e the officer to leave.  
 As further discussed below, under the “totality of 
circumstances” of this case, Hewitt was in custody well before 
probable cause developed.  Hence, the district court and the ICA 
erred by holding that Miranda warnings were not req uired until 
Hewitt responded affirmatively to an officer’s question as to 
whether she had been driving a truck found damaged on a 
roadside.   
 Hewitt’s convictions have already been set aside,  however, 
based on developments discussed in Section IV.A below.   The 
nolle prosequi of both counts raises appellate jurisdiction and  6 mootness questions.  Hence, before addressing the merits of the 
issues on certiorari, we explain why appellate jurisdiction was 
retained.  We also clarify that mootness is a prudential 
consideration and not an issue of subject matter jurisdiction, 
and that the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine 
applies.   
 Remand is no longer appropriate, however, whether for the 
grounds stated in the ICA opinion or in this opinion, and it is 
unnecessary to determine precisely when Hewitt should have been 
provided Miranda warnings.  Based on the procedural posture of 
this case, we reverse the ICA’s March 18, 2021 Judgment on 
Appeal and affirm the district court’s August 9, 2021 judgment 
of nolle prosequi of both counts.  
II.  Background  
1. Factual background  
In 2014, Hawaiʻi County Police Department (“HCPD”) Officers 
Chandler Nacino (“Officer Nacino”) and Kaea Sugata (“Officer 
Sugata”) were called to Kona Community Hospital to interview 
Hewitt as a possible assault victim.  An unknown male had 
dropped Hewitt off at the hospital’s emergency room, and 
hospital staff contacted HCP D regarding Hewitt possibly being an 
assault victim.  Hewitt had large contusions on her face, eyes 
that were swollen shut, a laceration on her ear, and a broken 
breast plate.  Although awake, Hewitt appeared disoriented and  7  was “rambling incoherently.”  S he did not know where she was or 
why she was in the hospital.  
 Officers Nacino and Sugata first encountered Hewitt at 
around one o’clock in the morning.  They waited for the nurse 
administering Hewitt’s treatment to leave before starting an 
interview.  He witt gave the officers her name and birth date.  
Officer Nacino then served Hewitt with a “legal document” for an 
unrelated case and told her she needed to sign it.1  Both 
officers stood at Hewitt’s bedside during the interview while 
Officer Nacino did th e majority of the talking.   
 Officer Nacino asked Hewitt whether she had been assaulted 
and why her eyes were swollen.  Hewitt first responded she had 
pink-eye, but later said she had a stye.  To Officer Nacino, 
Hewitt’s injuries did not appear consistent  with either 
explanation.  
 At some point, Hawai‘i Fire Department (“HFD”) paramedics 
walked by and asked what was going on.  Officer Nacino said they 
were investigating a possible assault.  The paramedics said they 
had seen a truck’s taillights sticking o ut from roadside bushes.  
 
1  As the ICA noted, “[t]he record does not show what the document was, to 
what case it pertained, or why Officer Nacino had possession of the document 
at the time he was assigned to investigate an unidentified potential assault 
victim.”  Hewitt, 149 Hawai‘i at 73 n.4, 481 P.3d at 715 n.4.   8 The police officers then left the room2 and contacted Sergeant 
Mekia Rose (“Sergeant Rose”) to check on the truck.   
 Sergeant Rose located an unoccupied truck in some bushes on 
the shoulder of the road at the Queen Ka‘ahumanu Highway and 
Kuakini Highway intersection.  The truck had front -end damage, 
and both of its airbags had been deployed.  Sergeant Rose found 
Hewitt’s identification card in the truck and sent a photo of it 
via text message to Officer Nacino.  He also  relayed the truck’s 
license plate number, a check of which revealed that the vehicle 
belonged to a “Cyrus Hewitt.”   
 Officer Nacino returned to the room and asked Hewitt 
whether she had been in a traffic accident.  Hewitt answered 
yes, first stating that  she was driving to a friend’s house and 
parked her vehicle there but later stating that she was going to 
a doctor’s appointment.  After this response, the officers 
stopped asking further questions and placed Hewitt under arrest 
for suspicion of OVUII.   
 Before the arrest, the officers did not provide Hewitt any 
Miranda warnings.  They also did not tell Hewitt whether she was 
free to not respond to questions, leave, or terminate the 
conversation.   
 After this, at around four o’clock in the morning, Hewitt  
 
2  The record does not reflect exactly when the officers left the room, 
but trial testimony suggests that the officers did leave at some point and 
“returned” or “recontacted” Hewitt after locating her vehicle.    9 was subjected to a blood draw without a search warrant having 
been requested or obtained.  Officer Nacino remained with Hewitt 
until the blood draw was completed.  He also ran a check on 
Hewitt’s driver’s license and learned that she had a suspended 
license.   
2. District court proceedings  
 On March 12, 2015, the State of Hawaiʻi (“the State”) 
charged Hewitt with OVUII and DWOL.  Before trial, Hewitt filed 
a motion to suppress statements alleging a violation of her 
constitutional rights under the federal and state constitutions.  
At the hearing just before the October 28, 2015 trial, the State 
argued that because Hewitt was not in custody, there was no 
constitutional violation.  The district court3 denied the motion 
to suppress and ultimately convicted Hewitt of OVUII in 
violation of HRS § 291E -61(a)(1) (2007)4 and DWOL in violation of 
HRS § 286 -102(b) (Supp. 2013).5   
 
3  The Hono rable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.  
 
4  §291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant.    
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle under the 
influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or assumes 
actual physical control of a vehicle:  
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient 
to impair the person’s normal mental faculties or ability to care 
for the person and guard against casualty[.]  
 
HRS § 291E -61(a)(1) (2007).  
 
5  §286-102 Licensi ng. 
. . . . 
(b) A person operating the following category or combination of 
categories of motor vehicles shall be examined as provided in 
section 286 -108 and duly licensed by the examiner of drivers:   10 3. ICA proceedings  
 Hewitt filed a notice of appeal on June 14, 2016.  On 
appeal, Hewitt argued, inter alia, that the district court erred 
in denying her motion to suppress because she had been subjected 
to custodial interrogation without any Miranda warnings before 
her statement.  In a published opinion, the ICA concluded, in 
relevant part, that Hewitt was not in custody at the time of 
questioning because (1) Hewitt’s inability to leave was not the 
result of detention by law enforcement; (2) the officers did not 
have probable cause to arrest Hewitt until she stated she had 
been drivi ng the truck; and (3) the record did not reflect any 
sustained and coercive questioning of Hewitt by the officers.  
Hewitt, 149 Hawaiʻi at 75, 481 P.3d at 717.  
 The ICA also held, however, that the district court e rred 
by overruling Hewitt’s HRS § 621 -26 (1993)6 trial objection and 
 
(1) Mopeds; 
(2) Motorcycles and motor scooters;  
(3) Passenger cars of any gross vehicle weight rating, buses  
designed to transport fifteen or fewer occupants, and 
trucks and vans having a gross vehicle weight rating of 
eighteen thousand pounds or less; and  
(4) All of the motor vehicles in category (3) and any vehicle  
that is not a commercial motor vehicle.  
A school bus or van operator shall be properly licensed to 
operate the category of vehicles that the operator operates as a 
school bus or van and shall comply with the standards of the 
department of transpor tation as provided by rules adopted 
pursuant to section 286 -181. 
 
HRS § 286 -102(b) (Supp. 2013).  
 
6  §621-26 Confessions when admissible.   No confession shall be 
received in evidence unless it is first made to appear to the  11 by failing to conduct a hearing on the voluntariness of her 
statement;7 and (2) the district court erred by denying Hewitt’s 
motion to suppress her blood test result.8  149 Hawaiʻi at 76, 
 
judge before whom the case is being tried that the confession was 
in fact voluntarily made.  
 
HRS § 621 -26 (1993).  
 
7  The ICA held the district court erred by failing to  conduct a hearing 
on the voluntariness of Hewitt’s statement that she was driving the vehicle 
and had parked it in the bushes.  Hewitt, 149 Hawaiʻi at 76, 481 P.3d at 718. 
The ICA ruled that, rather than overruling Hewitt’s HRS § 621 -26 objection, 
the district court should have conducted an evidentiary hearing to determine 
whether Hewitt’s statement was voluntarily made, in light of the evidence 
that Hewitt had sustained significant head trauma, did not know where she 
was, and was incoher ent.  Id. 
 
8  The ICA noted that although the State argued that Hewitt’s motion to 
suppress evidence of the alcohol content of her blood was not timely filed 
under Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 12(c) (2007), the 
district court had the disc retion to proceed to rule on the merits, citing 
State v. Przeradski , 5 Haw.App. 29, 32, 677 P.2d 471, 474 -75 (1984), and 
therefore, the denial of the motion on its merits was properly before the 
ICA.  Hewitt, 149 Hawaiʻi at 76, 481 P.3d at 718.  The ICA appropriately noted 
that although the district court relied upon Schmerber v. California , 384 
U.S. 757 (1966) in denying Hewitt’s motion to suppress, Missouri v. McNeely , 
569 U.S. 141 (2013), which was decided after State v. Entrekin , 98 Hawaiʻi 
221, 47 P.3d 336 (2002) (discussing Schmerber ), held “that in drunk -driving 
investigations, the natural dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream does 
not constitute an exigency in every case sufficient to justify conducting a 
blood test without a warrant.”  149 Hawaiʻi at 77, 481 P.3d at 719.  The ICA 
noted that it cited McNeely in State v. Niceloti -Velazquez , 139 Hawaiʻi 203, 
386 P.3d 487 (App. 2016), in which it held the trial court erred by holding 
exigent circumstances existed to justify the warrantless extraction of the 
defendant’s blood sample, because the trial court only cited the risk of 
blood alcohol dissipation to support its finding of exigency and the State 
failed to adequately develop the record to demonstrate that the police 
officers were justi fied to act without a warrant.  149 Hawaiʻi at 78, 481 P.3d 
at 720.   
The ICA opined that the facts of this case illustrate why more than 
just “the risk of blood dissipation” should be required to justify a 
warrantless blood draw.  Id.  The ICA stated that Officer Nacino did not 
testify that he detected an odor similar to that of an alcoholic b everage on 
Hewitt’s breath or body; there was no evidence that empty or open containers 
of liquor, or a bar or restaurant tab or other receipt evidencing the recent 
consumption of alcohol, were found in Hewitt’s truck or with her 
identification card; Hewit t’s apparent disorientation could have been 
explained by a concussion, as evidenced by her significant head trauma; 
although she knew who she was, she did not know where she was; there was no 
evidence that Officer Nacino attempted to determine if Hewitt wa s oriented to 
time (as one would to attempt to diagnose or rule out a concussion); and  12 79, 481 P.3d at 718, 721.  The ICA rem anded the case for a new 
trial.   
4. Certiorari   
 Hewitt’s certiorari application presents a single question:  
whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the district court 
did not err in denying Hewitt’s motion to suppress because 
Hewitt was not in cus tody.  We accepted certiorari.   
III.  Standard of Review  
“An appellate court reviews a ruling on a motion to 
suppress de novo to determine whether the ruling was ‘right’ or 
‘wrong.’”  State v. Weldon , 144 Hawaiʻi 522, 530, 445 P.3d 103, 
111 (2019) (quoting State v. Tominiko , 126 Hawaiʻi 68, 75, 266 
P.3d 1122, 1129 (2011)).  
IV.  Discussion  
A.  Preliminary issues  
 Before addressing the issue on certiorari, we address 
unusual developments after our acceptance of cert iorari, which, 
 
Hewitt’s disorientation could also have been the result of prescription 
medication administered to her in the hospital emergency room.  149 Hawaiʻi at 
79, 481 P.3d at 721.  The ICA concluded that under the totality of these 
circumstances, it would not have been unreasonable for a judge to require 
more information before issuing a warrant for a blood draw; there was no 
evidence that Officer Nacino, Officer Sugata, Sergeant  Rose, or any other 
police officer attempted to contact a judge to obtain a warrant before 
requesting the blood draw.  Id.  Thus, the ICA held the State failed to 
adequately develop the record to demonstrate the existence of exigent 
circumstances that woul d have justified Officer Nacino requesting a 
warrantless blood draw, and therefore, the district court erred in denying 
Hewitt’s motion to suppress the blood test results.   Id. 
  13 at first blush, might appear to raise questions of appellate 
jurisdiction and mootness.  
 1. Background after acceptance of certiorari  
 
 As noted, the ICA’s published opinion ruled in the State’s 
favor regarding the motion to suppress denial, and this was the 
only question raised by Hewitt on certiorari.  Immediately after 
we entered our order accepting certiorari, however, the State 
contacted Hewitt’s counsel and offered to dismiss Hewitt’s case 
with prejudice if Hewitt dismissed the i nstant certiorari 
proceeding.  Hewitt therefore filed a motion requesting a 
temporary remand of this appeal to the district court.9  Our 
order regarding this motion provided:  
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the motion is granted as 
follows.  This case shall be temporarily remanded to the 
District Court of the Third Circuit for no more than 30 
days.  No later than 30 days after this order, the clerk of 
the district court shall supplement the record on appeal 
with all documents entered on temporary remand, and the  
case shall then resume in the Supreme Court for such 
further proceedings as may be appropriate.  
 
 On remand, the State filed a motion for nolle prosequi10 
with prejudice as to the complaint against Hewitt.  The State 
indicated it filed the motion “due to the ICA opinion on appeal 
following bench trial and in the interest of justice.”  The 
 
9  Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (“HRAP”) Rule 42 requires appellate 
court approval of any dismissal.  
 
10  The expression nolle prosequi, or more fully, dicit nolle prosequi, 
means that the government will not prosecute.  The King v. Robertson , 6 Haw. 
718, 1889 WL 1054 (Haw. Kingdom 1889).   
  14 district court11 granted the motion and filed a judgment 
indicating a  disposition of “nolle prosequi” for both counts.  
The district court’s supplemental record was filed pursuant to 
our order  of temporary remand, and we scheduled oral argument.  
 Hewitt then filed a motion to set aside the oral argument 
setting or to clari fy the status of the case due to the nolle 
prosequi on remand.12  We entered an order denying the motion to 
set aside the oral argument, and we now explain why.  
2.  This court retained appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 
the order of temporary remand  
 
 Based on our order of temporary remand, the district 
court’s judgment of nolle prosequi  did not terminate th is 
certiorari proceeding.  Pursuant to HRS § 602 -5(a)(6) (Supp. 
2004), this court has jurisdiction:  
[t]o make . . . such . . . orders . . . and do such other 
acts and take such other steps as may be necessary to carry 
into full effect the powers which are or shall be given to 
it by law or for the promotion of justice in matters 
pending before it.   
 
Our order specifically provided that, after remand, the 
case would resume in th is court “ for such further proceedings as 
may be appropriate. ”  Thus, th is court retained appellate 
jurisdiction despite the nolle prosequi.  
 
 
11  The Honorable Robert J. Crudele presided.  
 
12  The State’s motion re quested a dismissal of both counts “with 
prejudice.”  The judgment did not include language indicating the dismissal 
was with prejudice.  This lack of clarity is immaterial to the issues we 
discuss.    15  3. The “public interest” exception to the mootness 
doctrine is applicable  
 
 Although we retained appellate jurisdiction, the charges 
against Hewitt were mooted based on the nolle prosequi of both 
counts.  We therefore address mootness.  
 We first clarify that mootness is a prudential 
consideration and not an issue of subject matte r jurisdiction, 
as we have stated, even recently.13  Tax Foundation v. State , 144 
Hawaiʻi 175, 439 P.3d 127 (2019), addressed standing, a 
“prudential concern of judicial governance” like “mootness”:  
As explained by Justice Nakamura in  Trustees  of the Office 
of Hawaiian  Affairs v. Yamasaki , 69 Haw. 154, 737 P.2d 446 
(1987): 
 
Unlike the federal judiciary,  the courts of Hawaiʻi 
are not subject to a cases or controversies  
limitation  like that imposed by Article III, § 2 of 
the United States Constitution .  But like the federal 
government, ours is one in which the sovereign power 
is divided and allocated among three co -equal 
branches.  Thus, we have taken the teachings of the 
Supreme Court to heart and adhered to the doctrine 
that the use of ju dicial power to resolve public 
disputes in a system of government where there is a 
separation of powers should be limited to those 
questions capable of judicial resolution and 
presented in an adversary context.  And, we have 
admonished our judges that even  in the absence of 
constitutional restrictions, they must still 
carefully weigh the wisdom, efficacy, and timeliness 
of an exercise of their power before acting, 
especially where there may be an intrusion into areas 
committed to other branches of governmen t. 
 
 
13  See, e.g., Skahan v. Stutts Constr. Co., Inc., 148 Hawaiʻi 460, 468 n.7, 
478 P.3d 285, 293 n.7 (2021);  Hawaiʻi Tech. Acad. v. L.E., 141 Hawaiʻi 147, 
156, 407 P.3d 103, 112 (2017); In Re Marn Fam., 141 Haw. 1, 7, 403 P.3d 621, 
627 (2016) . 
 
  16  Our guideposts  for the application  of the rules 
of judicial  self-governance  founded in concern about 
the proper — and properly  limited — role of courts in 
a democratic  society reflect the precepts  enunciated  
by the Supreme Court.  When confronted with  an 
abstract or hypothetical question, we have addressed 
the problem in terms of a  prohibition against 
rendering advisory opinions;  when asked to decide 
whether a litigant  is asserting  legally recognized  
interests,  personal  and peculiar  to him, we have 
spoken of standing ; when a later decision appeared 
more appropriate, we have resolved the justiciability 
question in terms of ripeness; and when the continued 
vitality of the suit was questionable, we have 
invoked the mootness bar . 
 
Thus, Yamasaki  recognizes that standing is a prudential 
concern in Hawaiʻi state courts, which are not subject to 
the case and controversy subject matter jurisdiction 
limitation of federal courts.   Yamasaki  also noted that 
standing is a prudential concern “founded in con cern about 
the proper – and properly limited – role of courts in a 
democratic society.”  
 
Tax Foundation, 144 Hawaiʻi at 190–91, 439 P.3d at 142–43 
(quoting Yamasaki , 69 Haw. at 170 -72, 737 P.2d at 455 -56) 
(cleaned up).  
 As noted in Yamasaki , “mootness,” like “standing,” is a 
prudential concern not subject to the “case and controversy” 
subject matter jurisdiction limitation of federal courts.  69 
Haw. at 170 -72, 737 P.2d at 455 -56.  In Tax Foundation , we noted 
that courts of other states reco gnize that standing is a 
prudential concern regarding justiciability and is not an issue 
of subject matter jurisdiction.  144 Hawaiʻi at 191, 439 P.3d at 
143.  Most other state c ourts also recognize that mootness is a 
prudential concern regarding justiciab ility, not an issue of 
subject matter jurisdiction.  See, e.g., Matter of Big Foot 
Dumpsters & Containers, LLC , 507 P.3d 169 , 173 (Mont. 2022)   17 (noting mootness is a concept of justiciability) ; Nesbitt v. 
Frakes, 911 N.W. 2d 598, 603 (Neb. 2018)  (holding mootness is a 
justiciability doctrine that does not prevent appellate 
jurisdiction); Couey v. Atkins , 355 P.3d 866, 901 (Or. 2015)  
(holding that the Oregon state constitution d oes not require 
dismissal of a case based on the justiciability doctrine of 
mootness); DeMarco v. Travelers  Ins. Co., 102 A.3d 616, 622 
(R.I. 2014)  (holding m ootness is a distinct concept, separate 
and apart from  subject-matter jurisdiction ); Wylie v. State of 
Idaho Transp . Bd., 253 P.3d 700, 705 ( Idaho 2011) (noting 
mootness is a subcategory of justiciability);  McIntyre v. 
Traughber , 884 S.W.2d 134, 137 (Tenn. Ct. App.  1994) (noting 
mootness is a doctrine of justiciability) .  Thus, mootness is an 
issue of justiciability, not an issue of subject matter 
jurisdiction.  
 Under Hawaiʻi law, a well -recognized exception to the 
mootness doctrine is for matters “affecting the public 
interest.”  See State v. Kiese , 126 Hawaiʻi 494, 509, 273 P.3d 
1180, 1195 (2012).  This exception applies here.  
 Only after we accepted Hewitt’s certiorari application on 
an issue for which the ICA had ruled in the State’s favor in a 
published opinion did the State offer to dismiss Hewitt’s case 
with prejudice; the State made the offer conditioned upon 
Hewitt’s dismissal of this a ppeal.  On temporary remand, t he  18 State indicated it filed the motion to nolle prosequi the case 
with prejudice for two reasons: “the ICA opinion on appeal 
following bench trial”; and “in the interest of justice.”  The 
State may have realized that the distr ict court had erred with 
respect to voluntariness, especially due to the testimony 
regarding Hewitt’s condition during questioning.  The State may 
also have realized that, as ruled by the ICA, a search warrant 
should have been obtained before the blood dra w.  But this court 
had just accepted certiorari on the custody issue, an issue on 
which the State had obtained a favorable opinion from the ICA.  
If this certiorari was dismissed pursuant to the State’s offer, 
the ICA’s published opinion would remain as pr ecedent despite 
the errors of law discussed in Section IV.B below.  
 Under these circumstances, the “public interest” exception 
to the mootness doctrine applies.  Although factually and 
procedurally distinguishable, concerns expressed in Ocean Resort 
Villas Vacation Owners Ass ’n v. County of Maui, 147 Hawai‘i 544, 
465 P.3d 991 (2020), which addressed “stipulated reversals” of 
trial court judgments are instructive .  In that case, we cited 
to a law review article highlighting the “‘tangible but 
frequently unde tectable social costs’ of allowing [appellate] 
courts to consider vacaturs based solely on the parties’ 
settlement during the pendency of an appeal ”:  19 The costs . . . include the . . . loss of precedential 
value for judicial decisions, and a diminished resp ect for 
the judicial process . . . . A procedure which allows 
parties to obtain vacatur as a matter of right . . . will 
encourage parties to delay settlement until after trial 
because the effects of an adverse judgment can be avoided 
at little or no cost by  postjudgment settlement.  The 
procedure . . . will place the defense of the integrity of 
judicial decisions in the hands of litigants who are not in 
a position to safeguard the public values inherent therein.  
 
147 Hawaiʻi at 560, 465 P.3d at 1007 (quoting Jill E. Fisch, 
Rewriting History: The Propriety of Eradicating Prior Decisional 
Law Through Settlement and Vacatur , 76 Cornell L. Rev. 589, 641 -
42 (1991)) (cleaned up).   
 Allowing the State to nolle prosequi charges afte r a 
favorable ICA opinion in exchange for dismissal of an appeal 
would likewise (1) result in t he loss of precedential value of 
judicial decisions  from this court;  (2) cause a diminished 
respect for the judicial process ; (3) allow parties to obtain 
dismissal as a matter of right , which could encourage the State 
to delay offering dismissal until after certiorari is accepted 
to see if a possible a dverse opinion can be avoided ; and (4) 
place th e defense of the integrity of judicial decisions in the 
hands of li tigants who are not in a position to safeguard the 
public values inherent therein .14  However well -intentioned the 
 
14  With respect to (4), an individual defendant has no real incentive to 
continue with a certiorari proceeding after receiving an offer to nolle 
prosequi with prejudice.  The nolle prosequi would be a sure thing, and a 
defendant does not know how this court w ill rule on certiorari.  We have no 
concern with the actions taken by Hewitt’s counsel after receipt of the 
State’s offer to nolle prosequi with prejudice in exchange for a dismissal of 
the appeal.  Counsel’s obligation was to represent Hewitt’s interests , and 
counsel took appropriate actions to do so.   20 State’s offer might have been, dismissal would have precluded 
this court from reviewing an issue on which the State had 
obtained a favorable published opinion from the ICA.  For the 
reasons discussed in Section III.B below, the public interest 
exception to the mootness doctrine applies here despite the 
dismissal of t he charges against Hewitt.  
B.  Custody  
 We therefore address the merits of the  issue raised on 
certiorari:   whether the ICA erred in determining that Hewitt 
was not in custody at the time she made her statements and that 
Miranda warnings were therefore not required.   
1. General Miranda principles  
 The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides, in 
relevant part, that no person “shall be compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself[.]”  U.S. Const. 
amend. V.  Article I, section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution 
similarly guarant ees a privilege against self -incrimination to 
our state’s citizens.  See State v. Ah Loo , 94 Hawaiʻi 207, 210, 
10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000).  Miranda warnings help safeguard this 
right: 
The Miranda rule is, at core, a constitutionally 
prescribed rule of evidenc e that requires the prosecution 
to lay a sufficient foundation —i.e., that the requisite 
warnings were administered and validly waived before the 
accused gave the statement sought to be adduced at trial —
before it may adduce evidence of a defendant ’s custodi al 
statements that stem from interrogation during [their] 
criminal trial.   21 The prosecution’s burden of establishing that the 
requisite warnings were given, however, is not triggered 
unless the totality of the circumstances reflect that the 
statement it seeks to adduce at trial was obtained as a 
result of “custodial interrogation, ” which, as the United 
States Supreme Court defined it in Miranda, consists of 
“questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a 
person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of 
[their] freedom of action in any significant way.”  In 
other words, the defendant, objecting to the admissibility 
of [their] statement and, thus, seeking to suppress it, 
must establish that [their] statement was the result of (1) 
“interrogation” that occurred while [they were] (2) “in 
custody.”  
 
State v. Wallace , 105 Hawaiʻi 131, 137, 94 P.3d 1275, 1281 (2004) 
(cleaned up).  Thus, a statement made by a defendant under 
custodial interrogation without a Miranda warning must be 
suppressed as unconstitutionally elicited.    
2. Hewitt was in custody when probable cause developed 
and Sagapolutele -Silva is overruled to the extent it 
said the existence  of probable cause is not 
dispositive on the issue of whether a person is in 
custody for purposes of  Miranda warnings  required by 
the Hawaiʻi constitution  
 
 In Ketchum, we articulated that a person is in custody for 
purposes of Miranda warnings as required by the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution:  
[I]f an objective assessment of the totality of the 
circumstances reflects either (1) that the person has 
become impliedly accused of committing a crime because the 
questions of the police have become sustained and coercive, 
such that they are no longer reasonably designed briefly to 
confirm or dispel their reasonable suspicion or (2) that 
the point  of arrest has arrived because either (a) probable 
cause to arrest has developed or (b) the police have 
subjected the person to an unlawful “de facto” arrest 
without probable cause to do so.  
 
Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘i at 126, 34 P.3d at 1025.   22  The majority in Sagapolutele -Silva said it was clarifying 
that despite this holding, the existence of probable cause is 
but one factor in the totality of circumstances test.  151 
Hawaiʻi at 291, 511 P.3d at 390.   
 Ketchum stated a clear, easily applied, bright -line rule:  
when probable cause to arrest exists upon an initial stop or 
detention, the Hawaiʻi constitution requires that Miranda rights 
be given before “interrogation” occurs.  Ketchum, 97 Hawaiʻi at 
126, 34 P.3d 1006 at 1025.   Even before Ketchum, we had held 
that “if the detained person ’s responses to a police officer’s 
questions provide the officer with probable cause to arrest . . 
. the officer is —-at that time—-required to inform the detained 
person of his or her constitutional rights against self-
incrimination and to counsel, as mandated by Miranda and its 
progeny.”  State v. Loo , 94 Hawaiʻi 207, 212 , 10 P.3d 728, 733 
(2000) (citing State v. Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 481-82, 643 P.2d 
541, 543-44 (1982)).  Ketchum followed within a year, setting 
out the rule quoted above pursuant to  article I, section 10 of 
the Hawaiʻi constitution.  97 Hawaiʻi at 126, 34 P.3d 1006 at 
1025. 
 Bright-line rules foster uniformity and predictability.  
See Antonin Scalia, The Rule of La w as a Law of Rules , 56 U. 
Chi. L. Rev. 1175, 1179 (1989).  The most significant role of 
judges may be to protect the individual criminal defendant  23 against the occasional excesses of popular will, and to preserve 
the checks and balances within our constitu tional system that 
are designed to inhibit that popular will.   Id., 56 U. Chi. L. 
Rev. at 1180.  In terms of constitutional rules of criminal 
procedure, in order to preserve checks and balances, bright -line 
rules are therefore preferable.15   
 
15  As Justice Scalia stated:  
 I had always thought that the common -law [“totality 
of circumstances”] approach had at least one thing to be 
said for it: it was the course of judicial restraint, 
“making” as little law as possible in order to decide the 
case at hand.  I have come to doubt whether that is true. 
For when, in writing for the majority of the Court, I adopt 
a general rule, and say, “This is the basis of our 
decision,” I not only constrain l ower courts, I constrain 
myself as well.  If the next case should have such 
different facts that my political or policy preferences 
regarding the outcome are quite the opposite, I will be 
unable to indulge those preferences; I have committed 
myself to the governing principle. In the real world of 
appellate judging, it displays more judicial restraint to 
adopt such a course than to announce that, “on balance,” we 
think the law was violated here —leaving ourselves free to 
say in the next case that, “on balance ,” it was not.  It is 
a commonplace that the one effective check upon arbitrary 
judges is criticism by the bar and the academy.  But it is 
no more possible to demonstrate the inconsistency of two 
opinions based upon a “totality of the circumstances” test 
than it is to demonstrate the inconsistency of two jury 
verdicts.   Only by announcing rules do we hedge ourselves 
in. 
 While announcing a firm rule of decision can thus 
inhibit courts, strangely enough it can embolden them as 
well.  Judges are sometimes cal led upon to be courageous, 
because they must sometimes stand up to what is generally 
supreme in a democracy: the popular will.  Their most 
significant roles, in our system, are to protect the 
individual criminal defendant against the occasional 
excesses of  that popular will, and to preserve the checks 
and balances within our constitutional system that are 
precisely designed to inhibit swift and complete 
accomplishment of that popular will.  Those are tasks 
which, properly performed, may earn widespread resp ect and 
admiration in the long run, but —almost by definition —never 
in the particular case.  The chances that frail men and 
women will stand up to their unpleasant duty are greatly  24  Determining whether a defendant is in custody under a 
totality of circumstances requires consideration of many factors 
other than the existence of probable cause.  In Sagapolutele -
Silva, however, the majority eliminated the bright -line 
“probable cause” test for custod y and required analyzing 
“custody” based on multiple factors.  151 Hawaiʻi at 292, 511 
P.3d at 791.  
 Also, until Sagapolutele -Silva, this court had 
“consistently provided criminal defendants with greater 
protection under Hawaiʻi’s version of the privilege against self -
incrimination (article I, section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution) 
than is otherwise ensured by the federal courts under Miranda 
and its progeny.”  State v. Valera , 74 Haw. 424, 434, 848 P.2d 
376, 380 (1993).  The majority in Sagapolu tele-Silva actually 
attempted to retrench on Hawaiʻi constitutional rights .  The 
Ketchum bright-line rule enhances protection of our citizens’ 
constitutional rights and equal treatment of people under the 
law.   
 
increased if they can stand behind the solid shield of a 
firm, clear princip le enunciated in earlier cases.  It is 
very difficult to say that a particular convicted felon who 
is the object of widespread hatred must go free because, on 
balance, we think that excluding the defense attorney from 
the line -up process in this case may h ave prevented a fair 
trial.  It is easier to say that our cases plainly hold 
that, absent exigent circumstances, such exclusion is a per 
se denial of due process.  
 
56 U. Chi. L. Rev. at 1179 -80.   25  We therefore expressly overrule Sagapolutel e-Silva’s 
abrogation of Ketchum’s bright -line rule  and, based on the 
above, hold that the Ketchum rule remains in effect:  Miranda 
warnings are required by article I, section 10 of the 
Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻi when probable cause to 
arrest has developed.  Ketchum, 97 Hawaiʻi at 126, 34 P.3d at 
1025.  
 Hence, at the point probable cause to arrest Hewitt had 
developed, whic h was at least by the time officers learned the 
truck owned by “Cyrus Hewitt” crashed on the roadside contained 
Hewitt’s identification card, she was entitled to Miranda 
warnings before questioning recommenced.  For the reasons 
discussed below, however, He witt was in custody under a totality 
of circumstances and entitled to Miranda warnings even before 
that point in time.  
3. Based on the totality of circumstances, Hewitt was 
already in custody even before probable cause 
developed  
 
 The ICA ruled that Hewitt  was not in custody at the time 
she made her statement about having driven the truck because (1) 
her inability to leave was not the result of detention by law 
enforcement; (2) the officers did not have probable cause to 
arrest Hewitt until she stated she h ad been driving the truck; 
and (3) the record does not reflect any sustained and coercive  26 questioning of Hewitt by the officers.  Hewitt, 149 Hawaiʻi at 
75, 481 P.3d at 717.   
 When a bright -line rule regarding “custody” (such as the 
existence of probable cause) has yet to be triggered, “[w]hether 
the defendant was in custody or otherwise deprived of [their] 
freedom of action for Miranda purposes is to be determined from 
the tota lity of the circumstances, objectively appraised.”  
Patterson , 59 Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at 755.  “These 
[circumstances] would include the place and time of the 
interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature of 
the questions asked, the conduct o f the police, and all other 
relevant circumstances.”  Id.   
 Thus, the circumstance of a person being questioned while 
in a hospital bed or receiving medical treatment is relevant to 
the “totality of circumstances” analysis.  Other courts have 
specifically  addressed questioning by law enforcement of a 
person in a hospital bed or receiving medical treatment .  The 
First Circuit has stated that “[w]hen an individual is unable to 
‘leave’ the place of the interrogation solely due to 
circumstances incident to med ical treatment, the question is 
said to be slightly different:  whether [they were] at liberty 
to terminate the interrogation and ‘cause the [officers] to  27 leave.’”  Infante, 701 F.3d at 396, modified on other grounds by 
Hill v. Walsh, 884 F.3d 16 (1st Cir. 2018) .16   
 
16  Other courts have articulated different tests regarding w hether custody 
is established when a person is unable to leave the hospital due to their 
medical condition.  See State v. Pontbriand , 878 A.2d 227, 231 -32 (Vt. 2005) . 
 The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit adopted a 
“reasonably free to terminate questioning and leave” test:  
 
 The question of custody typically turns on whether “a 
reasonable person [would] have felt [they were] not at 
liberty to terminate the interrogation and leave.”  
Thompson v. Keohane , 516 U.S. 99, 112, 116 S.Ct. 457, 133 
L.Ed.2d 383 (1995).  In some circumstances, however, the 
defendant may be prevented from pretermitting the 
interrogation because of factors independent of police 
restraint.  For example, in Florida v. Bostick , the 
defendant's “freed om of movement was restricted by a factor 
independent of police conduct —i.e., by his being a 
passenger on a bus” —which rendered the standard “free to 
leave” analysis inapplicable.  501 U.S. 429, 436, 111 S.Ct. 
2382, 115 L.Ed.2d 389 (1991) (emphasis omitted ).  In such 
circumstances, “the appropriate inquiry is whether a 
reasonable person would feel free to decline officers’ 
requests or otherwise terminate the encounter.”  Id. at 
436, 111 S.Ct. 2382.  
This court came to a similar conclusion in United 
States v.  Conley, 779 F.2d 970 (4th Cir. 1985), a case 
decided before Bostick. . . .  
 . . . . 
Analysis of whether Jamison was in custody when he 
made the statements describing the shooting depends on 
“whether a reasonable person would [have] fe[lt] free to 
decline the officers’ requests or otherwise terminate the 
encounter,” Bostick, 501 U.S. at 436, 111 S.Ct. 2382.  In 
dissecting the perceptions of such a reasonable person, 
however, we must be careful to separate the restrictions on 
his freedom arising from police  interrogation and those 
incident to his background circumstances.  That is, to the 
extent Jamison felt constrained by his injuries, the 
medical exigencies they created (e.g., the donning of a 
hospital gown and the insertion of an I.V. line), or the 
routine police investigation they initiated, such 
limitations on his freedom should not factor into our 
reasonable -person analysis.  It is this careful 
differentiation between police -imposed restraint and 
circumstantial restraint that leads us to conclude that 
Jamison was not in custody when he described the shooting 
during his hospital interview.  The district court properly 
invoked the same lodestar, but proceeded to classify the 
significant limitations on Jamison’s freedom as police -
imposed when they were actu ally routine treatment for a 
person in Jamison’s position.  
   
28  We generally adopt the First Circuit’s approach for 
purposes of the article I, section 10 right against self -
incrimination.  We hold that, under the Hawaiʻi Constitution, if 
a person is unable to leave a place of interrogation due to 
circumstances incident to medical treatment, determining whether 
the person is “in custody” under a totality of circumstances 
requires an inquiry into whether the person was at liberty to 
terminate the interrogation and cause the officer(s) to leave.  
 Applying  that inquiry here, at  the time of the questioning, 
Hewitt lay in a hospital bed with contusions on her face, eyes 
swollen shut, a laceration on her ear, and a broken breast 
plate.  Early in the officers’ encounter with Hewitt, Officer 
Nacino served her wi th a “legal document” and told her that she 
needed to sign the document.  The officers proceeded to question 
Hewitt about her injuries.  She did not know where she was or 
why she was there.   
 Both officers stood at her bedside throughout the 
interview, which started around one o’clock in the morning and 
continued intermittently until about three hours later.  
 
United States  v. Jamison , 509 F.3d 623, 629 (4th Cir. 2007) (alterations in 
original).  
 
 We disagree with the Fourth Circuit that limitations on a person’s 
freedom due to background medical treat ment circumstances should not factor 
into the custody analysis.  Such circumstances are relevant to the 
determination of whether a person is at liberty to terminate the 
interrogation and cause the officers to leave.  
   29 Hewitt’s responses were largely incoherent.  The officers had to 
continually wake her up throughout the interview because she had 
been heavily sedated.  When Hewitt finally left the hospital, 
she could not do so on her own, and her friend had to assist her 
movements.  Hewitt was not at liberty to terminate the 
interrogation and cause the of ficers to leave.  
 Applying other factors relevant to the “totality of 
circumstances” analysis, Hewitt had also become the focus of an 
OVUII investigation before Officer Nacino asked whether she had 
been driving.  See Patterson , 59 Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at  755 
(holding that the focus of the investigation upon the defendant 
is an important factor in the determination of whether the 
defendant was subjected to custodial interrogation).  In this 
regard, at the start of the officers’ shift and before they even 
went to the hospital, HC PD received a report that somebody heard 
a traffic collision.  The officers suspected Hewitt was under 
the influence of alcohol or another intoxicant.  While Officer 
Nacino questioned Hewitt, HFD paramedics informed the officers 
of a truck apparently invol ved in a traffic collision and 
suggested that Hewitt was somehow connected.  When the officers 
called Sergeant Rose to confirm the truck’s whereabouts, they 
already doubted that Hewitt’s injuries were from an assault as 
they told Sergeant Rose that “a pers on was at the hospital for 
injuries, which they didn’t know if it was from an assault or  30 from a traffic accident” and “received information that there 
was a possible crash.”17   
 Hence, under the totality of circumstances, Hewitt was in 
custody and entitle d to Miranda warnings well before the 
officers asked her whether she had been driving the truck.  T he 
district court and ICA erred in holding that Miranda warnings 
were not required until after she responded to the question.   
V.  Conclusion  
 Hewitt’s conv iction has already been set aside and the 
charges against her have been dismissed.  It is therefore 
unnecessary to determine when custodial interrogation of Hewitt 
actually commenced.  A remand is no longer appropriate, whether 
on the bases previously orde red by the ICA or to address the 
issues discussed in this opinion.  
 
 
 
 
 
17  Sergeant Rose confirmed the truck’s location in some brush and its 
damaged state, which provided an explanation for Hewitt’s injuries and why 
she had dirt and leaves on her person —details Officer Sugata testified to 
noticing about Hewitt’s appearance.  Ser geant Rose also found Hewitt’s 
identification card in the truck, and texted a photo of the card to Officer 
Nacino.  Except for her injuries, Hewitt matched the image of the person on 
the card.  A search of the truck’s license plate number revealed that it was 
registered to a “Cyrus Hewitt,” whom the officers assumed was Hewitt’s 
father.    31  Due to the procedural posture of this case, we therefore 
instead reverse the ICA’s March 20, 2021 Judgment on Appeal that 
ordered a remand and affirm the district court’s August 9, 20 21 
judgment of nolle prosequi of both counts.  
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
 
 
 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
  
 Taryn R. Tomasa
for petitioner   
 
     
     
Christopher K. Rothfus
for respondent    /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
  
        
 
 
 
 
