*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000775 23-JAN-2014 
08:07 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
LYNEDON A. VAN NESS,
Petitioner/Claimant-Appellant
 
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Respondent/Employer-Appellee, Self-Insured.
 
SCWC-11-0000775
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000775; CASE NO. AB 2009-158 (M) (7-07-10239)
 
January 23, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This appeal arises out of a workers’ compensation claim
 
filed by Petitioner/Claimant-Appellant Lynedon Van Ness (Van
 
Ness) with the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations
 (Director), in which Van Ness sought compensation for the
 aggravation of his asthma resulting from his exposure to vog at
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
work.1
 
The Director denied his claim, and the Labor and 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) affirmed the decision. 
Van Ness now seeks review of the January 31, 2013 Judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), affirming the LIRAB’s decision. For the reasons set forth herein, we hold that Van Ness is entitled to compensation pursuant to Hawai
'i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 386-3(a), governing an injury by disease that is proximately caused by employment. Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment and the LIRAB’s decision and remand to the Director for a determination of the amount of compensation to be awarded. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The following facts are taken from the record and from
 
Van Ness’s testimony at the LIRAB hearing.
 
A.
 
Van Ness was employed by the State of Hawai
'i, 
Department of Education (DOE), as a technology coordinator at Lahainaluna High School (Lahainaluna), on the island of Maui, from July 2005 to November 2006. He had a history of “mild 
1
 “Vog is a term that refers to volcanic smog. It is . . . caused 
by a combination of weather, wind conditions and volcanic activity. Vog
becomes thicker or lighter depending upon the amount of emissions from Kilauea
volcano [on the island of Hawai' i], the direction and amount of wind, and
other weather conditions.” Important Information About Vog, Governor of the 
State of Hawai' i, http://governor.hawaii.gov/emergency-information/important­
information-about-vog/ (last visited Dec. 11, 2013). See Merriam-Webster,
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/vog (last visited Dec. 12, 2013)
(defining “vog” as “air pollution caused by volcanic emissions”).
 
-2­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
persistent asthma” that he had largely controlled through
 
avoidances and prescribed medications. 
In 1989, Van Ness was employed by the DOE as a school 
teacher on the island of Hawai 'i. While teaching in Kona, Van 
Ness was exposed to vog and “had difficulty breathing and required courses of systemic corticosteroid for rescue along with regular controller medication.” 
In 1991, Van Ness was transferred to a school on the 
island of O
'ahu and began receiving respiratory treatment from 
James M. Sweet, M.D. (Dr. Sweet) and Russell M. Tom, M.D. (Dr. Tom). “He was tested and confirmed to have allergic potentials to multiple inhalant allergens including dust mite and mold spores.” He was placed on “a several-year course of desensitizing immunotherapy and had [a] favorable outcome.” 
From 1995 to 2001, Van Ness lived in Idaho, during
 
which he “had few symptoms of allergic-respiratory disease.” 
Van Ness returned to O
'ahu in 2001 and was employed by 
the DOE as one of two technology coordinators at Leilehua High School. In October 2004, during a trip to California, Van Ness was hospitalized for a diaphragmatic hernia. He also contracted pneumonia during his treatment. 
In July 2005, Van Ness was transferred to Lahainaluna
 
to work as the technology coordinator. Lahainaluna had
 approximately one thousand students and one hundred and fifty
 staff members. Van Ness was the only technology coordinator at
 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the school and was responsible for maintaining and repairing the
 
technical equipment for the entire school. 
Van Ness testified that Lahainaluna is located on the
 
side of a mountain, at the end of Lahainaluna Road. Lahainaluna
 Road “starts right at the ocean, goes a couple blocks, and then
 goes up the hill past the intermediate and elementary school to
 the high school.” Lahainaluna’s campus was situated at the
 highest point that Lahainaluna Road reached on the mountain.
 
Van Ness testified that due to the school’s location,
 
the school buildings and classrooms are “kind of spread out and
 put up against the sides of the mountain in various locations,”
 and there are “stairs that go up the side of the hill.” Van Ness
 estimated that between campus buildings on the lowest and highest
 point of the mountain, there was an elevation difference of a
 “couple hundred feet.” 
Van Ness testified that the staff was not provided with
 
golf carts for transportation, and due to the steepness of the
 campus terrain and the lack of paved roads, it would have been
 impractical to attempt to use golf carts for transportation
 around the school. 
Van Ness’s office was located in the school library,
 
which was situated at the highest point of the campus. Van Ness
 was required to repeatedly climb up and down the school stairs
 daily in order to service the classroom computers at the lower
 parts of campus. He explained that there were fifty to sixty
 
-4­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stairs at the base of the library, another eighty stairs to reach
 
the next level of buildings, about “three or four floors” down to
 the parking lot, and then another “hike down” to the final
 section of buildings. The stairs “wrap[ped] around trees” and
 went “up the side of the hill.” There were also “switchbacks,
 where you go up one way and go the other direction.” 
Van Ness testified that he was forced to stop to catch
 
his breath as he traveled uphill to his office from the lower
 campus. It took “about five minutes to go down to [the]
 admin[istration] [building], [but] like 20 minutes to come back. 
It’s the elevation change in the stairs. It takes quite a bit of
 effort.” 
Van Ness was generally present on campus for seven to
 
eight hours a day. Although his office was air conditioned, Van
 Ness estimated that he spent less than five percent of his time
 at work in his office. When he was not in his office, Van Ness
 worked in non-air conditioned environments “all over campus,” in
 buildings with “louvered windows” and “fans . . . inside to keep
 the air circulating.” Although many of the classrooms and
 offices were equipped with air conditioners, most of the units
 were turned off and the louver windows were left open.
 
Van Ness explained that his experience working as a
 
technology coordinator at Lahainaluna was different from his
 experience working in the same position at other schools because
 he was required to engage in a significant amount of physical
 
-5­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
activity outside. Additionally, Van Ness testified that the 
computers at Lahainaluna required more maintenance than computers at other schools because they were exposed to more dust and dirt as a result of the buildings being non-air conditioned and the windows being left open. Van Ness frequently cleaned and replaced the computer filters, which were clogged with dust. Many computers “overheated” because of the lack of circulation 
and the accumulation of dust. At schools on O
'ahu, he focused on 
upgrading the computers to “run faster and more efficiently,” 
whereas at Lahainaluna, “it was more an issue of keeping them running.” 
While Van Ness worked at Lahainaluna, he lived in an
 
air conditioned home in Kihei. The air conditioner had a built-
in filter. In addition, Van Ness had several “Bionic Breeze”
 filter units placed around his home. The units were high-
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters, and had been
 recommended by his doctor. Van Ness also had a HEPA filter in
 his car.
 
Van Ness testified that there was a significant amount
 
of vog on Maui from late October 2005 through April 2006. On
 days when the vog was severe, he was unable to see the
 administrative building “halfway down the campus” from the
 library. Van Ness also stated that a film of volcanic ash would
 
accumulate on his car and windshield, requiring him to use the
 
windshield wipers to keep the windshield clear while driving. 
-6­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Van Ness did not have any problems with volcanic ash
 
inside his car or his home. He testified that while living on
 
Maui he spent little time outside, other than when he was at
 work, as he was “not much of an outdoors person” and “there
 really wasn’t much to do there.” 
Van Ness testified that in late 2005, his exposure to
 
vog at work affected his respiratory condition by reducing the
 amount of air he was able to breathe. When the vog was severe,
 he experienced “a lot of coughing, wheezing.” He also caught a
 cold and contracted bronchitis. Van Ness’s shortness of breath
 worsened when he walked uphill to his office from servicing the
 computers in the lower campus classrooms. Van Ness described the
 pain from coughing as “incredibly sharp,” “like a stabbing pain.”
 
Additionally, Van Ness explained that when he tried to
 
move around, he would start sweating, his heart began “pounding a
 
lot,” and his face “[got] all red.”  Because Van Ness had to walk
 
to his office and assigned parking spot located at the top of
 
Lahainaluna’s campus, “it caused a lot of . . . issues with
 strength, a lot of issues with just being able to breathe.” He
 explained:
 
[The vog] basically reduced the amount of air I was able to
breathe. And started wheezing and coughing. Real shortness
 of breath. And obviously the more that happened, the worse
it got, to where I basically went level to level and took
breaks before I’d continue all the way up. It’s steep.
There were times when I would drive. It was easier to drive
 from the library down, around the campus, up to admin, than
to actually walk down there.
 
Prior to the period of severe vog, Van Ness was able to
 
control his asthma condition with a regular inhaler, which he
 
-7­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
usually did not need to use. Van Ness was prescribed enough 
medication to last thirteen months. While living on O 'ahu, Van 
Ness never exhausted the entire thirteen-month supply and only refilled his prescription when the inhalers expired. 
While working at Lahainaluna in late 2005, however, Van
 
Ness exhausted his supply of inhalers before his prescription
 expired, and he was frequently required to refill his inhalers at
 the pharmacy. However, his inhalers and other medication were
 not helping with his breathing. 
On December 23, 2005, which was a work holiday during 
Lahainaluna’s winter break, Van Ness traveled to O
'ahu to see Dr. 
Tom, his primary care physician, about his condition. Dr. Tom’s clinical notes include a reference to “vog,” although some of the handwriting is illegible. Dr. Tom wrote that Van Ness was experiencing difficulty breathing and coughing. Van Ness testified that after performing x-rays and tests, Dr. Tom 
diagnosed him with chronic bronchitis.  
Van Ness testified that following his visit with Dr.
 
Tom, he was placed on “light duty” at work, which required that
 
he “stay out of the vog whenever [he] could” but did not limit
 his physical activity. 
Van Ness had a follow-up visit with Dr. Tom on January
 
28, 2006. Dr. Tom’s clinical notes indicated that Van Ness’s
 symptoms of coughing, chest congestion, shortness of breath, and
 wheezing, had “never completely gone away from [the] 12/23/05
 
-8­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
visit.” Dr. Tom also made note of the possibility of “vog
 
contributing” and “vog on Maui.” 
On March 4, 2006, Van Ness saw Dr. Sweet, his treating
 
physician for his respiratory condition. 
Van Ness was still
 
experiencing shortness of breath and wheezing. Dr. Sweet also
 noted that Van Ness had taken a trip to Pennsylvania and “[w]hile
 in Philadelphia he was on prednisone. His wheezing and
 [shortness of breath] essentially resolved. [Van Ness] states as
 soon as he returned to Maui he started to have wheezing and
 [shortness of breath].” 
On March 10, and 23, 2006, Dr. Tom wrote two notes, 
addressed “To Whom It May Concern,” stating that Van Ness had an asthma condition which was exacerbated by vog. Dr. Tom wrote that Van Ness’s symptoms had worsened since moving to Maui due to the higher vog exposure there. Dr. Tom recommended that Van Ness 
be transferred to O
'ahu due to his condition. 
On March 23, 2006, the DOE approved Van Ness’s request
 
for a “hardship transfer from Maui District to Oahu District due
 
to medical reasons.” However, Van Ness was not immediately
 transferred. 
On May 2, 2006, Van Ness was hospitalized at Queen’s 
Medical Center (QMC) on O
'ahu for surgery on a hernia in his 
diaphragm. Van Ness testified that the x-ray that Dr. Tom performed of Van Ness’s diaphragm in December 2005 had identified a “hole in the diaphragm . . . separating the abdomen from the lungs.” He testified that “later it was found that because of 
-9­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
all the coughing and wheezing, . . . the tear had gotten a lot
 
larger[.]” 
After surgery, Van Ness testified that he experienced 
various complications, including “post-operative pneumonia, post­operative multi-system organ failure, life threatening pneumonia, advanced respiratory distress syndrome, renal failure, gastrointestinal bleeding, tracheostomy and gangrene.” The gangrene “led to amputation of the terminal digits of his first and fifth fingers on the right.” Van Ness testified that Paul Morris, M.D. (Dr. Morris), Van Ness’s treating physician at QMC, told him that his body would not have been as physically weak post-operation if the DOE had transferred him to O
'ahu in March 
2006 when his hardship transfer was approved by the DOE. 
Van Ness was discharged from QMC on June 9, 2006. On
 
July 25, 2006, Van Ness returned to work at Lahainaluna. 
Van Ness was transferred to O 'ahu in November 2006. 
Following the transfer, he continued to have respiratory difficulties as his body recuperated from surgery. On June 16, 2007, Dr. Tom restricted Van Ness from “walking too far because that just kept [Van Ness] in a situation of overworking [his] lungs in the recovery period.” 
B.
 
On September 20, 2007, Van Ness filed a workers’
 
compensation claim with the Director, stating that “on or about”
 December 23, 2005, he was exposed to vog during the course of his
 employment at Lahainaluna, resulting in the “exacerbation of
 
-10­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[his] asthma, bronchitis, [and] difficulty breathing.” He stated
 
that he had given his employer notice of injury through Joanne
 Dennis, Lahainaluna’s Vice Principal. 
On October 12, 2007, the DOE filed a report denying
 
liability for Van Ness’s claimed injury “pending further
 evaluation.” 
On October 19, 2007, Vice Principal Dennis wrote a
 
letter confirming that prior to December 23, 2005, she had, on
 several occasions, discussed with Van Ness his difficulties with
 breathing and asthma that he experienced while working at
 Lahainaluna. She also verified that “[w]e experienced some
 unusually severe vog-polluted days during the weeks preceding
 that winter break.” “On some days the atmosphere was so heavy
 with vog that we could barely see Lahaina town from Lahainaluna
 High School.” She noted that “the vog was even worse” in Kihei,
 where Van Ness lived. Vice Principal Dennis also “experienced
 intense headaches during those ‘voggy’ days,” even though she did
 not have asthma. 
Van Ness also testified that he had discussed his
 
medical condition with Vice Principal Lynn Kaholohala prior to
 December 23, 2005.
 
C.
 
Upon the DOE’s request, the Director issued an order on
 
January 11, 2008, requiring Van Ness to submit to an Independent
 
-11­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Medical Examination (IME) by Ajit S. Arora, M.D. (Dr. Arora).2
 
The IME was conducted on January 25, 2008, and consisted of an
 
“extended interview and examination.”3 No medical records were
 
available for Dr. Arora’s review at the time. Dr. Arora
 submitted his report on February 5, 2008. 
As an initial matter, Dr. Arora noted that “[t]he claim
 
apparently is based on the assumption that since exposure to vog
 occurred also at the school, it is a work related exacerbation of
 asthma. The legal implications of this are not clear to me
 because vog is not a factor that is associated with school
 
2
 The DOE asked Dr. Arora to review Van Ness’s medical records and
 
to conduct a physical examination in order to address: (1) Van Ness’s relevant
medical history; (2) whether Van Ness suffered “an industrial injury” as a
result of exposure to vog on December 23, 2005; (3) whether the “alleged
condition was due in whole or in part to the nature of [Van Ness’s] employment
with the DOE,” or some other pre-existing cause; (4) whether the alleged
condition or injury was “temporary in nature”; (5) if the injury is not
temporary in nature, whether Van Ness is “expected to have permanent
impairment resulting solely from an alleged industrial injury of 12/23/05”;
and 5) whether there are any further issues or considerations regarding the
alleged injury. 
3 Dr. Arora noted that Van Ness, upon advice of counsel, refused to
submit to blood work or to testing with an electrocardiogram to assess organ
function. 
On March 31, 2010, the DOE filed a motion for an order suspending
Van Ness’s right to claim compensation for failure to comply with HRS § 386­79, based on Van Ness’s refusal to have tests done during the IME.
Furthermore, the DOE alleged that Van Ness’s counsel “revoked medical
authorizations” and withheld certain medical records. 
On June 23, 2010, the LIRAB denied the DOE’s requested order. In
 
the DOE’s June 3, 2010 post-hearing trial memorandum filed with the LIRAB, the
DOE continued to argue that Van Ness’s right to seek compensation should be
suspended because of his failure to participate in tests during the IME and
his continued withholding of medical records. The LIRAB concluded that it did
 not need to reach the DOE’s argument regarding the suspension of Van Ness’s
rights to claim workers’ compensation benefits.
HRS § 386-79 (1993) provides that “[a]fter an injury and during
the period of disability, the employee, whenever ordered by the [Director],
shall submit oneself to examination . . . by a duly qualified physician or
surgeon designated and paid by the employer.” The statute further states that
 “[i]f an employee refuses to submit oneself to, or in any way obstructs, such
examination the employee’s right to claim compensation for the work injury
shall be suspended until the refusal or obstruction ceases and no compensation
shall be payable for the period during which the refusal or obstruction
continues.” Id.
 
-12­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
uniquely.” 
The majority of Dr. Arora’s report reiterated Van
 
Ness’s medical history and exposure to vog at Lahainaluna,
 
consistent with Van Ness’s testimony at the LIRAB hearing. Dr.
 Arora stated that “the issues are quite complex.” Because Dr.
 Arora did not have access to Van Ness’s medical records, he
 concluded that “it [would] be unwise to address the [DOE’s]
 referral questions” until he had access to the relevant records.
 
On February 14, 2008, Van Ness was seen by David A. Mathison,
 
M.D. (Dr. Mathison), for a consultation regarding “asthma,
 allergies, [and] vog effect on lungs.” Dr. Mathison prepared a
 consultation report based on his interview with Van Ness and his
 wife, a physical examination of Van Ness, and Van Ness’s medical
 records provided by Dr. Sweet dating back to 1991, which included
 a summary of Van Ness’s hospitalization at QMC in May 2006. 
Dr. Mathison first discussed Van Ness’s aggravated
 
asthma and noted that after several months on Maui “during a 40­
day spell of rainy weather with vog (moisture, pollutants
 
including volcanic smoke/ash) exposure from about November 2005
 and continuing into the spring of 2006, [Van Ness] had serious
 flare of asthmatic symptoms with harsh paroxysms of cough, chest
 tightness, shortness of breath, and wheeziness[.]” At that time
 
Van Ness’s symptoms were “only partially controlled with
 
medications for asthma/bronchitis including Advair, Singulair,
 
and albuterol.” 
-13­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Dr. Mathison wrote that Van Ness’s symptoms were
 
complicated by “hernia of the right diaphragm, and urgent surgery
 
was performed at the Queens Medical Center on May 2, 2006.” Dr.
 Mathison also noted the various post-surgery complications Van
 Ness experienced. He wrote that after being discharged from the
 hospital, Van Ness had “improved respiratory symptoms, he was
 able to return to Maui and work there through the remainder of
 2006.” 
Dr. Mathison noted that since moving back to O
'ahu, Van 
Ness “has been relatively free of respiratory symptoms. He . . . rarely has had need for albuterol and has not regularly taken the Advair.” 
Dr. Mathison noted that throughout the years, Van
 
Ness’s “allergic diathesis has largely been controlled with
 avoidances and the several-year course of immunotherapy during
 the early 90s. However, he has had significant asthma
 exacerbations with exposures to volcanic smoke (high in sulfur
 dioxide) and ash including that carried by meteorologic[al]
 conditions holding the pollutant[] in moist air over Maui.” Dr.
 Mathison also found that at the time of the consultation, Van
 Ness’s condition had “improved coincident to his residence in
 Oahu, though he continues to . . . recover[] from complications
 of respiratory disease-surgery from near 2 years ago.” 
In conclusion, Dr. Mathison diagnosed Van Ness with
 
“[m]ild persistent asthma with history of exacerbations with
 exposures to volcanic smoke-ash-pollution.” 
-14­  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Dr. Mathison recommended that Van Ness “continue the
 
regimen of avoidances and medications as prescribed by Dr. Sweet
 
in an attempt to optimally control the allergic-asthmatic
 disorders.” Dr. Mathison wrote, “Of particular concern is the
 risk for serious and potentially fatal asthma exacerbation with
 exposure to volcanic products, a well-recognized risk factor for
 asthmatic patients.” (Emphasis added). He concluded that Van
 Ness “can be considered to be disabled by virtue of his asthmatic
 tendency and susceptibility to the volcanic pollutant effects
 and, in accordance with the American Disabilities Act, it
 behooves his employer not to place him at risk of asthmatic
 exacerbations by assignments to areas likely to have volcanic
 exposure-pollution.” (Emphasis added).
 
D.
 
The Director’s hearing on Van Ness’s claim was held on
 
March 13, 2008.
4 On April 21, 2008, the Director issued a
 
decision denying Van Ness’s workers’ compensation claim. The
 
Director stated that “[a]fter a review of the evidence presented
 
at the hearing, the Director is not convinced that claimant’s
 
injury arose out of and in the course of employment.” The
 Director found that “[Van Ness’s] exposure to vog aggravated his
 long standing asthma condition.” However, “[t]he vog was present
 on the entire island of Maui and not only at claimant’s place of
 employment.” The Director found that “it was claimant’s exposure
 
4
 The transcript for the March 13, 2008 hearing was not made part of
the record on appeal.
 
-15­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to vog on the island of Maui that aggravated his asthma
 
condition,” and there was “insufficient evidence” to support Van
 Ness’s “claim that his exposure to vog at only Lahainaluna School
 was so overwhelming that [Van Ness’s] exposure to vog occurred at
 this place of employment only[.]” The Director therefore did not
 “find a nexus between the claimant’s employment and his injury of
 12/23/2005.” 
The Director concluded: “[T]he claimant’s respiratory
 
problem and aggravation of his asthma condition was not work
 related. The Director credits the report of Dr. Arora and the
 employer’s position.”
 
II. APPEAL TO LIRAB
 
On May 2, 2008, Van Ness timely filed an appeal from
 
the Director’s Decision with LIRAB, pursuant to HRS § 386-87.
5
 
A.
 
On April 10, 2009, Dr. Arora issued a supplemental
 
report as a follow-up to his initial evaluation of February 5,
 2008. The report reviewed records from Dr. Tom from 1994 through
 2007, diagnostic reports from the same time period, records from
 the California hospital where Van Ness was admitted in 2004, and
 hospital records from January 2005 through October 2006. 
Dr. Arora wrote that Dr. Tom’s records from Van Ness’s December
 
23, 2005 visit noted that Van Ness had experienced a cough for
 
5
 HRS § 386-87(a) (1993) provides in relevant part: “A decision of
the director shall be final and conclusive between the parties, . . . unless
within twenty days after a copy has been sent to each party, either party
appeals therefrom to the appellate board by filing a written notice of appeal
with the appellate board or the department.”
 
-16­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
only five days, had difficulty breathing, and requested a refill
 
of his albuterol inhaler. According to Dr. Arora, Dr. Tom did
 not make any note of the vog as a contributory factor. 
Additionally, Dr. Arora found that Van Ness had seen
 
Dr. Tom on December 2, 2005 for a regular checkup and laboratory
 work-up, and did not report any problem with breathing at that
 time. 
In Dr. Arora’s opinion, it was “impossible to
 
determine” if the reported worsening of Van Ness’s asthma
 symptoms in March 2006 was caused by the vog or by the
 diaphragmatic hernia that worsened around the same time. 
Dr. Arora stated that he had “not had the opportunity to review
 
the records from Dr. Sweet to determine if objectively there was
 
any change in [Van Ness’s] pulmonary status between December 2005
 and March 2006 compared to his previous baseline.” Nevertheless,
 Dr. Arora indicated, “I doubt that to be the case.” He
 explained, “Asthma exacerbation can occur in association with
 irritant exposure. However, it is a temporary worsening of the
 symptoms with recovery to baseline. It does not constitute
 
aggravation of the condition.” 
Dr. Arora concluded that Van Ness’s “history is
 
compatible with mild exacerbation of his asthma while in Maui
 
because of vog conditions.” Dr. Arora also concluded that the
 exacerbation of asthma “has no relationship to his employment
 with the department of education,” and “[s]uch exacerbation was
 temporary and reversible and did not cause any permanent
 
-17­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
aggravation of his condition.” Dr. Arora’s opinion was that
 
“there was no occupational injury that occurred in [Van Ness] as
 a result of employment with [the DOE].” 
B.
 
On July 1, 2009, the LIRAB issued a Pretrial Order,
 
providing that “[t]he sole issue to be determined is whether
 Claimant sustained a personal injury to his respiratory system,
 on December 23, 2005, arising out of and in the course of
 employment.”
6
 
The LIRAB hearing on the case was held on April 6,
 
2010. Van Ness was the only testifying witness at the hearing,
 and testified as to his asthmatic condition and his experience
 working at Lahainaluna, as summarized above. 
An air quality advisory that was posted on the State of 
Hawai
'i government’s website on July 29, 2008 was stipulated into 
evidence. The advisory stated that the State Department of Health and Hawai
'i County Civil Defense had reported “that recent 
activity at the Kilauea volcano has resulted in some temporary increased levels” of sulfur dioxide and particulates. The advisory provided that the Department of Health “advises that exposure to such elevated levels of sulfur dioxide can pose an immediate health threat to people who have asthma and other respiratory conditions.” (Emphasis added). The advisory further stated that people in “sensitive groups such as those with asthma . . . can be particularly vulnerable” and that “people reacting 
6
 The Director’s case file was made a part of the LIRAB’s record.
 
-18­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to volcanic emissions” should “take protective measures such as
 
staying indoors with the windows closed or relocating to a safe
 area.” The advisory cautioned that people should “avoid physical
 activity (especially outdoors) such as brisk walking or
 exercise.” 
In addition, an undated document entitled “Health
 
Effects,” prepared by the Office of the Governor, was also
 entered into evidence. The document explained that sulfur
 dioxide is an “irritant gas” that is “a major component of vog.” 
Sulfur dioxide “is usually removed by the nasal passages,” and
 “[m]oderate activity levels that trigger mouth breathing (such as
 a brisk walk) are needed for [sulfur dioxide] to cause health
 problems.”
 
The document further stated that “[p]eople with pre­
existing respiratory conditions are more prone to adverse effects
 of vog which may include: headaches, breathing difficulties,
 increased susceptibility to respiratory ailments, watery eyes,
 and sore throat.” Additionally, “[p]eople with asthma who are
 physically active outdoors are most likely to experience the
 health effects of [sulfur dioxide]. The main effect, even with a
 short exposure, is a narrowing of the airways (called
 bronchoconstriction). This may cause wheezing, chest tightness,
 and shortness of breath.” (Emphasis added).
 
Both the air quality advisory and the “Health Effects”
 
notice provided that “[t]he long-term health effects of vog are
 unknown.” 
-19­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.
 
The LIRAB ordered that the parties submit post-trial
 
memoranda in lieu of closing arguments. 
1.
 
In his Post Hearing Memorandum, Van Ness argued that he 
“suffered an aggravation of his asthmatic condition due to having 
to do strenuous work and breathe outdoor air during a period of 
high vog concentrations.” He contended that the DOE failed to 
provide substantial evidence to overcome the presumption of 
compensability for his workers’ compensation claim. Van Ness argued that the aggravation of his asthma met the test for compensability under Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai
'i 70, 81, 9 P.3d 
382, 393 (2000), which held that an injury by disease is compensable if the disease (1) is caused by conditions that are characteristic of or peculiar to the particular trade, occupation, or employment, (2) results from the employee’s actual exposure to such working conditions, and (3) is due to causes in excess of the ordinary hazards of employment in general. 
The DOE countered that Van Ness failed to establish a
 
nexus between his employment and the alleged injury of vog­related asthma. The DOE argued that there was no causal
 connection between Van Ness’s employment and his injury because
 Van Ness was not required to be at work on the alleged date of
 injury and his medical records indicated that his respiratory
 problems were related to his preexisting health condition. 
-20­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Additionally, the DOE argued that there was no evidence 
that the vog conditions experienced by Van Ness at work were 
greater than that experienced by the general population. The DOE also contended that any aggravation of Van Ness’s asthmatic condition was temporary in nature as demonstrated by his improved health when he was transferred to O
'ahu. 
2.
 
On September 20, 2011, the LIRAB issued its Decision
 
and Order, which included its Findings of Fact (FOF) and
 Conclusions of Law (COL). 
With respect to Van Ness’s medical records, the LIRAB 
found that: 1) on March 23, 2007, Dr. Tom “concluded that [Van Ness] suffered from asthma exacerbated by vog while he was on Maui” and recommended that Van Ness move to O
'ahu; 2) on February 
14, 2008, Dr. Mathison diagnosed Van Ness with “mild persistent asthma with history of exacerbations with exposures to volcanic smoke-ash-pollution”; and 3) Dr. Arora’s opinion in his supplemental report was that “Claimant’s history was compatible with mild exacerbation of his asthma because of vog conditions.” 
The LIRAB entered findings reiterating Van Ness’s
 
testimony about Lahainaluna’s campus, the vog at work, and his
 pre-existing asthma condition. However, the LIRAB found that Van
 Ness faced the same “hazard from vog exposure” at work as the
 general public, and the DOE had presented substantial evidence to
 overcome the presumption of compensability: 
9. The Board finds that Claimant’s work or work environment
 
posed no greater vog exposure than that posed to the general
 
-21­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public. The hazard from vog exposure Claimant faced while
on the campus of Lahainaluna School was no greater hazard or
risk than that faced by others off of the campus of
Lahainaluna School.
 
10. The Board has applied the presumption of compensability
and finds that Employer has presented substantial evidence
to overcome said presumption.
 
(Emphases added).
 
The LIRAB thus concluded that Van Ness “did not sustain
 
a personal injury to his respiratory system, on December 23,
 
2005, arising out of and in the course of employment.” The LIRAB
 explained that Van Ness “was not at work or even on Maui on
 December 23, 2005.” 
“However, inasmuch as Claimant identified his date of
 
injury as ‘on or about’ December 23, 2005,” the LIRAB also
 concluded that it was “not persuaded by” Van Ness’s argument that
 “his asthma was a compensable disease caused by conditions
 peculiar to his particular employment.” In this regard, the
 LIRAB concluded that “exposure to vog was not accentuated or made
 worse by the nature and conditions of Claimant’s employment,”
 based on the following reasoning:
 
Claimant was a technology coordinator. His risk of exposure
to vog was walking outdoors and being in some buildings that
were not air-conditioned. These exposures are no greater
than that of the general public. The nature and conditions
 
of his employment did not accentuate the exposure. Rather,
the vog was in the air, and the general public breathed the
same air.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
The LIRAB also rejected Van Ness’s claim that, “but for
 
work, he would otherwise have been in a filtered environment at
 
his home.” The LIRAB reasoned that “the relevant comparison is
 
-22­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
made to the general public’s exposure, not Claimant’s alleged
 
comparatively hermetic and sterile home environment.”
 
Based on the foregoing, the LIRAB concluded that it was
 
unnecessary to address the DOE’s argument that Van Ness’s “right
 to claim workers’ compensation benefits be suspended because of
 his refusal to cooperate by undergoing the tests requested by Dr.
 Arora.”
7
 
Therefore, the LIRAB affirmed the Director’s decision
 
to deny compensation. 
III. APPEAL TO ICA
 
On October 20, 2011, Van Ness timely filed a Notice of
 
Appeal to the ICA.8
 
A.
 
Van Ness raised three points of error on appeal to the
 
ICA, alleging that the LIRAB erred 1) in entering FOF 9 that his
 vog exposure at work posed no greater vog exposure or greater
 hazard or risk than that faced by the general public; 2) by
 concluding that he did not sustain a personal injury to his
 respiratory system on December 23, 2005, arising out of and in
 the course of employment; and 3) by concluding that his exposure
 to vog was not made worse by the nature and conditions of his
 employment because the general public breathed the same air. 
7
 See supra note 3.
 
8
 HRS § 386-88 (Supp. 2011) provides in relevant part: “The decision
or order of the appellate board shall be final and conclusive, . . . unless
within thirty days after mailing of a certified copy of the decision or order,
the director or any other party appeals to the intermediate appellate court, .
. . by filing a written notice of appeal with the appellate board.” 
-23­ 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Van Ness reiterated that the aggravation of his asthma
 
condition was compensable as an injury by disease under the Flor
 
test. With respect to the first Flor factor, he argued that his
 
preexisting asthma condition should be considered along with the
 unique nature of his work at Lahainaluna, as compared with the
 same position at other schools. Second, Van Ness argued that his
 work required actual exposure to vog, as was found by the LIRAB
 in FOF 9, and the evidence demonstrated that exposure to vog
 adversely affected him and exacerbated his asthma. Third, Van
 Ness contended that the LIRAB erred in comparing his vog exposure
 to that of the general public, as the general public was not
 exposed to the vog conditions while being “required to do
 strenuous work outdoors.” The real issue was that “Claimant’s
 job conditions exposed him to a positional or actual risk which
 resulted in his injury.” In this case, the LIRAB’s own findings
 demonstrated that his asthma was exacerbated by vog.
 
In response, the DOE maintained that Van Ness’s claim
 
was non-compensable based on the evidence that Van Ness was
 
exposed to the same air and vog at work as all other persons on
 
Maui. Additionally, the DOE argued that “[a]lthough the medical
 experts opined that vog exacerbated Claimant’s asthma, none of
 them opined that Claimant’s asthma was exacerbated by his
 employment.” 
The DOE further contended that while it was unclear
 
whether Van Ness was pursuing his claim as an injury by accident
 or injury by disease, the LIRAB accurately concluded that Van
 
-24­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ness’s injury was not compensable under either alternative. With
 
respect to an injury by accident, the DOE argued that the LIRAB
 correctly found that there was no nexus between the alleged
 
injury and Van Ness’s employment, as Van Ness was not physically
 
present at work or on Maui on the alleged date of injury. In
 
regard to an injury by disease claim under Flor, the DOE
 
maintained that there was “no evidence that [Van Ness’s] asthma
 
is characteristic of his occupation as a technology coordinator.” 
The DOE acknowledged that Van Ness “may meet” the second Flor
 requirement, as there was evidence that “Claimant’s presence at
 Lahainaluna School, just as his presence anywhere on the island
 of Maui, exacerbated his asthma due to the presence of vog.” As
 to the third Flor condition, the DOE maintained that there was
 “no evidence that the aggravation of Claimant’s asthma is due to
 causes in excess of the ordinary hazards or employment in
 general,” as the vog affected the entire island. Therefore, the
 LIRAB’s FOF 9 and FOF 10 were correct.
9
 
Van Ness responded that his claim was based on an
 
injury by disease under the Flor test. He also argued that the
 DOE misconstrued Flor as requiring “all technology coordinators .
 
9
 Relatedly, the DOE argued that Van Ness failed to challenge FOF 10
as a point of error and that any arguments regarding FOF 10 should therefore
be disregarded.
Van Ness responded that his argument should not be disregarded, as
FOF 10 was thoroughly discussed as a point of error in the body of his Opening
Brief. [RB at 8] Van Ness argued that FOF 10 was clearly erroneous because
the DOE did not adduce substantial evidence to overcome the presumption of
compensability.
The ICA found that although Van Ness had not raised FOF 10 as a
point of error, he had challenged FOF 10 in the argument section of his
Opening Brief and provided the necessary information to assist the ICA in
identifying his argument. Van Ness v. State, No. CAAP-11-0000775, 2012 WL
6115601, at *2 (Haw. App. Dec. 10, 2012) (mem.).
 
-25­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . to have something in their work that causes asthma.” Rather,
 
the correct analysis was to determine whether a condition,
 characteristic to Van Ness’s particular job as a technology
 coordinator at Lahainaluna, caused the exacerbation of his
 asthma. 
B.
 
The ICA applied the Flor test for providing coverage
 
for injuries caused by an “occupational disease.” Van Ness v.
 
State, No. CAAP-11-0000775, 2012 WL 6115601, at *4 (Haw. App.
 Dec. 10, 2012) (mem.). Characterizing Van Ness’s claim as a
 claim that the exacerbation of his asthma resulted from work-
related vog exposure, the ICA found that the second condition of
 the Flor test was met because it was “undisputed that Van Ness
 faced actual exposure to vog in his employment[.]” Id. However,
 
the ICA concluded that Van Ness’s claim did not constitute a
 “compensable occupational disease because the DOE produced
 substantial evidence” that the first (disease caused by
 conditions characteristic of employment) and third (disease due
 to causes in excess of ordinary hazards of employment) conditions
 of Flor were not met. Id. 
Citing Flor, the ICA applied the following standard for
 
compensable occupational diseases:
 
[A]n occupational disease requires “a recognizable link
between the disease and some distinctive feature of the
 claimant’s job, common to all jobs of that sort.” An
 occupational disease cannot be “an ordinary disease of life
to which general public was equally exposed outside of that
employment,” and the disease must “have incidence
substantially higher in that occupation than in usual
occupations or, in case of ordinary disease of life, in
general population.” In other words, the Flor test requires
 
-26­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that “the employer’s working conditions produced the ailment
as a natural incident of the employee’s occupation in such a
manner as to attach a hazard distinct from and greater than
the hazard attending employment in general.”
 
Id. (citations omitted) (emphasis added). 
The ICA found that Van Ness did not meet this test,
 
emphasizing the requirement that the feature causing the disease
 
be “common to all jobs of that sort.” Id. The ICA reasoned that
 
“Van Ness’s occupation was as a technology coordinator, and his
 primary duties were maintaining and repairing technology
 equipment.” Id. at *5. “This work, in and of itself, could not
 
have exacerbated his asthma and Van Ness does not contend that it
 does.” Id. Thus, the ICA concluded, “his disease was produced
 
not by ‘natural incident’ or ‘distinctive feature of the
 claimant’s job, common to all jobs of that sort,’ but rather by
 his exposure to vog.” Id. (citation omitted) (emphasis added). 
The ICA continued, “Vog exposure itself cannot be considered a
 condition characteristic of or peculiar to Van Ness’s employment,
 however, because it is undisputed that vog affected the entire
 island of Maui at the time.” Id. 
The ICA held that the LIRAB’s FOF 9, finding that Van
 
Ness’s work or work environment posed no greater vog exposure
 than that posed to the general public, was supported by
 substantial evidence rebutting the presumption that Van Ness’s
 injury was work-related. Id. In this regard, the ICA cited the
 
medical reports, finding that the “reports all concluded the Maui
 vog exacerbated Van Ness’s asthma, but nothing in those reports
 noted any relationship between the exacerbation and Van Ness’s
 
-27­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
employment.” Id. (emphases added). Dr. Tom’s recommendation 
that Van Ness transfer to O 'ahu rather than to another position 
on Maui demonstrated that Van Ness’s “condition was not peculiar 
to his employment at Lahainaluna.” Id. Additionally, the ICA 
noted the vice principal’s statement that she also experienced adverse effects of vog and that the vog was heavier in other parts of Maui. Id. Thus, the ICA concluded that Van Ness “faced 
a risk no different and no greater than that faced by any member of the general public or in another field of work who spent time outdoors.” Id. 
The ICA further emphasized Dr. Arora’s conclusion in
 
his supplemental report that Van Ness’s exacerbated asthma had
 “no relationship to his employment with the DOE.” Id. (brackets
 
and quotation marks omitted). The ICA noted that Dr. Arora
 reviewed “extensive medical records,” which “indicate Van Ness
 had a complex medical history and numerous health issues,” and
 
Dr. Arora “identified a diaphragmatic hernia as a possible cause
 
or contributing factor of Van Ness’s exacerbated asthma.” Id. 
According to the ICA, “Dr. Arora’s reports were sufficiently
 
specific and credible to constitute substantial evidence, and
 given the complexity of Van Ness’s medical history, it was
 reasonable for the LIRAB to conclude Van Ness’s condition was
 unrelated to his work.” Id. at *6.
 
In addition, the ICA found that “[o]ther than Van
 
Ness’s own testimony about his work environment and his duties,
 there is no other evidence in the record suggesting that vog
 
-28­  
   
In his Application, Van Ness argued that Flor did not
 
limit compensable diseases to those associated with particular
 
trades.   Rather, under Flor, “causation could be . . . peculiar
 
to the particular ‘occupation, or employment’.” Thus, the ICA
 
erred in holding that his “claim failed because all technology
 coordinator positions do not face asthma exacerbation.” 
Van Ness proposed that “[a] test similar to the unitary test of
 
compensability for injury by ‘accidents’ should also apply to
 injury by ‘disease,’ that is, the requirement of HRS § 386-3 is
 simply that the disease be proximately caused by or result from
 the nature of employment.” At oral argument, counsel for Van
 Ness maintained that the Flor test was met, but also extended
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
exposure was a hazard peculiar to his employment or in excess of
 the hazards of employment in general.” Id.
 
The ICA therefore concluded that the LIRAB’s decision
 
was not clearly erroneous and affirmed the decision. Id. 
IV.APPLICATION
A.
 
On April 1, 2013, Van Ness timely filed the Application
 
and presented the following questions for review:
 
A. Is the contraction of a disease compensable under HRS §
386-3 although there is no historical association of that
disease with that particular line of work?
 
B. Are “ordinary diseases of life” compensable under HRS §
386-3?
 
C. Should a test similar to the “unitary test” of Royal
State National Insurance Company v. Labor & Industrial
Relations Appeal Board, 53 Haw. 32, 487 P.2d 278 (1971),
be applied to “diseases” under HRS § 386-3?
 
-29­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this argument by asking the court to reexamine or overrule the 
three-part Flor test and to expressly apply the unitary test to determine the compensability of injuries by disease under HRS § 386-3(a). MP3: Oral Argument, Hawai
'i Supreme Court, at 0:03:00, 
0:07:20 (Jun. 20, 213), available at
 http://state.hi.us/jud/oa/13/SCOA_062013_11775.mp3. 
B.
 
In response, the DOE maintained that Van Ness, “at
 
most, met one of the three criteria established by Flor” but that
 Flor “requires that all three criteria must exist for an
 occupational disease claim to be compensable.” 
Alternatively, the DOE argued that the ICA’s ruling
 
should be upheld even if it misapplied the Flor test because Van
 Ness’s injury also did not meet the requirements for
 compensability of an injury by accident. The DOE contended that
 although “both the Board and ICA decided the case based on the
 merits of an occupational disease claim, both should have decided
 the claim as an injury by accident claim.” The DOE emphasized
 that the LIRAB’s pretrial order identifies the issue as whether
 Van Ness “sustained a personal injury to his respiratory system .
 . . arising out of and in the course of employment,” which
 “connotes an injury by accident claim.” However, at oral
 argument, counsel for the DOE stated that although the LIRAB
 framed the issue as an injury by accident, it was not necessarily
 the DOE’s position that the LIRAB should have decided Van Ness’s
 
-30­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
claim as an injury by accident rather than an injury by disease. 
Oral Argument at 00:56:30-00:57:03.
 
V. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Board decisions
 
Appellate review of the LIRAB's decision is governed by
 
HRS § 91–14(g) (1993), which provides that:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
or(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Tauese v. State of Haw., Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Relations, 113
 
Hawai'i 1, 25, 147 P.3d 785, 809 (2006) (quotation marks and 
citations omitted).
 
The LIRAB’s conclusions of law are reviewed de novo,
 
under the right/wrong standard. Id. Its findings of fact “are
 
reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard to determine if
 the agency decision was clearly erroneous in view of reliable,
 probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record.” Id.
 
(quoting Poe v. Haw. Labor Relations Bd., 87 Hawai
'i 191, 195, 
953 P.2d 569, 573 (1998)) (quotation marks omitted). 
-31­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Statutory interpretation
 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo. When construing a statute, our 
foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.” Tauese, 113 
Hawai
'i at 26, 147 P.3d at 810 (quotation marks and citations 
omitted). 
VI. DISCUSSION
 
HRS § 386-3(a) (Supp. 2005) provides, “If an employee
 
suffers personal injury either by accident arising out of and in
 the course of the employment or by disease proximately caused by
 or resulting from the nature of the employment, the employee’s
 employer or the special compensation fund shall pay compensation
 to the employee or the employee’s dependents[.]”
 
Pursuant to HRS § 386-85 (1993), for any workers’
 
compensation claim, “it shall be presumed, in the absence of
 substantial evidence to the contrary . . . [t]hat the claim is
 for a covered work injury.” “In workmen’s compensation cases,
 the employer carries a heavy burden.” Lawhead v. United Air
 
Lines, 59 Haw. 551, 559, 584 P.2d 119, 124 (1978). The
 presumption imposed by HRS § 386-85 “is not a mere procedural
 device that disappears upon the introduction of contrary
 evidence.” Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw.
 
406, 408, 495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972). Rather, “it imposes upon
 the employer the burden of going forward with the evidence and
 
-32­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the burden of persuasion.” Id. The presumption is rebutted
 
“only by substantial evidence that [the injury] is unrelated to
 
the employment.” Id. 
“The term ‘substantial evidence’ signifies a high
 
quantum of evidence which, at the minimum, must be ‘relevant and
 credible evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify
 a conclusion by a reasonable [person] that an injury or death is
 
not work-connected.’” Flor, 94 Hawai' i at 79, 9 P.3d at 391 
(quoting Akamine, 53 Haw. at 408, 495 P.2d at 1166) (emphasis 
added). “If the employer fails to adduce substantial evidence to the contrary, the presumption mandates that the claimant must prevail.” Akamine, 53 Haw. at 409, 495 P.2d at 1166. 
The high burden placed on the employer is attributed to
 
the purpose of the workers’ compensation law. “[T]he legislature
 has decided that work injuries are among the costs of production
 which industry is required to bear[.]” Id. “Workmen’s
 
compensation laws were enacted as a humanitarian measure, to
 create legal liability without relation to fault. They represent
 a socially enforced bargain: the employee giving up his right to
 recover common law damages from the employer in exchange for the
 certainty of a statutory award for all work-connected injuries.” 
Evanson v. Univ. of Haw., 52 Haw. 595, 598, 483 P.2d 187, 190
 (1971). 
Accordingly, “[t]his court has consistently construed §
 
386-85 liberally in accordance with the humanitarian purposes of
 workmen’s compensation.” Lawhead, 59 Haw. at 559, 584 P.2d at
 
-33­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
124. Thus, “[i]n addition to the presumption of compensability,
 
the broad humanitarian purpose of the workers’ compensation
 
statute read as a whole requires that all reasonable doubts be
 resolved in favor of the claimant[.]” Id. at 560, 584 P.2d at
 
125 (quotation marks and citations omitted) (emphasis added). 
See Akamine, 53 Haw. at 409, 495 P.2d at 1166 (“if there is
 reasonable doubt as to whether an injury is work-connected, the
 humanitarian nature of the statute demands that doubt be resolved
 in favor of the claimant”).
 
A.
 
In this case, Van Ness alleged that the aggravation of
 
his asthma resulting from his exposure to vog at Lahainaluna was
 a compensable injury by disease. This court has interpreted HRS
 § 386-3 broadly to “reflect[] the policy of the Workmen’s
 Compensation Law that an employee should be indemnified for all
 infirmities resulting from his employment.” Royal State Nat’l
 
Ins. Co. v. Labor & Indus. Relations Appeal Bd., 53 Haw. 32, 37,
 487 P.2d 278, 281 (1971) (emphasis added) (holding that “psychic
 injuries arising out of the employment relationship” are
 compensable under the statute). The parties have not contested
 that the aggravation of Van Ness’s asthma would constitute a
 compensable injury if it was sufficiently connected to his
 employment.
10
 
10
 In the context of workers’ compensation, “[t]he term ‘disease’
[has been] construed in its broadest dictionary meaning of any ‘serious
derangement of health’ or ‘disordered state of an organism or organ.’” A.
 Larson, Workers’ Compensation Law § 52.04[2] (2012) [hereinafter Larson’s].
See Black’s Law Dictionary 535 (9th ed. 2009) (defining “disease” as a
“deviation from the healthy and normal functioning of the body,” “[a]ny
 
-34­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The parties dispute whether the aggravation of Van
 
Ness’s asthma was “proximately caused by or resulting from the
 
nature of the employment.” In this regard, the parties have
 focused on the applicability of the three-part test for
 
occupational diseases established in Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai' i 
70, 9 P.3d 382 (2000), recon. granted in part, 94 Hawai' i 92, 9 
P.3d 404 (2000). 
In Flor, the court held that “an employee’s injury
 
caused by a disease is compensable as an ‘injury by disease,’
 
pursuant to HRS § 386-3, when the disease (1) is caused by
 conditions that are characteristic of or peculiar to the
 particular trade, occupation, or employment, (2) results from the
 employee’s actual exposure to such working conditions, and (3) is due to causes in excess of the ordinary hazards of employment in 
general.” 94 Hawai' i at 81, 9 P.3d at 393 (citations omitted). 
Applying this test, the ICA in this case found that although it 
was “undisputed that Van Ness faced actual exposure to vog in his
 employment, satisfying the second condition,” “Van Ness’s
 condition does not fall within the definition of a compensable
 occupational disease because the DOE produced substantial
 evidence that the first and third conditions of Flor were not
 met.” 2012 WL 6115601, at *4. Similarly, the LIRAB rejected Van
 Ness’s argument that his asthma was a compensable disease,
 concluding that “[t]he nature and conditions of his employment
 
disorder; any depraved condition”). 
-35­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did not accentuate the exposure” to vog because “the vog was in
 
the air, and the general public breathed the same air.”
 
Inasmuch as the ICA and LIRAB considered whether vog
 
exposure was a natural incident of Van Ness’s occupation as a
 technological coordinator, the analyses reflect a conflation of
 the injury by disease prong of HRS § 386-3(a). The plain
 language of HRS § 386-3(a) provides for two distinct ways in
 which an “injury by disease” may be compensable under the
 statute: “If an employee suffers personal injury . . . by disease
 proximately caused by or resulting from the nature of the
 employment, the employee’s employer . . . shall pay compensation
 to the employee . . . .” (Emphasis added). 
Revised Laws of Hawai' i (RLH) § 97-3 (1955), the 
counterpart to HRS § 386-3, provided that “[i]f a workman
 receives personal injury . . . by disease proximately caused by
 the employment, or resulting from the nature of the employment,
 his employer . . . shall pay compensation[.]” The history of the
 statute thus demonstrates that disease proximately caused by
 employment and disease resulting from the nature of employment
 were intended to be distinct, although related, concepts. 
A close reading of Flor indicates that the three-part
 
test articulated in that case is not applicable to situations in
 which the disease is alleged to be “proximately caused by”
11 the
 
11
 See Black’s Law Dictionary 250 (9th ed. 2009) (defining “proximate 
cause” as “[a] cause that is legally sufficient to result in liability”);
Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 287 n.5, 884 P.2d 345, 350 n.5 (1994) (“For
our purposes, the terms ‘legal cause’ and ‘proximate cause’ are
synonymous[.]”). 
-36­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
employment, rather than alleged to “result[] from the nature of
 
the employment.”
 
In Flor, the claimant filed a workers’ compensation
 
claim upon being diagnosed with the hepatitis C virus after
 decades of working as a dental hygienist for numerous dentists
 and periodontists. Id. at 74, 9 P.3d at 386. There was
 
significant evidence demonstrating that the claimant “probably
 had acquired hepatitis C through work exposure to contaminated
 blood.” Id. However, there was “no test or procedure that could
 
reliably isolate either the time of first infection with
 hepatitis C or the source of the infection,” and the claimant was
 “unable to recall, identify, or otherwise determine the date on
 which she contracted hepatitis C.” Id. Given the multiple
 
employers and lengthy time period involved, and the inability to
 isolate the event precipitating the disease, the court stated
 that it would analyze the claim as an “injury by disease,” id. at
 83-85, 9 P.3d at 395-97, and defined an “injury by disease” as an
 injury that “generally developed gradually over a long period of
 time” as opposed to “result[ing] from a discrete event.” Id. at
 
78, 9 P.3d at 390. 
Although the court then characterized the issue before
 
it as “constru[ing] the causation requirements applicable to the
 ‘injury-by-disease’ prong of HRS § 386-3,” id. at 80, 9 P.3d at
 392, the court was clearly focused on the “resulting from the
 nature of the employment” prong of injuries by disease. Thus,
 the court defined an “occupational disease” as a disease
 
-37­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“resulting from the nature of the employment.” Id. at 80, 9 P.3d
 
at 392 (citing Komatsu v. Bd. of Trustees, Employees’ Ret. Sys.,
 
5 Haw. App. 279, 284, 687 P.2d 1340, 1344 (1984)) (emphasis
 added). The court further developed the definition of an
 “occupational disease,” explaining that “‘an ailment does not
 become an occupational disease simply because it is contracted on
 the employer’s premises.’” Id. (quoting Anderson v. General
 
Motors Corp., 442 A.2d 1359, 1360 (Del. 1982)) (brackets
 omitted). Rather, 
[t]here must be a recognizable link between the disease and
some distinctive feature of the claimant’s job, common to
all jobs of that sort. In other words, an ailment or
disease is a compensable occupational disease if the
employer’s working conditions produced the ailment as a
natural incident of the employee’s occupation in such a
manner as to attach a hazard distinct from and greater than
the hazard attending employment in general. 
94 Hawai' i at 80, 9 P.3d at 392 (emphases added) (citations and 
quotation marks omitted). The Flor court then announced its
 
three-part test for compensating an employee’s injury caused by
 disease under HRS § 386-3(a). Id. Based on the facts of that
 
case, the court determined that the claimant’s “disability,
 caused by hepatitis C,” was compensable “inasmuch as the
 Employers failed to demonstrate by substantial evidence that
 Flor’s disease (1) was not caused by conditions that were
 characteristic of or peculiar to her employment as a dental
 hygienist, (2) did not result from her actual exposure to such
 conditions, and (3) was not due to causes in excess of the
 ordinary hazards of employment in general.” Id. at 84-85, 9 P.3d
 
at 396-97.
 
-38­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Flor court distinguished its three-part test from
 
the “unitary” or “nexus” test used for determining the
 
compensability of injuries “by accident.” Id. at 80, 9 P.3d at
 
392. The unitary test “considers whether there is a sufficient
 
work connection to bring the accident within the scope of the
 statute,” and “requires the finding of a causal connection
 between the injury and any incidents or conditions of
 
employment.” Tate v. GTE Hawaiian Tel. Co.
, 77 Hawai' i 100, 103, 
881 P.2d 1246, 1249 (1994). 
The 
Flor court did not examine whether the claimant’s 
injury by disease was compensable under the proximate cause 
analysis due to the factual nature of the case. However, the court did not preclude circumstances in which an injury by disease claim would be compensable under a proximate cause analysis. On the contrary, the Flor court expressly stated that “[w]hen a disease causing injury results from an identifiable accident,” or from a “discrete event—the time and place of which can be fixed,” “rather than from a peculiar risk of the employment, it should be compensated as an accidental injury.” Id. at 78, 9 P.3d at 390 (emphasis added). Thus, the purpose of the Flor test was to expand coverage under HRS § 386-3 in a case where the claimant would not have been able to show proximate cause under the unitary test; the purpose was not to supplant the proximate cause analysis.
12 
12
 This is consistent with the purpose of occupational disease
legislation generally. The distinction between injuries by accident and by
disease originally developed because occupational diseases were excluded from
 
-39­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Accordingly, the Flor test for compensability is
 
limited to determining the compensability of injuries by disease
 
“resulting from the nature of the employment.” For injuries by
 disease “proximately caused by” the employment, we continue to
 apply the unitary test.
13
 
B.
 
The relevant issue under the unitary or “work­
connection approach” is simply whether there is a causal
 connection between the injury and any incidents or conditions of
 employment: 
The work-connection approach rejects the necessity of
establishing temporal, spatial, and circumstantial proximity
 
coverage under early workers’ compensation laws. See Larson’s § 52.02.
Workers’ compensation statutes “were designed to substitute no-
fault coverage for common law fault remedies,” which provided coverage for
“accidental” injuries. 2 Employment Law § 7.24 Occupational disease (4th
 ed.). “Because occupational diseases were not conditions subject to tort
liability, state legislatures did not address those particular problems,” and
most early court decisions did not allow coverage for non-accidental
illnesses. Id. “[T]he earliest kind of occupational disease coverage in the
United States,” beginning in the early 20th century, “took the form of general
inclusion within the term ‘injury’ or within the term ‘disease’.” Larson’s §
52.02. 
However, “[w]ith the expansion of occupational disease
legislation, [the] contrast between accidental and occupational disease is
gradually losing its importance, and awards are frequently made without
specifying which category the injury falls in.” Id. at § 52.03[1].
“Jurisdictions having general coverage of occupational disease now usually
define the term to include any disease arising out of exposure to harmful
conditions of the employment, when those conditions are present in a peculiar
or increased degree by comparison with employment generally.” Id. at § 52-1. 
13 This court has previously applied the unitary test in cases
involving the compensability of an injury resulting from a disease or the
aggravation of a pre-existing disease, without explicitly identifying whether
it considered the injury to be an injury by accident or by disease under the
statute. See Akamine, 53 Haw. 406, 495 P.2d 1164 (awarding compensation for
aggravation of heart condition resulting in death); Lawhead, 59 Haw. 551, 584
P.2d 119 (holding that “a disease or illness such as influenza is an injury
within the meaning of § 386-3” and awarding compensation because employee
“contracted influenza as a result of her employment”). See also Chung, 63
Haw. 642, 636 P.2d 721 (applying work-connection test to determine that
claimant’s heart attack arose out of and in the course of employment based on
evidence that claimant’s employment activities engaged claimant for long hours
and “generated a substantial amount of mental and emotional stress which is
strongly linked to the production of heart disease”).
 
-40­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
between the injury and employment. Instead, focusing on the
injury’s origin rather than the time and place of its
manifestation, the work-connection approach simply requires
the finding of a causal connection between the injury and
any incidents or conditions of employment. 
Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc., 63 Haw. 642, 648, 636 P.2d 721, 725
 
(1981) (emphasis added). “[C]ompensation is awarded if the
 injury reasonably appears to have flowed from the conditions
 under which the employee is required to work.” Royal State Nat’l
 
Ins. Co. v. Labor & Indus. Relations Appeal Bd., 53 Haw. 32, 37­38, 487 P.2d 278, 281-82 (1971). 
In Akamine, 53 Haw. at 407-08, 495 P.2d at 1165-66, the
 
court held that the employer and insurance carrier failed to
 overcome the presumption of compensability, where an employee
 died of a heart attack at work while he unloaded, stacked and
 handtrucked cargo. The LIRAB had denied the workers’
 compensation claim filed by the employee’s dependents, reasoning
 that the employee’s death “was due to his cardiovascular disease
 of long standing and that it was not attributable to his
 employment[.]” Id. at 407, 495 P.2d at 1165. 
In reviewing this decision, the court noted that
 
“[b]ecause of the relatively higher degree of uncertainty
 surrounding causation of heart diseases, the strength of the
 presumption is especially formidable” in “cardiac cases.” Id. at
 
409, 495 P.2d at 1167. The court explained that the presumption
 “signals and reflects a strong legislative policy favoring awards
 in arguable cases.” Id. In Akamine, there was medical testimony
 
by two expert witnesses. Id. at 409-10, 495 P.2d at 1167. One
 
-41­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expert testified that there was no connection between the
 
employee’s death and his employment, based “on his belief that
 heart diseases originate relatively early in one’s life and [the
 employee’s] pre-existing pathological condition was the sole
 cause of death.” Id. at 410-11, 495 P.2d at 1167 (footnote
 
omitted). The expert further testified that the employee’s job
 was not “extremely exertional” and would not have precipitated a
 heart attack. Id. at 411, 495 P.2d at 1168. 
The court determined that it would give “little
 
probative weight” to such testimony. Id. at 410-11, 495 P.2d at
 
1167-68. The court reasoned that “while it may be sound
 medically to say that the work did not ‘cause’ the attack, it may
 be bad law, because, [i]n general, existing law treats the
 slightest factor of aggravation as an adequate ‘cause’.” Id. at
 
410, 495 P.2d at 1167 (emphasis added). Thus, it was “legally
 irrelevant” whether the employee’s heart attack “might have
 occurred at home, on the street or elsewhere while tending to his
 private affairs. The only consideration should have been whether
 
the attack in fact was aggravated or accelerated by his work
 activity.” Id. at 413, 495 P.2d at 1169 (emphasis added). 
Based on this standard, the court found that a doctor’s
 
testimony that he was unable to render an opinion as to whether
 the heart attack was related to the employee’s work activity
 “represents a salient index of the absence of substantial
 evidence to the contrary.” Id. at 414, 495 P.2d at 1169
 
(emphasis added). The court found that the employee’s claim was
 
-42­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compensable, and reversed and remanded for a determination of the
 
amount of the award. Id. at 414, 495 P.2d at 1170. 
Following Akamine, this court has continued to hold 
that “the slightest aggravation or acceleration of an injury by the employment activity mandates compensation.” DeFries v. Ass’n 
of Owners, 999 Wilder, 57 Haw. 296, 309, 555 P.2d 855, 862 (1976) (holding that claimant was entitled to recover for injuries resulting from stumble that aggravated or accelerated the arthritic condition of his knee). See Chung, 63 Haw. at 651-52, 
636 P.2d at 727-28 (claimant’s heart attack was aggravated or 
accelerated by work activity); Flor, 94 Hawai' i at 85, 9 P.3d at 
397 (applying principle that primary focus of medical testimony 
is “whether employment situation in any way contributed to the employee’s injury”); Korsak v. Haw. Permanente Med. Group, Inc., 
94 Hawai' i 257, 260, 12 P.3d 357, 360 (App. 1999) (applying 
slightest aggravation test and comparing facts to Akamine, which 
held that “[t]he primary focus of the medical testimony should have been a discussion on whether the employment effort, whether great or little, in any way aggravated [the] heart condition which resulted in his death”) (quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Lawhead, 59 Haw. at 558, 584 P.2d at 124, the court
 
held that “[i]n view of the broad scope of [HRS § 386-3], . . . a
 disease or illness such as influenza is an injury within the
 meaning of § 386-3.” In that case, the claimant was a flight
 attendant. Id. at 553, 584 P.2d at 121. On a certain flight,
 
-43­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
she “worked in the galley section of the aircraft where the
 
temperature was extremely low.” Id. During a stopover, she
 
stayed in accommodations arranged by her employer, where the air
 was very dry due to a “defective heating and air-conditioning
 system.” Id. She woke up the next day with a “dry and sore
 
throat” and upon returning home she was diagnosed with influenza. 
Id. 
Based on these facts, the court held that the claimant
 
was entitled to compensation. Id. at 560, 584 P.2d at 125-26. 
The court rejected the employer’s contention that the claim
 should be denied because the claimant “failed to show that she
 was exposed to an increased risk attributable to work.” Id. at
 
560, 584 P.2d at 125. The court noted that a nearly identical
 argument was rejected as legally irrelevant in Akamine, and
 explained, “The relevant point is not whether a claimant would
 more likely have suffered an injury at work than elsewhere but
 whether her injury occurring in the course of employment was work
 related.” Id. In announcing its holding, the court referenced
 
the statutory language for injuries by disease: “[T]here was
 evidence that she suffered from an illness proximately caused by
 or resulting from the nature of her employment. Since United
 failed to present substantial evidence to rebut the presumption
 that her claim was for a covered work injury, appellee must
 prevail.” Id. at 560, 584 P.2d at 125-26 (emphasis added).
 
-44­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.
 
In this case, the DOE failed to present substantial
 
evidence to overcome the statutory presumption of compensability. 
As stated, “[t]he statue nowhere requires . . . some preliminary
 showing . . . before the presumption will be triggered. Rather,
 HRS § 386-85 clearly dictates that coverage will be presumed at
 the outset, subject to being rebutted by substantial evidence to
 the contrary.” Chung, 63 Haw. at 650-51, 636 P.2d at 727. 
Here, the evidence was undisputed that Van Ness had a
 
pre-existing asthma condition. It was also undisputed that
 exposure to vog aggravated Van Ness’s condition. Dr. Mathison
 diagnosed Van Ness with “[m]ild persistent asthma with history of
 exacerbations with exposures to volcanic smoke-ash-pollution,”
 and Dr. Tom recommended that Van Ness be transferred out of Maui
 because of his “asthma condition, which is exacerbated by vog.” 
Dr. Arora’s supplemental report concluded that Van Ness’s medical
 history is “compatible with mild exacerbation of his asthma while
 in Maui because of vog conditions.”
 
The State’s 2008 advisory further recognized that
 
elevated levels of sulfur dioxide as a result of volcanic
 emissions “pose an immediate health threat to people who have
 asthma and other respiratory conditions.” The State’s “Health
 Effects” notice confirmed that “[p]eople with asthma who are
 physically active outdoors are most likely to experience the
 health effects of [sulfur dioxide],” which may include “wheezing,
 chest tightness, and shortness of breath.” Van Ness testified to
 
-45­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
experiencing such health effects when exposed to vog at work. 
Thus, his asthma condition was clearly exacerbated and aggravated
 
by exposure to vog.
 
It was further undisputed that Van Ness faced actual
 
exposure to vog while employed at Lahainaluna. This was
 
recognized by both the LIRAB and the ICA. The LIRAB found that
 Van Ness’s “work or work environment posed no greater vog
 exposure than that posed to the general public,” (emphasis
 added), implicitly finding that Van Ness was exposed to vog at
 work, while the ICA expressly stated that it was “undisputed that
 Van Ness faced actual exposure to vog in his employment.” 2012
 WL 6115601, at *4. Additionally, there was evidence that the vog
 on Maui was particularly severe around December 2005. Vice
 Principal Dennis, who did not have a pre-existing asthma
 condition, confirmed that she “experienced intense headaches”
 during that time because of the vog.
 
Finally, Van Ness testified that his exposure to vog at
 
Lahainaluna, coupled with the requirements of his employment, the
 layout of the campus, and the severity of the vog in late 2005,
 caused his condition to worsen. Van Ness’s employment as a
 
technology coordinator at Lahainaluna was affected by the campus’
 
location and layout. Lahainaluna’s campus is situated on a
 
mountain side, with stairs providing most of the access to the
 school buildings. Van Ness’s office was located at the highest
 elevation point of the campus. During the seven to eight hours a
 day that he was generally present on campus, Van Ness estimated
 
-46­ 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that he spent less than five percent of his time in his office. 
In order to service the computers at the lower parts of the
 campus, Van Ness was required to repeatedly climb up and down the
 school stairs daily. He estimated that there were 140 stairs or
 about “three or four floors” down to the parking lot, and then
 another “hike down” to the final section of buildings. The
 stairs went “up the side of the hill” and there were also
 “switchbacks.” Van Ness explained that it took “quite a bit of
 effort” and about twenty minutes for him to get back to his
 office from the administration building. 
Van Ness testified that the exposure to vog caused many
 
issues with “strength” and his ability to breathe. He testified
 that when the vog was severe, he experienced coughing and
 wheezing, as well as a “sharp” “stabbing pain” from coughing. 
This made it very difficult for him to move around the
 Lahainaluna campus. His coughing worsened when he walked uphill
 and climbed stairs back to his office from the lower campus, and
 he would have to take breaks between stair levels because of the
 coughing and wheezing that the vog caused. 
Accordingly, it is clear that the “effort or strain”
 
Van Ness experienced with his respiratory condition as a result
 of vog exposure “occur[ed] during the course of the employment
 and as an ordinary or usual incident of the work,” given that his
 employment required strenuous activity and the strenuous activity
 caused the exacerbation of his asthma. Akamine, 53 Haw. at 413,
 
495 P.2d at 1169. The LIRAB’s finding that Van Ness’s “work
 
-47­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
environment posed no greater vog exposure than that posed to the
 
general public” is inapposite, inasmuch as the “relevant point is
 not whether [Van Ness] would more likely have suffered an injury
 at work than elsewhere[,] but whether [his] injury occurring in
 the course of employment was work related.” Lawhead, 59 Haw. at
 
560, 584 P.2d at 125-26.
 
The evidence offered by the DOE to rebut the statutory
 
presumption was Dr. Arora’s opinion in his supplemental report
 that the exacerbation of Van Ness’s asthma was “temporary and
 reversible.” However, as the court held in Akamine, “existing
 law treats the slightest factor of aggravation as an adequate
 ‘cause’” of injury. 53 Haw. at 410, 495 P.2d at 1167 (emphasis
 added).
 
Dr. Arora also concluded that it was “impossible to
 
determine” if the exacerbation of Van Ness’s asthma was caused by
 the vog or by the diaphragmatic hernia that developed around the
 same time. While the ICA relied on this opinion to conclude that
 Dr. Arora’s reports constituted substantial evidence for the
 LIRAB to conclude that Van Ness’s condition was unrelated to
 work, 2012 WL 6115601, at *6, the LIRAB did not rely on Dr.
 Arora’s opinion in this regard. Furthermore, Dr. Arora’s opinion
 that it was impossible to determine the cause of the aggravation
 does not constitute substantial evidence rebutting the
 presumption. On the contrary, pursuant to Akamine, doubt as to
 the cause of the injury “represents a salient index of the
 absence of substantial evidence” required to overcome the
 
-48­ 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
presumption that the claim is compensable. 53 Haw. at 414, 495
 
P.2d at 1169 (emphasis added). In any event, the presumption of
 compensability and “the broad humanitarian purpose of the
 workers’ compensation statute . . . requires that all reasonable
 doubts be resolved in favor of the claimant.” Lawhead, 59 Haw.
 
at 560, 584 P.2d at 125 (quotation marks and citations omitted)
 (emphasis added). 
The LIRAB, however, found that the “hazard from vog
 
exposure [Van Ness] faced while on the campus of Lahainaluna
 School was no greater hazard or risk than that faced by others
 
off of the campus,” and concluded that “[t]he nature and
 
conditions of [Van Ness’s] employment did not accentuate the
 
exposure. Rather, the vog was in the air, and the general public
 breathed the same air.”
 
As discussed, the evidence overwhelmingly demonstrated
 
that Van Ness’s exposure to vog at work, combined with the
 surrounding circumstances of his employment and his pre-existing
 condition, resulted in the exacerbation of his asthma. Thus, the
 aggravation of Van Ness’s asthma was causally connected to the
 “incidents or conditions” of his employment. See Chung, 63 Haw.
 
at 648, 636 P.2d at 725 (“the work-connection approach simply
 requires the finding of a causal connection between the injury
 and any incidents or conditions of employment”). The LIRAB’s
 finding and conclusion failed to properly consider Van Ness’s
 pre-existing condition and the fact that the general public was
 
not exposed to the vog in the same manner as Van Ness. Therefore
 
-49­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the LIRAB’s finding is clearly erroneous and the conclusion of
 
law is wrong.14
 
The DOE failed to present substantial evidence to
 
overcome the presumption that the aggravation of Van Ness’s
 asthma was an injury “by disease proximately caused by” his
 
employment. See Miyamoto v. Wahiawa General Hosp., 101 Hawai' i 
293, 310-11, 67 P.3d 792, 809-10 (App. 2003) (holding that LIRAB
 
misapplied statutory presumption that claimant’s injuries were
 work-related, reversing LIRAB’s judgment and remanding for a
 determination of the amount of compensation to be awarded);
 Korsak v. Haw. Permanente Med. Group, Inc.,
 94 Hawai 'i 257, 261­
62, 12 P.3d 357, 361-62 (App. 1999) (reversing LIRAB’s decision
 denying benefits and remanding for determination of compensation
 and apportionment, given that undisputed facts were not
 sufficient “to constitute substantial evidence to rebut the
 
presumption” of compensability), affirmed by 94 Hawai' i 297, 309, 
12 P.3d 1238, 1250 (2000) (affirming ICA’s reversal of LIRAB
 
decision and ICA’s remand to the LIRAB for determination of
 
14 It is somewhat unclear what standard the LIRAB applied in denying
Van Ness’s claim, as the LIRAB referenced language consistent with Flor as
well as language referring to the statutory standard for accidental injuries.
As stated, the LIRAB erred in applying the Flor test. The LIRAB also erred in
 the way it applied the unitary work-connection test.
The LIRAB’s pretrial order characterized the claim as an injury by
accident, and the LIRAB’s decision concluded that Van Ness “did not sustain a
personal injury to his respiratory system, on December 23, 2005, arising out
of and in the course of employment.” The LIRAB’s basis for its conclusion was
 simply that Van Ness “was not at work or even on Maui on December 23, 2005.”
However, as stated, the work-connection approach “rejects the necFessity of
establishing temporal, spatial, and circumstantial proximity between the
injury and employment.” Chung, 63 Haw. at 648, 636 P.2d at 725. The focus is
 
on the “injury’s origin rather than the time and place of its manifestation.”
Id. Accordingly, the LIRAB clearly erred in its application of the unitary
test.
 
-50­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compensation and apportionment); DeFries, 57 Haw. at 309, 555
 
P.2d at 863 (reversing LIRAB’s judgment and remanding for
 determination of amount of compensation); Akamine, 53 Haw. at
 415, 495 P.2d at 1170 (same).
 
Accordingly, Van Ness’s claim is for a covered work
 
injury under HRS § 386-3.
 
VII.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s judgment
 
and the LIRAB’s decision and order. The case is remanded to the
 LIRAB for a determination of the amount of compensation to be
 awarded.
15
 
Wayne H. Mukaida
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Steve Miyasaka
for respondent /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
15
 As appropriate, the LIRAB may consider the DOE’s argument
regarding the suspension of Van Ness’s right to claim workers’ compensation
benefits. See supra note 3. 
-51­