***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I,  
Petitioner and Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
SHAWN D. VISINTIN,  
Respondent and Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-14-0000391 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0000391; CR. NO. 13- 1-0166) 
 
AUGUST 31, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J . 
  A protracted pretrial period can hinder the accurate 
determination of a case as evidence dissipates, as well as cause 
anxiety and hardship to a defendant awaiting the d isposition  of 
criminal charges.  Thus, the Hawai‘i and U.S. Constitutions and 
our court rules grant an accused the right to a prompt 
adjudication, and a case generally must be dismissed if a  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000391
31-AUG-2018
08:10 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 defendant is held to answer for a period exceeding a prescribed 
time limit or an unreasonable amount of time without a trial 
ensuing.  
  In this case, the State wa s not prepared to proceed 
with a prosecution on the date of the defendant’s initial court 
appearance.  In a process referred to as a calendar call, the 
court read aloud a list of defendants against whom no charges 
had been filed  before stating orally that the defendants we re 
free to go and that any bail or bond they posted would be  
discharged.  Seven months later, the defendant was indicted for 
the same crime for which he had been arrested, and he moved to 
dismiss the case based on the State’s delay in brin ging the 
prosecution. 
  We now hold that, because no written order or notice 
of the ruling was filed effectively discharg ing the defendant’s 
bail, he remained held to answer for the alleged crime 
underlying his arrest and the case must be dismissed under our 
court rules for this reason.  We further hold that the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals erred by considering the legal 
merits of the defendant’s constitutional speedy trial challenge 
when the trial court failed to make  the factual findings 
necessary for review.  Accordingly, we remand the case for 
dismissal with or without prejudice as the trial court 
determines appropriate under our court rules.  We also set forth ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 applicable legal principles for the trial court’s evaluation of 
the defendant’s constitutional speedy trial challenge if the 
dismissal under our court rules is determined  to be without 
prejudice.  
I. BACKGROUND 
A.  Events on August 7, 2012 and Visintin’s Arrest  
  O n August 7, 2012, a round 2:40 a.m., Officer Brian 
Silva of the Kauai Police Department was on uniform patrol when 
he saw a person running across the street to a facility that 
appeared to be closed.  Upon turning on his cruise lights, 
Officer Silva saw the figure of a person in the bushes of the 
facility’s driveway.  Officer Silva exited his vehicle, ordered 
the person to come out of the bushes, and asked the person for 
identification.  Officer Silva observed that the person was 
breathing heavily and sweating profusely  and that there was an 
odor of alcohol emitting from  the person.  The person, who was 
identified as Shawn Visintin, provided Officer Silva with his 
driver’s license from the State of Montana .   
  While Visintin was removing his license from his 
wallet, Officer Silva saw a concealed weapons permit in the 
wallet.  Suspecting that Visintin may be armed, Officer Silva 
asked him  if he was carrying  any weapons.  After Visintin 
responded that he had a handgun, Officer Silva conducted a pat-
down search of Visintin and discovered a semi-automatic .45 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 caliber handgun in the back part of the waistband of Visintin’s 
pants.  Officer Silva then re covered the handgun, which was 
unloaded, and placed Visintin under arrest for place to keep 
pistol or revolver in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 134-25.1   
B.  Events Following Visintin ’s Arrest  
  Visintin’s bail was set at $10,000 . 
 Upon posting bail 
on August 7, 2012, Visintin  was given a “Bail/Bond Receipt, 
Acknowledgment, and Notice to Appear” form, indicating that he 
was to appear in district c ourt on September 5, 2012.2   
  I n an email to the prosecutor dated August 31, 2012, 
counsel for Visintin inquired whether Visintin’s matter would 
proceed as scheduled on September 5 or if the State of Hawaii 
intended to dismiss the charge without prejudice.  C ounsel 
provided Visintin’s full name and the “BBRA NO.”3 associated with 
the case.  The prosecutor responded that her office had not 
received the police 
reports and thus  no complaint had been  
filed.   
                     
 1 HRS § 134 -25(a) (2011) provides in relevant part, “Except as 
provided in sections 134 -5 and 134- 9, all firearms shall be confined to the 
possessor’s place of business, residence, or sojourn.”  
 2 The form appears to be identical to Form J of the Hawai i Rules of 
Penal Procedure. 
 3 “BBRA” is an acronym used to refer to “Bail/Bond Receipt, 
Acknowledgment, and Notice to Appear.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5   A “calendar call ” was conducted in the District Court 
of the Fifth Circuit (district court) on September 5, 2012.4  
During this proceeding, the district court called the names of 
those persons against whom no complaint had been filed, 
including Visintin,  who was not present.5  The court announced 
that these persons were free to go and that  any cash bail they 
posted would be refunded or  their bonds would be discharged.  
However, the record does not contain a  filed document or 
calendar notation indicating  that Visintin’s bond was 
discharged, that the case  was dismissed, or that the  case was 
addressed by some other disposition.  Nor does the record show 
that Visintin received notice of the outcome of the September 5, 
2012 proceeding.   
  More than seven months later, on April 25,  2013, a 
grand jury indicted Visintin on one count of place to keep 
pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25 and one count  of 
unregistered firearm in violation of HRS §§  134-3(a)6 and 134-
                     
 4 The Honorable Trudy K. Senda presided.  
 5 The State surmised that V isintin’s non- appearance at the calendar 
call was due to Visintin’s counsel knowing beforehand that no complaint would 
be filed.   
 6 HRS § 134 -3(a) (2011) provides in pertinent part as follows:  
Every person arriving in the State who brings or by any 
other manner causes to be brought into the State a firearm 
of any description, whether usable or unusable, serviceable 
or unserviceable, modern or antique, shall register the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 17(b).7  The indictment was based on the same conduct for which 
Visintin had been arrested almost nine months earlier.  On April 
29, 2013, the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court) 
issued a warrant for Visintin’s arrest and set bail at $10,000.8   
  
In an email dated April 30, 2013, the prosecutor 
informed Visintin’s counsel of the indictment and the 
outstanding bench warrant for the arrest of Visintin, who had 
returned to Montana following his release from custody.  The 
prosecutor suggested that Visintin fly back  to Kaua i rather than 
be arrested and extradited.  Defense counsel replied by email 
and inquired whether Visintin’s case could be resolved at 
arraignment.  In a response  dated May 1, 2013, the prosecutor 
stated that she would provide an answer at a later time as she 
was getting ready for a trial  scheduled  the following week.  
Three weeks later, in a n email dated May 24, 2013, the 
prosecutor asked defense counsel whether Visintin was planning 
on returning to Kaua i to turn himself in, adding that she would 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
firearm within five days after arrival of the person or of 
the firearm, whichever arrives later[.]   
 7 HRS § 134 -17(b) (2011) states, “Any person who violates section 
134-3(a) shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.”   
 8 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 not discuss a plea offer until Visintin was arrested on the 
warrant.   
  On May 31, 2013, the State of Montana filed a 
“Fugitive from Justice Complaint”  (fugitive complaint) in 
response to the warrant issued by the circuit court.  In the 
fugitive complaint, a Montana County Attorney stated that  
Visintin was wanted in Hawai i, Fifth Circuit,  for the two 
indicted offenses; that a warrant had been issued for Visintin ’s 
arrest; that Visintin “ ha[d] fled from justice or ha[d]  been 
convicted of crimes in that state and ha[d]  escaped from 
confinement or ha [d] broken the terms of his bail, probation or 
parole”; and that a request had been made by the authorities in 
Hawaii for his arrest.   (Capitalization omitted.)  The fugitive 
complaint requested the issuance of a warrant fro m the Montana 
court commanding law enforcement officers  “to apprehend the said 
fugitive” and bring him to court.    
  T he next day,  on June 1, 2013, Visintin was arrested 
on the f ugitive c omplaint , and he proceeded to post bail  in 
Montana.  Three days later, t he Montana County Attorney filed a 
motion to dismiss the fugitive complaint on the basis that “it 
[was] not in the interest of justice to pursue.”  The following 
day, the Montana court granted the motion, dismissed the case , 
and exonerated any bond posted by Visintin.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8   Visintin subsequently returned to Kauai voluntarily 
and on August 1, 2013, filed a motion in the circuit court to 
recall the bench warrant
 issued after his indictment.  The court 
denied Visintin’s request to be released on recogni zance but 
reduced the bail amount from $10,000 to $100.9  Visintin posted 
bail on August 6, 2013, and he was arraigned the 
same day.   
C.  Motion to Dismiss 
1.  Visintin’s Motion  and the State’s Opposition  
  
On August 20, 2013, Visintin filed a “Motion to 
Dismiss Based on Rule 48, Speedy Trial, Right to Bail and Due 
Process” (motion to dismiss)  in the circuit court.  In his 
motion, Visintin argued that the time limit set forth in Rule 48 
of the Hawai
i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP )10 was exceeded 
                     
 9 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided over all remaining 
circuit court proceedings.  
  The order reducing Visintin’s bail also granted Visintin 
permission to travel outside the State of Hawai ‘i during his pretrial release 
provided he executed a waiver of extradition and appeared for all court 
proceedings.  Visintin executed the required waiver on August 6, 2013.   
 10 HRPP Rule 48 (2000) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(b) By Court.  Except in the case of traffic offenses that 
are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on 
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or 
without prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not 
commenced within six months:  
 (1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from 
the filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any 
offense based on the same conduct or arising from the 
same criminal episode for which the arrest or charge 
was made . . . . 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 based on the plain language of the rule because more than nine 
months had passed from 
the setting of bail to his arraignment.11  
Visintin submitted that HRPP Rule 48 does not support the 
conclusion that the “unsetting of bail ” triggers Rule 48 
tolling.  Rather, he maintained, tolling requires that the State 
demonstrate good cause for the delay.   
  Visintin 
contended that the delay, which doubled the 
period allowed under the rule, was entirely attributable to the 
State and that the State had provided no good cause for the 
delay.  Thus, Visintin concluded that HRPP Rule 48 support ed the 
dismissal of his case with prejudice.   
  Visintin also contended that his constitutional right 
to speedy trial, which attached at his initial arrest,  was 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
(c) Excluded Periods.  The following periods shall be 
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:  
 . . . 
 (6) the period between a dismissal of the charge by 
the prosecutor to the time of arrest or filing of a 
new charge, whichever is sooner, for the same offense 
or an offense required to be joined with that 
offense; 
 . . . 
 (8) other periods of delay for good cause.  
 11 Visintin distinguished his case from State v. Johnson , 62 Haw. 
11, 608 P.2d 404 (1980), arguing that, unlike in Johnson where the defendant 
was released outright, bail was set in his case and the setting of bail is 
the point from which the clock runs pursuant to HRPP Rule 48.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 violated.  He  maintained that the State was entirely responsible 
for the delay and had provided no valid reason for it, that the 
delay was presumptively prejudicial, that he suffered tangible 
losses to his employment, that “memories have faded and even 
police witnesses who ‘searched the area for criminal activity 
with negative r esults’ have apparently retired,”  and that he had 
always demanded a speedy trial.  Visintin also submitted that 
the calendar call procedure does not provide a mechanism by 
which a defendant could assert the right to speedy trial.  Thus, 
Visintin argued,  the violation of his constitutional right to 
speedy trial supported the dismissal of his case with prejudice.   
  Lastly, Visintin  asserted that the State had thwarted 
the purpose of bail, which is to ensure that the defendant is 
present at trial while also affording the defendant freedom from 
harassment and confinement.  Although he posted bail, Visintin 
contended, he was arrested two more times and a fugitive warrant 
was wrongly obtained in another state based on inaccurate 
information.  Visintin concluded that requiring the posting of 
bail multiple times for the same matter violates the E ighth 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and article I,  section 12 of 
the Hawai i Constitution.   
  Opposing Visintin’s motion to dismiss , the State 
described the “unique” procedu re employed in the district court 
of the Fifth Circuit when the State does not file a charging ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 document by an established deadline.12  The State c ontended that 
it did not charge Visintin  as it lacked  adequate information to 
do so because the police reports were not forwarded to the 
prosecutor’s office until the date when Visintin’s bond was 
discharged.  Since no case numbers are created unless  a charging 
document has been filed, the State asserted, there is no readily 
available mechanism to file a written dismissal of a case.  
Therefore, the State submitt ed, the effect of the call list  is a 
“de facto dismissal of the cases ,” and the period from the  day 
after Visintin’s bond was discharged until he was indicted  was 
excluded from the time limit calculation under HRPP Rule 
48(c)(6).  Alternatively,
 the State maintained that this period 
was excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) for good cause because the 
procedure employed in the Fifth Circuit prevented  the State from 
filing a dismissal of the case before  the first scheduled court 
date.   
  As to the  claim of a constitutional speedy trial 
violation, the State argued that Visintin did not provide 
sufficient facts demonstrating actual prejudice and th at he had 
not previously asserted his right to a speedy trial .  Upon 
balancing the four factors set forth in Barker v. Wingo , 407 
                     
 12 A detailed summary of this procedure is set forth infra.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 U.S. 514 (1972), the State  concluded that Visintin’s right to 
speedy trial under the federal and state constitutions was not 
violated.   
  
Finally, t he State  submitted that Visintin’s  argument 
as to excessive bail was without merit because the State had not 
charged him by the calendar call date, and his bond was 
discharged.  Any argument by Visintin that he did not receive 
notice of the dismissal
, the State added, was misplaced given 
that defense counsel knew before the calendar call proceeding 
that no complaint would be filed.   
2.  Hearing on the Motion to Dismiss 
 
 At the hearing on Visintin’s motion , the State 
requested that the cour t take judicial notice that , inter alia, 
the prosecu tor assigned to Visintin’s  case was in trial from 
December 3 to December 11, 2012,  and from January 7, 2013,  to 
March 6, 2013.  The court questioned whether  the prosecutor’s 
work schedule was a sound  basis for the delay, stating that the 
court was not aware of any cases in which the prosecutor’s 
workload justified a delay in bringing a defendant to trial.13  
 
                     
 13 The court concluded that it would take judicial notice of the 
presented facts but that it was inclined not to give these facts any weight.  
Prior to the hearing on the motion to dismiss, the State filed a notice of  
intent requesting that the court also take judicial notice that 2012 was an 
election year for the prosecutor’s office, that the new prosecutor was 
elected on November 6, 2012, and that the new prosecutor took office on 
December 3, 2012.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13   The State then called Vera Tabe, court administrator 
of the Fifth Circuit, to testify about the “calendar call 
procedure” that the district court of the Fifth Circuit has 
adopted.  Tabe testified that, after a defendant posts bail or 
bond or is released on his or her own recognizance, the district 
court receives an  original BBRA from the Kauai Police 
Department, which is file -stamped and placed in a  “pending file” 
(a lateral drawer).  A  criminal number is not assigned to a  case 
until a complaint is filed by the prosecu tor’s office.  When the 
State does not file a charging document by 12:00 p.m. on Monday 
of the week of the scheduled court date, the case is placed on 
the calendar call list, an internal document that notes the 
defendant’s name, charge, and method of relea se.   
  At the scheduled proceeding, Tabe continued, the judge 
reads the names on the call list and informs  the defendants that 
no formal charges have been filed and that they will be served 
with documents indicating where and when to appear if there are 
charges filed in the future.  If cash bail has been posted, 
there is an unfiled “order” that is provided  to the fiscal 
office to refund the cash .  If a bond was posted, “the judge 
just discharges the bond, ” meaning “there is nothing more  on 
that bond.”   
  Tabe explained that no document is filed by either the 
court or the clerk as to any action taken regarding the bail or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 bond and no notation is made on the calendar call list regarding 
the discharge.  Additionally, Tabe stated that no written notice 
is provided to the defendant or defense counsel when a bond is 
discharged and nothing is sent to the bonding company.   
  
To Tabe’s knowledge, the State has never attempted to 
request a written dismissal of a case that has been placed in 
the pending file, although defendants commonly file motions 
under the bail/bond receipt number seeking permission to travel.  
Tabe acknowledged that,  after the case is placed on the calendar 
call list, circuit court staff “[do not] know what actually 
happens to the case.”14  These unwritten “court rules” relating 
to the calendar call procedure, Tabe explained, are based on an 
agreement between the courts and the prosecutor’s office.   
  
Following Tabe’s testimony, the circuit court  denied 
Visintin’s motion to dismiss, relying solely on HRPP Rule 48.  
The court found that the period from the calendar call date to 
the date of 
Visintin’s indictment  was excluded under HRPP Rule  
48(c)(6), reasoning that the purpose of the calendar call list 
is to notify “defendants who have been arrested . . .  that their 
case is not active and is being dismissed. ”  Based on this 
finding, the court conclud ed that 180 qualifying days had not 
                     
 14 There is no consequence for a defendant whose name is on the call 
list who does not appear for the calendar call.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 passed since Visintin’s arrest .15  The court did not make any 
findings as to Visintin’s contentions that  his constitutional 
right to speedy trial and right against excessive bail had been 
violated.   
D.  No Contest Plea and Circuit Court Judgment 
  On September 16, 2013, Visintin 
pleaded no contest to 
the charge of place to keep pistol or revolver, which plea was 
made conditional on his 
right to appeal any pretrial rulings, 
and the State dismissed the unregistered firearm charge.16  The 
court sentenced Visintin to five years of probation, with a 
condition of sixty days in jail in addition to time previously 
served.  The circuit court entered its judgment
 of guilty 
conviction and probation sentence on January 30, 2014.17   
II. APPEAL 
  Visintin timely appealed to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA) from the circuit court’s denial of the motion to 
dismiss and the judgment.  In a published opinion, the ICA 
vacated the circuit court ’s judgment and remanded  the case to 
the circuit court for dismissal,  with or without prejudice,  as 
                     
 15 The court directed the State to prepare an order regarding its 
oral ruling.  However, no such order is found in the record on appeal.   
 16 The court denied Visintin’s motion for deferred acceptance of his 
nolo contendere plea.   
 17 In an order filed on February 19, 2014, the court granted 
Visintin’s motion for stay of execution of sentence pending appeal.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 determined by that  court pursuant to HRPP Rule 48.  State v. 
Visintin , 142 Hawaii 126, 140, 414 P.3d 178 , 192 (App. 2018) .  
  The ICA determined that, based on the plain language 
of HRPP Rule 48(b)(1) and the record, the calendar call 
procedure did not stop the Rule 48 clock  from running.  Id. at 
138, 414 P.3d at 190.  Hawai‘ i Supreme Court precedents have 
acknowledged that HRPP Rule 48 is modeled after section 12-
2.2(a) of the American Bar Association Standards for Criminal 
Justice (2d ed. Supp. 1986), the ICA stated , under which the key 
inquiry in the speedy trial calculation is whether the defendant 
is “held to answer” for an offense  through custody, bail, or 
recognizance.  Visintin, 142 Hawai i at 138-39, 414 P.3d at 190-
91 (citing State v. White , 92 Hawaii 192, 199, 990 P.2d 90, 97 
(1999)).  Reasoning that the purpose of t he Rule is to “ prevent 
long periods of detention, conditional release, personal 
anxiety, and public suspicion ,” the ICA held that a defendant ’s 
reasonable belief that  he or she was being held to answer was 
sufficient to cause the HRPP Rule 48 clock to continue to run.  
Id. at 139, 414 P.3d at 191 (quoting ABA Standards for Criminal 
Justice, § 12-2.2(a) cmt. at 12-21 (2d ed. Supp. 1986)).  
Because the record did not reflect that Visintin was notified 
that his posted bond was discharged or that there was a change 
in his bail status
, the ICA held, “ the effect is that he ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 reasonably believed he was still ‘held to answer’ for the 
offense asserted upon his arrest.”  Id. 
  In addition, the ICA  determined that the calendar call 
procedure should not be construed as a de facto dismissal of 
Visintin’s case because it would contravene the requirements of 
HRPP Rule 48.  Id.  The plain text of HRPP Rule 48(a),18 the ICA 
reasoned, indicates that a prosecutor’s dismissal of a charge  
must include a document filed 
with the court.  Id. at 139-40, 
414 P.3d at 191-92.  The ICA  held that, under the calendar call 
procedure, there i s neither a document “filed” n or a “charge” to 
be dismissed, and the procedure thus cannot be considered a 
dismissal under HRPP Rule 48(c)(6).  Id.  Additionally, the ICA 
held that the State had not made a showing of good cause under 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).19  Id. at 140, 414 P.3d at 192.   
  Accordingly, the ICA held that the circuit court was 
required to dismiss the charges pursuant to HRPP Rule 4 8 because 
                     
 18 HRPP Rule 48(a) provides, “The p rosecutor may by leave of court 
file a dismissal of a charge and the prosecution shall thereupon terminate.  
Such a dismissal may not be filed during the trial without the consent of the 
defendant.”  HRPP Rule 48(a) ( underlining added). 
 19 Chief Judge Nakamura dissented from this ruling, maintaining 
that, given the longstanding use of the calendar call procedure, the 
prosecutor knew that not filing a charge by the deadline “will effectively 
lead” to its dismissal, adding that the defense attorney should als o be aware 
that such a failure meant no charge was pending and the arrested person was 
free to leave.  Visintin , 142 Hawai ‘i at 146 –47, 414 P.3d at 198 –99 (Nakamura, 
C.J., concurring and dissenting).  As to Visintin in particular, the dissent 
asserted that any lack of notice was due to his failure to appear as directed 
in his bail/bond receipt.  Id. at 147, 414 P.3d at 199.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 none of the rule’s exclusions were applicable.  Id.  The ICA 
limited its ruling to the circumstances in this case and stated 
that it did “not reach the question of the type of notice that 
must be given to a defendant when he or she is released or 
discharged from bail.”  Id. at 140 n.16, 414 P.3d at 192 n.16.  
On remand, the ICA directed that the circuit court exercise its 
discretion to determine whether the charges should be dismissed 
with or without prejudice.  Id. at 140, 414 P.3d at 192.  
  Turning to the constitutional speedy trial challenge , 
the ICA found that the circuit court had not addressed 
Visintin’s constitutional speedy trial right and thus had 
implicitly rejected 
it when the court denied Visintin’s motion 
to dismiss on Rule 48 grounds.  Id.  The ICA then considered the 
merits of the challenge.  The ICA applied the four- part test set 
forth in Barker v. Wingo , 407 U.S. 514 (1972), to determine 
whether Visintin’s  constitutional speedy trial right was 
violated.  Visintin , 142 Hawai i at 140-42, 414 P.3d at 192 -94.  
After concluding that the length of the delay was sufficient to 
warrant considering the remaining factors, the ICA determined 
that the reasons for the delay, the timing and consistency of  
Visintin’s demand for a speedy trial, and the amount of 
prejudice the delay caused Visintin all weighed in favor of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 State.20  Id.  Thus, the  ICA held that Visintin’s constitutional 
right to speedy trial was not violated.  Id. 
  As to Visintin’s final contention on appeal, the ICA 
pointed out that Visintin provided no authority for the 
assertion that a defendant whose right against excessive bail 
has been violated is entitled to dismissal of criminal charges.  
Id. at 143, 414 P.3d at 195.  The ICA therefore held that “there 
is no independent basis for dismissing the criminal charges 
against Visintin based on his claim of excessive bail.”  Id.   
  Both the State and Vis intin filed applications for 
writs of certiorari from the ICA’s decision.  We accepted both 
applications. 
III.  STANDARDS  OF REVIEW  
A trial court’s findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding an HRPP 
Rule 48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review. . . . However, whether those 
facts fall within HRPP Rule 48(b)’s exclusionary provisions 
is a question of law, the determination of which is freely 
reviewable pursuant to the “right/wrong” test.   
State v. Samonte , 83 Hawai i 507, 514, 928 P.2d 1, 8 (1996) .   
  This court reviews questions of constitutional law 
under the right/wrong standard.  State v. Davis, 133 Hawaii 102, 
111, 324 P.3d 912, 921 (2014) (citing State v. Jenkins , 93 
Hawaii 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26 (2000)).   
                     
 20 The ICA’s reasoning as to each factor is discussed in greater 
length infra, § IV -B-1. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 IV. DISCUSSION 
A.  State’s Application for Writ of Certiorari 
  On certiorari, the State contends that the contested 
period was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(6) or, 
alternatively, HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).  These arguments are 
addressed in turn below.   
1. The Period Between the Calendar Call Proceeding and the 
Indictment Date is not Excluded under  HRPP Rule 48(c)(6) 
  Under HRPP Rule 48(b), trial must commence within six 
months “from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the 
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner.”  The parties agree 
that bail was set following Visintin ’s initial arrest, thereby 
starting the clock from the date of arrest for purposes of HRPP 
Rule 48(b).  See State v. Visintin , 142 Hawai‘i 126, 138, 414 
P.3d 178, 190 (App. 2018).  HRPP Rule 48(c)(6), however , 
excludes from the computation of time for trial commencement 
“the period between a dismissal of the charge by the prosecutor 
to the time of arrest or filing of a new charge, whichever is 
sooner, for the same offense.”  The State contends that the 
more-than -seven-month period from the calendar call proceeding 
to the date of Visintin’s indictment is excluded under HRPP Rule 
48(c)(6) because the calendar call procedure effectively 
dismissed Visintin’s case .   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21   The ICA in this case correctly determined that the 
district court’s calendar call procedure cannot be construed as 
a de facto dismissal because it would contravene the plain 
language of HRPP Rule 48.  Visintin , 142 Hawai ‘i at
 139-40, 414 
P.3d at 191- 92.  HRPP Rule 48(a) sets forth the procedure by 
which a prosecutor may dismiss a case and thereby obtain tolling 
under HRPP Rule 48(c)(6).  The rule states that “a prosecutor 
may by leave of court file  a dismissal of a charge and the 
prosecution shall thereupon terminate. ”  HRPP Rule 48(a) 
(emphases added).  Under the calendar call procedure, there i s 
no “charge” to be dismissed  because charges have not yet been 
initiated.  There also is nothing “filed ,” which by its plain 
meaning indicates the submission of a written document.  See 
Hawai‘i Rules of Electronic Filing (HREF) Rules 1.1, 1.4 (2010) 
(defining “conventionally file” and “electronic filing” to mean 
“the submission of paper documents and physical exhibits to the 
clerk for filing in the court record” and “ the submission of 
documents by authorized JEFS Users for docketing and storage in 
JIMS
,” respectively); HRPP Rule 2.3 (2012) (cross -referencing 
the HREF for definitions).  Additionally, the prosecution does 
not obtain leave from the court prior to employing the calendar 
call procedure as is required for the dismissal of charges under 
HRPP Rule 48(a).  The calendar call procedure is therefore not a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 dismissal by the prosecutor for purposes of HRPP Rule 48, and it 
cannot form the basis for tolling under HRPP Rule 48(c).21 
  The ICA indicated, however, that the result would have 
been different had the record established  that Visintin was 
notified that his bond  was discharged or that his bail status  
had changed.  Relying on section 12-2.2(a) of the American Bar 
Association Standards for Crim
inal Justice (2d ed. Supp. 1986), 
the ICA held that the HRPP Rule 48 clock continued to run 
because Visintin 
“reasonably believed he was still ‘held to 
                     
 21 It is notable that, prior to 2010, many procedures in Hawai ‘i 
circuit, family, and district courts were governed by a range of informal 
administrative orders and memoranda that commonly set forth  individualized 
local practices not unlike the calendar call procedure utilized in the 
present case.  See  In re Bettencourt, 126 Hawai ‘i 26, 28, 265 P.3d 1122, 1124 
(2011).  Like the calendar call procedure, the various administrative orders 
and memoranda caused much confusion and were oftentimes in conflict with 
Hawai‘i statutes, our precedents, or our duly promulgated court rules.  See 
id.; Price v. Obayashi  Haw. Corp., 81 Hawai ‘i 171, 178, 914 P.2d 1364, 1371  
(1996).  And because  the plethora of regulation s was not easily navigated , 
they created inconsistent results and hindered public access to our justice 
system. 
  Cognizant of these difficulties, Chief Justice  Ronald T.Y. Moon 
issued an order rescinding all statewide circuit, family, and district court 
administrative orders or memoranda.  Order, In Re Statewide Court 
Administrative Orders and Memoranda  (Haw. June 9, 2010), 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/sct_various_orders/order35.pdf.  The order 
noted that many of the administrative orders and memoranda contained 
“requirements that are more appropriate for co urt rules than for 
administrative orders and memoranda.”  Id.  This is because the Hawai i 
Constitution reserves to the Hawai ‘i Supreme Court the power to “promulgate 
rules . . . relating to process, practice, [and] procedure.”  Haw. Const. 
art. VI, § 7.   
 
 The calendar call employed in the present case  resembles the 
rescinded administrative orders in many respects  and possesses the same 
potential to create inconsistent results , hinder access to justice, and 
impinge on this court’s constitutional authority .  Further, the problems 
created by these type s of administrative practices are compounded when the 
procedure is not even memorialized in writing, as in this case . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 answer’ for the offense asserted upon his arrest.”  Visintin, 
142 Hawai‘ i at 139, 414 P.3d at 191.  Accordingly, the ICA 
limited its ruling “to the circumstances in this case” and did 
“not reach the question of the type of notice that must be given 
to a defendant when he or she is released or discharged from 
bail.”  Id. at 140 n.16, 414 P.3d at 192 n.16. 
  But this reasoning is predicated on the incorrect 
assumption that Visintin was in fact no longer held to answer 
following the calendar call proceeding.  Although it is true 
that, under our precedents, the HRPP Rule 48 trial clock does 
not run when a defendant is released outright without bail being 
set, see State v. Johnson , 62 Haw. 11, 12, 608 P.2d 404, 405 
(1980), no actual order discharging Visintin’s bail and 
releasing him outright was ever entered in this case.   
  That a written order must be filed in this context-- or 
at the very least a written notice of entry of the decision or 
ruling--is indicated by the plain language of the HRPP.  HRPP 
Rule 44A (2011) provides in relevant part as follows: 
After the decision or ruling of the court following a 
hearing on a motion, the clerk shall note the decision or 
ruling on the docket.  The filing of the written decision
 
or ruling, or in the event of an oral decision or ruling, 
the filing of the written notice of entry of the decision 
or ruling, in the office of the clerk constitutes entry of  
the order .  The decision or ruling or notice of entry shall 
be signed by the judge or by the clerk, if the judge so 
directs, provided that for purposes of this rule, an oral 
order granting an oral motion is en tered when the court’s 
oral order is entered by the clerk on the electronic 
docket. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 (Emphasis added.)  The calendar call proceeding operates as a 
hearing on the State’s motion to refund bail or discharge a bond 
and to release the defendant outright.  See Motion , Black’s Law  
Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014) (“A written or oral application 
requesting a court to make a specified ruling or order.”).  
Alternatively, the proceeding may be viewed as a hearing on the 
court’s own motion  or a joint motion of the court and the State.   
  Regardless of whom the motion is viewed as originating 
from, HRPP Rule 44A requires either the district court or court 
clerk to file a written order or a written notice 
of the ruling 
for the decision to be considered “entered.”22  It must follow 
that, even were we to construe the circuit court’s general 
statements addressing multiple defendants during the calendar 
call procedure as an oral order, that order would be ineffective 
because it was not accompanied by a written notice of entry.  
And without an effective order, Visintin remained held to answer 
as a matter of law, notwithstanding any administrative 
procedural actions or his notice thereof.  
  Sound policy considerations underlie 
HRPP Rule 44A ’s 
requirements.  The absence of a written order or notice of entry 
                     
 22 Although criminal charges have not yet been filed against 
defendants involved in the calendar call procedure, the HRPP nonetheless 
apply because they “govern the procedure in the courts of the State in all 
penal proceedings ,” with only limited exceptions not applicable here.  HRPP 
Rule 1(a) (2012) (emphasis added). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 denies future courts an adequate record of events that occurred 
under the jurisdiction of district courts in the Fifth Circuit.  
The present case is emblematic of the problems that can arise 
under such conditions.  Because no formal order was  filed in 
Visintin’s case, the circuit court lacked any meaningful ability 
to review judicial records following Visintin’s indictment when 
it considered the State’s request for an arrest warrant and bail 
in the amount of $10,000.   
  Despite the fact that the earlier posted bond had been 
discharged because the prosecutor was unprepared to proceed with 
the case, the circuit court’s outstanding warrant resulted in 
Montana issuing a “fugitive ” warrant against Visintin.  
Visintin’s life was subject to significant upheaval when he was 
arrested by Montana law enforcement as a fugitive from justice, 
incarcerated, and again required to post bail.  At a minimum, 
had there been a written order or notice of entry discharging 
Visintin’s initial bond and formally releasing him from custody, 
the issuance of the fugitive warrant in this case may have been 
avoided.   
  Additionally, were we to hold that the calendar call 
proceeding was a legally effective order , the absence of a 
written order or notice of  entry of the ruling would force a 
person released pursuant to the procedure to obtain the 
transcript or recording of the proceeding to acquire ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 documentation that he or she is no longer being held to answer 
for the crime underlying the perso n’s arrest.  A defendant 
should not be required to take such measures to obtain 
information affecting one’s fundamental liberty that may easily 
be relayed through a written order  or notice of entry.  Nor 
should the defendant, counsel, or the public be required to rely 
upon a court’s verbal statements indicating that a felony case 
will not be going forward or that the restraints of bail 
conditions no longer apply.   
  F urther compounding the problematic nature of the 
calendar call procedure is that the procedure itself is  
unwritten and thus not readily accessible to public 
understanding or scrutiny except to those with inside 
knowledge.23  Pro se defendants or those with counsel unfamiliar 
with the Fifth Circuit’s “unique” procedure are unlikely to 
                     
 23 Inside knowledge as to the discharge of bond figured prominently 
in the reasoning of Chief Judge Nakamura’s concurring in part and dissenting 
in part opinion (dissent).  The dissent argued that, given the longstanding 
use of the calendar call procedure, the “prosecutor knows” that  not filing a 
charge by the deadline will effectively lead to its dismissal, and “criminal 
defense counsel should be aware that under the calendar call procedure” the 
State’s failure to formally charge a defendant by a week before the calendar 
call appearance date means that no charge is pending, any bail will be 
returned, and any bail bond will be discharged.  Visintin , 142 Hawai‘ i at 146 –
47, 414 P.3d at 198 –99 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting).  As 
discussed supra, note 21, the adoption of informal court  procedures is 
problematic even when their details  are published in written form because, 
inter alia, they require uninitiated litigants to navigate a maze of 
administrative procedures  and thereby impair public access to our justice 
system.  We likewise reject an approach that is reliant upon the presumed 
knowledge of counsel as to unwritten, localized court procedures . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 understand the legal significance the procedure is intended to 
hold without a written document, leaving them 
uninformed as to 
the status of the criminal claim 
against them. 
  
The State argues that requiring a written order to 
discharge bail will leave it with no established method of 
disposing of a case under these circumstances .  It is not 
possible to file a written bail discharge order before a written 
complaint is filed, the State contends, because there is no case 
number under which to file the order.  But  the filing of written 
orders prior to formal charging is both routine and expressly 
authorized under our court rules.   
  HRPP Rule 5(a) (2) (2012), for example, provides  the 
following: 
(2)
 PROBABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION UPON ARREST WITHOUT A 
WARRANT.  As soon as practicable, and, Rule 45 
notwithstanding, not later than 48 hours after the 
warrantless arrest of a person held in custody, a district 
judge shall determine whether there was probable cause for 
the arrest. . . . If probable cause is found as aforesaid, 
an appropriate order shall be filed with the court as soon 
as practicable .  If probable cause is not found, or a 
proceeding to determine probable cause is not held within 
the time period provided by this subsection, the arrested 
person shall be ordered released and discharged from  
custody. 
(Emphases added.)  Thus, this rule provides that when a person 
has been arrested without a warrant and remains in custody, the 
court shall, no later than forty- eight hours after the arrest,  
determine whether there is probable cause for the arrest.  If 
probable cause is found, the court is required to file an order ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 as soon as practicable.  Similarly, i f probable cause is not 
found or a proceeding to determine probable cause is not held 
within the time provided by HRPP Rule 5(a)(2), the arrested 
person “shall be ordered released
 and discharged from custody. ”  
(Emphasis added.)  In other words, when probable cause has not 
otherwise been determined through a preliminary hearing or 
indictment, the district court must file an order whenever  a 
person is arrested without a warrant and held in custody for 
more than forty-eight hours after arrest, notwithstanding the  
lack of formal charges in the case.   
  This authority of the district court to issue orders 
prior to the filing of a charge is also recognized in HRPP Rule 
5(c)(8), which provides as follows: “ The district court, as 
authorized by Hawai i Revised Statutes, chapter 804, may admit 
the defendant to bail or modify bail any time prior to the 
filing of the written order committing the case to circuit 
court.”  HRPP Rule 5(c)(8) (2014).   Indisputably, admission to 
bail or modification of bail requires a written order of the 
court.  The court’s authority to modify bail prior to the filing 
of the charge was in fact referenced by the court administrator, 
who stated  that defendants commonly file motions to the court  
under the BBRA number seeking permission to travel.  I f motions 
and orders can be filed under the BBRA number, nothing precludes 
the district court from filing a written order or notice of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 entry under that number to refund bail, discharge a bond, and 
release the defendant outright from custody.  
Accordingly, this 
court will not defer to the established procedure of the 
district court in the Fifth Circuit with regard to cases on the 
calendar call list-- which does not include disposition by a 
written order or notice of entry--merely because a charge has 
not been filed in the case.    
  In summary, because the calendar call procedure 
involves matters with significa
nt and consequential effects, a 
verbal directive that is not memorialized is ineffective  as an 
“order.”  To hold otherwise would create great uncertainty by 
denying future courts, defendants, and the public a definitive 
record of proceedings.   And, as this case demonstrates, the 
absence of a written order or notice of entry affect s the 
integrity of the procedure by which judicial warrants  issue and 
hampers a court’s duty to promote a fair process.  This  is why 
the filing of a written order--or at the very least a written 
notice of entry-- is both permitted and explicitly called for 
under our court rules.24 
                     
 24 See HRPP Rule 2 (1977) (“These rules are intended to provide for 
the just determination of every penal proceeding.  They shall be construed to 
secure simplicity in procedure, fairness in administration and the 
elimination of unjustifiable expense and delay.”) . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30   B ecause there was no written order or notice of entry 
of an oral order discharging Visintin’s bond and releasing him 
outright, Visintin remained held to answer for purposes of the 
HRPP Rule 48 trial clock.  And, because no dismissal of charges 
occurred, the period between the calendar call procedure and the 
date of his indictment is not excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(6).   
2.  The Period Between the Calendar  Call Proceeding and the 
Indictment Date is not Excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) 
  
The State contends in the alternative that the period 
between the calendar call proceeding and the date of Visintin’s 
indictment is excluded based on good cause.  HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) 
provides that “other periods of delay for good cause” shall be 
excluded from the computation of time for trial commencement
.  
This court has defined “good cause” as “a substantial reas on 
which affords a legal excuse. ”  State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 
368, 742 P.2d 369, 373 (1987) (citing State v. Estencion , 63 
Haw. 264, 267, 625 P.2d 1040, 1042 (1981)).  The good cause 
provision of HRPP Rule 48(c), we have held, “is provided to take 
care of unanticipated circumstances ” and events that are not 
reasonably foreseeable.  State v. Abregano , 136 Hawai i 489, 497, 
498, 363 P.3d 838, 846, 847  (2015) (quoting State v. Gillis , 63 
Haw. 285, 288, 626 P.2d 190, 192 (1981)) .  It “is not to be used 
to excuse a lack of diligence on the part of the government to 
comply with Rule 48.”  Id. (quoting Gillis, 63 Haw. at 288, 626 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 P.2d at 193).  “Whether a period of time is excludable as ‘good 
cause’ under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) is dependent on the facts of 
each case.”  Id.  at 498–99, 363 P.3d at 847 –48 (citing State v. 
Herrera, 63 Haw. 405, 409, 629 P.2d 626, 629 (1981)).    
  On certiorari, the State argues that Visintin’s 
failure to appear at the scheduled court proceeding constitutes 
good cause to exclude the delay between the calendar call 
proceeding and the date of Visintin’s indictment under HRPP Rule 
48(c)(8).  The State contends that Visintin chose not to attend 
the hearing even though he was ordered to do so.   
  I n State v. Choy Foo , 142 Hawai i 65, 71-72, 414 P.3d 
117, 123-24 (2018), the defendant argued that his appearance 
without counsel at arraignment was not an unanticipated 
circumstance constituting good cause.  We agreed, holding that 
it was “‘reasonably foreseeable’ that many defendants will make 
their initial appearance in district court without an attor ney.”  
Id. at 76, 414 P.3d at 128.  Similarly, it is not an 
unanticipated circumstance that many defendants will not appear 
at the calendar call given that, under the system that has been 
established in the Fifth Circuit, there is no consequence for a 
defendant who does not appear at the calendar call.   
  Moreover, as discussed above, the calendar call 
procedure would not have resulted in the stopping of the HRPP 
Rule 48 trial clock even had Visintin been present at the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 calendar call proceeding because no written order or notice of 
entry was filed discharging Visintin’s bond.  Visintin’s 
nonattendance was therefore irrelevant to the State’s obligation 
to comply with the HRPP Rule 48 time limit and cannot constitute 
good cause for its failure to do so.  Accordingly, the ICA did 
not err in vacating the circuit court’s judgment  because the 
contested period was not excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).25   
B.  Visintin’s Application for Writ of Certiorari  
  Visintin contends on certiorari that the circuit  court 
erred in denying his constitutional speedy trial motion and that 
his right against excessive bail was violated, which should have 
resulted in the dismissal of the criminal charges against him.   
1.  Speedy Trial 
  The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
and article I, section 14 of the Hawai i Constitution guarantee a 
defendant in a criminal case the right to a speedy trial in all 
                     
 25 It is also noted that the circuit court judgment prescribed a 
jail term “in addition to time served.”  However, HRS § 706 -671(1) provides 
in relevant part as follows:  
When a defendant who is sentenced to imprisonment has 
previously been detained in any State or local correctional 
or other institution following the defendant’s arrest for 
the crime for which sentence is imposed, such period of  
detention following the defendant’s arrest shall be 
deducted from the minimum and maximum terms of such 
sentence . 
HRS § 706- 671(1) (2012) (emphasis added).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 prosecutions.  State v. Lau, 78 Hawai i 54, 62, 890 P.2d 291, 299 
(1995).  Whether the defendant’s right to a speedy tri al has 
been violated is determined by applying the four factors 
articulated in Barker v. Wingo , 407 U.S. 514 (1972): “ (1) length 
of the delay; (2) reaso ns for the delay; (3) defendant’ s 
assertion of his right to speedy trial; and (4) prejudice to the 
defendant.”  Lau , 78 Hawaii at 62, 890 P.2d at 299 (citing 
Barker, 407 U.S. at 530).  No one factor “is to be regarded as 
either a necessary or sufficient condition to the finding of a 
deprivation of the right to a speedy trial .”  Id. (quoting State 
v. Wasson , 76 Hawaii 415, 419, 879 P.2d 520, 524 (1994)).  
Rather, the factors are related “and must be considered together 
with such circumstances as may be relevant.”  Id. (quoting 
Wasson, 76 Hawaii at 419, 879 P.2d at 524).  When  a defendant’s 
right to a speedy trial has been violated, the only remedy is 
dismissal with prejudice.  Id.   
  As to the first factor, length of delay, the ICA held 
in this case that the more-than-twelve-month period between 
Visintin’s arrest and the filing of the motion to dismiss was  
sufficient to warrant inquiry into the other Barker factors.  
State v. Visintin , 142 Hawaii 126, 141, 414 P.3d 178,  193 (App. 
2018).  With regard to the second factor, reasons for the delay, 
the ICA held that the State’s proffered explanations --the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 assigned prosecutor’s unavailability and the leadership change 
at the prosecutor’s office --were not “overwhelming 
justifications” but nonetheless provided “a reasoned basis for 
the delay and are weighted less heavily.”  Id.  The ICA thus 
concluded that the  second factor weighed slightly in favor of 
the State.  Id.   The ICA also determined that a portion of the 
delay, which spanned several months, was attributable to the 
time required to bring Visintin back to Hawai i from Montana and 
was reasonable.  Id.  Turning to the third factor, assertion of 
the right to a speedy trial, the ICA held that this factor 
weighed in favor of the State because, other than the motion to 
dismiss, the record lacked a showing that Visintin actually 
desired a speedy trial.  Id. at 141- 42, 414 P.3d at 193- 94. 
  Lastly, with respect to the fourth factor, prejudice 
to the defendant, the ICA held that Visintin did not submit 
“objective, contemporaneous evidence of anxiety, such as prompt 
and persistent assertion of the desire for a speedy trial 
coupled with a demonstrable basis for the court’s believing the 
delay is traumatic.”  Id. at 142, 414 P.3d at 194 (quoting State 
v. Ferraro , 8 Haw. App. 284, 300, 800 P.2d 623, 632 (1990)).  
Further, the ICA determined that Visintin did not suffer 
oppressive pretrial incarceration, that he only alleged the 
possibility of prejudice-- which was insufficient to establish a 
violation of the constitutional speedy trial right, and that the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
35 twelve-month period of delay was not “exceedingly long.”  Id.  
Accordingly, the ICA held that Visintin’s constitutional right 
to a speedy trial had not been violated.  Id. 
a.  The ICA E rred in Considering Visintin’s Constitutional 
Speedy Trial Claim on the Merits 
  After determining that the circuit court “implicitly 
rejected” Visintin’s argument regarding the right to a speedy 
trial when it denied his motion to dismiss, the ICA considered 
the merits of Visintin’s constitutional speedy trial challenge .  
Visintin, 142 Hawai ‘i at 140 -42, 414 P.3d at 192- 94.  However, 
nothing in the record indicates that the circuit court 
considered Visintin’s argument regarding his constitutional 
right to a speedy trial, let alone evaluated the four Barker 
factors.  Instead, the circuit court relied solely on HRPP Rule 
48 in denying Visin tin’s motion to dismiss.    
  Additionally, even assuming the circuit court 
considered Visintin’s argument regarding a constitutional speedy 
trial violation, the court neither issued a written order 
setting forth its findings or conclusions with respect to the 
issue nor did it state any findings or conclusions on the record 
when it denied the motion. 
  HRPP Rule 12(e) (2007) provides in relevant part, 
“Where factual issues are involved in determining a motion, the 
court shall state its essential findings on the record .”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
36 (Emphasis added.)  Visintin’s motion to dismiss based on a 
constitutional speedy trial violation required the determination 
of factual issues that are part and parcel of  the four Barker 
factors.  The circuit court, however, failed to make any factual 
findings as to the speedy trial motion.   
  This court has repeatedly stated that “cases will be 
remanded when the f actual basis of the lower court’ s ruling 
cannot be determined from the record .”  
See, e.g. , State v. 
Anderson , 67 Haw. 513, 514, 693 P.2d 1029, 1030 (1985) 
(remanding to the lower court after determining that the lower 
court granted the motion to suppress without having made any 
findings of fact); State v. Hutch , 75 Haw. 307, 331, 861 P.2d 
11, 23 (1993) (holding that both trial courts committed 
reversible error in denying the defendant’s HRPP Rule 48 motions 
without stating the “essential findings on the record”);  see 
also State v. Rodrigues , 122 Hawaii 229, 238, 225 P.3d 671, 680 
(App. 2010) (“In the absence of the findings of fact r equired by 
HRPP Rule 12(e), it is not the role of the appellate court, in 
the first instance, to make determinations” as to such factual 
issues).  This is because “[factual] findings are imperative for 
an adequate judicial review of a lower court’ s conclusions of 
law.”  Anderson , 67 Haw. at 514, 693 P.2d at 1030; accord Hutch, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 75 Haw. at 331, 861 P.2d at 23; Rodrigues, 122 Hawai i at 238, 
225 P.3d at 680.    
  The ICA nevertheless considered Visintin’s argument as 
to his constitutional speedy trial challenge.  The ICA evaluated 
each of the four Barker factors and made a number of implicit or 
express factual findings in determining whether the factors
weighed in favor of or against Visintin.    
  For example, regarding the second Barker factor, 
reasons for the delay, the ICA found that the State’s proffered 
justifications--that the prosecutor was unavailable due to her 
trial schedule and that it was an election year--provided “a 
reasoned basis for the delay.”  Visintin, 142 Hawai ‘i at 141, 414 
P.3d at 193.  The ICA also determined that a portion of the 
delay was due to the time needed 
to bring Visintin back to 
Hawaii from Montana following his indictment, which was 
“reasonable.”  Id.  The circuit court, however, did not make any 
specific findings that these reasons were the actual causes of 
the delay.  And, insofar as the ICA suggested that Visintin was 
responsible for the delay for his return to Hawai‘i from Montana, 
this conclusion was contradicted by the circuit court ’s factual 
findings in ruling upon Visintin’s HRPP Rule 48 argument .  The 
court found that the State was responsible for the period of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
38 delay between Visintin’s indictment and the arraignment, not 
Visintin.  The court stated as follows: 
Now, once the indictment is issued on April 25th to the 
period of August 6th, because the defendant is free to 
leave at that point in time, you cannot now say the 
defendant is making himself unavailable.   It would be 
inconsistent for the Court to have that type of ruling.  
 So 
the period  between April 25th to August 6th is chargeable 
to the State.  
The ICA never determined that this finding was clearly 
erroneous, and the circuit court is certainly better positioned 
than an appellate court to make factual findings as to the 
causes of delay and the allocation of responsibility between the 
parties.   
  Similarly, the ICA specifically found 
as to the fourth 
factor, prejudice to the defendant, that Visintin did not suffer 
oppressive pretrial incarceration, that he did not suffer 
anxiety, and that he had only alleged the possibility of 
prejudice, which the ICA stated was insufficient to establish a 
violation of the speedy trial right.  Visintin , 142 Hawai‘i at 
142, 414 P.3d at 194.   However, the circuit court itself did not 
make any findings as to whether Visintin had established 
oppression, anxiety, or prejudice.  This was of particular 
import here because Visintin alleged that he had suffered a 
number of extreme, potentially anxiety- inducing circumstances 
that were arguably caused by the State’s delay in bringing the 
case.  Visintin asserted that he was subject to multiple ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39 arrests, including one in which heavily armed Marshals forced 
their way into his family  home in Montana and forcibly detained 
Visintin and his mother.  Visintin further contended that he 
endured false accusations of being a fugitive and  was required 
to post bail multiple times.  And the email exchanges between 
the deputy prosecutor and Visintin’s counsel may 
suggest that 
Visintin was very concerned as to the impa ct of the prosecution 
on his prospects of becoming a police officer, a job for which 
he had invested much training and preparation.  Whether these 
events occurred, were caused by the delay, and resulted in 
Visintin experiencing great anxiety were factual m atters that 
should have been initially ascertained by a trial court and not 
by a court on appeal
.   
  Thus, because “it is not the role of the appellate 
court, in the first instance, to make determinations” as to 
factual issues, the ICA erred in considering Visintin’s 
constitutional speedy trial argument without the circuit court 
having made any findings of fact.  Rodrigues, 122 
Hawaii at 238, 
225 P.3d at 680.   
b.  The ICA A pplied Incorrect P rinciples of L aw 
  In improperly considering Visintin’s constitutional 
speedy trial claim, the ICA did not correctly apply precedent 
relating to three Barker
 factors: reasons for the delay, 
assertion of the right to a speedy trial, and prejudice to the  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
40 defendant.  These three factors are accordingly addressed below 
to set forth principles applicable to the circuit court ’s 
determination should the speedy trial motion be further 
considered on remand.   
i.  Reasons for the D elay 
  This court has stated, in accordance with the U.S. 
Supreme Court’s decision in Barker, that different weights are
 
assigned to different reasons in determining whether  a delay of 
trial violates a defendant’s constitutional speedy trial right .  
Lau, 78 Hawai i
 at 63, 890 P.2d at 300 (citing Barker, 407 U.S. 
at 531).  “A deliberate attempt to delay the trial in order to 
hamper the defense should be weighted heavily against the 
government.”  Id.  (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. at 531).  “ A more 
neutral reason such as negligence or overcrowded courts should 
be weighted less heavily but nevertheless should be considered 
since the ultimate responsibility for such circumstances must 
rest with the government rather than with the defendant. ”  Id. 
(quoting Barker , 407 U.S. at 531).   
  Whe n a defendant contributes in substantial part to 
the delay, we have held that the second Barker factor weighs in 
favor of the prosecution.  In State v. White , for instance, the 
defendant’s various pretrial motions resulted in a delay of 
approximately four and a half months.  92 Hawai i 192, 203, 990 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
41 P.2d 90, 101 (1999).  Although the State’s requests to continue 
trial resulted in a four- month delay, the White court deter mined 
that the State’s requests did not appear to have been a 
deliberate attempt to delay trial.  Id.  Because the defendant 
was responsible for a substantial part of the delay, the court 
concluded that the second Barker factor weighed in favor of the 
State.  Id. at 204, 990 P.2d at 102.   
  By contrast, when a delay results from a more neutral 
reason, we have held that the second Barker factor weighs in 
favor of the defendant.  In Lau, the defendants contended that 
the reasons for the delay were court cong estion and the State’s 
determination to try every case involving a charge of driving 
under the influence of an intoxicant.  78 Hawai i at 63, 890 P.2d 
at 300.  In response, the State conceded that court congestion 
was present but argued that the evolution of caselaw in Hawai i 
constituted “unique circumstances” that led to the backlog of 
cases.  Id.  The Lau court acknowledged that the State’s 
contention had some merit, but found that there was no 
indication that the defendants were responsible for the delay in 
bringing the case to trial.  Id.   “[W]hile court congestion is a 
‘more neutral’ reason that ‘counts less heavily against the 
State than would a deliberate delay,’” the court held, “it 
nevertheless still tips the scales in favor of [the defendants],  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
42 since the ultimate responsibility for such circumstances must 
rest with the government rather than with the defendant .”  Id. 
(quoting Wasson , 76 Hawaii at 420, 879 P.2d at 525).  Thus, the 
Lau court concluded that the second Barker factor weighed in 
favor of the defendants.  Id.   
  Even when the defendant is partially responsible for 
the delay, this court has held that the second Barker factor may 
tip in favor of the defendant.  In State v. Dwyer , the 
defendant’s trial was continue d three times.   One of the 
continuances was due to the defendant’s counsel falling ill , and 
one was at the request of the State because it was unable to 
proceed to trial.26  78 Hawaii 367, 371, 893 P.2d 795, 799 
(1995).  The Dwyer  court found that there was no attempt by the 
State to deliberately delay the defendant’s trial.  Id.  
Nonetheless, it concluded that, on balance, the reasons- for-the-
delay factor weighed in favor of the defendant.  Id.  Similarly, 
in Wasson, both the State and the defendant shared some 
responsibility for the delay in the defendant’s trial.  76 
Hawaii at 419-20, 879 P.2d at 524- 25.  The reasons for the delay 
included court congestion, two failures to appear by the 
                     
 26 The court in Dwyer found that the record was insufficient to 
determine the reason for one of the continuance s.  State  v. Dwyer, 78 Hawai i 
367, 371, 893 P.2d 795, 799 (1995).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
43 defendant, and the defendant’s two motions for continuances.  
Id.  This court held that, while court congestion was a “more 
neutral” reason that counted less heavily against the State and 
was offset to a degree by the defendant’s own actions, the 
second Barker factor nonetheless tipped in favor of the 
defendant “since the ultimate responsibility for such 
circumstances must rest with the government rather than with the 
defendant.”  Id.  at 420, 879 P.2d at 525 (quoting Barker, 407 
U.S. at 531).   
  In this case, although the ICA determined that the 
State was primarily responsible for the delay, it held that the 
reasons-for-the-delay factor weighed slightly in favor of the 
State.  Visintin , 142 Hawai‘i at 141, 414 P.3d at 19 3.  The ICA 
held that the State’s proffered justifications --that the 
assigned prosecutor was unavailable and that the prosecutor’s 
office underwent a change in leadership-- provided “a reasoned 
basis for the delay and are weighted less heavily.”  Id.  The 
ICA did not directly state that Visintin was responsible for any 
portion of the delay between his arrest on August 7, 2012, and 
his arraignment on August 6, 2013, though the ICA appeared to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
44 suggest the delay in returning Visintin to Hawai ‘i to stand trial 
may be attributable to him .27  See id. 
  In Dwyer , the State moved to continue the trial 
because it was unable to proceed with the case, and we held that 
the second Barker  factor tipped in favor of the defendant.  78 
Hawai‘i at 371, 893 P.2d at 799.  Likewise, this court in Wasson  
weighed the second Barker factor in favor of the defendant when 
court congestion was alleged as a reason for the delay.  76 
Hawaii at 419, 879 P.2d at 524.  The State submitted in this 
case that it could not proceed with trial because the assigned 
deputy prosecutor was busy with trials in other cases and there 
was a change in leadership at the prosecutor’s office.28  But the 
workload of a deputy prosecutor, the election of a new 
prosecutor, and court congestion all share common features in 
that they are in all but exceptional circumstances recurring, 
systemic, foreseeable, and ultimately the government’s 
responsibility.   
                     
 27 As discussed supra, this suggestion is contrary to the circuit 
court’s findings on the matter.   
 28 At the hearing on the motion to dismiss, the circuit court 
appeared to reject the State’s reason for the delay based upon the assigned 
prosecutor’s trial schedule , stating that it was not aware of any cases in 
which the court “has said, ‘Ms. [Prosecutor], you’re busy, so we can infringe 
on defendant’s right to, you know, a timely trial .’”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
45 Hence, the ICA misapprehended applicable principles in 
evaluating the second Barker factor.  Cf. State v. Hanawahine, 
69 Haw. 624, 631, 755 P.2d 466, 470 (1988) (holding that the 
defendant’s late arraignment that resulted from the assigned 
prosecutor’s workload was “not good cause for the delay [under 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(8)] given that [the prosecutor’s] problem is n ot 
that unusual” (citing State v. Gillis , 63 Haw. 285, 626 P.2d 190 
(1981) (per curiam))) ; State v. Dunphy , 71 Haw. 537, 543, 797 
P.2d 1312, 1315 (1990) (analyzing the defendant’s due process 
argument and determining that the period of delay resulting from 
the “malfunctions in the staffing at the Prosecutor’s Office, is 
unreasonable and inexcusable”).  
ii.  Assertion of the R ight to a Speedy Trial 
  The ICA also incorrectly applied legal principles 
relating to the third Barker
 factor: the assertion of the right 
to a speedy trial.  We have stated that “[a] defendant has no 
duty to bring himself [or herself] to trial; the [S ]tate has 
that duty.”  Wasson , 76 Hawai i at 420, 879 P.2d at 525 
(alterations in original) (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. at 527).  
“Thus, a defendant does not waive his or her right to a speedy 
trial by failing to demand one. ”  Id. (citing Barker, 407 U.S. 
at 526).  However, the assertion of the right to a speedy trial 
“is entitled to strong evidentiary weight in determining whether ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
46 the defendant is being deprived of the right.”  Id. (quoting 
Barker, 407 U.S. at 531- 32).   
  A defendant’s motion to dismiss based on speedy trial 
“is ‘tantamount to an assertion of his [or her] constitutional 
right to a speedy trial.’”  Id.  at 420-21, 879 P.2d at 525- 26 
(alteration in original) (quoting State v. Nihipali , 64 Haw. 65, 
70 n.5, 637 P.2d 407, 412 n.5 (1981)).  Nonetheless, the motion 
“does not necessarily indicate that the defendant actually wants 
to be tried immediately” unless accompanied by an alternative 
demand for a speedy trial.  Id. at 421, 879 P.2d at 526 (citing 
United States v. Loud Hawk , 474 U.S. 302, 314 (1986)).   
  In concluding that this factor weighed in favor of the 
State, the ICA determined that nothing in the record, other than 
Visintin’s motion to dismiss, indicated that Visintin asserted 
the right to a speedy trial.  Visintin , 142 Hawai‘i at 141-42, 
414 P.3d at 193-94.  The ICA’s holding overlook s the significant 
circumstance that there appears to have been no conventional 
forum in which Visintin could have asserted the right to a 
speedy trial.   
 
 Although Visintin was arrested on August 7, 2012, he 
was not charged until more than seven months later on April 25, 
2013.  During the period between the arrest and the indictment, 
there was no pending charge against Visintin.  Visintin aptly 
notes that it “is unfair to require that a defendant demand a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
47 speedy trial after he has been accused, but then refuse to 
create an actual case in which defendant can make a timely 
demand.”  Without a pending charge and an arraignment to allow a 
trial to be set, there doe s not appear to have been any standard 
legal proceeding in which Visintin could have demanded a speedy 
trial.  And when Visintin was finally arraigned on August 6, 
2013, he filed a motion to dismiss based on speedy trial grounds 
within two weeks-- on August 20, 2013.29  Thus, the ICA erred in 
concluding this factor weighed in favor of the State without 
considering whether Visintin raised the issue of speedy trial  as 
soon as was practicable under the circumstances.30 
iii.   Prejudice to the D efendant 
  Prejudice to the defendant “should be assessed in the 
light of the interests of defendants [that]  the speedy trial 
right was designed to protect.”  Lau, 78 Hawaii at 64, 890 P.2d 
at 301 (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. at 532).  These interests are 
the prevention of oppressive pretrial incarceration, the 
                     
 29 Although the motion was not accompanied by an alternate demand 
for a speedy trial, more than a year had already elapsed by the time Visintin 
was arraigned and a demand for speedy trial could have been made.  A period 
of even six months  delay is deemed sufficient to warrant an inquiry into the 
remaining Barker factors, and thus even a demand for immediate trial would 
not have resulted in a “speedy” trial under our precedents.  Lau, 78 Hawai‘ i 
at 63, 890 P.2d at 300.  
 30 Indeed, the State itself acknowledged in its answering brief to 
the ICA that the third Barker factor potentially weighed in  favor of 
Visintin.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
48 minimization of the defendant’s anxiety and concern, and the 
preservation of the ability to mount an effective defense.  Id.    
  With regard to anxiety, the ICA concluded in this case 
as follows: 
The government will prevail unless the defendant offers 
objective, contemporaneous evidence of anxiety, such as 
prompt and persistent assertion of the desire for a speedy  
trial coupled with a demonstrable basis for the court’s 
believing the delay is traumatic.  State v. Ferraro , 8 Haw. 
App. 284, 300, 800 P.2d 623, 632 (1990) (citation and 
internal brackets omitted).  Visintin has not offered such  
evidence here .   
 
Visintin , 142 Hawai‘i at 142, 414 P.3d at 194 (emphases added) .  
While the ICA correctly stated that to demonstrate anxiety, the 
defendant must offer objective, current evidence, the ICA 
incorrectly applied Ferraro to require that Visintin offer 
evidence that he demanded a speedy trial in order to demonstrate 
anxiety.   
  We have stated the following in addressing the issue 
of prejudice in the speedy trial context: 
[W]holly aside from possible prejudice to a defense on the 
merits, [inordinate delay] may seriously interfere with the 
defendant’s liberty, whether he is free on bail or not, and 
. . . may disrupt his employment, drain his financial 
resources, curtail his associations, subject him to public 
obloquy, and create anxiety in him, his family and his 
friends.  
Lau, 78 Hawai i at 65, 890 P.2d at 302 (alterations in original) 
(quoting Moore v. Arizona , 414 U.S. 25, 27 (1973)).  Thus, 
because anxiety may be based on a variety of circumstances, 
evidence of anxiety may take a variety of forms.  The Ferraro ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
49 court specifically recognized this fact when it used the phrase 
“such as,” followed by examples of what may constitute evidence 
of anxiety depending on the circumstances of the case.  8 Haw. 
App. at 300, 800 P.2d at 632.   
  Although we have in the past held that a def endant’s 
demand for a speedy trial may be relevant evidence of anxiety, 
we have never indicated that it is a necessary precondition for 
a showing of anxiety.31  When the defendant has raised financial 
circumstances as a basis for asserted anxiety, for examp le, 
Hawaii courts have considered whether there was a demand for 
speedy trial as evidence that the defendant was indeed impacted 
by the alleged financial hardship.  In Lau, the defendants 
contended that they suffered from anxiety due to increased 
automobile insurance premiums.  78 Hawai i at 64, 890 P.2d at 
301.  In assessing whether the prejudice factor weighed in favor 
of the defendants, this court considered, inter alia, that the 
defendants had not asserted their right to a speedy trial and 
concluded that the record did not show that the alleged 
financial hardship was sufficient to warrant a finding of 
prejudice to the defendants.  Id. at 65, 890 P.2d at 302.   
                     
 31 Such a holding would render the fourth Barker factor largely 
redundant, as its parameters would almost entirely overlap with the third 
Barker factor, which directly considers whether the defendant has asserted 
the right to a speedy  trial.  A failure to demand a speedy trial would thus 
negate both factors, regardless of any actual prejudice the defendant 
demonstrate s. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
50   In this case, whether Visintin demanded a speedy trial 
is not an appropriate consideration as evidence of anxiety.  
Visintin did not allege a financial hardship as a basis for any 
asserted anxiety.   
  Moreover, as discussed supra, Visintin could not have 
readily demanded a speedy trial during the period between the 
initial court proceeding and the arraignment, as there was no 
pending charge against him.  Thus, the ICA misapprehended 
Ferraro by improperly considering the absence of an assertion of 
the right to a speedy trial by Visintin as a factor indicating 
that there was no evidence of anxiety.   
2.  Excessive Bail 
  Under HRS § 804
-1 (1993), bail is defined as “the 
signing of the recognizance by the defendant and the defendant’ s 
surety or sureties, conditioned for the appearance of the 
defendant at the session of a court of competent jurisdiction to 
be named in the condition, and to abide by the judgment of the 
court.”  While the amount of bail rests within the discretion of 
the judge, HRS § 804- 9 (1993), article I, section 12 of the 
Hawaii Constitution prohibits excessive bail.  Sakamoto v. Won 
Bae Chang , 56 Haw. 447, 450, 539 P.2d 1197, 1199 (1975).  “ In 
all cases, the officer letting to bail should consider the 
punishment to be inflicted on conviction, and the pecuniary 
circumstances of the party accused. ”  HRS § 804 -9.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
51   The ICA declined to reach Visintin’s argument that his 
right against excessive bail was violated, concluding that 
“there is no independent basis for dismissing the criminal 
charges against Visintin based on his claim of excessive bail.”  
State v. Visintin , 142 Hawai‘ i 126, 143, 414 P.3d 178,  195 (App. 
2018).  T he ICA’s ruling may potentially be interpreted 
overbroadly as an apparent categorical exclusion on dismissal 
based on violation s of a defendant’s bail -related rights.  
However, courts in other jurisdictions have held that the denial 
of bail may warrant dismissal of the case with prejudice under 
certain circumstances.  For example, in City of Jamestown v.  
Erdelt, the defendant was arrested for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) and was detained for a period of 
eight hours before being allowed to post bail.  513 N.W.2d 82, 
83 (N.D. 1994).  The trial court granted the defendant’s motion 
to dismiss the DUI charge.  Id.  The Supreme Court of North 
Dakota affirmed the trial court’s dismissal “as a sanction for 
institutional non-compliance and systematic disregard of the 
law.”  Id.
 at 85-86 (citations omitted).  The court reasoned 
that the arresting officer had detained the defendant without 
making an individualized determination of the intoxication and 
dangerousness of the defendant --in violation of the bail 
statutes and case precedent.  Id. at 86.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
52   Similarly, in State v. Cuchy , DUI arrestees were 
jailed for twelve hours, based on the sheriff department’s 
policy, before being allowed to post bond.  19 P.3d 152, 153 
(Kan. 2001).  The Kansas Supreme C ourt determined that the 
officers made no individualized determinations of whether the 
arrestees were intoxicated and dangerous, instead detaining them 
based solely on the blanket policy.  Id. at 158.  The court held 
that the defendants were denied their constitutional right to 
make bail.  Id.   However, because “the officers did not 
disregard a previous ruling or decision by the district court in 
detaining the defendants,” the court concluded that dism issals 
were not warranted.  Id. at 159-60.   
  In light of Erdelt and Cuchy, there is legal authority 
for the proposition that criminal charges against a defendant 
may be dismissed based on violations of the right to bail under 
certain circumstances, including when law enforcement denies 
bail pursuant to a blanket policy of jailing DUI arrestees for 
several hours.  Nevertheless, even if this court applied the 
holding in Erdelt  and Cuchy, a dismissal of the charges against 
Visintin would not be warranted.  While the circumstances in 
this case raise serious concerns as to the number of times 
Visintin was subject to arrest and the posting of bail for a 
single incident, the circumstances are not similar to those 
presented in Erdelt  and Cuchy.  Cf. Lock v. M oore, 541 N.W.2d ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
53 84, 87 (N.D. 1995) (unlike in Erdelt, “this is not a case of a 
person meeting all the bail requirements but nonetheless being 
kept in jail”).  Because the circumstances in this case do not 
rise to the level of a violation of the right against excessive 
bail, Visintin has not demonstrated that this constitutional 
right was violated.32   
V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s March 20, 2018 
Judgment on Appeal is affirmed in part and vacated in part.   The 
ICA’s judgment on appeal is aff irmed to the extent that it 
vacated the circuit court ’s judgment and remanded the case to 
the circuit court for dismissal, with or without prejudice as 
determined by that court,  based on a finding of a HRPP Rule 48  
violation.  The ICA’s judgment on appeal is vacated insofar as 
it considered Visintin’s speedy trial motion and concluded that 
Visintin’s right to speedy trial was not violated.  The case is 
remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.  If, on 
remand, the circuit court decides that the Rule 48 violation 
warrants a dismissal without prejudice, the circuit court must 
then rule on Visintin’s speedy trial motion, rendering findings 
                     
 32 It is noted that Visintin also asserted in his motion to dismiss 
that his right to due process was violated by the  State’s “unilateral” 
decision not to charge him when bail was initially set and then to “seek 
multiple arrests and successive re -postings of bail.”  This argument is not 
raised on certiorari to this court.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
54 of facts and conclusions of law and applying the factors set 
forth in Barker v. Wingo , 407 U.S. 514 (1972), consistent with 
this opinion.    
Tracy Murakami 
for petitioner/respondent 
 
Daniel G. Hempey 
for respondent/petitioner 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
