***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o---  
 
 
L.R.O., Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
N.D.O., Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-19-0000446 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000446; FC-D NO. 16-1-1111) 
 
NOVEMBER 5, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ.,  AND CIRCUIT JUDGE CHANG, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION
  
 
  Our state’s version of the Uniform Premarital 
Agreement Act (UPAA) provides that a premarital agreement (PMA) 
is enforceable unless one of the parties proves they did not 
execute it voluntarily.  Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 572D-
6(1) (2018).  Petitioner N.D.O. (Wife) argued throughout the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000446
05-NOV-2020
07:46 AM
Dkt. 7 OPA***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
2 
 parties’ divorce proceeding that she involuntarily executed a 
PMA prior to her marriage to L.R.O. (Husband).  We conclude that 
the family court did not err in rejecting that argument and by 
enforcing the PMA.  However, to provide further guidance to the 
family courts, we adopt the California Supreme Court’s test for voluntariness in PMAs under the UPAA.  We further hold that 
Wife’s other asserted points of error are meritless, and we 
affirm the judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
and the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).  
II. BACKGROUND 
This appeal arises from a Divorce Decree between 
parties Wife and Husband.  In Wife’s application for writ of 
certiorari, she argues that the family court erred by: 
(1) awarding full physical custody of the parties’ minor child 
to Husband based on the custody evaluator’s allegedly biased 
opinion; (2) enforcing a PMA between the parties that Wife 
alleged was unconscionable and entered into involuntarily; and 
(3) failing to find that Husband abused the temporary 
restraining order (TRO) process to gain advantage in the custody 
dispute. 
A. Family Court Proceedings 
  The facts of this case are complex, and Wife and 
Husband presented two drastically different versions of events.  
The following background facts are undisputed. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
3 
  
 In 2013, Wife’s aunt, J.D., who lived in Hawai‘ i, 
approached Husband, who used to live in J.D.’s building, because 
she wanted to introduce Husband to her niece (Wife) who lived in 
Vietnam.  After Husband and Wife electronically communicated for 
several months, J.D. and Husband traveled to Vietnam in December 
2013; J.D. paid for Husband’s flight.  Husband met Wife in 
person for the first time on this trip, at which point Husband was 45 years old and Wife was 22 years old.  Four months later, 
Husband returned to Vietnam and proposed to Wife, who accepted.  
Wife came to the United States in June 2014 on a K-1 fiancée 
visa, allowing her 90 days to marry Husband.   
  On August 13, 2014, the parties entered into the PMA,
1 
which contained terms releasing the parties from “any alimony or support obligations.”  The PMA also provided that each spouse’s 
property upon entry into the marriage would be treated as 
separate.  Further, the PMA stated, “It is the intention of the husband in the event that he sells his current residence . . . 
that any equity shall be used to finance another shared property 
with the wife and said equity will be considered shared and 
                                                 
1  The six- page PMA was entered into evidence along with “ Schedule A1” 
which listed Husband’ s assets as follows: 
 
1. Federal [Thrift] Savings Plan (government retirement) current 
value is $150k and all future payouts 
 
2. Federal Annuity (government retirement) 
 
3. Primary Residence, [address omitted] ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
4 
 joint property.”  Husband and Wife were married the same day 
they signed the PMA by an officiant Husband hired using 
Craigslist. 
 
 Husband and Wife’s only child together was born in 
Honolulu in May 2015.  Both spouses acknowledged that there was 
discord in the home before and after the child’s birth, and the 
police came to the couple’s home several times.  Each spouse 
alleged physical abuse at the hands of the other.  Wife also 
alleged that Husband abused her emotionally and financially.  
During the marriage, Wife and the minor child spent 
approximately six months in Texas over the course of three 
separate trips, residing with Wife’s aunt, D.D.  Husband filed for divorce on August 25, 2016, while Wife was in Texas.  On 
September 22, 2016, Husband petitioned for a TRO on behalf of 
himself, their child, and M.F.O., Husband’s teenage son from a 
prior marriage; the TRO was granted.
2  Wife returned to Hawai‘ i 
                                                 
2  Husband’s petition alleges the following instances of abuse, rephrased 
for clarity: 
 
(1) On May 19, 2016, Wife bit Husband.  
 
(2) In July 2016, Wife was “acting violent” toward Husband while he was 
confined to bed recovering from a stroke at the Rehabilitation Hospital of 
the Pacific; Wife was banned from the hospital. 
 (3) In late July 2016, Husband was “forced to flee” his house because 
of Wife’s actions. 
 (4) On September 14, 2016, Wife sent Husband an email wishing him “ill 
will.” 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
5 
 from Texas on September 29, 2016, and was served with the TRO at 
the airport, where Husband took custody of the child. 
 On 
November 2, 2016, Husband stipulated to visitation between Wife and the minor child, removing the child from the TRO.   
  The family court
3 appointed Dr. Reneau Kennedy as a 
custody evaluator tasked with investigating the family’s 
situation and making a custody recommendation.  Dr. Kennedy 
submitted a 112-page report. 
 1.  Trial Testimony 
  a.  Dr. Reneau Kennedy
 
  Dr. Kennedy is a licensed psychologist in Hawai‘ i.  Dr. 
Kennedy’s custody evaluation report was entered into evidence.  She concluded that Husband “has a better sense of what the child 
needs and is focused on the child’s best interest.”  Further, 
Dr. Kennedy stated, “[T]here is a question in my mind . . . 
whether mother does have capacities that really focus on the best interest from a legal perspective[.]”  Dr. Kennedy stated 
that she relied on interviews with the parents, the parents’ 
contacts, collateral data from subjects, and documents provided 
to her.  Her ultimate recommendation was an 80/20 custody split 
in Husband’s favor.
   
                                                 
3  The Honorable Paul T. Murakami and the Honorable Kevin T. Morikone 
presided over the proceedings in family court. Judge Morikone presided over 
the trial. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
6 
   Dr. Kennedy testified that he
r report included 
information from neighbors and others indicating that Wife had, 
at times, left the minor child in the house alone for up to two 
hours at a time while she allegedly met with other men.  Dr. 
Kennedy opined that, possibly as a result of being left alone, the child was “not on course” developmentally.  Placement in a 
special program brought the child up to speed, but Dr. Kennedy 
indicated Wife was resistant to the program.   
  Dr. Kennedy also testified that, according to the 
child’s preschool teacher, the child’s demeanor differed based 
on which parent dropped him off: with Wife, the child was 
“clingy,” “preverbal,” and “often in diapers”; with Husband, the child “act[ed] age appropriate[ly].”  Additionally, Wife 
sometimes kept the child home from school on the days she had 
custody, which Dr. Kennedy viewed as a failure to prioritize the 
child’s education.   
  Regarding Wife’s immigration status, Dr. Kennedy 
stated that Wife’s “green card is pending based on her [Violence 
Against Women Act] claim.”  Dr. Kennedy’s report states that in 
June 2018, Wife received a notice from United States Citizenship 
and Immigration Services (USCIS) that she was granted “deferred” action, giving her case “lower priority for removal” until ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
7 
 September 14, 2019.4   
  Dr. Kennedy testified that she visited the residence 
of Wife and her boyfriend, S.A., to observe them with the child.  
Dr. Kennedy also separately interviewed S.A. in her home office.   
  On cross-examination, Dr. Kennedy testified that, although she interviewed J.D. on July 10, 2018, the notes from 
that interview were mistakenly omitted from her report.  Dr. 
Kennedy indicated that J.D. acknowledged that Wife had several 
extramarital affairs.  In addition, Dr. Kennedy stated that J.D. 
said negative things about Husband.   
  The following exchange occurred between Wife’s counsel 
and Dr. Kennedy: 
Q So, Dr. Kennedy, when you talked to mom about her 
concerns about father, what was one of the biggest concerns 
she said? 
 
A I’ll have to look. 
 Q You don’t know off the top of your head what mother’s 
biggest concern about father is? 
 
A No. 
 Q Why not? 
 
A Because there are multiple concerns -- 
 Q Okay. Give me the top two –- 
 
A And they are documented in my report. 
 Q Top 3? 
 A Well –- 
 
Q You don’t know any of them, do you? 
                                                 
4  The record indicates that Wife received her green card on February 8, 
2019.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
8 
  
A -- if I can refresh my memory? 
 . . . . 
 
Q
 It’s very clear that you said “The following concerns 
about custody and parenting issues,” the very first one you listed is that “He’s an alcoholic with a temper”; isn’t 
that right?  
A That’s what the report says. 
 
. . . . 
 
Q
 Okay.  Now in your interview with father –- all 
right.  Now I’m gonna give you time on this one –- you show 
me one point, one point where you confronted him or asked him about his consumption of alcohol.  And I’ll wait ‘cause 
I am going to assert you never brought up the alcoholism with father ‘cause it’s not – 
 . . . . 
 A
 I haven’t written that in my report -– 
 
Q Thank you. 
 
. . . . 
 
A
 I had a discussion with father about his drinking. 
 Q Okay. How come that’s not in your report when you 
talk about what you talked about with father then?  A Simply because of all of the other information, all 
the other collaterals told me about the absence of father’s 
alcohol abuse -- 
 
Q But -- 
 
A -- and his denial that he is an alcoholic. 
 Q Did he deny it in your report?  Show us where. 
 
A I have not put that in my report. 
 Q So why are you saying he has denied he’s an alcoholic 
when it’s not in this report?  A I don’t put every word of my interviews with people 
in my reports.  
Q Right.  But this is a concern that mother had that’s 
one -- the first one listed.  Don’t you think that’s worth 
addressing later on?  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
9 
 A And I did with multiple people -- 
 
Q Right. 
 
A -- who said that father is not an alcoholic. 
 
. . . . 
 
Q
 Isn’t it true, ma’am, that she specifically told you 
he would drink when he got home and he wouldn’t stop ‘til he passed out at night and this happened almost every 
night?  Isn’t that what she told you? 
 
A Never. 
 
Q She never told you that? 
 A That is not her -- her information that she provided 
to me. 
 
  Dr. Kennedy went on to testify on cross-examination 
that she did not speak with any of Wife’s other aunts because 
Wife did not list any others for Dr. Kennedy to interview.     Wife’s counsel also cross-examined Dr. Kennedy with 
respect to an email that Husband sent to Wife on September 28, 
2018 – after the court had granted him the TRO, but before Wife 
came back to Hawai‘ i from Texas – promising to help Wife 
transition to living on her own.
5  Dr. Kennedy testified that she 
                                                 
5  Wife argues that this email was designed to “lure” her into returning 
to Hawai‘ i so that H usband could serve her with the TRO and remove the child 
from her care.  It stated that Husband will let Wife have the master bedroom 
in his house for a few days, after which she can move into a small bedroom in 
the house while she looks for her own place.  It appears from the email that Wife told Husband that she would like to stay with him for “two month[s] max” 
so she has time to establish other living arrangements.  The email also 
stated that Wife could use Husband’s credit card during the transition and 
that Husband hired a nanny who would start the next week if Wife had job 
interviews.   
 
 Husband testified on cross- examination that he sent the email to Wife 
because he was not yet sure if he wanted to serve her with the TRO, and he thought the TRO would be effective only after service.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
10 
 believed Husband meant to follow through on the promises in his 
email, notwithstanding that the TRO he had already obtained 
would preclude him from doing so.   
 
 With respect to the status quo of the custody 
arrangements, on cross-examination, Dr. Kennedy and Husband’s 
counsel had the following exchange: 
Q What does mother describe the current time- share 
schedule as? 
 A I don’t know.  I have not been in contact with these 
folks for months.  
Q What was it when you were in contact with them, 
ma’am? 
 
A Um, she was getting the child on the weekends through 
Mondays.  
Q You sure? ‘Cause let me read you what you wrote. 
 
A Okay. Well, that’s fine. 
 Q Thank you.  “Mother describes the current time-
sharing schedule as sharing half custody.  Week 1, mother 
has [the child] from Friday to Monday; Week 2, from Friday 
to Tuesday on a rotating schedule. . . .  So does that 
refresh your recollection as to what she said the current 
time-sharing was? 
 
. . . . 
 
A
 I am saying that she did not have half custody. 
 
. . . . 
 Q
 Friday to Monday and Friday to Tuesday.  Friday, 
Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, that’s five days out of the week, isn’t it? 
 
. . . . 
 A
 [N]o because he goes to school on Friday and he’s 
supposed to be in school on Mondays and Tuesdays.  
. . . . 
 Q
 So my point is here you’re a little generous with 
your time with father because you included all the time ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
11 
 that the child’s in school as time with father, yeah? 
 
A Correct. 
 
Q Okay.  And the only time you included with mother is 
when he’s not in school?  
A Correct. 
 
  b.  Husband 
  When directly examined about the PMA, Husband 
contended that he first showed a “general format[]” PMA to Wife 
and told her that “all men in the west” get PMAs.  Husband 
testified that Wife can “read English well” and understood the 
document.   
  Husband claimed that he presented Wife with the PMA 
“at least two weeks before” she signed it.  When asked whether 
Wife appeared to have reservations about the PMA, Husband 
contended that he modified the agreement to account for Wife’s 
concerns about ownership of the equity in Husband’s home.  Additionally, Husband contended that he encouraged Wife to have 
the document reviewed by a lawyer and gave her $300 and a credit 
card to do so.   
  Husband testified that both he and Wife signed the PMA 
on August 13, 2014 at approximately 9:00 a.m. in front of a 
notary.  Husband testified that Wife appeared comfortable when 
she signed the document and that he had done nothing prior to give her the belief that she must sign the PMA.  The parties 
were legally married that same day around 4:30 p.m.  According ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
12 
 to Husband, Wife requested the August 13 wedding date because 
she wanted to “get it over with” and the faster they got 
married, the faster they could apply for her green card and work 
per
mit.  The parties had originally planned to get married in 
Las Vegas in September; Husband testified that he had pre-paid a 
vacation package.   
  Husband denied having ever had a drinking problem.  
With respect to Husband’s claims of Wife’s abuse, Husband 
recounted a day in May 2016 – which was also reflected in 
Husband’s TRO petition – when Wife found emails from a dating 
site in Husband’s email inbox and allegedly attacked Husband 
while he was in the shower with their child.     Husband recounted a series of verbal altercations with 
Wife, allegedly culminating in Wife hitting him in the face and 
on the side of the head five to ten times on the morning of 
July 12, 2016.  Husband asserted that he then pushed Wife off of 
him, but that about half an hour later, he began to vomit and 
dry heave.  Husband recounted that he called 911 a few hours 
later and was picked up by an ambulance and taken to Pali Momi 
hospital, where he stayed for four to five days.  Husband 
contends that Dr. Sydney Lee conducted an MRI and told him that he had suffered a stroke caused by trauma to his vestibular 
artery in his neck, the same area where Wife struck him on 
July 12.  Husband testified that he obtained a TRO against Wife ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
13 
 on November 2, 2016.6   
On cross examination, Husband testified that he did 
not offer Wife a waiver of independent professional advice that 
would confirm that she knew she could have her own attorney 
review the PMA.  Husband sat with Wife in their home while she read the PMA to herself.  Additionally, Husband conceded that he 
told Wife he would not marry her unless she signed the PMA.  
Husband also admitted that the notary had recorded the PMA 
signing time as 2:45-2:50 p.m., which was closer to the wedding 
ceremony than the 9:00 a.m. time stated.   
  c.  J.D.  
  J.D. spoke about her interview with Dr. Kennedy, 
stating that she felt Dr. Kennedy was looking for bad things 
about Wife and good things about Husband.  J.D. testified that 
she told Dr. Kennedy that Husband drinks too much and that Wife 
is a capable parent.  J.D. stated that Dr. Kennedy did not 
specifically ask J.D. to speak poorly about Wife, but did ask 
J.D. if she knew about Wife’s affairs with other men.   
  d.  S.A. 
  S.A. testified that he met Wife through a mutual 
friend on O‘ ahu in October 2016.  They began dating in February 
                                                 
6  The TRO petition does not include Husband’s allegation that Wife hit 
him and caused him to have a stroke.   In addition, Dr. Kennedy’s report 
stated that the alleged hitting occurred on July 11, 2016, reflecting a 
discrepancy between the report and Husband’s testimony at trial. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
14 
 2017 and moved in together in March 2017.  S.A. testified that 
Wife’s English “wasn’t that good” when he met her and that it 
had “gotten a lot better” since.   
 
 S.A. testified that Wife is not abusive; after living 
together for almost two years, he had never seen her get angry 
or yell.  Further, S.A. stated that Wife’s child was her first 
priority.   
  S.A. stated that Dr. Kennedy interviewed him at her 
home office for approximately an hour and a half but felt that 
she “wasn’t listening” to him.  He told Dr. Kennedy that Wife is 
an “amazing” mother.  Dr. Kennedy allegedly told S.A. that Wife 
was an illegal alien who “has been asked multiple times to leave the country.”  When S.A. reviewed Dr. Kennedy’s final report, he 
noticed that it did not contain notes from his interview.  S.A. 
testified that Dr. Kennedy’s statement in her report that this 
was his first experience with young children was false.   
  e.  Wife
7 
  Wife testified that when she first met Husband, J.D. 
translated for them.  Wife stated that she started learning 
English in high school but had no English-speaking people to 
practice with.  When communicating with Husband in writing before coming to the United States, Wife used Google Translate.   
                                                 
7  Wife testified almost entirely in English, with an interpreter standing 
by who stepped in to assist when Wife asked for help.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
15 
  
 Wife asserted that her child’s perceived developmental 
delays were the result of her calling him by his middle name and 
speaking to him in Vietnamese; thus, a test in English that 
calls him by his first name would elicit no response.   
  Wife stated that Husband arranged for the couple to 
marry on August 13, 2014.  Husband first gave Wife the PMA 
around 3:00 that day, while they were at the mall.  Wife further 
testified as follows: 
Q You were in a mall with [Husband] and he gave you – 
what happened? Describe it to the judge. 
 
A So, uh, we walk around the mall and the guy called.  
He showed up.  And [Husband] asked me to, um, sign on the 
paperwork. 
 
Q Did you read the agreement before you signed it? 
 A No. 
 
Q Did you read any of the agreement? 
 A No. 
 
Q Did [Husband] read it for you? 
 A No. 
 Q Did [Husband] explain it to you? 
 
A He told me that, uh, this is the prenup that I have 
to sign.  I ask him what is the prenup and he told me that all rich western men have to do this before marriage. 
 Q Did he tell you what it would mean if you signed it? 
 A He told me that is – it’s – it’s mean that you don’t 
touch my property if we divorce.  And – and – and I ask – 
and I told him that I am not sure about it.  And he told me that – he ask me if I’m planning on divorce him and I told 
him no.  And he told me, “Then why you even care?  But if you don’t sign it now, then I’ll kick you back Vietnam.”  
 
  
According to Wife, Husband did not tell her that she 
could have the PMA reviewed by her own attorney.  Wife testified ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
16 
 that she was afraid of being sent back to Vietnam because she 
had no place or belongings to return to, and it 
would be 
shameful to be sent back.   The parties married “15 minutes or 
half an hour” after signing the PMA.  Wife stated that Husband 
did not give her a copy of the PMA in Vietnam, and even if he had, she would not have understood it.   
  Wife stated that she felt Dr. Kennedy’s report was 
“very unfair” because it was “very one-sided and far from the truth,” omitted important information, and had incorrect 
information about dates of events.  In addition, Wife testified 
that she sent Dr. Kennedy a list of individuals to interview, 
including D.D., but Dr. Kennedy did not contact D.D.     Wife was served with the TRO when she and the child 
returned to Honolulu from Texas.  Police took the child from her and gave her an envelope with two hundred dollars and a credit 
card inside.   
  Wife stated that she knew what an agreement was 
generally but did not understand that the PMA was an agreement.  
She felt she had no choice but to sign it because she did not 
want to return to Vietnam and needed medical insurance for her 
pregnancy.     With respect to her alleged pregnancy, Wife stated 
that she informed Husband as soon as she found out, sometime in 
August 2014.  Wife also stated that she saw a doctor, Dr. Chang, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
17 
 after she miscarried, while Husband was i
n Guam for work; she 
told Dr. Chang that the miscarriage was due to abuse from 
Husband.  However, Wife admitted that her statement was not in 
Dr. Chang’s notes.  Wife said that Dr. Chang told her that he 
would only put her report in his notes if she called the police.  Because Wife did not want to involve the police, she did not ask 
Dr. Chang to include the abuse allegation in his notes.   
  Wife denied both hitting Husband in the neck on the 
morning of his stroke and hitting him at the Rehab Hospital.  
She also provided a different account of why she bit Husband on 
the arm in May 2015: Wife stated that Husband was not in the 
shower with their child and that she bit Husband to defend herself after he threw her on the ground and punched her on the 
left clavicle.  Wife visited a psychologist soon after, who 
noticed the bruise and asked if she called the police.  When 
Wife indicated she had not, the psychologist took a photo of the 
bruise.   
Wife also provided an alternate account of the morning 
of Husband’s stroke.  Wife said that Husband began drinking at 
5:00 p.m. the day before, despite admitting that his doctor told 
him not to drink.  Wife asked him to stop drinking, but he continued.  According to Wife, Husband brought up Wife’s past 
affairs, and they argued until about midnight, Husband drinking 
the entire time.  They went to bed, and Husband told Wife that ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
18 
 he had sex with 18-year-old twins in Thailand.  Wife testified 
that she asked Husband to stop talking about it, but he 
continued, in detail, about his sexual encounters with other 
women.  Wife then told him, “If you say it again, I’m gonna slap 
your mouth.”  According to Wife, Husband continued, so she slapped him on the lips with an open hand.  Around 1:00 a.m., 
Wife walked outside for about fifteen minutes and came back in.  
At this point, Wife alleges that Husband raped her.  They fell 
asleep until 8:00 a.m., when Husband began to show symptoms of 
the stroke.  Wife acknowledged that Husband took his ex-wife to 
the military base around 10:00 p.m. the night before the stroke 
and stated that, although Husband was drunk, military police did not stop him.   
 
 Wife confirmed that she regularly kept the child home 
from school on the Mondays she had custody because she believed that strengthening their bond was more important.  After her 
interview with Dr. Kennedy, in which Dr. Kennedy told her that 
it was better for the child to go to school, Wife began 
following that recommendation.   
2.  Family Court’s FOFs and COLs 
  The family court’s order contained the following 
findings of fact (FOFs), which are at issue in Wife’s 
application for certiorari: 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
19  
  15. After being introduced, Plaintiff and Defendant 
communicated with each other by e- mail and
 text message.  
Said communications were in the English language. 
  16. Defendant learned English as a second language in 
elementary school and through high school.  Although a second language, Defendant understood English. 
 . . . . 
 
 19. While the parties
 were in Thailand, the parties 
discussed the possibility of marriage and Plaintiff raised the issue of a [PMA] and that Defendant would be required 
to execute a PMA before the parties would marry. 
 . . . . 
  28.
 A few weeks prior to the execution of the PMA, 
Plaintiff provided a copy of the PMA to Defendant and 
Defendant reviewed the same.  The parties discussed the 
content of the PMA and the portions that Defendant did not 
like. 
 
 29. 
Plaintiff made changes to the initial draft of 
the PMA to address Defendant’s concerns. 
 
 30. 
There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
Defendant did not voluntarily execute the PMA.  
. . . . 
 
 32.
 There was no credible or reliable evidence to 
support the assertion that Defendant did not understand the terms of the PMA.
 
 
 33. There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
the terms of the PMA [were] unconscionable at the time of the execution of the PMA. 
  34.
 There was no credible or reliable evidence that 
the terms of the PMA [were] unconscionable at the time of trial. 
 
. . . . 
 
 43. The Court found Dr. Kennedy’s report and 
testimony credible and persuasive.  Notwithstanding[,] however, approximately six (6) months elapsed between the 
filing of the report and the completion of trial.
 
 
. . . .  
 45. Father took a 
pro-active approach with respect to 
the child’s education and Mother did not. 
. . .
 . ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
20       (continued . . .) 
  
 48. Although domestic violence between the parties 
were alleged by both sides, Dr. Kennedy[,] through her extensive investigation, believed that Father’s accounts were more credible and the Court agreed with the same. 
 
. . . . 
 
 53. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence 
adduced at trial, the Court found that it is in the best 
interests of the child that the then
[-]existing timesharing 
schedule be modified. 
 
. . . . 
 
 60. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence, 
orders requiring alimony to be paid to either party were precluded by the PMA.
 
 
. . . . 
 
  The family court further entered the following 
conclusions of law (COLs) at issue in Wife’s application for the 
writ of certiorari: 
 6. The terms of the PMA did not violate HRS § 572D-
3.[8] 
                                                 
8  HRS § 572D-3 (2018) states: 
 
(a) Parties to a premarital agreement may contract 
with respect to: 
 
(1)  The rights and obligations of each of the 
parties in any of the property of either or 
both of them whenever and wherever acquired or 
located; 
 
(2)  The right to buy, sell, use, transfer, 
exchange, abandon, lease, consume, expend, 
assign, create a security interest in, 
mortgage, encumber, dispose of, or otherwise 
manage and control property; 
 
(3)  The disposition of property upon separation, 
marital dissolution, death, or the occurrence 
or nonoccurrence of any other event; 
 
(4)  The modification or elimination of spousal 
support; 
 
    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
21 
  
. . . . 
  10. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence, 
the Court did not find that Defendant was forced to execute 
the PMA.  On the contrary, based upon the credible and 
reliable evidence, the Court found that Defendant 
voluntarily executed the PMA. 
 
. . . . 
 
 13. Based upon the reliable and credible evidence, 
the Court found that Husband provided a copy of the PMA to Wife
 a few weeks prior to the execution of the PMA. 
 
. . . . 
 
 20. Based upon the credible and reliable evidence, 
the Court found that neither the terms governing property division, nor the terms eliminating spousal support were 
unconscionable.
 
 
. . . . 
 
 33. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
pre
sented, as well as the relevant factors enumerated in 
HRS 571- 46(b), the Court finds that it is in the best 
interest of the child that Father be awarded primary physical custody of the child, subject to Mother’s visitation rights outlined below. 
 
. . . . 
 
 49. The enforcement of the PMA precludes an award of 
alimony to either party.
 
 
 
                                                 
(5)  The making of a will, trust, or other 
arrangement to carry out the provisions of the 
agreement; 
 (6)  The ownership rights in and disposition of the 
death benefit from a life insurance policy; 
 (7)  The choice of law governing the construction of the agreement; and 
 (8)  Any other matter, including their personal 
rights and obligations, not in violation of 
public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty. 
 
(b) The right of a child to support may not be 
adversely affected by a premarital agreement. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
22 
 B.  
ICA Proceedings 
1.  Wife’s Opening Brief  
  Wife presented ten points of error, consolidated for clarity as follows: 
1.  The family court erred by awarding sole physical 
custody of the minor child to Husband. 
2.  The family court erred by enforcing the PMA, 
rejecting Wife’s contention that she was coerced into signing it or signed under duress. 
3.  The family court erred by failing to require 
Husband to pay child support. 
4.  The family court erred by entering FOFs 15, 16, 
19, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 43, 44, 45, 48, 49, 53, 57, 60, 61, 62, 63, and 64.
9 
5.  The family court erred by entering COLs 6, 10, 
13, 20, 33, 41, 44, 49, 50, and 51. 
6.  The family court erred by declining to admit an 
email between the parties in which Husband admitted to consuming 
“too much” alcohol. 
  We address only arguments Wife made in the ICA that 
relate to her claims on certiorari. 
  Wife first argued that the best interests of the child 
                                                 
9  Concomitantly, Wife contended that the family court erred by declining 
to enter Wife’s proposed FOFs and COLs.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
23 
 required either an award of sole custody to Wife or joint 
custody.  In support of this argument, she pointed out that Dr. 
Kennedy’s report stated that Wife’s ability to stay in the 
United States was one of the important deciding factors.  Since 
Wife has la
wful permanent residence, she argued that this factor 
cuts in her favor.  Wife also contended that Dr. Kennedy did not 
know Wife’s immigration status, and instead “was sure” that Wife 
was illegally present in the United States and would soon leave.  
This conclusion was allegedly without a basis in fact and was 
prejudicial to Wife.   
  According to Wife, Dr. Kennedy reached conclusions 
without knowledge or investigation into the underlying facts.  Specifically, Wife argued that Dr. Kennedy did not include 
Wife’s concerns about Husband’s alcohol use in the custody 
report.  In addition, Wife contended that Dr. Kennedy’s report 
should have addressed the vulnerabilities of female immigrant 
spouses.  Dr. Kennedy’s report also did not include the notes 
from her interview with S.A. or with J.D.  Dr. Kennedy did not 
interview D.D., who lived in Texas, though Wife had asked Dr. 
Kennedy to do so.   
  With respect to the PMA, Wife asserted that Husband 
alone arranged the marriage ceremony, and the PMA was notarized 
an hour before the ceremony.  Wife did not read or understand 
the PMA because English was not her native language, nor was she ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
24 
 informed that she should have her own attorney review the 
agreement.  Instead, Husband allegedly told Wife he would send 
her back to Vietnam if she did not sign the PMA.  Wife argued 
that the facts showed that she signed the PMA involuntarily; the 
family court thus should not have found that it was enforceable.  In support of her contention, Wife cited cases from other 
jurisdictions in which courts found PMAs signed under similar 
circumstances unenforceable.   
 
 Wife alleged that when she and the child returned from 
Texas, Husband lied and misused the TRO process to remove the minor child from Wife’s care.   
2.  Husband’s Answering Brief   
 With respect to the PMA, Husband asserted that he gave 
Wife a copy of the agreement two weeks before she signed it, 
along with $300 to pay a lawyer to review it.  Wife allegedly 
said that she didn’t need a lawyer’s opinion and asked Husband 
to make one change to the agreement to “contribute his 
premarital equity to any joint properties the parties were to 
purchase,” which Husband did.  Husband maintained that Wife was 
fluent in English and communicated with her attorney and with 
Husband in English.    3.  Wife’s Reply Brief 
 Wife argued that Husband’s AB ignored the mistakes and 
bias of the custody evaluator and failed to respond to Wife’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
25 . . . . 
 arguments that Husband abused the TRO process.  
 
 4.  The ICA’s Memorandum Opinion 
  The ICA concluded that each challenged FOF relating to 
child custody was supported by substantial evidence in the 
record, and that the circuit court properly considered the relevant factors set forth in HRS § 571-46 (2018)
10 to determine 
                                                 
10  HRS § 571- 46 (2018) states in relevant part: 
 
(a) In actions for divorce . . . where there is at 
issue a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the 
court . . . may make an order for the custody of the minor 
child as may seem necessary or proper.  In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided by the following 
standards, considerations, and procedures: 
 
(1)  Custody should be awarded to either parent or to both parents according to the best interests of 
the child, and the court also may consider 
frequent, continuing, and meaningful contact of 
each parent with the child unless the court 
finds that a parent is unable to act in the best 
interest of the child; 
 
. . . . 
 (4) 
 Whenever good cause appears therefor, the court 
may require an investigation and report concerning the care, welfare, and custody of any 
minor child of the parties.  When so directed by 
the court, investigators or professional 
personnel attached to or assisting the court, 
hereinafter referred to as child custody evaluators, shall make investigations and 
reports that shall be made available to all 
interested parties and counsel before hearing, 
and the reports may be received in evidence[.] 
 
. . . . 
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest
 
of the child under this section, the court shall consider, but not be limited to, the following: 
 
 
 
         (continued . . .) 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
26       (continued . . .) 
 the best interest of the minor child.  The ICA quoted FOFs 39-
52, concluding that those FOFs supported the family court’s 11
                                                 
(2)  Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a 
child by a parent; 
 (3)  The overall quality of the parent- child 
relationship; 
 
(4)  The history of caregiving or parenting by each 
parent prior and subsequent to a marital or 
other type of separation; 
 
. . . . 
 
(6)
  The physical health needs of the child; 
 
(7)  The emotional needs of the child; 
 
(8)  The safety needs of the child; 
 (9)  The educational needs of the child; 
 
(10)  The child’s need for relationships with siblings; 
 
. . . . 
 
(12)  Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they 
separate the child’s needs from the 
parent’s 
needs; 
 
. . . . 
 
(15)  The areas and levels of conflict present within 
the family[.]
 
 
11  These FOFs are as follows: 
 
39. On or about October 16, 2017, the Honorable Dyan 
M. Medeiros ordered that Reneau Kennedy, Ed.D. serve a[s] 
custody evaluator in this case. 
 
40. Dr. Kennedy engaged in a comprehensive 
investigation and provided a 112- page report which was 
filed on July 27, 2018[,] and received into evidence as 
Plaintiff’s Exhibit “6”. 
 
41. Dr. Kennedy also provided testimony and was 
subject to cross- examination during the trial. 
 
 
    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
27 
 decision to award Husband sole physical custody of the minor 
child.  
 
 With respect to the PMA, the ICA again quoted the 
family court’s FOFs and concluded that “[t]he family court’s 
                                                 
42. Dr. Kennedy provided her findings and 
recommendations in her report and also testified to the 
same. 
 
43. The Court found Dr. Kennedy’s report and 
testimony credible and persuasive.  Notwithstanding 
however, approximately six (6) months elapsed between the filing of the report and the completion of trial. 
 
44. Dr. Kennedy identified that the child had 
developmental delays in several areas and that the Department of Health Services provided support and services 
to the child which helped to compensate for said delays. 
 
45. Father took a pro- active approach with respect to 
the child’s education and Mother did not. 
 
46. After some time, however, it appears that Mother 
became more supportive of the child’s educational needs. 
 
47. Although initially, Mother frequently took the 
child to school late or failed to take the child to school, 
it appeared to the Court that Mother addressed the issue. 
 
48. Although domestic violence between the parties 
were alleged by both sides, Dr. Kennedy through her 
extensive investigation, believed that Father’s accounts 
were [] more credible and the Court agreed with the same. 
 
49. There was no credible evidence that either party 
was a danger to the child or neglected the child. 
 
50. It appeared to the Court that both parties had a 
strong and healthy relationship with the child. 
 
51. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
adduced at trial, the Court found that it is in the child’s 
best interests that Mother and Father share joint legal 
custody except for educational decisions. 
 
52. Based on the credible and reliable evidence 
adduced at trial, the Court found that it is in the best 
interests of the child that Father be awarded sole physical 
custody of the child subject to the liberal visitation set 
forth in the Decision and Order. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
28 
 conclusions of law are supported by the family court’s [FOFs] 
and reflect an application of the correct rule of law.”  
 
C.  Supreme Court Proceedings   Wife presented three points of error in her 
application for the writ of certiorari, which we construe as follows: 
I. The family court erred in finding that the PMA was 
enforceable in spite of evidence that Wife signed it 
involuntarily. 
 
II. The family court erred in relying on the Custody 
Evaluator’s biased report recommending awarding Husband 
sole custody of the minor child. 
 III. The family court erred in failing to find that Husband 
abused the TRO process in order to gain an advantage in a 
custody dispute. 
 
  Wife’s contentions in her certiorari application 
regarding the PMA’s execution are the same as those in her 
opening brief.  As to Dr. Kennedy’s bias, Wife’s application 
cites the following instances of alleged unfairness in the 
report: (1) the opinion that Wife’s immigration status was an 
important factor in determining the best interests of the child 
and the statement that Wife was subject to deportation; (2) the 
absence of notes from the custody evaluator’s interviews with 
S.A. and J.D.; (3) the custody evaluator’s belief that the child 
was only with Wife on the weekends; (4) the custody evaluator’s need to refresh her recollection on the stand by reading her 
report in order to answer Wife’s counsel’s questions about 
Wife’s “concerns” about Husband; (5) the absence of analysis of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
29 
 Husband’s alleged misuse of the TRO process; (6) the absence of 
questions to Husband about his alcohol use; and (7) the custody 
evaluator’s failure to interview D.D.  As to her third point of 
error, Wife repeats her opening brief’s arguments. 
 
 Husband did not file a response. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A.  Construction of a Contract 
   In Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawai‘ i 29, 332 P.3d 631 
(2014), we stated: 
The construction and legal effect to be given a contract is 
a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court.  
Unconscionability is a question of law this court reviews 
de novo.  Whether particular circumstances are sufficient 
to constitute duress is a question of law, although the 
existence of those circumstances is a question of fact. 
 
Id. at 37-38, 332 P.3d at 639-40 (quotation marks, elipsis, 
brackets and citations omitted). 
B.  Family Court’s FOFs 
   We have held: 
The family court’s FOFs are reviewed on appeal under the 
clearly erroneous standard.  A FOF is clearly erroneous 
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support 
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left 
with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made.  Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is 
of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  
In re Doe, 95 Hawai‘ i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) 
(quotation marks, ellipsis and citations omitted). 
   A mixed question of law and fact is likewise reviewed 
under the clearly erroneous standard.  Id. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
30 
 C.  Family Court’s COLs 
  “[T]he family court’s COLs are reviewed on appeal de 
novo[.]”  Id. 
IV.  DISCUSSION 
A.  The Family Court Did Not Err in Finding that the PMA was 
Enforceable 
 
   A PMA is enforceable unless (1) execution of the 
agreement was involuntary, or (2) the agreement was 
unconscionable when executed, and “before execution of the 
agreement,” the party against whom enforcement is sought: 
(A) Was not provided a fair and reasonable disclosure of 
the property or financial obligations of the other party; 
 (B) Did not voluntarily and expressly waive, in writing, 
any right to disclosure of the property or financial 
obligations of the other party beyond the disclosure 
provided; and 
 (C) Did not have, or reasonably could not have had, an 
adequate knowledge of the property or financial obligations 
of the other party. 
 
HRS § 572D-6(a). 
   Wife’s primary argument is that she did not enter into 
the PMA voluntarily.  Nonetheless, we discuss both 
involuntariness and unconscionability below because her brief 
could be construed to raise unconscionability as well. 
1. The family court did not clearly err in its factual 
findings that Wife voluntarily entered into the PMA   
  Given the conflicting testimony on the circumstances 
under which the parties executed the PMA, there was substantial 
evidence in the record to support the family court’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
31 
 determination that Wife did not prove that she involuntarily 
entered into the agreement.  In other words, the family court, 
judging the demeanor and credibility of the witnesses, found 
Husband credible, and Husband’s testimony supports the trial 
court’s ultimate conclusion on the question of voluntariness.  Thus, we are not left with a “definite and firm conviction” that 
the family court made a mistake. 
2.  
The family court’s factual findings supported its 
conclusion of law that Wife did not involuntarily execute the PMA 
 
  This court has not considered voluntariness in the 
context of a PMA.  However, the ICA did so in Chen v. 
Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai‘ i 346, 357, 279 P.3d 11, 22 (App. 2012), in 
which the ICA stated, “Involuntariness is shown by evidence of 
duress, coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstance 
indicating lack of free will or voluntariness.”  (Quotation 
marks omitted.)  See Balogh, 134 Hawai‘ i at 49, 332 P.3d at 651 
(applying the ICA’s formulation of involuntariness in Chen to 
the question of enforceability of a post-marital agreement).  
Given the substantial evidence supporting the family court’s 
factual findings, its conclusion of law that Wife did not prove 
she involuntarily signed the PMA was not erroneous under the 
principles articulated in Chen.  Nevertheless, we take the 
opportunity to provide more specific guidance for family courts to use in determining whether a PMA was involuntarily entered ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
32 
 into.  We find the factors set forth in In re Bonds, 5 P.3d 815 
(Cal. 2000), compelling, and we adopt those factors under the 
laws of our state. 
  In Bonds, the California Supreme Court upheld a PMA 
between Husband (baseball player Barry Bonds) and Wife, a Swedish citizen whose first language was not English.  The 
agreement was signed the day before the wedding, and Wife 
testified that she did not know until she arrived at Husband’s 
lawyer’s office that she was there to execute a PMA.  Id. at 
818.  The court held that “[i]n determining the voluntariness of a premarital agreement, a reviewing court should accept such 
factual determinations of the trial court as are supported by substantial evidence.”  Id. at 834.  Because there was 
substantial evidence to support the trial court’s findings that (1) Wife was not subject to any threats and did not express 
reluctance to sign the agreement, (2) the close proximity to the 
wedding was not coercive, and (3) the wedding could have been 
postponed, the court found the PMA enforceable.  Id. at 835.   
  Bonds set forth the following guidance:12 
In considering defenses proffered against enforcement of a 
premarital agreement, the court should consider whether the 
                                                 
12  Although the Bonds factors were adopted in the context of a PMA in 
which one spouse was in the United States on a 90- day visa, California courts 
have used the factors to determine the voluntariness of PMAs outside of this 
specific immigration context, as well.  See, e.g., In re Marriage of Hill & 
Dittmer, 202 Cal. App. 4th 1046 (2011).  Likewise, going forward, courts 
should consider these factors in all cases where the voluntariness of a PMA 
is disputed, regardless of whether a party contends that immigration concerns contributed to the alleged involuntariness of the agreement. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
33 
 evidence indicates coercion or lack of knowledge . . . .  
Specifically, the cases cited in the comment to the 
enforcement provision of the Uniform Act direct 
consideration of the impact upon the parties of such factors as the coercion that may arise from the proximity 
of execution of the agreement to the wedding, or from 
surprise in the presentation of the agreement; the presence 
or absence of independent counsel or of an opportunity to 
consult independent counsel; inequality of bargaining power 
– in some cases indicated by the relative age and 
sophistication of the parties; whether there was full disclosure of assets; and the parties’ understanding of the 
rights being waived under the agreement or at least their 
awareness of the intent of the agreement.  
5 P.3d at 824-25. 
  The Nebraska Supreme Court adopted this language in 
Mamot v. Mamot, 813 N.W.2d 440 (Neb. 2012), as have several 
other state courts.  E.g., In re Marriage of Rudder, 217 P.3d 
183, 191 (Or. Ct. App. 2009); Chaplain v. Chaplain, No. 1301-10-
1, 2011 WL 134104, at *4 (Va. Ct. App. 2011).  California, 
Nebraska, and Oregon, like Hawai‘ i, have adopted the Uniform 
Premarital Agreement Act.  See Uniform Law Commission, 
“Premarital Agreement Act” (1983), https://perma.cc/KW87-
R3Z4?type=image .  The factors set forth in Bonds illustrate 
practical concerns regarding voluntariness and give trial courts 
ample guidance on this important issue.   
  Based on the family court’s FOFs, Wife does not satisfy the Bonds test for unenforceability.  Although the PMA 
was executed the same day as the parties married, the family 
court found that the marriage took place that day at Wife’s 
request, Husband provided a copy of the PMA to Wife a few weeks ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
34 
 prior, Husband edited a provision of the PMA in response to 
Wife’s concerns to make it more favorable to her, and Wife 
understood the intent of the PMA.  In addition, there was no 
evidence that Husband failed to disclose any of his assets.  
Thus, four out of five of the Bonds factors – surprise in the 
presentation of the agreement, bargaining power, full disclosure 
of assets, and awareness of the intent of the agreement - weigh 
in favor of Husband.  As to the fifth Bonds factor, opportunity 
to consult independent counsel, Husband testified that he provided Wife with time and money to hire a lawyer, but she 
declined to do so.  The family court did not enter a specific 
finding of fact on this issue, but the family court judged Husband generally credible.  Thus, the family court’s and ICA’s 
decision on the PMA’s voluntariness was correct. 
 3.  The PMA was not unconscionable   An unconscionable PMA is unenforceable.   
Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one- sidedness 
and unfair surprise.  One- sidedness (i.e., substantive 
unconscionability) means that the agreement leaves a post-
divorce economic situation that is unjustly disproportionate.  Unfair surprise (i.e., procedural 
unconscionability) means that one party did not have full 
and adequate knowledge of the other party’s financial 
condition when the marital agreement was executed.
 
 
Balogh, 134 Hawai‘ i at 41, 332 P.3d at 643 (quotation marks, 
citations and brackets omitted). 
  HRS § 572D-6(a)(2) requires that a party prove both 
substantive and procedural unconscionability in order to avoid ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
35       (continued . . .) 
 enforcement of a PMA.  Here, the PMA was neither substantively 
nor procedurally unconscionable.  
As to substantive unconscionability, it appears that 
the agreement was not “unjustly disproportionate.”  The 
agreement preserved for each party the assets and liabilities with which they entered the marriage and provided that any 
assets or liabilities acquired during the marriage would be 
joint property, and it released both parties from alimony or 
support obligations.
13  These terms do not rise to the level of 
substantive unconscionability.  The applicable statute specifically permits PMAs providing for “modification or 
elimination of spousal support,” and “disposition of property upon . . . marital dissolution.”  HRS § 572D-3(a)(3)-(4).  
Moreover, Wife has not established that, based on the statutory 
factors in HRS § 580-47 (2018),
14 she would have been awarded 
                                                 
13  The agreement also provided that, if the parties were still married at 
the time of Husband’s death, Wife would receive 100% of Husband’s Thrift 
Savings Plan benefit and life insurance policies, so long as all of Husband’s 
dependent children were over age 22.  If any dependent children were under age 22 at the time of Husband’s death, the benefit would be split between 
Wife and the children in equal shares.  Further, the agreement expresses 
Husband’s intent to will “all previously acquired real estate and future real estate acquired jointly to the Wife at time of his death.”   
 
14  HRS § 580- 47 states in relevant part: 
 
In addition to any other relevant factors considered, 
the court, in ordering spousal support and maintenance, 
shall consider the following factors:  
(1)  Financial resources of the parties; 
 
    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
36 
 spousal support absent the PMA.
    
  As to procedural unconscionability, crediting 
Husband’s account of events as the family court did, the PMA was 
not procedurally unconscionable.  According to the testimony 
that the family court found credible, Wife had the opportunity to review the PMA, have independent counsel review it (though 
she chose not to), and negotiate with Husband for more favorable 
terms.  There is no evidence that the family court found 
                                                 
(2)  Ability of the party seeking support and 
maintenance to meet his or her needs 
independently; 
 (3)  Duration of the marriage; 
 
(4)  Standard of living established during the 
marriage; 
 (5)  Age of the parties; 
 
(6)  Physical and emotional condition of the parties; 
 (7)  Usual occupation of the parties during the 
marriage; 
 
(8)  Vocational skills and employability of the party 
seeking support and maintenance; 
 (9)  Needs of the parties; 
 
(10)  Custodial and child support responsibilities; 
 (11)  Ability of the party from whom support and 
maintenance is sought to meet his or her own 
needs while meeting the needs of the party seeking support and maintenance; 
 (12)  Other factors which measure the financial 
condition in which the parties will be left as 
the result of the action under which the determination of maintenance is made; and 
 (13)  Probable duration of the need of the party 
seeking support and maintenance.
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
37 
 credible that would indicate Wife did not have full knowledge – 
or the chance to obtain full knowledge – of Husband’s financial 
situation.  Schedule A1, attached to the PMA, lists Husband’s 
assets, and Wife has not argued that the list is incomplete.  
Hence, the PMA was not unconscionable. 
B.  
The Family Court Did Not Err by Considering the Custody 
Evaluator’s Report 
 
  Pursuant to HRS § 571-46(4), custody evaluators’ 
reports “may be received in evidence if no objection is made and, if objection is made, may be received in evidence; provided 
the person or persons responsible for the report are available 
for cross-examination[.]”  A custody evaluator’s expert opinion 
is treated as evidence, and the family court as factfinder is 
permitted to assign weight to that opinion based on its 
credibility assessment.  See Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai‘ i 41, 
50-51, 137 P.3d 355, 364-65 (2006) (“Inasmuch as the family 
court accorded weight to certain witnesses over others and those 
witnesses [including the custody evaluator] provided evidence 
that the relocation would benefit the children, the ICA did not 
err in upholding the family court’s findings and conclusions regarding the best interests of the children.”); see also In re 
Doe, 95 Hawai‘ i 183, 197, 20 P.3d 616, 630 (2001); cf. D.J. v. 
C.J., 147 Hawai‘ i 2, 22, 464 P.3d 790, 810 (2020) (arguing that 
the family court erred in considering a custody evaluator’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
38 
 report that omitted arguably relevant information went to the 
report’s weight, not its admissibility). 
 
 Counsel for Wife cross-examined Dr. Kennedy with 
respect to each of the inconsistencies and errors Wife raises in her certiorari application.  S.A. and J.D., the two people whose interviews were omitted from Dr. Kennedy’s report, testified at 
trial as to what they told Dr. Kennedy during their interviews.  
Thus, the family court was able to appropriately consider Dr. 
Kennedy’s credibility and the probative value of the report.   C.  The Family Court Did Not Err by Failing to Find that 
Husband Abused the TRO Process to Gain an Advantage in a 
Custody Dispute  
 
  “A parent’s prior [willful] misuse of the protection 
from abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical 
advantage in any proceeding involving the custody determination 
of a minor” is one of the factors that the family court must 
consider in determining the best interests of a child.  HRS 
§ 571-46(b)(16).  Further: 
Such [willful] misuse may be considered only if it is 
established by clear and convincing evidence, and if it is 
further found by clear and convincing evidence that in the 
particular family circumstance the [willful] misuse tends 
to show that, in the future, the parent who engaged in the [willful] misuse will not be able to cooperate successfully 
with the other parent in their shared responsibilities for 
the child.  
HRS § 571-46(b)(16). 
  Husband obtained a TRO against Wife on behalf of the 
minor child, although his petition did not list any instances of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’ S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
39   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
  /s/ Gary W.B. Chang 
 abuse against the minor child.  The child was removed from the 
scope of the TRO at the first hearing on the matter, on 
November 2, 2016, to allow Wife visitation with the child.  Wife 
relied on these facts, along with her contention that Husband 
lied about the instances of abuse he listed on the TRO application, to argue that Husband misused the TRO process to 
gain a tactical advantage. 
 
 This evidence fails to “clear[ly] and convincing[ly]”  
show (1) a willful misuse of the TRO process or (2) that the misuse gave Husband any tactical advantage in the custody 
dispute.  Further, there was no evidence regarding the TRO that 
showed Husband could not cooperate with Wife in the future.  Wife’s third point of error is thus meritless.  
V. CONCLUSION 
 For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the ICA’s 
March 4, 2020 Judgment on Appeal pursuant to its February 6, 
2020 Memorandum Opinion affirming the Decree Granting Absolute 
Divorce and Awarding Child Custody entered by the Family Court 
of the First Circuit on May 20, 2019. 
Michael A. Glenn 
for petitioner   
      
Scot Stuart Brower
for respondent   
  
 
       
      