                                                                 
                                                                 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-13-0003065 06-OCT-2016 09:02 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
KILAKILA 
'O HALEAKALÂ, Petitioner/Appellant-Appellant, 
vs.
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, SUZANNE CASE,1
 in her official capacity as
Chairperson of the Board of Land and Natural Resources, and
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I,
Respondents/Appellees-Appellees. 
SCWC-13-0003065
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-13-0003065; CIV. NO. 12-1-3070)
 
OCTOBER 6, 2016
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA AND McKENNA, JJ.,
WITH McKENNA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY, AND
POLLACK, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY, WITH WHOM WILSON, J.,
JOINS IN PART, AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
1
 State of Hawai 'i Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) 
chairperson Suzanne Case was automatically substituted as a respondent/
appellee-appellee in place of former BLNR chairperson William J. Aila, Jr.,who was sued in his official capacity.  Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1) (2010).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case concerns a conservation district use permit
 
for construction of the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope
 
(ATST) on the island of Maui, in an area at the summit of
 Haleakalâ that was set aside for astronomical observatories in
 1961. Haleakalâ is a site of great cultural and spiritual
 importance to the Native Hawaiian community. It also bears
 scientific significance for astronomical studies, and is a
 popular visitor destination.
 
The Board of Land and Natural Resources (Board or BLNR) 
granted a permit for the University of Hawai' i (UH) to construct 
the ATST.
2 Kilakila ' O Haleakal â (Kilakila), an organization 
“dedicated to the protection of the sacredness of Haleakalâ [,]” 
challenged BLNR’s approval of the permit to construct the ATST. Kilakila appealed to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit and the Intermediate Court of Appeals, and both courts affirmed BLNR’s decision. 
This court granted certiorari review. We conclude that
 
the permit approval process was not procedurally flawed by
 prejudgment because BLNR’s initial permit was voided. Nor was it
 flawed by impermissible ex parte communication because BLNR
 
2
 The ATST has been the subject of much litigation, including 
Kilakila 'O Haleakal â v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 131 Hawai 'i 193, 317 P.3d 27 
(2013) (Kilakila I), Kilakila 'O Haleakal â v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 134 Hawai 'i 86,
332 P.3d 688 (App. 2014), cert. granted, SCWC-13-0000182 (Sept. 12, 2014),
which we are deciding today, and the case at bar. 
2
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
removed the original hearing officer after he communicated with a
 
party, and the BLNR Chairperson’s meeting with non-parties did
 not address the merits of the permit approval process. We
 further conclude that BLNR validly determined that the ATST met
 the applicable permit criteria and was consistent with the
 purposes of the conservation district. 
Accordingly, we conclude that BLNR properly granted the
 
permit and affirm the ICA’s judgment. 
I. Background
 
A.	 Haleakalâ, the Haleakal â High Altitude Observatory, and the
Proposed Advanced Technology Solar Telescope
 
The summit of Haleakalâ has important cultural
 
significance to Native Hawaiians. Cultural assessments performed
 for the ATST determined that the Haleakalâ summit is one of the
 most sacred sites on Maui, and the Haleakalâ  Crater is known as
 
“where the gods live.” The summit was traditionally used by
 Native Hawaiians as a place for religious ceremonies, for prayer
 to the gods, to connect to ancestors, and to bury the dead. 
Native Hawaiians continue to engage in some of these practices at
 the summit. 
The Haleakalâ summit consists of three volcanic cones, 
and all are partially developed. One volcanic cone includes facilities belonging to the County of Maui, the State of Hawai' i, 
and the federal government. The second cone houses Haleakalâ 
3
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
National Park’s popular visitor outlook. In 1961, Hawai' i 
Governor William Quinn set aside 18.166 acres on the third 
volcanic cone, Pu' u Kolekole, as the site of the Haleakalâ High 
Altitude Observatory (HO). Since this designation by Governor Quinn, the site has been used for astronomical observatories and is the only site at Haleakalâ used for these purposes. The HO currently consists of eight research facilities “for advanced studies of astronomy and atmospheric sciences” owned by UH and managed by the UH Institute of Astronomy (UHIfA). 
The HO is located in a conservation district, as
 
categorized by the State Land Use Commission. Land within a
 conservation district is divided into subzones. See HAR § 13-5­
10 (1994). The HO is in a “general subzone,” which seeks to
 “designate open space where specific conservation uses may not be
 defined, but where urban use would be premature.” HAR § 13-5­14(a) (1994). Several types of land use are permitted in the
 general subzone, including astronomical facilities. See HAR
 
§ 13-5-24 (1994) (listing “[a]stronomy facilities under an
 approved management plan” as one of the allowable uses in a
 resource subzone); HAR § 13-5-25 (1994) (stating that “[i]n
 addition to the land uses identified [for general subzones], all
 identified land uses . . . for the protective, limited, and
 resource subzones also apply to the general subzone, unless
 otherwise noted”).
 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Over the past two decades, the proposed ATST was
 
developed through the work of the Association of Universities for
 
Research in Astronomy, the National Solar Observatory, and the
 National Science Foundation. Astronomers and other scientists
 determined that there was a world-wide need for a telescope
 capable of taking high-resolution images of the sun to study its
 solar magnetic fields and its relation to solar energy, sunspots,
 and flares. No current or planned ground-based or space-based
 telescope in the world has this capability. The ATST would
 consist of an 142.7-feet tall telescope observatory structure, a
 support and operations building, a utility building, a parking
 lot, a wastewater treatment plant, and modifications to an
 existing observatory. In 2004, after studying 72 potential
 sites, Haleakalâ was chosen as the best site for the ATST because
 it met or exceeded all requirements. 
B. Application for Conservation District Use Permit
 
The ATST requires a conservation district use permit
 
(CDUP) because the HO is located in a conservation district. On
 
March 1, 2010, UHIfA submitted a conservation district use
 
3
application (CDUA) to BLNR pursuant to HAR § 13-5-31(a)  and HAR
3
 HAR § 13-5-31(a) (1994) details the requirements for a permit
 
application:
 
(1) A draft or final environmental assessment, draft
or final environmental impact statement, or proof of
an exemption or request for an exemption from the
chapter 343, HRS, process, as applicable;
 
(continued...)
 
5
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 13-5-39(a)4. The CDUA provided a range of detailed information
 
about the ATST, including a final environmental impact statement
 
(FEIS) and a management plan (MP). 
1. Final environmental impact statement
 
5
The FEIS  was completed in July 2009 and addressed the
environmental impacts associated with the construction and
 operation of the proposed ATST Project.
6 The impacts were
 
3(...continued)
(2) Associated plans such as location map, site plan,
floor plan, elevations, and landscaping plans drawn to
scale;
 
(3) The proposed land use shall address their
relationship with county general plans and development
plans;
 
(4) Any other information as determined by the
department;
 
(5) Signature of the landowner;
 (6) Applicable fees;
 (7) A minimum of twenty copies (only one original copy
required for site plan approvals) of the application
and all attachments.
 
4 HAR § 13-5-39(a) (1994) states, “Where required, management plans
 
shall be submitted with the board permit application[.]”  A management plan
was required for the ATST because the site is located in a general subzone.
See HAR §§ 13-5-24,-25.
 
5 An environmental impact statement is “an informational document
 
. . . which discloses the environmental effects of a proposed action, effects
of a proposed action on the economic welfare, social welfare, and cultural
practices of the community and State, effects of the economic activities
arising out of the proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse
effects, and alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.”  HRS
 § 343-2 (Supp. 2008). 
6
 The FEIS was completed in accordance with several environmental
 
laws:  (1) the Federal National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Title 42,
U.S.C. § 4321 and 40 CFR Parts 1500-1508, (2) Hawai 'i Environmental Policy Act
(HEPA) HRS § 343 and HAR § 11-200, and (3) BLNR’s requirement for an EIS toobtain a CDUP under HAR § 13-5-31(a)(1).  The National Science Foundation was 
(continued...)
 
6
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“analyzed under three alternatives, two action alternatives
 
located within HO: the Mees Alternative (the Preferred
 Alternative) and the Reber Circle Alternative, and a No-Action
 Alternative.” 
The FEIS analyzed the environmental impacts from the
 
ATST in the following categories: (1) land use and existing
 activities, (2) cultural, historic, and archeological resources,
 (3) biological resources, (4) topography, geology, and soils, (5)
 visual resources and view planes, (6) visitor use and experience,
 (7) water resources, (8) hazardous materials and solid waste, (9)
 infrastructure and utilities, (10) noise, (11) climatology and
 air quality, (12) socioeconomics and environmental justice, (13)
 public services and facilities, and (14) natural hazards.
7
  
Most relevant to this appeal are the FEIS’s conclusions
 
about the impacts on cultural and visual resources from the
 construction and operation of the ATST. 
Regarding the cultural
 
resources category, the FEIS determined: 
Construction and operation of the proposed ATST
Project at either the Preferred Mees or Reber Circle
sites would result in major, adverse, short- and
long-term, direct impacts on the traditional cultural
 
6(...continued)
the l
ead agency responsible for completing the FEIS, and will be funding the
construction of the ATST.
 
7
 The FEIS reported the impacts in each category in several ways. 
The impacts were described as direct, indirect, or cumulative, and categorized
as negligible, minor, moderate, or major.  The FEIS also determined whether
 the impacts were long-term or short-term in duration.  Lastly, the FEIS
considered whether mitigation measures would reduce the duration, intensity,
or scale of the impacts. 
7
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
8
].  No
 resources within the ROI [Region of Influence  
indirect impacts are expected.  Mitigation measures
would be implemented; however, those measures would
not reduce the impact intensity:  impacts would remain
major, adverse, long-term and direct.  
In addition, the FEIS found that “under the No-Action
 
Alternative, there would continue to be major, adverse,
 
long-term, direct impacts to traditional cultural resources.” 
In the visual resources and view planes category, the
 
FEIS analyzed the impacts from two general viewpoint areas: (1)
 land within Haleakalâ National Park and (2) various areas on the
 island of Maui, where the current HO facilities are visible. The
 FEIS determined that from either the preferred Mees site or the
 Reber Circle site, the direct impact on visual resources within
 the Park would be moderate, adverse, and long-term:
 
No mitigation would adequately reduce this impact.
The new structure would be visible to the point of
co-dominance with other nearby structures.  It would
 intensify the already developed appearance in its
immediate surroundings, and would also appear to
increase slightly the amount of horizontal space
occupied by structures in views from within the Park. 
The new structure would not substantially alter the
existing visual character visible in any view. 
Further, the FEIS concluded that from outside the Park,
 
the impact of building the ATST at either the Mees site or the
 
Reber Circle site “would result in minor, adverse and long-term
 impact to visual resources[,]” and therefore “[n]o mitigation
 would be necessary.” 
8
 “Region of Influence” refers to the HO site and surrounding areas,
 
including Haleakal â National Park.
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The FEIS also analyzed each category for cumulative
 
impacts, defined as “impacts from past, present, and reasonably
 
foreseeable future actions within the ROI . . . combined with the
 potential impacts from the proposed ATST Project.” In the
 cultural resources category, the FEIS found that the cumulative
 impacts would be major, adverse, and long-term at either site and
 that implementation of mitigation measures would not reduce these
 impacts. In the visual resources category, the FEIS found that
 the cumulative impacts would be major, adverse, and long-term
 from areas within the Haleakalâ National Park, and negligible,
 adverse, and long-term from other areas on Maui. 
2. Management plan
 
UHIfA submitted a draft MP with its CDUA on March 1,
 
2010, and submitted the final MP to BLNR on June 8, 2010.
9 The
 
MP “is the governing document used for existing and future
 
development at HO.” It “specifies the design and environmental
 criteria that would be followed when implementing development,
 and presents strategies for managing, monitoring, and protecting
 the various natural and cultural resources[.]” 
The Executive Summary section of the MP summarized the
 
strategies offered by UHIfA to protect cultural, historic, and
 
9
 The MP was meant to supersede and replace the management planning
 
policies and practices in UHIfA’s Long Range Development Plan (LRDP) from
January 2005.  The LRDP described the general conditions at the HO site, the
principles behind the current and future scientific projects that UH planned
at the HO site, and the planning process to protect the Haleakal â summit.  
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
archeological resources:
 
Monitoring strategies are presented to ensure the
protection of cultural, historic, and archeological
resources through policies, practices, and procedures
developed in consultation with Native Hawaiian
practitioners, agencies, interested individuals, and
the Maui community, to ensure that historic
preservation concerns are met.  Monitoring strategies
are also presented to prevent introduction of alien
invasive species (AIS), to protect endangered species,
and to educate all workers and contractors as to the
 potential impacts of construction and operations on
the cultural and biological resources.  Monitoring for
construction practices to protect all resources at the
site is described.  Finally, the MP imposes certain
design criteria on new facilities to minimize
inappropriate design elements within the natural
environment at the summit. 
A final environmental assessment (FEA) was completed on
 
October 25, 2010. The FEA examined the anticipated impacts from
 
the MP’s implementation. The purpose of the FEA was to “inform
 the relevant state agencies and the public of the likely
 environmental consequences of the MP on ongoing and future
 actions at HO in support of astronomical research.” The FEA
 concluded that the MP would “either have beneficial, less than
 significant, or no impacts on the environment.”
10
  
C. BLNR Administrative Proceedings
 
BLNR’s review and ultimate approval of UHIfA’s
 
application involved a series of events which are relevant to
 this appeal. As set forth below, these included BLNR’s grant of
 a permit, Kilakila’s appeal of that permit, a contested case
 
10
 The sufficiency of the FEA was challenged on appeal to this court
 
in Kilakila 'O Haleakal â v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 134 Hawai 'i 86, 332 P.3d 688
(App. 2014), cert. granted, SCWC-13-0000182 (Sept. 12, 2014).
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hearing, ex parte communications involving the hearing officer,
 
BLNR’s dismissal of that hearing officer and appointment of a new
 hearing officer, Kilakila’s motions for disclosure of any
 additional ex parte communications, the new hearing officer’s
 recommendation to BLNR, and BLNR’s grant of a second permit. 
1. BLNR approval of the first ATST permit: CDUP MA-3542
 
On November 22, 2010, BLNR held its first public
 
hearing on the ATST’s MP and CDUA. On December 1, 2010, BLNR
 
approved the MP and granted CDUP MA-3542 during its regular board
 meeting. CDUP MA-3542 permitted the construction of the ATST,
 subject to several conditions. Kilakila made three requests for
 
11
 a contested case hearing  prior to and immediately after BLNR’s
approval, and BLNR took no action on the requests. 
Kilakila
 
subsequently appealed to the circuit court, arguing that BLNR
 erred in denying Kilakila’s request for a contested case hearing
 
11 A contested case hearing is a quasi-judicial administrative
 
hearing conducted pursuant to HAR § 13-1-28 (2009), which states:
 
(a) When required by law, the board shall hold a
contested case hearing upon its own motion or on a
written petition of any government agency or any
interested person.
 
(b) The contested case hearing shall be held after any
public hearing which by law is required to be held on
the same subject matter.
 
(c) Any procedure in a contested case may be modified
or waived by stipulations of the parties. 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and in granting CDUP MA-3542.12 See Kilakila I, 131 Hawai' i at 
207, 317 P.3d at 41. 
2. Contested case hearing
 
While the appeal of CDUP MA-3542 was pending, BLNR
 
granted Kilakila’s request for a contested case hearing, and on
 
February 11, 2011, Steven Jacobson was appointed as the hearing
 officer. 
On June 2, 2011, Kilakila filed a motion to disqualify
 
deputy attorneys general Linda Chow and Julie China from advising
 Jacobson or BLNR at the contested case hearing. Kilakila
 asserted that Chow and China could not serve as counsel for BLNR
 because “[t]hey have filed documents in circuit court arguing
 that the BLNR could legally grant a conservation district use
 permit for the [ATST].” On June 28, 2011, Jacobson denied
 Kilakila’s motion because he would not be relying on advice from
 Chow or China in making his recommendation to BLNR. Jacobson
 dismissed the motion without prejudice so that Kilakila could
 renew its motion after Jacobson issued his recommendation to
 BLNR. 
The contested case hearing was held over four days,
 
12
 That appeal ultimately resulted in this court’s decision in 
Kilakila I , in which we held that the circuit court had jurisdiction over the
appeal pursuant to HRS § 91–14 and that Kilakila’s request for a contested
case hearing should have been granted prior to BLNR’s approval of the permit. 131 Hawai 'i at 205-06, 317 P.3d at 39-40.  We remanded to the circuit court 
regarding Kilakila’s request for stay or reversal of CDUP MA-3542.  Id. at 206, 317 P.3d at 40.  The parties then stipulated to void CDUP MA-3542, which ended the appeal. 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from July 18-20 and on August 26, 2011. On February 23, 2012,
 
Jacobson issued his proposed findings of fact, conclusions of
 law, and decision and order, recommending approval of the permit. 
On March 2, 2012, Kilakila renewed its motion, this
 
time to BLNR, to disqualify Chow and China. Kilakila argued that
 Chow and China have “appeared as adversaries to [Kilakila] at
 hearings regarding the conservation district use application.” 
On March 12, 2012, Jacobson issued his final findings of fact,
 conclusions of law, and decision and order, which recommended
 that BLNR approve the permit to construct the ATST. On March 16,
 2012, BLNR denied Kilakila’s March 2, 2012 motion, noting that
 while Chow and China appeared as counsel for BLNR in a prior
 circuit court proceeding, “the appearance by the deputy attorneys
 general as counsel for the Board in that circuit court proceeding
 does not disqualify the deputy attorneys general from advising
 the Board in this administrative proceeding.” 
3. Minute Order No. 14 regarding ex parte communication
 
On March 19, 2012, BLNR filed Minute Order No. 14 “RE:
 
EX PARTE COMMUNICATION[.]” The order explained to the parties
 
that BLNR had been notified that Jacobson sent an email to
 UHIfA’s counsel on March 15, 2012. In the email, which was
 attached to the order, Jacobson stated that he had received
 “inappropriate ex parte pressure and activity by US Senator
 [Daniel] Inouye’s and the Governor’s offices” which “essentially
 
13
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
required” him to submit an incomplete report and recommendation
 
to BLNR. Jacobson had contacted “appropriate ethical offices”
 and was informed that disclosures were not required where:
 
(1) neither UHIfA nor its counsel had anything to do
with what the Senator’s and Governor’s offices were
 doing, (2) the Board and courts disregard the interim
[proposed] report and recommendations and consider
only the final report and recommendations (to the
extent they consider them at all), and (3) Kilakila is
not prejudiced by being shortchanged in time to
respond to the final report and recommendations.
 
The email from Jacobson concluded with a question to
 
UHIfA’s counsel as to “whether any of you had anything to do with
 
what the Senator’s and Governor’s offices were doing.” 
BLNR’s order noted that the email between Jacobson and
 
UHIfA’s counsel “was an unpermitted ex parte communication[,]”
 which “call[ed] into question the Hearing Officer’s impartiality”
 in relation to his report and recommendation to BLNR. BLNR
 stated that it was considering the following actions in response
 to the ex parte communication:
 
1. Striking the Report and Final and Amended Report
from the record;
 
2. Discharging the Hearing Officer, Steven Jacobson, as the
hearing officer in this case; and
 3. Retaining a new hearing officer to review the
record of the proceedings in this case and to issue a
new hearing officer’s report and proposed findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order. The
 new hearing officer would be authorized to conduct
additional fact finding as necessary.
 
BLNR scheduled a hearing and invited the parties to
 
file comments or objections to the proposed actions. 
On March 20, 2012, Jacobson filed a response to BLNR’s
 
14
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order, describing what he characterized as the pressure placed on
 
him by the Governor’s office to release his recommendation and to
 consult deputy attorney general Chow:
 
In this file, while preparing my report and
recommended decision, considerable ex parte pressure
was placed upon me to simply spit out a recommended
decision quickly, so that the Board would have
something before it, to approve.  That pressure
included requiring me to make daily reports to both
the Health Department and the Board’s Chair as to how
soon I contemplated finishing, what else I thought I
needed to do, why I thought I had to do it, etc.
 
The pressure included a “suggestion” that Deputy
General Chow be given a role in completing the
decision. 
  
I was advised that the pressure was generated by
a staffer in US Senator Inouye’s office, and applied
through the Governor’s office.  I was not asked to
 recommend a particular result, although the result
Senator Inouye’s office wanted from the Board was
clear.  I did not see any evidence that anyone else
(i.e., anyone in State Government), wanted any
particular result, and the Board’s Chair, in
particular, made clear that all he wanted to know was
when this matter could be put on the Board’s calendar.
 
My initial [proposed] report and recommended
decision herein were filed as a result of “or else”
 pressure.  The only way the pressure affected my
initial [proposed] report and recommended decision was
that they were incomplete.  I made no substantive
 changes in light of comments by Ms. Chow.
 
I then completed my final report and
recommendations.  In completing them, the only effect
of the previous pressure upon me (which had been
withdrawn) was that I very carefully went through
everything UHIfA submitted, again, to be sure that I
hadn’t missed something that those favoring the ATST
Project might be hoping that I would miss.
 
Again, nothing substantive was changed due to
anything said by Ms. Chow.  The final report and
recommendations are entirely mine.
 
UH responded to Minute Order No. 14 by “urg[ing]” BLNR
 
to review the record and issue a decision without appointing a
 
new hearing officer. In the alternative, UH requested that: 
15
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“(1) the additional fact finding should be limited to a site
 
visit; and (2) the new Hearing Officer should be required to
 respond to the Board within a reasonable time frame.” Kilakila
 also responded, requesting the appointment of a new hearing
 officer as well as disclosures of “any communications tending to
 show that external pressure was applied to affect the outcome of
 [the] proceeding.” 
4.	 Minute Order No. 15 discharging hearing officer
Jacobson
 
On March 29, 2012, following a hearing on the issue of 
the ex parte communications, BLNR filed Minute Order No. 15, 
which discharged Jacobson and authorized the appointment of a new hearing officer “to avoid even the appearance of impropriety.” BLNR concluded that the email from Jacobson to UHIfA’s counsel was “an unpermitted ex parte communication in violation of Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-1-37.”
13 BLNR also struck 
13	 HAR § 13-1-37 (2009) provides:
 
(a) No party or person petitioning to be a party in a
contested case, nor the party’s or such person’s to a
proceeding before the board nor their employees,
representatives or agents shall make an unauthorized
ex parte communication either oral or written
concerning the contested case to the presiding officer
or any member of the board who will be a participant
in the decision-making process.
 
(b) The following classes of ex parte communications
are permitted:
 
(1) Those which relate solely to matters which a
board member is authorized by the board to dispose of
on ex parte basis.
 
(continued...)
 
16
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Jacobson’s recommendation from the record and authorized the new
 
hearing officer to make a ruling regarding Kilakila’s standing,
 issue a new recommendation within sixty days of appointment,
 schedule a site visit with the parties, hold additional
 evidentiary hearings as necessary, and consider a supplemental
 environmental assessment dated February 10, 2012. 
5. Kilakila’s motion for disclosure 
On March 30, 2012, Kilakila filed a motion for
 
disclosure of BLNR’s communications regarding the ATST. 
Kilakila’s motion sought: 
[T]o have each member of the BLNR disclose any and all
communication (written, electronic and oral) that
mentioned or related to the University’s proposed
Advanced Technology Solar Telescope except for (a)
communications between board members; (b)
communications between any board member and the
Board’s counsel; (c) any board meeting when the ATST
was a subject matter of the agenda.
 
The request included “any and all communication with
 
Senator Inouye or his staff, the Governor or his staff,
 
politicians, union leaders and members and construction industry
 representatives that mentioned or related to the [ATST].” 
In support of the motion, Kilakila cited hearing
 
officer Jacobson’s statements regarding the ex parte
 
13(...continued)
(2) Requests for information with respect to the
procedural status of a proceeding.
 
(3) Those which all parties to the proceeding
agree or which the board has formally ruled may be
made on an ex parte basis.
 
17
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
communications, as well as testimony from a former superintendent
 
of Haleakalâ National Park who also noted pressures from Senator
 Inouye’s office regarding the ATST:
 
While serving as superintendent, I was well
aware of Senator Inouye’s displeasure with my
statements/comments against the construction of the
ATST.  His staff assistant, James Chang placed heavy
pressure on me to mute objections that the National
Park Service had regarding the impacts of the ATST.
For example, in a meeting with Mr. Chang, he strongly
encouraged me to go along with the construction of the
ATST project.  When I stated it was my job to guard
against such extreme impacts to this majestic national
park, he indicated that he would go to the Secretary
of the Interior to override my objections.
 
UH opposed Kilakila’s motion, arguing that the request
 
was a “fishing expedition” with no factual or legal basis. In
 
reply, Kilakila asserted that it was aware of at least one ex
 parte communication between a member of BLNR and the Governor’s
 office. Kilakila attached emails obtained pursuant to a records
 request from the Governor’s office, which provided evidence of a
 meeting on March 21, 2012 between the Governor’s office, the
 Attorney General’s office, Senator Inouye’s office, and BLNR
 Chairperson William Aila to discuss the ATST. These include a
 March 21, 2012 email between Bruce Coppa, the Governor’s chief of
 staff, and another staff member. The staff member informs Coppa,
 “Jennifer [Sabas, Senator Inouye’s chief of staff,] requested a
 meeting today at 3 p.m. to discuss the telescope, hearings
 officer and funding issue. AG will be coming in and Chair Aila
 is pending.” 
18
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6.	 Minute Order No. 23 partially granting Kilakila’s
motion for disclosure
 
On June 24, 2012, BLNR issued Minute Order No. 23
 
granting Kilakila’s motion only “with regard to the meeting held
 
on March 21, 2012[.]” BLNR informed Kilakila and UHIfA that a
 meeting occurred on March 21, 2012, in which Aila participated. 
BLNR noted that “[d]uring the meeting the sole topic of
 discussion was when the recommended decision in this contested
 case would be issued by the hearing officer, Steven Jacobson.” 
BLNR concluded that no further action was warranted: 
Inasmuch as no party was present during the meeting,
there was no ex parte communication with the hearingofficer or any member of the Board.  Even if a partywere present, the discussion . . . comes within thepurview of Hawai 'i Administrative Rule (HAR) § 13-1-37
as a permitted communication related to requests forinformation with respect to the procedural status of aproceeding.  No further action is required regardingthis communication. 
BLNR noted that Kilakila failed to “provide a time
 
frame or context for the requested disclosures” and thus its
 
“motion may encompass communications that occurred long before
 this matter was the subject of a contested case.” BLNR further
 noted that Kilakila failed to show any communications beyond what
 was allowed under HAR § 13-1-37 and that its motion was “based,
 at most, upon mere speculation.” Finally, BLNR concluded that it
 had not “acted in any manner other than as an impartial
 adjudicator” and that any prejudice to Kilakila had been
 rectified by the discharge and replacement of hearing officer
 
19
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Jacobson. 
7. Kilakila’s motion to reconsider Minute Order No. 23
 
On June 8, 2012, Kilakila filed a motion to reconsider
 
Minute Order No. 23. Kilakila alleged that the “sole topic” of
 
the March 21, 2012 meeting could not have been the timing of the
 release of Jacobson’s recommendation because Jacobson had already
 issued his initial and final decisions at this point. Kilakila
 also requested communications between any member of BLNR and
 “anyone else” that related to the ATST:
 
[F]or the sake of appellate court review, this Board
should respond definitively as to whether or not there
were any communications (oral, written or electronic)
between any member of the Board and anyone else that
mentioned or related to the University’s proposed
Advanced Technology Solar Telescope with anyone
(except for (a) communications between board members;
(b) communications between any board member and the
Board’s counsel; (c) any board member when the ATSTwas a subject matter on the agenda) from the time thatKilakila 'O Haleakal â requested a contested case 
hearing. 
On July 13, 2012, BLNR granted Kilakila’s motion in
 
part, amending Minute Order No. 23: “During the meeting, the
 
sole topic of discussion was when the final decision in the
 contested case would be issued, in light of Minute Order No. 14
 [regarding Jacobson’s ex parte communication], filed on March 19,
 2012.” 
8. Hearing officer Ishida’s recommendation
 
On July 16, 2012, the new hearing officer, Lane Ishida,
 
filed a report, proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law,
 
20
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision, and order, which recommended that BLNR grant the CDUP,
 
subject to several conditions. To support her recommendation,
 Ishida made several findings, including that the ATST was
 consistent with the purposes of the conservation district and
 general subzone, would not cause substantial adverse impact to
 existing natural resources, and would not be materially
 detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. 
9.	 Kilakila’s second motion to reconsider Minute Order No.
 
23
 
On September 27, 2012, Kilakila filed a second motion
 
to reconsider Minute Order No. 23. Kilakila attached additional
 
documents obtained from UH pursuant to a records request. Most
 relevant to this appeal are six email communications, which are
 summarized as follows:
 
•	 January 30, 2012: 
Mike Maberry (UHIfA), emailed
Jennifer Sabas, Senator Inouye’s chief of staff,
regarding the ATST. Maberry stated that he knew
that Sabas had already spoken with Aila, “but as
previously mentioned, Steve Jacobsen [sic] doesn’t
work for Aila he works for Fuddy. Would it be
 possible for you or someone to talk with Fuddy to
see if it could be clarified that Steve’s work
 priority is to complete the Finding of Facts,
Conclusions of Law and Recommendation in the ATST
 Contested Case?” 
•	 January 30, 2012: In response to Maberry’s email,
Sabas emailed Bruce Coppa, the Governor’s chief of
staff, stating: “can you reach out to loretta
fuddy who apparently the hearing officer is on
contract with rather than dlnr––uh and my feds are
getting really really nervous about losing the
money for the atst.” 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
•	 January 30, 2012: Coppa responded to Sabas,
stating: “I will speak with Loretta. I also spoke
with Bill and asked to please help[.]” 
•	 January 31, 2012: Sabas responded to Coppa
noting, “Thanks. This will be bad if we lose it.” 
•	 January 31, 2012: Maberry emailed Sabas regarding
a potential meeting between the Governor’s office,
Senator Inouye’s office, and BLNR regarding the
ATST. Maberry noted that UH could not meet with
BLNR until after BLNR acted on the hearing
officer’s recommendation “or it could jeopardize
the Contested Case.” 
•	 January 31, 2012: Sabas responded to Maberry
regarding his inability to attend the proposed
ATST meeting and noted that she could “carry the
message and [could] also carry the uh message.” 
Kilakila contended that these documents demonstrated
 
that “the applicant has acted in bad faith; immense political
 pressure has been applied in this case that is even greater than
 prior documents had revealed; and Williams Aila Jr. has received
 more ex parte communication than has been previously revealed.” 
Kilakila then sought the following disclosure: 
At a minimum, the BLNR must disclose information about
Bruce Coppa’s ex parte communication with WilliamAila, Jr. and Jennifer Sabas’ ex parte communicationwith William Aila, Jr. . . .  If, in any of the exparte communications, anyone communicated to anymember of the Board the reasons that a decision needed to be expedited, this should be disclosed to Kilakila'O Haleakal â. 
On November 9, 2012, BLNR issued an order denying
 
Kilakila’s second motion to reconsider Minute Order No. 23. BLNR
 
noted that Kilakila “fails to show that any unpermitted ex parte
 
communications occurred between the former hearing officer or any
 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Board members and one of the parties in this case that would be a
 
basis to reconsider this Board’s prior Order No. 23.” 
10.	 BLNR’s approval of the second ATST permit: CDUP MA-11­
04
 
On November 9, 2012, BLNR issued its findings of fact,
 
conclusions of law, decision and order approving a second permit
 
for the ATST, CDUP MA-11-04. BLNR made findings of facts
 concerning the parties to the contested case hearing, the
 procedural background of the permit application, the ATST project
 description, the Section 106 consultation
14
  , the FEIS, and the
anticipated benefits of the ATST. BLNR then made conclusions of
 law under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(1)-(8) (1994), which provides the
 criteria for “evaluating the merits of a proposed land use” and
 granting a CDUP: 
(c) In evaluating the merits of a proposed land use,
the department or board shall apply the following
criteria:
 
(1) The proposed land use is consistent with the
purpose of the conservation district;
 
(2) The proposed land use is consistent with the
objectives of the subzone of the land on which the use
will occur;
 
(3) The proposed land use complies with
provisions and guidelines contained in chapter 205A,
HRS, entitled “Coastal Zone Management”, where
applicable;
 
(4) The proposed land use will not cause
 
14
 In its order, BLNR explains, “Section 106 of the [National
 
Historical Preservation Act] requires federal agencies to take into account
the impacts of the agencies’ undertakings on historic properties and to afford
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation . . . a reasonable opportunity
to comment on such undertakings.” 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substantial adverse impact to existing natural
resources within the surrounding area, community, or
region;
 
(5) The proposed land use, including buildings,
structures, and facilities, shall be compatible with
the locality and surrounding areas, appropriate to the
physical conditions and capabilities of the specific
parcel or parcels;
 
(6) The existing physical and environmental
aspects of the land, such as natural beauty and open
space characteristics, will be preserved or improved
upon, whichever is applicable;
 
(7) Subdivision of land will not be utilized to
increase the intensity of land uses in the
conservation district; and
 
(8) The proposed land use will not be materially
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
 
The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating
that a proposed land use is consistent with the above
criteria.
 
“Based upon the evidence and testimony presented in
 
this case,” BLNR concluded that the ATST satisfied each of the
 
eight criteria, UH “met its overall burden of proof[,]” and a
 CDUP for ATST was approved, subject to twenty conditions. 
D. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Kilakila appealed BLNR’s decision to the Circuit Court
 
of the First 
Circuit.15 On July 11, 2013, after holding oral
 
argument and reviewing the parties’ briefings, the circuit court
 
issued its Order affirming BLNR’s decision to grant CDUP MA-11­04. The circuit court filed its Final Judgment on August 20,
 2013. 
15
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
24
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
E. ICA Proceedings
 
Kilakila appealed to the Intermediate Court of
 
Appeals.16 The ICA rejected each of Kilakila’s points of error
 
in its October 17, 2014 Memorandum Opinion, which affirmed the
 
circuit court’s judgment and BLNR’s decision. The ICA’s Judgment
 on Appeal was filed on November 13, 2014. Kilakila timely
 applied for writ of certiorari on December 1, 2014. 
II. Standards of Review
 
Appellate court review of a circuit court’s review of
 
an administrative decision is a secondary appeal. “The standard
 of review is one in which this court must determine whether the
 circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the
 standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency’s
 
16 Kilakila contended that the circuit court erred because:
 
(1) the Board’s approval did not comply with Hawai 'i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-5-3(c) (1994); (2) the Board erred by considering economic factors;
 (3) the Board erred by weighing the lack of
alternatives against the Solar Telescope’s adverse
impacts,
 
(4) the correct entity did not apply for the
conservation district use permit (CDUP),
 
(5) the Solar Telescope is inconsistent with the June
8, 2010 Management Plan (Management Plan) prepared bythe University of Hawai 'i Institute for Astromony 
(UIA), 
(7)[s
ic] the Board violated Kilakila’s procedural due
proce
ss rights; and
 
(8)[sic] the Board acted pursuant to unauthorized
procedure.
  
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision.” Save Diamond Head Waters LLC. v. Hans Hedemann Surf, 
Inc., 121 Hawai' i 16, 24, 211 P.3d 74, 82 (2009) (citing Citizens 
Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals, 114 Hawai' i 184, 
193, 159 P.3d 143, 153 (2007); Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple 
of Hawai' i v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai' i 217, 229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 
(1998)). 
HRS § 91-14(g), “Judicial review of contested cases,”
 
provides as follows: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise
of discretion.
 
“Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are
 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions
 
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3);
 findings of fact are reviewable under subsection (5); and an
 agency’s exercise of discretion is reviewable under subsection
 
26
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(6).” Save Diamond Head Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 24-25, 211 P.3d 
at 82-83 (quoting Paul v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i 416, 426, 
168 P.3d 546, 556 (2007)) (internal brackets omitted). 
“Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g), an agency’s conclusions of 
law are reviewed de novo.” United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 
646, AFL-CIO v. Hanneman, 106 Hawai' i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 
(2005) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). “A 
conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case.” Save Diamond Head Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 25, 
211 P.3d at 83 (quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawai' i), Inc. 
v. Int’l Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai'i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006)). 
An agency’s interpretation of its own rules is 
generally entitled to deference unless “plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose.” Panado v. 
Bd. of Trs., Emps.’ Ret. Sys., 134 Hawai' i 1, 11, 332 P.3d 144, 
154 (2014). An agency’s exercise of discretion “will not be overturned unless ‘arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by . . . [a] clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.’” Paul’s 
Elec. Serv. Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 498-99, 91 P.3d 
494, 416-17 (2004) (citing HRS § 91-14(g)(6)). 
27
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Discussion
 
Kilakila’s application for writ of certiorari raises
 
several issues,17 many of which overlap or were raised without 
17
 Kilakila’s application raised the following thirteen points of
 
error:
 
1. Did the ICA err in affirming the Circuit Court’s
affirmation of the BLNR’s decision?  More
 
specifically, the questions presented include:
 
2. Did the ICA err when it held that an agency can
use decisionmaking criteria that are not identified in
its own rules––despite this Court’s rulings in Aluli
v. Lewin, 73 Haw. 56, 61, 828 P.2d 802, 805 (1992),Mahuiki v. Planning Comm’n, 65 Haw. 506, 519-20, 654P.2d 874, 882-83 (1982), Ainoa v. Unemployment
Compensation Appeals Div. , 62 Haw. 286, 614 P.2d 380
(1980), and Aguiar v. Hawai 'i Hous. Auth., 55 Haw. 
478, 522 P.2d 1255 (1974)? 
3. In determining whether the ATST project is
consistent with the purposes of the land use law and
the conservation district, did the ICA err by (a)confusing an “as applied” challenge with a “facial”challenge; (b) failing to employ this Court’s analysisin Neighborhood Bd. No. 24 (Waianae Coast) v. StateLand Use Comm’n , 64 Haw. 265, 639 P.2d 1097 (1982);
and (c) refusing to consider whether the proposed ATSTproject itself “frustrates the state land use law’sbasic objectives,” Curtis v. Board of Appeals , 90
Hawai'i 384, 396, 978 P.2d 822, 834 (1999)?  
4. Should the courts take a close look at the record
 
in cases affecting the environment?
 
5. Did the ICA err in concluding that the ATST
project would not have substantial impacts when (a)
the applicant repeatedly admitted that the impacts
would be substantial; (b) the BLNR and the ICA failed
to point to any evidence that the impacts to cultural
resources would not be substantial, as required by In
re Kauai Elec. Div., 60 Haw. 166, 184, 590 P.2d 524,
537 (1978); (c) there was no evidence that the
mitigation measures would reduce the intensity of the
impacts to less than substantial; and (d) the BLNR
relied on the final environmental impact statement
(FEIS) to reach certain conclusions, but without any
explanation ignored other portions of the FEIS?
 
6. Did the ICA err by relying on grounds not “invoked
by the agency,” In re Water Use Permit Applications,
(continued...)
 
28
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any supporting argument. See HRAP 40.1(d) (applications for writ
 
of certiorari shall contain a “short and concise statement of the
 
questions presented” and a “brief argument with supporting
 authorities”). Therefore, we address the following questions,
 which we consider controlling and dispositive:
 
(1) Did the ICA err in concluding that the permit
approval process was not procedurally flawed,
specifically that BLNR did not prejudge CDUP MA-11-04
and was not improperly influenced by ex parte
communications?
 
(2) Did the ICA err in concluding that BLNR’s findings
 
(...continued)
94 Hawai 'i 97, 163, 9 P.3d 409, 475 (2000)? 
7. D
id the ICA err in interpreting HAR §
13-5-30(c)(6) in a manner that excludes consideration
of natural beauty and open space characteristics?
 
8. Did the ICA err in assuming that the lease of a
portion of land does not subdivide it despite the
plethora of law to the contrary?
 
9. Did the ICA err in holding that the ATST project
is consistent with a valid management plan?
 10. Did the BLNR prejudge the issue by granting the
CDUP before the contested case was held and then
 
authorizing some construction activities to proceed
pursuant to that permit prior to completion of the
post hoc contested case hearing?
 
11. Did the ICA err in relying on HRS § 171-6(20) to
justify the BLNR’s conduct pursuant to HRS chapter
183C when chapter 183C is not part of HRS chapter 171?
 
12. Was the BLNR’s post hoc contested case hearing
tainted by political pressure, ex parte communication,
the refusal to fully and timely disclose the extent of
ex parte communication, the dual role of the deputy
attorney general as adversary and advisor to the
tribunal, and the arbitrary deletion of key findings
by the hearing officer?
 
13. Did the ICA err in holding that the applicant was
authorized to apply for the permit?
 
29
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4),(5), and (6) were valid?
 
(3) Did the ICA err in concluding that the ATST was
not inconsistent with the purposes of conservation
districts and general subzones?
 
A.	 The permit approval process did not suffer from procedural
infirmities
 
Kilakila alleges that the approval process for CDUP MA­
11-04 suffered from two procedural defects: (1) BLNR prejudged
 
the permit approval and (2) BLNR engaged in impermissible ex
 parte communications and failed to disclose them. We address
 each of these issues below. 
1.	 BLNR did not prejudge the permit prior to the contested
case hearing 
Before addressing the issue of prejudgment, it is
 
necessary to review the underlying sequence of events. At the
 
first public hearing regarding the ATST’s CDUA, Kilakila
 requested that BLNR conduct a contested case hearing. Without
 granting Kilakila’s request, BLNR approved the first permit for
 the construction of the ATST, CDUP MA-3542. Kilakila then
 appealed BLNR’s decision to grant the permit prior to holding a
 contested case hearing. 
That appeal resulted in this court’s decision in 
Kilakila I, in which we held that the circuit court had jurisdiction over the appeal pursuant to HRS § 91-14 and that Kilakila’s request for a contested case hearing should have been granted prior to BLNR’s approval of the permit. 131 Hawai' i at 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
205-06, 317 P.3d at 39-40. We remanded to the circuit court
 
regarding Kilakila’s request for stay or reversal of CDUP
 MA-3542. 
Id. at 206, 317 P.3d at 40. On remand, the parties
 
entered into a stipulation, titled “Stipulation That the
 Conservation District Use Permit (CDUA MA-3542) Is Void”:
18
 
IT IS HEREBY STIPULATED by and amongst the parties
described below, through their respective undersigned
counsel that the conservation district use permit
(CDUA MA-3542) granted by the Board of Land and
Natural Resources and the Department of Land and
Natural Resources in December 2010 is void.
 
This stipulation ended the appeal. 
While the appeal regarding CDUP MA-3542 was pending,
 
BLNR granted Kilakila’s request for a contested case hearing. 
After the contested case hearing, on November 9, 2012, BLNR
 issued an order approving a second permit for the construction of
 the ATST, CDUP MA-11-04. It is that permit that is the subject
 of the instant appeal.
 
Kilakila now asserts that BLNR prejudged the permit at
 
issue in this case, CDUP MA-11-04, because it approved
 construction prior to the completion of the contested case
 
18 The stipulation was not included in the record for this case, but 
in the record of the pending case Kilakila 'O Haleakal â v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 
134 Hawai 'i 86, 332 P.3d 688 (App. 2014), cert. granted , SCWC-13-0000182
(Sept. 12, 2014).  We may therefore take judicial notice of the stipulation. 
See Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence 201(b) (“A judicially noticed fact must be one
not subject to reasonable dispute that is . . . capable of accurate and readydetermination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot be reasonably bequestioned.”); see also State v. Puaoi, 78 Hawai 'i 185, 190, 891 P.2d 272, 277
(1995) (“[A]n appellate court may take judicial notice of facts despite thefailure of the trial court to do so, provided that the facts are capable ofimmediate and accurate demonstration by resort to easily accessible sources ofindisputable accuracy.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
31
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hearing. However, this construction was for the removal of an
 
unused foundation at the Reber Circle site. BLNR did not approve
 any construction of the ATST itself. The removal of the unused
 foundation was previously supported by Kilakila and was required
 by other agreements, such as the Archaeological Recovery Plan
 that BLNR approved in 2006. Furthermore, no construction
 ultimately occurred prior to the completion of the contested case
 hearing. 
Kilakila also argues that BLNR prejudged the second 
permit, CDUP MA-11-04, by voting on the first permit, CDUP MA­3542, prior to a contested case hearing. The issue of prejudgment was recently addressed by this court in Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136 Hawai' i 376, 363 P.3d 
224 (2015), in which we held that BLNR’s decision to approve a permit prior to a contested case hearing violated appellants’ due 
process rights. Id. at 391; 363 P.3d at 239. This case is 
dissimilar to Mauna Kea, insofar as here Kilakila entered into a 
stipulation with BLNR and UH to void the first permit. Since BLNR’s initial approval of CDUP MA-3542 was voided, appellants’ due process rights were adequately protected by the contested case hearing and subsequent vote by BLNR. See Hawai' i Elec. 
Light Co. v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res., 102 Hawai' i 257, 266, 74 
P.3d 160, 169 (2003) (holding that, when BLNR’s initial vote on a permit was later invalidated, “the constitutional right of due 
32
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
process was adequately protected through the contested case
 
hearing process and the subsequent votes by the Board”). 
Indeed, the stipulation rendered the first permit “of
 
no validity or effect.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1805 (10th ed.
 
2014) (defining “void” as “[t]o render of no validity or effect;
 
to annul”). Because the first permit was deemed invalid by the
 stipulation, Kilakila received the relief sought in its previous
 appeal. Kilakila cannot now seek to vacate the second permit
 based on the first permit, which Kilakila voluntarily stipulated
 to void. 
In sum, the permit approval process for CDUP MA-11-04
 
met procedural due process requirements. BLNR did not approve
 any construction of the ATST itself prior to the completion of
 the contested case hearing. Since BLNR’s initial approval was
 voided, appellants’ due process rights were protected by the
 contested case hearing and subsequent vote by BLNR. 
2. Ex parte communications with BLNR were not improper
 
Kilakila argues that the ICA erred in concluding that
 
BLNR’s permit approval process was not subject to impermissible
 
ex parte political pressure. Kilakila alleges that the Governor
 and Senator Inouye’s offices exerted pressure on BLNR Chairperson
 Aila in order to attain approval of the telescope, and that BLNR
 failed to disclose these ex parte communications. 
The ICA rejected Kilakila’s argument on the basis that
 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
BLNR promptly removed Jacobson as the hearing officer and
 
disregarded his recommendation, curing any allegation of
 partiality involving Jacobson. The ICA also noted that Kilakila
 did not contend that hearing officer Ishida, who ultimately made
 the recommendation to BLNR, was subject to any ex parte
 communication or political pressure. 
We agree with the ICA that any concern of impropriety
 
was cured when BLNR replaced Jacobson with Ishida. Indeed, this
 is precisely the relief that Kilakila requested. 
However, the ICA did not consider whether any ex parte
 
communications involving Aila tainted the permit approval process
 or whether BLNR improperly denied Kilakila’s discovery requests
 for additional communications involving the ATST. Though we note
 that Kilakila never moved to disqualify Aila as it did with
 Jacobson, we address these questions now. 
The communications at issue here are: (1) the March
 
21, 2012 meeting between Aila, the Governor’s office, the
 Attorney General’s office, and Senator Inouye’s office, (2) the
 January 30-31, 2012 emails between Jennifer Sabas of Senator
 Inouye’s office and Mike Maberry of UHIfA, and (3) the January
 30-31, 2012 emails between Sabas and Bruce Coppa of the
 Governor’s office. 
We first determine whether the communications violated
 
the relevant administrative rule, HAR § 13-1-37. HAR § 13-1-37
 
34
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
governs ex parte communication in contested case proceedings and
 
provides: 
(a) No party or person petitioning to be a party in a
contested case, nor the party’s or such person’s to a
proceeding before the board nor their employees,
representatives or agents shall make an unauthorized
ex parte communication either oral or written
concerning the contested case to the presiding officer
or any member of the board who will be a participant
in the decision-making process.
 
(b) The following classes of ex parte communications
are permitted: 
(1) Those which related solely to the matters
which a board member is authorized by the board to
dispose of on ex parte basis.
 
(2) Requests for information with respect to
the procedural status of a proceeding.
 
(3) Those which all parties to the proceeding
agree or which the board has formally ruled may be
made on an ex parte basis. 
HAR § 13-1-37 does not apply to the January 30-31, 2012
 
communications because they were not sent to “any member of the
 
board who will be a participant in the decision-making process.” 
HAR § 13-1-37(a). Nor would it apply to the March 21, 2012
 meeting between Aila, the Governor’s office, the Attorney
 General’s office, and Senator Inouye’s office. Although Aila was
 a “member of the board” as BLNR Chairperson, the other meeting
 participants were not “part[ies] . . . to a proceeding” or a
 party’s “employees, representatives or agents.” HAR § 13-1-37(a)
 (emphasis added). There is no evidence that UH or Kilakila
 attended the meeting.
 
Even if the Governor’s office and Senator Inouye’s
 
35
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
office were considered “representatives or agents” of UH, the
 
meeting would not violate HAR § 13-1-37 because the “sole topic”
 of the discussion during the meeting was the timing of BLNR’s
 final decision following the contested case hearing. The timing
 of BLNR’s decision falls under the category of permitted ex parte
 communications, as “[r]equests for information with respect to
 the procedural status of a proceeding.” HAR § 13-1-37(b)(2). 
Though the communications were not impermissible ex 
parte communications in violation of HAR § 13-1-37, they may nevertheless demonstrate that improper outside influences tainted BLNR’s permit approval. In In re Water Use Permit Applications (Waiâhole), this court determined whether external political pressure on an agency violated due process and invalidated the agency’s decision. 94 Hawai' i 97, 123, 9 P.3d 409, 435 (2000). 
We noted: 
External political inference in the administrative
process is of heightened concern in a quasi-judicial
proceeding, which is guided by two principles.  First,
the appearance of bias or pressure may be no less
objectionable than the reality.  Second, judicial
evaluation of the pressure must focus on the nexus
between the pressure and the actual decision maker. 
As we have previously observed, the proper focus is
not on the content of communication in the abstract,
but rather upon the relation between the
communications and the adjudicator’s decisionmaking
process.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted;
 
emphases in original). 
This court then evaluated an allegation of improper
 
36
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
political pressure based on these principles. The petitioner in
 
Waiâhole alleged that the Governor exerted improper influence on
 the Commission on Water Resource Management by publicly
 criticizing the Commission’s proposed decision. Id. Consistent
 
with the focus on “the relation between the communications and
 the adjudicator’s decisionmaking process,” this court noted that
 other instances of improper political influence involved “at
 minimum, some sort of direct contact with the decisionmaker
 regarding the merits of the dispute.” Id. (emphases added). 
The Governor’s comments in Waiâhole did not meet this
 
minimum standard. Although the Governor had made several
 statements that “related directly to the dispute before the
 Commission,” there was not sufficient evidence of “direct and
 focused interference” in the Commission’s decision-making. Id.
 
at 124, 9 P.3d at 436. Thus, there was not a nexus between the
 Governor’s comments and the Commission that demonstrated improper
 pressure on the Commission’s decision. Id. at 124-25, 9 P.3d at
 
436-37. 
Similar to Waiâ hole, the communications here do not
 
show evidence of “direct contact” with BLNR over the “merits of
 the dispute.” The January 30-31, 2012 emails do not discuss the
 merits of the contested case hearing. Rather, as the ICA
 described, the emails appear to indicate concerns over “the
 possibility of losing funding for the [ATST] if construction did
 
37
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not begin by a certain date.” The email communications are also
 
unclear on whether there was any direct contact with Aila. Only
 one email mentions Aila and states that “[Coppa, the Governor’s
 chief of staff] spoke with [Aila] and asked to please help.” The
 Governor’s office and Senator Inouye’s office did have direct
 contact with Aila at the March 21, 2012 meeting, but there is no
 evidence that they discussed anything other than the timing of
 BLNR’s final decision following the contested case hearing.
19
 
Undoubtedly, the public criticisms in Waiâhole and the
 
timing concerns voiced here both placed pressure on the
 respective agencies. However, the question is not whether there
 was any pressure placed on the agency, but whether the pressure
 was directed at the merits of the agency’s decision. While the
 communications here concerned the permit approval process for the
 ATST and therefore “related directly to the dispute before” BLNR,
 we are not presented with evidence of communications relating to
 the merits that would constitute “direct and focused
 interference” in BLNR’s decision-making. Id. at 124, 9 P.3d at
 
436. In sum, we do not find that the political pressure placed
 
19
 The March 21, 2012 email from a member of the Governor’s staff to
 
Coppa stated that “[Sabas] requested a meeting today at 3 p.m. to discuss the
telescope, hearings officer and funding issue.”  Similar to the January 30-31,
2012 emails, the email indicates an interest in knowing when the final BLNR
decision will be made given funding deadlines.  It was also sent prior to the
March 21, 2012 meeting by someone who appears to have helped schedule the
meeting, but did not actually attend it.  Thus, the fact that this email
mentions “funding” does demonstrate that Aila discussed the merits of the case
at the March 21, 2012 meeting.
 
38
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on BLNR rose to the level of impropriety.
 
We now turn to Kilakila’s three requests for
 
communications regarding the ATST. In its March 30, 2012 motion
 
for disclosure, its June 12, 2012 motion to reconsider Minute
 Order No. 23, and its September 27, 2012 second motion to
 reconsider Minute Order No. 23, Kilakila sought the release of
 oral, written, and electronic communications involving BLNR
 members. Kilakila was specifically concerned with ex parte
 communications involving Aila, though it never moved to
 disqualify Aila or any other BLNR member. BLNR provided
 information about the March 21, 2012 meeting in response to the
 first two requests, and dismissed the third request outright. 
We have concerns about BLNR’s handling of Kilakila’s
 
requests. For example, in light of Kilakila’s receipt of the
 January 30-31, 2012 emails, BLNR could have granted discovery
 limited to the parties involved in the emails, rather than
 dismissing the request outright. In future contested case
 hearings, BLNR could certainly do more to remove doubts of
 impropriety and build confidence in its permit approval process. 
Despite these concerns, we cannot say that BLNR abused
 
its discretion when it denied Kilakila’s requests. 
“[A]
 
determination made by an administrative agency acting within the
 boundaries of its delegated authority will not be overturned
 unless ‘arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by . . . [a]
 
39
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.’” Paul’s Elec. 
Serv., 104 Hawai' i at 419, 91 P.3d at 501 (citing HRS § 
91-14(g)(6)); see also Save Diamond Head Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 
24, 211 P.3d at 82 (stating that an agency’s exercise of 
discretion is reviewable under the arbitrary and capricious standard). 
BLNR had broad discretion over Kilakila’s discovery 
requests, and it did in fact provide additional information in response to the requests. See Hawai' i Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, 
Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 472, 164 P.3d 696, 730 (2007) (stating 
that courts have “considerable latitude and discretion” over discovery requests). In its Minute Order No. 23, BLNR disclosed the participants and nature of the March 21, 2012 meeting. Later, BLNR clarified that the meeting’s topic of discussion concerned the timing of BLNR’s decision in light of the dismissal of hearing officer Jacobson. Contrary to Kilakila’s argument, BLNR was not required to provide all of the disclosures sought in the requests. See id. (determining that the circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion when it “did not grant all of the requests for discovery[,]” but did require an opposing party provide a financial statement which addressed concerns of 
improper payment underlying the discovery requests). 
BLNR also provided its reasoning for not disclosing
 
more information. It concluded that Kilakila’s first request was
 
40
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
too broad, noting that it did not provide a time frame for the
 
request and encompassed communications beyond the subject of the
 contested case hearing. BLNR also concluded that Kilakila failed
 to show any improper ex parte communications, and as discussed
 above, we agree that the communications did not constitute an
 impermissible ex parte communication in violation of HAR § 13-1­37 or an improper political influence under the reasoning in
 Waiâhole.
20
 
This reasoning was not unreasonable or unlawful. See 
Del Monte Fresh Produce, 112 Hawai' i at 509, 146 P.3d at 1086 
(Hawai'i Labor Relations Board did not abuse its discretion when 
its disputed action was not “unreasonable or in disregard of principles of law”); see also Hac v. Univ. of Hawai' i, 102 Hawai' i 
92, 100, 73 P.3d 46, 54 (2003) (“[T]he extent to which discovery is permitted . . . is subject to considerable latitude and the discretion of the trial court.”) (quoting Wakabayashi v. Hertz Corp., 66 Haw. 265, 275, 660 P.2d 1309, 1315 (1983)) (internal 
20 In circumstances such as these, we have never held that procedural 
communications with agency officials raise due process concerns.  Thus, we
need not employ any constitutional analysis, but instead must refer to theapplicable statute and administrative rule, neither of which precludeprocedural communications.  See HRS § 91-13 (“No official of an agency whorenders a decision in a contested case shall consult any person on any issueof fact except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate,save to the extent required for the disposition of ex parte matters authorizedby law.”) (emphasis added); HAR § 13-1-37.  The communications here were permissible as they did not address the merits of the contested case or anyissues of fact.  Given that this issue involves a question of administrativelaw, the appropriate standard of review of BLNR’s denial of Kilakila’sdisclosure requests is abuse of discretion.  See Paul’s Elec. Serv., 104 
Hawai'i at 419, 91 P.3d at 501. 
41
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
brackets omitted). 
Therefore, we cannot conclude that BLNR abused its
 
discretion. However, we caution public officials and other
 
interested parties that contacts of the type involved here carry
 significant risk of creating the appearance of impropriety,
 and––as Jacobson’s filings indicate––of having an effect on the
 process. 
B.	 BLNR properly analyzed the criteria under HAR § 13-5-30
 
Kilakila argues that BLNR’s decision to grant the
 
permit was not supported by the evidence and does not satisfy HAR
 
§ 13-5-30(c), which provides eight criteria that BLNR must
 consider prior to approving a permit. Specifically, Kilakila
 argues that the ICA erred in affirming BLNR’s findings under HAR
 § 13-5-30(c)(4), (5), and (6). We address these three criteria
 below. 
1.	 BLNR did not err in determining that the ATST would
not have a substantial adverse impact under HAR
§ 13-5-30(c)(4)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) states: “The proposed land use
 
will not cause substantial adverse impact to existing natural
 
resources within the surrounding area, community, or region[.]” 
“Natural resource” is defined as “resources such as plants,
 aquatic life and wildlife, cultural, historic, recreational,
 geologic, and archeological sites, scenic areas, ecologically
 significant areas, watersheds, and minerals.” HAR § 13-5-2.
 
42
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kilakila argues that the ICA erred in
 
“rubberstamp[ing]” BLNR’s findings of no substantial adverse
 
impact on existing natural resources, specifically cultural and
 visual resources. Kilakila argues that the ICA, the circuit
 court, and BLNR erred by failing to cite any evidence that the
 impacts to cultural resources would be less than substantial and
 that mitigation measures would reduce the intensity of the
 impacts. Kilakila further asserts that BLNR erred in
 disregarding certain findings in the FEIS to conclude that the
 ATST would not have a substantial impact on scenic vistas. 
Despite Kilakila’s contentions, we do not find that 
BLNR’s treatment of the FEIS and its analysis under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) was clearly erroneous. See Save Diamond Head 
Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 25, 211 P.3d at 83 (“A conclusion of law 
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard[.]”). 
It is undisputed that the FEIS concluded that there
 
would be adverse impacts on cultural and visual resources from
 the construction and operation of the ATST. The FEIS determined
 that there would be “major, adverse, short- and long-term, direct
 impacts” on cultural resources and that mitigation measures
 “would not reduce the impact intensity[.]” It also determined
 that the direct impact on visual resources within the Haleakalâ
 National Park would be “moderate, adverse and long-term” and that
 
43
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“[n]o mitigation would adequately reduce this impact.” From
 
outside the Park, the impact of building the ATST “would result
 in minor, adverse and long-term impact to visual resources[,]”
 and therefore “[n]o mitigation would be necessary.” 
Kilakila suggests that the FEIS findings required BLNR 
to determine that HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) was not satisfied. While BLNR was required to consider the findings in the FEIS, it was not bound by these findings and still retained discretion over its decision. See Mauna Kea Power Co. v. Bd. of Land & Nat. 
Res., 76 Hawai' i 259, 265, 874 P.2d 1084, 1090 (1994) (affirming 
BLNR determination despite conflicting conclusions in EIS). In other words, BLNR was not required to conclude that the ATST would not satisfy HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) solely because the FEIS determined there would be major adverse impacts on cultural resources. Rather, an environmental impact statement is “merely an informational document,” and its findings neither presume approval nor denial of a conservation district use application. Id.; see also HRS § 343-2 (defining “environmental impact statement” as “an informational document”). 
As such, in making its decision to grant the permit,
 
BLNR properly considered the FEIS, along with the information
 provided by the permit application, the site visits and maps, the
 public hearing testimony, the contested case hearing testimony
 and evidence, the hearing officer’s recommendation, and other
 
44
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
documents. See HAR §§ 13-5-31, 13-5-40 (1994), 13-1-28; see also
 
Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984)
 
(“[I]n deference to the administrative agency’s expertise and
 experience in its particular field, the courts should not
 substitute their own judgment for that of the administrative
 agency where mixed questions of fact and law are presented. This
 is particularly true where the law to be applied is not a statute
 but an administrative rule promulgated by the same agency
 interpreting it.”) (citation omitted). 
Next, Kilakila argues that BLNR did not sufficiently 
explain how it reached its decision despite the conflicting findings in the FEIS. More specifically, Kilakila asserts that BLNR should have provided “supporting analytical data” for its decision, rather than “a perfunctory description or mere listing of mitigation measures[.]” Kilakila takes this language from Makua v. Rumsfeld, in which the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai' i concluded that a supplemental environmental 
assessment’s finding of no significant impact on endangered species “contain[ed] no analysis or evidence of the effectiveness of [the] mitigation measures” and therefore was insufficient. 163 F. Supp. 2d 1202, 1218 (D. Haw. 2001). 
In addition to not being binding on this court, Makua
 
is not analogous because the issue in that case was whether an
 environmental impact statement should have been prepared. Id. at
 
45
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1216. Here, an environmental impact statement was completed, and 
BLNR subsequently determined “[b]ased upon the evidence and testimony presented in this case, and the files and records herein,” that a permit approval was warranted. Furthermore, this court has never required an agency to provide “supporting analytical data” to uphold its findings. Instead, our court requires that “where the record demonstrates considerable conflict or uncertainty in the evidence, the agency must articulate its factual analysis with reasonable clarity, giving some reason for discounting the evidence rejected.” Waiâhole, 94 
Hawai'i at 163-64, 9 P.3d at 475-76 (emphasis added). 
We therefore consider whether BLNR articulated with
 
reasonable clarity why the ATST would not result in a substantial
 adverse impact on natural resources, despite the apparently
 conflicting findings in the FEIS. 
BLNR noted that “[t]he impacts of the ATST Project must
 
be viewed in the context of the HO site[,]” which has “housed
 astronomy facilities since the 1950’s and was specifically
 created for astronomy uses.” There are eleven facilities
 currently located within the HO site, and the ATST would leave
 only one vacant location, the Reber Circle site. 
Due to these existing facilities in the HO, the FEIS
 
found that there would be “major, adverse, long-term, direct
 impacts” on cultural resources even under the No-Action
 
46
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Alternative. The No-Action Alternative refers to the scenario in
 
which “no construction [of the ATST] would take place and
 operations [in the HO] would continue unaltered.” These impacts
 are almost identical to the impacts that would result from the
 construction of the ATST, which the FEIS described as “major,
 adverse, short- and long-term, direct.” Therefore, regardless of
 whether or not the ATST was constructed, the FEIS determined that
 there would be major, adverse impacts on cultural resources. 
Consistent with this finding in the FEIS, BLNR
 
concluded that “because of the past construction of man made
 structures[,]” the ATST’s additional impact on cultural resources
 would be “incremental[.]” BLNR concluded that the impact on
 visual resources would be similarly incremental: “[T]he ATST
 would be visible to a point of co-dominance with other nearby
 structures” and “would not substantially alter the existing
 visual character visible in any view.” In other words, BLNR
 concluded that the ATST would have an impact on cultural and
 visual resources, but given the existing buildings in the HO,
 BLNR concluded that the impact would not be substantial. 
BLNR also considered mitigating measures when
 
determining whether ATST would have a substantial adverse impact
 on natural resources. In the CDUA, UHIfA committed to mitigation
 measures “intended to reduce the duration, intensity or scale of
 impacts or to compensate for the impact by replacing or providing
 
47
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substitute resources or environments.” The measures specifically
 
directed at reducing cultural and visual impacts included
 creating a Native Hawaiian Working Group to address issues
 concerning Native Hawaiians, setting aside area within the HO
 site solely for use by Native Hawaiians, removing unused
 facilities, and decommissioning the ATST within 50 years. 
Other mitigating effects included the expected
 
scientific, economic, and educational benefits of the ATST. BLNR
 determined that the ATST would result in “the advancement of
 scientific knowledge,” as it would “significantly increase
 understanding of the Sun . . . and help scientists predict major
 solar events having a profound impact on life on Earth.” 
Additionally, BLNR noted that “[j]obs and revenue for the economy
 would be created on Maui,” including job opportunities in the
 “clean high-tech industry.” It also concluded that
 “[e]ducational opportunities would be created for students at the
 Maui Community College as well as for native Hawaiian
 astronomers” to “foster a better understanding of the
 relationships between native Hawaiian culture and science.”
21
 
21
 Specifically, Maui College submitted a “mitigation proposal,”
 
which requested funding for:
 
(1) development and implementation of an innovative
math and science curriculum and program based on
Hawaiian cultural knowledge and worldview; (2)
building up relevant coursework and dedicated programs
at Maui College; (3) significantly increasing the
number and retention of native Hawaiian students in
 
(continued...)
 
48
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Additionally, BLNR noted that the ATST was designed to
 
be as small as possible while still being consistent with
 
scientific needs. It also added permit conditions that would
 mitigate impacts on cultural resources, including: 
17. Within 2 years of completion of the construction
of the ATST facility, Kilakila may require the
 in
 construction and consecration of a new ahu[22]
addition to the two currently present.  Upon request
by Kilakila, UHIfA will work with Kilakila, the
Cultural Specialist and the Native Hawaiian Working
Group to select an appropriate location for the new
ahu which shall be built and consecrated in [a]
similar manner to the prior ahu;
. . . . 
20. In or
der to protect the traditional and customary
rights exercised in the HO site, during construction
of the ATST Project and after, UHIfA shall allow
access to the two ahu for the reasonable exercise of
 traditional and customary practices of native
Hawaiians to the extent feasible and safe, as
determined by the Cultural Specialist and the ATST
Project construction site supervisor.
 
Based on this analysis, BLNR concluded that “[t]he
 
proposed land use, when considered together with all minimization
 
and mitigation commitments discussed . . . and with the
 additional conditions contained in this Decision, will not cause
 
21(...continued)
Scien
ce, Technology, Engineering and Math (“STEM”)
courses and programs at Maui College; and (4)
cultivating and developing an experienced, highly
skilled native Hawaiian workforce for STEM related
 industries and careers.
 
The National Science Foundation adopted the proposal and “will make $20
million ($2 million per fiscal year for ten years) available to support this
educational initiative to address the intersection between traditional native
 Hawaiian culture and science and to foster a better understanding of the
relationships between native Hawaiian culture and science.” 
22
 An “ahu” is defined as an altar or shrine.  Pukui & Elbert,
 
Hawaiian Dictionary 8 (2nd ed. 1986).  In 2005, UHIfA contracted with Native
Hawaiian stonemasons to erect a west-facing ahu within the HO site.  In 2006,
“in the spirit of makana aloha for the ATST Project,” UHIfA contracted with
the same stonemasons to erect an east-facing ahu in the HO site. 
49
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substantial adverse impact [sic] to existing natural resources
 
within the surrounding area, community or region.” 
In reviewing BLNR’s findings under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4),
 
we first consider BLNR’s reliance on the “incremental” nature of
 the ATST Project. We agree with Kilakila that BLNR does not have
 license to endlessly approve permits for construction in
 conservation districts, based purely on the rationale that every
 additional facility is purely incremental. It cannot be the case
 that the presence of one facility necessarily renders all
 additional facilities as an “incremental” addition. 
In spite of our concerns, we are not “left with a firm 
and definite conviction” that BLNR made a mistake in reaching its conclusion given the highly specific circumstances of this case. Brescia v. N. Shore Ohana, 115 Hawai' i 477, 491-92, 168 P.3d 929, 
943-44 (2007) (“An agency’s findings are not clearly erroneous and will be upheld if supported by reliable, probative and substantive evidence unless the reviewing court is left with a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made.”) (quoting Poe v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd., 105 Hawai' i 97, 100, 
94 P.3d 652, 655 (2004)). 
BLNR reviewed the ATST Project within the context of a
 
single, highly developed 18.166-acre area within a much larger
 conservation district, and which involves a use (astromony) which
 is specifically permitted in the general subzone of the
 
50
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conservation district. The FEIS also determined that the level 
of impacts on natural resources would be substantially the same even in the absence of the ATST. In addition, UHIfA committed to mitigation measures directed at reducing the cultural and visual impacts on natural resources. See HAR § 13-5-42(a)(9) (1994) 
(“All representations relative to mitigation set forth in the accepted environmental assessment or impact statement for the proposed use are incorporated as conditions of the permit[.]”); see also Morimoto v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 107 Hawai' i 296, 
303, 113 P.3d 172, 179 (2005) (concluding that BLNR properly considered mitigation measures when evaluating HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4)). Taken cumulatively, BLNR “articulate[d] its factual analysis with reasonable clarity” why the ATST would not result in a substantial adverse impact on natural resources. Waiâhole, 94 Hawai' i at 164, 9 P.3d at 476. 
Lastly, Kilkila argues that BLNR made its findings
 
under HAR § 13-5-30(c) based on “unwritten criteria,” referring
 to BLNR’s mention of the ATST’s scientific, economic, and
 educational benefits in its findings under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4). 
However, there is no regulation suggesting that BLNR could not
 consider benefits related to HAR § 13-5-30(c) when approving a
 permit. HAR § 13-5-30(c) states, “In evaluating the merits of a
 proposed land use, the department or board shall apply the
 following criteria[,]” but the statute and agency regulations
 
51
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concerning conservation districts do not suggest that scientific,
 
economic, and education benefits are not relevant. Rather, they
 suggest the opposite. 
The purpose of HAR § 13-5-30(c) and the other
 
conservation district regulations is “to regulate land-use in the
 conservation district for the purpose of conserving, protecting,
 and preserving the important natural and cultural resources of
 the State through appropriate management and use to promote their
 long-term sustainability and the public health, safety, and
 welfare.” HAR § 13-5-1 (1994). The statute governing the
 conservation districts, HRS § 183C-1 (Supp. 1996), similarly
 states: 
The legislature finds that lands within the
state land use conservation district contain important
natural resources essential to the preservation of the
State’s fragile natural ecosystems and the
sustainability of the State’s water supply.  It is
 therefore, the intent of the legislature to conserve,
protect, and preserve the important natural resources
of the State through appropriate management and use to
promote their long-term sustainability and the public
health, safety and welfare.
 
BLNR is therefore unequivocally tasked with protecting
 
natural and cultural resources through “appropriate management
 
and use to promote their long-term sustainability and the public
 health, safety, and welfare.” HRS § 183C-1; HAR § 13-5-1. The
 consideration of relevant scientific, economic, and educational
 benefits of the ATST within the context of the HO does not
 conflict with this, as these benefits impact long-term
 
52
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sustainability and public welfare.23 See Black’s Law Dictionary
 
1828 (10th ed. 2014) (defining “public welfare” as “[a] society’s
 
well-being in matters of health, safety, order, morality,
 economics, and politics”).
 
The cases cited by Kilakila are not applicable here, 
where an agency has evaluated considerations relevant to––rather than instead of––the criteria set forth in the applicable regulations. See Aluli v. Lewin, 73 Haw. 56, 58, 828 P.2d 802, 
803 (1992) (agency had no rules governing the issuance of permit); Mahuiki v. Planning Comm’n, 65 Haw. 506, 519, 654 P.2d 874, 882 (1982) (court found no evidence in the record supporting agency finding); Ainoa v. Unemployment Compensation Appeals Div., 62 Haw. 286, 293, 614 P.2d 380, 385 (1980) (agency failed to comply with existing requirements); Aguiar v. Hawai' i Hous. 
Auth., 55 Haw. 478, 498, 522 P.2d 1255, 1268 (1974) (same). 
Therefore, while BLNR could certainly not rely solely
 
on the scientific, economic, or educational benefits of the ATST,
 BLNR did not improperly consider benefits relevant to the ATST’s
 
23 We agree with Kilakila that BLNR should not have considered that 
“[j]obs and revenue for the economy would be created on Maui” under
13-5-30(c)(4) inasmuch as jobs unrelated to the preservation and advancementof natural or cultural resources are irrelevant.   However, as BLNR properlyconsidered the scientific and educational benefits in addition to the findingsin the FEIS and numerous other mitigating measures, we conclude that thiserror was harmless. See Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple, 87 Hawai 'i at 241­
42, 953 P.2d at 1339-40 (holding that the Director of the Department of LandUtilization’s improper consultation of evidence outside the record washarmless error because “the outcome of the proceedings would not have beenaltered”). 
53
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expected impact on existing natural resources under HAR § 
13-5-30(c)(4). See Morimoto, 107 Hawai' i at 303, 113 P.3d at 179 
(allowing BLNR to consider mitigation measures even though not explicitly mentioned in HAR § 13-5-30(c)). 
Accordingly, we find that BLNR’s conclusion that the 
ATST satisfied the criteria under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) was not clearly erroneous, though we emphasize that review of future BLNR decisions will be “dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case.” Save Diamond Head Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 
25, 211 P.3d at 83 (quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce, 112 Hawai' i 
at 499, 146 P.3d at 1076). 
2.	 BLNR did not err in interpreting HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5) to
include the area within the HO
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5) states: “The proposed land use,
 
including buildings, structures, and facilities, shall be
 
compatible with the locality and surrounding areas, appropriate
 to the physical conditions and capabilities of the specific
 parcel or parcels[.]” Kilakila argues that the ICA erred in
 affirming BLNR’s interpretation of “locality and surrounding
 areas” in HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5) as the immediate vicinity of the
 proposed ATST site. Rather, Kilakila asserts that “surrounding
 areas” includes Haleakalâ  National Park, and that there is no
 
evidence that the ATST is compatible with the Park. 
In its consideration of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5), BLNR
 
54
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
focused on the permitted land use in the HO site:
 
The HO site was specifically set aside for observatory
site purposes under Executive Order No. 1987.
Astronomical and observatory facilities have existed
on the HO site since 1951.  The ATST Project includes
the construction of astronomical facilities which are
 compatible with the locality and surrounding areas,
appropriate to the physical conditions and
capabilities of the specific parcel.
 
Because it did not mention areas outside of the HO
 
site, BLNR necessarily interpreted “locality and surrounding
 
areas” as the areas within the HO site. 
We defer to BLNR’s interpretation unless it was plainly 
erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose. See Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai' i 53, 67, 283 P.3d 
60, 74 (2012) (“An agency’s interpretation of its own rules is generally entitled to deference.”); In re Wai' ola O Moloka' i, 
Inc., 103 Hawai' i 401, 425, 83 P.3d 664, 688 (2004) (stating that 
courts do not defer to agency interpretations that are “plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose”). 
The ATST will be located in a small subsection of the
 
HO site, which is a clearly defined, highly specialized area. 
The HO site’s 18.166 acres were specifically set aside for
 observatory site purposes by Governor Quinn in 1961, and this
 site is the only site at Haleakalâ  used for these purposes. 
Since Governor Quinn’s designation, the HO has been considerably
 developed by the construction of numerous observatories and other
 
55
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
astronomical research facilities. The ATST will be the next
 
facility built within the site’s set boundaries and will fulfill
 the site’s designated purposes. As such, it was not plainly
 erroneous to interpret “locality” as the location of the ATST and
 “surrounding areas” as the HO site, due to the site’s unique
 characteristics and history. 
Kilakila argues that BLNR recognized that Haleakalâ
 
National Park was part of the “surrounding area” based on a quote
 from the BLNR order approving the permit. In describing a site
 visit, BLNR states: 
The parties and Hearing Officer Jacobson visited the
site of the proposed ATST and the surrounding area onJuly 15, 2011.  They observed the views from the area,the proximity of the structures to each other, the ahuin the HO site and views from them, the view from Pu 'u 
'Ula'ula, the view from Haleakal â National Park Visitor 
Center and the area around the Visitor Center, theview from the road driving up to the HO site, and thehistoric sites in the HO site. 
This quote does not demonstrate any such recognition,
 
as the second sentence appears to simply be listing locations
 
without any reference to the first sentence’s use of “surrounding
 area.” Regardless, the fact that BLNR used the term “surrounding
 area” in describing a site visit does not bind BLNR to this exact
 definition when interpreting HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5). 
Therefore, the ICA did not err in affirming BLNR’s
 
conclusions under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5).
 
56
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3.	 BLNR did not err in concluding existing aspects of the
land would be preserved under HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6) states: “The existing physical and
 
environmental aspects of the land, such as natural beauty and
 
open space characteristics, will be preserved or improved upon,
 whichever is applicable[.]” Kilakila argues that HAR §
 13-5-30(c)(6) is not satisfied because UH admitted that the ATST
 does not improve natural beauty or open space characteristics,
 and because “BLNR failed to point to any evidence that ATST
 preserves natural beauty and open space[.]” 
In its consideration of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6), BLNR noted
 
that “[t]he ATST will not enhance the natural beauty or open
 space characteristics of the HO site.” However, because “[t]he
 HO site contains various astronomy facilities, including support
 buildings, roads and parking lots[,]” and “the proposed ATST is
 similar to existing facilities,” BLNR concluded that “[t]he ATST
 will be consistent with and will preserve the existing physical
 and environmental aspects of the land.” In other words, BLNR
 relied on similar reasoning as in HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4), which
 focused on the ATST within the context of the HO site. Because
 the ATST will be located within the HO site and among other
 pre-existing facilities, the ATST will maintain, or “preserve,”
 the “existing physical and environmental aspects of the land[.]” 
Additionally, BLNR considered numerous mitigation
 
57
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
commitments in the CDUA, which were designed to mitigate impacts
 
on biological resources. The measures included consulting a
 wildlife biologist, monitoring invertebrates, flora, and fauna,
 and following washing and inspection protocol to prevent the
 introduction of alien invasive species. BLNR also determined
 that “[l]ittle to no impacts are anticipated to the topography,
 geology, soils, water resources or air quality as a result of the
 ATST Project and as such no mitigation is required.” 
Therefore, similar to its analysis of HAR 
§ 13-5-30(c)(4), BLNR articulated with “reasonable clarity” why the ATST would preserve the existing physical and environmental aspects of the land. See Waiâhole, 94 Hawai' i 97 at 164, 9 P.3d 
at 476. Because we are not “left with a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made,” we do not find BLNR’s findings regarding HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6) clearly erroneous, and we affirm the ICA on this point. Brescia, 115 Hawai' i at 492, 168 
P.3d at 944. 
C.	 The ATST is not Inconsistent with the Purposes of
Conservation Districts and General Subzones
 
Kilakila argues that the ICA erred in determining that
 
the ATST is consistent with the purposes of the conservation
 
district because of its “unprecedented height, mass, and scale;
 industrial appearance; use of hazardous materials, location in
 ‘Science City’, location in an area that is already 40%
 
58
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
developed, and substantial impacts[.]” The issue presents a 
mixed question of fact and law, and is therefore “reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case.” Save Diamond Head Waters, 121 Hawai' i at 25, 211 P.3d at 
83 (quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce, 112 Hawai' i at 499, 146 P.3d 
at 1076). 
To grant a CDUP in a conservation district, HAR
 
§ 13-5-30(c)(1) requires that the proposed land use is
 “consistent with the purpose of the conservation district[.]” 
Additionally, HAR § 13-5-30(c)(2) requires that the proposed land
 use must be “consistent with the objectives of the subzone of the
 land on which the use will occur[.]” The ATST must therefore be
 consistent with the purposes of general subzones and conservation
 districts. 
A general subzone seeks to “designate open space where
 
specific conservation uses may not be defined, but where urban
 use would be premature.” HAR § 13-5-14(a). HAR § 13-5-24
 together with HAR § 13-5-25 provide guidance on appropriate land
 uses in general subzones. HAR § 13-5-24 lists “astronomy
 facilities under an approved management plan” as one of the
 allowable uses under a resource subzone. HAR § 13-5-25 states
 that “[i]n addition to the land uses identified [for general
 subzones], all identified land uses . . . for the . . . resource
 
59
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
subzones also apply to the general subzone, unless otherwise
 
noted.” Together, these rules specifically permit the
 construction of astronomy facilities and do not specify a limit
 as to size, appearance, or other characteristics. As an
 astronomy facility, the ATST falls under an appropriate use and
 is not inconsistent with the purposes of a general subzone. 
Additionally, as discussed above, the ATST complies
 
with the broad purposes set out in the statute and agency rules
 regulating conservation districts. See HAR § 13-5-1 (directing
 
BLNR to manage natural and cultural resources “to promote their
 long-term sustainability and the public health, safety, and
 welfare”); HRS § 183C-1 (stating that the legislature created
 conservation districts “to conserve, protect, and preserve the
 important natural resources of the State through appropriate
 management and use to promote their long-term sustainability and
 the public health, safety and welfare”). 
In sum, BLNR did not erroneously conclude that the ATST
 
was consistent with the purposes of both general subzones and
 conservation districts.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons stated above, BLNR properly granted
 
CDUP MA-11-04 for construction of the ATST. The permit did not
 suffer from the procedural infirmities of prejudgment or improper
 ex parte communications, BLNR made valid findings under the
 
60
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
applicable permit criteria, and the ATST is not inconsistent with
 
the purposes of the conservation district. Therefore, the ICA’s
 November 13, 2014 Judgment on Appeal is affirmed. 
David Kimo Frankel and 
Sharla Ann Manley
for petitionerKilakila ' O Haleakalâ  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Sabrina S. McKennaLinda L.W. Chow
 
for respondents Board of
Land and Natural Resources,
Department of Land and Natural
Resources, and Suzanne Case,
in her official capacity as
Chairperson of the Board of
Land and Natural Resources
 
Lisa Woods Munger, Lisa A.Bail, Kimberly A. Vossman,and Christine A. Terada for respondent Universityof Hawai' i 
61
 