 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-30172 31-AUG-2015 08:02 AM IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI
 
---oOo---
CUC THI NGO, ANGELO NGUYEN, ANTHONY NGUYEN, AN VAN NGUYEN, and 
LEO YOUNG, ESQ., in his capacity as Personal Representative of 
the Estate of Jennifer Giao Nguyen, Deceased,  
Petitioners/Plaintiffs
-Appellants,  
 
vs.  
 
THE QUEEN’S MEDICAL CENTER, a Hawai ʻi Domestic Nonprofit 
Corporation; THINH T. NGUYEN, M.D.; THE EMERGENCY GROUP, INC.,   
a Hawaiʻ i Domestic Professional Corporation,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
SCWC-30172
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(ICA NO. 30172; CIV. NO. 07-1-0268)
 
August 31, 2015
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE AYABE,  ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
 
I. Introduction 
This case arises from the death of a nine-year-old 
minor child (“Minor”) from cardiac arrest caused by hypovolemic 
shock, a condition that results when “ severe blood and fluid 
loss make the heart unable to pump enough blood ” through the  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
                         
 
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
body. Ngo v. Queen’s Med. Ctr. , No. 30172, at 5 (App. Dec. 30, 
2013) (mem.). 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs- Appellants are Minor’s 
parents (“Parents”) , brothers, and the personal representative 
of Minor’s Estate (collectively “Plaintiffs”). Plaintiffs 
claim, inter alia, that Respondents/Defendants-Appellees the 
Queen’s Medical Center (“QMC”),1 Dr. Thinh T. Nguyen (hereinafter 
“Defendant”), and T he Emergency Group, Inc. (collectively, 
“Defendants”) failed to provide information required under the 
informed consent doctrine before treating Minor for nausea and 
vomiting with the anti-emetic medication Reglan.2 Plaintiffs 
assert that Reglan led to Minor’s hypovolemic shock because it 
increased the motility of Minor’s stomach and small intestines, 
or, in other words, increased Minor’s diarrhea. It is 
undisputed that Defendant did not give Plaintiffs any 
information about Reglan or its risks and side effects, and did 
not provide any information regarding alternative treatments.  
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit 
court”) granted judgment as a matter of law (“JMOL”) in favor of 
3Defendants on the informed consent claim. The Intermediate 
1 QMC is not a party in the appellate proceedings as the sole issue 
on appeal is Defendant’s alleged failure to obtain Plaintiffs’ informed 
consent; thus, issues concerning QMC will not be discussed except where 
relevant. 
2 Anti-emetic medications help to prevent nausea and vomiting. 
3 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
2  
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
                         
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed the circuit court’s decision 
on appeal, concluding that Plaintiffs failed to meet their 
evidentiary burden regarding the “materiality of the risk of 
harm” that resulted from Defendant’s treatment of Minor with 
Reglan. 
At issue in this appeal is the extent of a plaintiff’s 
burden of presenting expert medical evidence regarding the 
“materiality of the risk of harm” that occurred in order to 
support a prima facie case for a physician’s negligent failure 
4to obtain informed consent.
Hawaiʻi law on th e doctrine of informed consent has 
evolved significantly in the past three decades.  The doctrine 
originated in the common law, and was largely codified in 1976 
in Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (“ HRS”)  § 671-3, which has since  been 
amended several times.  Some common law precepts, however, still 
govern. For example, we  have held that “expert testimony will 
ordinarily be required to establish the ‘materiality’ of the 
4 Plaintiffs present the following questions on certiorari: 
1. Whether it was error to exclude or discount evidence of 
information contained in a drug’s package insert or 
[Physicians’ Desk Re ference] entry, in combination with  
expert testimony as to the significance of that information, on a claim of informed consent.  
2. Whether a physician’s admitted failure to disclose the 
information required by [Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) 
§§] 671- 3(b)(1) through (6), when coupled with evidence 
of the materiality of such failure, precludes a finding 
of informed consent.  
3  
 
   
 
    
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
risks, i.e., ‘the nature of risks inherent in a particul ar 
treatment, the probabilities of therapeutic success, the 
frequency of the occurrence of particular risks, and the nature 
of available alternatives to treatment[]’” (“expert testimony 
requirements”). Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists , 125 Hawai ʻi 
253, 262, 259 P.3d 569, 578 (2011) (citations omitted). “The 
standard of disclosure of material risks prior to treatment, 
however, . . . is capable of determination under the patient
-
oriented standard without reference to prevailing medical 
standards or medical judgment . . . .” Carr v. Strode,  79 
Hawaiʻi 475, 485 n.6, 904 P.2d 489, 499 n.6 (1995). 
In this case , Plaintiffs’ 
experts testified on the 
risks of Reglan generally, and also explained the significance 
of the information in the manufacturer’s insert. Moreover, 
pursuant to Craft v. Peebles , 78 Hawai ʻi 287, 893 P.2d 138 
(1995), although a manufacturer’s insert cannot, on its own, 
satisfy a plaintiff’s burden of producing expert testimony to 
establish the materiality of a risk, it can constitute evidence 
that a fact finder may consider along with expert testimony on 
the issue. We hold, therefore, that Plaintiffs presented 
sufficient expert medical evidence to advance their informed 
consent claim to the jury. 
In addition, Plaintiffs’ complaint clearly alleged 
that Defendant treated Minor “without obtaining the informed 
4  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
                         
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consent of Plaintiff[.]” The informed consent doctrine includes 
a physician’s duty to disclose “recognized alterna tive 
treatments or procedures ” and “intended and anticipated results 
of the proposed treatment or procedure [.]” Relevant evidence of 
alternative treatments and the use of Reglan in children was 
adduced. Therefore, the ICA erred in concluding that Plaintiffs 
waived the issue of Defendant’s failure to inform them of all 
statutorily mandated information. 
Accordingly, we vacate in part (1) the ICA’s February 
11, 2014 Judgment on Appeal as to Plaintiffs’ informed consent 
claims; and (2) the circuit court’s July 28, 2009 Final Judgment 
as well as its order granting Defendants ’ motion for JMOL as to 
Plaintiffs’ informed consent claims, and remand the case to the 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
II. Background 
A. Facts 
On Friday, February 13, 2004, Minor’s Parents and two 
brothers took nine-year-old Minor to the QMC emergency room (“ER”) to be treated for diarrhea and vomiting, which she had 
been experiencing since the previous night.
5 Defendant treated 
Minor at the QMC ER, where he performed a variety of tests, 
5 Parents are not fluent in English, but their children are fluent. 
Minor’s brother Anthony Nguyen served as an interpreter for Defendant and 
Parents while Minor was in the hospital. 
5  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
                         
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
which revealed an elevated heart rate, mild to moderate 
dehydration, and a possible infection. 
Defendant diagnosed Minor with viral gastroenteritis, 
an infection of the stomach. He ordered intravenous (“IV”) 
fluid of normal saline and ten milligrams of Reglan through an 
IV line.  Upon discharge, Minor was given a prescription for ten 
milligrams of Reglan tablets to take as needed for nausea, and 
instructed to follow up with her primary physician in three to 
four days. 
Minor continued to suffer from diarrhea and vomiting 
after returning home.  Minor’s mother testified that she gave 
Minor Reglan tablets every six hours as directed.6 One of 
Minor’s brothers called QMC three times -– on Friday night, 
Saturday morning, and Saturday night –-concerning Minor’s 
continued symptoms. Each time, QMC staff told him to let the 
medicine work, and to follow up with Minor’s primary physician 
on Monday. The family testified that Minor’s symptoms remained 
the same throughout the weekend. 
At 3:00 a.m. on Sunday morning, Minor told her Parents 
that she was having trouble breathing. At 7:00 a.m., Minor 
became unconscious and an ambulance was called to take her to 
6 Plaintiffs’ expert testimony focused mainly on the IV 
administration of Reglan because whether any Reglan tablets actually entered 
Minor’s system was disputed. 
6  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the hospital, where she died of cardiac arrest caused by 
hypovolemic shock. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
On February 12, 2007, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in 
circuit court against Defendants, alleging medical negligence 
and negligent failure to obtain informed consent. 
1. The Trial 
a. Testimony of Defendant 
At trial, Plaintiffs called Defendant as an adverse 
witness. The following exchange took place regarding 
Defendant’s failure to provide pretreatment disclosures: 
Q. When you prescribed and caused the intravenous 
dosage of Reglan to be given, before doing so, did you ever 
tell the parents of any risks involved with Reglan? 
A. No. 
Q. After the IV was in process, did you ever tell 
the parents of any risks associated with Reglan? 
A. No[.]

 
. . . 
 
Q. When you wrote out the prescription, . . . before 
the parents left the hospital, did you at any time give them any warnings 
of any kind about the drug Reglan? 
A. No. 
Defendant testified that he did not inform Parents of 
the manufacturer’s position on the safety and effectiveness of 
Reglan in pediatric patients. He contended that the  
manufacturer’s warning meant that the safety and effectiveness 
of Reglan in pediatric patients had not been established to 
standards set by the United States Food and Drug Administration 
7  
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(“FDA”); however, he testified that “[his] training and 
experience has made this drug a safe medication.” Defendant 
also testified that he prescribed Reglan to pediatric patients 
as “an off-label use[,]” and that he prescribed the dosage based 
on Minor’s weight, wh ich was approximately 150 lbs. 
Defendant testified that he knew diarrhea was a side 
effect of Reglan. He further testified that he did not attempt 
to treat Minor’s diarrhea other than by ordering IV fluids to 
hydrate her. 
In addition, Defendant testified that at the time he 
administered Reglan to Minor, he knew that an alternative drug 
without Reglan’s side effects was “out there but [he] didn’t use 
it” because “it wasn’t available to [him] to use.” Plaintiffs’ 
counsel clarified that the alternative drug was Zofran.  
Plaintiffs’ counsel also introduced into evidence a list of 
drugs approved by the FDA in 1991, which included Zofran.  
Defendant further testified that he knew of the existence of an alternative anti-emetic medication approved by the FDA to treat 
pediatric patients for nausea, Phenergan; however, he contended 
that it was a “worse drug[.]” 
b. Reglan Manufacturer’s Package Insert 
During Defendant’s testimony, a printout of the FDA 
version of the Reglan manufacturer’s package insert in effect at 
8  
 
  
   
 
 
CONTRAINDICATIONS
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
                         
 7  Defendant testified that although he had not read the version of 
the manufacturer’s insert admitted at trial, he had known of the information 
it contained at the time he administered Reglan to Minor. In addition,  
another expert, Dr. Gary Leroy  Towle,  explained that the version admitted at 
trial was substantially similar to the Physicians’ Desk Reference or 
manufacturer’s package insert for Reglan.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the time (“manufacturer’s insert”) was entered into evidence 
over objection.7 
The manufacturer’s insert state s, in relevant part, as 
follows: 
[Reglan] should not be used whenever stimulation of 
gastrointestinal motility might be dangerous, e.g., in the 

presence of gastrointestinal hemorrhage, mechanical 
obstruction or perforation.
 
. . ..
 
Pediatric Use
  
Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not 
been established (see OVERDOSAGE).
 
. . ..
 
The safety profile of [Reglan] in adults cannot be 
extrapolated to pediatric patients.
 
. . ..
 
ADVERSE REACTIONS
  
In general, the incidence of adverse reactions correlates 
with the dose and duration of [Reglan] administration. The 
following reactions have been reported, although in most 
instances, data do not permit an estimate of frequency:
 
. . ..
 
Gastrointestinal
  
Nausea and bowel disturbances, primarily diarrhea.
 
c. Testimony of Dr. Gary Leroy Towle (“Dr. Towle”) 
Plaintiffs called Dr. Towle to testify as an expert on 
the standard of care and the material risks of Reglan.  Dr. 
Towle testified that “Reglan is not recommended for use in 
children except for very specific circumstances” not present in 
9  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this case. Interpreting the manufacturer’s insert, Dr. Towle 
testified that the manufacturer could not say Reglan was safe to 
treat pediatric patients, but  was not saying it was  unsafe 
either.  Rather, Reglan’s safety in pediatric patients was 
undetermined. 
Dr. Towle testified that “one of the ways Reglan works 
is that it gets the pylorus, or the sphincte
r between the 
stomach and small intestines, to relax and open up and allow the 
contents of the stomach to pass through to the small intestine.” 
He stated that “[t]he problem with Reglan is it increases the 
motility of the stomach and small intestine. In other words, it 
gets it going, it gets things flowing through it.” Dr. Towle 
also testified that the contraindications section in the Reglan 
insert states that Reglan should not be used whenever 
stimulation of gastrointestinal motility might be dangerous. 
Dr. Towle stated that in Minor’s case, although Reglan did not 
directly cause diarrhea in and of itself, “if you’re emptying the stomach and you’re dumping things into the small intestine, 
it kind of gets the intestines going and diarrhea is one of the 
more common side effects with Reglan.” 
Dr. Towle testified that he would have started with 
other anti-emetics, such as Phenergan and Zofran, which the FDA 
has specifically approved to treat pediatric patients, and which 
were safer for use in children with nausea and vomiting.  He 
10  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that one of the more common side effects of Reglan was 
increased diarrhea, and while Zofran or other “anti -emetics 
theoretically can increase diarrhea[,] Reglan is more likely to” 
have this effect. Dr. Towle also testified that Zofran was an 
“excellent anti-emetic. It’s used in chemotherapy patients, in 
cancer patients, and also for people with gastroenteritis. It 
works very well. It has a relatively low side effect profile. 
It’s very popular and it could be the most p opular one now 
replacing even Tigan and Phenergan.” 
Dr. Towle stated, however, that he could not testify 
to a reasonable degree of medical probability that Reglan 
increased Minor’s nausea and diarrhea , nor that it had any side 
effects that were of consequence to Minor. Dr. Towle also 
stated that he could not say whether Defendant should have 
warned Parents about any risks because “[i]t’s like asking 
what’s the dose of some medicine you’re not supposed to give. I 
can’t answer that.” 
d. Testimony of Dr. James Gallup (“Dr. Gallup”) 
Plaintiffs also called Dr. Gallup to testify as an 
expert on the cause of Minor’s death. With respect to any 
effect Reglan may have had on Minor’s system, Dr. Gallup opined 
that “it did what Reglan is noted well to do and that is 
stimulate the contraction of smooth muscle, particularly in the 
intestine and the stomach to a lesser extent.” Dr. Gallup 
11  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that Reglan relaxes the “sphincter so that any fluid 
in the stomach can easily get transported down through the small 
intestine into the large intestine.” He further testified that 
Zofran does not do this and “works almost exact ly in the 
opposite direction.”  
Dr. Gallup  opined that Reglan moderately increased 
Minor’s diarrhea, which significantly increased her dehydration. 
He further opined that the increase in dehydration was a 
substantial factor leading to Minor’s hypovolemic shock because 
the dehydration “quite significantly hastened th e loss of 
workable fluid . . . into the intestinal tract and loss from the body ultimately.” As to Minor’s cause of death, he opined that 
Minor “died from cardiac arrest as a result of hypovolemic 
shock[.]” He further opined that Reglan was a substantial   
factor in causing Minor’s death.  
On redirect, Dr. Gallup clarified that Reglan “may 
have increased the volume [of diarrhea, but] may not have 
increased the frequency.” 
e. Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law 
At the close of Plaintiffs’ case  in chief, Defendants 
moved for JMOL on the issue of informed consent, arguing  that 
Plaintiffs’ experts failed to opine on the materiality of the 
risks  of Reglan to meet Plaintiffs’ burden of adducing expert 
12  
 
    
 
 
 
                         
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
medical testimony. Plaintiffs cross-moved for JMOL,8 contending 
that the testimony of Drs. Towle and Gallup  in combination with  
the manufacturer’s insert co nstituted  “competent expert 
evidence” of the risks.  
The circuit court agreed with Defendants, and stated: 
[T]he issue essentially is there’s not a legally cogni zable 
informed consent claim in this case. . . .  
In the Court’s view, not only is there no expert 
testimony, as is required[,] . . . the parents   . . . were  
never asked whether if they had been informed of certain 
things they would have given permission, etc., etc., [sic] 
which are all elements of informed consent.[9] 
. . . 
[W]hat we’ve got here is a case of medical 
negligence, period. Informed consent may sound like –-may 
sound viable sort of in some sort of common sensible view, 
well, he should have told the parents about Reglan and what 
it could cause, etc. But . . . in th e Court’s view there 
8 Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 50(a) (2000) 
provides:
 (1) If during a trial by jury   a party has been fully 
heard on an issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary basis for a reasonable jury to find for that 
party on that issue, the court may determine the issue against that party and may grant a motion for judgment as a 
matter of law against that party with respect to a claim or 
defense that cannot under the controlling law be maintained 
or defeated without a favorable finding on that issue.
 (2) Motions for judgment as a matter of law may be 
made at any time before submissi
on of the case to the jury. 
Such a motion shall specify the judgment sought and the law 
and the facts on which the moving party is entitled to the 
judgment. 
HRCP Rule 50(a) (emphasis added). Although Plaintiffs cross -moved for JMOL, 
the circuit court would not have been able to grant the motion at that time 
because Defendants had not presented any evidence, and thus, had not “been 
fully heard” on the informed consent claims. 
9 We note that the circuit court erred in concluding that 
Plaintiffs failed to establish an element of informed consent by not specifically testifying that they would have withheld consent if properly 
informed of the risks. 
We address this error in 
note 16 in Part IV.B, infra. 
13  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
                         
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
simply is no legally cognizable claim for informed consent 
on the facts of this case. 
And you add that to –-and in a sense that’s why 
there was no expert testimony on materiality because it ’s 
simply not an informed consent case. 
The circuit court granted JMOL in Defendants’ favor on the issue 
of informed consent, concluding that, even viewing the evidence 
and inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to 
Plaintiffs, a reasonable jury could not find in their favor. On 
July 28, 2009, the circuit court subsequently entered its Final 
Judgment. 
2. Plaintiffs’ Renewed Motion 
On August 10, 2009, Plaintiffs filed a “Renewed Motion 
to Amend the Complaint to Conform to the Evidence and Renewed 
Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law, or, i
n the Alternative, 
Motion for New Trial” (“Renewed Motion”). Plaintiffs argued, 
inter alia, that JMOL on the informed consent claim should have 
been entered in their favor because Defendant failed to provide 
statutorily mandated information 
pursuant to HRS § 671-3(b)  
10 (Supp. 2008)  about (1) recognized alternative treatments and/or 
10 HRS § 671-3 (Supp. 2008) provides, in relevant part :
 (b) The following information shall be supplied to the 
patient or the patient’s guardian or legal surrogate prior 
to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or 
surgical 
treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure:  
(1) The condition to be treated; 
(2)
 A description of the proposed treatment or procedure; 
(3) The intended and anticipated results of the proposed 
treatment or procedure; 
(continued  . . .  )  
14  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
                                                                              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
medications, and (2) recognized material risks of serious 
complications or mortality associated with the proposed 
treatment or procedure. 
The circuit court denied Plaintiffs’ Renewed Motion at 
an October 14, 2009 hearing, and entered its order the following 
day. 
On November 13, 2009, Plaintiffs appealed the July 28, 
2009 Final Judgment and October 15, 2009 order denying their Renewed Motion to the ICA. 
C. Appeal to the ICA 
On 
appeal, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s grant 
of JMOL in Defendant’s favor, concluding that Plaintiffs’ 
“expert testimony presented at trial [did] not sufficiently 
establish the ‘materiality of the risk of harm’ imposed by 
[Defendant’s] administration of ten milligrams of Reglan to 
[Minor].” Ngo, mem. op. at 15. In particular, the ICA 
( . . . continued) 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments or procedures, 
including the option of not providing these treatments 
or procedures; 
(5) The recognized material risks of serious complications 
or mortality associated with: 
(A) The proposed treatment or procedure; 
(B) The recognized alternative treatments or 
procedures; and 
(C) Not undergoing any treatment or procedure; and 
(6) The recognized benefits of the recognized alternative 
treatments or procedures. 
15  
 
   
    
 
  
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concluded that “expert testimony was not adduced to establish 
the ‘probabilities of therapeutic success’ or ‘ the frequency of 
the occurrence of particular risks’ and th erefore Plaintiffs 
failed to carry their evidentiary burden.” Ngo, mem. op. at 16 
(citing Carr, 79 Hawai ʻi at 486, 904 P.2d at 500). 
With respect to Plaintiffs’ evidence at trial, t he ICA 
concluded that Dr. Towle’s testimony that he could not opine on 
whether the risks should have been explained to “[P]arents 
because Reglan ‘should not have been given [to Minor] no matter 
what in these circumstances[]’” 
“did not sufficiently elaborate 
on the probabilities that Reglan treatment would be successful[.]” 
Id. The ICA further concluded that Dr. Towle’s 
testimony “that Reglan posed a greater risk of gastric motility, 
i.e., diarrhea, than other anti-emetics” did not establish the frequency of occurrence nor significance of that risk. 
Ngo, 
mem. op. at 17. 
Addressing Plaintiffs’ argument that Defendant’s 
testimony in conjunction with  the manufacturer’s warning 
established the materiality of the risk,  the ICA concluded that 
“the manufacturer’s warning, in and of itself, does not 
establish the materiality of risk of harm with respect to 
Reglan, because it does not constitute ‘expert testimony’ and 
does not permit a legitimate inference regarding the materiality 
16  
 
      
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
                         
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the risk.”11 Ngo, mem. op. at 19 (citing Craft, 78 Hawai ʻi at 
306, 893 P.2d at 157). 
Finally, the ICA held that Plaintiffs waived their 
claim that Defendant “failed to provide statutorily mandated 
information to [Minor’s] parents other than the risks of Reglan 
. . . [b]ecause Plaintiffs failed to raise this argument to the 
circuit court[.]” Ngo, mem. op. at 22. 
III. Standard of Review 
“A trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment as a 
matter of law is reviewed de novo.” Ray, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 261, 259 
P.3d at 577 (emphasis omitted) (citations omitted).  Hawai ʻi 
appellate courts apply the same standard as the trial court.  
Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai ʻi 1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 (2004) 
(citation omitted). Trial courts apply the following standard: 
A motion for judgment as a matter of law may be granted 
only when after disregarding conflicting evidence, giving 
to the non- moving party’s evidence all the value to which 
it is legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate 
inference which may be drawn from the evidence in the non -
moving party’s favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to  support a jury verdict in his or her favor.  
Ray, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 261, 259 P.3d at 577 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Miyamoto, 104 Hawaiʻ i at 7, 84 P.3d at 515). 
11 The ICA explained that its holding “that no legitimate inference 
about the materiality of risks . . . can be drawn from the Reglan manufacturer’s warning is consistent with case law in other j urisdictions, 
which hold that testimony that a treatment may or may not be safe does not 
establish risks pertinent to an informed consent issue. ” Ngo, mem. op. at 20 
(citations omitted). 
17  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. Discussion 
Hawaii’s informed consent doctrine is generally based 
on the policy judgment that “ every human being of adult years 
and sound mind has a right to determi
ne what shall be done with 
his or her own body[.]” Leyson v. Steuermann , 5 Haw. App. 504, 
513, 705 P.2d 37, 44 (1985) 
(brackets and citation omitted), 
overruled on other grounds by Bernard v. Char , 79 Hawai
ʻi 362, 
903 P.2d 667 (1995) (hereinafter “ Bernard II ”).  “Physicians 
have an obligation to obtain the informed consent of their 
patients before administering diagnostic and treatment 
procedures.” Barcai v. Betwee , 98 Hawai ʻi 470, 483, 50 P.3d 946, 
959 (2002) (citing Carr
, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 479, 904 P.2d at 493).  It 
is “well-settled that a physician owes a duty to a patient to 
disclose sufficient information about a proposed course of 
treatment or surgical procedure so that the patient can make an 
informed and intelligent decision about whether to submit to the 
treatment or surgical procedure[.]” Bernard v. Char,  79 Hawai ʻi 
371, 380, 903 P.2d 676, 685 (App. 1995)
, aff’d
, 79 Hawaiʻ i 362, 
903 P.2d 667 (hereinafter “ Bernard I ”). 
Before the informed consent doctrine was codifi
ed in 
HRS § 671-3, Hawaiʻ i courts recognized the common law doctrine of 
informed consent. See Nishi v. Hartwell
, 52 Haw. 188, 191, 473 
P.2d 116, 119 (1970), overruled by Carr  , 79 Hawaiʻ i 475, 904 P.2d 
18  
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
489.  The expert testimony requirements originated in the common  
law. See, e.g., Mroczkowski v. Straub Clinic & Hosp., Inc. , 6 
Haw. App. 563, 567, 732 P.2d 1255, 1258 (1987) (trial court 
granted directed verdict based on patient’s failure to introduce 
expert testimony as to specific risks of harm defendant was 
required to disclose)
; Bernard I  ,  79 Hawai ʻi at 383, 903 P.2d at 
688 (adopting expert testimony requirements  in dental  
malpractice case founded on the common law doctrine of informed  
consent).  When the doctrine was codified, Hawaiʻ i courts 
continued to utilize elements of  the common law doctrine to 
analyze and interpret the statutory requirements.  See Leyson  , 5 
Haw. App. at 516, 705 P.2d  at 46, overruled  on other grounds  by  
Bernard II, 79 Hawai ʻi 362, 903 P.2d 667  (noting that it was not 
clear from the language or history of HRS chapter 671 whether 
the legislative intent was to supplant Nishi  ’s general standards 
of required disclosures).  As the interplay between the common law and the statute  has not always been clear, we review the 
development of the doctrine of informed consent.  
A. An Overview of Informed Consent in Hawai
ʻi 
1. The Common Law Doctrine of Informed Consent 
The common law doctrine of informed consent was first 
recognized as a subset of medical negligence actions.  In Nishi, 
this court explained that the common law doctrine of informed 
consent imposed upon a physician “a duty to disclose to his 
19  
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
patient all relevant information concerning a proposed 
treatment, including the  collateral hazards attendant thereto, 
so that the patient’s consent to the treatment would be an 
intelligent one based on complete information.” 52 Haw. at 191, 
473 P.2d at 119 (citation omitted)  , overruled by  Carr, 79 Hawaiʻ i 
475, 904 P.2d 489.  
In determining the question of a physician’s liability 
for nondisclosure, the Nishi 
court noted that “courts generally 
follow the rule applicable to medical malpractice actions predicated on alleged negligence in treatment which requires the 
question of negligence to be decided by reference to relevant 
medical standards and imposes on the plaintiff the burden of proving the applicable standard by expert medical testimony.” 
52 Haw. at 195, 473 P.2d at 121.  The 
Nishi court then held that 
the “plaintiffs did not adduce any expert medical testimony to 
establish a medical standard from which the jury could find that 
defendants deviated from their duty . . . .” 52 Haw. at 196, 
473 P.2d at 121. Rather, the “defendants, by their testimonies, 
established the medical standard applicable to this case. The medical standard so established was that [of] a competent and 
responsible medical practitioner . . . .” 52 Haw. at 196 -97, 
473 P.2d at 121. 
20  
 
                          
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In 1976, the informed consent doctrine was codified in 
12  HRS § 671-3.  HRS § 671-3 (1976 Repl.   ) “directed the board of 
medical examiners (board) to specifically itemize  the probable  
risks and effects of each specific treatment or surgical 
procedure.”   Mroczkowski, 6 Haw. App. at 567, 732 P.2d at   1258.   
The resulting itemizations were to be prima facie evidence of the information a physician was required to disclose to a 
patient in order to obtain informed consent.  Id.  (explaining 
12 HRS § 671- 3 (1976 Repl.) stated: 
(a) In any action for medical tort based on an 
incident that occurred after January 1, 1977, based on the 
rendering of professional service without informed consent, evidence may be introduced that the health care provider 
complied with standards established by the board of medical 
examiners governing the information required to be given by 
or at the direction of the health care provider to a 
patient, or the patient’s guardian in the case of a patient who is not competent to give informed consent. 
(b) 
The board of medical examiners shall, insofar as 
practicable, establish reasonable standards of medical practice, applicable to specific  treatment and surgical 
procedures, for the substantive content of the information 
required to be given and the manner in which it is given 
and in which consent is received in order to constitute 
informed consent from a patient or a patient’s guardian. 
The standards shall include provisions which are designed  
to reasonably inform and to be understandable by a patient 
or a patient’s guardian of the probable risks and effects 
of the proposed treatment or surgical procedure, and of the 
probable risks of not receiving the proposed treatment or 
surgical procedure. The standards established by the board shall be prima facie evidence of the standards of care 
required but may be rebutted by either party.  
(c) Nothing in this section shall require informed 
consent f
rom a patient or a patient’s guardian when 
emergency treatment or emergency surgical procedure is 
rendered by a health care provider and the obtaining of 
consent is not reasonably feasible under the circumstances without adversely affecting the condition o f the patient’s 
health. 
21  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the board’s standards were “ admissible as evidence of the 
required specific standards of care only if the board’s specific 
standards [we]re designed to reasonably inform the patient of, 
inter alia,  the recognized serious possible risks and 
complications of each specific treatment or surgical 
procedure”). The board, however, did not fulfill the statutory 
mandate because there were too many medical and surgical 
procedures to provide such an itemization. 6 Haw. App. at 567, 
732 P.2d at 1259. 
In 
Leyson, 5 Haw. App. 504, 705 P.2d 37
, overruled by  
Bernard II, 79 Hawai ʻi 362, 903 P.2d 667, the ICA first 
recognized the emerging confusion in the informed consent doctrine. First, the ICA opined that that there appeared to be 
a conflict in 
Nishi regarding the scope of a physician’s duty. 
The ICA explained that “Nishi initially describe[d] the 
[informed consent] doctrine as a precise and definite duty [,]” 5 
Haw. App. at 513, 705 P.2d at 44, on the part of the physician 
to disclose “all relevant information concerning a proposed 
treatment, including the collateral hazards attendant thereto, so that the patient’s consent to the treatment would be an 
intelligent one based on complete information[,]” 5 Haw. App. at 
512, 705 P.2d at 44 (quoting Nishi, 52 Haw. at 191, 473 P.2d at 
119), “but then it alternatively describe[d] the doctrine as a duty to comply with relevant medical standards []” by requiring 
22  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plaintiffs to prove the applicable medical standard of 
disclosure. 5 Haw. App. at 513, 705 P.2d at 44.  Second, the 
ICA noted that the duty to inform had been codified in HRS § 
671-3; however, it was “not clear from the language or history 
of chapter 671 whether the legislature’s intent was to supplant 
Nishi
’s ambiguously defin ed duty of disclosure.” 5 Haw. App. at 
516, 705 P.2d at 46. The ICA also noted that under the common 
law, a “physician [was] not required to disclose risks that are 
unexpected or immaterial, by whatever standard, nor . . . risks 
that are commonly understood, obvious, or already known to the 
patient.” 5 Haw. App. at 513-14, 705 P.2d at 45 (footnote 
omitted) (quoting W. Page Keeton, Dan B. Dobbs, Robert E. Keeton, and David G. Owen, 
Prosser and Keeton on The Law of 
Torts
, § 32 at 192 (5th ed. 1984)).  
The ICA then set out five material elements for the 
tort of a physician’s negligent failure to disclose risk s 
of 
harm prior to treatment, which this court adopted in Bernard II,  
79 Hawai
ʻi 362, 903 P.2d 670.  The five elements are as follows: 
(1) [the physician] owed a duty to disclose to [the 
patient] the risk of one or more of the collateral injuries 
that [the patient] suffered; (2) [the physician] breached 
[his or her] duty; (3) [the patient] suffered injury; and 
(4) [the physician’s] breach of duty was a c ause of [the 
patient’s] injury in that: (a) [the physician’s] treatment 
was a substantial factor in bringing about [the patient’s] 
injury and (b) [the patient], acting rationally and 
reasonably, would not have undergone the treatment had he 
[or she] been informed of the risk of the harm that in fact 
occurred; and (5) no other cause is a superseding cause.  
23  
 
  
                         
   
then the standards shall be admissible as evidence of the 
standard of care required of the health care providers.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Bernard II, 79 Hawai ʻi at 365, 903  P.2d at 670 (alteration s in  
original) (quoting Leyson, 5 Haw. App. at 516 –17, 705 P.2d at 
47); see also Barcai   , 98 Hawaiʻ i at  483-84, 50 P.3d at 959  -60 
(reaffirming the five elements required to establish a claim of 
negligent failure to obtain informed consent under Hawaiʻ i law).    
HRS § 671-3 was amended in 1983,13 and provided that 
the applicable general standard of information a physician was 
required to disclose, among other things, was “all recognized 
13 HRS § 671- 3 (Supp. 1983) provided:
 (a) The board of medical examiners, insofar as 
practicable, shall establish standards for health care 
providers to follow in giving information to a patient, or to a patient’s guardian if the patient is not competent to 
give an informed consent, to insure that the patient’s consent to treatment is an informed consent. The standards 
may include the substantive content of the information to 
be given, the manner in which the information is to 
be 
given by the health care provider and the manner in which 
consent is to be given by the patient or the patient’s 
guardian.  
 (b) If the standards established by the board of 
medical examiners include provisions which are designed to 
reasonably inform  a patient, or a patient’s guardian, of:  
(1) The condition being treated;  
(2) The nature and character of the proposed 
treatment or surgical procedure;  
(3) The anticipated results;  
(4) The recognized possible alternative forms of 
treatment; and  
(5) The recognized serious possible risks, 
complications, and anticipated benefits involved
in the treatment or surgical procedure, and in the recognized possible alternative forms of 
treatment, including non -treatment,   
24  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
serious possible risks of harm and complications that the 
physician knew of or should have known[.]” Mroczkowski , 6 Haw. 
App. at 567, 732 P.2d at 1258; see also   Keomaka v. Zakaib,  8 
Haw. App. 518, 525, 811 P.2d 478, 483
, cert. denied , 72 Haw. 
618, 841 P.2d 1075 (1991) (holding that a physician owes a duty 
to disclose items set forth in HRS § 671-3(b), “including the 
‘recognized serious possible risks’ and the ‘recogni zed possible 
alternative forms of treatment[]’”). 
2.
	 The Patient-Oriented Standard of Disclosure and Expert 
Testimony Requirements 
Nishi and HRS § 671-3 left unresolved the question of 
the standard applicable to the tort of a physician’s negligent 
failure to obtain informed consent, as well as the role of 
expert testimony in establishing a prima facie case of negligent 
failure to obtain informed consent.  In Carr, 79 Hawaiʻ i 475, 904 
P.2d 489, this court addressed these issues. 
This court first expressly adopted the “patient-
oriented standard” to govern whether a physician owes a duty to 
disclose a particular piece of information to a patient prior to 
treatment, overruling Nishi to the extent that it required a 
plaintiff to prove the applicable standard of disclosure of material risks prior to treatment by expert medical testimony. 
79 Hawaiʻ i at 485, 904 P.2d at 499.  Recognizing that (1) Nishi 
was decided without the benefit of the seminal decision on the 
25  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
patient-oriented standard of disclosure, Canterbury v. Spence, 
464 F.2d 772 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied , 409 U.S. 1064 (1972); 
(2) the informed consent doctrine had been  codified; and (3) the 
growing nationwide trend favored the patient  -oriented standard, 
this court held that the dispositive inquiry regarding a 
physician’s duty of  disclosure in an informed consent case was  
no longer “what the physician believes his or her patient needs 
to hear in order for the patient to make an informed and 
intelligent decision[.]”   79 Hawaiʻ i at 486, 904 P.2d at 500.  
Rather, “the focus should be on what a reasonable person 
objectively needs to hear from his or her physician to allow the 
patient to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed medical treatment.” 
Id.   This court  therefore held, “a 
plaintiff is not required to prove the standard of disclosure required for informed consent with medical expert evidence[.]” 
79 Hawaiʻ i at 487, 904 P.2d at 501.  
In a footnote, 
this court differentiated between the 
standard of care and the standard of disclosure of material 
risks prior to treatment with respect to the necessity of expert 
testimony as follows: 
It is clear that the standard of care for a claim based on 
allegedly negligent medical treatment must be established 
by reference to prevailing standards of conduct in the 
applicable medical community and must be so proved by expert medical testimony becau se . . . “a jury generally 
lacks the requisite special knowledge, technical training, 
and background to be able to determine the applicable 
standard without the assistance of an expert.” The 
26  
 
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
standard of disclosure of material risks prior to 
treatment, however, as we have discussed above, is capable 
of determination under the patient -oriented standard 
without reference to prevailing medical standards or medical judgment, although such evidence may, subject to a 
Hawaiʻi Rule of Evidence 403 balancing, be relevant and 
admissible. 
79 Hawaiʻ i at 485 n.6, 904 P.2d at 499 n.6 (internal citation 
omitted) (quoting Craft , 78 Hawaiʻ i at 298, 893 P.2d at 149). 
Next, citing to the ICA’s decision in Bernard I, 
however, this court  cautioned “that our adoption of the patient-
oriented standard does not relieve plaintiffs of their burden to  
provide expert medical testimony[,]”  79 Hawai ʻi at 486, 904 P.2d 
at 500 (citing Bernard I , 79 Hawaiʻ i at 383, 903 P.2d at 688),  
“to establish the ‘materiality’ and/or the magnitude of the risk 
of harm that in fact occurs.”   79 Hawai ʻi at 486 n.7, 904 P.2d at 
500 n.7.  This court  held that “a plaintiff maintains the burden 
of adducing expert medical testimony to establish ‘the natu re of 
risks inherent in a particular treatment, the probabilities of 
therapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence of 
particular risks, and the nature of available alternatives to 
treatment.’” 79 Hawai ʻi at 486, 904 P.2d at 500 (quoting Bernard 
I, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 383, 903 P.2d at 688).  See also  Barcai, 98 
Hawaiʻi at 484, 5 0 P.3d at 960; Ray,   125 Hawai ʻi at 268, 259  P.3d 
at 584.   
In further support of the conclusion  in Carr that  
expert testimony is required in informed consent cases, this 
27 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
28 
 court cited the United States Court of Appeals for the District 
of Columbia’s decision in Canterbury
, 464 F.2d 772.  This 
seminal decision explained why expert testimony is critical in 
informed consent cases: 
Experts are ordinarily indispensable to identify and 
elucidate for the factfinder the risks of therapy and the 
consequences of leaving existing maladies untreated.  They 
are normally needed on issues as to the cause of any injury 
or disability suffered by the patient . . . .  Save for 
relative[ly] infrequent instances where questions of this 
type are resolvable wholly within the realm of ordinary 
human knowledge and experience, the  need for the expert is 
clear. 
464 F.2d at 791-92, quoted in Carr, 79 Hawai ʻi at 486, 904 P.2d 
at 500.  
In Barcai, this court reaffirmed our holdings 
concerning the “materiality” of the risk in informed consent 
cases.  This court explained that “expert testimony will 
ordinarily be required ” to establish the first aspect of 
“materiality” -- “the  ‘materiality’ of the risks, i.e., ‘nature 
of risks inherent in a particular treatment, the probabilities 
of therapeutic success, the frequency of the occurrence of 
particular risks, and the nature of available alternatives to 
14treatment.’”   98 Hawai ‘i at 484, 50 P.3d at 960 (emphasis added) 
                         
 14 We note that expert testimony is not required in all situations.  
As stated infra, expert testimony is not required to determine what a 
reasonable patient needs to hear in order to make an informed decision 
regarding proposed medical treatment.  In addition, expert testimony is 
ordinarily, but not universally required to rebut a defendant physician’s 
justification of nondisclosure on the basis of the therapeutic privilege 
exception.  Barcai, 98 Hawai ʻi at 486, 50 P.3d at 962  (“[W]here [a] defendant 
physician justifies nondisclosure on the basis of the therapeutic privilege 
(continued  . . . )  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
                                                                              
  
  
   
   
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(quoting Carr, 79 Hawai ʻi at 486, 904 P.2d at 500 (citing Bernard 
I, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 383, 903 P.2d at 688)).  This court then 
explained that, “[b]ecause lay jurors do not normally possess 
such information, it must be made available to them by an 
expert[,]” so that the jury can make a factual determination 
regarding the second aspect of “materiality” -- the materiality 
of the medical information to a patient’s decision, i.e., 
“whether a reasonable person would have wanted to consider the 
purportedly withheld information before consenting to the 
treatment.” Id. (citing 79 Hawai ‘i at 486, 904 P.2d at 500). 
( . . . continued)
 
exception, expert testimony may be required to refute the contention.”) . The 
therapeutic privilege exception “recogni zes that, under some circumstances, 
disclosure of certain risks would not be in the patient’s best medical 
interests.” Carr, 79 Hawai ʻi at 480, 904 P.2d at 494.  With regard to the 
necessity of expert testimony to rebut the  therapeutic privilege exception, 
this court has stated:
  
If the jury could evaluate the defendant physician’s 
testimony without specialized expert knowledge, no such 
expert testimony is needed and the jury should be instructed on the informed consent issue. . . . It is only 
when the part icular facts associated with the physician’s 
rationale for withholding disclosure involve “medical facts” that expert testimony will be required to rebut the 
claim and allow the jury to consider an informed consent claim.  
98 Hawaiʻ i at 486 n.10, 50 P.3d at 
962 n.10.  
Barcai further stated that “
all of the Hawai ‘i cases cited since Nishi--
and [] Canterbury, as well - -. . . repeatedly discuss the exception in the 
context of explicating ‘limits’ to the patient oriented standard, thereby 
suggesting that Hawai‘ i appellate courts have intended this exception to 
remain applicable.” 98 Hawai ‘i at 485 n.9, 961 n.9 (citations omitted).  We 
discuss the exception as illustrative of the necessity of expert testimony in informed consent cases. We do not address the continued viability of the therapeutic privilege exception under the current iteration of HRS § 671 -
3(b), as that issue is not before us . 
29  
 
                          
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The second aspect of materiality does not require expert 
testimony, although, as recognized by footnote 6 from Carr  
quoted above, expert testimony can also be helpful.  
Following Barcai, HRS § 671-3 was amended in 2003   
(effective January 1, 2004)  to integrate 
advances to legal and  
medical standards regarding the materiality of the risk of harm.   
See 2003 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 114, § 2 at 221-222; see also  S. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1228, in 2003 Senate Journal, at 1547. 
15  HRS § 671-3 (Supp. 2003)  mandated disclosure of specific 
15 HRS § 671- 3 (Supp. 2003) provided, in relevant part:
 (a) The board of medical examiners may establish 
standards for health care providers to follow in giving 
information to a patient, or to a patient’s guardian or 
legal surrogate if the patient lacks the capacity to give 
an informed consent, to ensure that the patient’s consent to treatment is an informed consent. T
he standards shall be 
consistent with subsection (b) and may include:  
(1) The substantive content of the information to be 
given; 
(2)
 The manner in which the information is to be 
given by the health care provider; and 
(3) The manner in which consent is to be given by the 
patient or the patient’s guardian or legal 
surrogate .
 (b) The following information shall be supplied to 
the patient or the patient’s guardian or legal surrogate prior to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or surgical treatment o
r a diagnostic or therapeutic 
procedure:  
(1) The condition 
to be treated; 
(2) A description of the proposed treatment or 
procedure; 
(3) The intended and anticipated results of the 
proposed treatment or procedure ; 
(continued . . . ) 
30  
 
                                                                               
  
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
information, in particular, “recognized material risks of 
serious complications or mortality[,]” as opposed to general 
standards of medical practice established by the board, and 
maintained the patient-oriented standard from Carr. See  S. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1228, in 2003 Senate Journal, at 1547; see 
also
 H.B. 651, H.D. 2, 22d Leg., Reg. Sess. (2003) (prior 
version of bill that became the 2003 act amending HRS § 671-3(b) 
contemplated switching to a physician  -oriented standard).  
In  Ray, this court  “interpreted HRS § 671 -3(b) as 
supplying the standard for a physician’s duty to disclose 
information to the patient.” 
125 Hawai ʻi at 266, 259 P.3d at 
582.  Under HRS § 671-3(b) (Supp. 2008), a physician’s duty to 
inform encompasses four separate duties: (1) the general duty to 
supply information about a proposed medical treatment or 
procedure embodied by HRS § 671-3(b)(1)-(3); (2) the duty to 
( . . . continued) 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments or 
procedures, including the option of not providing 
these treatments or procedures; and 
(5) The recognized material risks of serious 
complications or mortality associated with: 
(A) The proposed treatment or procedure 
(B)
 The recognized alternative treatments or 
procedures; and  
(C) Not undergoing any treatment or procedure; 
and  
(6)
 The recognized benefits of the recognized 
alternative treatments or procedures. 
31  
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
inform the patient of recognized alternative treatments or 
procedures, including the option of not providing these 
treatments or procedures, as provided in HRS § 671-3(b)(4); (3) 
the duty to warn of material risks as provided in HRS § 671 -
3(b)(5); and (4) the duty to inform patients of the recognized benefits of any recognized alternative treatments or procedures 
as provided in HRS § 671-3(b)(6). 
Under HRS § 671-3(b)(5)(A), Plaintiffs’ main claim, a 
physician is required to inform patients of “recognized material 
risks of serious complications or mortality associated with . . 
. [t]he proposed treatment or procedure[.]” Thus, at trial, a 
plaintiff alleging a violation of this subsection bears the burden of presenting expert medical evidence to establish prima 
facie that the risk of harm to which the plaintiff was subjected 
is a “recognized material risk[] of serious complications or 
mortality associated with . . . [t]he proposed treatment or 
procedure[.]” Cf. Ray, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 268, 259 P.3d at 584 
(holding that a “plaintiff will need to show that the medical 
community recognizes the different dosage as an alternative treatment” in an HRS § 671-3(b)(4) claim).  “[E]xpert ‘testimony 
is not conclusive and like any testimony, the jury may accept or 
reject it.’” 
125 Hawai ʻi at 262, 259 P.3d at 578 (quoting 
Bachran v. Morishige , 52 Haw. 61, 67, 469 P.2d 808, 812 (1970)). 
32  
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Once a plaintiff adduces expert testimony establishing 
prima facie that the risk of harm that occurred is a “recognized 
material risk[] of serious complication or mortality[,]” whether 
the physician was required to supply that information to the 
patient prior to obtaining consent is a question for the 
factfinder that does not require expert testimony, although, as 
noted in the quotation from Carr, supra (citing Craft), expert 
testimony can also be relevant and admissible. See 79 Hawai ʻi at 
485 n.6, 904 P.2d at 499 n.6 (citation omitted).  In other 
words, the jury, applying the patient-oriented standard, decides 
“what a reasonable person objectively needs to hear from his or 
her physician to allow the patient to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed medical treatment.” 
Ray, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 267, 259 P.3d at 583 (quoting Carr, 79 Hawai ʻi 
at 486, 904 P.2d at 500) (quotation marks omitted). 
B.	 The Circuit Court Erred in Granting JMOL Because Reglan’s 
Package Insert Combined With Expert Testimony Sufficiently 
Established the Materiality of the Risk of Reglan 
Plaintiffs argue that the ICA erred in concluding that 
they failed to establish the materiality of the risk by expert 
testimony, and in affirming the circuit court’s grant of JMOL in 
Defendants’ favor on that basis. Plaintiffs assert that the 
manufacturer’s warning , in combination with expert testimony as 
to the significance of that information, sufficiently 
established the materiality of the risk of harm to which Minor 
33  
 
                          
 16  Although not raised by the parties nor on appeal, we note that in 
granting JMOL in Defendant’s f avor on the informed consent claim, the circuit 
court stated, “the parents . . . were never asked whether if they had been 
informed of certain things they would have given permission[.]” Plaintiffs’ 
subjective view is, however, unnecessary. 
We have held ,  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was subjected when Defendant administered Reglan to Minor. We 
agree. 
“Claims for negligent failure to obtain informed 
consent typically arise when a plaintiff patient alleges that 
the defendant physician failed to warn the patient of a 
particular risk associated with the procedure and the particular 
risk ultimately occurred .” Barcai, 98 Hawai ʻi at 4 83, 50 P.3d at 
959. 
To establish a claim of negligent failure to obtain 
informed consent under Hawai ʻi law, the plaintiff must 
demonstrate that: (1) the physician owed a duty to disclose 
the risk of one or more of the collateral injuries that the patient suffered; (2) the physician breached that duty; (3) 
the patient suffered injury; (4) the physician’s breach of 
duty was a cause of the patient’s injury in that (a) the 
physician’s treatment was a substantial factor in b ringing 
about the patient’s injury and (b) a reasonable person in 
the plaintiff patient’s position would not have consented 
to the treatment that led to the injuries had the plaintiff 
patient been properly informed; and (5) no other cause is a 
superseding cause of the patient’s injury.  
16  98 Hawaiʻ i at 483-84, 50 P.3d at 959-60  (citation omitted).  The 
first prong of this common law formulation of the tort is 
the question of part (b) causation in an action based on 
the doctrine of informed consent is to be judged by an 
objective standard, that is, whether a reasonable person in 
the plaintiff -patient’s position would have consented to 
the treatment that led to his or her injuries had the 
plaintiff- patient been properly informed of the risk of the 
injury that befell him or her.  
Bernard II, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 371, 903 P.2d at 676. Thus, in this case, a 
determination of proximate causation depends upon whether there was 
sufficient evidence for a jury to find that, had Plaintiffs been advised of 
(continued . . . 
) 
34  
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
  
                          
(  . . . continued)
                                                      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
subject to appropriate modification based on the specific 
provisions of HRS § 671-3(b) alleged to have been violated; in 
other words, the first prong is now “the physician violated a 
duty of disclosure under HRS § 671-3(b).” In proving the 
elements of an informed consent claim alleging an HRS § 671 -
3(b)(5)(A) violation, a plaintiff must present expert testimony 
to establish prima facie that the risk of harm to which the 
plaintiff was subjected is an undisclosed “recognized material 
risk[] of serious complications or mortality associated with . . 
. [t]he proposed treatment or procedure[.]” Although not 
explicitly required by HRS § 671-3(b)(5), expert testimony is typically necessary to establish the medical information 
statutorily required to be disclosed. 
In this case, the ICA misconstrued Craft, 78 Hawai ʻi 
287, 893 P.2d 138, when it concluded that the manufacturer’s 
insert “does not constitute ‘expert testimony’ and does not 
permit a legitimate inference regarding the materiality of the 
risk.” Ngo, mem. op. at 19 (citing 78 Hawai ʻi at 306, 893 P.2d 
at 157). In Craft, we affirmed the trial co urt’s reading of a 
jury instruction “that a plaintiff who brings ‘an action based 
on informed consent must establish the applicable standard of 
the risks of Reglan, they would not have consented to its use to treat Minor. 
Plaintiffs need not testify as to what they subjectively would have done if 

properly informed of the risks.
 
35  
 
  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
care through expert medical testimony and m anufacturer’s package 
inserts do not, by themselves, set the standard  of care which is 
applicable to a physician on the issue of informed consent. ’” 
78 Hawaiʻ i at 306, 893 P.2d at 157  (brackets omitted).  Thus, 
Craft  recognized the view that “a drug manufacturer’s package 
insert merely constitutes evidence to be considered along with 
the expert’s testimony[,]” but does not supplant expert 
testimony. 78 Hawai ʻi at 299, 893  P.2d at 150 (discussing the 
conflicting views of package inserts).  Therefore, under  Craft, 
although  information contained in a manufacturer’s insert 
cannot, on its own, satisfy  a plaintiff’s burden of production 
in an informed consent case, it can constitute   evidence that the 
jury or fact finder may   consider along with the requisite  expert 
testimony.  
In the instant 
case, while the manufacturer’s insert 
did not establish the materiality of the risk of increased 
diarrhea by itself, Plaintiffs adduced expert testimony 
regarding the significance of the information in the 
manufacturer’s insert. Plaintiffs’ expert testimony , in 
conjunction with the manufacturer’s insert , established prima 
facie that Defendant failed to supply Plaintiffs with 
“recognized material risks of serious complications or mortality 
associated with” Reglan , as required by HRS § 671-3(b)(5)(A).  
Applying the standard applicable to a motion for JMOL, it cannot 
36  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be said that there was no evidence to support a jury verdict in 
Plaintiffs’ favor on their informed consent claim. Ray, 125 
Hawaiʻi at 261, 259 P.3d at 577 (brackets omitted) (quoting 
Miyamoto, 104 Hawai ʻi at 7, 84 P.3d at 515). Therefore, 
Plaintiffs’ informed consent claim should ha ve been presented to 
the jury. 
The  ICA erred in concluding that “expert testimony was 
not adduced to establish the ‘probabilities of therapeutic 
success’ or ‘the frequency of the occurrence of particular 
risks’ and t
herefore Plaintiffs failed to carry their 
evidentiary burden.” Ngo, mem. op. at 16 (citing Carr, 79 
Hawaiʻi at 486, 9 04 P.2d at 500).   The “probabilities of 
therapeutic success”  is not part of an informed consent claim   
based on an alleged HRS § 671-3(b)(5)(A) violation, but is 
information required to be provided under HRS § 671  -3(b)(3), the 
“intended and anticipated results of the proposed treatment or procedure[.]”   With respect to the risks that must be disclosed 
under HRS § 671-3(b)(5)(A),  at trial, Plaintiffs’  expert medical 
evidence established that  increased diarrhea is a risk  
associated with Reglan. Defendant expressly admitted that he 
knew diarrhea was a side effect of Reglan.   With respect to 
adverse gastrointestinal reactions, the manufacturer’s insert 
listed: “nausea and bowel disturbances, primarily diarrhea[.]” 
Plaintiffs’ expert, Dr. Towle, testified that “one of the ways 
37  
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Reglan works is that it gets the pylorus, or the sphincter 
between the stomach and small intestines, to relax and open up 
and allow the contents of the stomach to pass through to the 
small intestine.”   Dr. Towle further stated that in Minor’s  
case, although Reglan did not directly affect the lower intestine and cause diarrhea in and of itself, “if you’re 
emptying the stomach and you’re dumping things into the small 
intestine, it kind of gets the intestines going and diarrhea is 
one of the more common side effects with Reglan.” Moreover, Dr. 
Towle pointed out that the contraindications section in the   
manufacturer’s insert states that Reglan should not be used 
whenever stimulation of gastrointestinal motility might be 
dangerous. He further testified that Reglan “should not have 
been given no matter what in  the circumstances of this case.” 
Finally, Dr. Towle testified that  Reglan is more likely to 
increase diarrhea than Zofran or other anti-emetics.  Therefore, 
Plaintiffs’ expert medical evidence established  increased 
diarrhea as a common side effect of Reg   lan.  
Plaintiffs’ other expert witness, Dr. Gallup testified 
that, in his opinion, Reglan moderately increased the amount of 
fluid excreted out of Minor’s system through 
diarrhea, thereby 
significantly increasing her dehydration. He further testified 
that this increase in dehydration was a substantial factor in 
leading to her hypovolemic shock. 
38  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although diarrhea is not a serious complication that 
generally results in death, in the instant case, the evidence 
established that Minor was moderately dehydrated and losing 
fluid through both vomiting and diarrhea. Plaintiffs’ expert 
testimony and the m anufacturer’s insert established increased 
diarrhea as a risk associated with Reglan, and that Reglan 
should not be used when stimulation of gastrointestinal motility 
might be dangerous. Therefore, Plaintiffs presented expert 
evidence that Minor might not be able to tolerate increased 
diarrhea. In short, Plaintiffs did adduce expert testimony 
establishing the “probabilities of therapeutic success” and “the 
frequency of the occurrence of particular risks” under the 
former common law formulation of the duties. More importantly, 
however, Plaintiffs adduced expert testimony regarding a 
violation of Defendant’s current statutory duty under HRS § 671 -
3(b)(5)(A). 
Accordingly, the ICA erred in concluding that 
Plaintiffs’ “expert testi mony presented at trial [did] not 
sufficiently establish the ‘materiality of the risk of harm’ imposed by [Defendant’s] administration of ten milligrams of 
Reglan to [Minor].” Ngo, mem. op. at 15. 
39  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.	 The ICA Erred in Concluding that Plaintiffs Waived Their 
Claim that Defendant Failed to Provide Other Statutorily 
Mandated Information 
Plaintiffs also contend that the ICA erred in ruling 
that they waived their argument that Defendant failed to provide 
all statutorily required disclosures, including information 
about “alternative treatments or medications, the risks of 
Reglan and alternative treatments, or the alternative of no 
treatment, or the benefits of Reglan and its alternatives, 
including the alternative of no treatment.” 
Plaintiffs assert that they in fact raised the 
nondisclosure issue. Plaintiffs specifically alleged in their 
complaint that Defendant treated Minor “without obtaining the 
informed consent of Plai ntiff,” and “failed to adequately inform 
Plaintiffs of the nature of the treatment and risks thereof[.]” 
Although Plaintiffs’ complaint omitted the specific statutory 
provisions, Plaintiffs ’ allegation that Defendant treated Minor 
“without obtaining the i nformed consent of Plaintiff[]” clearly 
implicated a physician’s dut y of disclosure, which includes the 
duties enumerated in HRS § 671-3(b). 
We recently ruled on the scope of a physician’s duty 
under HRS § 671-3(b)(4) in Ray, 125 Hawai ʻi 253, 259 P.3d 569.  
The plaintiffs in Ray adduced evidence in support of their 
contention that recognized alternative dosing regimens of the 
same treatment had a lower risk of the harm the patient 
40  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ultimately suffered. 125 Hawaiʻ i at 267, 259 P.3d at 583.  The 
defendants moved for JMOL on the issue of informed consent 
because it was undisputed that defendants informed the patient 
of the risk of injury that occurred. 125 Hawaiʻ i at 265, 259 
P.3d at 581. This court held that the circuit court properly 
denied the defendant’s motion because “an alternative dosage can 
constitute a ‘recognized alternative treatment’ within the 
meaning of HRS § 671-3(b)(4).” 125 Hawai ʻi at 267, 259 P.3d at 
583. This court further held, “[i]f a reasonable patient would 
need to hear the information to make an informed decision, the 
physician is required to disclose that information.” Id.  
In the instant case, Plaintiffs similarly adduced 
evidence of recognized alternative treatments to Reglan.  
Plaintiffs’ counsel elicited testi mony from Defendant indicating 
that, at the time he 
administered Reglan to Minor, he knew of 
the existence of alternative anti-emetic medications, including 
Zofran, which did not have Reglan’s side effects, and Phenergan, 
which was specifically approved by the FDA to treat nausea in pediatric patients. Dr. Towle testified that safer alternatives 
to Reglan existed, including Zofran, which had been approved for 
use in pediatric patients, had a lower risk of causing diarrhea, 
and could be the most “popular” anti -emetic.  In addition, Dr. 
Gallup testified that while Reglan relaxes the “sphincter so that any fluid in the stomach can easily get transported down 
41  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
through the small intestine into the large intestine, ” does not 
do this and in fact, “ works almost exactly in the opposite 
direction.” Thus, at trial, Plaintiffs raised the issue of 
Defendant’s failure to inform them of recognized alternative 
treatments pursuant to HRS § 671-3(b)(4). 
Moreover, although expert evidence of the 
“probabilities of therapeutic success” was not required as part 
of Plaintiffs’ HRS § 671 -3(b)(5)(A) claim, as discussed in Part 
IV.B, supra, a physician’s failure to provide such information 
implicates a claim based on a violation of HRS § 671-3(b)(3), 
which requires disclosure of the “ intended and anticipated 
results of the proposed treatment or procedure [.]” 
In this case, Defendant admitted that he did not 
inform Plaintiffs that the manufacturer’s insert stated that 
“[s]afety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been 
established (see overdosage).” See (Reglan insert). The 
manufacturer’s insert also stated that “[t]he safety profile of 
[Reglan] in adults cannot be extrapolated to pediatric 
patients.” Dr. Towle testified that the manufacturer’s 
statement meant that the safety and effectiveness of Reglan in 
pediatric patients was undetermined. In addition, Dr. Towle 
testified that “Reglan is not recommended for use in chi ldren 
except for very specific circumstances” not present in this 
42  
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
       
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
case. Despite these warnings, Defendant prescribed Reglan based 
on Minor’s weight of 150 lbs.  
Accordingly, the ICA erred in concluding that 
Plaintiffs waived these additional informed consent claims. 
V. Conclusion 
Based on the evidence adduced at trial, the circuit 
court erred in granting JMOL in favor of Defendants on 
Plaintiffs’ informed consent claims. Because the court did so 
at the end of Plaintiffs’ case, however, the defense may not 
have been fully heard on the informed consent claims. Although we answer Plaintiffs’ first question on certiorari in the 
affirmative and rule that Plaintiffs presented sufficient 
evidence to have the jury consider their informed consent 
claims, we decline to answer the second question.
17 Accordingly, 
we vacate in part (1) the ICA’s February 11, 2014 Judgment on 
Appeal as to Plaintiffs’ informed consent claims ; and (2) the 
circuit court’s July 28, 2009 Final Judgment as well as its 
order granting Defendants’ motion for JMOL as to Plaintiffs’ 
17 See supra notes 4 (questions on certiorari) and 8 ( regarding HRCP 
Rule 50, which governs JMOLs ). 
43  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
John Reyes-Burke  
for respondent 
Thinh T. Nguyen, M.D., and  
the Emergency Group, Inc.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
informed consent claims and its award of costs, and remand the 
case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion. 
John S. Edmunds,    
Ronald J. Verga, and  
Joy S. Omonaka,    
for petitioner Leo Young,  
in his capacity as    
Personal Representative of the  
Estate of Jennifer Giao Nguyen,  
Deceased, and 
Michael J.Y. Wong,    
for petitioners 
Cuc Thi Ngo, Angelo Nguyen,  
Anthony Nguyen, and  
An Van Nguyen /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Bert I. Ayabe 
44 