***    FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
MAXWELL F. JONES,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-16-0000345 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000345 ; CASE NO. 1DTA -15-03477) 
 
JUNE 30, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART,  
WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction 
 This appeal arises from Maxwell Jones ’s (“Jones”) 
conviction by the District Court of the First Circuit ( “district Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000345
30-JUN-2020
10:26 AM***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
2 
 court
”)1 for the offense of operating a vehicle u nder the 
influence of an i ntoxicant ( “OVUII”) in violation of  
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes ( “HRS”) § 291E -61(a)(1) (Supp. 2014).2  
Jones’s certiorari application raises four questions: 
 1. Did the ICA gravely err as a matter of law in 
finding that “it was not error for the [d]istrict [c]ourt 
to allow Officer Wong to express an expert opinion that 
Jones ‘failed
’ the HGN [horizontal gaze nystagmus] test, 
the walk -and-turn test, and the one -leg stand test[]” ?  
 
 2. Did the ICA gravely err as a m atter of law in 
finding that “even if the [d]istrict [c]ourt erroneously 
allowed Officer Wong to opine that Jones failed th
e HGN 
test and other SFSTs, the error was harmless because there 
was other substantial evidence supporting Jones ’s OVUII 
conviction[]” ? 
 
 3. Did the ICA gravely err as a matter of law in 
finding that “Officer Wong was properly allowed to express 
an expert opinion that Jones was intoxicated ”? 
 
 4. Did the ICA gravely err as a matter of law in 
determining that “Officer Wong ’s observations of Jones ’s 
operation of his car, the strong odor of alcohol coming 
from Jones ’s breath, Jones ’s red and bloodshot eyes, 
Jones’s fumbling with his driver ’s license, and Jones ’s 
dropping his license in his lap, was sufficient to support 
Jones’[s] conviction[]” ? 
 
                     
1  The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided.  
 
2  The August 7, 2015 written complaint, which also included an alleged 
violation of HRS § 291E -61(a)(4) regarding blood alcohol  content, was orally 
amended before trial commenced on January 8, 2016, to charge Jones solely 
with violating HRS § 291E -61(a)(1), which provides:  
 
§291E-61  Operating a vehicle under the influence of an 
intoxicant .  (a)  A person commits the offense of operating 
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the 
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a 
vehicle:  
 
     (1)  While under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
     sufficient to impair the person ’s normal mental  
     faculties or ability to care for the person and     
     guard against casualty[.]  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
3 
  We answer the first 
two questions “yes.”  The third 
question has three components.  On certiorari, Jones reasserts 
questions he raised to the Intermediate C ourt of A ppeals (“ICA”)  
regarding (a) whether Officer Joshua Wong’s (“Officer Wong ”) 
expert opinion testimony regarding Jones ’s performance on the 
standardized field sobriety tests (“ SFSTs” or “FSTs”) was 
admissible as substantive evidence of intoxication and not just 
as to probable cause for arrest; (b) whether Officer Wong ’s 
expertise permitted  him to draw a correlation between the test 
results and sobriety to render an expert opinion that Jones was 
intoxicated; and (c) whether Officer Wong’ s expertise permitted 
him to testify that Jones had a blood alcohol level of 0.08 or 
above.  We answer question 3 (a) “yes.”  
 
Based on State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai ʻi 8,
 26, 904 P.2d 893, 
911 (1995) (setting out evidentiary foundation required for 
admission of a police officer ’s expert opinion testimony about 
whether a defendant was intoxicated based on performance on 
SFSTs), we answer question 3(b) “yes.”   
 Based on State v. Vliet , 91 Hawai ʻi 288, 296 –97, 983 P.2d 
189, 197–98 (1999) (ruling in OVUII case that any error in the 
officer’s legal conclusion testimony that defendant ’s state of 
sobriety “would have been over the legal limit ” was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt), we answer question 3(c ) “no.”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
4 
  
Based on  the reaso ns discussed herein, however, w e also 
prospectively hold that f or trials occurring after the date of 
this opinion, police officers may no longer testify, whether in 
a lay or expert capacity, that a driver  appeared “ intoxicated .” 
 Finally, because there was substantial evidence supporting 
Jones’s OVUII conviction, we answer the fourth question “no.”   
 Accordingly, we vacate the ICA ’s July 15, 2019 judgment on 
appeal and the district court ’s March 22, 2016 judgment of 
conviction, and we remand this matter to the district court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
II.  Background 
A.  District court proceedings 
 Jones was arrested on July 25, 2015, on suspicion of OVUII.  
He was charged by complaint on August 7, 2015.3  Jones pleaded 
not guilty, and the case proceeded to a bench trial, which began 
on January 8, 2016, and ended on March 22, 2016.  
 1.  Officer Wong ’s testimony  
 The State presented only one witness: Officer Wong of the 
Honolulu Police Department ( “HPD”), the arresting officer.  
Jones did not testify nor did he present any other witnesses.    
 Officer Wong testified that he attended the police academy 
as a police recruit in 2010.   As of his January 8, 2016 
testimony, Officer Wong had been an HPD officer for five years.   
                     
3  See supra note 2. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
5 
  On July 25, 2015, at around 3:15 a. m., Officer Wong was 
waiting at a red light on Ke ʻeaumo
ku Street heading inland at the 
intersection of Makaloa Street.  After his light turned green, 
Officer Wong heard a loud sound, as from a roaring engine, to 
his left and saw headlights heading eastbound on Makaloa Street; 
the car, a four-door Toyota sedan, went through the intersection, 
running the red light.  Officer Wong followed and pulled over 
the car.   
 
When he approached the driver ’s side window, Officer Wong 
could “sme ll the strong odor of alcohol from [the driver ’s] 
breath.”  Officer Wong informed the driver , whom he identified 
as Jones, why he had been  pulled over, to which Jones  responded, 
“[O]h, I didn’ t make the light? ”  Jones spoke with “[s]trong 
slurred speech. ”  When Officer Wong viewed  Jones and the 
interior of the cabin with his flashlight, he  also noticed that 
Jones had red, bloodshot eyes.  When Officer Wong asked Jones 
for his license
, car registration, and insurance, Jones fumbled 
with his wallet and driver ’s license, and the license fell in 
his lap.   
 Officer Wong then asked Jones if he would participate in 
SFSTs.  Jones stated he had not been drinking as he was the 
designated driver for his friends, and that they had just come 
from a nightclub, but that he would participate in the SFSTs.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
6 
  
As of July 25, 2015, Officer Wong had administered SFSTs 
approximately 800 times.   He first received  training in SFST 
administration in May 2011.4  Officer Wong ’s initial training had 
consisted of more than twenty-four hours of training on three 
days and two nights of SFST testing on live subjects, some of 
whom had been drinking and some of whom had not.  As part of his 
training, 
which included both classroom and practical components, 
he was taught how to evaluate a subject ’s performance on the 
SFSTs.  Officer Wong had passed written and practical 
examinations on administering SFSTs; the practical exam included 
going over studies that described the findings and success rate 
of each SFST.  As a result of his t
raining, he had been 
qualified to administer and evaluate the S FSTs.   
 In 2012, Officer Wong attended the “ARIDE” program,  which 
he described as a refresher course on SFSTs and an introductory 
course in the drug recognition expert program.5  Upon completion 
of the ARIDE program in 2012, he was recognized as a drug 
                     
4  According to Officer Wong, the SFST training was mandatory training 
given to all police recruits at the police academy.  His later testimony  
suggested that this training may have occurred in 2010.  
 
5  California Highway Patrol describes the “ARIDE” program as an Advanced 
Roadside Impaired Driving Enforcement course developed by the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the International Association of 
Chiefs of Police Technical Advisory Panel and the Virginia Association of 
Chiefs of Police to “bridge the gap” in training between standard field 
sobriety testing and drug evaluation and classification programs for states 
that also have such drug programs.  See California Highway Patrol, Advanced 
Roadside Impaired Driving Enforcement (ARIDE) Course, available at 
https://www.chp.ca.gov/programs -services/for -law-enforcement/drug -
recognition- evaluator -program/schedule -of-classes/aride  
[https://perma.cc/QRW9 -9M3K]. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
7 
 recognition expert, and 
he also took a refresher course in drug 
recognition in 2013.   
 In 2015, Officer Wong became a SFST instructor for the HPD.  
To become an instructor, he was again trained by senior 
instructors, gave classes, and passed  exams.  When asked whether 
he was required to receive any certifications to become an 
instructor, Officer Wong responded that the senior instructors 
were qualified by the National Highway and Traffic Safety 
Administration ( “NHTSA”) and the International Association of 
the Chiefs of Police ( “IACP”).  The senior instructors then 
trained the officers who trained him.  He described this as the 
certification process.
  Jones’s nonresponsive objection to this 
testimony was overruled.  Officer Wong’s later testimony 
regarding his instructors ’ certifications by NHTSA was also 
received over Jones ’s lack of foundation and hearsay objections.   
 According to Officer Wong, the NHTSA manual sets forth 
standards for 
the administration of SFSTs, which consist of the 
horizontal gaze nystagmus6 test (“HGN”), the walk- and-turn test, 
and the one-leg stand test.  Officer Wong testified that a 
subject’s performance on SFSTs “is indicative of whether or not 
they can operate a vehicle in a safe and prudent manner. ”   
                     
6  Nystagmus has been defined as “[a] rapid, involuntary jerking or 
twitching of the eyes, sometimes caused by ingesting drugs or alcohol.”  
Nystagmus, Black’s Law Dictionary  (11th ed. 2019).  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
8 
  Officer Wong was 
asked what correlation, if any, exis ted 
between a subject ’s ability to perform the SFSTs and the 
subject’s ability to operate a motor vehicle.  Jones objected to 
this question based on a lack of foundation for Officer Wong to 
testify as an expert on a correlation, the lack of scientific 
evidence of a correlation, and the lack of evidence that Officer 
Wong had received training on making such a correlation.  The 
deputy prosecuting attorney ( “DPA”) responded that Officer Wong 
had testified that he had been certified, that he was a trainer 
on SFSTs, and that he was trained multiple times on the SFSTs.  
The following exchange occurred: 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Well, the -- the testimony was rather 
summary in nature, but as far as I ’m concerned, it did 
[hit] the prime points initially set forth [] in State 
versus Mitchell [7] not in the order listed and not 
necessarily broken up in bullet point form.  But I ’m 
satisfied that the officer ’s testimony does meet with the 
primary requirements set forth, the foundational 
requirement s. 
 If the officer has been certified and retrained which 
is, by the way, something that ’s often missing from this 
testimony, and in this case has himself been qualified to 
become a certified instructor, and has specifically 
testified that this is all in accordance with NHTSA, I ’m 
satisfied the Mi tchell standard has been met in this case.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Except that there was no testimony yet 
that he was so certified.  He did say he -- he was 
initially trained in May of 2011 to do the field sobriety 
test and then he testified about drug recognition until 
2013 he became --  he said he became a field sobriety test 
instructor.  But nothing about certification.  
THE COURT:  Well, to be allowed to be -- I grant you the 
exact language hasn ’t been adduced.   But to become an 
instructor and then to be allowed to perform these tests 
                     
7  In State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai ʻi 388, 15 P.3d 314 (App. 2000), the ICA 
held that bef ore HGN test results can be admitted into evidence, “it must be 
shown that (1) the officer administering the test was duly qualified to 
conduct the test and grade the test results; and (2) the test was performed 
properly in the instant case. ”  94 Hawai ʻi at 397, 15 P.3d at 323.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
9 
 over the past few years, I find, for foundational purposes, 
it does meet the standard.  At  least he couldn ’t have done 
that if he wasn ’t certified.  
 So I
’m granting you that specific testimony has not 
been adduced.  That said, I ’m satisfied that, at least via 
inference if not exact language, the standard has been met.  
So objection ’s overruled.  
 
 Officer Wong then testified as to the SFSTs performed by 
Jones.  Jones responded in the negative to the medical rule-out 
questions regarding whether he had any impediments that could 
affect his performance on the SFSTs.  Officer Wong also 
testified that the sidewalk area of Makaloa Street, where Jones 
performed the SFSTs, was well- lit and level, that the weather 
was clear, and that he did not notice any physical injuries to 
Jones or any other circumstance that would interfere with 
Jones’s ability to perform the SFSTs.  
 Officer Wong 
was then asked about the HGN test.  Jones 
immediately objected on the grounds that there is no scientific 
evidence to establish a foundation that performance on the HGN 
test is admissible to prove intoxication beyond a reasonable 
doubt, and that State v. Ito, 90 Hawaiʻi 225, 978 P.2d 191 (App. 
1999)8 had discussed the HGN test  being admissible as to probable 
cause only and had not reached the issue of whether the HGN test 
is sufficiently scientifically reliable to prove guilt beyond a 
                     
8  In Ito, the ICA held that HGN test results have been sufficiently 
established to be reliable, and that as long as a HGN test was properly 
administered, its results are relevant and admissible as evidence  in an OVUII 
(previously referred to as DUI) case  that police officers  had probable cause 
to believe that a defendant was OVUII, but expressly not deciding whether HGN 
test results are admissible as evidenc e of a defendant’s intox ication because 
the issue had not been presented.  90 Hawai ʻi at 240- 41, 978 P.2d at 206 -07.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
10 
 reasonable doubt.   The district court overruled the objection 
without prejudice.9   
  Officer Wong then testified on how he had been trained to 
administer the HGN test in accordance with the NHTSA manual, 
which was to have a subject place their feet together with heels 
and toes touching, hands to the sides, and to inform them he 
would be holding a stimulus, a pen, twelve to fifteen inches 
from the subject ’s face, slightly  above eye level, and that the 
subject was to follow the tip of his pen with their eyes without 
head movement.  He testified he was trained to look for the lack 
of smooth pursuit, distinct and sustained nystagmus at maximum 
deviation, and the onset of n
ystagmus before forty- five degrees, 
and that if a subject exhibited any of those three things, it 
would be a “clue ” of nystagmus that was considered a “fail.”   
 When asked by the DPA what that meant regarding a subject ’s 
sobriety, Jones again objected based a lack of foundation 
regarding correlation.  The DPA again responded that Officer 
Wong had testified he had been trained and certified according 
to NHTSA standards to administer SFSTs, including attending a 
recent refresher course, which should allow him to give an 
opinion regarding nystagmus and a subject ’s sobriety.  Jones 
                     
9  The district court stated, “There’s a wealth of material, not just Ito, 
Ferrer, K[eh dy], all those cases get into whether or not HGN is admissible 
for the purpose of determining intoxication.”  See supra note 8 and infra  
notes 12 and 13. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
11 
 responded that the issue was not whether Officer Wong had 
properly administered the test, but the lack of foundation
 
regarding Officer Wong ’s expertise regarding whether the HGN 
test is correlated to evidence of intoxication beyond a 
reasonable doubt. The district court then stated: 
 Here’s the issue.  
Ito,[10][ Mitchell ,[11] Ferrer,[12] 
even K[ehdy],[13] none of them say what would constitute 
admissibility  of HGN results for substantive intoxication. 
All they say  is what wasn ’t done in those cases.  
 I am finding, lacking any guiding authority otherwise, 
that the standard they say hasn ’t been met in  those cases 
has been met in this case.  And without anything saying I 
can’t, I will, over objection, admit the  testimony for the 
purpose of determining substantive  evidence of intoxication 
beyond simple probable cause which  isn’t even relevant at 
this point.   So objection is  overruled.  Your objection is 
preserved for the record, [defense counsel] . 
 
 Officer Wong then testified over another overruled 
objection that if there was no medical problem or medication 
issue, the existence of nystagmus is indicative that alcohol is 
                     
10  See supra note 8. 
 
11  See supra note 7.  
 
12  In State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawaiʻ i 409, 23 P.3d 744 (App. 2001), the ICA 
held that the State had failed to lay a proper Toyomura  foundation, for the 
admission of an officer’s expert opinion on whether the defendant had “passed” 
or “failed” the psychomotor FSTs.  95 Hawai ʻi at 430, 23 P.3d at 765.  Ferrer  
also separately held that the foundation laid had been insufficient to 
establish that the officer was duly qualified to conduct the HGN test and 
grade the test results.  95 Hawai ʻi at 424, 23 P.3d at 759.  
   
13  In State v. Kehdy, No. 29146, 2009 WL 1805908 (App. June 25, 2009)  
(SDO), the ICA ruled that  the State failed to provide sufficient foundation 
to admit an officer ’s testimony regarding a driver’s performance on the HGN 
test, where the officer stated he was provided with materials from the NHTSA 
during his training and that his instructors went through the standard s and 
guidelines from the NHTSA, but did not state the training he received met 
NHTSA standards as required by Ito, and merely stated he received materials 
from NHTSA regarding standards and guidelines, and that, like in Ito, there 
was no evidence the officer was supervised by  certified  instructors during 
his training.  2009 WL 1805908, at *4.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
12 
 impairing a subject ’s ability to perform the SFSTs and to 
operate a motor vehicle.  Officer Wong then testified that on 
July 25, 2015,  he instructed Jones on the HGN test consistent 
with the standard instructions indicated above, and that Jones 
stated he understood them.   This concluded the testimony for 
January 8, 2016, and Officer Wong ’s testimony was continued 
until March 22, 2016.  
 Upon  resumption of Officer Wong ’s testimony on March 22, 
2016, Jones renewed his objection to the relevance of SFSTs to 
prove intoxication beyond a reasonable doubt.  The district 
court overruled the object ion, indicating that although it 
believed Jones ’s previous objections had been sufficient, Jones 
would be granted a standing objection to the relevance of the 
SFSTs to prov e intoxicat ion beyond a reasonable doubt.  The 
district court also overruled Jones ’s renewed objection to the 
admission of the HGN test testimony in its entirety as evidence 
of intoxication and granted a continuing objection to the 
admission of the HGN test testimony.   The following exchange 
occurred: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I would just for the record like to  
renew my objection to the relevance of the field sobriety  
test to prove intoxication beyond a reasonable doubt, and  
ask for a continuing objection in that regard.  
THE COURT: So noted.  But I think your --  well, objection’ s 
noted but overruled.  And I think it ’s -- it’s lodged 
sufficiently.  If you’re just talking about the  field 
sobriety test, case law makes it fairly clear what  that 
consists of.  So just saying that you object to the  field 
sobriety test I think lays out sufficient parameters  to 
cover what they are.    ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
13 
  So running objection is noted.  
 I don’t think it’s 
necessary, but your initial objection is sufficient to  make 
a record.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And I would also like to renew and 
ask 
for a continuing objection to  the horizontal gaze 
nystagmus 
test as evidence of intoxication.   Under State 
versus Ito ,[] it clearly states that it ’s admissible for
 
probable cause but does not reach the issue of whether it ’s 
admissible for intoxication.  14
THE COURT: So noted.   And again  overruled for  the same 
reasons as before.   Ito,[]
 Mitchell,[ ] Ferrer[ ] and 
K[ehdy][] make the requirements fairly stringent.  
 But I 
do find or  have found and, therefore, will stand on my 
finding that  this is one of the rare cases because of the 
situation with  Officer Wong ’s having been --  let’s see, was 
this the one?  Oh, yeah, okay, yeah, not just originally 
certified by  recently recertified.   
 1817 16 15
 To the extent that K[ehdy] makes that  requirement, 
periodic retraining amongst and including any  other 
requirements, it ’s satisfied in this case.  So foundation 
has been laid.  Objection is noted, though, and  lodged for 
the record.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, I wasn ’t -- I wasn’t clear that he 
actually testified that he was recertified for the  purposes 
of HGN.  I think he -- I thought he testified that he was 
recertified for -- as a -- as a drug recognition expert.  
THE COURT: Right, which includes HGN precisely because it 
is not, as I recall, an indicator of -- of intoxication due 
to THC.[19]  But that would necessarily mean covering as 
well for alternative intoxication including without -- 
including and especially alcohol.  So, I mean, for the 
reasons stated before, your objection is noted and lodged.  
I believe it’ s safe.  And if it ’s not, I ’m sure that you’ ve 
made it clear enough for appeal purposes.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL] : Yes.  And so just to confirm, I  have a 
continuing objection,  I don’t have to raise it every time 
that it’s discussed? 
THE COURT:  Well, once you ’ve -- yeah, you don’ t.  
 
 Officer Wong then testified that he administered and 
evaluated the results of each SFST administered to Jones in 
                     
14  See supra note 8. 
 
15  See supra note 8. 
 
16  See supra note 7. 
  
17  See supra note 12. 
 
18  See supra note 13. 
 
19  No such evidence was received in this case.  It appears the district 
court may have been relying on its knowledge of the contents of NHTSA manuals.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
14 
 accordance with his training and the NHSTA manual.   With respect 
to the HGN test, Officer Wong checked for and found no resting 
nystagmus,  he observed that Jones ’s pupils were of equal size,  
and he confirmed that Jones could track the stimulus equally -  
based on these observations, Officer Wong continued on with the 
test.  Officer Wong testified that during Jones ’s performance of 
the HGN test, he  observed six out of six clues of intoxication, 
which were lack of smooth pursuit, distinct and sustained 
nystagmus at maximum deviation, and onset of nystagmus prior to 
forty-five degrees, in both eyes.   
 According to Officer Wong, this meant that Jones h ad 
“failed” the HGN test.  Officer Jones also testified the  “fail” 
meant Jones had a blood alcohol content of 0.08 or above.   The 
DPA then asked Officer Wong if there were any studies about the 
HGN test that would point toward that conclusion.  Officer Wong 
began testifying about a San Diego field test study, indicating 
that it was the most recent study, in which police officers 
conducted the test in the field and in the laboratory.  At this 
point, Jones objected on hearsay grounds, that Officer Wong was 
testifying about a study he had not seen.  The DPA responded 
that the testimony was being offered for foundation.  The 
district court sustained the objection on the grounds that  
“there are certain hoops that still have to be jumped through 
for even an expert to testify about external treatises, articles, ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
15 
 that sort of thing that have not been met yet as far as I ’m 
concerned.”20  Thus, Officer Wong did not testify as to studies 
apparently supporting his testimony that 
Jones’s “failure” on 
the HGN test mean he had a blood alcohol content of 0.08 or 
above.
   
 Next, Officer Wong testified regarding his 
administ ration 
of the walk-and-turn test.  Once more, he gave Jones 
instructions on how to perform the test, including verbal 
instructions and a 
demonstration of the correct position.   Jones 
confirmed he understood the test and had no questions.  Officer 
Wong looked for two clues during the instructional phase, in 
which he asked Jones to stay in position and not begin until 
cued: whether Jones could keep his balance while standing still 
and whether he started too soon or without being told to start.  
He then looked for six clues during the walking portion of the 
test: whether Jones turned around improperly, stopped, failed to 
                     
20  It appears the district court was referring to Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence 
(“HRE”) Rule 803(b)(18) (2002), which provides a hearsay exception for 
“learned treatises”:  
 
(18) Learned treatises.  To the extent called to the 
attention of an expert witness upon cross -examination or 
relied upon by the witness in direct examination, 
statements contained in published treatises, periodicals, 
or pamphlets on a subject  of history, medicine, or other 
science or art, established as a reliable authority by the 
testimony or admission of the witness or by other expert 
testimony or by judicial notice.   If admitted, the 
statements may be read into  evidence but may not be 
received as exhibits. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
16 
 step heel- toe, stepped off -line, raised his hands, or took an 
improper number of steps.   
 According to Officer Wong, a subject “fails” the test if he 
exhibits two clues.   Officer Wong testified Jones exhibited 
seven clues: he was unable to keep his balance during the 
instructional phase,  stopped walking while on the turn,  turned 
improperly,  did not step heel- to-toe five times (missing by 
about a half- inch), stepped off- line three times,  raised his 
arms six to eight inches,  and took ten steps instead of  nine.  
Officer Wong also testified that at the end of the first nine 
steps, Jones stopped and asked him if he should take nine steps 
or ten; Officer Wong responded that he should “take the test as 
how he had remembered ” from the instructions.  Jones ended up 
taking ten steps.   
 Officer Wong then testified that Jones “failed” the walk-
and-turn test and that his blood alcohol content was at or above 
0.08.   
 Officer Wong then testified that he instructed Jones and 
demonstrated how to complete the one- leg stand test, after which 
Jones affirmed that he understood.   During the test, Officer 
Wong looked for four clues while Jones stood on one leg and 
counted for thirty seconds: whether Jones swayed to keep balance, 
raised his arms six inches or more, hopped  on one leg, and put 
his foot down at any point.   Officer Wong testified he observed ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
17 
 Jones three times sway from side-to-side about two inches and 
twice raise his arms about eight inches; according to Officer 
Wong, these motions were of a sufficiently significant degree to 
constitute clues for purposes of the test.   
 Officer Wong then testified that Jones also “failed” the 
one-leg stand test.   He also testified this meant Jones was “not 
able to drive a car safely. ”  
   Officer Wong then testified regarding Jones ’s performance 
on the SFSTs as a whole, stating,  “My evaluation is that based 
on all three of the standardized field sobriety tests that the 
defendant was not sober and that he was not able to operate a 
vehicle safely and that he did not pass[.] ”  Over objection, he 
testified that Jones was intoxicated.  After completion of the 
SFSTs, Officer Wong arrested Jones  for OVUII.   
 On cross-examination, with respect to the alleged heel-toe 
“miss” on the walk- and-turn test, Officer Wong testified t hat he 
“didn’t have a measuring stick ” and that he just “look[ed] and 
determine[d] if it ’s a half an inch. ”  Officer Wong conceded he 
was “approximating ” the distance.   With respect to the HGN test, 
Officer Wong stated that the last time he had measured exactly, 
rather than merely estimated, forty- five degrees of eye 
displacement  had probably been in 2010 at the police academy.   
 Officer Wong also testified, over the State ’s objection, 
that SFSTs provide the probable cause basis for an OVUII arrest ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
18 
 and that he was trained to “take the arrestee to the police 
station for further testing to determine intoxication[ .]”  In 
response to a cross- examination question as to whether “the 
conclusion of intoxication is not based on the field sobriety 
test, the conclusion of intoxication is based upon what further 
testing is done at the police station, blood or breath or 
whatever,” however, Officer Wong responded,  “No, because if the 
person refuses to take a test, then how would we come to the 
conclusion that they ’re intoxicated? ”    
 2.  The district court ’s ruling  
 The district court adjudicated Jones guilty of OVUII .  
Although the district court acknowledged Jones ’s argument that 
the individual clues were insufficient and that Jones ’s slurred 
speech may have been attributable to his natural speaking 
pattern, the district court nevertheless found “the accumulation 
sufficient” and described the evidence supporting conviction as 
“ample.”  The district court then sentenced Jones to 240 ho urs 
of community service, a two- year license suspension, and a $700 
fine.  
B. ICA proceedings 
 In his opening brief, Jones argued that the district court 
erred in admitting, without proper foundation, Officer Wong ’s 
testimony that Jones failed each SFST an d failed the SFSTs  as a 
whole.  Jones maintained Officer Wong lacked the qualifications ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
19 
 to testify as an expert because he “never testified that he was 
certified to administer the test, only that he had received 
training from an individual who himself was also not certified. ”  
According to Jones, the district court committed “clear and 
obvious error”  when it determined that Officer Wong ’s 
qualifications “met the standard ” for being “certified. ”  Jones 
argued that, thus, Officer Wong ’s testimony regarding  the 
results of the SFSTs was erroneously considered by the district 
court on the substantive issue of guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt.   
 In addition, Jones  claimed that the district court erred by 
admitting the S FSTs as evidence of intoxication rather than as 
merely evidence of probable cause .  Jones contended that this 
court’s decision in Toyomura , while permitting an officer to 
provide a lay opinion that  a defendant was intoxicated based on 
a lack of coordination, forbids reliance on the results of the 
SFSTs as the basis of that opinion.  Jones maintained that “the 
trial court failed to apply and enforce this prohibition ” when 
Officer Wong offered an opinion on Jones ’s intoxication based 
solely on the S FSTs.   
 Jones also analogized his case to State v. Bebb , 99 Hawai ʻi 
213, 53 P.3d 1198 (App. 2001), overruled on other grounds by 
State v. Maldonado, 108 Hawai ʻi 436, 121 P.3d 901 (2005), in 
which the officer based his lay opinion about an arrestee ’s ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
20 
 intoxication on his assessment of the S FSTs, but the State 
failed to lay sufficient foundation as required by Toyomura .  99 
Hawaiʻi at 217 –218, 53 P.3d at 1202 –03.  Jones claimed the same 
error occurred here.   
 Jones also asserted that “there was not substantial 
evidence to support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt.”  According to Jones, besides the results of the SFSTs 
that should not have been considered, the evidence supporting 
the conviction was scant: that he had run a red light, that 
Officer Wong smelled alcohol, and that his eyes were red and 
bloodshot.  Jones argued that he “contested ” whether the light 
had been red when he passed through the intersection, that “[i]t 
is common knowledge that can be judicially noted that . . . 
every police officer reports ” red, bloodshot eyes after an OVUII 
arrest, and that the smell of alcohol could have been coming 
from the passengers in the car, who had been drinking.  
 The State responded that Officer Wong was properly 
qualified as an expert.  The State argued that  Officer Wong ’s 
testimony was relevant and reliable under H
awaiʻi Rules of 
Evidence (“HRE”)  Rule 702 (1992), and that it had laid 
sufficient foundation for him to opine as an expert on the SFSTs  
and Jones’s performance.  Likewise, it argued that “any 
testimony by Officer Wong opining as to Jones being under the ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
21 
 influence of alcohol was admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 704,” 
which permits an expert to opine even on an ultimate issue.   
 The State also argued that sufficient evidence existed to 
convict Jones.  The State, emphasizing that an appellate court 
must review the evidence “in the strongest light for the 
prosecution,”  cited the “strong odor of alcohol coming from 
[Jones’s] breath, ” that Jones fumbled with his documents,  that 
Jones exhibited clues on each S FST, and that his eyes were red 
and bloodshot.  
 In his reply, Jones argued that Officer Wong lacked 
certification to perform the S FSTs and that even Officer Wong ’s 
own instructor was not certified.   Jones also contended that no 
evidence was presented tending to establish O fficer Wong’s 
expertise to permit him to draw a correlation between the SFST 
results and sobriety.  Jones argued Officer Wong ’s expert 
testimony was therefore improper.  He also rei terated that a 
police officer testifying as a lay witness cannot base an 
opinion about a defendant ’s sobriety on the results of the S FSTs.   
 In its J une 19, 2019 summary disposition order (“SDO”) 
affirming Jones ’s conviction , the ICA reasoned that “Officer 
Wong was certified by NHTSA and IACP to instruct HPD officers to 
perform and evaluate the SFST[s,] ” that he was qualified to 
“conduct and grade ” each component test, and that it was not 
error for the district court “to allow Officer Wong to express ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
22 
 an expert opinion that Jones ‘failed’ the HGN test, the walk-
and-turn te st, and the one- leg stand test. ”  State v. Jones, No. 
CAAP-16-0000345, at 5, 2019 WL 2521149 (App. June 19, 2019) 
(SDO) (footnote omitted).  
 The ICA also ruled that even if admission of this expert 
opinion testimony was erroneous, “the error was harmless because 
there was other substantial evidence supporting Jones ’s OVUII 
conviction.”   Jones, SDO at 4- 5 n.5. 
 The ICA also held it was not error for the district court 
to rely on Officer Wong ’s expert opinions on Jones ’s SFST 
performance as substantive evidence of intoxication.  Jones, SDO 
at 6.  The ICA cited to  Toyomura for the proposition that 
“foundational evidence of a police officer ’s knowledge of HPD ’s 
SFST procedure was necessary before the officer could be allowed 
to express an expert opinion about whether a defendant was 
intoxicated based upon an SFST. ”  Id.  The ICA concluded the 
State’s foundation was sufficient for “Officer Wong, an NHTSA-  
and IACP- certified SFST instructor for HPD, to opine that Jones 
was intoxicated based upon the results of Jones ’s SFST.”  Id.  
The ICA distinguished this case from Bebb, stating,  “[B]ecause 
we hold that Officer Wong was properly allowed to express an 
expert opinion that Jones was intoxicated , Bebb does not apply. ”  
Id. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
23 
  Finally, the ICA rejected the contention that Jones ’s 
conviction was not supported by substantial evidence.  Jones, 
SDO at 8- 9.  Even without  the contested expert opinion testimony, 
the ICA concluded Officer Wong ’s lay observations supported the 
conviction.  Id.  Again citing Toyomura, the ICA ruled that an 
officer may describe the results of the S FSTs and offer a lay 
opinion about the defendant ’s sobriety from those results.  
Jones, SDO at 9 (citing Toyomura, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 26, 904 P.2d at 
911).  Thus, even if Officer Wong should not have been qualified 
as an expert, the ICA ruled his testimony regarding how Jones 
performed the tasks on the SFSTs  were admissible:   
Officer Wong ’s testimony about his observations of 
Jones’s performance on the walk -and-turn and one -leg 
stand tests, along with Officer Wong ’s observations 
of Jones ’s operation of his car, the strong odor of 
alcohol coming from Jones ’s breath, Jones ’s red and 
bloodshot eyes, Jones ’s fumbling with his driver ’s 
license, and Jones’ s dropping his license in his lap, 
was sufficient to support Jones ’s conviction.  
 
Id.21 
C.  Certiorari application  
 On certiorari, Jones presents the four questions presented 
in Section I.  In Section IV below, we address each question on 
certiorari in turn.  
 
                     
21  But see discussion in Section IV.D.  infra, explaining a police 
officer’s lay opinion testimony regarding a driver’s state of sobriety , if 
the testimony is based on the results of the driver’s performance on the 
SFSTs, is inadmissible under  existing law . ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
24 
 III.  Standards of Review
 
A.  Admission of expert testimony 
 “Generally, the decision whether to admit expert testimony 
rests in the discretion of the trial court.  To the extent that 
the trial court ’s decision is dependent upon interpretation of 
court rules, such interpretation is a question of law, which 
[the appellate] court reviews de novo. ”  State v. Metcalfe, 129 
Hawaiʻi 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013) (alteration  in 
original).  
B. Whether error is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt  
 In a criminal case, if there is a reasonable possibility 
that error might have contributed to a conviction, then the 
error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the 
judgment of conviction on which the error may have been based 
must be set aside.  
State v. Cabrera, 90 Hawai ʻi 359, 365, 978 
P.2d 797, 803 (1999). 
C.  Sufficiency of the evidence 
 We review the sufficiency of evidence in a criminal case 
“in the strongest light for the prosecution. ”  State v. Kalaola, 
124 Hawai ʻi 43, 4
9, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010).  “The test on 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable 
doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact. ”  Id.  Substantial evidence 
means “credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
25 
 probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to 
support a conclusion. ”  Id.  
IV.  Discussion  
 
A. The district court erred by permitting Officer Wong to 
express an expert opinion that Jones “failed” the SFSTs  
  
 1. Requisite evidentiary foundation 
 
 In his first question on certiorari, Jones asks this court 
to hold that the district court erred by permitting Officer Wong 
to “express an expert opinion that Jones ‘failed’” the elements 
of the SFSTs .  Jones maint ains the district court erred in 
admitting, without proper foundation, Officer Wong ’s testimony 
that Jones “failed ” the HGN test, the walk- and-turn test, and 
the one-leg stand test.   
  The ICA reasoned that because “Officer Wong was certified 
by NHTSA and IACP to instruct HPD officers to perform and 
evaluate the SFST[s,] ” he was qualified to “conduct and grade ” 
each component test, and it was not error for the district court 
“to allow Officer Wong to express an expert opinion that Jones 
‘failed’ the HGN test, the walk- and-turn test, and the one- leg 
stand test.”  Jones, SDO at 5 (footnote omitted).   
 HRE  Rule 702 governs the admission of expert testimony and 
provides: 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge 
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or 
to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an 
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
26 
 otherwise. In determining the issue of as
sistance to the 
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness 
and validity of the scientific technique or mode of 
analysis employed by the proffered expert.   
 
 
Qualifying a witness as an expert requires that the 
proponent lay foundation establishing that “(1) the witness [is] 
qualified by knowledge, skill, training, or education; (2) the 
testimony [has] the capacity to assist the trier of fact to 
understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue; and (3) 
the expert’s analysis [meets] a threshold level of reliability 
and trustworthiness. ”  Metcalfe, 129 Hawai ʻi at 227
, 297 P.3d at 
1083.  “[ T]he determination of whether or not a witness is 
qualified as an expert in a particular field is largely within 
the discretion of the trial judge, and, as such, will not be 
upset absent a clear abuse of discretion. ”  State v. Torres , 60 
Haw. 271, 277, 589 P.2d 83, 87 (1978).  HRE Rule 702 thus  allows 
those qualified by “knowledge, skill, training, or education ” to 
express expert opinions if the testimony has the capacity to 
assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to 
determine a fact in issue and the expert ’s analysis meets a 
threshold level of reliability and trustworthiness.  Metcalfe, 
129 Hawaiʻ i at 227, 297 P.3d at 1083.   
 However, an expert ’s opinion testimony is not limitless. 
The HRE contemplates that “experts will have a specific field of 
expertise, and limit their opinion testimony to matters within 
that field.”  129 Hawai ʻi at 244, 
297 P.3d at 1100.  Furthermore, ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
27 HRE Rule 704 (1980) provides that “[t]estimony in the form of an
opinion or inference otherwise admissible is not objectionable 
because it embraces an ultimate issue to be decided by the trier
of fact.” 
 “However, it is well settled that ‘questions which 
would merely allow the witness to tell the [fact-finder] what 
result to reach are not permitted.  Nor is the rule intended to 
allow a witness to give legal conclusions. ’”  Vliet, 91 Hawai ʻi 
at 296–
97, 983 P.2d at 197–98 (alteration in original) (ruling 
in OVUII case that any error in the officer’ s legal conclusion 
testimony that defendant ’s state of sobriety “would have been  
over the legal limit ” was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt).  
 
It appears no published Hawaiʻi appellate cases have 
actually upheld a ruli ng admitting expert opinion testimony that 
a driver “failed” a SFST.  State v. Nishi, 9 Haw. App.  516, 852  
P.2d 476 (1993) addressed an officer ’s opinion testimony that
the defendant had failed the “heel-to- toe, “leg raised,”  and 
“arch back” tests.  9 Haw.  App. at 523, 852 P.2d at 480.  The 
ICA ruled this testimony inadmissible as HRE Rule 70122 lay
opinion testimony.  Id.   The ICA indicated lay opinion testimony 
22HRE Rule 701 (1984) provides:  
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness ’ 
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited 
to those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally 
based on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to 
a clear understanding of the witness ’ testimony or the 
determination of a fact in issue.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
28 
 rationally based on an officer ’s perception regarding a driver ’s 
lack of coordination while performing SFSTs is admissible.  Id.   
The ICA noted, however, that a normal person would not be able 
to form opinions that a driver had “failed” the tests without 
knowledge of the HPD’s field sobriety testing procedures, and 
that the record disclosed no such foundational evidence.  Id.  
Noting that the officer had not been qualified as an expert 
witness, the ICA ruled the district court abused its discretion 
in admitting the officer ’s testimony.  9 Haw. App. at 521 n.6, 
523-24, 852 P.2d at 479 n.6,  480.   
 In Toyomura, we cited Nishi in holding that “foundational 
evidence as to the arresting officer ’s knowledge of HPD ’s field 
sobriety testing procedures[,] ” which the record in that case 
did not disclose, was “necessary ” for the admission of an 
“arresting officer ’s opinion testimony ” that a driver had 
“failed to pass the FSTs[.] ”  80 Hawai ʻi at 25-26, 904 P.2d at  
910—11 (brackets omitted).  As noted in Bebb, the case heavily 
relied on by Jones, Toyomura  actually stated: 
Toyomura  is also correct in observing that insufficient 
foundation was laid to permit Officer Fujihara,  based on 
Toyomura ’s performance of the FSTs , to render a lay opinion 
as to whether he was intoxicated, inasmuch as the 
prosecution elicited no testimony establishing that (1) the 
horizontal gaze nystagmus, “one-leg stand, ” and “walk-and-
turn” procedures were elements of the HPD ’s official FST 
protocol, (2) there was any authoritatively established 
relationship between the manner of performance of these 
procedures  and a person ’s degree of intoxication, and (3) 
Officer Fujihara had received any specific training in the 
administration of the procedures and the “grading”  of their 
results.   Therefore, Toyomura is correct that Officer ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
29 
 Fujihara was improperly permitted to render an opinion that 
he (i.e. Toyomura) was intoxicated based in part on Officer 
Fujihara ’s assessment of the results of the FSTs. . . .  
 Toyomura is simply wrong, however, in concluding that 
the “rule in Nishi was violated in this case ” in such a 
manner as to require that his DUI conviction be vacated.  
As the trial court correctly noted, “any . . . lay person,”  
including a police officer, “can have an opinion regarding 
sobriety. ”  As set forth above, Officer Fujihara expressly 
testified  that, over the course of his approximately 
nineteen years as a police officer, he “had an opportunity 
to observe people who had been drinking and at different 
levels[.] ”  And, as noted, the record reflects that the 
trial court both assured Toyomura that he was considering 
Officer Fujihara ’s testimony “only from a lay point of view ” 
and that the trial court  applied its independent assessment 
of the evidence in finding Toyomura guilty of DUI.  . . .  
 
 . . . . 
 
 Examined in the light of the entire proceedings  and 
given the effect the whole record shows it to be entitled, 
we are convinced that there is no reasonable possibility 
that any improper lay opinion testimony on the part of 
Officer Fujihara contributed to Toyomura ’s DUI conviction. 
Accordingly, we hold that any error in the admission of 
that testimony was harmless.  
 
99 Hawai ʻi at 216- 17, 53 P.3d at 1201- 02 (alterations and 
ellipses in original) (citations omitted) (second emphasis 
added) (quoting Toyomura, 80 Hawaiʻi at 26-27, 904 P.2d at 911 -
12). 
 As indicated by Chief Judge Burns in Bebb, the inclusion of 
the word “lay”  before “opinion” in the third line of the excerpt 
above was erroneous:  as stated in Bebb , “[i]n context, it 
appears that this word should have been ‘expert’ rather than 
‘lay’ because ‘testimony establishing ’ the three facts that 
follow would qualify Officer Fujiha ra as an expert. ”  99 Hawaiʻi 
at 216 n.4, 53 P.3d at 1201 n.4.  Thus, Toyomura
 indicated that ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
30 
 if the three foundational requirements stated therein were met, 
an officer could testify that a driver had “failed” an SFST.  
 After Toyomura,  the ICA held in Ferrer that the State had 
failed to lay a proper Toyomura foundation for the admission of 
an officer ’s expert opinion on whether the defendant had “passed” 
or “failed” the psychomotor field sobriety tests.23  95 Hawaiʻi at 
430, 23 P.3d at 765.  Ferrer also separately held that the 
foundation laid had been insufficient to establish that the 
officer was duly qualified to conduct the HGN test and grade the 
test results.  95 Hawai ʻi at 424, 23 P.3d at 759.   
 Thus, a lthough our appellate cases set out a n evidentiary 
foundation framework for admission of expert opinion testimony 
that a driver “failed” a SFST, there are no reported cases 
upholding the admission of such expert opinion testimony .24 
 2. Lack of “certification ” 
 Jones contends insufficient foundation exists to qualify 
Officer Wong as an expert because Officer Wong never testified 
                     
23  The psychomotor FSTs are the walk -and-turn test and the one -leg stand 
test.  Ferrer held that psychomotor FSTs are nonscientific in nature and that, 
therefore, an arresting officer may be permitted to testify as to a driver’s 
performance on such tests and to give a lay opinion based on observations 
whether the driver was intoxicated when arrested.  95 Hawai ʻi at 427, 23 P.3d 
at 762.  Ferrer also held, however, that absent foundation testimony 
establishing conformity to NHTSA training standards, it was an abuse of 
discretion to allow an officer to testify about a driver’s performance on the 
HGN test.  95 Hawai ʻi at 425, 23 P.3d at 760.   
 
24  Vliet reaffirmed Nishi ’s holding that “a lay witness may express an 
opinion regarding another person’s sobriety, provided the witness has had an 
opportunity observe the other person.  91 Hawai ʻi at 298, 983 P.2d at 199.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
31 
 that he was certified to administer the SFST
s, only that he had 
received training from someone who himself was not certified.  
Jones therefore argues that it was error for the 
district court 
to qualify Officer Wong as an expert; he argued that just 
because an officer was “allowed” to perform the SFST, it  did not 
mean “that he was therefore certified and qualified to do so. ”   
 This objection appears to arise from the ICA’s opinion in 
Ito, in which the ICA stated: 
 In this case, no evidence was adduced that [the 
officer]  was duly qualified to conduct the HGN test and 
grade the test results.  Over Defendant’ s objection, the 
district court “assum[ed] that the standard training from 
HPD is, I ’ve always assumed it to be sufficient so I ’ll 
assume he has in fact been qualified to give the test. ”  
However, it is not clear what HPD ’s “standard training ” 
consists of and whether HPD ’s standard training program 
meets the requirements of the NHTSA.   Therefore, we have no 
way of knowing the extent and nature of [the officer ’s] HGN 
training, whether [the office r’s] training was supervised 
by certified instructors, whether [the officer]  was 
certified to administer the test . . . .  
 
90 Hawai ʻi at 244, 978 P.2d at 210 .25  
 
 With respect to Jones ’s contention regarding 
“certifications, ” the Hawai ʻi appellate cases setting forth 
foundational requirements for admission of expert opinion 
testimony regarding a driver ’s performance on SFSTs, see Section 
IV.A.1. above, do not contain any “certification ” requirement.  
Officer Wong repeatedly testified he had been qualified to 
administer and evaluate SFSTs pursuant to NHTSA standards and 
the NHTSA manual.  When asked whether he  had been required to 
                     
25  See also supra note 8. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
32 (continued. . .)  
 receive any certifications to become an SFST instructor for HPD, 
Officer Wong actually
 described the “certification ” process as 
NHTSA and IACP qualifying senior instructors, who trained 
officers who then trained him.  The district court permitted 
Officer Wong to express various opinions regarding Jones ’s 
performance on the SFSTs constituting  expert opinion testimony, 
describing Officer Wong at various times as “certified ” and 
“qualified.”  For example, the district court stated, “ [I]n this 
case[, the officer] has himself been qualified to become a 
certified instructor, and has specifically testified that this 
is all in accordance wi
th the NHTSA, I ’m satisfied[.] ”   
 According to NHTSA manuals, although NHTSA provides 
certificates of completion of SFST training, neither NHTSA nor 
IACP are certifying agencies for impaired driving courses, i.e., 
SFST and ARIDE, “includ[ing] both practiti oners and instructors. ”  
See NHTSA, DWI Detection and Standardized Field Sobriety Testing 
(SFST) Instructor Guide,  40, 44, available at 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/sfst_i
g_full_manual.pdf [https://perma.cc/53W5- MSNV] (“NHTSA 2015  
Instructor Guide ”).26   
                     
26  “[O]ur appellate  courts have ‘not hesitated in the past to take 
judicial notice [on appeal] of the validity of underlying scientific 
principles and the reliability  of scientific techniques.’”  Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi 
at 112, 19 P.3d at 60 (second alteration in original).  The trial and 
appellate record are replete with references to NHTSA and  its manuals.  The 
district court referred to information from NHTSA manuals not received in ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
33 
  
It therefore appears  that although “certificates of 
completion” are provided, NHTSA does not actually “certify” SFST 
instructors or officers.27  In any event, existence or non-
existence of “ certification ” is not dispositive, because 
pursuant to HRE Rule 702, a witness can render expert opinion 
testimony based on “knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
education.”  The ICA  expressed concer n in Ito that “it [was] not 
clear what HPD ’s ‘standard training ’ consists of and whether 
HPD’s standard training program meets the requirements of the 
NHTSA.”  90 Hawaiʻi at 244, 978 P.2d at 210.  In Jones’s case, 
Officer Wong testified regarding the training and testing he had 
undergone pursuant to NHTSA standards to administer and evaluate 
SFSTs.  In general, s
ufficient foundation was laid under 
Toyomura to qualify Officer Wong to render expert opinion 
                                                                 
(continued. . .)  
evidence, when it stated that Officer Wong ’s recertification as a drug 
recognition expert included retraining that the presence of HGN “is not . . . 
an indicator of [] intoxication due to THC. ”  The district court in Ferrer  
had taken judicial notice of various NHTSA manuals, and the ICA opinion 
contains various excerpts from them.  95 Hawaiʻi at 420, 424, 23 P.3d at 755, 
759.  Ito also contains various excerpts from NHTSA manuals.  90 Hawai ʻi 225, 
978 P.2d 191, passim.  See also Webster v. State, 26 S.W.3d 717, 721 n.4 (Ct. 
App. Tex. 2000) ( “Although the parties have not provided a copy  of the 
1992 NHTSA Manual, we take judicial  notice of its contents .”).  We therefore 
take judicial notice of the NHTSA 2015 Instructor Guide and the NHTSA 2015 
Participant Manual.   
 
27  Our appellate cases, however, contain references to NHTSA 
“certifications.”  See, e.g., State v. Wilson, 144 Hawai ʻi 454, 458, 445 P.3d 
35, 39 (2019) (“NHTSA Certified Instructor”); Mitchell, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 398, 15 
P.3d at 324 (“certified DUI instructor”); Ito, 90 Hawai ʻi at 244, 978 P.2d at 
210 (discussing lack of evidence of whether the officer was certified to 
administer HGN test and whether his training had been supervised by certified 
instructors).  Based on the NHTSA manuals, it is unclear whether such 
“certifications” exist for Hawai ʻi officers.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
34 
 testimony regarding Jones ’s performance on the SFSTs and clues 
of intoxication based on NHTSA standards . 
 3. Expert opinion testimony that Jones “failed” the SFSTs  
 Jones more specifically asserts in his first question  on 
certiorari, however, that the district court erred in allowing 
Officer Wong to express an expert opinion that Jones “failed” 
the HGN test, the walk- and-turn test, and the one- leg stand test.  
Jones argues the district erred in admitting Officer Wong ’s 
testimony that he had failed each test and failed the SFSTs as a 
whole.  
 As noted, Officer Wong ’s qualifications to testify as an 
expert as to his administration and evaluation of SFSTs were 
based entirely on NHTSA standards.  A s he testified, SFSTs are 
conducted pursuant to NHTSA standards contained in the NHTSA 
manual.   
 NHTSA itself dictates, however, that the SFSTs are not 
scored “pass” or “fail,” and are merely tools to assist an 
officer in seeing visible signs of impairment.  In other words, 
NHTSA itself does not recognize “pass” or “fail” scores on 
SFSTS: 
Remember, you should not testify that the defendant passed 
or failed the SFSTs.   The tests are not scored “pass” or 
“fail.”  You should testify if the defendant completed the 
tests as instructed.   These tests simply identify 
impairment.  
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
35 
 NHTSA, DWI Detection and Standardized Field Sobriety Testing 
(SFST) Participant Manual, 349, available at 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/sfst_p
m_full_manual.pdf [https://perma.cc/X22R- 3XXT] (“NHTSA 2015 
Participant Manual ”); NHTSA 2015 Instructor Manual,  at 409; see  
also NHTSA 2015 Participant Manual, at 257 ( “Remember that the 
SFSTs are a tool to assist you in seeing visible signs of 
impairment and are not a pass/fail test. ”).  
 Thus, the very standards upon which Officer Wong based his 
expertise explicitly state that SFSTs are not “pass” or “fail” 
tests.28  Hence, although our appellate cases set out an 
evidentiary foundation framework for admission of expert opinion 
testimony that a driver “failed” a SFST, no reported cases had 
previously upheld the admission of such expert opinion testimony.  
NHTSA standards do not allow such testimony.  Therefore, the 
district court erred in allowing Officer Wong to render such 
expert opinion testimony. 
B. The erroneous admission of expert opinion testimony that 
 Jones “failed” the SFSTs was not harmless beyond a 
 reasonable doubt 
 
 Jones next challenges the ICA ’s holding that even if it was 
error to permit Officer Wong to opine that Jones failed the SFST, 
                     
28 Based on our holding that it was error to allow Officer Wong to testify 
that Jones “failed”  the SFSTs, we do not go through the thorough analysis 
conducted by the ICA in Ferrer regarding whether the officer met specific 
NHTSA requirements as to each test.  See 95 Hawaiʻ i at 422-27, 23 P.3d at 757 -
62. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
36 “the error was harmless because there was substantial other 
evidence supporting Jones ’s OVUII conviction. ”  
“Erroneously admitted evidence is evaluated under 
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard. ”  State v. 
Matsumoto, 145 Hawai ʻi 313, 327, 4
52 P.3d 310, 324 (2019) ( citing 
State v. McCrory, 104 Hawaiʻi 203, 210, 87 P.3d 275, 282 (2004)). 
“Under this standard, ‘[t]he relevant question . . . is whether 
there is a reasonable possibility that error might 
have contributed to [the] conviction. ’”  Id. (alteration and 
ellipsis in original) (emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Han, 
130 Hawaiʻi 83, 93, 306 P.3d 128, 138 (2013) (citing State v. Kim ,
140 Hawai ʻi 421, 434 n.15, 402 P.3d 497, 510 n.15 (2017)).  
“In applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard, the court is required to examine the record and 
determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.”  State v. Souza , 142 Hawai ʻi 390, 402,
 420 P.3d 321, 
333 (2018)  (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Mundon, 121 
Hawaiʻi 339, 368,
 219 P.3d 1126, 1155 (2009) ). 
Thus, the ICA applied an erroneous standard in ruling that 
“the error was harmless because there was other substantial  
evidence supporting Jones ’s OVUII conviction. ”  The existence of 
“other substantial evidence ” supporting a conviction is not 
determinative of whether error is harmless beyond a reasonable ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
37 
 doubt.  Rather, as our cases have repeatedly held, the issue is 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error 
contributed to a conviction.  Cabrera, 90 Hawai ʻi at
 365, 978 
P.2d at 803.  If so, the error is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
 Granted, in a bench trial, “[i]t is well established that a 
judge is presumed not to be influenced b y incompetent evidence. ”  
Vliet, 91 Hawai ʻi at 298, 983 P.2d at 199
 (alteration in 
original).  In Vliet, this court found harmless an officer ’s 
improper opinion testimony regarding the defendant ’s sobriety 
and whether the officer believed the defendant was able to 
operate his vehicle safely that night.  91 
Hawaiʻi at 290, 983 
P.2d at 191.   
 
In Jones ’s trial, however, the district court repeatedly 
overruled Jones ’s objections and admitted Officer Wong ’s expert 
testimony that Jones had “failed” each SFST  individually , and 
then that Jones “failed” the SFSTs as a whole.  I n adjudicating 
Jones guilty of OVUII at the conclusion of trial, the district 
court stated that although the individual clues regarding 
Jones’s performance on the SFSTs were insufficient, and that 
Jones’
s slurred speech may have been attributable to his natural 
speaking pattern
, the “accumulation ” of evidence was “sufficient ” 
and the evidence supporting conviction was “ample.”  On this 
record, there is a reasonable possibility that the erroneous ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
38 
 admission of expert opinion testimony that Jones had failed the 
SFSTs individually and as a whole contributed to Jones ’s 
conviction.  Therefore, the error was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
 
C.  The district court (a) did not err by admitting expert 
 opinion testimony regarding Jones ’s performance on the 
 SFSTs as substantive evidence of intoxication and not just 
 as to probable cause for arrest,  and (b) based on Toyomura, 
 did not err in permitting expert opinion testimony that 
 Jones was intoxicated , but (c) based on Vliet , did err in 
 permitting expert opinion testimony that Jones had a blood 
 alcohol content of 0.08 or above   
 
 We have already concluded that Jones ’s conviction must be 
vacated.  We address the third question on certiorari, however, 
to provide guidance on remand.   
 As noted, the third  question has three parts.  On 
certiorari, Jones reasserts the questions he raised to the ICA,  
which are: (a ) whether the district court erred in admitting 
Officer Wong’s expert opinion testimony regarding Jones ’s 
performance on the SFSTs as substantive evidence of intoxication 
and not just as to probable cause for arrest;  (b) whether 
evidence was presented to establish Officer Wong ’s expertise to 
permit him to draw a correlation between the test results and 
sobriety to render an expert opinion that Jones was intoxicated; 
and (c) whether Officer Wong’ s expertise permitted him to 
testify that Jones had a blood alcohol level of 0.08 or above
.  
The ICA found no error.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
39 (continued. . .)  
  1. Expert opinion testimony regarding Jones ’s    
  performance on the SFSTs as substantive evidence   
  of intoxication and not just as to probable cause  
  for arrest 
 
 We first address Jones ’s assertion that the ICA erred in 
holding the HGN test and S FSTs were admissible for the purpose 
of establishing substantive evidence of intoxication beyond 
probable cause.   
 In Ito, the ICA stated: 
[W]e conclude that HGN test results have been sufficiently 
established to be reliable and are therefore admissible as 
evidence that police had  probable cause to believe that a 
defendant was [OVUII].   Since the issue was not presented, 
we do not decide whether HGN test results are admissible at 
trial as evidence of a defendant ’s intoxication.  
 
90 Hawaiʻ i at 241, 978 P.2d at 207.  
 As contended by Jones, NHTSA states that the SFSTs are to 
determine whether probable cause exists to arrest a driver for 
OVUII: “The third phase in the DWI detection process.[29]  In 
                     
29  According to the NHTSA 2015 Participant Manual, the phases are as 
follows: 
 
In Phase One: Your first task is to observe the vehicle in 
operation.  Based on this observation, you must decide 
whether there is sufficient cause to command the driver to 
stop.  Your second task is to observe the stopping sequence.  
You may want to take a picture of the vehicle or scene, 
especially if the vehicle was involved in a crash.  
 
In Phase Two: Your first task is to  observe and interview 
the driver face to face.  Based on this observation, you 
must decide whether there is sufficient cause to instruct 
the driver to step from the vehicle for further 
investigation.  Your second task is to observe the driver ’s 
exit and walk  from the vehicle.  You may want to take a 
photo of the defendant.  
 
In Phase Three: Your first task is to administer structured, 
formal psychophysical tests .  Based on these tests, you ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
40 
 this phase the officer administers field sobriety tests to 
determine whether there is probable cause to arrest the driver 
for DWI.”  NHTSA 2015 Participant Manual,  at 23.  NHTSA further 
defines “probable cause ” as “more than mere suspicion; facts and 
circumstances within the officer ’s knowledge, and of which [they 
have] reasonably trustworthy information, are sufficient to 
warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an 
offense has been or is being committed. ”  Id. 
 NHTSA does not, however, limit a driver ’s performance on 
the SFSTs to an establishment of probable cause.  NHTSA 
instructs on the importance of officers taking field notes of a 
driver’s performance on the SFSTs to “determine whether there is 
probable cause to arrest[,] ” but points out that “to secure a 
conviction, more descriptive evidence is needed.  The officer 
must be able to describe how the subject performed on the tests, 
and what the subject did. ”  Id. at 268.  Thus, NHTSA recognizes 
that an officer ’s observation and description of the manner in 
which a driver performs a field sobriety test is admissible at 
trial on the issue of impairment.   
                                                                 
(continued. . .)  
must decide whether there is sufficient probable cause to 
arrest the driver for DWI.   Your second task is then to 
arrange for (or administer) a Preliminary Breath Test . 
 
Id. at 95.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
41 
  Hawaiʻi appellate
 cases have also allowed for consideration 
of the manner in which a driver performs  SFSTs as substantive 
evidence of intoxication,  regardless of whether the officer was 
qualified as an expert.  See, e.g., Toyomura, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 26, 
904 P.2d at 911 (specifying foundation necessary for expert 
opinion testimony regarding SFST performance); Nishi, 9 Haw. App. 
at 524, 852 P.2d at 480 (allowing police officer to give lay 
witness testimony regarding observations of a driver ’s 
coordination problems while performing SFSTs) .  
 Therefore, evidence of a drive r’s conduct and physical 
actions while perform ing a SFST is not only relevant to probable 
cause for an arrest, but is also admissible as indicia of 
whether a driver was OVUII beyond a reasonable doubt. 
  2. Expert opinion testimony that Jones was    
  intoxicated 
  
 With respect to the second part of this question on 
certiorari, the ICA stated that pursuant to Toyomura , 
“foundational evidence of a police officer ’s knowledge of HPD ’s 
SFST procedure was necessary before the officer could be allowed 
to express an expert opinion about whether a defendant was 
intoxicated based upon an SFST. ”  The ICA concluded the State ’s 
foundation was sufficient for “Officer Wong, an NHTSA-  and IACP-
certified SFST instructor for HPD, to opine that Jones was 
intoxicated based upon the results of Jones ’s SFST.”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
42 
  In Toyomura, we cited Nishi and stated that “foundational 
evidence as to the arresting officer’s knowledge of HPD’s field 
sobriety testing procedures[,]” which the record in that case 
did not disclose, was “necessary” for the admission of an 
“arresting officer’s opinion testimony” that a driver had 
“failed to pass the FSTs[.]”  80 Hawai ʻi at 25-26, 904 P.2d at 
910—11 (brackets omitted).  The issue Jones directly presents in 
this case, whether such opinion testimony should be excluded 
even when the requisite foundation has been laid, was not 
presented in Toyomura.  In addition, Vliet, discussed in more 
detail below, was decided  after Toyomura  and pertains to whether 
such testimony would be admissible.  And as further discussed 
below, there are significant issues with allowing such testimony.  
We recognize, however, that Toyomura indicated that an officer 
could express an expert opinion that a driver was intoxicated as 
long as sufficient foundation was laid.   
 Here, Officer Wong testified he had been trained and re-
trained and had passed written and practical examinations 
regarding the administration and evaluation of SFSTs in 
accordance with NHTSA standards, and he had performed hundreds 
of SFSTs.  Therefore, an adequate foundation was laid, and the 
district court did not err in allowing Officer Wong to testify 
as an expert in the administration and evaluation of SFSTs and 
to express his opinions regarding the NHTSA -recognized “clues of ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
43 
 intoxication” in Jones ’s performance of the SFST s.  Thus, under 
Toyomura, in this case, Officer Wong was properly allowed to 
render expert opinion testimony regarding his evaluation of 
Jones’s performance on the SFSTs and to render expert opinion 
testimony that Jones was “intoxicated.”  
 3. Expert opinion testimony that Jones had a blood   
  alcohol level of 0.08 or above 
 
 Officer Wong ’s expert opinion testimony, however, exceeded 
the scope of allowable testimony as an expert under existing law.  
Officer Wong not only testified as to the clues of intoxication 
he observed during Jones’ s performance of the SFSTs, he also 
opined that Jones had a blood alcohol content of 0.08 based on 
his performance on the SFSTs.  First, a s Jones argues, Officer 
Wong’s testimony did not provide adequate foundation to allow 
him to draw such a correlation based on Jones ’s performance on 
each of the SFSTs.  Officer Wong did testify that the NHTSA 
practical exam included going over studies that described the 
findings and “ success rate ” of each S FST.  He never testified, 
however, as to what “success rate ” meant.  Then, when O fficer 
Wong testified that a “ fail” meant Jones had a blood alcohol 
content of 0.08 or above and the DPA asked Officer Wong whether 
there were any studies about the HGN test that wou
ld point 
toward that conclusion, the district court sustained Jones ’s 
objection.  Therefore, no foundation was laid that clues of ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
44 intoxication correlated to a bloo
d alcohol level of 0.08 or  
above.  
In addition, it is well-settled that opinion testimony  
should not merely tell the fact- finder what result to reach, and 
witnesses are not permitted to give legal conclusions.  See 
State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 559, 799 P.2d 48, 52 (1990) 
(stating that HRE Rule 704 does not permit opinion testimony  
that merely tells the jury what result to reach); Vliet , 91 
Hawaiʻi at 296
-97, 983 P.2d at 197-98 (noting that HRE Rule 704 
does not allow a witness to give legal conclusions).  Although 
Toyomura indicated t hat if sufficient foundation existed of a  
police officer ’s knowledge of SFST procedures  the officer could 
be allowed to express an expert opinion about whether a  
defendant was intoxicated based upon SFST performance, our 
ruling in Vliet, which came after Toyomura, directly addressed 
the issue.  In Vliet , an OVUII case, we noted that although HRE 
Rule 704 provides that “[t]estimony in the form of an opinion or 
inference otherwise admissible is not objectionable because it 
embraces 
an ultimate issue to be decided by the trier of fact[,] ” 
“questions which would merely allow the witness to tell the  
[fact-finder] what result to reach are not permitted. ”  91 
Hawai’i at 296, 983 P.2d at 197.  We further noted that  
HRE Rule 704 is not “intended to allow a witness to give legal 
conclusions.”   91 Hawaiʻi at 296–97, 983 P.2d at 197–98.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
45 
  Vliet specifically addressed an officer ’s testimony that a 
defendant’s state of sobriety “ would have been over the legal 
limit.”  91 Hawai ʻi at 296–
97, 983 P.2d at 197 –98.30  This court 
held that the officer’s testimony amounted to a legal conclusion 
and was therefore impermissible.  91 Hawaiʻi at 298, 983 P.2d at 
199 (“Clearly, Officer Uehara was attempting to offer a legal 
conclusion as to whether [the defendant] was DUI.”).  Although 
in Vliet we ruled
 the admission of this testimony harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt, we identified  its problematic nature.  
 The officer’s  testimony in Vliet  is comparable to Officer 
Wong’s testimony that Jones had a blood alcohol level of 0.08 or 
above.  Jones was charged with 
OVUII in violation of  
HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).  This subsection proscribes operating a 
vehicle “
while under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair the person ’s normal mental faculties or 
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty. ”  
Officer Wong’s  testimony  that Jones had a blood alcohol level of 
0.08 or above based on his performance on the SFSTs wa s 
tantamount to te lling the fact- finder what result to reach and 
constituted legal conclusion testimony in violation of Vliet.   
Therefore, on this basis also, the district court erred by 
                     
30  As recognized by the concurrence and dissent, Vliet  also found 
impermissible the officer’s testimony that the defendant “did poorly, he 
would be driving poorly too[.]”   91 Hawai ʻi at 298, 983 P.2d at 199.  Vliet  
indicated that the officer’s testimony that he believed the defendant was not 
able to operate his vehicle safely that night was improper.  Id.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
46 
 permitting Officer Wong to testify as an 
expert that Jones had a 
blood alcohol level above 0 .08.   
D. Prospe ctively, police officers may no longer testify,  
 whether in a lay or expert capacity, that a driver  
 appeared “intoxicated”  
 
 In this case, Officer Wong testified as an expert witness, 
and the issues raise
d by Jones on certiorari relate to Officer 
Wong’s expert testimony.  The ICA ruled, however, that Officer 
Wong’s testimony was in any event admissible as lay opinion 
testimony as an officer may describe the results of the SFSTs 
and offer a lay opinion about the defendant’s sobriety from 
those results.  
Jones, SDO at 9 (citing Toyomura, 80 Hawai ʻi at 
26, 904 P.2d at 911).   
 To the extent the ICA stated that an officer’ s lay opinion 
testimony can be based on SFST results , this conclusion was 
erroneous under existing law.  As Chief Judge Burns stated in 
Bebb,  
In Toyomura , the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court concluded that a 
police officer, based on [their] “lay” observations, can 
have a “lay” opinion that an arrestee is not sober. It also 
says, however, that a police officer cannot base [their] 
“lay” opinion that an arrestee is not sober on [their] 
“assessment of the results of the FSTs. ”  
 
99 Hawai ʻi at 217
, 53 P.3d at 1202 (citing Toyomura, 80 Hawai ʻi 
at 26, 904 P.2d at 911).    
 Under HRE Rule 701, a lay opinion must be “rationally based 
on the perception of the witness[ .]”  As recognized in Nishi, 
which we adopted in Toyomura , an officer’s opinion that a driver ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
47 (continued. . .)  
 was intoxicated based upon SFST performance would necessarily 
rely on that officer’s knowledge of SFSTs and would not be based 
solely on the officer’s perception.  See 9 Haw. App. at 523, 852 
P.2d at 480 (“A normal pers on may not necessarily form such an 
opinion if [they] had not been taught to grade the performance 
of the three field sobriety tests[, and thus] this was a 
situation where foundational evidence as to [the arresting 
officer’s] knowledge of HPD's field sobri ety testing procedures 
was necessary.”).  Thus, as recognized in  Bebb, Toyomura , which 
adopted Nishi, ruled that although an officer performing a SFST 
may be able to testify as to what would constitute lay 
observations, such as the general physical condition or 
coordination of a driver, an officer’s opinion regarding a 
driver’s level of intoxication cannot be based on the driver’s 
SFST results.   
 Thus, under existing law, a police officer cannot provide a 
lay opinion that a driver was “intoxicated”  or with  respect to 
the driver’s state of sobriety if the testimony is based on the 
results of the 
driver’s SFST performance.31  Our existing law 
                     
31  Thus, the dissent misstates that law when it states that:   
 
 Toyomura also recognized that a lay witness, 
including an officer testifying as such, can form an 
opinion as to whether someone they observed is intoxicated  
based on information besides the SFSTs, and Hawaiʻi courts 
have long followed this rule.  Toyomura, 80  Hawaiʻi at 25-27, 
904 P.2d at 910- 12 (“[A]ny lay person, incl uding a police 
officer, can have an opinion regarding sobriety.” (ellipsis,  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
48 states that an officer can, however, offer expert opinion 
testimony that a driver was “intoxicated”  assuming sufficient 
foundation, and an officer can offer lay opinion testimony that 
a driver was “intoxicated”  if that testimony is based on general 
observations regarding a dri ver’s coordination.   Toyomura , 80 
Hawaiʻi at 25-26, 904 P.2d at 910 —11.  
We now prospectively hold that police officers may no 
longer testify, whether in a lay or expert capacity, that a 
driver appeared “ intoxicated .”32
(continued. . .)  
citation, and inter nal quotation marks omitted)); see also  
State v. Bebb, 99 Hawai ʻi 213, 217 , 53 P.3d 1198, 1202 (App. 
2001) (recognizing that “ a police officer, based on his or 
her ‘lay’ observations, can have a ‘lay’ opinion that an 
arrestee is not sober ” (citation omitted)).  
(Alteration in original.) (Footnote omitted.)  
32As we explain, our prospective holding is based on HRE Rule 704.  
Although not necessary to our holding, we also note that lay opinion 
testimony from an officer conducting a SFST from whom expert testimony is 
sought raises additional concerns recognized in State v. Torres, 122 Hawaiʻi 2, 
222 P.3d 409 (App. 2009):  
When enacted in 1980, HRE Rules 701 and 702 were 
modeled upon and were virtually identical to the 
corresponding Federal Rules of Evidnce (FRE) Rules 701 and 
702. See Commentary to HRE Rule 701 and HRE Rule 702.  In 
2000, FRE Rule 701 was amended to specifically provide that , 
lay opinions coul d “not [be] base d on scientific, technical 
or other specialized knowledge within
 the scope of
[FRE] Rule 702.”  The Advisory Committee Notes to the 2000
amendment to FRE Rule 701 explain that the purpose of the 
amendment was to “eliminate the  risk that the reliability 
requirements set forth in Rule 702 will be evaded through
the simple expedient of proffering  an expert in lay witness
clothing.”   FRE Rule 701 advisory committee’ s note.  The
2000 amendment to FRE Rule 701 also ensures that a party
will not evade rules requiring pre -trial disclosure of
expert witnesses by “simply calling an expert witness in
the guise of a layperson.”   Id.  The 2000 amendment to
(continued. . .)  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
49 (continued. . .)  (continued. . .)  
FRE 701 incorporates the distinction set forth in  State v. 
Brown, 836 S.W.2d 530, 549 (Tenn.  1992), that “lay 
testimony ‘results f rom a process of reasoning familiar in 
everyday life,’ while expert testimony ‘results from a 
process of reasoning which can be mastered only by 
specialists in the field.’”  FRE Rule 701 advisory 
committee’ s note. 
Although Hawaiʻ i has not amended HRE Rule  701 to 
incorporate the 2000 amendment to FRE Rule 701, the Hawai ʻi 
Supreme Court has implicitly recognized the limitation on 
lay opinion testimony set forth in the 2000 amendment to 
FRE Rule 701.  
 In cases upholding the admission of opinion 
testimony as lay opinion, the supreme court justified its 
decisions by noting that the challenged testimony  did not 
require “scientific, technical, or other specialized 
knowledge” within the scope of HRE Rule 702.   Jenkins,  93 
Hawaiʻi at 105, 997 P.2d at 31 (“Jenkins do es not suggest, 
nor does the record reflect, that testimony regarding 
whether the pouches qualified as rigidly constructed 
containers or commercial gun cases required ‘scientific, 
technical, or other specialized knowledge,’ such that 
expert testimony would  have been required pursuant to  
HRE Rule 702 (1993).”);  Yoneda v. Tom,  110 Hawai ʻi 367, 385, 
133 P.3d 796, 814 (2006) (“Yoneda’ s testimony as to the 
events leading up to the accident and his observations 
regarding the location of the restroom building and  the 
route of the cart path did not require ‘scientific, 
technical, or other specialized knowledge’ such that expert 
testimony would have been required pursuant to  
HRE Rule 702[.]”).  
122 Hawaiʻ i at 29–30, 222 P.3d at 436 –37, aff’d and corrected  on other grounds  
by State v. Torres , 125 Hawaiʻ i 382, 2 62 P.3d 1006  (2011) (alterations in 
original).   Thus, pursuant to Torres, for opinion testimony from officers 
regarding their evaluation of a driver’ s performance on SFSTs to be 
admissible, they must be properly identified as expert witnesses.  Federal 
courts also recognize an additional concern with “proffering an expert in lay 
witness clothing.”  As stated by the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals:  
We recognize that witnesses who testify in both a lay 
capacity and an expert capacity may present special risks 
at trial.  The “aura of special reliability and 
trustworthiness surrounding expert testimony,” may give the 
witness “unmerited credibility” and “ create[] a risk of 
prejudice ‘because the jury may infer that the agent’s 
opinion about the criminal nature of the defendant’s  
activity is based on knowledge of the defendant  beyond the 
evidence at trial.’ ”  United States v. Dukagjini
, 326 F.3d 
45, 53–54 (2d Cir. 2003) (citations omitted).   In light of 
this concern, some circuits have encouraged district courts 
to take precautionary measures, including warning the jury 
about the witness’s dual roles or bifurcating the 
questioning to clearly demarcate lay and expert testimony ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
50 As discussed in Section IV.C
. above, an officer cannot  
express an opinion, whether in a 
lay or expert capacity, that  
simply tells a factfinder what result to reach or that provides  
a legal conclusion.  As discussed, Vliet held that although  
HRE Rule 704 provides that “[t]estimony in the form of an 
opinion or inference otherwise admissible is not objectionable 
because it embraces an ultimate issue to be decided by the trier 
of fact[,]” “questions which would merely allow the witness to 
tell the [fact- finder] what result to reach are not permitted. ” 
91 Hawai’ i at 296 , 983 P.2d at 197.
  Vliet also held that 
[HRE Rule 704] is not intended “to allow a witness to give legal 
conclusions.
”  91 Hawaiʻ i at 296 –97, 983 P.2d at 197 –98; see also 
State v. Pinero, 70 Haw. 509, 520 -21, 778 P.2d 704, 712 (1980) 
(holding conclusory questions with answers that told jury what 
result to reach improper under HRE Rule 704).  
On these bases, Vliet thus found impermissible an officer's 
testimony that a defendant’s state of sobriety “ would have been 
(continued. . .)  
offered by the same witness, to protect against these 
dangers.  See, e.g., United States v. Rios, 830 F.3d 403, 
414–15 (6th Cir. 2016), cert. petition filed, No. 16- 7314 
(Dec. 27, 2016); United States v. Moralez, 808 F.3d 362, 
365–67 (8th Cir. 2015); United States v. Haines, 803 F.3d 
713, 730 –32 (5th Cir. 2015); United States v. Vera, 770 
F.3d 1232 , 1242–43 (9th Cir. 2014); United States v. Garcia ,
752 F.3d 382, 392 (4th Cir. 2014); United States v. Tucker,
714 F.3d 1006, 1016 (7th Cir. 2013); United States v.
Flores-De-Jesus, 569 F.3d 8, 21 (1st Cir. 2009); Dukagjini,
326 F.3d at 53 –56.
United States v. Sandoval , 680 F. App’x 713, 718 –19 (10th Cir. 2017).  As 
noted, however, our prospective holding is based on HRE Rule 704.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
51 over the legal limit.”  91 Hawai ʻi at 296–
97, 983 P.2d at 197 –98. 
Vliet also found impermissible the officer’s testimony that the 
defendant “did poorly, he would be driving poorly too”  and that 
he believed the defendant was not able to operate his vehicle 
safely that night.  91 Hawaiʻ i at 298, 983 P.2d at 199.  The 
dissent concedes that, pursuant to Vl iet, testimony that the 
driver “would be driving poorly” and was “over the legal limit”  
reflect improper legal conclusions.  The dissent disagrees, 
however, that an officer’ s testimony that a driver was 
“intoxicated,”  whether given in a lay or expert capacity, tells 
the factfinder what result to reach, and invades the province of 
the factfinder.  
There is no real qualitative distinction between the 
testimony found i mproper in Vliet  and our other caselaw, however, 
with testimony that a driver was “ intoxicated. ”  As recently 
reaffirmed in State v. Ikimaka, No. SCWC -16-0000003, 2020 WL 
3056494 (Haw. June 9, 2020):  
Officer Hsu’s testimony on Ikimaka’s intent and knowledge 
was [] impermissible because it expressed a legal 
conclusion as to Ikimaka’s state of mind.   See State v.  
Vliet, 91 Hawai ʻi 288, 296 -97, 983 P.2d 189, 197 -98 (1999). 
While HRE Rule 704 (1980) permits testimony “embrac[ing] an 
ultimate issue to be decided by the trier of fact,” it “does not allow ‘the admission of opinions which would 
merely tell the jury what result to reach[.]’ ”  State v. 
Batangan
, 71 Haw. 552, 559,  799 P.2d 48, 52 (1990) (quoting 
HRE Rule 704 cmt.);  see also  State v. Ryan
, 112 Hawai ʻi 136, 
141, 144 P.3d 584, 589 (App. 2006) (holding an officer’s 
opinion testimony that the complaining witness was truthful  
impermissibly invaded the province of the jury  to determine  
the facts).   “Nor is [HRE Rule 704] intended to allow a ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
52 (continued. . .)  witness to give legal conclusions.”   Vliet, 91 Hawaiʻ i at
296-97, 983 P.2d at 197 -98. 
No. SCWC-16-0000003, at 33 (alterations in original). 
Allowing an officer to testify that a driver was 
“intoxicated” likewise expresses a legal conclusion and invades 
the province of the factfinder.  Webster’s Third International 
Dictionary defines “intoxicated” as “being under the marked 
influence of an intoxicant: DRUNK, INEBRIATED.”  An office r’s 
testimony that a driver was “intoxicated,”  whether given in a 
lay or expert capacity, invades the province of the factfinder 
to determine whether a person drove “[w]hile under the influence 
of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person’s normal 
mental faculties or ability to care for the person and guard 
against casualty[,] ” HRS § 293E-61(a)(1), and is tantamount to a 
legal conclusion that they did.  Accordingly, testimony  that a 
driver was “intoxicated ” violates HRE Rule 704.33
33We also observe that the definition of the term “intoxicated” appears 
to be evolving, and that the term can mean different things to different 
people.  As noted, the 1966 Webster’s Third International Dictionary defines 
“intoxicated” as “being under the marked inf luence of an intoxicant: DRUNK, 
INEBRIATED.”  The 1988 Webster’s Ninth Collegiate Dictionary defines the term 
as “affected by [] alcohol[.]”  The 2019 Black’s Law Dictionary defines the 
term as “[h]aving the brain affected by the presence in the body of a drug or 
alcohol.  — Also termed inebriated.”  Intoxicated, Black’s Law Dictionary  
(11th ed. 2019).  In addition, we have cited other legal definitions of 
“intoxication” above.  
Jones was charged with driving “[w] hile under the influence of alcohol 
in an amount sufficient to impair [his] normal mental faculties or ability to 
care for [himself]  and guard against casualty” under HRS § 291E -61(a)(1).  He 
was not charged with driving under the influence of other intoxicants.  Yet, 
a person can appear “intoxicated” even if under the influence of other 
substances.  Thus, admission of testimony from a police officer, whether in a 
lay or expert capacity, that a person was “intoxicated,” raises significant 
HRE Rule 403 concerns based on “unfair prejudice, confusion o f the issues, or ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
53 
  We therefore prospectively hold that for trials occurring 
after the date of this opinion, police officers may no longer 
testify, whether in a lay or expert capacity, that a driver 
appeared “intoxicated.”34   
E. Jones ’s conviction was supported by substantial evidence 
 Finally, Jones alleges there was not substantial evidence 
to support his conviction.  Citing Bebb, Jones asserts the 
evidence was insufficient to support his conviction because 
besides the results of the S FSTs - which he challenges -  the 
other evidence supporting guilt was “subjective. ”  Moreover, he 
claims that “[n]o evidence was proffered as to the correlation 
between red, watery eyes and intoxication, or whether such 
indicia rise to the level of substantial evidence of alcohol 
consumption in an amount sufficient to impair a person ’s normal 
mental faculties[.] ”  
 We review the sufficiency of the evidence supporting a 
criminal conviction in the light most favorable to the State.  
                                                                 
(continued. . .)  
misleading the jury [or factfinder judge]” as to what “intoxicated” means.  
See HRE Rule 403 (“Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of 
undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative 
evidence.”).  In addition, such opinion testimony, whether offered in a lay 
or expert capacity, also may be needless and cumulative when, for example, 
the officer is able to testify as to the driver’s physical actions, conduct, 
and appearance or when a video  of the SFSTs  exists. 
 
34  This is a “new rule” that changes standards upon which courts and law 
enforcement have relied.  Therefore, we give it purely prospective effect.  
See Lewi v. State, 145 Hawaiʻ i 333, 349 n.21, 452 P.3d 330, 346 n.21 (2019).  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
54 
  Kalaola, 124 
Hawaiʻi at 49, 237 P.3d at 1115.  “‘Substantial 
evidence’ as to every material element of the offense charged is 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative 
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion.
”  Id.    
 Jones argues that substantial evidence was lacking that he 
was “under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to 
impair [his] normal mental faculties. ”  HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).  
 As indicated by the ICA, Jones ’s conviction was supported 
by “Officer Wong ’s observations of Jones ’s operation of his car, 
the strong odor of alcohol coming from Jones ’s breath, Jones ’s 
red and bloodshot eyes, Jones ’s fumbling with his driver ’s 
license, and Jones ’s dropping his license in his lap[.] ”  In 
addition, we have held that Officer Wong ’s expert opinion 
testimony as to clues of intoxication based on Jones ’s 
performance on the SFST s was properly admitted.  Thus, 
substantial evidence supported Jones ’s conviction.  
V.  Conclusion 
 Based on these reasons, we vacate the ICA ’s July 15, 2019 
judgment on appeal and the district court ’s March 22, 2016  
judgment of conviction, and we remand this matter to the  
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
55 
 district court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
Michael S. Zola,
for petitioner
   
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
 /s/ R
  
 /s/ M 
 
  
 ichard W. Pollack 
   
ichael D. Wilson 
  
  
Sonja P. McCullen,
for respondent  
 