*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
THEO PEDRO, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-19-0000439 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000439; CASE NO. 2FFC-18-0000252(4)) 
 
JUNE 4, 2021 
 
McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ., WITH WILSON, J., ALSO 
CONCURRING SEPARATELY, AND RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING IN PART 
AND DISSENTING IN PART, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
 
Theo Pedro (“Pedro”) pleaded no contest to four counts of 
sexual assault in the second degree.  Before sentencing, Pedro 
moved to withdraw his pleas.  He said he was innocent.  He Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000439
04-JUN-2021
08:04 AM
Dkt. 13 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 
 wanted a trial.  The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (the 
“circuit court,” “trial court,” or “court”) denied Pedro’s 
motion.  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (the “ICA”) affirmed 
the circuit court’s decision and we granted Pedro’s application 
for certiorari. 
Consistent with our “liberal approach” to deciding motions 
for plea withdrawal before sentencing, see State v. Jim, 58 Haw. 
574, 576, 574 P.2d 521, 522-23 (1978), we conclude that Pedro 
presented a “fair and just reason” for the withdrawal of his 
pleas.  The trial court erred in denying Pedro’s motion.  
Accordingly, we vacate the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence 
and remand this case to the circuit court. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A June 2018 indictment charged Pedro with four counts of 
sexual assault in the first degree, attempted sexual assault in the first degree, sexual assault in the fourth degree, and 
kidnapping.  Count 1 alleged: 
That on or about the 24th day of June, 2018, in the County 
of Maui, State of Hawaii, THEO PEDRO did knowingly subject 
another person to an act of sexual penetration by strong 
compulsion, to wit, by placing his finger into her genital 
opening, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault 
in the First Degree in violation of Section 707- 730(1)(a) 
of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.1 
                                                 
1 The remaining sexual assault in the first degree charges tracked the 
language of count 1.  They differed only in the alleged conduct 
constituting sexual penetration by strong compulsion.  Counts 2 and 4 
described the act as “placing his penis into her genital opening;” count 3 
as “engaging in the act of cunnilingus.”  Count 5 alleged an attempted act 
of sexual penetration by strong compulsion.  Count 7, sexual assault in 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 
  
The Family Court of the Second Circuit arraigned Pedro on 
July 2, 2018.2  Pedro appeared in custody with a deputy public 
defender and court-appointed Marshallese interpreter.  He said 
he spoke some English and had been in the United States since 2013.  Pedro’s attorney waived reading of the indictment and 
entered not guilty pleas for Pedro.
3  The court scheduled a 
September trial.  Defense counsel twice orally moved to continue the trial.    
The court scheduled a February 25, 2019 trial.  Then the defense 
moved to compel discovery, seeking information purportedly 
“material to the preparation of the defense” from the Maui 
Police Department, the Children’s Justice Center, and the Maui 
                                                                                                                                                             
the fourth degree, alleged sexual contact by compulsion.  The indictment 
did not define “strong compulsion” or “compulsion.” 
 
2 The indictment was filed on June 29, 2018, in the Family Court of the Second 
Circuit and the family court arraigned Pedro.  But Pedro was neither the parent nor the guardian of his alleged victim, and the record does not 
suggest any other basis for the family court’s jurisdiction under Hawai‘ i 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 571-14(a)(1).  Any potential jurisdictional defect 
is, however, immaterial.  The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit had 
jurisdiction under HRS § 603
-21.5, and family courts are “divisions of the 
circuit courts of the State . . . ”  HRS § 571- 3.  In State v. Malave, 146 
Hawaiʻi 341, 463 P.3d 998 (2020), we explained that since “circuit court 
judges sitting in family court have authority over both circuit and family matters,” when a circuit court judge presides over a family court matter, it 
does not matter whether or not the family court has jurisdiction under HRS § 
571-14(a).  I d.
 at 349, 463 P.3d at 1006.  We take judicial notice of the 
fact that Judge Richard T. Bissen, Jr. was appointed to the Circuit Court of 
the Second Circuit in 2005 and was serving as Chief Judge of the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit at the time he presided over Pedro's case. 
 
3 It is unclear whether Pedro received the indictment or reviewed it with 
counsel and the interpreter before the arraignment.  Pedro’s counsel 
declared: “A nd, your honor, since I have received the indictment at this time 
waive reading.  Enter not guilty.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 
 Department of the Prosecuting Attorney. 
At the January 7, 2019 hearing on the motion to compel 
discovery, Pedro’s counsel announced that the parties had 
reached a plea agreement: Pedro would plead no contest to 
amended charges of sexual assault in the second degree in counts 
1-4 and the State would dismiss counts 5-7 (attempted sexual 
assault in the first degree, kidnapping, and sexual assault in 
the fourth degree).  The plea agreement’s sentencing disposition permitted the State to argue for, at most, concurrent ten-year 
terms of imprisonment.  Pedro could argue for probation.  The 
trial court was not bound to follow the plea agreement.  It 
could ignore its terms.
4 
Pedro’s decision to accept the plea agreement was 
unexpected, anticipated by neither defense counsel, nor the 
prosecutor, nor the court before January 7, 2019.  Completion 
and review of “Form K,” the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(“HRPP”) standard change of plea document, happened shortly 
before Pedro entered the courtroom.  Defense counsel represented 
that, with the interpreter’s assistance, he and Pedro had reviewed the form, and a September 21, 2018 letter from the 
deputy prosecuting attorney detailing the proposed plea 
                                                 
4 The plea agreement cautioned Pedro: “I t is further understood that the 
sentence to be imposed upon the Defendant is within the sole discretion of 
the sentencing judge, and that this department does not make any promise or 
representation as to what sentence the Defendant will actually receive.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 
 agreement.  Pedro had signed the form. 
In court, defense counsel recited the plea agreement’s 
terms.  The court asked Pedro whether he understood the terms.   
Pedro replied, “Yes, your Honor.”  The court advised: “Now, you 
have an interpreter with you here.  If you don’t understand what 
I’m saying, and you wish to respond, you may do so in English.  
If you need the assistance of the interpreter, she’s there to 
help you as well.”  A plea colloquy ensued.  Pedro addressed the court both in English and in Marshallese through the 
interpreter.  Pedro stated he was 33 years old and attended 
school “up until the ninth grade.”  He felt clear minded. 
The trial court’s plea colloquy entailed reading each 
paragraph of Form K, the change of plea document, and asking 
Pedro whether the statement was true. 
The Court:   Two says, I have received a written copy of the 
original charges in this case.  The charges have been 
explained to me.  I understand the original charges against 
me.  Is that true? 
 
The Defendant:  Yes, sir. 
 
The Court:  I told my lawyer all of the facts I know about 
the case.  My lawyer explained the government’s evidence 
against me, my possible defenses, and the facts which the 
government must prove in order to convict me.  Is that all 
true? 
 
The Defendant:  Yes, your Honor. 
 
The Court:  Item three reads, I understand the reduced charges of sexual assault in the second degree in counts 
one through four with which the government has agreed to 
charge me, instead of the original charges of sexual assault in the first degree.  Is that true?   
 
The Defendant:  Right, your Honor. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 
 The Court:  Are you saying correct, I couldn’t hear what 
you said. 
 
The Defendant:  Yeah. Yes. Yes, your Honor.  
 
The court continued reciting the plea form’s numbered 
paragraphs.  It asked Pedro to confirm his agreement with 
the form’s statements.  Pedro responded to each question 
with “Yes, your Honor” or a slight variation. 
The court reviewed the plea agreement’s terms with Pedro.5  
Pedro said he understood the agreement.  Paragraph 8 of the 
change of plea form advised: “I know that the court is not 
required to follow any deal or agreement between the Government and me.”  The court made a sentencing inclination.  It told 
Pedro, “if the Court were to grant prison or, um, order prison, 
that the Court would not exceed the State’s recommendation with 
concurrent sentencing.” 
 Before asking for Pedro’s plea, the court summarized 
paragraph 11 of the change of plea form: “I’m signing this no 
contest plea form after I have gone over all of it with my 
lawyer, and while I will not be permitted to withdraw my plea, I 
am signing this form in the presence of my lawyer.  I have no complaints about my lawyer.  I am satisfied with what he has 
                                                 
5 Later in the hearing, the circuit court also reviewed a “Sex Offender 
Addendum” with Pedro.  Pedro acknowledged understanding, signing, and 
reviewing the document with his attorney.  When asked whether he had read the 
form or had it interpreted for him, Pedro answered, “Correct, your Honor.”   
The document advised Pedro that he would have to comply with Hawaiʻ i’ s sex 
offender registration laws.  Under HRS § 846E-10, Pedro would register as a 
sex offender for the rest of his life. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7 
 done for me.”  The court asked Pedro whether these statements 
were true.  Pedro replied: “Yes, your Honor.” 
Pedro then entered no contest pleas to sexual assault in 
the second degree in counts 1-4.  Defense counsel stipulated 
“for purposes of the no contest plea and the no contest plea 
alone” to a factual basis supporting Pedro’s pleas. 
The court accepted Pedro’s pleas.  It concluded Pedro 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently entered his pleas.  Pedro signed the plea form, acknowledging “the Judge questioned 
me personally in open court to make sure that I knew what I was 
doing in pleading guilty or no contest and understood this form 
before I signed it.”  The court found Pedro guilty of four 
counts of sexual assault in the second degree. 
On March 3, 2019, defense counsel filed a Notice of 
Disclosure of Discovery Materials.  The Notice informed the 
State that counsel intended to share discovery materials with 
Pedro under HRPP Rule 16(e)(3).
6  That rule states that an: 
attorney may provide the defendant with a copy of any 
discovery material obtained if the attorney notifies the prosecutor in writing and files a copy of such 
                                                 
6 The notice read: 
 
Notice is hereby given that counsel for Defendant shall 
disclose copies of discoverable materials to Defendant 
pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 16 and an 
agreement with the prosecution that the copies shall redact sensitive personal information including, but not limited 
to, social security numbers, dates of birth, account numbers, telephone numbers, physical addresses, and 
identification of involved juveniles. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8 
 intention with the court, and the prosecutor does not 
file a motion for protective order within 10 days of 
the receipt of the notice. 
 
The court filed a stipulation and order regarding custody 
of discovery on March 14, 2019.7  The record does not indicate 
when defense counsel told Pedro of his right under HRPP Rule 
16(e)(3) to possess the investigative reports in his case.  The 
record also reveals neither when Pedro requested his discovery 
materials from defense counsel, nor when defense counsel 
provided Pedro the materials.    
Also on March 14, 2019, defense counsel moved to withdraw 
as counsel.  A two-paragraph declaration of counsel was all that supported the motion: 
1. I represent Defendant, Theo Pedro, in the above 
entitled case.  Mr. Pedro does not wish to have the Office 
of the Public Defender to represent him in this case and wishes to have a new attorney represent him. 
 
2.  Counsel must withdraw from representation when 
discharged by the client.  Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.16(a)(3).
 
 
The circuit court scheduled the hearing on the motion to 
withdraw as counsel on Pedro’s sentencing date, March 29, 
2019.  A presentence report was filed March 21, 2019.  On 
March 29 the court continued the hearing on the motion to 
                                                 
7 The deputy prosecuting attorney and defense counsel signed the stipulation.  
It stated defense counsel notified the prosecuting attorney of an “intention 
to provide Defendant with a copy of any and all discovery material pursuant 
to Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure 16(e)(3) . . . .”  The parties agreed that 
before defense counsel provided discovery to Pedro, he would redact 
confidential personal information.  The court approved the stipulation and 
protective order.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 
 withdraw as counsel.8 
On April 4, 2019, respective counsel and Pedro appeared, 
along with a court interpreter.  Defense counsel revealed he had 
“another conversation” with Pedro “about his options and what he 
wishes to do.”  Defense counsel then disclosed the basis for his 
motion to withdraw as Pedro’s counsel: Pedro wanted new counsel 
appointed to assist him with withdrawal of his pleas.  Counsel 
stated that it was his “understanding that [Pedro] seeks to withdraw his no contest plea.”  Counsel continued: “given what 
was discussed, I would ask that the pending motion to withdraw 
as counsel be granted and that a substitute counsel can be 
appointed.” 
The trial court confirmed Pedro’s desire to start the case 
“all over again” with new counsel.  It asked him why he wanted 
new counsel.  Pedro explained through the interpreter: “[M]y 
question is to have a new person come help me because I only 
worked a little bit of time with this lawyer.”  He told the court he needed a new lawyer to “[e]xplain to me and help me 
with this case” and “[e]xplain to me about everything because I 
did not understand.” 
The court granted the motion to withdraw as counsel.  The 
written order stated Pedro “has or had a conflict with The 
                                                 
8 The record omits a transcript of the proceeding.  The court minutes state: 
“After discussion cont’d to 4/4/19, 8 am.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 
 Office of the Public Defender.”  The court asked an attorney in 
the courtroom to represent Pedro.  The attorney accepted the 
appointment.  The court continued sentencing to May 10, 2019. 
On May 3, 2019, Pedro’s new attorney moved to withdraw 
Pedro’s no contest pleas.9  Counsel declared that Pedro 
“adamantly” maintained his innocence and wanted a trial.  Counsel wrote that Pedro “did not fully understand his options 
at trial” and that prior counsel “did not fully explain his options in regard to a trial,” had “only seen him in person 
briefly,” and pressured him into changing his pleas by 
“insist[ing] that Defendant’s only option was to accept the 
plea offer from the State.”  
The State opposed the motion.  It cited State v. Gomes, 79 
Hawaiʻi 32, 37, 897 P.2d 959, 964 (1995), for the proposition 
that there are “two fundamental bases of demonstrating ‘fair and just reasons’ for granting withdrawal of a plea: (1) the 
defendant did not knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waive 
his or her rights; or (2) changed circumstances or new 
information justify withdrawal of the plea.”    
Referencing the court’s plea colloquy and the signed change 
of plea form, the State argued Pedro entered his pleas intelligently, voluntarily, and knowingly.  The State supported 
                                                 
9  The motion was styled as a “motion to recall nolo contendere plea entered 
on 01/07/2019.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 
 this claim by pointing to the fact that an interpreter was 
present both when Pedro reviewed the form with his lawyer and 
during the court’s colloquy.  The State also argued that there 
were no changed circumstances justifying the withdrawal of 
Pedro’s pleas. 
In Gomes, we held that a court abuses its discretion by 
denying a defendant’s pre-sentence request for plea withdrawal 
where: 
(1) the defendant has never expressly admitted guilt; (2) 
the defendant advances a claim of new information or changed circumstances with factual support that, if 
believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate the 
defendant; (3) there has been no undue delay in moving to 
withdraw the plea; and (4) the prosecution has not 
otherwise met its burden of establishing that it relied on the plea to its substantial prejudice. 
 
Id. at 39, 897 P.2d at 966.  The State used the four-part test 
we introduced in Gomes (the “Gomes test”) to argue that Pedro 
was not entitled to withdraw his plea because he had not 
satisfied all four of these criteria.  Addressing the Gomes 
test’s second factor, the State argued: “Defendant has neither advanced a claim of new information nor changed circumstances.  
Furthermore, Defendant has failed to supply the requisite 
factual support that, if believed by a reasonable juror would exculpate the defendant.”  Regarding the fourth Gomes test 
factor, the State claimed the plea withdrawal would prejudice it because it had: 
learned there has been significant familial and cultural
pressure put on [the complaining witness] and her family  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 
 not to cooperate with this prosecution and blame her for 
the Defendant’s actions during the time between Defendant’s
change of plea date and the March 29, 2019, sentencing 
date, when these claims began.  10 
 
The motion to withdraw plea hearing happened on May 10, 
2019.  Defense counsel characterized Pedro’s no contest pleas as 
a “sudden change of heart” and “kind of a surprise to everyone.”  
He shared that Pedro had continually insisted, “I am not 
guilty.”  Counsel stated: “He wants a trial now.  He wants a 
trial.  He wants the State to prove each and every element of 
the charge.  These are all just the most fundamental 
constitutional rights.  This is what is at stake today for him.” 
The State referred the court to its memorandum discussing 
Gomes.  Regarding the “substantial prejudice” it faced if Pedro 
withdrew his plea, the State mentioned without attribution:  
I found out this morning, just this morning outside the 
courtroom, that the victim’s mother is sick with cancer and 
she is returning to the Marshall Islands to be with her.  
And there is no indication that, um, when she is – is going 
back.  That is not pressure.  But it is prejudice. 
 
The State also represented that the complaining witness faced 
“an extreme” amount of pressure.  The deputy prosecuting 
attorney explained, “[y]es, there’s always a cultural influence, but she had been willing to go a certain way.  Now, it is 
completely . . . different.”  The State asserted that Pedro knew 
                                                 
10 The State’s o pposition was supported by a declaration from the d eputy 
prosecuting attorney.  She declared that the information in the State’s 
memorandum was true and correct to the best of her knowledge and belief. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 
 of the shift in the complaining witness’s willingness to testify 
and was “trying to withdraw this plea for the pure fact that he 
knows I do not have the victim at this time.” 
The trial court stated it had “meticulously” reviewed the 
change of plea form with Pedro.  It concluded Pedro entered his 
pleas knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. 
The court then considered whether changed circumstances or 
new information justified withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas.  It reasoned: 
the State [is] now asserting that someone has pressured the 
complaining witness to not cooperate, to not take part.  
That’s not the change in circumstance that Gomes – State 
versus Gomes talked about.  The change in circumstance in 
State versus Gomes was somebody else coming forward and 
taking responsibility for the crime. . . .   But that’s not 
the case we have.  We don’t have a change in circumstance.  We don’t have a new thing.  What we have, if the . . . 
Court believes the State’s argument is an uncooperating family pressure situation on the complaining witness.  And 
the defendant sees that as his opportunity. . . .  He’s 
thinking, I can get better than that deal, because they don’t have the witness now. 
 
 The court also found that “[o]nly after the presentence 
investigation was received did this motion . . . arise. . . . 
The withdrawal came about at sentencing.  That is undue delay.”  
The court remarked: “He waited till sentencing after he reviewed 
the presentence investigation and then said, [‘]I changed my 
mind, I changed my mind.[’]”  Finally, the court agreed with the 
prosecution that “there will be substantial prejudice to the State if the defendant is allowed to withdraw his plea, if their 
witness is no longer available.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 
  The trial court denied Pedro’s motion to withdraw his 
pleas.  It then asked the parties whether they wanted the 
sentencing hearing to begin.  The prosecution did.  The defense 
did not.  The court continued sentencing to May 14, 2019. 
 At the start of Pedro’s sentencing hearing, defense counsel 
alerted the court to “possibly exculpatory evidence.”  Counsel 
disclosed he had received information “yesterday” about the 
complainant recanting.  The defense called Pedro’s mother, Joanne Pedro, to testify.
11  Joanne Pedro testified she did not 
know the complainant, but that on May 11, 2019, her cousin Bonet told her that she had heard secondhand, from someone named 
Marilyn, that the complainant had said Pedro “didn’t have 
anything to do with it, with the accusation – allegation.”  
Joanne Pedro further testified that the complainant also told 
Marilyn “it was not her [the complainant’s] doing” and “it 
wasn’t her . . . that made up the story.”
12 
The deputy prosecuting attorney disputed Joanne Pedro’s 
testimony.  She said the complainant had never recanted: 
Not once . . . has she ever changed her – changed her 
statement to me or any law enforcement or to anybody.  If 
it is to family, it’s because of – of pressure and not what 
she – I’ve –  I’ve questioned her numerous times.  What she 
                                                 
11 Although English was not her first language, Joanne Pedro testified in 
English.  
12 The court later clarified the testimony, asking Joanne Pedro: “Before I 
sentenced your son you wanted me to know that Bonet told you that Marilyn told her that [the complaining witness] said, it wasn’t her, and whoever made 
up a story.  Is that correct?”  Pedro’s mother replied, “Yes.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 
 said happened happened.  There has never been a recantation 
in this case. 
 
 After the testimony, the defense counsel moved to continue 
the hearing.  The court rejected the request; it observed that 
even if Joanne Pedro’s testimony had been presented at the 
hearing on Pedro’s motion for plea withdrawal, it “would not 
have made any difference;” the court still would not have 
allowed Pedro to withdraw his pleas. 
 Sentencing occurred.  During his pre-sentence allocution, Pedro did not discuss sentencing matters.  Instead, Pedro voiced 
dissatisfaction with his first lawyer.  He explained why he 
wanted to withdraw his pleas.  He spoke in English to explain 
that subsequent to the entry of his pleas — after he received 
his discovery for the first time — he decided to withdraw his 
pleas:  
Um, the reason why I did ask for, um a different lawyer, 
because like I said before, long time ago, I didn’t believe 
that, um, my other lawyer was helping me.  And I – I had 
hard time to figure out whether I want to take this to trial or because I never get my – my discovery yet.  It was 
hard for me to decide because I don’t know what was my 
charges.  And after I went sign the deal, I just – that’s 
when I, a day – couple days or weeks after, I got my 
discovery. 
 
 The court asked Pedro whether he wrote the letters it 
received from him in connection with his sentencing.  Pedro 
stated he had.13  The letters advanced a consent defense to the 
charged crimes.  The court told Pedro: “You didn’t write about a 
                                                 
13 The record is unclear on what assistance, if any, Pedro received in 
drafting these letters. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 
 burglary.  You didn’t write about a shoplift.  You didn’t write 
about a stolen car.  You wrote about having consensual sex with 
a 17 year old.  So you knew what the case was about; right?”  
Pedro answered, “Yeah, but I never really know what the whole—” 
before the court interjected, “What did you think this case was 
about?” 
 Pedro said he read the police reports after he pleaded no 
contest.  “[A]fter I went sign the deal, that’s when I just went – they just gave me one discovery.”  He said: “for a long time I 
never know what was discovery was.  I – I – I was – everything 
that I just found out was learned from other inmates.”  He 
insisted: “I – I wanted to go to trial right after I got my 
discovery.  That’s why.  Because I found some false story on 
that.” 
 The court asked Pedro if there was anything else he wanted 
to say before sentencing.  There was not.  The court sentenced 
Pedro to concurrent ten-year terms of imprisonment.  The court entered its findings of fact (“FOFs”) and 
conclusions of law (“COLs”) in June 2019.  In denying Pedro’s 
motion to withdraw his plea, the court found that Pedro entered 
his pleas voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently (FOF 2) and 
understood all the proceedings (FOFs 4, 5).  It further found 
that “[t]here was undue delay in the fact that Defendant waited 
until sentencing to request that his attorney be removed from *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 
 his case” (FOF 6), that “[t]here is no change of circumstance 
that would allow Defendant to withdraw his plea” (FOF 8), and 
that “the Defendant’s motion to withdraw his plea, based on his 
counsel’s understanding that the Complainant had recanted her 
allegations, lacks credibility and believability” (FOF 21).  
Citing Jim, 58 Haw. at 576, 574 P.2d at 523, the court 
identified the “applicable standard” governing plea withdrawal 
before sentencing as “whether the ‘defendant presented fair and just reason for his request and the State has not relied to its 
substantial prejudice’” (COL 3). 
The trial court further concluded: 
COL 4.  There are two fundamental bases of demonstrating 
“fair and just reasons ” for withdrawal of plea: (1) the 
defendant did not knowingly, intelligently
, or voluntarily 
waive his or her rights; or (2) changed circumstances or 
new information justify withdrawal of the plea.  State v. 
Gomes, 79 Hawaiʻ i 32, 37, 897 P.2d 959, 964 (1995); see Jim, 
supra. 
 COL 5.  The defense has the burden to prove there is a 
“fair and just reason” for granting the withdrawal of his plea and he has not met that burden in this case. 
 COL 6.  Defendant failed to establish that he did not waive 
his rights knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily.  
 COL 7.  Defendant did waive his rights, when he signed the 
no contest plea form and plead no contest, knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily. 
 
COL 8.  A Change of Circumstance refers to a separate 
individual taking the blame for the crime the Defendant pled guilty or no contest to.  There is no change of 
circumstance in this case.   
 
COL 9.  The Court does not find the Defendant’s mother 
credible, as to the information put forth by Defense Counsel that the Complainant recanted the allegations against the Defendant. 
 
COL 10.  A recantation would entail the Complainant stating *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 
 that this was not a sexual assault but, a consensual sexual 
encounter.  The information provided was that someone, 
other than the Complainant, made the information about the Defendant and the Complainant up.  That is not a 
recantation by the Complainant. 
 COL 11.  Based on Defendant’s own handwritten letters to 
the Court the sexual encounter occurred between him and the 
Complainant.  
COL 12.  There was no recantation, no change of circumstances, and nothing in the testimony of Defendant’s 
mother that requires a delay in sentencing for further 
investigation by D efense Counsel.  
 COL 13.  The State has relied upon the no contest plea to its substantial prejudice.
 
 
On appeal, Pedro argued the trial court abused its 
discretion by (1) denying his motion to withdraw his no contest 
pleas; and (2) sentencing him to a ten-year term of 
incarceration.  Pedro’s opening brief challenged FOFs 2, 4, 5 
and 6; and COLs 12 and 13.14  He argued he was entitled to 
                                                 
14 The State argued that Pedro’s failure to challenge FOF 8, which stated 
“[t]here is no change of circumstance that would allow Defendant to withdraw 
his plea[,]” means that Pedro cannot prove “changed circumstances or new 
information justifying withdrawal of a no contest plea[.]”  Pedro also failed 
to challenge COLs 6 and 7.  The former provides: “Defendant failed to establish that he did not waive his rights knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily.”  The latter provides: “Defendant did waive his rights, when he 
signed the no contest plea form and plead [sic] no contest, knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily.”  Since Pedro did not challenge these COLs on 
appeal, the State argued, they were “a binding determination that Appellant 
failed to meet his burden to show he did not knowingly, intelligently, or 
voluntarily waive his rights when he pleaded no contest.”  Additionally, the 
State asserted that because Pedro failed to challenge COL 9 regarding Joanne Pedro’s testimony, he had no “credible evidence” to support his claim that 
the complaining witness recanted her testimony.  COL 9 provides: “T he Court 
does not find the Defendant’s mother credible, as to the information put 
forth by Defense Counsel that the Complainant recanted the allegations 
against the Defendant.” 
 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (“ HRAP”) Rule 28(b)(4) provides that an 
appellant’s opening brief must contain: 
 
A concise statement of the points of error set forth in separately numbered paragraphs.  Each point shall state: (i) 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 
 withdraw his pleas because “he did not understand his charges, 
he did not receive his copy of the discovery until post change 
of plea and there was an alleged complaining witness recantation 
that was not investigated.”  The State contested this argument. 
In its Summary Disposition Order (SDO), the ICA evaluated 
Pedro’s claims under each of the two “Gomes bases.”  See State 
v. Pedro, NO. CAAP-19-0000439 (App. Aug. 24, 2020) (SDO); see 
also Gomes 79 Hawaiʻ i at 37, 897 P.2d at 964 (identifying two 
“fundamental bases of demonstrating a ‘fair and just reason’ for 
the pre-sentence withdrawal of plea: (1) the defendant did not 
                                                                                                                                                             
the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii) 
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) 
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the 
attention of the court or agency.  
 
Non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) offers sufficient grounds for the 
dismissal of the appeal.  See Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 
Hawaiʻi 408, 420,  32 P.3d 52, 64 (2001).  This court, however, has 
“consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity 
‘to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible.’”  Morgan v. 
Planning Dep’t, Cty. of Kauai, 104 Hawaiʻ i 173, 180 –81, 86 P.3d 982, 989– 90 
(2004) (quoting O’Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawaiʻ i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 
361, 364 (1994)).  In Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawaiʻ i 490, 280 P.3d 94 (2012), 
we recognized that evaluating an appellant’s arguments notwithstanding 
noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) was particularly appropriate where “the 
remaining sections of the brief provide the necessary information to identify 
the party's argument.”  Id. at 496, 280 P.3d at 94.  See also Lesser v. 
Boughey, 88 Hawaiʻ i 260, 261 n.1, 965 P.2d 802, 803 n.1 (1998) (noting policy 
of permitting litigants to have their cases heard on the merits where 
possible and addressing the appellant’s arguments even though appellant did 
not comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) where it was “possible to discern the 
point of error upon which [the appellant] relies . . . .”). 
   
Notwithstanding Pedro’s non- compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), we will 
address all of the issues raised by his appeal.  This is appropriate given 
that Pedro’s opening brief in the ICA implicitly challenges FOF 8 and COLs 6 
through 9; the scope and nature of his challenges to this FOF and these COLs 
are obvious given his arguments about his entitlement to plea withdrawal.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20 
 knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waive his or her rights; 
or (2) changed circumstances or new information justify 
withdrawal of the plea.”).  After reviewing the record and 
highlighting the signed change of plea form and the court’s 
colloquy with Pedro before accepting his pleas, the court ruled: 
[W]e conclude that Pedro did not meet his burden of 
establishing a fair and just reason for withdrawal of his 
no contest plea under the first Gomes basis.  We thus 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion in ruling that Pedro failed to establish that he 
did not waive his rights knowingly, intelligently, or 
voluntarily when he entered his plea.  
 
Pedro, SDO at 7. 
Next, the ICA evaluated Pedro’s contention that the 
discovery he received post-plea and the new information 
regarding the complainant’s recantation were “fair and just” 
reasons for the withdrawal of his pleas.  Like the trial court, 
the ICA rejected these arguments.  It stated that in order for  
Pedro to satisfy the second prong of the Gomes test — “changed 
circumstances or new information” — Pedro would need to provide facts that if believed by a reasonable juror would exculpate 
him:  
These contentions appear to raise a claim under the second 
Gomes basis – that there were changed circumstances or new 
information that justified withdrawal of Pedro’s plea.  To 
withdraw a plea on this basis, Pedro must, as an initial 
matter, ‘advance[] a claim of new information or changed 
circumstances with factual support that, if believed by a 
reasonable juror, would exculpate [him].[’]  Gomes, 79 
Hawaiʻi at 39, 897 P.2d at 966. 
 
Id. at 8. 
The ICA explained that Pedro’s arguments concerning his *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 
 belated receipt of his discovery fell short since “absent any 
indication in the record of the nature of the later-acquired 
‘discovery’ or the ‘false story’ that it allegedly contained, 
Pedro did not advance a claim of new information with factual 
support that, if believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate 
him.”  Id. (emphasis added). 
Pedro’s claim that the “recantation” constituted “new 
information or changed circumstances” that entitled Pedro to withdraw his pleas was likewise rejected.  After concluding that 
Pedro did not present new information or changed circumstances 
with factual support that, if believed by a reasonable juror, 
would exculpate the defendant, the ICA declined to address 
Pedro’s alleged undue delay in moving to withdraw his pleas or 
the prosecution’s purported reliance upon the pleas.  The ICA 
concluded: “Pedro failed to present a plausible claim of new 
information or changed circumstances under Gomes, and the 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Pedro's 
motion to withdraw his no contest plea on this basis.  See 
[Gomes,] 79 Hawaiʻ i at 36, 897 P.2d at 963.”  Id. at 10 (footnote 
omitted). 
 Pedro’s application for certiorari was accepted.  He 
reasserts his claim that the trial court abused its discretion 
by denying his motion to withdraw his no contest pleas.  Pedro 
also argues that the ICA erred when it held that the court did *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 
 not abuse its discretion in sentencing him. 
II. DISCUSSION 
HRPP Rule 32(d) governs plea withdrawals.  It specifies 
that sentenced defendants who move for plea withdrawal within 
ten days after the imposition of sentence are entitled to 
withdraw guilty or no contest pleas to “correct manifest 
injustice.”  It also provides that at any later time, a 
defendant seeking to withdraw a plea may do so only by petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40.  But HRPP Rule 32(d) omits a standard 
controlling plea withdrawal before sentencing.  We introduced 
such a standard in Jim, explaining that courts evaluating pre-
sentence requests for plea withdrawals should take a “liberal 
approach” and grant them “if the defendant has presented a fair 
and just reason for [the] request and the State has not relied 
upon the guilty plea to its substantial prejudice.”  58 Haw. at 
576, 574 P.2d 521 at 522-23 (emphasis added).15  See also State 
v. Sanney, 141 Hawaiʻ i 14, 22, 404 P.3d 280, 288 (2017) 
(emphasizing that before sentencing and absent substantial 
prejudice to the prosecution, defendants may withdraw their plea and reclaim their constitutional rights for a “fair and just 
reason”).   
                                                 
15  See also Kercheval v. United States, 274 U.S. 220, 224 (1927) (reasoning 
in dicta, “[t]he court in exercise of its discretion will permit one accused 
to substitute a plea of not guilty and have a trial if for any reason the 
granting of the privilege seems fair and just .”)(emphasis added). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 
 “The defendant has the burden of establishing plausible and 
legitimate grounds for the withdrawal.”  State v. Costa, 64 Haw. 
564, 565, 644 P.2d 1329, 1331 (1982).   
In Gomes, 79 Hawaiʻ i 32, 897 P.2d 959, we identified two 
“fundamental bases” of demonstrating a “fair and just reason” 
for the pre-sentence withdrawal of plea: (1) the defendant did 
not knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waive his or her 
rights; or (2) changed circumstances or new information justify 
withdrawal of the plea.”  Id. at 37, 897 P.2d at 964. 
The “fair and just reason” standard is more flexible and 
permissive than the “manifest injustice” standard governing 
post-sentencing plea withdrawals.  This distinction is based on “sound policy” since “when a motion to withdraw a plea has been 
made prior to sentencing, as opposed to after sentencing, there 
is no opportunity for the defendant to test the severity of 
sentence before finally committing himself to a guilty plea.”  
State v. Guity, 144 Hawaiʻ i 557, 562, 445 P.3d 138, 143 (2019) 
(cleaned up).  Even more importantly, “[b]efore sentencing, the 
inconvenience to the court and prosecution resulting from a 
change of plea is ordinarily slight as compared with the public 
interest in protecting the right of the accused to trial by 
jury.”  Kadwell v. United States, 315 F.2d 667, 670 (9th Cir. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 
 1963). 16
A criminal trial fully activates a defendant’s rights to 
confront accusers, testify, or not testify, present a complete 
defense, and have the prosecution prove each element of the 
charged or included offenses beyond a reasonable doubt.  With 
serious crimes, the right to a jury trial and unanimity attach.   
By pleading guilty or no contest, defendants renounce these core 
constitutional rights, forgo a public trial, and subject themselves to the government’s punitive power.  Given the 
significance of the constitutional rights waived by a guilty or 
no contest plea, the flexible and comparatively liberal approach 
we adopted in Jim favors allowing pre-sentence defendants to 
reclaim their constitutional rights and go to trial.  See State 
v. Pokini, 55 Haw. 640, 656, 526 P.2d 94, 108 (1974) (noting 
that the right to trial by jury is “considered fundamental to our system of criminal justice.”).  
The trial court correctly identified Jim’s “fair and just 
reason” standard as the controlling law.  But it misapplied that 
                                                 
16 The ease with which the public interest in the finality of criminal pleas 
may yield to accommodate other values is illustrated by courts’ near 
boundless power to unilaterally revoke plea agreements prior to sentencing.  Courts may, at their discretion, unwind plea agreements either by rejecting 
the agreements’ sentencing terms or by deciding to depart from a prior 
sentencing inclination.  See Sanney, 141 Hawaiʻ i
 at 16, 404 P.3d at 282 
(stating “if a defendant pleads guilty or no contest in response to a court’ s 
sentencing inclination, but the court later decides not to follow the 
inclination, then the court must so advise the defendant and provide the 
defendant with the opportunity to affirm or withdraw the plea of guilty or no 
contest.”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 
 law in evaluating Pedro’s motion for plea withdrawal.  The trial 
court, and the ICA after it, considered whether Pedro’s pleas 
were unknowing or involuntary and whether Pedro had presented 
new evidence or changed circumstances like those presented by 
the defendant in Gomes.  After determining Pedro’s pleas were 
knowing and voluntary, rejecting Joanne Pedro’s testimony about the complainant’s recantation as non-credible, and finding undue 
delay and prejudice to the prosecution, the trial court concluded its “fair and just reason” analysis and denied Pedro’s 
request.  It did not examine the totality of the circumstances 
to determine whether there was any fair and just reason for 
Pedro’s plea withdrawal. 
The trial court correctly concluded that Pedro’s pleas were 
knowing and voluntary.  And it did not err in finding that the “new evidence” Pedro presented did not justify allowing his 
pleas’ withdrawal.  But these determinations should be the 
beginning, not the end, of the “fair and just reason” inquiry.  
Cf. Guity, 144 Hawaiʻ i at 561, 445 P.3d at 142 (“[i]t is true 
that the failure of a defendant to enter a guilty plea 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily will amount to a ‘fair 
and just reason’ to withdraw the plea. . . . It does not follow, 
however, that the only permissible ‘fair and just reason’ to 
withdraw a plea is the defendant's failure to enter the plea 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily.”).  Here, the trial *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 
 court misread Gomes and did not conduct the full “fair and just 
reason” inquiry required by Jim.  As such, the trial court’s 
denial of Pedro’s motion was an abuse of discretion because it 
“disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.”  State v. Enos, 147 
Hawaiʻi 150, 159, 465 P.3d 597, 606 (2020) (quoting State v. 
Rapozo, 123 Hawaiʻ i 329, 336, 235 P.3d 325, 332 (2010)). 
 After reviewing the trial court and ICA’s treatment of Pedro’s plea withdrawal request, we clarify the scope of Gomes’ 
holding and introduce a five-factor test to prospectively guide courts’ consideration of whether there is a “fair and just 
reason” justifying plea withdrawal before sentencing. 
A. The trial court correctly concluded Pedro’s pleas were 
constitutionally valid 
 
The circuit court and the ICA correctly concluded that 
Pedro entered his no contest pleas knowingly, voluntarily, and 
intelligently.   
 A defendant’s signature on Form K, the standard change of 
plea form, does not by itself render a plea constitutionally 
valid.  See, e.g., State v. Krstoth, 138 Hawaiʻ i 268, 378 P.3d 
984 (2016).  But a signed Form K document does tend to show a 
plea was proper and its implications understood.  Here, Pedro signed the change of plea form after reviewing it and the 
prosecution’s plea agreement letter with his attorney and an *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 
 interpreter.  Defense counsel certified in Form K’s “Certificate 
of Counsel” that he had explained and reviewed the entire change 
of plea form with Pedro.    
On the record, the court confirmed Pedro’s age, educational 
background, English language skills, and clear, sound mind.  An 
interpreter was present.  Pedro addressed the court both in 
English and through the interpreter.  The court’s plea colloquy 
systematically marched through each paragraph of Form K.  Depending on the paragraph, the court asked Pedro whether the 
statement was true or whether he understood the constitutional 
rights he was waiving.  Pedro acknowledged that the statements 
in the form were true.  He also represented that he understood 
the constitutional rights he was waiving.  Pedro responded, 
“Yes, your Honor” or some slight variation to each of the 
court’s questions.  The court also reviewed the plea agreement’s 
terms with Pedro.  Pedro said he understood the agreement and 
the consequences of his pleas.   
After entering his pleas, Pedro signed the bottom of the 
plea form, acknowledging “the Judge questioned me personally in open court to make sure that I knew what I was doing in pleading 
guilty or no contest and understood this form before I signed 
it.”  The court accepted Pedro’s pleas.  
The record shows that the court engaged in a sufficient 
plea colloquy.  Pedro’s mind was clear.  He directly responded *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 
 to the court’s questions.  He understood his constitutional 
rights and waived them.  The circuit court correctly concluded 
that Pedro entered his no contest pleas knowingly, voluntarily,  
and intelligently. 
B. Gomes and Jim allow for pre-sentence plea withdrawal for 
any fair and just reason  
 
Underlying both the trial court’s ruling and the ICA’s SDO 
is a misapplication of our holding in State v. Gomes.  In Gomes, 
we considered whether the trial court had abused its discretion by denying a defendant’s motion to withdraw his plea after the 
emergence of exculpatory evidence.  We held that a court abuses 
its discretion by denying a pre-sentence request for plea 
withdrawal where:  
(1) the defendant has never expressly admitted guilt; (2) 
the defendant advances a claim of new information or 
changed circumstances with factual support that, if 
believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate the 
defendant; (3) there has been no undue delay in moving to 
withdraw the plea; and (4) the prosecution has not otherwise met its burden of establishing that it relied on 
the plea to its substantial prejudice. 
 
79 Hawai‘ i at 39, 897 P.2d at 966.   
The application of this four-part Gomes test is narrow.  It 
establishes one set of circumstances in which a trial court must 
grant a pre-sentence motion for plea withdrawal based on new 
circumstances that if believed by a jury would exculpate the 
defendant.  It does not provide any guidance for courts 
considering “new information or changed circumstances” that, 
though not exculpatory, may be a “fair and just reason” for plea *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 
 withdrawal.  The four factors outlined in Gomes impose a floor, 
not a curb, on trial courts’ discretion to grant a pre-sentence 
motion for plea withdrawal. 
Some treatments of the Gomes test, however, have 
incorrectly framed it as circumscribing Jim’s fair and just 
reason standard such that each of the test’s four factors is a hurdle to be cleared by defendants seeking plea withdrawal 
before sentencing.
17  This approach is wrong.  As Jim provided 
and our recent case law affirms:  
When a motion to withdraw a plea is made prior to 
sentencing, a more liberal approach is to be taken, and the 
motion should be granted if [1] the defendant has presented 
a fair and just reason for [the] request and [2] the State 
has not relied upon the guilty plea to its substantial 
prejudice. 
 
Guity, 144 Hawaiʻ i at 561, 445 P.3d at 142 (cleaned up).  See 
also Sanney, 141 Hawaiʻ i at 23-24, 404 P.3d at 289-90 (noting 
that Hawaiʻ i has adopted standards consistent with the American 
Bar Association Criminal Justice Standards Standard 14-2.1, 
which provides that defendants should be allowed to withdraw 
pleas before sentencing for “any fair and just reason”). 
                                                 
17 For example, in State v. Fogel, 95 Hawaiʻ i 398, 23 P.3d 733 (2001),  we 
styled Gomes as setting forth “standards relating to pre- sentence plea 
withdrawal motions,” without specifying that these factors are applied not in 
determining whether an exercise of discretion is appropriate, but rather in 
determining whether the court has abused its discretion by denying a pre-
sentence motion for plea withdrawal.  Id. at 402, 23 P.3d at 737.  See also 
State v. Oshiro,  No. 29375, ( App. Nov. 30, 2010) (SDO) (affirming the denial 
of a motion to withdraw a plea pre- sentence and explaining that “one of the 
conditions that a defendant must satisfy to establish his or her entitlement 
to withdraw a no- contest plea based on new information or changed 
circumstances is that the new information or changed circumstances, if believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate the defendant.”)(cleaned up). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 
 Citing Gomes and borrowing language from the second prong 
of the Gomes test, the ICA held that Pedro had not established 
changed circumstances or new information entitling him to 
withdraw his pleas because he “did not advance a claim of new 
information with factual support that, if believed by a 
reasonable juror, would exculpate him.”  There are two problems 
with this reasoning.  First, it distorts the significance of the 
second prong of the Gomes test.  As discussed above, the Gomes 
test considers whether a trial court had abused its discretion 
by denying a defendant’s pre-sentence motion for plea 
withdrawal.  It is not a checklist of conditions defendants must 
meet before they are entitled to withdraw their plea.  Second, 
under Jim, Pedro – like all defendants — is entitled to withdraw 
his plea before sentencing and reactivate the constitutional rights he waived upon a showing that the plea’s withdrawal is 
justified by a fair and just reason.  The ICA disregarded this 
principle when it affirmed the trial court on the grounds that Pedro was not entitled to withdraw his pleas because he did not 
advance a claim of new information or changed circumstances 
“with factual support that, if believed by a reasonable juror, 
would exculpate him.” 
The trial court’s conclusion that “[a] Change of 
Circumstances refers to a separate individual taking the blame 
for the crime the Defendant pled guilty or no contest to.  There *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 
 is no change of circumstances in this case” (COL 8) is similarly 
problematic.  This conclusion transforms the facts at issue in 
Gomes – which involved a “separate individual taking the blame 
for the crime the Defendant [Gomes] pled no contest to” – into a standard to be met by defendants seeking plea withdrawal before 
sentencing.  Our holding in Gomes was intended to ensure that no 
defendant advancing a “claim of new information or changed circumstances with factual support that, if believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate them” is denied the right to a 
trial.  It did not recalibrate Jim’s fair and just reason 
standard in any way.  The operative question for courts considering a defendant’s HRPP Rule 32(d) request prior to 
sentencing is whether there is any fair and just reason for 
withdrawal, not whether the facts of a given case are similar to, or dissimilar from, those of Gomes. 
The trial court did not err in concluding that the 
“possibly exculpatory evidence” Pedro produced — his mother’s triple hearsay testimony about an alleged recantation by the 
complainant — did not constitute a “fair and just reason” for 
Pedro’s plea withdrawal.  But it did err by treating this 
conclusion as dispositive of whether there were any 
circumstances constituting a ‘fair and just’ reason for the pre-
sentence withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas.  The absence of a 
“separate individual taking the blame for [the crimes Pedro *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 
 pleaded to]” does not mean that there was no other “fair and 
just reason” justifying the withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas.  After 
discounting Joanne Pedro’s testimony, the trial court should 
have examined the totality of the circumstances to determine 
whether there was any fair and just reason justifying Pedro’s 
plea withdrawal. 
C. A multi-factor test for evaluating “fair and just reasons” 
 
Motions for plea withdrawal made before sentencing or 
within ten days after the imposition of sentence must be granted – regardless of prejudice to the prosecution – if plea 
withdrawal is necessary to correct manifest injustice.  See HRPP 
Rule 32(d).  But our case law addressing when changed circumstances constitute a fair and just reason for a plea 
withdrawal outside circumstances showing manifest injustice is 
thin.  Almost all of our cases involving plea withdrawal have 
involved either constitutionally-deficient pleas
18 or assertions 
of changed circumstances that are so manifestly unjust they 
would justify plea withdrawal before or after sentencing.  See, 
                                                 
18 Guilty or no contest pleas that are made involuntarily or without the 
requisite knowledge are constitutionally invalid and manifestly unjust.  See, 
e.g., State v. Nguyen, 81 Hawaiʻ i 279, 292, 916 P.2d 689, 702 (1996) 
(“Manifest injustice occurs when a defendant makes a plea involuntarily or 
without knowledge of the direct consequences of the plea.”); Wong v. Among, 
52 Haw. 420, 425, 477 P.2d 630, 634 (1970) (holding “[a] plea of guilty in 
itself is a conviction and a simultaneous waiver of several important 
constitutional guarantees . . .[ s]uch a waiver is not constitutionally 
acceptable unless made voluntarily and with full understanding of the 
consequences.”). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
33 
 e.g., State v. Merino, 81 Hawaiʻ i 198, 226, 915 P.2d 672, 700 
(1996) (rejecting the defendant’s claim that there was a “fair 
and just” reason for the withdrawal of his plea in case where 
plea was knowing and voluntary); State v. Kealoha, 142 Hawaiʻ i 
46, 414 P.3d 98 (2018) (recognizing that manifest injustice 
occurs where a defendant makes a plea without knowledge of its 
direct consequences); Krstoth, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 276, 378 P.3d at 
992 (2016) (concluding that defendant was entitled to withdraw 
guilty plea before sentencing where record did not establish 
plea was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary); Guity, 144 Hawaiʻ i 
at 563, 445 P.3d at 144 (2019) (holding plea agreement 
unenforceable because it was legally impossible for defendant to 
have committed one of the crimes); State v. Adams, 76 Hawaiʻ i 
408, 414, 879 P.2d 513, 519 (1994) (explaining “where a 
defendant is denied due process because the prosecution violates a plea agreement, ‘there is ‘manifest injustice’ as a matter of 
law,’ and the defendant ‘is entitled to withdraw his guilty 
plea.’”) (citation omitted); State v. Garcia, 135 Hawaiʻ i 361, 
351 P.3d 588 (2015) (holding that prosecutor’s pre-sentence 
breach of plea agreement constituted a fair and just reason for 
plea withdrawal). 
These cases offer little guidance to courts considering 
whether, absent manifest injustice, there is a “fair and just
reason” for plea withdrawal before sentencing.  In order to  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
34 
 prospectively facilitate this analysis, we introduce a five-
factor test to guide trial courts in evaluating whether a fair 
and just reason supports a defendant’s pre-sentence request for
plea withdrawal.    19 
Courts evaluating an HRPP Rule 32(d) motion to withdraw a 
knowing and voluntary plea before sentencing should consider: 
(1) whether the defendant has asserted and maintained innocence; 
(2) the timing of the request for the plea withdrawal and the reasons for any delay; (3) the circumstances underlying the 
plea; (4) the defendant’s nature and background; and (5) the 
potential prejudice to the prosecution caused by reliance on the 
plea.
20 
                                                 
19 Appellate courts interpreting and applying their analogous federal “fair 
and just reason” standard often rely on multi- factor tests to guide their 
analyses.  See, e.g., United States v. Jordan, 759 F. Supp. 902, 904 (D.D.C. 
1991) (identifying five factors that courts usually consider in evaluating 
whether “fair and just” reasons justify withdrawal of plea), aff’d, 43 F.3d 
712 (D.C. Cir. 1994);  United States v. Bazzi, 94 F.3d 1025, 1027 (6th Cir. 
1996) (listing factors courts should consider in determining whether there is 
a “fair and just reason” for pre- sentence plea withdrawal); United States v. 
Moore, 931 F.2d 245, 248 (4th Cir. 1991) (identifying six factors that courts 
typically consider in determining whether a defendant has met his or her 
burden under Federal Rule of Procedure Rule 32(d)); United States v. Carr, 
740 F.2d 339, 343 (5th Cir. 1984) (listing various factors and elements courts should consider in applying the “fair and just” reason standard). 
 
20 These factors are non- exclusive and courts applying them may still consider 
other factors that are relevant to the fair and just reason inquiry.  See 
Jim, 58 Haw. at 579, 574 P.2d at 524 (instructing “[t]he trial court was 
entitled to consider the defendant’s asserted reasons and the factual basis 
therefor against a background consisting of the earlier proceedings.”); 
Gomes, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 38, 897 P.2d at 965 (a nalyzing the reason Gomes provided 
for seeking withdrawal “against the background provided by earlier 
proceedings.”).  These factors are also to be considered collectively; the 
defendant need not show that each of the five factors individually weighs in 
favor of allowing withdrawal in order for there to be a “fair and just 
reason” for withdrawal.  F urther, in cases where the defendant has a 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
35 
 The evidentiary record concerning Pedro’s pleas and his 
motion for their withdrawal is fully developed.  We are thus 
unpersuaded by the dissent’s contention that the trial court is 
best positioned to apply our newly-introduced five-factor test 
to the facts of Pedro’s case.  Cf. Nishimura v. Gentry Homes, 
Ltd., 134 Hawaiʻ i 143, 338 P.3d 524 (2014) (adopting a 
“fundamental fairness” standard for resolving challenges to 
arbitrator selection provisions and applying it to the facts of 
the case before it); State v. Ontai, 84 Hawaiʻ i 56, 929 P.2d 69 
(1996) (adopting new definition of the “enterprise” element 
of HRS § 842–1 and analyzing the facts of the case before it in 
light of the new definition).  
D. Pedro presented a fair and just reason for the withdrawal 
of his pleas 
 
Applying these five factors, we conclude that Pedro 
presented a “fair and just reason” for the withdrawal of his 
pleas. 
1. Pedro asserts his innocence and has never admitted 
guilt 
 
Our “liberal approach” to motions for plea withdrawal made
before sentencing favors allowing plea withdrawal and the 
restoration of constitutional rights where a defendant has  
                                                                                                                                                             
particularly plausible and legitimate reason for withdrawal, courts may find 
a “fair and just reason” for withdrawal notwithstanding substantial prejudice 
to the prosecution.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
36 
 asserted innocence and has never admitted guilt.  See State v. 
Smith
, 61 Haw. 522, 523, 606 P.2d 86, 88 (1980) (reversing 
denial of HRPP Rule 32(d) motion where defendant had never “expressly admit[ted] that he committed the offenses charged in
the indictment.”); Gomes, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 38, 897 P.2d at 965 
(reversing denial of HRPP Rule 32(d) motion where defendant 
“never explicitly admitted that he committed the crimes for 
which he was charged and convicted.”).  Though an assertion of 
innocence, standing alone, is not a “fair and just reason” for 
plea withdrawal,  an assertion of innocence by a defendant who 
has never admitted guilt weighs strongly in favor of allowing plea withdrawal before sentencing.   
21
Pedro pleaded no contest.  He has never admitted guilt.  
Neither the plea agreement nor the change of plea form detailed a factual basis supporting his pleas.  No “confession” appears 
on the record.  Pedro did not, and was not required to, admit 
facts supporting the charges.  See State v. Deguair, 108 Hawaiʻ i 
179, 191, 118 P.3d 662, 674 (2005) (stating “there is no 
requirement that the court elicit a factual basis for a no 
contest plea.”) (discussing State v. Merino, 81 Hawaiʻ i at 219, 
                                                 
21 But see Commonwealth v. Gordy, 73 A.3d 620, 630 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2013) 
(holding assertion of innocence in a pre- sentence motion for plea withdrawal 
was fair and just reason justifying plea withdrawal); Commonwealth v. Forbes, 
299 A.2d 268, 272 (Pa. 1973) (holding that assertion of innocence by 
defendant who plead ed guilty was “fair and just” reason for plea withdrawal 
before sentencing). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
37 
 915 P.2d at 693 (noting court is not required to make “such 
inquiry as shall satisfy it that there is a factual basis for 
the plea.”)).  
Pedro has asserted and maintained his innocence and has 
never admitted guilt.  Though not dispositive, this factor 
weighs 
strongly in favor of allowing Pedro to withdraw his 
pleas.22   
2. There was no undue delay 
 The presence or absence of undue delay impacts a 
defendant’s entitlement to pre-sentence plea withdrawal.  See 
Gomes, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 39, 897 P.2d at 966 (including absence of 
undue delay as a factor in multi-part test for evaluating 
whether court must grant a pre-sentence motion for plea 
withdrawal); Cf. United States v. Barker, 514 F.2d 208, 222 
(D.C. Cir. 1975) (noting “[a] swift change of heart is itself 
strong indication that the plea was entered in haste and 
confusion; furthermore, withdrawal shortly after the event will
rarely prejudice the Government’s legitimate interests.”).  The
trial court faulted Pedro for the timing of his plea withdrawalrequest.  It suggested Pedro’s motion was a ploy, motivated by  
 
 
                                                 
22 Courts must look favorably on requests for plea withdrawal from defendants 
who have maintained their innocence and never admitted guilt, but the 
converse is not true.  The relevance of a defendant’s admission of guilt to 
the fair and just reason analysis is context- dependent.  Even defendants who 
have pleaded guilty and admitted to crimes may still advance a “fair and 
just” reason for the withdrawal of their pleas. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
38 
 the contents of the presentence report.  It stated: “Only after
the presentence investigation was received did this  
motion . . . arise. . . . The withdrawal came about at 
sentencing.  That is undue delay.”  The court continued: “[H]e 
waited till sentencing after he reviewed the presentence 
investigation and then said, [‘]I changed my mind, I changed my
mind.[’]”  The trial court concluded that there was an undue 
delay between Pedro’s pleas and his request for their withdrawal.  
 
 Based on our review of the record, we conclude that Pedro 
did not unduly delay in requesting plea withdrawal.  This is 
true for three reasons.  First, the trial court advised Pedro 
during its plea colloquy that his plea was irreversible.  
Second, the court’s speculation about Pedro’s motivations for 
seeking to withdraw his pleas is unfounded.  And third, Pedro’s 
ability to explain the timing of his plea withdrawal request and 
the reasons for any delay was undermined by the court’s failure to conduct a “penetrating and comprehensive inquiry” into the 
attorney-client relationship between Pedro and his lawyer after 
Pedro’s counsel moved to withdraw.  See State v. Harter, 134 
Hawaiʻi 308, 323, 340 P.3d 440, 455 (2014). 
 Paragraph 11 of Form K, the change of plea form Pedro 
signed, reads, in relevant part: “I know I will not be permitted *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
39 
 to withdraw my plea.”   Immediately before taking Pedro’s pleas,
the court discussed paragraph 11 with Pedro.  It told him the 
form said:  23 
I’m signing this no contest plea form after I have gone 
over all of it with my lawyer, and while I will not be 
permitted to withdraw my plea, I am signing this form in 
the presence of my lawyer.  I have no complaints about my 
lawyer.  I am satisfied with what he has done for me. 
 
The court asked Pedro whether these statements were true.  Pedro 
said they were. 
 Given the language in the plea form, the trial court cannot 
be faulted for advising Pedro that he would not be “permitted to 
withdraw [his] plea.”  But Paragraph 11 of the plea form was 
misleading because Pedro could seek to withdraw his pleas under 
HRPP Rule 32(d).24  When Pedro tried to do just that, he was 
faulted for not acting faster.  This is unfair given that Pedro 
                                                 
23 Since the entry of Pedro’s plea, Form K has been amended.  The revised 
version of the Hawaiʻ i criminal plea  form (Form K) acknowledges that 
defendants may, in some cases, withdraw their pleas.  It reads, in relevant 
part: “I know I will not be permitted to withdraw my plea except in certain 
limited circumstances.”  SCRU- 11-0000083, Order Amending Form K and Adopting 
Form L of the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal Procedure at 5 (emphasis added).  
 
24 HRPP Rule 32(d) provides: 
 
A motion to withdraw a plea of guilty or of nolo contendere 
may be made before sentence is imposed or imposition of 
sentence is suspended; provided that, to correct manifest 
injustice the court, upon a party’s motion submitted no 
later than ten (10) days after imposition of sentence, 
shall set aside the judgment of conviction and permit the 
defendant to withdraw the plea.  At any later time, a 
defendant seeking to withdraw a plea of guilty or nolo 
contendere may do so only by petition pursuant to Rule 40 
of these rules and the court shall not set aside such a 
plea unless doing so is necessary to correct manifest 
injustice. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
40 
 was told during the plea colloquy that it would be impossible 
for him to withdraw his pleas. 
Second, the trial court’s speculation about the presentence 
report’s role in motivating Pedro’s request to withdraw his 
pleas is unfounded.  The record shows neither when Pedro 
received the presentence report, nor when he reviewed it with 
counsel and an interpreter.  The record also offers no 
indication of how Pedro felt about the report’s contents.  It does indicate, however, that Pedro’s desire to withdraw his 
pleas predated the March 21, 2019 filing of the presentence 
report: Pedro’s attorney moved to withdraw as counsel on March 
14, 2019, one week before the presentence report was filed.  At 
the April 4, 2019 hearing on that motion, Pedro’s counsel 
represented that the reason he filed the motion to withdraw as 
counsel on March 14, 2019, was that Pedro wanted to withdraw his 
pleas.  Pedro’s counsel stated: 
I just want to say on the record that, um, this morning 
with our interpreter today I had another conversation with 
Mr. Pedro about his options and what he wishes to do.  Is 
my understanding that he seeks to withdraw his no contest 
plea.  And given what was discussed, I would ask that the 
pending motion to withdraw as counsel be granted and that a substitute counsel can be appointed. 
 
These statements undermine the trial court’s theory about 
Pedro’s inappropriate motives for seeking plea withdrawal.  They 
suggest Pedro’s desire to withdraw his pleas emerged at some *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
41 
 point before the March 14, 2019 filing of the motion to
withdraw as counsel. 25 
Third and finally, the trial court’s handling of the motion 
to withdraw as counsel likely compromised Pedro’s ability to 
explain any “delay” in his request for plea withdrawal.   
Withdrawal and substitution of counsel require “approval of 
the court.”  HRPP Rule 57; see also Hawai‘ i Rules of Professional 
Conduct (“HRPC”) Rule 1.16(c) (“A lawyer must comply with applicable law requiring notice to or permission of a tribunal 
when terminating a representation.”).  Defendants do not have an 
automatic right to discharge counsel.  See State v. Torres, 54 
Haw. 502, 504, 510 P.2d 494, 496 (1973) (advising that “there is 
no absolute right, constitutional or otherwise, for an indigent 
to have the court order a change in court-appointed counsel.”).   
Pedro’s counsel’s motion to withdraw was spare.  It 
declared that Pedro “wishes to have a new attorney represent 
him” and that “[c]ounsel must withdraw from representation when 
discharged by the client.  Hawaiʻ i Rules of Professional Conduct 
Rule 1.16(a)(3).”   The motion was not supported by a 26 
                                                 
25 Counsel did not say when Pedro first expressed his desire to withdraw his 
pleas, but it can be reasonably inferred that Pedro did so at some point 
before his counsel moved to withdraw on March 14, 2019. 
 
26  HRPC Rule 1.16(a)(3) provides, in relevant part: “a lawyer shall not 
represent a client or, where representation has commenced, shall withdraw 
from the representation of a client if: . . . (3) the lawyer is discharged.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
42 
 declaration or any evidence or argumentation.,  At the April
4, 2019 hearing on the motion to withdraw as counsel, Pedro’s 
counsel stated that Pedro wanted to withdraw his pleas.  He 
offered no other explanation for the motion to withdraw as 
counsel.  The court did not inquire into the nature of the 
relationship between Pedro and his lawyer. 2827 
Instead, and despite counsel’s representation that Pedro 
wanted to withdraw his pleas, the court asked Pedro: “Did you want your new attorney to come here and do your sentencing for 
you?”  Pedro expressed a desire to have a new attorney represent 
him in a trial.  Pedro explained through the interpreter: “[M]y 
question is to have a new person come help me because I only 
worked a little bit of time with this lawyer.”  He told the 
court he needed a new lawyer to “[e]xplain to me and help me 
                                                 
27 The motion to withdraw as counsel in this case stands in marked contrast to 
that in Krstoth.  In Krstoth, a motion to withdraw as counsel was filed in 
anticipation of a HRPP Rule 32(d) motion.  Defense counsel and an interpreter 
visited the in- custody defendant to understand his rationale for requesting 
substitute counsel.  Krstoth’s attorney explicitly informed the court of the 
basis for the motion to withdraw as counsel.  The attorney’s declaration of 
counsel stated in relevant part: “[Krstoth] made several things clear: (a) 
that he felt pressured by me to accept the plea bargain offered by the State 
and plead ‘ guilty’ to the charged offense; (b) that he did not understand all 
of his rights he had, including the right to a trial, because I did not make 
things clear to him; and (c) that he does in fact want to withdraw his previously entered ‘guilty’ plea and have a trial to contest the charge 
against him.”  138 
Hawaiʻi at 271, 378 P.3d at 987.  Unlike Krstoth’s  counsel, 
Pedro’s deputy public defender declined to disclose the reasons for Pedro’s 
dissatisfaction in the motion to withdraw as counsel. 
 
28 Sensitive information supporting a motion for withdrawal of counsel may be 
submitted to the court for in camera review.  See Hawaiʻi Electronic Filing 
and Service Rules Rule 8.2 (“Documents submitted for in camera review shall 
be maintained in JIMS under electronic security and made accessible to only 
the court, the appellate courts, and court staff until a court of competent 
jurisdiction orders otherwise.”).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
43 
 with this case” and “[e]xplain to me about everything because I 
did not understand.”  When asked by the court whether he 
“want[ed] to start this whole case all over again[,]” Pedro 
replied, “Yes.”  Other than saying Pedro wanted to withdraw his 
pleas, defense counsel remained silent throughout the hearing.    
 The trial court granted the motion to withdraw as counsel.  
Its one sentence order granting the motion stated: “Defendant 
has or had a conflict with The Office of the Public Defender.”29     
In Harter, we held that when an indigent defendant requests 
that appointed counsel be replaced, the “trial court has a duty to conduct a ‘penetrating and comprehensive examination’ of the 
defendant on the record, in order to ascertain the bases for the 
defendant’s request.”  134 Hawaiʻ i 308, 323, 340 P.3d 440, 455 
(2014).  This “penetrating and comprehensive” inquiry into the 
status and quality of the attorney-client relationship and the 
source and depth of the defendant’s dissatisfaction is essential 
to safeguarding the defendant’s constitutional rights.   The 
30
                                                 
29 Counsel with undivided loyalties may be unable to meet the constitutional 
standard of effective assistance of counsel. See Harter, 134 Hawaiʻ i at 324, 
340 P.3d at 456 (stating “[g]enerally, ‘a conflict exists when an attorney is 
placed in a situation conducive to divided loyalties . . .’”) ( quoting Smith 
v. Lockhart, 923 F.2d 1314, 1320 (8th Cir. 1991)).  The court did not 
identify the conflict constituting good cause to grant the motion.  But given 
that Pedro’s attorney represented that Pedro’s desire to withdraw his pleas 
was the basis for the motion to withdraw as counsel, it is an unremarkable 
inference that counsel and the court were concerned with divided loyalties 
arising from a potential ineffective assistance of counsel claim.     
   
30 Harter explained, “[t]his inquiry is necessary to protect the defendant’s 
right to effective representation of counsel.”  134 Hawaiʻ i at 323, 340 P.3d 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
44 
 trial court did not ask Pedro or his attorney a single “probing 
and specific question[]” about the status of their attorney-
client relationship.  See id. at 324, 340 P.3d at 456.  It made 
no inquiries into the frequency, scope, and tenor of the attorney-client interactions or the role of Pedro’s desire to 
withdraw his pleas in causing the conflict between lawyer and 
client. 
A robust Harter inquiry would have afforded Pedro the 
opportunity to discuss his conflict with his attorney and explain its effect on his ability to quickly move for withdrawal 
of his pleas.  Because the record does not contain an account of 
the conflict between Pedro and his attorney it is difficult to 
determine the extent to which that conflict was the root cause 
of Pedro’s “delay” in requesting plea withdrawal.  Given that 
Pedro is not responsible for this gap in the record, we 
recognize the reasonable possibility that the conflict between 
Pedro and his original counsel contributed to Pedro’s “delay” in requesting withdrawal of his pleas. 
Collectively, the incorrect information Pedro received 
about the impossibility of plea withdrawal, the lack of evidence 
that the timing of Pedro’s request for plea withdrawal was 
motivated by dissatisfaction with the sentencing report, and the 
                                                                                                                                                             
at 455. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
45 
 fact that Pedro’s conflict with his counsel may have caused his 
“delay” in requesting withdrawal all weigh against finding that 
Pedro unduly delayed in requesting withdrawal of his pleas. 
3. The circumstances underlying the pleas 
Four features of the circumstances surrounding Pedro’s 
pleas weigh in favor of allowing their withdrawal. 
First, Pedro’s pleas were spur of the moment.  On January 
7, 2019, Pedro was in custody and transported to court for a 
motion to compel discovery hearing.  Neither defense counsel, 
nor the prosecution, nor the court anticipated that Pedro would 
accept the plea agreement.  Counsel prepared a change of plea 
form at court.  He reviewed it with Pedro and the interpreter 
shortly before entering the courtroom.  Later, at the hearing on 
Pedro’s motion to withdraw his pleas, Pedro’s counsel 
characterized the pleas as “a sudden change of heart” and “kind 
of a surprise to everyone.”  Pedro’s haste in entering his pleas 
weighs in favor of allowing their withdrawal.  Cf. United States 
v. Barker, 514 F.2d at 222 (affirming denial of motions to 
withdraw guilty pleas where the pleas “were not ill-considered or offered in haste.”); State v. Dicks, 57 Haw. 46, 59, 549 P.2d 
727, 736 (1976) (Kobayashi, J., dissenting) (observing “‘[a] 
swift change of heart is itself a strong indication that the 
plea was entered in haste and confusion; furthermore, withdrawal 
shortly after the event will rarely prejudice the Government's *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
46 
 legitimate interests.’”) (quoting Barker, 514 F.2d at 222). 
Second, Pedro’s pleas were entered well in advance of 
trial.  At the time Pedro pleaded no contest, the court had 
neither adjudicated any motions in limine nor empaneled jurors.  
No potential jurors had been summoned.  Trial was not imminent.  
The judicial resources consumed by allowing Pedro to withdraw 
his pleas, reclaim his constitutional rights, and go to trial 
were near nil.  The prosecution’s argument that allowing the withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas would undermine the efficient 
administration of justice is thus unconvincing. 
Third, at the time he entered his pleas, Pedro did not 
possess the investigative reports detailing the evidence against 
him.  Pedro had been imprisoned for more than eight months by 
the time defense counsel took steps to get Pedro the case’s 
discovery materials.  See supra Section I.  The record reveals 
neither when Pedro first requested his discovery materials nor when he actually received the documents.  But Pedro told the trial court that he did not receive his discovery materials 
until after he had pleaded no contest: 
Um, the reason why I did ask for, um a different lawyer, 
because like I said before, long time ago, I didn’t believe that, um, my other lawyer was helping me.  And I – I had 
hard time to figure out whether I want to take this to trial or because I never get my – my discovery yet.  It was 
hard for me to decide because I don’t know what was my charges.  And after I went sign the deal, I just – that’s 
when I, a day – couple days or weeks after, I got my 
discovery. 
 
He continued: “for a long time I never know what was discovery *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
47 
 was.  I – I – I was – everything that I just found out was 
learned from other inmates.”  He insisted: “I – I wanted to go 
to trial right after I got my discovery.  That’s why.  Because I 
found some false story on that.” 
Pedro was not asked to discuss or clarify the “false story” 
he found in his discovery.  But even so, Pedro’s post-plea 
receipt of his discovery materials weighs in favor of allowing 
Pedro to withdraw his pleas since Pedro would have been better positioned to evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of 
surrendering his constitutional rights by pleading no contest if 
he had possessed his discovery beforehand. 
Fourth, by withdrawing his pleas, Pedro would lose the 
protections of his plea agreement, which capped his potential 
prison term at ten years and left open the possibility of 
probation.  If convicted of his original charges at trial, Pedro 
faced life imprisonment with the possibility of parole.
31  The 
difference between the maximum sentence Pedro was guaranteed 
under the plea agreement and the potential for life in prison he 
would face if he went to trial is significant: the fact that 
                                                 
31 Pedro faced four counts of sexual assault in the first degree, one count of 
attempted sexual assault in the first degree, and one count of kidnapping.  
These are all class A felonies.  HRS §§ 705-502, 707-720, 707- 730.  Each of 
these class A felonies is punishable by an indeterminate term of imprisonment 
of twenty years without the possibility of suspension of sentence or 
probation.  HRS § 706- 659.  Pedro was also charged with sexual assault in the 
fourth degree, a misdemeanor, which carried a prison term of up to one year.  
HRS § 707-733.  The court, after considering the factors set forth in HRS § 
706-606, could order any terms of imprisonment imposed on Pedro to run 
consecutively, rather than concurrently.  See HRS § 706-668.5. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
48 
 Pedro sought to unravel his plea agreement notwithstanding the 
severe potential consequences of doing so lends plausibility and 
legitimacy to his request for plea withdrawal and supports 
allowing it. 
4. Pedro’s background weighs in favor of allowing plea 
withdrawal 
 
A youthful defendant, or a defendant with limited mental 
faculties, education, or English-language proficiency may be 
poorly equipped to thoughtfully consider a plea’s implications.  
See Smith, 61 Haw. at 523, 606 P.2d at 88 (considering teenage 
defendant’s youth and eighth-grade education in determining there was a fair and just reason for the withdrawal of his 
guilty plea); State v. Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i 504, 513, 353 P.3d 1046, 
1055 (2015)(explaining that a “‘language barrier’ between the 
defendant and the court is a ‘salient fact’ that puts the trial 
court on notice that a defendant’s waiver [of the right to counsel] may be ‘less than knowing and intelligent.’”) (quoting  
State v. Gomez–Lobato, 130 Hawaiʻ i 465, 471, 312 P.3d 897, 903 
(2013).  
Pedro was 33 years old and attended school “up until the 
ninth grade.”32  He had been in the United States since 2013. 
                                                 
32 Pedro received vocational training in “building and maintenance.”  He also 
received a “diploma” from the “Windward School for Adult[].”  When asked 
whether the diploma he received was the equivalent of a GED, he replied “I 
guess so.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
49 
 Pedro knew some English, but his first language was Marshallese. 
During the plea colloquy, the court asked Pedro whether it 
was true that Pedro understood “the reduced charges of sexual 
assault in the second degree in counts one through four with 
which the government has agreed to charge me, instead of the 
original charges of sexual assault in the first degree.”  Pedro 
said “Yes.”  That was the extent of the discussion about the 
charges.33 
The legal terminology surrounding different sexual assault 
charges can be complex.  Here, that complexity was exacerbated by the fact that the indictment — which charged Pedro with 
committing various sexual acts by “strong compulsion” and 
“compulsion” — did not define “strong compulsion” or 
“compulsion.”
34  Pedro’s pleas were knowing and voluntary, but 
                                                 
33 At Pedro’s sentencing hearing, the trial court suggested that because Pedro 
had written three letters to the court in English about his case he “knew 
what the case was about.”  This analysis equates “knowing what the case is about” with having a nuanced understanding of the criminal charges one faces. 
Pedro may have had a constitutionally adequate understanding of the charges he plead ed to, but that does not mean he had a sophisticated understanding of 
sexual assault in the second degree and the ways in which it is similar to, or different from, sexual assault in the first and fourth degrees. 
 
34 In State v. Aledo, No. CAAP- 16-0000470 (App. Nov. 18, 2019) (SDO) — a case 
that post- dated Pedro’s proceedings — the ICA observed that the common 
understanding and dictionary definition of the word “compulsion” 
significantly depart from the statutory definition of that term.  It 
concluded that an indictment charging attempted sexual assault in the second 
degree without defining the statutory term “compulsion” did not provide 
adequate notice of the charge.  No application for writ of certiorari was 
filed in Aledo.  Without endorsing or rejecting Aledo’s holding, we note that 
the case illustrates the conceptual difficulty of understanding elements like 
“compulsion” and “strong compulsion.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
50 
 given his education and linguistic background, his ability to 
strategically evaluate the risks and disadvantages of waiving 
his constitutional rights – particularly given that the charges 
were complex and only cursorily discussed during the plea 
colloquy – was sub-optimal.  This factor thus weighs in favor of 
allowing Pedro to withdraw his pleas. 
5.
 The withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas would cause only minor 
prejudice to the prosecution 
In evaluating whether there is a “fair and just reason” for 
plea withdrawal, the court should “weigh any prejudice to the 
prosecution caused by reliance on the defendant’s plea.”  Sanney 
141 Hawaiʻ i at 22, 404 P.3d at 288 (quoting The American Bar 
Association’s Criminal Justice Standards Standard 14-2.1(a)).  The approach we introduce here considers prejudice to the 
prosecution in determining whether a “fair and just reason” for 
withdrawal exists, rather than conducting a discrete prejudice 
inquiry only if the defendant has shown a fair and just reason 
for withdrawal.  Contra Jim at 576, 574 P.2d at 522–23.  In some 
cases, even a showing of substantial prejudice to the prosecution may be outweighed by other factors strongly favoring 
withdrawal. 
In the State’s opposition to Pedro’s motion for plea 
withdrawal and at the hearing on that motion, the deputy prosecuting attorney declared, based on a conversation with the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
51 
 complaining witness and her aunt and uncle, that there was 
“significant familial and cultural pressure put on [the 
complainant] and her family to not cooperate with this 
prosecution and blame her for the defendant’s actions.”  At the 
hearing, the deputy prosecuting attorney also stated:  
I found out this morning, just this morning outside the 
courtroom, that the victim’s mother is sick with cancer and 
she is returning to the Marshall Islands to be with her.  And there is no indication that, um, when she is – is going 
back.  That is not pressure.  But it is prejudice. 
 
Four days later, at Pedro’s May 14, 2019 sentencing 
hearing, the deputy prosecuting attorney emphasized that despite 
the “pressure” faced by the complaining witness, she had never 
recanted: “Not once . . . has she ever changed her – changed her 
statement to me or any law enforcement or to anybody. . . . What 
she said happened happened.  There has never been a recantation 
in this case.” 
 The “prejudice” shown by the prosecution is minimal and does not weigh strongly against allowing withdrawal of Pedro’s 
pleas.  This is true for three reasons. 
First, uncooperative witnesses are an unexceptional feature 
of criminal cases; to the extent that the complaining witness 
was reluctant to testify, that reluctance may inconvenience the 
State, but it was not caused by Pedro’s pleas.  Cf. United 
States v. Greer, 956 F. Supp. 525, 529 (D. Vt. 1997) (holding 
that criminal defendant was not prejudiced by pre-indictment *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
52 
 delay during which the State secured the cooperation of 
previously uncooperative witnesses because it was not shown 
“that the delay caused these individuals to cooperate.”) 
(emphasis added). 
Second, the mere possibility that the complainant may be 
unavailable at trial is speculative and insufficient to 
establish that plea withdrawal would prejudice the State.  See 
Commonwealth v. Gordy, 73 A.3d 620, 628 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2013) 
(reasoning that “[s]peculation about harm that might possibly arise does not establish prejudice so as to deny a pre-sentence 
motion to withdraw a guilty plea.”).  Our opinion in Gomes is 
instructive.  In Gomes, we held that, notwithstanding an 
affidavit from the prosecution stating that one of its witnesses 
had expressed a desire to move to an undetermined location, the 
State had not shown it would be substantially prejudiced by the 
withdrawal of Gomes’ plea.  79 Hawaiʻ i 32, 897 P.2d 959.  The 
mere fact that “the passage of time might make it even more 
difficult for the prosecution to locate [a prosecution witness]” 
did not, we held, mean that Gomes was “required to forfeit his 
fundamental right to a jury trial.”  Id. at 40, 897 P.2d at 967. 
Third and finally, the evidentiary support for the 
prosecution’s claims concerning prejudice is relatively weak.  
There are no signed declarations from the complaining witness or 
her family members describing the “pressure” she faced, her *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
53 
 reluctance to testify against Pedro, or her plans to move to the 
Marshall Islands.  Cf. United States v. Yazzie, 998 F. Supp. 2d 
1044, 1119-1120 (D.N.M. 2014) (finding that government would be prejudiced by plea withdrawal in case where there were 
affidavits from alleged victims indicating their desire to 
recant or change their testimony).  The prosecution also 
declined to present in-court witness testimony.   
The deputy prosecuting attorney did declare that there had 
been “significant familial and cultural pressure put on [the complainant] and her family to not cooperate with [the] 
prosecution.”  But that declaration was dated May 9, 2019, and 
five days after that, at the May 14, 2019 sentencing hearing, 
the deputy prosecuting attorney told the court that she had not 
spoken to the complaining witness in two months.
35  Moreover, at 
the sentencing hearing, the deputy prosecuting attorney told the court that the complaining witness had never recanted her story 
or “changed her statement” to the deputy prosecutor. 
For the foregoing reasons, the potential of prejudice to 
the prosecution weighs only slightly against allowing withdrawal 
                                                 
35 Notably, the State’s contention concerning “cultural pressure” was also 
vague and unsubstantiated.  The deputy prosecuting attorney did not claim any 
personal or specialized knowledge of the complaining witness’s “culture.”  
And the record contains no declarations from the complaining witness or her 
family members describing the cultural constructions of blame or victimhood 
within their community or the “cultural pressure” faced by the complainant.   
It is thus unclear what “evidence” the State considered in determining that the complainant faced “cultural pressure.”  The record leaves open the 
possibility that this claim is ill- defined stereotype masquerading as legal 
argument.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
54 
 of Pedro’s pleas.  As such, and given Pedro’s assertion and 
maintenance of innocence, the timing and circumstances 
surrounding Pedro’s pleas and their withdrawal, and Pedro’s 
nature and background, we conclude that on balance there is a 
“fair and just reason” for the withdrawal of Pedro’s pleas. 
III. CONCLUSION 
 
The constitutional right to a public trial activates other 
fundamental constitutional rights.  Our liberal approach to pre-sentence requests for plea withdrawal favors allowing the 
restoration of these rights.  Pre-sentence defendants are entitled to withdraw their pleas for any “fair and just reason.” 
The trial court disregarded this principle by denying 
Pedro’s request to withdraw his pleas, reclaim his 
constitutional rights, and go to trial.  This denial was an 
abuse of discretion.  We vacate the ICA’s September 28, 2020, 
Judgment on Appeal and the trial court’s May 15, 2019 Judgment; 
Conviction and Sentence.36  The case is remanded to the trial 
court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
Shawn A. Luiz, 
for petitioner 
 Richard B. Rost, 
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
                                                 
36 Because we vacate the circuit court’s judgment and sentence, we decline to 
address Pedro’s contention that the circuit court abused its discretion by 
sentencing Pedro to an indeterminate ten- year term of imprisonment. 