 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., WITH, NAKAYAMA,
J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM CIRCUIT JUDGE OCHIAI,
IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED, JOINS 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000686 30-JUN-2015 
10:31 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI. 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
HAN KAMAKANI PHUA,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-11-0000686 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-11-0000686; CASE NO. 3P810-0184) 

June 30, 2015 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case concerns the right of a defendant to be 
represented by counsel during criminal proceedings and the 
importance of ensuring that a waiver of this right is made 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily. 
Han Kamakani Phua 
attended his sentencing hearing without his lawyer, and after a  
                      
 brief colloquy with Phua, the district court found that he 
validly waived his right to counsel and imposed sentence. The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the finding of the district court that Phua waived his right to counsel and upheld 
Phua’s sentence. We conclude that the record does not support a 
finding that Phua’s waiver of counsel was knowingly and intelligently made, and therefore Phua’s sentence must be vacated and the case remanded for a new sentencing hearing. 
I.
 BACKGROUND 
On July 28, 2010, the complainant and others entered 
the property where Phua lives and works. Phua confronted the group believing they were trespassing, and a non-violent quarrel ensued between Phua and the complainant. Phua was arrested and charged with the offense of harassment.
1 At arraignment and 
1 The Amended Complaint, included language from the following
subsections of HRS § 711-1106(1) (1993 & Supp. 2009): 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if,
with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other
person, that person: 
. . . 
(b) Insults, taunts, or challenges another person in
a manner likely to provoke an immediate violent
response or that would cause the other person toreasonably believe that the actor intends to causebodily injury to the recipient or another or damageto the property of the recipient or another; 
. . . 
or (f) Makes a communication using offensively coarselanguage that would cause the recipient to reasonably
believe that the actor intends to cause bodily injury
(. . .continued)
- 2 - 
    
 
                                                                  
 plea, Phua appeared with counsel in the District Court of the 
Third Circuit (district court), entered a not guilty plea to the charge, and trial was scheduled for July 1, 2011.
2 
A. Motion to Continue 
When Phua’s Mandarin interpreter did not appear at 
trial, his counsel requested a continuance because English is Phua’s second language. Defense counsel explained that when dealing with “legal issues that are very much terms of art, there need[ed] to be an interpretation” for Phua to fully understand. The State opposed the continuance, and two State witnesses and two defense witnesses testified regarding the motion to continue. 
The State’s first witness--Phua’s coworker and the 
complainant’s daughter--testified that though Phua was a stock boy at Walmart who usually worked the night shift, Phua communicated and provided customer service to patrons in English. Additionally, Henry Ivy, a police officer who interacted with Phua on the day of his arrest, testified that he spoke with Phua in English, although he noted that Phua spoke 
(. . .continued)
to the recipient or another or damage to the property

of the recipient or another. 
2 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided over the
proceedings in this case. 
- 3 -
 
 with a slight accent. Officer Ivy stated that Phua expressed in 
English his understanding of his rights and that he signed a waiver of rights in English without any difficulty. Neither State witness knew that Phua was born in Singapore or whether 
Phua had any formalized education in English. 
Phua’s mother April Haunani Lui Phua, testified to the 
following: (1) Phua was born in Singapore where he was raised by 
his paternal grandmother who spoke no English; (2) his native languages are Chinese and Malay; (3) he was not “given English instruction in school because he did not pass the streaming exam of the country to be proficient in his native language of the country as well as English”; (4) he was considered a “special 
education” student because he did not pass any elementary grade 
levels after the first grade and repeated the sixth grade three times; (5) he suffered from “heavy dyslexia”; (6) when he worked at Walmart, he worked in the stock room with other native Chinese speakers and did not work at a counter collecting cash from customers in English; and (7) Phua, who was thirty-one 
years old at the time of trial, had only lived in Hawai ʻi for 
approximately six years. 
Shelley Stephens, who previously helped Phua with 
legal documents in English, testified that she observed Phua was 
unable to understand the meaning of certain unfamiliar legal 
- 4 -
 
  
 
                     
 terms or phrases without assistance. She also testified that 
Chinese is Phua’s primary language and that Phua usually had others present to help him with legal matters. 
The court denied the motion to continue the trial to a 
later date. The court determined that Phua had “some knowledge of English and is reasonably able to converse in English.” The court explained that, although an English interpreter was perhaps preferable, it was “not necessary” for Phua’s criminal trial. If Phua had trouble understanding any issue, the court would provide him the opportunity to “speak with his attorney to clarify any information that might be presented in court.”
3 In 
response to defense counsel’s request that Phua be allowed to 
confer with his mother during breaks if there were any 
comprehension difficulties, the court responded that Phua could talk to whomever he wanted during breaks. The case then proceeded to trial. 
B. Trial 
Phua testified that when he heard the complainant on 
the property, he went down to check the pump house as there had been damage and vandalism to it in the past. When he arrived at 
the pump house, he found the complainant and those in her group 
3 The district court noted that Phua had interpreters at the last
civil trial over which he presided. 
- 5 -
 
  
                     
 
 
  nearby. Phua previously had contact with the complainant and 
her family over alleged trespassing incidents on the property, which was at the time legally disputed in civil proceedings.
4 
Phua believed that the complaining witness and her 
group were trespassing at the pump house. He pointed out to the complainant the “No Trespassing” sign posted on the pump house. Phua testified that he did not ask for paperwork proving the 
complainant’s Public Access Shoreline Hawai ʻi (PASH) rights, 
which would permit access to the property. The complainant and 
members of her group, however, testified that Phua demanded her PASH paperwork and that she showed it to him. After this brief interaction, a loud disagreement erupted. Both Phua and the complainant testified that they feared for their lives due to the other’s actions, although no physical contact was involved in the incident. In defense to the harassment charge, Phua 
4 The disputed property in this case was also the subject of
separate civil ejectment actions against Phua and several other individuals,
who allegedly occupied the land as trespassers. The Honorable Joseph P.Florendo, Jr. also presided over these civil cases and granted summaryjudgment in both cases. The complaining witness involved in this case was
found to have Public Access Shoreline Hawai ʻi (PASH) rights for recreational
purposes on the parcel where the incident occurred. In both of these cases,
Phua appeared pro se and was deemed to have no rights in the disputedproperty. 
When this case commenced, one of the cases involving the
complainant’s PASH rights had already been decided, and the other commencedin state court after the date of the alleged harassment but prior to trial.There was also a pending federal court case. 
- 6 -
 
  
   
                     
  
 asserted self-defense, defense of others, and defense of 
property. 
At the end of the bench trial, the district court 
found Phua guilty of the charge. Phua’s counsel requested a 
Pre-Sentence Investigation Report (PSI), and preparation of the 
PSI was referred to Adult Probation Services. Sentencing was scheduled for August 29, 2011. 
C. Declaration of Phua’s Counsel 
Prior to sentencing, on August 23, 2011, Phua filed a 
pro se “Motion to Ammend/Writ of Error” (sic) (Motion to Amend) seeking to notify the court of the attempted removal or transfer of a state civil matter to federal court.
5 
Two days later, on August 25, 2011, Phua’s attorney 
filed a “Declaration of Counsel” (Declaration). The Declaration stated counsel planned to seek a continuance of the sentencing hearing because he was required to be at a trial on another matter in Hilo on the scheduled hearing date.
6 Counsel stated he 
did not file a formal motion to continue the sentencing date because Phua indicated that he wanted to be present on the 
5 For a description of the civil proceedings, see supra, note 4. 
6 Counsel indicated he would be available the week following the
scheduled hearing date. 
- 7 -
 
 scheduled date and time, even if that meant appearing without 
counsel. 
The Declaration presented two scenarios for the court 
to consider based on whether or not Phua wished counsel to be 
present at sentencing: “If on his appearance [Phua] wishes 
counsel present, [then] please consider this a motion for continuance. Otherwise, if Mr. Phua wishes to waive counsel for sentencing [then] please refer to the Presentence Investigation Report and this counsel’s submission to same which I understand is contained therein.” 
Accordingly, if Phua wished to waive counsel at 
sentencing, counsel asked the court to refer to the PSI, and 
argued for leniency in sentencing, noting Phua was caught in a 
stressful situation related to civil matters. He also recommended no jail or one day, already served, as Phua had no other criminal record: 
This counsel strongly notes that the fact that [Phua]
has no other criminal record. He felt provoked in a
stressful situation that appears to be a civil matter
that is being addressed through the civil courts.
Defense Counsel  recommends that no jail or 1 day  as
already served be considered, as the process has beensufficiently educational. 
(Emphases added). 
Counsel pointed out in the Declaration that as of 
August 25, 2011, he had not received the PSI but that he had 
contacted probation services to fax it to him. Counsel 
- 8 -
 
  
 
 
THE COURT:
 indicated that he would email and mail a copy to Phua when he 
received it. However, the record does not indicate whether defense counsel received the PSI from probation services or whether he forwarded it to Phua before the sentencing date. 
D. Sentencing Hearing 
Four days later, on August 29, 2011, Phua appeared at 
the sentencing hearing without counsel. The district court did not calendar the Declaration as a motion to continue or note it in any other way in the minutes for the day. The court also did not mention the Declaration during the proceedings or ask Phua if he wished to continue the hearing to a later date with counsel present. Rather, the court initially asked whether Phua 
intended to proceed without counsel: 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you want to proceed with this
case without your attorney? 
MR. PHUA: I have let my attorney go, and that’s why
I have filed this document right in front of me thatI have submitted to the Court. Last Thursday I filed
it. 
 Okay. So you have fired your attorney? 
MR. PHUA: Yes. 
The court did not inquire as to why Phua had fired his 
counsel; there is no indication of any problems between Phua and 
counsel other than counsel’s unavailability for the scheduled sentencing hearing. The court continued its colloquy with Phua: 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you want to proceed and
represent yourself? 
- 9 - 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 MR. PHUA: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: You want to give up your right to an
attorney for this hearing today? 
MR. PHUA: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
Do you understand that you’re
entitled to have an attorney represent you and if you
cannot afford one, the Court can appoint one for you?
Can I see the file? 
MR. PHUA: 
No, I was not aware of that but  – 
THE COURT: Do you still wish to proceed without an
attorney? 
MR. PHUA:
 Yes. 
(Emphases added). Phua’s response that he “was not aware” of 
the right to appointed counsel is not further clarified.7 
Next, the court informed Phua generally about 
counsel’s role, determined Phua’s age and level of education, and confirmed that no one was forcing him to proceed without counsel: 
THE COURT: Now, an attorney can provide you with
information and advice, can represent you at all
stages of these proceedings, and can speak for you in
court. Do you understand? 
MR. PHUA: Yes. 
THE COURT: And if you represent yourself, you will
be opposed by a prosecuting attorney who is more
experienced at trial, and you would be at a

disadvantage in terms of knowledge and understanding
of court practice and procedure. 
MR. PHUA: 
Yes. 
THE COURT: How old are you? 
7 Phua was not represented by court-appointed counsel during the
proceedings. 
- 10 -
 
  
MR. PHUA: 
 
THE COURT: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thirty-one. 
 
How many years of education have you
received? 
Mr. PHUA:  High school. 
THE COURT: And anyone forcing you to represent
yourself? 

MR. PHUA:  No. 
THE COURT: Okay. All right. The Court would find 
that you have knowingly and voluntarily waived your
right to an attorney with an understanding of the
nature and elements of the charge. This is for 
sentencing, so you’ve heard all of the evidence. 
MR. PHUA: 
But – 
THE COURT: And does the state have any comments with
regard to sentencing? 
The record does not reflect any further inquiry by the 
court into Phua’s decision to proceed without counsel, including 
whether Phua understood the maximum penalties that could be imposed for the offense of which he had been convicted. 
The court then proceeded directly to sentencing. Phua 
was not asked if he had received a copy of the PSI, and consequently, there was no inquiry as to whether Phua had any corrections or additions to the PSI. When the State was asked for its sentencing recommendation, the prosecutor referred to 
the contents of the PSI. Phua interrupted the prosecutor asking 
for a “motion to strike because that is hearsay.” 
After the State’s argument, the court asked Phua if he 
wanted to make “any statement,” without specifically referring 
- 11 -
 
  
 
THE COURT:
 
 
And due to my sovereign rights, I feel that the
Article I court, which is this court that I’m inright now, does not have the rights or jurisdictionover me, the sovereign; that only Article III, acompetent court of the federal court in Honolulu, the
Hawaiʻi District Court of the United States, has
jurisdiction to try me. 
 
 to sentencing. Phua responded with statements about his Motion 
to Amend: 
THE COURT: Okay. And, Mr. Phua, do you want to make
any statement? 
MR. PHUA: 
Yes, your Honor. On August 23rd, I had
filed a motion to amend and slash writ of error
 that 
my attorney at the time, Gary Zamber – I had told him
that these two cases before me in this document, 195and 131, were pertinent subject matter to thisharassment charge. And I told him to remove the case 
to the federal court, to consolidate it, and at that
time he had told me that I had no such right. 
 Well, he’s right. He’s right. 
MR. PHUA: 
I haven’t finished, your Honor. And that 
the case 195 and 131, that the case has been removedto the federal court and that by allowing this caseto go forward would only affect judgment due todefense of property. 
(Emphases added). 
The Court asked Phua why a federal court would have 
jurisdiction over his case but not a state court. Phua 
explained that he was a “sovereign” and that he was choosing a court to “fit [his] needs.” Phua then explained why he had filed his writ of error: 
And that’s why I filed a writ of error because it’s
judgmental because the defense – well, the prosecutorhad attached the summary judgment and had my caseinto a land issue that there was a witness called representing the county, and I feel that I was not
fairly recognizing the case as I told my attorney
that I wanted to file a removal. 
- 12 - 
  
 
                     
   Whether or not if that was granted, at that time I
did not sen[d] my paper to the federal court, whichmy – I have attached on June 20th. Chief Justice 
Susan Mollway
[8] stamped approval for my case to be
removed to the federal court. But because I had 
trust my attorney to represent me at the time, thathe would look out for my interests and only myinterests, and I feel that he has failed to represent
me fairly. 
The court then denied Phua’s Motion to Amend, which was “in the 
file” and sentenced Phua to the maximum five-day jail term allowed for a term of probation for the harassment offense: 
THE COURT: Okay. So I see that there is a motion to 
amend in file, and if what you just told me is the
basis of that motion, I will deny it. I don’t find 
any good cause to grant that request. This is a state case. This Court has jurisdiction over thecharge and over you, and the Court has already
rendered a decision at a trial. So your request to
amend, if I understand you correctly, to transferthis case to the federal district court has no basis in fact or law, and I will deny it. 
With regard to sentencing, the Court has considered
the presentence investigation and the provision inSections 706-606 and 706-621. I will place you onprobation for a period of six months. I will order you to abide by the terms and conditions – general
terms and conditions of probation, order you to pay a
criminal injury fee of $30 and a probation fee of$75. I will order you to serve a sentence of jail offive days. I’ll allow credit for one day.
[9] 
During the proceeding, Phua did not make a statement regarding 
sentencing for the offense, or address any mitigating factors 
8 Chief Judge Susan Mollway is a federal district judge of the
United States District Court for the District of Hawai ʻi. 
9  Harassment is a petty misdemeanor offense. HRS § 711-1106(2).
For a petty misdemeanor, the court may sentence a person to a jail term not
exceeding thirty days. 
HRS § 706-663 (1993). Alternatively, a court may
impose a term of probation of up to six months and up to one year with afinding of good cause. HRS § 706-623(1)(d) (1993 & Supp. 2009). As a condition of probation in petty misdemeanor cases, the court may also imposea jail term not exceeding five days. HRS § 706-624(2)(a) (1993 & Supp. 2006). 
- 13 -
 
 regarding the incident, his lack of a criminal record, or the 
possible sentencing dispositions. 
E. Intermediate Court of Appeals 
On September 16, 2011, Phua filed a Notice of Appeal 
to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA). Phua asserted on appeal that the district court erred in concluding that he knowingly and intelligently waived his constitutional right to counsel. 
Phua contended the district court’s overall 
examination was “woefully deficient.” He highlighted that the court should have inquired into primary factors affecting his ability to comprehend--including his education, work history, 
and experience with the criminal justice system--before 
informing him of the risks of self-representation because the information elicited would have put the court on notice that a more in-depth examination of waiver of counsel was necessary. At the very least, Phua asserted that the court should have made him aware of the maximum possible punishment and any other facts essential to a broad understanding of the charges against him. 
Phua also argued that the district court erred by 
ignoring his response that he was not aware of the right to court-appointed counsel and in failing to further inform him of that right if he could not afford representation. Phua 
- 14 -
 
  contended that he was unable to understand the consequences of 
his actions when he decided to appear pro se at sentencing and that there was nothing to show his familiarity with the legal system. 
The State countered that the court did not violate 
Phua’s right to counsel at sentencing because Phua effectively waived his right by firing his counsel, by failing to seek replacement counsel, and by not seeking a continuance of his sentencing hearing. The State also maintained the district court sufficiently advised Phua of his right to court-appointed counsel and gave him enough time to request counsel or seek new counsel. The State contended “it was not necessary to establish 
that [Phua] had prior experience representing himself in a 
criminal trial” to allow him to proceed pro se because he had already been found guilty at trial. 
Moreover, the State argued that Phua failed to show 
any “substantial detriment” resulting from self-representation. The State asserted that Phua’s refusal to take “court warnings about self-representation seriously enough to obtain counsel does not mean that the State or complainants should suffer the 
consequences of [Phua’s] stubborn attitude and reckless manner 
by being deprived of the finality of a conviction and sentence.” 
- 15 -
 
 In its November 19, 2013 Summary Disposition Order 
(SDO), the ICA concluded that the district court’s inquiry and 
explanation of Phua’s waiver of counsel was adequate because “the record need not reflect a discussion between the court and 
a defendant illuminating every [
Dickson] factor.” The ICA also 
found the district court sufficiently informed Phua of his right 
to court-appointed counsel if he could not afford one, “albeit in the form of a question rather than a statement.” 
Further, the ICA found that Phua “articulated no 
reason why the District Court’s inquiry about his education, work history, and experience after warning him of the possible punishment and advising him of the risks of self-representation 
was prejudicial.” The ICA noted that the record demonstrated 
that Phua was “adequately informed of the risks of self-
representation, the right to private or appointed counsel, and that the waiver was made knowingly and voluntarily.” 
The ICA 
concluded the district court “did not plainly err by finding that Phua waived his right to counsel during sentencing.” 
F. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
Phua presents the following questions in his 
Application for Writ of Certiorari (Application): (1) whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the district court did not plainly err when it found Phua knowingly and intelligently 
- 16 -
 
  waived his right to counsel for sentencing; and (2) whether the 
district court erred by failing to personally address Phua regarding his right to pre-sentence allocution. 
With regard to the first question presented, Phua 
advances similar arguments raised before the ICA. He asserts that the record reflects the district court’s examination was insufficient to establish a knowing and intelligent waiver of counsel and to assure his awareness of the risks of self-representation. Phua further suggests his ability to “defend his interests on a level playing field was substantially affected by the lack of counsel during sentencing.” Phua also argues that the district court erred in failing to inform him of 
the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation and that 
this affected the outcome of the sentence and therefore “was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
Concerning the second question presented, Phua 
contends the district court erred when it failed to personally address him regarding pre-sentence allocution because when the court asked for “any statement,” Phua referenced his pro se Motion to Amend and did not assert his right to allocution. 
Phua contends the court denied his Motion to Amend and proceeded 
directly to sentencing without “further affording [him] an opportunity to make a statement regarding sentencing and to 
- 17 -
 
  
                     
 present any information in mitigation of his punishment.” 
Although Phua acknowledges he did not raise this issue on appeal before the ICA, he urges this Court to notice plain error 
pursuant to Rule 28(b)(4) of the Hawai ʻi Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) (2010).
10 
The State did not respond to Phua’s Application. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
We review questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. E.g., State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai ʻi 405, 
411, 984 P.2d 1231, 1237 (1999). 
Therefore, we review questions 
of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard. E.g., 
State v. Mallan, 86 Hawai ʻi 440, 443, 950 P.2d 178, 181 (1998). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A.
 Waiver of Counsel Inquiry 
Both the Hawai ʻi Constitution and the United States 
Constitution guarantee a person accused of a crime the right to 
be represented by counsel “at every critical stage of the 
prosecution.” Reponte v. State , 57 Haw. 354, 361, 556 P.2d 577, 
582 (1976) (citing United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300 (1973)). A “critical stage” of the prosecution includes “any stage where 
10 HRAP 28(b)(4) states that any point of error not presented on
appeal in accordance with Rule 28 “will be disregarded, except that the
appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented.” 
- 18 -
 
                      
 potential substantial prejudice to [a] defendant’s rights 
inheres,” and it has long been settled that this includes 
sentencing. State v. Pitts, 131 Hawai ʻi 537, 544, 319 P.3d 456, 
460-61 463 (2014) (quoting 
State v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 359, 
628 P.2d 1018, 1022 (1981)). The assistance of counsel at 
sentencing is of paramount importance because it is an “oftentimes complicated part of the criminal process that 
contains subtleties which may be beyond the appreciation of the 
average layperson seeking to represent him/herself.” D’Ambrosio 
v. State, 112 Hawai ʻi 446, 464, 146 P.3d 606, 624 (2006) (quoting 
United States v. Salemo, 61 F.3d 214, 220 (3d Cir. 1995)). 
When a defendant elects to proceed pro se , the record 
must indicate that the defendant was offered counsel, but he or she “voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently rejected the offer and waived that right.” State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 
614, 619, 673 P.2d 1036, 1041 (1983).
11 The trial court must 
11 The minority quotes a portion from Iowa v. Tovar, 541 U.S. 77
(2004), for the proposition that Miranda warnings “adequately inform[] the
defendant of his [or her] Sixth Amendment right to counsel.” See
 minority at
3 (alterations in original) (quoting Tovar, 541 U.S. at 90). In doing so,
the minority misapplies Justice Ginsburg’s opinion in Tovar. The passage
cited by the minority was addressing Patterson v. Illinois, 487 U.S. 285(1988), and stated as follows: 
Patterson concerned postindictment questioning by police
and prosecutor. At that stage of the case, we held, thewarnings required by Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436
(1966), adequately informed the defendant not only of hisFifth Amendment rights, but of his Sixth Amendment right to
counsel as well. Miranda warnings, we said, effectively
(. . .continued)
- 19 - 
                                                                   ensure two requirements are met: first, the waiver of counsel is 
“knowingly and intelligently” made, and second, “the record is complete so as to reflect that waiver.” Id. 
The latter 
requirement arises because appellate courts are charged with 
determining from the record whether there was an unequivocal 
waiver, which was voluntarily and freely made. Id. at 621, 673 
P.2d at 1042. 
Dickson set forth three areas of “specific waiver 
inquiry” factors to assist trial courts: 
(1) the particular 
facts and circumstances relating to the defendant that indicate the defendant’s level of comprehension; (2) the defendant’s awareness of the risks of self-representation; and (3) the 
defendant’s awareness of the disadvantages of self-
representation. Id. at 619-20, 673 P.2d at 1041-42. Under 
(. . .continued)
convey to a defendant his right to have counsel present

during questioning. 
Tovar, 541 U.S. at 89. 
Thus, the Court in Tovar noted that Miranda warnings
were adequate to inform a defendant of his Sixth Amendment right to counsel
at the stage of postindictment questioning by police and prosecutor. 541 
U.S.
 at 89. This case involves a defendant waiving the right to counsel
during a sentencing proceeding. We apply Article 1 section 14 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution, which guarantees the assistance of counsel for an accused’sdefense in criminal prosecutions and court-appointed counsel for an indigentdefendant. 
See Haw. Const. art. I, § 14; State v. Merino, 81 Haw. 198, 219,
915 P.2d 672, 693 (1996). “In an appeal involving the question of whetherone has been deprived of the right to counsel,” our task is to determine
whether the record reflects that “there was an unequivocal waiver, which was
voluntarily and freely made, and based upon an intelligent awareness of thebenefits associated with representation by counsel and the dangers anddisadvantages of self-representation.” 4 Haw. App. at 622, 673 P.2d at 1042. 
- 20 -
 
  
   Dickson,  the first factor dictates the level and depth of the 
court’s inquiry regarding the second and third factors. Id. at, 
619, 673 P.2d at 1041. 
Thus, 
Dickson
 indicates that a “trial court should 
first examine” the facts and circumstances particular to the 
defendant that will assist the court in assessing the 
defendant’s level of comprehension. Id. Once this initial 
inquiry is complete, the trial court may tailor its colloquy with the defendant to ensure that the court adequately conveys the risks and disadvantages of self-representation in a manner that the defendant will be able to understand. 
While courts are 
not required to strictly adhere to Dickson’s analytical 
framework, it provides an important tool to ensure waivers are made knowingly and intelligently in addition to establishing a complete record for appellate review. 
1. Background and Comprehension of the Defendant 
Once the defendant expresses an interest in proceeding 
pro se, Dickson recommends that the court first explore facts 
and circumstances pertaining to the defendant that will allow the court to determine the defendant’s level of comprehension. 
Such circumstances include age, education, English language 
skills, mental capacity, employment background, and prior experience with the criminal justice system. This examination 
- 21 -
 
 of the “particular facts and circumstances relating to the 
defendant . . . is necessary to allow the trial court to determine the level and depth to which its explanation and inquiry must extend.” 
Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 619, 673 P.2d at 
1041. 
In this case, the district court’s inquiry into Phua’s 
particular circumstances was limited. 
The court questioned Phua 
about his age and whether he attended high school. However, there was other information before the court that suggested a further inquiry into Phua’s background was necessary. As to his education, Phua’s mother testified at trial that he was considered a “special education” student, he did not pass any 
elementary grade levels after the first grade, and he repeated 
the sixth grade three times. The court’s inquiry did not address these matters and further inquiry as to where Phua was educated and whether he received a high school diploma may have benefited the court’s analysis. 
Additionally, the court did not inquire into Phua’s 
English language skills even though the court was on notice that English was Phua’s second language. A “language barrier” 
between the defendant and the court is a “salient fact” that 
puts the trial court on notice that a defendant’s waiver may be “less than knowing and intelligent.” State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 
- 22 -
 
 Hawaiʻi 465, 471, 312 P.3d 897, 903 (2013) (quoting United States 
v. Duarte-Higareda
, 113 F.3d 1000, 1003 (9th Cir. 1997)). In 
this case, the court ruled at trial that Phua’s language ability 
was adequate to proceed without an interpreter. However, when the court made this ruling, Phua had the assistance of counsel to help him in understanding legal terms and the nature of the proceedings. In fact, the court specifically mentioned that if 
Phua had trouble understanding any issue, the court would 
provide Phua an opportunity to speak with his attorney for clarification. Given the potential language barrier, the district court should have further questioned Phua in this regard. 
Another important circumstance that should have been 
addressed by the trial court is Phua’s prior experience or familiarity with criminal trials. 
A defendant’s experience, or 
knowledge of, the court system may be a factor in determining that a valid waiver was made. 
See Dickson , 4 Haw. App. at 622
-
23, 673 P.2d at 1040, 1043 (finding that the record did not indicate a knowing and intelligent waiver of counsel where there was nothing to show that the defendant had previously represented himself, that he was familiar with a felony jury trial situation, or that he was aware of the pitfalls of proceeding pro se, even though the record indicated the 
- 23 -
 
                      
 defendant had “many contacts with the legal system”). While 
Phua was involved in two prior civil cases,12 Phua’s counsel 
indicated in his Declaration that Phua had no prior criminal record. 
It is questionable whether Phua perceived the 
distinction between criminal and civil actions. When given an opportunity to make a statement regarding his sentence, Phua instead expressed his desire to have the case removed to federal court and consolidated with his civil cases. Phua further expressed that a federal court “might be able to fit [his] needs” and that “Chief Justice Susan Mollway stamped approval for [his] case to be removed to the federal court.” Phua did 
not address the State’s recommended sentence, nor did he make 
any suggestion of what an appropriate sentence would be. 
The district court’s inquiry into Phua’s background 
and understanding not only was lacking in depth, but it came at the end of the court’s colloquy with Phua. The court questioned Phua concerning his age and education only at the end of the waiver colloquy after briefly informing him of the pitfalls of 
12 The district court took judicial notice of its judgments in two
cases involving possession of the land over which the dispute in this case
arose. Phua was a defendant in one of those civil cases, in which heappeared pro se. The minutes reflect that Phua appeared at the hearing onthe motion for summary judgment with an interpreter. In the second case, inwhich Phua was not a party, Phua was present with an interpreter at the
hearing on the plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment. 
- 24 -
 
   
                     
 self-representation. Dickson indicates that the first area of 
inquiry is “necessary to allow the trial court to determine the 
level and depth to which its explanation and inquiry must extend.” Id. at 619, 673 P.2d at 1041. Without this initial 
examination, the trial court may lack the requisite information to determine the defendant’s level of comprehension necessary in order to ascertain whether the defendant understood the risk s 
and disadvantages of self-representation. Here, given Phua’s 
limited education, his potential language barrier with the court, and his unfamiliarity with the criminal justice system, further inquiry into Phua’s background should have been conducted by the district court before proceeding to the court’s 
warning of the risks and disadvantages of waiving counsel.
13 
2. 	Defendant’s Level of Understanding of the Risks and
Disadvantages of Self-Representation 
Dickson directs that once the court completes its 
examination of the defendant’s background and level of 
comprehension, the court may then move onto the second and third areas of inquiry, which involve warning the defendant of the 
13 We do not, as the minority indicates, find that the trial court
was constitutionally required to conduct further inquiry into Phua’s
background. See minority at 4. Rather, we adopt the recommendations of
Dickson, which suggests areas of inquiry to assist courts in obtaining a
valid waiver and has been the governing law in Hawai #i courts for over thirty
years. Given the record in this case, Phua’s proficiency in English may be
relevant to the court’s inquiry on remand. 
- 25 -
 
 risks particular to the defendant in proceeding without counsel, 
and then explaining to the defendant the inherent disadvantages of self-representation. 
See 4 Haw. App. at 619-20, 673 P.2d at 
1041; Wayne R. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 11.5(c). The 
record must reflect that the defendant understands what he or 
she is doing and that the decision is made “with eyes open.” Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 835 (1975)). 
Although the trial court “is not required to give the 
defendant a short course in criminal law and procedure,” the judge’s warnings must reflect more than “vague, general admonishments, without reference to specific” risks or disadvantages. 
Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 620, 673 P.2d at 1042. 
The extent and depth of the court’s inquiry and explanation of the second and third factors should respond to the court’s perception of the defendant’s level of understanding. The purpose of the trial court in this regard is not simply to mechanically provide the defendant with the information, but rather, the court should engage the defendant to ensure that the waiver is intelligently and voluntarily made. 
In some circumstances, it may be necessary for a trial 
court to ask follow up questions to confirm the defendant’s understanding of the court’s warnings of the risks of waiving 
- 26 -
 
                      
  
 counsel and the disadvantages of self-representation.14 This is 
particularly true in cases where there is a potential language 
barrier between the defendant and the court--as there was in 
this case.15 See Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai ʻi at 472, 312 P.3d at 
904. In Gomez-Lobato,  this court found that a language barrier 
between the court and the defendant “should have prompted the . 
. . court to ask additional questions to verify that [the 
defendant] understood the right he was waiving.” Id. at 479, 
312 P.3d at 912. 
a. Risks of Self-Representation 
The second area of inquiry set forth in Dickson is 
designed to “fully assure that the defendant is informed of the 
risks of self-representation.” 4 Haw. App. at 619-20, 673 P.2d at 1041. The court should therefore make the defendant aware of “the nature of the charge, the elements of the offense, the 
pleas and defenses available, the punishments which may be 
imposed, and all other facts essential to a broad understanding of the whole matter.” Id. (citations omitted). This 
information is essential to a defendant’s understanding of the personal risks of self-representation. 
Id. 
14 LaFave et al., supra note 11, § 11.5(c) suggests that trial court
follow up any reference to a risk or disadvantage with an inquiry designed to
reveal whether the defendant understands the court’s warning. 
15 See supra Part III.A. 
- 27 -
 
   
                     
 
 
 In this case, the district court did not address the 
potential risks of self-representation with Phua. Most 
significantly, the court did not inform Phua of the potential punishment that could be imposed at the sentencing proceeding.
16 
It is unlikely that a record could reflect a knowing and intelligent waiver of counsel at sentencing without the defendant being apprised of such basic information as the maximum or range of punishment that may be imposed. See State 
v. Hartman, 349 A.2d 223, 225 (Vt. 1975) (“If a defendant . . . is unaware of the nature of the charges and the range of the allowable punishment at the time of his decision to represent himself, the waiver of his rights . . . is not made knowingly 
and intelligently.”). This is particularly true in this case 
where the record reflects that Phua had limited or no familiarity with the criminal justice system. 
Since information regarding the potential sentence is 
fundamental to an understanding of the risks of waiving counsel, trial courts should take care to ask questions that inform a defendant of this critical information. The record shows no 
16 The ICA misapprehended the record in this case: “ Phua articulates 
no reason why the District Court’s inquiry about his education, work history,
and experience after warning him of the possible punishment and advising him
of the risks of self-representation was prejudicial.” (Emphasis added). No 
such warning regarding the possible punishment occurred in this case. 
- 28 -
 
  
 
 
 
                     
 indication that Phua was informed of or understood the maximum 
penalty that could be imposed at sentencing; consequently we cannot find that his waiver of counsel was knowingly and voluntarily made. 
b. Disadvantages of Self-Representation 
Finally, Dickson provides that a trial court must also 
inform the defendant of the inherent disadvantages of self-representation before a waiver of the right to counsel is obtained. 4 Haw. App. at 620, 673 P.2d at 1042-43. An essential obligation in this regard is to meaningfully inform the defendant of his or her right to the assistance of counsel. LaFave et al., supra, § 11.3(a). Such information may be 
conveyed by the following questions: 
Because of the seriousness of the offense and the serious 
consequences of being found guilty, do you understand that
you have a Constitutional right to be represented by anattorney at a sentencing hearing? 
Do you understand that if you cannot afford an attorney,
you have the right to have free legal representation
through the public defender’s office or a court appointedlawyer?
[17] 
The record demonstrates that Phua was not fully aware of his 
right to court-appointed counsel. When asked whether he understood his right to a court appointed attorney if he could 
17 Under HRS § 802-2, “[i]n every criminal case or proceeding in
which a person entitled by law to representation by counsel appears without
counsel, the judge shall advise the person of the person’s right torepresentation by counsel and also that if the person is financially unableto obtain counsel, the court may appoint one at the cost to the State.” 
- 29 -
 
   
                     
 not afford one, Phua responded, “No, I was not aware of that . . 
. .” The court did not further discuss the right to court-appointed counsel with Phua but instead asked him whether he still wished to proceed without an attorney. We find that 
Phua’s response that he was not aware of the right to a court-
appointed attorney required further explanation and inquiry. See State v. Young, 73 Haw. 217, 220-21, 830 P.2d 512, 514 (1992) (noting that “waiver of a fundamental right is never presumed” and finding that where record is unclear as to whether defendant is waiving his right to jury trial, the court should conclude the defendant is not waiving the right); see also State 
v. Gomez-Lobato,
 130 Hawai ʻi 465, 469, 312 P.3d 897, 901 (2013) 
(“[T]he court should also engage in an oral colloquy with the defendant to establish that the waiver was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.”); State v. Ibuos, 75 Haw. 118, 122, 857 P.2d 
576, 578 (1993) (“The necessity for colloquy between the court 
and a defendant is especially apparent in light of the importance we place on the personal nature of a defendant's right to a jury trial.”).
18 
18 In finding this exchange sufficient under Miranda (“No, I was not
aware of that . . . .”), the minority reduces the judge’s role to merely
notifying a defendant of his constitutional rights, without responsibility toclarify when the defendant expresses confusion or lack of understandingregarding the right that is being advised. See minority at 3-6. 
(. . .continued)
- 30 - 
                                                                   Once informed of the right to counsel or court-
appointed counsel, the “defendant’s relinquishment of that right 
must be clear and unequivocal.” LaFave et al., supra, § 11.3(a); see also Young, 73 Haw. at 220, 830 P.2d at 
514. Dickson
 summarizes the information that a trial court 
should inform a defendant regarding the disadvantages of self-representation: 
[T]he trial court should inform the defendant: of his
right to counsel, whether private or appointed; that
self-representation is detrimental to himself; that
he will be required to follow all technical rules and
substantive, procedural, and evidentiary law; thatthe prosecution will be represented by able counsel;that a disruption of the trial could lead to vacation
of the right to self-representation; and that if
voluntary self-representation occurs, the defendantmay not afterward claim that he had inadequate self-representation. 
Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 620, 673 P.2d at 1041-42 (emphasis 
added) (citations omitted). 
(. . .continued)
Additionally, the minority’s conclusion, which is premised on the
Miranda doctrine, is misplaced. “Miranda protects against the coercive
pressures of custodial interrogation.” 
Wayne R. LaFave et al., 2 Criminal
Procedure § 6.4(h) (3d ed.). On the other hand, the Sixth Amendment secures 
the right to counsel in judicial proceedings. See State v. Luton, 83 Hawai ʻi 
443, 448, 927 P.2d 844, 849 (1996) (“An individual has a right to counsel
under the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I,
section 14 of the Hawai ʻi State Constitution which guarantees an accused the
right to assistance of counsel for his or her defense. This right “attaches
at critical stages of the criminal prosecution.” (alterations omitted)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State v. Liulama, 9
Haw. App. 447, 453 n.5, 845 P.2d 1194, 1199 n.5 (1992); State v. Masaniai, 63
Haw. 354, 358, 628 P.2d 1018, 1022 (1981))). The distinction between these two constitutional amendments does not render our decision “unprecedented.”
See minority at 5. 
- 31 -
 
 
   Although the district court informed Phua of some of 
the disadvantages of self-representation, the record does not 
indicate clearly whether Phua understood the seriousness of his decision to waive his right to counsel. The court might also 
have warned Phua in simple terms that “self-representation is 
detrimental to himself” and urged him to reconsider. Id. 
In this case, the district court’s inquiry into the 
disadvantages of self-representation is a series of yes or no questions with little opportunity for Phua to express confusion or ask questions. Additional questions, or varying the form of the questions, may have assisted the district court to verify that Phua understood the right he was waiving. See Gomez-
Lobato, 130 Hawai ʻi at 479, 312 P.3d at 912. Further, a trial 
court may find it beneficial to conclude the inquiry with a question seeking an affirmation of the defendant’s desire to 
waive the right to counsel--e.g., “Understanding all that I have 
explained to you, do you still wish to waive your right to be represented by a lawyer and to represent yourself at trial?” Had the court concluded its inquiry by asking Phua if he still desired to waive his right to counsel, Phua would have had an opportunity to confirm or change his mind in light of the court’s warnings. 
- 32 -
 
                      
 3. Validity of Phua’s Waiver 
The record in this case is critically deficient to 
support a finding that Phua’s waiver of his right to counsel was 
intelligently and knowingly made. There were circumstances in 
this case necessitating further inquiry into Phua’s background, 
and the record does not reflect that Phua understood the risks and disadvantages of waiving counsel. The fact that the trial court did not warn Phua of the range of allowable punishment in this case is alone sufficient grounds for vacating the sentence.
19 Accordingly, this case must be remanded to the 
district court for a new sentencing proceeding. 
B. Pre-Sentence Allocution 
Phua also contends that the district court erred by 
failing to personally address him regarding his right to pre-sentence allocution. We do not address the merits of this contention in light of our conclusion that Phua did not knowingly and intelligently waive his right to counsel. Nonetheless, we reiterate the importance of a defendant’s right 
19 Since both this opinion and the minority conclude that the
district court’s failure to advise Phua of the potential punishment is
sufficient ground for vacating the sentence, it is unnecessary to determinewhether “sentencing may require a less stringent colloquy.” Minority at 14.
We note however that a sentencing proceeding may include extended term
sentencing, involving presenting of evidence, cross-examination, argument,and submission of jury instructions. We therefore specifically decline toaddress this issue. 
- 33 -
 
  
                     
  
  to pre-sentence allocution under the Hawai ʻi Constitution and our 
law. 
State v. Chow recognized the fundamental importance of 
a defendant’s right to pre-sentence 
allocution.20 77 Hawai ʻi 241, 
246-47, 883 P.2d 663, 668-69 (App. 1994). Under Chow, trial 
courts must ensure that its mandate is complied with during 
sentencing proceedings, particularly as it is “essential to fair treatment.” Id. at 250, 883 P.2d at 672. Accordingly, “[t]rial 
judges before sentencing should, as a matter of good judicial administration, unambiguously address themselves to the 
defendant” providing a personal invitation to speak prior to 
sentencing. Id. at 248, 883 P.2d at 670 (quoting Green v. 
United States, 365 U.S. 301, 305 (1961)). The right is one 
easily administered by the trial court by the following inquiry: “Do you, . . . [(defendant’s name)], have anything to say before I pass sentence?” Id. at 248, 883 P.2d at 670 (alterations in 
original) (quoting Green v. United States, 365 U.S. 301, 305 (1961)). 
20 See also  HRS § 706-604(1) (1993 & Supp. 2006) (“Before imposing
sentence, the court shall afford a fair opportunity to the defendant to be
heard on the issue of the defendant’s disposition.”); Rule 32(a) of the
Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) (2006) (“Before suspending or imposing
sentence, the court shall address the defendant personally and afford a fair
opportunity to the defendant and defendant’s counsel, if any, to make astatement and present any information in mitigation of punishment.”). 
- 34 -
 
   
  
 
 
 
                     
 We observe the trial court has an especially important 
role in affording the right to pre-sentence allocution to a 
defendant appearing pro se at sentencing.  When a pro se defendant is not responsive to the court’s request for 
allocution, the trial court may, as a matter of good judicial 
administration, seek confirmation that the defendant understands the right to address the court regarding sentencing before the sentence is imposed.
21 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s December 
23, 2013 Judgment on Appeal and the district court’s August 29, 2011 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence and remand the case to 
the district court for resentencing. 
James S. Tabe 
for petitioner /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna/s/ Richard W. Pollack Linda L. Walton 
for respondent 
21 We note that the record in this case does not disclose whether 
Phua received a copy of the PSI. When a defendant appears pro se at
sentencing, the trial court should confirm the defendant received a copy ofthe PSI and had an opportunity to review it. HRS § 706-604(2) requires thetrial courts to furnish the parties with a copy of the PSI and “afford fair
opportunity” for the parties to “controvert or supplement” it. Thus, the
court may verify that the PSI has been received by a counseled or uncounseleddefendant, when it affords the parties the opportunity to correct orsupplement the PSI. 
- 35 -
