 
          
         
          
           ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER***
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29742 11-MAY-2012 
11:29 AM 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
ALAKA'I NA KEIKI, INC., Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant, 
vs. 
KATHRYN MATAYOSHI,1
 in her official capacity as
Superintendent of Education, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee.
 
NO. SCWC-29742
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29742; CIV. NO. 05-1-1658)
 
May 11, 2012
 
ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.; WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J. 
We hold that decisions of administrative officers of 
the State of Hawai
'i Department of Education (the DOE), headed by 
1
 Pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
43(c)(1), Kathryn Matayoshi, the current Superintendent of Education, has been
substituted for Patricia Hamamoto, the Superintendent of Education at the timethis case was decided by the circuit court of the first circuit.         
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant Kathryn Matayoshi, (Respondent),2 
to reject the proposal of Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant Alaka' i 
Na Keiki, Inc. (Petitioner) that responded to a request for 
proposals (RFP) to provide health and human services under contracts pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 
103F, are subject to judicial review under the circumstances of this case. In so holding, we conclude first that, as construed, HRS chapter 103F is not unconstitutional for violating the doctrine of separation of powers as Petitioner contends, because although the DOE, in interpreting and applying provisions of HRS chapter 103F and in deciding disputes to which it is a party, exercises aspects of the judicial power, its decisions are subject to judicial review under the declaratory judgment statute, HRS § 632-1 (1993). Second, we conclude that Petitioner’s request for a declaratory judgment is moot to the extent the subject contracts have been awarded and their terms expired. Third, we conclude that Petitioner’s claim for alleged negligence by the DOE in evaluating Petitioner’s proposal and in deciding the dispute with Petitioner is barred under HRS chapter 662, the State Tort Liability Act (STLA), because the DOE’s conduct herein is not analogous to “a recognized claim for relief against a private person.” Kaho'ohanohano v. State, 117 Hawai' i 
262, 282, 178 P.3d 538, 558 (2008). Fourth, we conclude that 
2
 Respondent is sued in her official capacity as Superintendent of the
 
DOE.
 
2
         
         
           
            
     
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner’s claim for injunctive relief, premised on the DOE’s
 
alleged faulty administration of the contract process, is moot
 inasmuch as we interpret such process in HRS chapter 103F as
 subject to judicial review.
 
Accordingly, we vacate the June 16, 2011 judgment filed
 
3
herein by the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA)  and the March
4, 2009 judgment of the circuit court of the first circuit (the
 court).
4 We remand this case to the court, with instructions, in
 
respect to the claims in Petitioner’s second amended complaint,
 to enter judgment (1) denying the relief sought in Counts I, II
 and IV as moot and (2) in favor of Respondent on Count III. 
I.
 A.
 
In October 2004, the DOE, as the purchasing agency,
 
issued an RFP “to solicit private providers to provide intensive
 instructional support service to eligible students[.]” Services
 would address the students’ educational, behavioral and
 therapeutic needs. The contract term ran from July 1, 2005, to
 June 30, 2006. Evaluation of proposals was to be conducted in
 three phases. First, the proposal would be reviewed to ensure
 proposal requirements were met. Second, the applicant would be 
3
 The published opinion was authored by Presiding Judge Daniel R.
 
Foley, and joined by Associate Judge Alexa D.M. Fujise and Circuit Judge
Patrick W. Border, in place of Chief Judge Craig H. Nakamura and Associate
Judge Katherine G. Leonard, both recused.
 
4
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
3
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
evaluated, and third, a recommendation of whether to grant an
 
award would be made. 
The RFP established weighted evaluation criteria to
 
determine which proposals would qualify for contracts with the
 DOE. “[I]n order to be eligible for the contract award,” the
 proposal had to “receive a score of 70 points or better[.]” The
 RFP explained that “[a]ny applicant may file a protest . . .
 against the awarding of the contract[.]” Only the following
 matters could be protested: “A state purchasing agency’s failure
 to follow procedures established by [HRS] chapter 103F[,]” “[a]
 state purchasing agency’s failure to follow any rules established
 by [HRS c]hapter 103F[,]” or “[a] state purchasing agency’s
 failure to follow any procedure, requirement or evaluation
 criterion in a request for proposals issued by the state
 purchasing agency.”
 
In January 2005, Petitioner submitted its proposal. On
 
March 31, 2005, Andrell Aoki, a “Fiscal Specialist,” notified the
 applicants that a list of qualified providers had been selected. 
Petitioner was informed that its proposal was rejected because
 the DOE determined that it “failed to meet the minimum score of
 70 to be entered into the pool of providers.” Petitioner
 received 51.2 points out of 100 possible points.
 
On April 5, 2005, Petitioner filed a notice of protest
 
stating that the DOE failed to apply proposal evaluation criteria
 fairly and competently, thereby violating HRS § 103F-402(b)
 
4
         
        
         
        
        
        
        
        
         
          
        
   
     
      
      
         
        
       
      
        
    
          
        
  
          
          
         
         
          
          
              
       
        
       
          
         
      
     
        
        
       
          
         
      
   
 
          
             
       
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5
(Supp. 2004),  and Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 3-143­
6 7
205(e) & (f) (2004).  Petitioner also complained that the RFP
 
5
 HRS § 103F-402 provides in its entirety as follows.
 
§103F-402 Competitive purchase of services. (a) State
 
agencies to which the legislature has appropriated funds for
the purchase of health and human services shall solicit
proposals to provide health and human services by purchase
of health and human services contracts, by publishing a
notice requesting the submission of health and human service
proposals. Notice of the request for proposals shall be
given a reasonable time before the date set forth in the
request for submission of proposals. The policy board shall
adopt rules which specify:
(1) The form of the notice;
(2) What constitutes a reasonable interim between
notice and the proposal submission deadline; and
(3) How the notice is to be published, including but
not limited to, whether the publication is to be
completed in a newspaper of general circulation, by
mail, through a public or private telecommunications
network, or any other method or combination of methods
which the board deems appropriate.
(b) The request shall state all criteria which will be used
to evaluate proposals , and the relative importance of the
proposal evaluation criteria.
(c) Any applicant who has a question regarding a request may
submit the question to the head of the purchasing agency, or
a designee, prior to the proposal submission deadline. The
 head of the purchasing agency, or a designee, shall provide
a response in the form of a clarification, or an amendment
of the request, that shall be made available to all those
who picked up a request.
(d) Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of
contents to competing applicants during the process of
proposal evaluation. A register of proposals shall be
prepared and available for public inspection after proposal
submission.
 (e) If stated in the request, discussions, as provided by
rule, may be held with applicants for the purpose of
clarification to assure full understanding of, and
responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements.
Applicants shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with
respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of
proposals, and revisions may be permitted after submissions
and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and
final offers . In conducting discussions, there shall be no
disclosure of any information derived from proposals
submitted by competing applicants.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
6
 Petitioner cited HAR § 3-142-205 in its notice of proposal, but
 
such provision of the HAR does not exists. HAR chapter 3-140 through 3-147
 and 3-149 were amended in January 2006, see
http://www4.hawaii.gov/spoh/har/hi_adminrulesch103f_bkgrd.htm HAR § 3-142­
(continued...)
 
5
         
            
             
         
  
         
      
        
         
         
          
        
       
       
 
         
           
        
    
        
          
         
        
        
          
           
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
failed to explain any criterion for the consideration of multiple
 
8
award contracts, violating HAR § 3-143-206(d),  and that the DOE,
as the purchasing agency, failed to follow RFP procedures and
 requirements because the DOE made factual errors and drew
 inaccurate inferences in evaluating the proposal, which
 “materially prejudiced” Petitioner.
 On April 29, 2005, the DOE informed Petitioner that
 
all awards had been “rescinded” and that all proposals were to be
 rescored due to “concerns” raised in one or more pending
 protests. 
6(...continued)
205(e), and, thus, the relevant section of HAR chapter 3-143 is the prior
version, which was in effect since June 1999. This version was attached to
 Petitioner’s opening brief. HAR § 3-143-205(e) stated as follows:
 
The evaluation of proposals shall be based solely upon the
evaluation criteria and their relative priorities as
established in the request for proposals . A written
 
evaluation shall be made for each proposal based on either
written comments or a numerical rating system. After the
 award and execution of a contract or contracts in the case
 of multiple awards is awarded and executed, the written
evaluations for all proposals received shall be made
available for public inspection in the procurement file.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7 HAR § 3-143-205(f) provided that “[a]fter all of the proposals
 
have been evaluated, the proposals shall be ranked from most advantageous to
least advantageous, based on the evaluations each proposal received.”
 
8
 HAR § 3-143-206(d) provided that:
 
“[a] multiple award contract may be made whenever the
purchasing agency deems that it is in the best interests of
the state. Only the providers whose proposals are evaluated
as the most advantageous over-all, by geographical area, or
by other criterion explained in the request for proposals,
shall be considered for a multiple award. If, for example,
a multiple award is to be made to two providers, then only
the providers with the two highest-ranked proposals may be
considered, and so on.”
 
6
         
         
        
          
   
        
         
   
        
            
          
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On May 12, 2005, the DOE informed Petitioner that its
 
proposal had been rescored, but that Petitioner had not been
 
selected. Petitioner’s score increased 14 points, to 65.2
 points, but was still 4.8 points short of the 70-point score
 necessary to be included in the qualified pool of providers. 
B. 
On May 18, 2005, Petitioner filed an amended Notice of
 
9
Protest,  stating that the DOE “failed to promulgate and apply
evaluation criteria fairly and competently.” 
According to
 
Petitioner, the DOE did not adhere to RFP procedures and
 
10  11  12
 requirements established by statute, rule,  and the RFP  by
 
making factual errors and drawing inaccurate references in
 evaluating and re-scoring the proposal.
 
On May 31, 2005, a protest scheduling order was issued,
 
setting forth the time for Petitioner to file its written protest
 and for the purchasing agency to respond. 
Pursuant to HAR § 
9 Petitioner filed a Notice of Protest on May 17, 2005.
 
10 Petitioner contended that the purchasing agency failed to follow
 
procedures and requirements established by HRS §§ 103F-402(b) & (e) (Supp.
2005), 103F-411, and 104F-511.
 
11
 Petitioner contended that the purchasing agency failed to follow
 
procedures and requirements established by HAR §§ 3-143-205, 3-143-206, 3-143­302, 3-143-403, and 3-148-202.
 
12
 Petitioner contended that the purchasing agency failed to follow
 
procedures and requirements established by sections II and IV of the RFP.
Section II listed the general requirements for a proposal (i.e., specific
qualification regarding licensure and accreditation) and section IV was the
procurement timetable.
 
7
         
       
            
         
            
             
         
         
         
             
       
        
       
        
         
         
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13
 3-148-502 (2005),  each party to the protest was entitled to ask
the opposing party for records and information. The scheduling
 
order also established deadlines for clarification requested by
 either party. The contract award was suspended during the
 protest.
 
On June 9, 2005, Petitioner requested clarification
 
under HAR § 3-148-502. Petitioner sought, inter alia, copies of
 the proposals of all applicants, the evaluation forms for each
 applicant, and the decisions as to all applicants. On June 24,
 2005, the DOE responded by refusing to identify or produce the
 requested information on the ground that the information had to
 be kept confidential, until the contract was executed. (Citing
 
14 15
  HAR §§ 3-143-604  & 3-143-616 (1999).) 
On July 15, 2005, Petitioner sent a “notice of dispute”
 
to the DOE. Petitioner noted that HAR § 3-148-103(a) allows an
 applicant to protest the “purchasing agency’s failure to follow
 
13 HAR § 3-148-502, entitled “Requests for Clarification,” provides
 
that “[t]he protestor may make a written request for access to the purchasing
agency's relevant procurement records, and the purchasing agency shall provide
such access except to the extent that information is required or permitted to
be withheld by law.” HAR § 3-148-502(b). Furthermore, both parties “may make
written requests for additional relevant information to each other[,]” and
 “[p]arties from whom additional information is requested shall respond by
producing such additional information except to the extent that such
information is required or permitted to be withheld by law.” HAR § 3-148­502(c).
 
14
 HAR § 3-143-604, entitled “Access to Documents and
 
Confidentiality[,]” provided, inter alia , that “[a]fter submission to a
purchasing agency, the confidentiality of proposals, modifications to
proposals, and withdrawals of proposals” shall be kept confidential.
 
15
 HAR § 3-143-616(a) provided that “[t]he procurement file for every
 
competitive purchase of service procurement shall be available for public
inspection after the execution of a contract[.]”
 
8
         
 
        
           
            
            
       
        
           
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
any procedure, requirement, or evaluation criterion in a request
 
16
  provides that the
 for proposals[,]” and that HRS § 103F-504
procedures and remedies under the administrative rules “shall be
 the exclusive means available for persons aggrieved in connection
 with the award of a contract to resolve their concerns.” 
According to Petitioner, the “exclusivity of remedies”
 
provision in HRS § 103F-504, combined with the HAR, “set up a
 catch-22” because, although “a protester is entitled to determine
 whether evaluators properly followed evaluation criteria[,]”
 under the HAR, a protester would have no access to this
 
information until after the contract was awarded. At this point,
 
“there would be no recourse because the agency decision on the
 protest is purportedly final.” (Citing HAR § 3-148-306(c)(4). 
17
 )
On July 18, 2005, Petitioner filed its formal protest
 
alleging that the DOE, as the purchasing agency, failed to follow
 the applicable procedures, to properly evaluate Petitioner’s
 proposal, to provide the discovery requested, and to establish
 criteria for justifying multiple award contracts. On July 27,
 2005, the DOE responded to the protest, contending that
 Petitioner’s proposals did not meet or were inconsistent with the
 
16 HRS § 103F-504, entitled “ Exclusivity of remedies [,]” provides in
 
its entirety that “ [t]he procedures and remedies provided for in this part,
and the rules adopted by the policy board, shall be the exclusive means
available for persons aggrieved in connection with the award of a contract to
resolve their concerns .” (Emphases added.)
 
17 HAR § 3-148-306(c)(4) provides that “[e]very decision issued in
 
resolution of a protest shall contain” “ [a] statement that the decision is
final and conclusive, unless a timely request for reconsideration is made .”
(Emphasis added.)
 
9
         
  
          
              
             
              
             
              
           
            
             
            
            
         
          
              
           
            
            
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
requirements in the RFP. Petitioner submitted a reply,
 
contending that its discovery was impeded by the DOE’s refusal to
 provide documents regarding the proposals submitted by other
 bidders.
 
On August 9, 2005, Christian H. Butt, a “Procurement &
 
Contracts Specialist” of the Office of Business Services of the
 DOE, denied the protest. On August 17, 2005, Petitioner
 submitted a request for reconsideration. On August 25, 2005, Rae
 M. Louie, “assistant superintendent,” denied the request for
 reconsideration, finding that the purchasing agency made no
 error.
 
The contracts were then awarded.
 
C.
 
Petitioner subsequently filed an appeal to the court
 
under HRS chapter 91. The court dismissed the action for lack of
 jurisdiction and entered judgment on October 10, 2005, which was
 affirmed by this court on January 22, 2007.
18
 
18 This court affirmed the court’s holding that “the [court] did not 
err in ruling that it lacked HRS chapter 91 jurisdiction in the instant case.”
Alaka'i Na Keiki, Inc. v. Hamamoto (Alaka'i I), No. 27559, 2007 WL 158980, at 
*1 (Jan. 22, 2007) (SDO). This court reasoned that inasmuch as HRS § 91-14(a)(1993) allows a person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested
case to appeal that order, and a contested case is defined as “a proceeding in
which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required
by law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing [,]” HRS § 
91-1(5) (1993), and an agency hearing “refers only to such hearing held by anagency immediately prior to a judicial review of a contested case[,]” HRS §91-1(6) (1993), HRS chapter 91 did not provide judicial review for Petitioner.(Emphases added.) This was because “submission of [Petitioner’s] writtenprotest, the DOE’s written response, and [Petitioner’s] written reply did notconstitute a ‘hearing’ within the meaning of HRS chapter 91[.]” Id. at *2. 
Additionally, this court noted that because neither HRS chapter 103F nor HARchapter 3-148 mandate a hearing prior to deciding a protest, the court lackedjurisdiction. Id. (Citing Bush v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n , 76 Hawai 'i 128, 134,
870 P.2d 1272, 1278 (1994) (“If the statute or rule governing the activity in
(continued...)
 
10
         
          
          
               
          
           
               
          
    
          
         
              
              
          
         
          
           
            
             
       
         
           
         
  
            
          
        
         
      
       
         
         
     
             
           
            
           
           
             
          
              
          
           
           
           
            
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D.
 
On September 16, 2005, Petitioner filed its complaint
 
in the instant case against Hamamoto, and on September 20, 2005,
 
Petitioner filed its First Amended Complaint.19 Petitioner was
 
18(...continued)
question does not mandate a hearing prior to the administrative agency's
decision-making, the actions of the administrative agency are not ‘required by
 law’ and do not amount to ‘a final decision or order in a contested case’ from
 which a direct appeal to circuit court is possible.” (Citations omitted.))
 
19 The contracts at issue expired on June 30, 2006. The contracts
 
were extended for one year, until June 30, 2007. The DOE then issued a new
 request for proposals and entered into new contracts with various providers
for similar services, including Petitioner.
On appeal to the ICA, Petitioner argued, “Assuming the court based
its decision [as to Petitioner’s request for declaratory and injunctivereleif] in whole or in part on mootness, the court clearly erred.” The ICA noted that “in its oral indication as to how it would rule, [the court] agreedwith [Petitioner] that the issue of constitutionality was not moot, statingthat ‘c]laims for declaratory relief regarding, one, the constitutionality ofchapter 103F and, number two, [Respondent’s] alleged failure to comply withthe applicable procedural law are not moot since the alleged violations arecapable of repetition.’” Alaka'i Na Keiki, Inc. v. Hamamoto , 125 Hawai 'i 200, 
209, 257 P.3d 213, 222 (App. 2011) ( Hamamoto ). The ICA concluded that the 
“court properly considered [Petitioner’s] claims for declaratory andinjunctive relief and did not base its ruling on mootness.”
The ICA was correct. In Kaho'ohanohano v. State , 114 Hawai 'i 302, 
332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007), it was explained that 
“[a] case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,
live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts are
to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.
The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicial
self-governance founded in concern about the proper--and
properly limited--role of the courts in a democratic
society. We have said the suit must remain alive throughout
the course of litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition to escape the mootness bar.”
 
(Quoting Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman , 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d
161, 165 (1987).) (Emphasis omitted.) Because the multiple contracts at issue
in this case have been awarded and fully performed, there is no live
controversy. However, the instant case falls within an exception to the
mootness doctrine because it “involv[es] a legal issue which is capable of
repetition, yet evading review[.]” Id. at 333, 162 P.3d at 727 (internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted). “The phrase, ‘capable of repetition,
 yet evading review,’ means that a court will not dismiss a case on the grounds
of mootness where a challenged governmental action would evade full review
because the passage of time would prevent any single plaintiff from remaining
subject to the restriction complained of for the period necessary to complete
the lawsuit[.]” Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Here,
the instant legal issue is capable of repetition inasmuch as the State will
continue to award health and human services contracts. By the time the issue
(continued...)
 
11
         
            
    
         
             
         
             
           
           
   
         
           
           
              
               
         
     
       
        
       
       
           
          
         
       
      
       
       
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
allowed to amend its First Amended Complaint, and on November 13,
 
2006, filed its Second Amended Complaint.
 The Second Amended Complaint contained four counts. 
In Count 1, Petitioner asserted that the denial of its request
 for reconsideration must be vacated because the DOE’s actions
 were unlawful, and the court may review and order appropriate
 relief for the DOE’s unlawful actions pursuant to its express and
 inherent powers under article VI, section 1 of the Hawai' i 
 and HRS § 603-21.9.
21
 Constitution20  In Count 2, Petitioner
 
sought a declaratory judgment pursuant to HRS § 632-122 that,
 
19(...continued)
reaches this court, the contracts will most often have been awarded and fully
executed, as in this case.
 
20 Article VI, section 1 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides that 
“[t]he judicial power of the State shall be vested in one supreme court, one
intermediate appellate court, circuit courts, district courts and in suchother courts as the legislature may from time to time establish . The several 
courts shall have original and appellate jurisdiction as provided by law and
shall establish time limits for disposition of cases in accordance with theirrules.” (Emphasis added.) 
21 HRS § 603-21.9(6) provides in pertinent part that circuit courts
 
have the power “[t]o make and award such judgments, decrees, orders, and
mandates, issue such executions and other processes, and do such other acts
and take such other steps as may be necessary to carry into full effect the
powers which are or shall be given to them by law or for the promotion of
justice in matters pending before them .” (Emphases added.)
 
22 HRS § 632-1 provides as follows:
 
Jurisdiction; controversies subject to. In cases of
 
actual controversy, courts of record, within the scope of
their respective jurisdictions, shall have power to make
binding adjudications of right , whether or not consequential
relief is, or at the time could be, claimed, and no action
or proceeding shall be open to objection on the ground that
a judgment or order merely declaratory of right is prayed
for[.] Controversies involving the interpretation of deeds,
wills, other instruments of writing, statutes, municipal
ordinances, and other governmental regulations, may be so
determined , and this enumeration does not exclude other
instances of actual antagonistic assertion and denial of
right.
 
(continued...)
 
12
         
        
       
        
       
        
          
        
          
        
           
        
        
       
         
          
         
       
         
      
          
        
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inter alia, (a) “to the extent” HRS § 103F-504 “preclude[s]
 
direct judicial review of the DOE’s final decision, it
 unconstitutionally delegates judicial power to an administrative
 agency and is thus void and invalid[,]” and (b) HRS chapter 103F
 and its accompanying administrative rules are unconstitutional or
 otherwise invalid because they “permit the DOE to adjudicate the
 propriety of its own actions[.]” In Count 3, Petitioner alleged
 that Respondent was negligent in preparing the RFP, evaluating
 the proposals, and deciding Petitioner’s request for
 reconsideration, and that Petitioner suffered damages as a result
 of Respondent’s negligence. In Count 4, Petitioner sought a
 preliminary and permanent injunction enjoining the DOE from
 continuing to administer any and all health and human services
 contracts, and urged the court to appoint a special master to
 
22(...continued)
Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in civil
cases where an actual controversy exists between contending
parties, or where the court is satisfied that antagonistic
claims are present between the parties involved which
indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or where in any
such case the court is satisfied that a party asserts a
legal relation, status, right, or privilege in which the
party has a concrete interest and that there is a challenge
or denial of the asserted relation, status, right, or
privilege by an adversary party who also has or asserts a
concrete interest therein, and the court is satisfied also
that a declaratory judgment will serve to terminate the
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding.
Where, however, a statute provides a special form of remedy
for a specific type of case, that statutory remedy shall be
followed ; but the mere fact that an actual or threatened
controversy is susceptible of relief through a general
common law remedy, a remedy equitable in nature, or an
extraordinary legal remedy, whether such remedy is
recognized or regulated by statute or not, shall not debar a
party from the privilege of obtaining a declaratory judgment
in any case where the other essentials to such relief are
present .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
13
         
          
        
             
            
           
     
         
           
          
       
          
          
        
         
    
          
               
           
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
oversee health and human services procurement “until such time as
 
defects in the statute and the administrative rules can be cured
 legislatively and administratively.” 
E.
 
23
 In May 2008,  Respondent moved for judgment on the
pleadings or, in the alternative, for summary judgment pursuant
 
24 25
 and to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rules 7,  12(c), 
5626 (2000) on all counts. Respondent argued, inter alia, that
 
Petitioner did not meet its burden of showing that HRS chapter
 103F is unconstitutional. According to Respondent, Petitioner
 “simply c[ould not] prove that the Hawai' i State Constitution 
precludes the ability of the legislature to enact HRS § 103F­504,” the “exclusivity of remedies” provision. In Respondent’s
 view, “[a]rticle VI, section 1 concerning judicial power clearly
 
23 Between November 2006 and May 2008, there were discovery disputes.
 
24 HRCP Rule 7(b)(1) provides in pertinent part that “[a]n
 
application to the court for an order shall be by motion which, unless made
during a hearing or trial, shall be made in writing, shall state with
particularity the grounds therefor, and shall set forth the relief or order
sought.”
 
25 HRCP Rule 12(c) provides that,
 
“[a]fter the pleadings are closed but within such time as
not to delay the trial, any party may move for judgment on
the pleadings. If, on a motion for judgment on the
pleadings, matters outside the pleadings are presented to
and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated
as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in
Rule 56, and all parties shall be given reasonable
opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a
motion by Rule 56.”
 
26 HRCP Rule 56(b) provides in pertinent part that “[a] party against
 
whom a claim . . . is asserted or a declaratory judgment is sought may move
with or without supporting affidavits for a summary judgment in the party's
favor as to all or any part thereof[.]”
 
14
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provides that the courts only have original and appellate
 
jurisdiction as provided by law[,]” and thus, “the legislature is
 free to decide what power if any to invest in the judiciary
 concerning the review of [HRS c]hapter 103F[.]” Respondent
 argued that the legislature did not invest any power in the
 judiciary inasmuch as the legislature decided that the procedure
 under HRS chapter 103F was the “‘[e]xclusive means available for
 persons aggriev[ed] in connection with the award of a contract to
 resolve their concerns’.” (Quoting HRS § 103F-504). Regarding
 Petitioner’s negligence claim, Respondent maintained, inter alia,
 that HRS chapter 103F did not afford Petitioner a private right
 of action to bring suit.
 
On May 9, 2008, Petitioner filed its motion for summary
 
judgment. Petitioner argued that HRS chapter 103F was facially
 invalid on two grounds, that it “empowers a government agency to
 determine the propriety and legality of its own procurement
 actions, including the disposition of protests[, and] as applied
 to the DOE, it erroneously designates the DOE superintendent to
 serve as a neutral in deciding protests and to sit in judgment of
 her protest decision on reconsideration.” Petitioner contended
 that HRS chapter 103F is “invalid because it expressly requires
 an agency head to determine with finality the propriety and
 legality of her agency’s procurement agencies, including the
 disposition of protests.” (Citing, inter alia, HOH Corp. v.
 Motor Vehicle Indus. Licensing Bd., Dep’t. of Commerce & Consumer
 Affairs, 69 Haw. 135, 143, 736 P.2d 1271, 1276 (1987)).
 
15
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On June 12, 2008, the court held a hearing on the
 
competing motions. As to Petitioner’s challenge to the
 
constitutionality of HRS chapter 103F, the court ruled, “the
 finality of the chief procurement officer’s decision on a request
 for reconsideration is not an unconstitutional delegation of
 adjudicatory power of the judiciary.” However, the court said it
 was “inclined” to grant Petitioner injunctive relief prohibiting
 Respondent from having any individual other than the chief
 procurement officer decide requests for reconsideration under HRS
 § 103F-502 (Supp. 2008). Additionally, the court gave its
 “inclination” that “[t]here is no private right of action under
 [HRS c]hapter 103F, no tort duty is imposed by [HRS c]hapter
 103F, [and] therefore there is no cause of action for damages
 under [c]hapter 662.” The court indicated it was also “inclined”
 to deny all other claims of Petitioner, explaining “the court is
 abiding by the legislature’s mandate that the decision made upon
 reconsideration is final, so this [c]ourt is not going to be
 tempted to start to look at the underlying merits [].”
 
On October 21, 2008, the court issued an order denying
 
Petitioner’s motion for summary judgment, without including any
 language that only the chief procurement officer could decide the
 motion for reconsideration. On October 29, 2008, the court
 granted Respondent’s motion for summary judgment, “to the extent
 that summary judgment is granted in favor of [Respondent] and
 against [Petitioner].” On March 4, 2009, judgment was entered 
16
         
        
          
            
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“in favor of [Respondent] and against [Petitioner], upon Counts
 
I, II, III, [and] IV of the Second Amended Complaint.” All other
 claims were dismissed with prejudice.
 
II.
 
A.
 
Petitioner filed a notice of appeal on April 3, 2009.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Petitioner argued, inter alia, that (1) HRS
 chapter 103F is unconstitutional because it delegates to an
 agency judicial power to interpret the law
27 and determine with
 
finality a protestor’s legal rights and the legality of an
 agency’s conduct, (citing HOH, 69 Haw. at 143, 736 P.2d at 1276);
 (2) under the separation of powers doctrine, the power to
 determine with finality the meaning of the law and the legality
 of an agency’s conduct resides with the judiciary, and the
 legislature’s “clear[] inten[t] that the DOE would be the final
 arbiter of the rights of aggrieved persons” violates the
 separation of powers doctrine; (3) the court had authority to
 review the validity of HRS chapter 103F pursuant to HRS § 632-1
 or HRS § 603-21.9(6); (4) assuming, arguendo, HRS chapter 103F is
 constitutional, the court still had authority to scrutinize the
 DOE’s actions within the context of a declaratory judgment action
 or in the context of the court’s general authority described in
 HRS § 603-21.9(6); and (5) the DOE was negligent and the STLA,
 
27
 In this regard, Petitioner maintained that HRS chapter 103F
 
“‘subverts a fundamental precept of American jurisprudence: that [i]t is
emphatically the province and the duty of the judicial department to say what
the law is[.]’” (Quoting Marbury v Madison , 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803)).
 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRS § 662-15 (Supp. 2009), allowed Petitioner to bring a
 
negligence claim against the DOE. 
B.
 
The ICA rejected Petitioner’s arguments. According to 
the ICA, because HRS § 103F-504 provides that the protest procedure “shall be the exclusive means available for persons aggrieved in connection with the award of a contract to resolve their concerns[,]” by its terms, HRS “[c]hapter 103F does not allow for judicial review.” Hamamoto, 125 Hawai' i at 206, 257 
P.3d at 219 (emphasis in original). 
As to Petitioner’s second argument regarding separation 
of powers, the ICA observed that Petitioner acknowledged HRS chapter 103F indicated that “the Hawai' i Legislature . . . 
clearly intended for DOE to be the final arbiter in contract award protests.” Id. According to the ICA, “‘the legislature 
has the power to establish the subject matter jurisdiction of our state court system’,” id. (quoting Sherman v. Sawyer, 63 Haw. 55, 57, 621 P.2d 346, 348 (1980)), and “in enacting [HRS c]hapter 103F, [the legislature] determined that the judiciary had no power to review procurement grievance procedures under [HRS c]hapter 103F.” Id. 
In addition, the ICA declared that, when a party
 
challenges the constitutionality of a statute, that party “has
 the burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable
 doubt.” Id. at 207, 257 P.3d at 220 (internal quotation marks
 
and citation omitted). The ICA determined that Petitioner failed
 
18
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to meet its burden of proving that HRS chapter 103F violated the
 
separation of powers doctrine.
 
As to Petitioner’s third argument, that an
 
administrative agency could not adjudicate the propriety of its
 own actions, the ICA determined that “an administrative agency
 does not have the authority to decide if its actions are
 constitutional[,] but [HRS c]hapter 103F does give an
 administrative agency the authority to decide if its actions are
 otherwise proper.” Id. The ICA distinguished HOH, reasoning
 
that there, the issue “was not the propriety of procedural
 actions, but, rather, the constitutionality of a statute[.]” Id. 
As to Petitioner’s fourth argument regarding the
 
court’s authority to review whether the DOE exceeded its
 authority, the ICA reasoned that neither HRS § 632-1 nor HRS §
 603-21.9(6) gave the court authority to review the DOE’s actions. 
According to the ICA, HRS § 632–1 “‘generally endorses
 declaratory relief in civil cases,’” but “‘disallows such relief
 where a statute provides a special form of remedy for a specific
 type of case.’” Id. (quoting Travelers Ins. Co. v. Hawaii
 
Roofing, Inc., 64 Haw. 380, 386, 641 P.2d 1333, 1337 (1982)
 (internal quotation marks, ellipsis, brackets, and footnote
 omitted)). In the ICA’s view, because HRS chapter 103F provided
 a “‘statutory remedy’” for a “‘specific type of case[,]’”
 “namely, the protest process under HRS §§ 103F–501 through
 103F–504[,]” “declaratory relief under HRS § 632–1 is
 unavailable[.]” Id. (citing Travelers Ins., 64 Haw. at 386–87,
 
19
         
       
      
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
641 P.2d at 1337–38). As to HRS § 603–21.9(6), the ICA
 
determined that it “does not give the circuit court jurisdiction
 to rule on a claim when the statute limits review exclusively to
 an administrative body.” Id. at 207-208, 257 P.3d at 220-21. 
As to Petitioner’s fifth argument alleging negligence
 
on Respondent’s behalf, the ICA determined that HRS chapter 103F
 does not provide a private right of action. The ICA determined
 that “‘[t]he legislative history supports the limitations on
 court challenges’” where HRS chapter 103F intended a “‘simpler,
 standardized process’” for the procurement of health and human
 services. Id. at 207-208, 257 P.3d at 221-22 (quoting S. Stand.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 1465, in 1997 Senate Journal, at 1447–48).
 
According to the ICA, because the “statutory language
 
clearly indicates the intent of the [l]egislature to deny a
 private right of action[,]” “there is no action in tort[,]” and
 because “there is no private right of action under [HRS c]hapter
 103F, there is also no cause of action for damages under HRS
 [c]hapter 662.” Id.
 
On June 16, 2011, the ICA entered judgment affirming
 
the judgment of the court. On September 14, 2011, Petitioner
 filed its Application for Writ of Certiorari (Application). 
III.
 
Petitioner lists the following questions in its
 
Application:
 
1. Whether [HRS c]hapter 103F represents an
unconstitutional delegation of judicial power to an
executive agency and is therefore invalid under [a]rticle VI
 
20
         
     
       
        
       
        
     
        
         
         
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 1 of the Hawai 'i [C]onstitution. 
2. Assuming [HRS c]hapter 103F is unconstitutional,
did the ICA err in affirming dismissal of [Petitioner]’s
tort action against the [DOE] for negligent administration
of the constitutionally defective law pursuant to the State
Tort Liability Act ([HRS] § 662-15(1)).
3. Assuming arguendo , that [HRS c]hapter 103F is
constitutional, did the ICA err in ruling that the legality
of the DOE’s actions in administering the statute [was] not
subject to judicial review pursuant to the [] court’s
inherent judicial powers?
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Respondent filed a Response to Petitioner’s Application
 
(Response) on September 29, 2011.
 
IV.
 
A.
 
Regarding its first question, Petitioner raises a 
constitutional question implicating Respondent’s actions. 
Petitioner contends that (1) the presumption that statutes are constitutional, as applied by the ICA, “does not apply to laws which ‘. . . impinge on fundamental rights expressly or impliedly granted by the constitution[,]’” (quoting Peroutka v. Cronin, 117 Hawai'i 323, 326, 179 P.3d 1050, 1053 (2008)), and because HRS 
chapter 103F denies Petitioner the “fundamental right of judicial review of an agency decision determining [its] legal rights[,]” it is presumptively unconstitutional; and (2) the ICA erroneously equated the concept of judicial review with the statutory concept of a right to appeal, and, “[i]f left to stand, . . . the separation of powers implicit in the Hawai' i [C]onstitution 
c[ould] be nullified by legislative fiat[]” in that the legislature “could endow any administrative agency with unreviewable judicial power to interpret the law and finally 
21
         
         
           
           
           
               
           
            
         
        
         
             
         
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
adjudicate the legal rights of petitioners as well as whether the
 
agency acted unlawfully.”
 
In response to Petitioner’s first question, Respondent
 
counters that (1) Peroutka is inapplicable and the ICA applied
 the correct standard to determine the constitutionality of a
 statute, and (2) because it is well settled that the right to
 appeal is purely statutory and exists only when constitutionally
 or statutorily established, “[t]here is nothing wrong” with the
 legislature foreclosing the ability “to appeal the determination
 made by an agency under HRS chapter 103F.”
28
 
B.
 
With respect to Petitioner’s first contention,
 
Petitioner does not cite any authority that would support the
 proposition that there is a specific fundamental right to
 judicial review of an agency decision that determines the legal
 rights of a party. Inasmuch as HRS chapter 103F cannot be said
 to deny such a specific right, it is not “presumptively
 unconstitutional.”
29 Therefore, the ICA applied the correct
 
28 Respondent also argues that Petitioner did not raise the argument
 
before the ICA that HRS chapter 103F violates the separation of powers
doctrine by delegating judicial authority, and, thus, cannot raise it now.
However, as related, Petitioner argued before the ICA that HRS chapter 103F
“delegate[d] to an agency . . . to determine with finality . . . the meaning
and application of the statute and administrative rules, and the legality and
propriety of its own conduct.” Inasmuch as Petitioner did raise the argument
to the ICA, Respondent’s assertion of waiver is wrong.
 
29
 Additionally, Petitioner’s reliance on Peroutka is misplaced. As 
Respondent contends, Petroutk a quoted Child Support Enforcement Agency v. Doe ,
109 Hawai 'i 240, 246, 125 P.3d 461, 467 (2005), for the proposition that a
statute is presumptively unconstitutional when it classifies persons on thebasis of suspect categories or impinges on fundamental rights. Doe involved 
an equal protection claim, and, in an equal protection challenge, the strict
(continued...)
 
22
         
         
           
           
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
standard of review, that is, that HRS chapter 103F is
 
presumptively constitutional. However, if the legislature
 delegates judicial power and precludes judicial review of the
 agency’s decision, it may raise separation of powers questions,
 as discussed infra.
 
C.
 
Although the ICA applied the correct standard of
 
review, respectfully, the ICA’s analysis regarding Petitioner’s
 separation of powers challenge appears to be wrong. The ICA
 relied on the fact that the legislature establishes the subject
 matter jurisdiction of the courts in reasoning there was no
 separation of powers issue. But, subject matter jurisdiction is
 not determinative of whether a legislative act that delegates
 
30
 judicial power  to an agency violates the separation of powers
doctrine or not.
 
We recognize that “[t]he separation of powers doctrine
 
is not expressly set forth in any single constitutional
 provision, but like the federal government, Hawaii’s government
 is one in which the sovereign power is divided and allocated 
29(...continued)
P
eroutka 
30
i
s inapplicable.
 scrutiny standard applies to classifications based on suspect categories or
that impinge on fundamental rights, while the rational basis test applies to
laws that do not. Inasmuch as Petitioner raises no equal protection
challenge, 
 It  is  said  that  “[t]he  judicial  power  is  an  aspect  of  the  power  of 
a  sovereign  over  a  certain  geographic  territory;  it  derives  from  a  generally
recognized  duty  of  the  sovereign  to  regulate  the  relationship  of  individuals
to  the  sovereign  and  the  relationship  of  individuals  inter  se.”   Alamida  v. 
Wilson,  53  Haw.  398,  499,  495  P.2d  585,  588  (1972).   The  Hawai'i  Constitution 
vests  judicial  power  in  the  courts  pursuant  to  article  VI  section  1. 
23
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
among three co-equal branches.” Hawaii Insurers Council v. 
Lingle, 120 Hawai' i 51, 69, 201 P.3d 564, 582 (2008) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). The separation of powers 
doctrine is intended “to preclude a commingling of essentially different powers of government in the same hands and thereby prevent a situation where one department would be controlled by, or subjected, directly or indirectly, to, the coercive influence of either of the other departments.” Pray v. Judicial Selection 
Comm’n of State, 75 Haw. 333, 353, 861 P.2d 723, 732 (1993) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Separation of powers concerns may arise when the 
legislature vests administrative agencies with judicial power but precludes judicial review of the determinations made by the agency in exercising such power. State v. Bani, 97 Hawai' i 285, 
291 n.4, 36 P.3d 1255, 1261 n.4 (2001) is relevant. In Bani, the defendant challenged the constitutionality of Hawaii’s sex offender registration and notification statute after he was required to register as a sex offender. Id. at 286-87, 36 P.3d 
at 1256-57. This court noted that a section of the statute provided that “‘a sex offender shall have a diminished expectation of privacy in the [registration] information.’” Id. 
at 291 n.4, 36 P.3d at 1261 n.4. 
It was declared by Bani that, although the legislature 
attempted to exempt the statute from the constitutional right to privacy, the framers of article I, section 6 of the Hawai' i 
24
         
         
             
           
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Constitution [ 31
 ] intended to entrust the definition of the right
to privacy ‘to both the legislature and the courts.’” Id. 
According to 
Bani, this court has stated, “‘Our ultimate 
authority is the Constitution; and the courts, not the 
legislature, are the ultimate interpreters of the Constitution.’” Id. (quoting State v. Nakata, 76 Hawai' i 360, 370, 878 P.2d 699, 
709 (1994)). 
It was further observed that “‘the question as to the 
constitutionality of a statute is not for legislative determination, but is vested in the judiciary, and a statute cannot survive constitutional challenge based on legislative declaration alone.’” Id. (quoting Del Rio v. Crake, 87 Hawai' i 
297, 304, 955 P.2d 90, 97 (1998)). Thus, according to Bani, “[t]o allow the legislature to exempt the statute from constitutional requirements, without independent review by this court and the judiciary, would effectively nullify article I, section 6.” Id. In sum, Bani concluded that “the legislature’s 
intent to preclude judicial review of [Hawai' i’s sex offender 
registration and notification statute] violate[d] the doctrine of ‘separation of powers[.]’” Id. 
The United State Supreme Court has similarly held that
 
if “Congress created a phalanx of non-Article III tribunals
 equipped to handle the entire business of the Article III courts
 
31
 Article I, section 6 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides that 
“[t]he right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed
without the showing of a compelling state interest. The legislature shall take affirmative steps to implement this right.” 
25
         
 
        
           
            
          
         
         
          
          
           
  
         
         
         
            
           
               
            
          
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
without any Article III supervision or control and without
 
evidence of valid and specific legislative necessities[,]” such a
 situation would violate the separation of powers doctrine. 
Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n v. Schor, 478 U.S. 833, 855
 (1986). Additionally, it has been said that when delegations of
 quasi-judicial functions to an administrative agency allow for
 “judicial review and full respect for due process[,]” “the
 Constitution does not require that [federal courts] strike down
 statutes, otherwise having a reasonable legislative purpose, that
 invest administrative agencies with regulatory functions
 previously filled by judge and jury.” Patlex Corp. v.
 
Mossinghoff, 758 F.2d 594, 604-05 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (emphasis
 added); see also Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe
 Line Co., 458 U.S. 50, 69 n.23 (1982) (“[W]hen Congress assigns
 . . . matters to administrative agencies, . . . it has generally
 provided, and we have suggested that it may be required to
 provide, for . . . judicial review.”).
32
 
32 These cases are cited for general separation of powers
 
propositions. The question of whether a claim involves private or public
rights was not dispositive in these cases. Under federal law, public rights
 encompass “matters arising between the Government and persons subject to its
authority in connection with the performance of constitutional functions of
the executive or legislative departments.” Thomas v. Union Carbide
 
Agricultural Products Co. , 473 U.S. 568, 585 (1985) (citation omitted).
Private rights generally involve “the liability of one individual to another
 under the law as defined.” Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
 
omitted).
 
The Court has “rejected any attempt to make determinative for
[purposes of determining whether Congress can withdraw certain cases from
Article III courts] the distinction between public rights and private
rights[.]” Id. at 853-84. The “theory that the public rights/private rights
dichotomy . . . provides a bright-line test for determining the requirements
of Article III” has not commanded a majority of the Court. Id. at 585-586.
 
See also Commodity Futures , 478 U.S. at 853 (“[T]his Court has rejected any
attempt to make determinative for Article III purposes the distinction between
public rights and private rights . . . .) (internal citation omitted). In any
(continued...)
 
26
         
      
       
         
       
        
       
        
        
        
       
         
       
            
         
        
         
           
            
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Along the same lines, some state courts have held that,
 
although the legislature may delegate judicial power to a
 
legislative agency, it may not preclude final judicial review of
 the agency’s decisions. See e.g., Ashbury v. Lombardi, 846
 
S.W.2d 196, 200 (Mo. 1993) (“[W]hile the legislature may allow
 for judicial or quasi-judicial decision-making by legislative or
 executive (administrative) agencies, it may not preclude judicial
 review of those decisions[;] [n]or may the legislature alter the
 principal power of the judiciary to make the final review.”). 
McHugh v. Santa Monica Rent Control Bd., 777 P.2d 91, 102 (Cal.
 1989), cogently explains the separation of powers doctrine when
 an administrative agency is given judicial power:
 
Our  constitutional  provision  confining  “judicial
 
powers”  to  the  courts  .  .  .  has  counterparts  in  most  other
state  constitutions,  as  well  as  the  federal  Constitution.
.  .  .  Modern  courts,  however,  have  not  rigidly  construed
these  provisions.   Instead,  a  more  tolerant  approach  to  the
delegation  of  judicial  powers  has  emerged  out  of  a  perceived
necessity  to  accommodate  administrative  adjudication  of
certain  disputes  and  thereby  to  cope  with  increasing  demands
on  our  traditional  judicial  system.
T
he accommodating view of modern courts, however,
generally has been conditioned by two limiting principles,
one procedural and the other substantive . First, our sister
state cases, like our own universally recognize the
constitutional necessity of the “principle of check.” They
hold the availability of judicial review of administrative
decisions is sufficient to satisfy the “principle of check. ”
The substantive limitation is[, . . . w]hen an
executive board has regulatory functions, it may hear and
determine controversies which are incidental thereto, but if
the duty is primarily to decide questions of legal right
between private parties, the function belongs to the
judiciary . . . . The creation of an executive board is
 justified if its service is to determine and maintain a
public right or interest. To accomplish its purposes
judicial powers may be necessarily exerted. But they must
 
32(...continued)
event, strictures imposed by the United States Supreme Court with respect to
Article III courts as opposed to non-Article III tribunals and the case law
thereunder are not binding on Hawai 'i courts with respect to judicial review 
under the Hawai 'i constitution. 
27
         
         
             
      
    
         
        
             
            
              
          
            
             
      
           
         
          
          
       
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
concern matters of an executive character. They are proper
if it may fairly be said that there is need of them in order
to produce an efficient and effective administrative
enforcement of the public interest.
 
(Citations and footnotes omitted.) (Emphases added).
 
It would appear from the foregoing that separation of
 
powers concerns may be implicated where the legislature vests an
 
administrative agency with adjudicatory power and precludes
 judicial review of the determinations made by the agency in that
 capacity.
33 Without judicial review, there would be no “check”
 
on the propriety of the agency’s actions under the law and the
 agency could be left to decide the legality of its own actions. 
See id. at 107 (stating that “the ‘principle of check’” is
 respected “by providing for judicial review of administrative
 determinations”). Thus, if the legislature delegates judicial
 power to an administrative agency and precludes judicial review
 of the legality of the agency’s own actions, a separation of
 powers issue would arise.
 
33 While “[t]he interpretation of the meaning of statutes, as applied
 
to justiciable controversies, is exclusively a judicial function[,]” United
 
States v. Am. Trucking Ass’ns , 310 U.S. 534, 544 (1940), “‘[t]he power to hear
and determine, or to ascertain facts decided by the application of rules of
law to the ascertained facts, is undoubtedly a part of the judicial power or a
judicial function[,]’” but it is not an exclusive judicial function, Great
Lakes Transfer, LLC v. Porter County Highway Dept. , 952 N.E.2d 235, 242 (Ind.
App. 2011) (quoting 1 Am. Jr. Administrative Law § 168). As noted,
 
“Administrative agencies may hear and determine, or
ascertain facts and decide by the application of rules of law to
the ascertained facts, and even determine the facts upon which
their jurisdiction depends, and the power exercised by them is not
judicial in the sense of a violation of the principle of
separation of powers, but is administrative or quasi-judicial.”
 
Id.
 
28
         
 
          
           
         
              
          
            
         
            
         
            
           
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D.
 
The ICA and Respondent did not view the issue in such a
 
manner. According to the ICA and Respondent, because the 
legislature has the power to establish the subject matter jurisdiction of the courts and to create or deny appellate review, the alleged prohibition against judicial review of protest decisions under HRS chapter 103F per se cannot present a separation of powers issue. See Hamamoto, 125 Hawai' i at 207, 
257 P.3d at 220; see also Response at 7 (“Since the Hawai' i 
Constitution authorizes the [l]egislature to determine the jurisdiction of the courts, it cannot, as a matter of logic, pose a separation of powers problem for the [l]egislature to exercise this power.”). Contrary to the ICA’s and Respondent’s positions, subject matter jurisdiction cannot be relied upon to determine whether, in granting an administrative agency judicial power without allowing for judicial review, the legislature violated the separation of powers doctrine.
34
 It is well established that the legislature has the
 
power to set the subject matter jurisdiction of the courts.35
 
34 As noted supra, “the question as to the constitutionality of a 
statute is not for legislative determination, but is vested in the judiciary,
and a statute cannot survive constitutional challenge based on legislativedeclaration alone.” Del Rio , 87 Hawai 'i at 304, 955 P.2d at 97. Accordingly, 
a legislative “declaration” in a statute allegedly providing that a courtlacks judicial review of an agency decision is not immune from a challengethat the “declaration” is itself unconstitutional because it vests judicialpower in an administrative agency and does not provide for judicial review.Id. 
35
 Even if the legislature attempted to preclude judicial review of
 
an agency’s decisions, it has been said “that even where the intent of
 Congress was to preclude judicial review, a limited jurisdiction exists in the
court to review actions which on their face are plainly in excess of statutory
(continued...)
 
29
         
           
          
          
          
          
           
            
           
          
            
           
            
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
However, the ICA appears to have erred in deciding that, because 
the legislature delineates the subject matter jurisdiction, the legislature could automatically preclude judicial review of the protest decision, without implicating the separation of powers doctrine. Hamamoto, 125 Hawai' i at 206, 257 P.3d at 219. Under 
the ICA’s approach, the legislature could give administrative agencies judicial power, and prohibit any judicial review of administrative decisions, all in an appropriate exercise of its power to set subject matter jurisdiction. 
V.
 
In order to determine whether there is a separation of
 
powers violation, it must be decided whether the legislature
 delegated a judicial function to an administrative agency; here,
 the DOE in its capacity as a procurement agency. It would seem
 that, to the extent HRS chapter 103F delegates to the DOE
 authority to interpret and to apply HRS chapter 103F and rules
 promulgated thereunder in deciding disputes raised by protesting
 parties, the legislature vested the DOE with judicial power.
36
  
35(...continued)
authority.” Briscoe v. Bell , 432 U.S. 404, 408 (1977) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted). As discussed infra, Petitioners argue that
Respondent failed to follow the procedures delineated under HRS chapter 103F
and thus raise the argument that Respondent acted beyond its statutory
authority.
 
36
 There is no doubt the DOE, as the purchasing agency, exercises
 
judicial power. To reiterate, HRS § 103F-501 (Supp. 2005) allows the
purchasing agency to decide a “protest” brought by a person aggrieved by an
 award of a contract because of “a purchasing agency’s [alleged] failure to
follow procedures established by [HRS chapter 103F], rules adopted by the
policy board, or a request for proposals in selecting a provider and awarding
a purchase of health and human services contract[.]” HRS 103F-501(a).
Pursuant to HRS § 103F-501(c), the protest must be submitted to the purchasing
agency which “may settle and resolve the protest by” the means set forth
 
(continued...)
 
30
         
  
          
           
          
             
           
          
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
For just as this court is the ultimate interpreter of our 
constitution, Bani, 97 Hawai' i at 291 n.4, 36 P.3d at 1261 n.4, 
this court is the final arbiter of our statutory law, see Rana v. Bishop Ins. of Hawaii, Inc., 6 Haw. App. 1, 10, 713 P.2d 1363, 1369 (1985) (“The state courts are the final arbiters of the State’s own law.”) (Brackets, quotation marks, and citation omitted.). Morever, “[t]he quintessential power of the judiciary is the power to make final determinations of questions of law” and “[t]his power is nondelegable power resting exclusively with the judiciary.” Ashbury, 846 S.W.2d at 200 (citing Marbury, 5 
U.S. 137 (other citations omitted)) (emphasis added). Insofar as
 the purchasing agency is charged with determining whether it
 failed to “follow procedures established by [HRS § 103F-501,]”
 HRS § 103F-501(a) and must decide whether the purchasing agency
 itself violated the law, i.e. “fail[ed] to comply with section
 103F-402 or 103F-403, rules[], or a [RFP],” HRS 103F-502, the
 agency makes “. . . determinations of questions of law.” Id.
 
VI.
 
A. 
Having decided that the DOE has been vested with
 
judicial power insofar as it interprets and applies the
 
36(...continued)
thereunder.
 
Again, if the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the
head of the purchasing agency must promptly “issue a decision in writing[,]”
 
which becomes “final and conclusive” “unless a request for reconsideration is
submitted to the chief procurement officer[.]” HRS § 103F-501(d) & (e). “A
 request for reconsideration may be made only to correct a purchasing agency’s
failure to comply with section 103F-402 or 103F-403, rules adopted to
implement the sections, or a request for proposal, if applicable.” HRS 103F­502.
 
31
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provisions of HRS chapter 103F in protestors’ disputes, it must
 
be decided whether HRS chapter 103F precludes judicial review of
 the agency’s decisions regarding its own actions in such
 disputes. 
This court has said that “there is a policy favoring
 
judicial review of administrative actions.” In re Matter of
 
Hawaii Gov’t Emps.’ Ass’n, Local 152, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, 63 Haw.
 85, 87, 621 P.2d 361, 363 (1980) (HGEA); accord Ariyoshi v. Haw.
 Pub. Emp’t Relations Bd., 5 Haw. App. 533, 538, 704 P.2d 917, 923
 (1985). In that regard, a civil complaint, such as the one filed
 by Petitioner, ostensibly falls within the prescribed
 jurisdiction of our courts. In Sherman, 63 Haw. at 58, 621 P.2d
 at 349, this court explained that the legislature established
 subject matter jurisdiction of the courts in enacting HRS § 603­21.5 and HRS § 633-27. HRS § 603-21.5 (Supp. 2005) provides in
 pertinent part that the several circuit courts shall have
 jurisdiction, “except as otherwise expressly provided by
 statute,” of “[c]ivil actions and proceedings[.]”
 
According to Sherman, “the circuit court has
 
jurisdiction over all civil causes of action unless precluded by
 the State Constitution or by statute.” 63 Haw. at 58, 621 P.2d
 at 349. Thus, the courts have subject matter jurisdiction over
 “civil actions and proceedings[,]” and it is presumed that the 
32
         
          
          
           
              
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
courts have jurisdiction, unless the legislature “expressly”
 
provides otherwise by statute. HRS § 603-21.5.37
 
B.
 
Consequently, the question is whether HRS chapter 103F
 
divests circuit courts of jurisdiction over appeals from an
 agency decision. As indicated, HRS §§ 103F–501 and 103F–502 set
 forth the steps for a party to protest a contract award. The
 party submits a letter of protest to the head of the purchasing
 agency. To reiterate, if the protest is denied, the party then
 has the option of submitting a request for reconsideration to the
 chief procurement officer, who can either confirm the previous
 decision or reopen the protest. If a party does not file a
 request for reconsideration, the decision of the head of the head
 of the purchasing agency is “final and conclusive.” HRS § 103F­501(e). If, however, a party does file a request for
 reconsideration, the chief procurement officer may uphold the
 decision of the head of the purchasing agency or reopen the
 protest. HRS § 103F-502(c). The decision of the chief
 procurement officer under HRS § 103F-502(c) is to be “final and
 conclusive.” HRS § 103F-502(d).
 
Preliminarily, it may be noted that the “final and
 
conclusive” language in HRS § 103F-502(d) would not appear to 
37
 HRS § 661-1 (1993) gives the circuit courts and district courts,
 
“except as otherwise provided by statute or rule,” original jurisdiction to
 
determine “[a]ll claims against the State founded upon any statute of the
 State[.]” This statute was not raised by the parties, and we need not reach
its applicability, if any, in these circumstances.
 
33
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
decisively absolve the purchasing agency’s decision under HRS
 
chapter 103F from judicial review. See Schneider v. United
 
States, 27 F.3d 1327, 1331 (8th Cir. 1994) (noting that where the
 statute states that the agency decision is “final,” it only
 prevents further administrative review) (citing Shaughnessy v.
 Pedreiro, 349 U.S. 48, 51–52 (1955)); see also Lindahl v. Office
 of Personnel Mgmt., 470 U.S. 768, 778-79 (1985) (holding that the
 phrase “final and conclusive” did not preclude judicial review
 altogether); Meaney v. Sacramento Hous. & Redevelopment Agency,
 13 Cal. App. 4th 566, 578-79 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993) (concluding
 that “final and conclusive” did not “preclude judicial review of
 the procedures followed by the agency and the local legislative
 body in making the determinations or of the question whether the
 determinations comply with [the statute]”). 
Based on the foregoing authorities, the phrase “final
 
and conclusive,” HRS § 103F-502(d), is insufficient to evince
 legislative intent to preclude judicial review of the purchasing
 agency’s decision altogether. See Lindahl, 470 U.S. at 771, 779­
80 (stating that “Congress typically employs language far more
 unambiguous and comprehensive” than “final and conclusive and []
 not subject to review” when it “intends to bar judicial review
 altogether[.]”); see also Heikkila v. Barber, 345 U.S. 229, 233
 (1953) (noting that the term “final” is ambiguous inasmuch as “it
 might refer to the doctrine requiring exhaustion of
 administrative remedies before judicial process can be
 
34
         
 
         
           
            
           
            
            
         
             
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
invoked”).38 It would appear from the foregoing cases that
 
courts generally require express language in addition to the
 
words “final and conclusive” to conclude that the legislature
 intended to preclude judicial review of an agency’s decisions. 
Therefore, under the views expressed supra, the “final and
 conclusive” language in HRS § 103F-502(c) would not preclude
 judicial review. Accordingly, nothing in HRS § 103F-502(c)
 expressly excludes judicial review.
 
C.
 
Here, no dispute arose as to whether Petitioner’s
 
request for reconsideration was timely. Because Petitioner’s
 request for reconsideration was denied by the DOE, Respondent
 maintains HRS § 103F–504 declares that “[t]he procedures and
 remedies . . ., and the rules adopted by the policy board, shall
 be the exclusive means available for persons aggrieved . . . to
 resolve their concerns” governs.
 
However, this language, on its face, does not
 
definitively settle the question of whether judicial review is
 precluded. (Emphasis added.) The statute suggests that the
 administrative procedure is the exclusive method to “resolve [the
 parties’] . . . concerns,” id., relating to a contract award, but
 
38
 Under federal law, there is a “strong presumption” that Congress
 
intends there to be judicial review of administrative agency action, see Bowen
v. Michigan Academy of Family Physicians , 476 U.S. 667, 670 (1986), and the
government bears a “heavy burden” when arguing that Congress meant to prohibit
all judicial review, see Dunlop v. Bachowski , 421 U.S. 560, 567 (1975).
Indeed, “only upon a showing of ‘clear and convincing evidence’ of a contrary
legislative intent should the [federal] courts restrict access to judicial
review.” Abbott Labs. v. Gardner , 387 U.S. 136, 141 (1967) overruled on other
grounds , Califano v. Sanders , 430 U.S. 99 (1977).
 
35
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
it does not expressly exclude judicial review. The term
 
“concerns” is defined as, inter alia, “a care or trouble”;
 “marked interest or regard”; “an uneasy state of blended
 interest, uncertainty, and apprehension”; or “matter for
 consideration[.]” Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 238
 
(10th ed. 1989). Thus, the term “concerns” is general and
 undifferentiating. It lacks the singular focus that would attach
 to the gravity of excluding judicial review. The exclusivity of
 remedy provision, then, would not compel the conclusion that
 judicial review was abrogated. 
Moreover, legislative history supports this view. See 
State v. Entrekin, 98 Hawai' i 221, 227, 47 P.3d 336, 342 (2002) 
(“Legislative history may be consulted to confirm an interpretation of a statute.”) HRS chapter 103F was enacted in 1997 to create a procedure for the purchasing of health and human services (chapter 103F), and a procedure governing the awards of grants and subsidies (chapter 42F). According to the legislature, this “simpler, standardized process” would ensure the “fair and equitable treatment of all persons who apply to, and are paid to provide those services on the agencies’ behalf” and “optimize information-sharing, planning, and service delivery efforts.” 1997 Haw Sess. Laws Act 190, § 1 at 351 (emphasis added). Additionally, the purpose of the bill enacting HRS chapter 103F “provid[ed] for a single source of public procurement policy that will promote greater fairness, efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.” Stand. Comm. 
36
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Report No. 940, in 1997 House Journal, at 1461 (emphases added);
 
see Stand. Comm. Report No. 1196, in 1997 Senate Journal, at 1348
 (noting that the purpose of the bill is to improve the process
 for expending funds for grants, subsidies, and purchases of
 services by providing a process to be used for grants and
 subsidies for public purposes, and a separate process for
 purchase of health and human services).
 
The foregoing legislative expressions indicate that
 
proceedings were established to streamline the awarding of health
 and human services contracts. But, nothing in the legislative
 history expressly states that the legislature intended the chief
 procurement officer’s protest decision be shielded from judicial
 review. Rather, on its face, the legislative intent that “all
 persons who apply to . . . provide [health] and human services”
 be afforded “fair and equitable treatment” would countenance
 against an intent to vest the purchasing agency with final,
 unreviewable decision making power in its own disputes, with a
 person who applied to provide services. Such a process would not
 be perceived as fair or as equitable. Empowering one party to
 the dispute to decide the outcome without recourse by the other
 party would taint the protest procedure as partial and
 inequitable. This would also undermine the legislature’s intent
 to foster “accountability,” of the agency. Accordingly,
 Respondent’s argument, that the legislative history constitutes
 “clear and convincing evidence” that judicial review is
 precluded, is unpersuasive, and judicial review would not be
 
37
         
           
         
             
            
               
               
             
         
          
 
          
               
         
      
      
         
       
       
   
       
      
        
      
        
        
    
       
       
    
    
            
         
            
             
           
           
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prohibited by the text of HRS §§ 103F-501 and 103F-504.39
 
D.
 
Significantly, judicial review of an administrative
 
decision may be available even in the face of language that
 
unambiguously precludes judicial review. For example, the Court
 of Appeals of New York concluded that a statute providing that an
 agency’s decision “shall be final and conclusive, and not subject
 to further review in any court” precluded review of “the merits
 
39 At oral argument, it was noted that there is nothing in the 
legislative history to indicate the legislature intended to prevent judicial
review under chapter 103F. Respondent responded that “in 1996 . . . the legislature . . . request[ed] the state procurement office to prepare a report . . . . The procurement office responded with a detailed report filed in 1996 . . . . Among [the] . . . recommendations was the state procurement office’srecommendation that there not be any judicial review. . . . In 1997, thelegislature followed that recommendation and enacted what is now chapter103F.” MP3: Oral Argument, Hawai 'i Supreme Court, at 35:59-37:27, available
at http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc29742.html .
However, the report referred to by Respondent at oral argument was
not made a part of the record in this case. In addition, the legislature did
 reference the “recommendations by State Procurement Office” as follows, but
 precluding judicial review is not among them:
 
(1)	 Deleting the definitions of “grants” and “subsidies”
 from the new chapter on Purchases of Health and Human
Services;
 
(2)	 Amending the definition of “health and human services”
 to mean services intended to maintain or improve
health or social well-being;
 
(3)	 Expanding the duties of the Chief Procurement Officer
to provide a statewide orientation and training
program for all parties on all matters relating to
carrying out the purposes of this chapter;
 
(4)	 Limiting the basis for reconsideration of the head of
a purchasing agency’s decision on a protest to non­compliance with statute or rule;
 
(5)	 Requiring each recipient or provider of services to
indemnify and hold the State harmless; and
 
(6)	 Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments for
purposes of style and clarity.
 
Stand. Comm. Report No. 940, in 1997 House Journal, at 1461. Hence,
significantly absent from the legislature’s reference to the state procurement
office report is any recommendation to abolish judicial review. As noted, HRS
 § 103F does not expressly preclude judicial review. In addition to the other
 reasons set forth supra, we decline to conclude, as Respondent suggests, that
the legislature enacted HRS chapter 103F with an intent to preclude judicial
review when there is nothing in the statute or its legislative history
expressly evincing such an intent.
 
38
         
          
           
               
           
            
         
           
         
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of the determination of the [agency].” New York City Dep’t. of
 
Envtl. Prot. v. New York City Civil Serv. Comm’n, 579 N.E.2d
 
1385, 1386 (N.Y. 1991). That court explained that “the
 Legislature is permitted to restrict the availability of judicial
 review” but that there must be “clear and convincing evidence” of
 such intent. Id. at 1387. New York City Department concluded
 
that the language of the statute and legislative history
 evidenced the legislature’s intent to preclude judicial review of
 the agency’s decision. Id.
 
However, the New York City Department court stated that
 
the inquiry did not end there. Id. That court held that
 
judicial review is required even in the face of such legislative
 intent to preclude judicial review in two instances. “First, if
 a constitutional right is implicated, some sort of judicial
 review must be afforded the aggrieved party.”
40 Id. at 1387. 
“Second, judicial review is mandated when the agency has acted
 illegally, unconstitutionally, or in excess of its jurisdiction.” 
Id. For example, “a court should step in if an agency acts in
 
violation of the [c]onstitution, statutes or its own
 regulations.” Id. at 1388 (emphasis added). This statement
 
would apply to Petitioner’s claims in the instant case alleging
 
40
 Similarly, in Johnson v. Robison , 415 U.S. 361, 367 (1974), the
 
Supreme Court’s holding that the language “shall be final and conclusive and
 
no . . . court of the United States shall have power or jurisdiction to review
any such decision[,]” “appear[ed] to be aimed at review only of those
decisions of law or fact that arise in the administration by the Veterans’
Administration of a statute providing benefits for veterans.” Johnson
 
concluded that such language did “not extend the prohibitions of that section
to actions challenging the constitutionality of laws providing benefits for
veterans.” Id. at 374.
 
39
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent acted outside of its statutory authority. Thus,
 
assuming, arguendo, HRS chapter 103F did include language
 expressly precluding judicial review of the agency’s decision, or
 that could be deemed as such, it should not bar review of whether
 the DOE violated the Constitution, statutes, or its own
 regulations in awarding the contract, as alleged by Petitioner. 
Id. Thus, judicial review would not be precluded in this
 
instance. 
E.
 
Furthermore, to conclude that HRS chapter 103F
 
abrogates judicial review of whether the purchasing agency
 interpreted the law correctly or complied with the law in the
 instant circumstances may render the statute violative of the
 separation of powers doctrine. As related before, where the
 legislature delegates judicial power to an administrative agency,
 there is a “necessity of the ‘principle of check.’” Monica Rent
 
Control Bd., 777 P.2d at 102. The “availability of judicial
 review of administrative decisions is sufficient to satisfy the
 ‘principle of check.’” Id. This is persuasive inasmuch as it
 
would seem fundamentally unfair and inequitable, see 1997 Haw
 Sess. Laws Act 190, § 1 at 351 (stating that HRS chapter 103F was
 intended to facilitate “fair and equitable treatment of all
 persons who apply to,” provide services), and contrary to “full
 respect for due process,” Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n, 478 
40
         
          
            
           
           
       
           
           
          
              
          
           
           
     
        
          
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
U.S. at 855, for an agency to determine the propriety of its own
 
actions in a legal dispute with an adverse party.41 Because the
 
statute as construed does not exclude judicial review, it would
 not implicate the separation of powers doctrine, and, thus, HRS
 chapter 103F would not violate that doctrine, as Petitioner
 suggests.
 
VII.
 
The availability of judicial review in this case is
 
also supported by constitutional imperative. Hawai' i’s multi-
tiered court system is a product of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Importantly, unlike in the federal court system, the Hawai' i 
Constitution does not leave it to the legislative body to
 establish courts other than the supreme court.
42 Rather, the
 
mandate for a judiciary consisting of trial and appellate courts
 proceeds from the constitution itself. The Consitution states in
 pertinent part, that “[t]he judicial power of the State shall be 
41 Respondent relies on Sifagaloa v. Bd. of Trustees , 74 Haw. 181,
 
188-92, 840 P.2d 367, 371-72 (1992) for the proposition that an agency may
determine the propriety of its own actions. In Sifagaloa this court
determined that the fact trustees of the employment retirement fund (ERS) have
purportedly conflicting obligations of awarding retirement benefits and
preserving the financial integrity of the ERS fund did not disqualify the
trustees from making decisions with respect to awarding benefits. However, in
 Sifagaloa , the trustees’ decision with respect to the award of retirement
benefits was subject to judicial review. Id. at 185-86, 840 P.2d at 369-70.
Unlike in Sifagaloa , Petitioners do not assert the agency may not
preliminarily determine the propriety of its own actions, but rather, that it
would violate separate of powers to preclude judicial review of the agency’s
decision. Thus, Sifagaloa is inapposite.
 
42
 Consequently, Hawai 'i courts are not limited by the dichotomy 
between “article III [of the United States Constitution] courts” and non-article III courts, or decisions in respect thereof, that characterizes thefederal court system. 
41
         
           
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
vested in one supreme court, one intermediate appellate court,
 
circuit courts, [and] district courts . . . .” Haw. Const. art
 VI, § 1 (1978).
43 The Constitution also establishes the number
 
of justices that may serve on the supreme court, provides for the
 appointment and removal of justices and judges, and delegates the
 administration of the courts to the chief justice of the supreme
 court. See id. In State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647 P.2d 705
 
(1982), this court explained that, although the exact nature of
 the “judicial power” is not defined in the constitution, the
 “‘inherent power of the court is the power to protect itself; the
 power to administer justice whether any previous form of remedy
 has been granted or not; the power to promulgate rules for its
 practice; and the power to provide process where none exists.’” 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712 (1982) (quoting In re Bruen, 172 P.
 1152, 1153 (1918)). 
Thus, the existence, structure, and composition of our 
judiciary is established by the Hawai' i Constitution and cannot 
be altered by the legislature. This indicates that the power to administer justice and adjudicate disputes that is conferred upon the courts is presumed and will be available to the people of the state. The constitutional power to administer justice, see id., is implicated in this case. Inherent in that power is, by corollary, that parties should have appropriate access to the courts of this state in resolving disputes. 
43
 Article IV, section 1 goes on to authorize “such other courts” as
 
the legislature may from time to time establish.
 
42
         
             
             
            
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VIII.
 
A.
 
Inasmuch as judicial review is not prohibited, the
 
issue becomes what type of judicial review is allowed.44 HRS
 
chapter 103D, which regulates government procurement contracts,
 
except for health and human services contracts covered by chapter
 103F, expressly provides that a party aggrieved by a final
 decision of a hearings officer may apply for judicial review of
 the agency’s decision through the procedures of HRS chapter 91,
 cf. n.18, supra. HRS § 103D-710 (Supp. 2010). 
Unlike HRS chapter 103D, HRS chapter 103F does not
 
delineate the nature of judicial review available. It may be
 argued that the fact that HRS chapter 103D expressly provides for
 judicial review while HRS chapter 103F does not, suggests that
 the legislature intended to preclude judicial review under HRS
 chapter 103F. However, as stated before, there is a policy
 favoring judicial review of administrative agencies, see HGEA, 63
 Haw. at 87, 621 P.2d at 363, and the courts of this state have
 jurisdiction over all civil actions unless “expressly provided by
 statute,” HRS § 603-21.5. To reiterate, HRS § 103F-502(c) and
 HRS § 103F-504 do not expressly preclude judicial review. In
 addition, the general and broad phrase “resolve their concerns”
 in the exclusivity of remedies provision, HRS § 103F-504, does
 
44
 It is plain that HRS § 91-14 would not provide a right to appeal 
the agency decision. See Alaka 'i I, 2007 WL 158980, at *1 (determining that
the protest under HRS chapter 103F was not an agency hearing, and, thus,
Petitioner could not appeal from that decision under HRS § 91-14). 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not convey the singular intent to bar judicial review. The 
legislative intent to fairly and equitably treat persons who apply to provide services under HRS chapter 103F and to ensure accountability of the purchasing agency countenance against construing the statute as vesting the agency with sole and unreviewable authority to determine the propriety of its own actions in a dispute with a protesting party. Furthermore, as discussed supra, to construe the statute as precluding judicial review would raise serious questions regarding the doctrine of separation of powers and the potential contravention of the judicial power vested in the courts by article VI, section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution. In light of the foregoing, it cannot 
be concluded that judicial review is prohibited. 
It would appear such review would be available, through
 
a declaratory judgment action brought pursuant to HRS § 632-1. A
 declaratory judgment action is a necessary remedy under the
 circumstances of this case. Thus, after the procurement decision
 is “final” and not subject to further review by the
 administrative officer, the protesting party should be able to
 maintain a declaratory judgment action in the circuit court to
 contest the decision.
 
B.
 
HRS § 632-1 provides that declaratory judgment relief
 
may be granted “where the court is satisfied that antagonistic
 
44
         
          
             
               
              
            
           
             
          
               
            
  
            
          
          
            
            
            
           
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
claims are present between the parties involved[.]”45 In the
 
instant case, Petitioner timely brought a declaratory judgment
 
action against Hamamoto,46 in her official capacity as
 
Superintendent of Education, because there were “antagonistic
 claims” between Petitioner and the DOE concerning the awarding of
 contracts. 
HRS § 632-1 additionally provides that, “[w]here,
 
however, a statute provides a special form of remedy for a
 specific type of case, that statutory remedy shall be
 followed[.]” HRS chapter 103F does contain a procedure for
 resolving the concerns of a party. As discussed, however, the
 procedure for resolving general “concerns” in HRS § 103F-504 is
 not a special form of remedy that substitutes for judicial
 review. See discussion supra. In sum, judicial review of HRS
 
chapter 103F should be available in this case by way of
 declaratory action pursuant to HRS § 632-1.
47
 
45 HRS § 91-14(a) provides an avenue for judicial review in a 
“contested case[.]” As noted, this court previously held that this is not a 
contested case. See Alaka 'i I, 2007 WL 158980, at *1-2. Hence, HRS § 91-14 
is inapplicable. In any event, HRS § 91-14 does not “prevent resort to other means of review, redress, [or] relief[,]” such as pursuant to HRS § 632-1. 
46 Thus, we are not faced with a question of timeliness with respect
 
to the filing of the instant declaratory action. Parties have an incentive to
 seek judicial review expeditiously inasmuch as delay may render any challenge
to an agency’s award of a contract moot. The effect of any delay should be
decided by the circuit court based on the facts and circumstances of each
particular case.
 
47
 HRS § 632-1 also provides that “the mere fact that an actual or
 
threatened controversy is susceptible of relief through a general common law
remedy, a remedy equitable in nature, or an extraordinary legal remedy,
whether such remedy is recognized or regulated by statute or not , shall not
debar a party from the privilege of obtaining a declaratory judgment in any
case where the other essentials to such relief are present.” That language
suggests that declaratory relief may be available even when other forms of
relief exist. HRS § 632-1 (emphasis added). This is consistent with
 
(continued...)
 
45
         
           
         
             
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
IX.
 
The ICA relied on Travelers Ins. Co. v. Hawaii Roofing, 
Inc., 64 Haw. 380, 385, 641 P.2d 1333, 1337 (1982), in concluding 
that declaratory relief was unavailable because HRS chapter 103F provides a specific statutory remedy that must be followed. Hamamoto, 125 Hawai' i at 207, 257 P.3d at 220. But, Travelers 
Ins. is distinguishable. In Travelers Ins., a dispute arose over which of two insurance carriers was responsible for payments to a workers’ compensation claimant. 64 Haw. at 381, 641 P.2d at 1334-35. In proceedings before the Disability Compensation Division, it was determined that Travelers Insurance Company (Travelers) was the responsible carrier. Id. at 382, 641 P.2d at 
1335. 
Travelers appealed to the Labor and Industrial
 
Relations Appeals Board (the Appeals Board) but at the same time,
 sought relief in the circuit court by way of declaratory action. 
Id. at 382-83, 641 P.2d at 1335. The other insurance carrier
 (HIG) moved to dismiss the declaratory action for want of
 jurisdiction. Id. That motion was denied, summary judgment was
 
granted in Travelers’ favor, and HIG appealed to this court. Id.
 
at 383, 641 P.2d at 1335-36. This court determined that
 declaratory relief was not available because the law already
 provides for judicial review in workers’ compensation cases, by
 
47(...continued)
l
egislative intent, inasmuch as the legislature amended the act in 1945 to
“afford greater relief” by declaratory judgment. Dejetley v. Kaho 'ohalahala ,
122 Hawai 'i 251, 268, 226 P.3d 421, 438 (2010) (quoting H. Stand. Com. Rep.
No. 76, in 1945 House Journal, at 566). 
46
         
     
       
      
       
         
          
           
       
        
           
         
   
          
             
            
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
way of HRS § 386-73. 
Pursuant to HRS § 386-73 (Supp. 2007),”48 “‘the
 
director of labor and industrial relations [(director)] shall
 
have original jurisdiction over all controversies and disputes
 arising under th[at] chapter.’” Id. at 383, 641 P.2d at 1336. 
The statute additionally provided that “‘[t]here shall be a right
 of appeal from the decisions of the director to the appellate
 board and thence to the supreme court[.]’”
49 Id. Because HRS §
 
386-73 already provided for an appeal to the supreme court,
 Travelers should have followed this course rather than also
 filing a declaratory action under HRS § 632-1.
 
Unlike in the instant case, the workers’ compensation
 
scheme in Travelers sets out an express and specific procedure by
 which a party may obtain judicial review. HRS § 386-73. This
 court would not allow the party in Travelers Ins. to circumvent 
48 HRS § 386-73 provides as follows:
 
Unless otherwise provided, the director of labor and
industrial relations shall have original jurisdiction over
all controversies and disputes arising under this chapter.
The decisions of the director shall be enforceable by the
circuit court as provided in section 386-91. There shall be
 
a right of appeal from the decisions of the director to the
appellate board and thence to the intermediate appellate
court, subject to chapter 602, as provided in sections
386-87 and 386-88 , but in no case shall an appeal operate as
a supersedeas or stay unless the appellate board or the
appellate court so orders.
 
49
 At the time Travelers was decided, HRS § 386-73 provided for
 
appeals to the appellate board and “thence to the supreme court[,]” but not to
 the intermediate appellate court. HRS § 386-73 now provides for appeals “to
 the appellate board and thence to the intermediate appellate court.”
 
47
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that procedure by attempting to obtain judicial review through
 
the use of HRS § 632-1. Here, HRS chapter 103F, as construed,
 does not expressly prescribe a form of judicial review. Hence,
 Travelers Ins. does not prohibit declaratory relief in the
 instant case. Travelers Ins., then, is not controlling. 
X.
 
Next, it must be considered whether Petitioner may sue 
to enforce HRS chapter 103F under the declaratory judgment statute. In order for a party to sue for enforcement under HRS § 632-1, HRS chapter 103F must provide for an express or implied private right of action. County of Hawaii v. Ala Loop 
Homeowners, 123 Hawai' i 391, 407 n.20, 235 P.3d 1103, 1119 n.20 
(2010) (“The private right of action inquiry focuses on the question of whether any private party can sue to enforce a statute, while the standing inquiry focuses on whether a particular private party is an appropriate plaintiff.”) This court applies “three factors in determining whether a statute provides a private right of action[,]” with the “understanding that legislative intent appears to be the determinative factor.” Whitey’s Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai' i 302, 313, 132 P.3d 1213, 1224 (2006). This court 
considers, first, whether “‘the plaintiff [is] one of the class for whose especial benefit the statute was enacted; . . . that is, does the statute create a . . . right in favor of the plaintiff.’” Id. at 312, 132 P.2d at 1223 (quoting Reliable 
48
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Collection Agency, Ltd. v. Cole, 59 Haw. 503, 507, 584 P.2d 107,
 
109 (1978)) (brackets omitted). Second, this court considers
 whether there is “‘any indication of legislative intent, explicit
 or implicit, either to create such a remedy or to deny one.’” 
Id. (quoting Reliable Collection Agency, 59 Haw. at 507, 584 P.2d
 at 109). Third, whether “‘it consistent with the underlying
 purposes of the legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the
 plaintiff[.]’” Id. (quoting Reliable Collection Agency, 59 Haw.
 
at 507, 584 P.2d at 109). 
Here, Petitioner’s claims are premised on the
 
allegation that there should be judicial review to ascertain
 whether the agency correctly followed the law and regulations in
 awarding contracts. HRS chapter 103F does create a right “in
 favor” of Petitioner, inasmuch as it entitles Petitioner to a
 contract award process that is in compliance with and not in
 excess of HRS chapter 103F and applicable regulations. In other
 words, HRS chapter 103F, by establishing the process in which a
 protester can challenge whether the award abided by statutes,
 regulations, or the RFP, creates a right of the protestor to have
 the process comply with statutes, regulations, and the RFP.
 
As to legislative intent, the legislature expressed the 
intent that the process in HRS chapter 103F “ensure the fair and
 equitable treatment of all persons who apply to . . . provide
 . . . services on the agencies’ behalf[,]” and “to promote . . .
 fairness and accountability.” 1997 Haw Sess. Laws Act 190, § 1 
49
         
 
 
         
           
              
              
           
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 351. Again, it would be fundamentally unfair and inequitable 
and counterproductive of promoting accountability to vest the purchasing agency with final unreviewable power to determine whether the agency itself complied with the law, in a dispute with one of the protesting parties. See HOH, 69 Haw. at 143, 736 
P.2d at 1276 (stating that the administrative agency is not “qualified to adjudicate the propriety of its own action”).
50 
Thus, there is “indication of legislative intent, implicit[ly], . . . to create [] a remedy” for the purchasing agency’s failure to comply with HRS chapter 103F and, correlatively, nothing expressly indicat[es] an intent to “deny one.” Whitey’s Boat 
Cruises, 110 Hawai' i at 313, 132 P.3d at 1224 (2006) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Based on the foregoing, there is a private right of action allowed against the State (i.e., the DOE) specifically challenging a decision made under HRS chapter 103F, as to whether the relevant administrative officers complied with the statutes, rules, and the RFP. 
XI.
 
Regarding its second question, Petitioner asserts that
 
the ICA erred in determining that Petitioner could not maintain a
 negligence claim with respect to Respondent’s decision under 
50
 Respondent argues that in HOH, this court considered whether an
 
agency may determine whether its actions were proper under the constitution.
Since the courts of this state are the final arbiters of statutes and of rules
 having the force of law as well as our constitution, see supra , it would seem
apparent that an agency may not render the final unreviewable determination on
the propriety of its own actions under the law in a dispute with another
person.
 
50
         
         
            
              
        
          
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
chapter 103F. According to Petitioner, the ICA erred inasmuch as
 
(1) the STLA, HRS Chapter 662, provides that the State51 can be 
liable in tort where its employees fail to exercise due care “‘in the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or not such statute or regulation is valid[,]’” (citing Tseu v. Jeyte, 88 Hawai'i 85, 87, 962 P.2d 344, 347 (1998), and (2) although the 
ICA dismissed its tort claim for lack of a private right of action, the STLA, in and of itself, creates a private right of action. Respondent counters that the STLA is a “waiver statute, not a statute establishing private causes of action,” and that the ICA properly concluded that because chapter 103F does not create a private right of action, Petitioner could not sue under the STLA.
52
 “The [STLA], enacted in 1957, is a specific waiver of
 
tort immunity.” Figueroa v. State, 61 Haw. 369, 383, 604 P.2d
 
1198, 1206 (1979). The State waives immunity for liability “in
 the same manner and to the same extent as a private individual
 under like circumstances[.]” HRS § 662-2 (1993). But, “[t]he
 State[] . . . remains immune from liability based upon
 governmental functions for which no private analog exists and
 waives its immunity only to the extent a plaintiff’s claim for
 relief is comparable to a recognized claim for relief against a
 
51
 As Respondent points out, Hamamoto was sued “in her official 
capacity as the only defendant” and “[a] suit against a state official acting
in his [or her] official capacity, is essentially a suit against the State.”Kaho'ohanohano , 114 Hawai 'i at 337, 162 P.3d at 731. 
52
 For the reasons discussed supra, HRS chapter 103F does provide for
 
a private right of action, and the ICA erred in concluding that it did not.
 
51
         
         
              
          
          
         
           
            
           
           
               
             
        
        
            
             
              
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
private person.” Kaho'ohanohano, 117 Hawai' i at 282, 178 P.3d at 
558. This proposition is dispositive of the second question.53
 
Here, there is no private analog to Petitioner’s claim
 
to support a waiver of the State’s immunity for purposes of the
 
STLA. Petitioner does not identify circumstances under which a
 private party could be sued for negligently applying the law,
 rules, or an RFP in awarding a government contract.
 
XII. 
Regarding its third question, Petitioner urges that HRS
 
54
 §§ 602-5(6)  and 603-21.9 afford a court “inherent powers” to
review agency action, and the ICA erred in determining that no
 inherent power exists. Respondent counters that a court must
 have jurisdiction before it may provide a remedy. According to
 Respondent, HRS § 603-21.9 is an “‘enumeration of the inherent
 powers conferred on our circuit courts by the constitution[,]’”
 and “does not, by itself, confer jurisdiction that does not
 otherwise exist.” (Quoting Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 55, 647 P.2d at
 
53 Petitioner maintains that Jeyte decided there was a private right 
of action found by this court pursuant to the STLA “for a landlord damaged due
to negligent investigation of a housing discrimination complaint by the Hawaii
Civil Rights Commission (HCRC).” In deciding that the landlord defendants’counterclaim against the HCRC for negligent investigation should not bedismissed, this court said that “the investigation of a complaint [by theHCRC] does not entail a broad policy decision immune from suit under thediscretionary function exception,” 88 Hawai 'i at 89, 962 P.2d at 348, and
“constru[ed] the counterclaim as a common law tort action for negligence.”Id. at 91, 962 P.2d at 350. Hence, unlike in the instant case, this court
decided there was, in effect, a private analog in Jeyte by virtue of the
common law, for the tort action against the State. 
54
 Apparently, Petitioner is referring to HRS § 602-5(5) (Supp.
 
2005), which gives the supreme court jurisdiction to “make or issue any order
or writ necessary or appropriate in aid of its jurisdiction, and in such case,
any justice may issue a writ or an order to show cause returnable before the
supreme court[.]”
 
52
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
712.) Respondent charges that Petitioner’s claim of “inherent”
 
power to review agency actions “is an invitation for a circuit
 court to exceed its jurisdiction[,]” is contrary to the plain
 language of HRS §§ 603-21.5 and 603-21.7, that do establish
 jurisdiction.
 
As to Petitioner’s third question, respectfully, the 
ICA erred in two respects. First, the ICA suggested that a court cannot have inherent powers to review an agency decision under HRS § 603-21.9(6) where a statute limits review exclusively to an agency body. See Hamamoto, 125 Hawai' i at 221, 257 P.2d at 220­
21. But, as construed, HRS chapter 103F does not limit review
 
exclusively to an administrative body.
 
Second, the ICA determined that Kaina v. Gellman, 119 
Hawai'i 324, 197 P.3d 776 (App. 2008), “clarified” that HRS § 
603-21.9(6) “gives the courts ‘the inherent power and authority to control the litigation process before them and to curb abuses and promote fair process including, for example, the power to impose sanctions for abusive litigation practices.’” Hamamoto, 
125 Hawai' i at 208, 257 P.3d at 221 (quoting Gellman, 119 Hawai' i 
at 330, 197 P.3d at 782. 
To the extent the ICA’s opinion limits the inherent
 
powers of the courts “to controlling the litigation process
 before them,” respectfully, the ICA opinion is incorrect. But,
 inasmuch as this opinion concludes that HRS chapter 103F does not
 prohibit judicial review, it need not be decided whether the 
53
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court had the inherent power to review the DOE’s decision and the
 
legality of its actions.
 
XIII.
 
In conclusion, as to Petitioner’s first question, the 
delegation of judicial power to an administrative agency raises serious questions regarding the doctrine of separation of powers, 
when the legislature precludes judicial review of the agency’s 
decision in the agency’s own dispute with another party. Inasmuch as HRS chapter 103F, namely HRS §§ 103F-502(c) and 103F­504, as construed, does not prohibit judicial review, the delegation of judicial power to the DOE did not violate the doctrine of separation of powers. Accordingly, as to Petitioner’s first question, HRS chapter 103F is not unconstitutional. However, with respect to the second question raised, Petitioner cannot maintain a negligence action against Respondent for allegedly failing to exercise due care in applying the statutes and regulations in awarding the government contract, inasmuch as “no private analog exists” for Petitioner’s claim. Therefore, “[t]he State[] . . . remains immune from liability” under the STLA. Kaho'ohanohano, 117 Hawai' i at 282, 178 P.3d at 
558. Finally, as to Petitioner’s third question, the ICA erred
 
in two respects, see supra, but it need not be decided whether
 the courts of this state have the inherent power to review the
 legality of the DOE’s actions since it has been determined that
 HRS chapter 103F does not preclude judicial review. Therefore,
 based on the foregoing, the ICA’s June 16, 2011 Judgment and the
 
54
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court’s March 4, 2009 Judgment are vacated and the case is
 
remanded to the court for further proceedings consistent with
 this opinion.
 
Perry Confalone, 
(Carlsmith Ball LLP),
for petitioner/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 Deirdre Marie-Iha, deputy
solicitor general,
for respondent
 
55
 