 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
____________________  
 
____________________  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-13-0000531 27-JUN-2016 
12:52 PM 
---oOo--
-
WILLIAM A. ARTHUR, SR., Individually, and  
 
THE ESTATE OF MONA ARTHUR thru William A. Arthur, Sr. 
  
as  the Personal Representative, 
  
Respondents/Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
  
  
vs.
  
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS;
  
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION; DESIGN PARTNERS INC., 
Respondents/Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
  
 
and
  
 
COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CO., INC.; 
  
SATO AND ASSOCIATES, INC.; and DANIEL S. MIYASATO,
  
Petitioners/Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
  
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION,
  
Respondent/Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee, 
  
vs.
  
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
  
Respondent/Third-Party Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee
   
 ________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
RECTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, POLLACK, WILSON, JJ., AND CIRCUIT   
COURT JUDGE BROWNING, IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
   
 KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
  
Respondent/Fourth-Party Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
  
vs.
  
PACIFIC FENCE, INC.,
  
Respondent/Fourth-Party Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee.
  
SCWC-13-0000531
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-13
-0000531; CIVIL NO. 05-1-1981-11)
 
JUNE 27, 2016
  
OPINION OF THE COURT  BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I. Introduction 
This case is a contract dispute between 
Petitioners/ 
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants Sato and Associates, Inc. 
and Daniel S. Miyasato (collectively, “Sato” or “Engineer” ), and 
Respondent/Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee Kamehameha Investment Corporation (“KIC” or “Developer”). Sato timely 
applied for writ of certiorari (“Application”) on August 7, 2015 
from a June 8, 2015 Judgment entered by the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (“ICA”) pursuant to its February 27 , 2015 Opinion 
(“Opinion”). In relevant part, the ICA affirmed the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit’s (“circuit court[’s]”) “Order Granting Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha 
Investment Corporation’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment 
Against Defendant Sato & Associates, Inc. . . .” filed May 27, 
2
  
     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  2011. Heavily relying on Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare 
Properties Corp., 85 Hawai i 286, 944 P.2d 83 ( App. 1997), t he 
ICA concluded that pursuant to the Project Consultant Agreement 
(“Agreement”) between Sato and KIC, Sato  had a duty to defend 
KIC in the wrongful death action brought by Respondents/  
Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees, William A. Arthur,  Sr. 
(“William”) and the Estate of Mona Arthur (collectively, 
“Arthurs”) upon KIC’s tender of defense to Sato.   See Arthur v.  
State, Dep’t of Hawaiian Home Lands , 135 Hawai i 149, 171, 346 
P.3d 218, 241 (App. 2015).  
In its Application, Sato presented 
two questions: 
1)  Was Pancakes  wrongly decided?  
2) In applying Pancakes, did the ICA fail to strictly  
construe the indemnity contracts at issue by treating  
Sato and other contractual indemnitors as insurers and  
the subject indemnity contracts as insurance policies?   
(formatting added). KIC opposed the Application, whereas 
Coastal Construction Co., Inc. (“Coastal”), a co -defendant in 
the Arthurs’ suit, filed a response in support of the 
Application. 
The Application  was accepted on September 18, 2015.  
This court requested supplemental briefing from the parties 
addressing the following:  
(1) Is the duty to defend presented in Sato’s non -
insurance, construction contract with KIC coextensive with 
Sato’s duty to indemnify? 
(2) Given case law and legislative history, does Hawai i 
Revised Statutes [(“HRS”)] § 431:10 -222 (2005), render void 
3
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 any provision in a construction contract requiring the 
promisor to defend “the promisee against liability for 
bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or 
resulting from the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of 
the promisee, the promise e’s agents or employees, or 
indemnitee?” 
Upon considering the parties’  briefs, oral arguments,  
and the relevant law,  we hold as follows:  
(1)
	 HRS § 431:10-222 renders invalid any provision  in a 
construction contract requiring the promisor to defend  
“the promisee against liability for bodily injury to 
persons or damage to property caused by or resulting 
from the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the 
promisee, the promisee’s age nts or employees, or 
indemnitee ”;  
(2)
	 Pancakes, 85 Hawai i 286, 944 P.2d 83 (App. 1997), does 
not apply to defense provisions in construction contracts; and 
(3)	 the scope of a promisor’s duty to defend that is imposed by a construction contract is determined at 
the end of litigation. 
II. Background 
A. The Arthurs’ Wrongful Death Action  
Mona Arthur (“Mona”) and  her husband, William, lived 
on property in the Kalawahine Streamside Housing Development (“Project”)  under an Assignment of Lease and Consent they 
executed with the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (“ DHHL”)  on 
4

  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
   October 31, 2000. They typically gardened on the hillside 
behind their home about three times a week. To access the 
hillside, the Arthurs crossed a concrete drainage ditch and 
climbed over a two-foot-high chain link fence.  Mona wore 
sneakers with snow spikes to prevent her from sliding down the 
hill. 
On November 10, 2003, Mona and William gardened   on the 
hillside. William left Mona’s side for a few minutes to get some water for Mona, and when he returned,  he found her lying in 
the concrete ditch. No one witnessed how Mona came to be in the ditch. Mona suffered severe head injuries, fell into a coma, 
and died on March 9, 2004.  
The Arthurs subsequently filed suit for Mona’s 
wrongful death on November 4, 2005. Their First Amended 
Complaint, filed November 8, 2005, alleged that Mona, while 
gardening on the hillside, “slipped and fell, rolled down the 
slope of the hillside over a fence, fell into the drainage embankment and hit her head against the concrete walling. . . .  
[Mona] . . . sustained injuries such that she was in a coma 
until her death . . . .” The Arthurs asserted Mona’ s injuries 
and death were due to the negligence of DHHL, KIC (as the developer), Design Partners, Inc. (“Design Partners”) (as the 
architect), Coastal (as the general contractor), Sato (as the 
5
  
  
 
 
 
c. 	Negligent supervision of the construction of the 
1 [ ] hillside area, including the fence and culvert.     
 
These claims  were unaltered in the Arthurs’  
Second Amended Complaint, filed December 3, 2009. [95:315]   
The Second Amended Complaint differed from the first 
primarily due to the addition of the following allegations, 
which asserted a punitive  damages claim against KIC:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         civil engineer), and other “Does” ; and that  that negligence was 
composed of, but was   not limited to, the following:   
a. Negligent design of the hillside area, including the 
fence and culvert; 
b. Negligent construction of the hillside area, including 
the fence and culvert; 
 20. ELTON WONG was the project manager for [KIC].
 21. At all times relevant, WONG was acting within the 
scope of his employment with [KIC].
 22. ELTON WONG, ordered [Sato] to lower the chain link 
fence guarding the concrete drainage ditch from 4 feet to 2 
feet.
 23. The lowering of the fence reduced the construction 
costs and thereby increased Defendant’s profits.  
 24. ELTON WONG, in his own handwriting, directed that 
the chain link fence be looked at for “value engineering”.  
 25. ELTON WONG 
knew that the fence was intended to 
protect persons from falling into the drainage culvert.
 26. ELTON WONG specifically met MONA ARTHUR at least 20 
times and knew that she was going onto the steep 
hillside[.]
 27. If ELTON WONG had allowed the fence to remain 4 feet 
high, MONA ARTHUR would not have been fatally injured; 
because of her lower center of gravity, a 4 foot high fence 
would have prevented MONA ARTHUR, who was 5’4” in height, from falling into the drainage ditch.  
 27.[sic] 
Instead of maintaining the safety of a 4 foot 
high fence, ELTON WONG ordered the fence lowered to 2 feet. 
He ordered the fence lowered simply to increase the 
6
 1   The Arthurs also separately alleged the Association of Kalawahine 
Streamside Association (“AOAO”) “was negligent with respect to the above 
including, but not limited to negligent inspection, maintenance and warning 
regarding the hillside area, including the fen ce and culvert.”  
   
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
2                         
 Defendants [sic] profits, without consideration to the 
safety of persons such as MONA ARTHUR.  He reduced the 
height of the fence knowing that residents, such as MONA 
ARTHUR, were required to maintain the steep hillside.
 28. [KIC]’s overriding concern was for a minimum -expense 
operation, regardless of the peril involved.
 29. [KIC] acted wantonly or oppressively or with such 
malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to civil obligations.
 30. [KIC]’s conduct constituted wilful misconduct or an 
entire want of care which would raise the presumption of a 
2  [ ]  conscious indifference to consequences.
B. 	KIC’s Tenders of Defense against the Arthurs’ Claims 
Pursuant to the Hold Harmless Clauses in Its Agreements 
with Parties Involved in the Project’s Construction 
A March 10, 1998 Project Consultant Agreement 
(“Agreement” or “Contract”) between KIC and Sato with respect to 
the Project described Sato’s “scope of work” to involve  
preparing, among other things, grading and drainage plans, electric and telephone plans, and sitework civil drawings for 
various permit applications as  necessary.  The Agreement also 
contained a paragraph titled, “Indemnity by Consultant,” which stated: 
Consultant [Engineer] hereby agrees to indemnify, defend 
and hold harmless Developer, and each of its officers, directors and employees, from and against any and all 
claims, demands, losses, liabilities, actions, lawsuits, 
proceedings, judgments, awards, costs and expenses 
(including reasonable attorneys ’ fees), arising directly or 
indirectly, in whole or in part, out of work undertaken by 
Consultant [Engineer] outside the scope of this Agreement 
and/or out of the negligence or any willful act or omission 
of Consultant [Engineer], or any of its officers, 
directors, agents or employees, in connection with this 
Agreement or Consultant’s [ Engineer ’s] services or work 
hereunder, whether within or beyond the scope of its duties 
or authority hereunder. The provisions of this Section 
7
  Partial summary judgment was later granted in KIC’s favor with respect to 
the punitive damages claim. See infra  Part II.C .     
  
 
(“Hold Harmless Clause”) .   KIC’s contracts with Design Partners, 
Coastal, and the general contractor for grading and site work,  
Kiewit Pacific Co. (“Kiewit”),  each contained indemnity 
language, similar to that in the Hold Harmless Clause, requiring 
the subcontractor to “indemnify, defend, and hold harmless” KIC. 
Kiewit’s contract with Pacific Fence, Inc. (“Pacific Fence”) to 
construct a debris fence between the constructed homes and the 
adjacent hillside also contained language requiring Pacific 
Fence to indemnify and defend Kiewit.      
 
 
    shall survive completion of Consultant’s [Engineer’s] 
services hereunder and/or the termination of this 
Agreement. 
By a letter dated December 15, 2005, KIC tendered its 
defense 
against the Arthurs’ claims to Sato, pursuant to the 
Hold Harmless Clause.  Although Kiewit was not named in the 
First Amended Complaint, based on its agreement with Developer, 
KIC also tendered its defense to Kiewit through KIC’s attorney, 
Brad S. Petrus, by letter dated December 1, 2005.  
On December 21, 2005, KIC then filed a third-party 
complaint against Kiewit, seeking, among other things, a declaration that Kiewit owed a duty to defend and indemnify KIC 
pursuant to their contract. KIC also filed cross-claims against 
Sato, Design Partners, and Coastal, alleging, among other 
things, that each party, pursuant to respective contracts, 
8
  
  
   
 
  “agreed to defend and indemnify” KIC against allegations such as 
those made by the Arthurs. 
On January 31, 2006, Kiewit filed a fourth-party 
complaint against Pacific Fence, alleging, among other things, 
that Kiewit was contractually “entitled to an immediate defense 
and full indemnification from Pacific Fence” with respect to 
KIC’s third-party complaint against Kiewit.  By letter dated 
February 9, 2006, Kiewit tendered its defense to Pacific Fence.    
Also on February 9, 2006, KIC filed a cross-claim 
against Pacific Fence, asserting, among other things, that by 
way of Pacific Fence’s contract with Kiewit (and Kiewit’s 
contract with KIC), that Pacific Fence agreed to defend and 
indemnify KIC against claims such as the ones brought by the 
Arthurs. KIC sought a declaration that “Pacific Fence owes a 
joint and several duty to defend . . . KIC” against the Arthurs’ 
claims. KIC’s February 9 filing was later construed by the 
circuit court to be KIC’s tender of its defense to Pacific Fence.  
Concurrent with KIC’s filings and requests for defense 
and indemnity, DHHL filed a cross-claim on January 12, 2006 
against KIC, Design Partners, Coastal, AOAO, and Sato, alleging, 
among other things, that the State was “entitled to defense, 
indemnification, contribution, subrogation and/or reimbursement 
from one or more Cross-claim Defendants.” By letter dated March 
9
  
    
     
    
 
 
   
      6, 2006, DHHL tendered its defense to KIC. In turn, KIC 
tendered the defense of DHHL to Kiewit. Kiewit then tendered 
that defense to Pacific Fence. 
By letters dated May 4, 2006 and July 26, 2006, Island 
Insurance Co., Pacific Fence’s insurer, agreed to provide a 
defense to KIC, Kiewit, and DHHL. 
According to KIC’s attorney, b y separate letters  dated 
April 24, 2006, Sato  and Kiewit agreed to participate on a pro  -
rata basis in KIC’s defense subject to several conditions.  
C.	 Circuit Court Proceedings with Respect to the Parties’ 
Duties to Defend 
Numerous motions were heard by the circuit court 
regarding the merits of the Arthurs’ claims and the parties’ 
respective contractual duties to defend. A summary of motions 
relevant to this appeal follows. 
In September 2009, upon the available evidence after a 
lengthy period of discovery, Coastal filed a renewed motion for 
summary judgment based on the fact that its work did not extend 
beyond the individual dwellings in the Project; i.e., did not 
include the hillside, fence, or culvert. In February 2010, the 
circuit court ruled on Coastal’s Motion: (1) summary ju dgment 
was granted in favor of Coastal and against the Arthurs with 
respect to claims raised in the First Amended Complaint or the 
Second Amended Complaint; (2) partial summary judgment was 
10
  
  
 
 
 granted in favor of KIC and against any other party on claims 
“arising out of, resulting from, attributed to, connected with, 
or otherwise premised upon the work contracted to and/or 
performed by . . . Coastal”; and (3) any duty of Coastal’s to 
defend KIC did not extend beyond February 25, 2010, the date of entry of the Order.   
On March 2, 2010, KIC filed a “Motion for Partial 
Summary Judgment as to Plaintiffs’ Claim for Punitive Damages [in its Second Amended Complaint],” arguing that even if the 
decision to lower the fence from 4 feet to 2 feet was “motivated 
by a desire to cut costs and boost profits,” that was 
insufficient as a matter of law to prove the requisite elements 
justifying punitive damages. The circuit court granted KIC’s 
Motion on May 24, 2010. 
On May 6, 2010, Pacific Fence filed a Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment, arguing that there was no question of 
fact that in installing the fence in the Project, Pacific Fence did so to specifications, and therefore was neither negligent, 
nor acted wrongly nor breached its contract with Kiewit. On 
September 16, 2010, the circuit court granted Pacific Fence’s 
motion for partial summary judgment. 
After ruling on multiple motions for partial summary 
judgment with respect to the parties’ duties to defend, and in 
light of the circuit court’s rulings on Coastal’s, KIC’s, and 
11
  
  
 
2) defense of KIC, is jointly and severally owed by Design 
Partners, Sato, Coastal, Kiewit, and Pacific Fence; wherein 
Kiewit’s obligation is passed through to Pacific Fence;  
 
 
   
                         
 
     
 
   Pacific Fence’s motions for partial summary judgment, the 
circuit court’s allocation of the parties’ defense obligations 
as reflected in the Amended Final Judgment are:  
1) defense of DHHL, is jointly and severally owed by KIC, 
Coastal, Kiewit, and Pacific Fence; wherein KIC’s obligation is owed jointly and severally by Coastal and Kiewit; and wherein 
any obligation of Kiewit is passed through to Pacific Fence;
3 
3) defense of Sato, which was tendered to and accepted by Kiewit, is passed through to Pacific Fence. 
With respect to KIC’s defense expenses, the court  
apportioned costs among Kiewit, Coastal, Sato, Design Partners, 
and Pacific Fence for various periods from December 1, 2005 
through April 30, 2011, taking into consideration the various 
dates of tenders of defense and relevant court orders. 
The 
court did not apportion defense costs based on specific claims.   
3   Pacific Fence prevailed on its appeal to the ICA with respect to any pass -
through duty to defend from Kiewit. In strictly construing the indemnity 
provision in Pacific Fence’s subcontract with Kiewit, the ICA concluded that  
 
it did not extend to Kiewit’s liability unless it arose at least in part from Pacific Fence’s work under their 
subcontract. . . . Pacific Fence’s alleged acts or 
omissions, as set forth in Arthur’s Complaint,[*] were the 
basis for its duties to defend itself as well as portions 
of the defense of its contractors insofar as their 
liabilities potentially arose from Pacific Fence’s acts or 
omissions.  
Arthur, 135 Hawai
ʻi at 176, 346 P.3d at 245. 
*The ICA is incorrect. To clarify, Pacific Fence was not named as a 
defendant to the Arthurs’ claims in either the First or Second Amended 
Complaints. Rather, Pacific Fence became a party to the litigation due to 
Kiewit’s Fourth- party Complaint against it.  
12
  
   
   
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
                         
  
   
   D.  Appeal to the ICA 
The various parties appealed the circuit court’s 
Amended Final Judgment dated April 2, 2013, which encompassed 
its various orders.4 Relevant here, Sato timely filed a Notice 
of Cross-Appeal of the Amended Final Judgment filed pursuant to the circuit court’s May 27, 2011 “Order Granting [KIC]’s Motion 
for Partial Summary Judgment Against [Sato] and [Kiewit], and 
For Enforcement of Order Granting Motion.” On June 4, 2013, 
Sato’s Cross-Appeal was consolidated under CAAP-13-531. 
Sato stated the following three points of error in its 
Opening Brief: 
1. It was error for the lower court to order that Sato 
“had a joint and se veral duty to defend . . . KIC from 
December 15, 2005”, and to enter judgment in accordance 
therewith. . . . 
2. It was error for the lower court to find that Sato was 
obligated to pay KIC fees or costs in any amount or any 
percentage or for any period, and to enter judgment in accordance therewith. . . . 
3. It was error for the lower court to enter judgment 
finding that Sato had “a contractual duty to indemnify and 
defend KIC,” and to enter a declaratory judgment in favor 
of KIC and against Sato, jointly and severally, that Sato 
“had a contractual, joint and several duty to defe nd KIC.” 
Sato stated the circuit court erred in apportioning KIC’s 
defense costs partly to Sato as the court should not have relied 
on Pancakes in arriving at its decision because Pancakes was 
“wrongly decided.” Sato argued that the Hold Harmless Clause 
The Arthurs succeeded before the ICA with respect to their appeal of the 
circuit court’s judgment entered in favor of AOAO, KIC, Sato, and Design 
Partners as to their negligence claims.  See Arthur , 135 Hawaiʻ i at 167–68, 
346 P.3d at 236– 37. Thus, litigation in this matter continues. 
13
 4  
   
   
  
  
 
 
 
HRS § 431:10-222.   Sato suggested that the circuit court’s 
application of Pancakes   “imposed large, potentially catastrophic 
costs upon the smallest players in [a construction] project, 
costs over which they have no ability to control by, e.g.[,] the 
selection of counsel.”    should be strictly construed, and when so construed, (1) Sato 
would not be liable for KIC’s defense costs until a finding of 
liability against Sato with respect to the Arthurs’ claims , and 
(2) 
Sato’s indemnity obligations apply only to those claims 
which “arise out of” its own wrongful conduct. All other 
claims against KIC fall outside of Sato ’s defense 
obligation and the applicable indemnity provision.  For example, the once -asserted punitive damages claim against 
KIC . . . is outside of Sato’s defense obligation because 
it was premised on KIC ’s own allegedly egregious conduct on 
the Project. 
Specifically, Sato asserted that HRS § 431:10-222, voids as 
against public policy, “construction contracts that purport to 
indemnify another fo r the other’s own negligence.”   The statute 
reads: 
Construction industry; indemnity agreements invalid. Any 
covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in 
connection with or collateral to, a contract or agreement 
relative to the construction, alteration, repair or 
maintenance of a building, structure, appurtenance or 
appliance, including moving, demolition or excavation connected therewith, purporting to indemnify the promisee 
against liability for bodily injury to persons or damage to 
property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence or 
wilful misconduc t of the promisee, the promisee’ s agents or 
employees, or indemnitee, is invalid as against public 
policy, and is void and unenforceable; provided that this 
section sha ll not affect any valid workers’ compensation 
claim under chapter 386 or any other insurance contract or agreement issued by an admitted insurer upon any insurable 
interest under this code. 
14

  
  
 KIC argued that Pancakes  was not flawed and was  
consistent with relevant case law.   Moreover, it argued that HRS 
§ 431:10-222  did not apply to Sato’s case, as the statute does 
not refer to “professional design services” or to defense 
obligations. KIC concluded by emphasizing that the “devastating 
consequences” to Hawaii’s construction industry suggested by 
Sato has not, and will not, occur as a result of applying 
Pancakes   to construction contracts as parties should have 
appropriate insurance protection to cover both liability and 
defense costs.   
Upon re-examining Pancakes   and the scope of a duty to 
defend as compared to the scope of a duty to indemnify, the ICA 
concluded: 
Expanding an insurer’s duty to defend based on the 
“complaint allegation rule” to general indemnity contracts 
makes sense “because if the duty to defend was determined 
only after the ultimate issue of liability on each claim has been made, the case would be fully resolved before the duty [to defend] was triggered, and there would be nothing 
left to defend.” .  . . .  
In light of such reasoning and the lack of a 
competing argument in  Pancakes,  we “discern[ed] no logical 
reason why the duty to defend based on indemnity contracts 
should not follow the same philosophy [of imposing a duty 
to defend at the outset  of litigation] used in the 
insurance context.”  . . . .  
Once an indemnitor is found to have a duty to defend, 
“[t]he indemnitor must bear the cost of a defense whenever any of the claims asserted may potentially come within the 
scope of an indemnity agreement, and the defense must 
continue until it is clear that the liability  cannot 
possibly come within the scope of the ind emnity.” Contrary 
to Sato’s contention that its duty to defend would not be 
triggered until wrongful conduct on the part of Sato  “is 
shown to have occurred, and be causally related to claims 
asserted by [Arthur],” Sato’s duty to defend KIC  was 
triggered upon the filing of the complaint and/or the 
15
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 In sum, HRS § 431:10 -222 restricts the scope of 
indemnification provisions in construction contracts, but it does not invalidate the application of the provision in the Sato Contract to [the] Arthur [s’] claims here, and 
Sato’s duty to ultimatel y indemnify KIC and/or others is 
separate from its duty to defend. . . . 
  tender of KIC’s defense to Sato and that duty encompassed 
all claims that could potentially come within the scope of 
the indemnity. 
Arthur, 135 Hawai i at 170–71, 346 P.3d at 239–40 (citations 
omitted) (brackets in original)  .    
Moreover, in response to Sato’s argument tha t, 
pursuant to HRS § 431:10-222 it was not required to defend 
claims wholly unrelated to its actions, such as the Arthurs’ 
punitive damages claim  raised solely against KIC  in the Second 
Amended Complaint, the ICA concluded:  
HRS § 431:10 -222 establishes that  Sato could not be  
held liable for the sole negligence or willful misconduct 
of KIC, but it does not bar Sato ’s duty to defend, and 
possibly to indemnify,  in this case because Sato, as well 
as the other defendants were alleged to have been negligent. Thus, this application of HRS § 431:10 -222 does 
not conflict with the circuit c ourt’s d etermination (1) 
that Sato’s duty to defend KIC  includes all claims 
potentially arising under the Sato  Contract and not only 
for those arising from Sato ’s negligence or wilful 
misconduct, and (2) as discussed in the prior section, that 
Sato was liable fo r defense costs when KIC  tendered its 
defense rather than after a judicial determination of 
Sato’s fault.  
 
Id. at 241, 346 P.3d at 172. 
E. Arguments before the Supreme Court 
The arguments raised by Sato and KIC with respect to 
Sato’s Application largely mirror the arguments the parties had 
raised before the ICA. However, in supplemental briefing, the 
parties raised additional points.  
16
  
  
 Sato asserted that the duty to indemnify and duty to 
defend imposed by the Agreement were coextensive because the 
duties were contained in one sentence. Sato also argued that 
HRS § 431:10-222 is “clearly a remedial statute” and therefore 
“must be liberally construed to effect its intended purpose.”  
Sato reasoned that a liberal construction would mean that the 
statute also banned promises to defend a promisee against 
liability caused by the sole negligence of the promisee in a 
construction contract. 
Coastal emphasized that Pancakes   inappropriately 
treated commercial contracts and policies of liability insurance 
similarly, when such agreements are markedly different. Among 
the differences include “their respective contractual purposes” 
and how indemnity provisions are construed in each type of 
contract: in commercial contracts, indemnity provisions are 
construed strictly against the indemnitee, whereas indemnity 
provisions in insurance policies are liberally construed in favor of the insured. Coastal echoed Sato’s argument that HRS § 
431:10-222 should be liberally construed, and added that the 
statute necessarily “precludes courts from determining the 
existence of any duty to defend at the commencement of 
litigation. . . . [as] [t]here would be no way of knowing 
whether a defense will end up violating H.R.S. § 431:10-222.”   
17

  
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
                         
   
 
   5 KIC argued that the duty to defend and the duty to 
indemnify are “distinctly different matters,” and therefore are 
not coextensive. KIC pointed out that this court cited to 
Pancakes with approval in Haole v. State , 111 Hawai i 144, 140 
P.3d 377 (2006), when considering the scope of a duty to defend outlined in Hawai i Administrative Rules (“HAR”) § 19 -41-7.
5 KIC 
reasoned: “By the foregoing, the Court endorsed the concept that 
the duty to defend, outside the context of an insurance contract 
but like an insurance contract, is not coextensive with the duty 
to indemnify. Rather, the duty to defend is broader than the 
duty to indemnify.” Lastly, KIC urged this court to focus on 
the plain language of HRS § 431:10-222, which does not refer to the duty to defend, as did the Court of Appeals of Massachusetts 
when it was called upon to construe its state anti-indemnity 
statute in 
Herson v. New Boston Garden Corp. , 40 Mass. App. Ct. 
779, 786
–87, 667 N.E.2d 907, 914 (1996). 
HAR § 19– 41–7 provides: 
Liability.  Agencies, masters, owners, operators, or 
charterers loading or unloading at state wharves shall 
indemnify, defend, and save harmless the  department, its 
members, and employees from and against all losses, claims, demands, and suits for damages, including death and personal injury, and including costs and attorneys’ fees, 
incident to or resulting from their operations on the 
property of the  department and the use of its facilities 
except where the department has been proven to be solely 
and legally negligent.  
 
Haole,
 111 Hawai
i at 150, 947 P.2d at 383 (emphases removed). 
18
  
     
  
  
 
  
 
 III. Standard of Review 
A. Interpretation of a Contract 
“As a general rule, the construction and legal effect 
to be given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by 
an appellate court.”  
 Casumpang v. ILWU Local 142 , 108 Hawai i 
411, 420, 121 P.3d 391,  400 (2005) (citation omitted).  
B.	 Interpretation of a Statute 
“Interpretation of a statu te is a question of law 
which [is] review[ed]  de novo.”  Dupree v. Hiraga , 121 Hawai i 
297, 312, 219 P.3d 10  84, 1099 (2009) (citation omitted).    
 
IV. Discussion 
A. 	HRS § 431:10-222 Voids A
s Against Public Policy 
Indemnification and Defense Clauses of a Promisee’s Sole 
Negligence or Wilful Misconduct in Construction Contracts 
HRS § 431:10-222 states in full: 
Construction industry; indemnity agreements invalid.  Any 
covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in 
connection with or collateral to, a contract or agreement 
relative to the construction, alteration, repair or 
maintenance of a building, structure, appurtenance or 
appliance, including moving, demolition or excavation 
connected therewith, purporting to indemnify the promisee against liability for bodily injury to persons or damage to 
property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence or 
wilful misconduct of the promisee, the promisee’s agen ts or 
employees,  or indemnitee, is invalid as against public 
policy, and is void and unenforceable; provided that this section shall not affect any valid workers’ compensation 
claim under chapter 386 or any other insurance contract or 
agreement issued by an admitted insurer upon any insurable 
interest under this code.  
 
The text of HRS § 431:10-222 is identical to its  predecessor 
statute, HRS § 431-453 (1985), when that statute  was initially  
19
  
 introduced and passed, save for the removal of gendered terms 
(e.g., replacing “workmen’s compensation” with “workers’ 
compensation,” and “his agents” with “ the promisee’s agents”), 
and the replacement of “chapter” with “code,” and deletion of “however.” 
Compare  HRS § 431:10-222, with  1970 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 169 (“Act”), § 2 at 304 –05, and  H.B. 1925, 5th Leg., Reg. 
Sess. (1970).   
The legislature clearly stated its reasons for the
Act’s passage:   
The purpose of this Act is to invalidate, as against public 
policy, the prevalent practice in the construction industry 
of causing contractors to assume liability for the 
negligence of others by contract. Such so -called “hold 
harmless” agreements are usually incorporated into contracts for construction projects on a “take -it-or-leave-
it” basis; (i.e., to take out the necessar y insurance or 
leave the bidding to someone else), and frequently require the contractor, engineer or architect, for example, to 
undertake assumption of liability for personal injury or 
property damage even where the same results from the “sole 
negligence”  of persons over whom the indemnitor has no 
control or right of control. This practice is, and precipitates further, a form of economic coercion by 
placing contractors in the inequitable position of paying 
prohibitive insurance premiums, which, if a small  
contractor cannot afford, precludes him from performing 
upon a project for which he is otherwise qualified, thereby 
effectively disenfranchising him under a system of free 
enterprise. In an economy in which the construction 
industry contributes so significantly, this practice can  
only be considered as contrary to the public interest.   
 
This Act does not serve to relieve a contractor from 
liability when he is negligent; but when he is not, it 
places the responsibility for injury or damage where it 
properly belongs, any promise of indemnification 
notwithstanding.  
 
Act 169, § 1 at 304. See also   S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 962-70, 
in 1970 Senate Journal, at 1441 –42 (observing that “[a]s a 
result [of then-industry practice], general contractors, in 
20

  
   
  
  
 
 
 order to protect themselves, are compelled to include similar 
clauses in contracts with their subcontra ctors, and so forth.”). 
Testimony submitted to the House Judiciary Committee from the 
Board of Underwriters of Hawaii noted that the then-industry 
practice “force[d] contractors to obtain broader insurance 
coverage than they would normally need with resulting increased costs in insurance premiums.” Board of Underwriters of Hawaii, 
“Statement on Bill Relating to Declaring the Invalidity of 
Certain Indemnity Agreements i n the Construction Industry,” Mar. 
19, 1970 (testifying in favor of H.B. 1925-70). Such increased premiums for “broad form contractual liability insurance 
[necessary to protect assets from uninsured losses caused by the 
negligence of third parties] is at least 300-400% of the cost of 
normal coverage.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 420-70, in 1970 
House Journal, at 979 (quoting testimony submitted by an 
insurance company executive who testified on behalf of the 
Construction Industry Legislative Organization). The House specifically elaborated upon the impact of the then-present 
practice on Hawaii’s construction industry: 
Your Committee is satisfied that this practice is, and 
precipitates further, a form of economic coercion, 
particularly in instances where the small contractor is 
bidding in an open and highly competitive market involving 
owners of substantial means, such that where there is a 
wide disparity in bargaining power, it may be impossible 
for the contractor to refuse to enter into a contract 
containing  such a provision, or, alternatively, even 
precluding him from performing upon a project for which he 
is otherwise qualified if he cannot afford the premium.  
21
  
  
 
  
 
                         
6   This contrasts with the primary purpose of anti -indemnification statutes in 
other states. See, e.g., 1800 Ocotillo, LLC v. WLB Group, Inc., 196 P.3d 
222, 225 (Ariz. 2008) (“Anti -indemnification statutes are primarily intended 
to prevent parties from eliminating their incentive to exercise due care.”)  
(citation omitted).  
 H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 420-70, in 1970 House Journal, at 979 
(emphasis added). 	 The House went on to reason:   
Furthermore, it is apparent to your Committee that such 
“hold harmless” clauses contribute, at least in part, to 
the increasing costs of construction. In an economy in which the construction industry contributes so 
significantly this is a very real problem which can only be 
remedied by legislative invalidation.  
Id. 
In sum, when enacting Act 169, the legislature was  
plainly concerned with the prohibitive cost  of insurance 
policies to contractors — particularly, “small contractors,” and  
subcontractors, and so forth —  necessitated by the inclusion of 
6“hold harmless”  clauses in their contracts  with owners.   Absent 
its intervention, the legislature concluded  that high insurance  
premiums caused higher construction costs, which would 
negatively impact Hawaii’s economy given that the construction 
industry “contributes so significantly” to it . See id.    
HRS § 431:10
-222, and its predecessor, HRS § 431-453, 
do not employ language prohibiting the imposition on contractors of a contractual duty to defend owners.  However, as a matter of 
law, claims that fall outside the scope of contractual indemnity do not trigger a promisor’s duty to defend. The framework of 
22
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
                         
   
   
 the court’s analysis in Haole v. State , 111 Hawai i 144, 140 P.3d 
377, illustrates this premise.7 
In Haole, the court determined whether a duty to  
defend imposed by Hawai i Administrative Rule § 19-41-7 was 
lawful by first analyzing  whether a duty to indemnify imposed by  
the same regulation was valid. The court reasoned that even if  
the duty to defend was triggered at the outset of litigation by  
claims as alleged in the complaint  (potentially rendering the 
scope of the duty to defend larger than the duty to indemnify),  
i.e., according to the “complaint allegation rule,”  if HAR § 19-
41-7 was invalid as to imposing a duty to indemnify, then the 
rule was also invalid as to imposing a duty to defend.   See  
Haole, 111 Hawai i at 151, 140 P.3d at 384  (“[U]nder the 
‘complaint allegation rule,’ if there is no potential for 
indemnification, then no duty to defend will arise.”) .       
In the same manner
, because HRS § 431:10-222 voids as 
against public policy indemnification clauses in construction contracts between owners and contractors as to “liability for 
bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or 
resulting from the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the 
promisee, the promisee ’s agents or employees , or indemnitee [s],” 
In argument, KIC relied on Haole for the premise that this court had 
“approved” Pancakes because Haole had cited to Pancakes.  Nothing in Haole 
supports this assertion. 
23
 7  
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
     
 
  
 
                         
  
 
 HRS § 431:10-222 also operates to invalidate defense clauses for 
that same subset of claims.8 In sum, pursuant to HRS § 431:10 -
222, in the construction industry, a contractor is not 
contractually liable for the sole negligence or wilful 
misconduct of another, or for the defense thereof, as such 
contractual requirements would cause higher insurance premiums 
and greater construction costs, thereby harming Hawaii’s 
economy. 
Thus, to the extent the ICA’s opinion suggests 
otherwise, we clarify that KIC’s defense costs associated with 
defending against the Arthurs’ punitive damages claim must be 
borne solely by KIC. 
B. 	Pancakes, 85 Hawai ʻi 286, 944 P.2d 83 (App. 1997), Does Not 
Apply to Defense Provisions in Construction Contracts 
1. 	The Pancakes decision did not distinguish among non-
insurance indemnity contracts. 
At issue in Pancakes  was not a construction contract, 
but rather a management and leasing agreement signed between 
Pomare Properties Corporation (“Pomare”), a managing agent of 
Lahaina Shopping Center, and Sofos Realty Corporation (“Sofos”), 
that handled managing and leasing duti
es.  Pancakes
, 85 Hawai i 
Moreover, we observe that as a practical matter, Act 169’s mitigation of 
excessive insurance premiums would not be realized if the statute did not 
similarly prohibit defense clauses — litigation costs can be substantial, and 
insuring against such costs would likewise result in heightened premiums. 
24
 8  
  
 
 
Id.  at 289 n.2, 944 P.2d at 86 n.2 (“Responsibility Clause”)  
(alterations in original).        at 288, 944 P.2d at 85. The managing and leasing agreement 
between Pomare and Sofos contained the following clause:  
Any actions taken by [Sofos] pursuant to the terms of this 
Agreement shall be done as agent of [Pomare Properties] and 
all obligations or expenses  incurred hereunder will be for  
the account, on behalf of and at the expense of [Pomare 
Properties], with [Pomare Properties’] prior review and 
approval.  
Further, except for the willful misconduct or gross 
negligence of [Sofos], [Pomare Properties] shall indemnify, 
defend and hold [Sofos] harmless from and against any and 
all claims, demands, losses, liabilities and damages of 
every kind and nature arising from any cause whatsoever 
when [Sofos] is acting under thi
s Agreement or the 
instructions of [Pomare Properties] or its designated 
representative. . . . 
In an effort to fill the shopping center with tenants, 
Lee Carter (“Carter”), a real estate salesperson working for 
Sofos, contacted the president of Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. 
(“Pancakes”). According to Pancakes, Carter represented that 
the center would soon reach an eighty to eighty-five percent 
occupancy level. After several months of negotiations, Pancakes 
entered into a lease agreement with Pomare in June 1990, built 
and opened a restaurant by September 1991, and ultimately closed 
the restaurant in December 1991 after suffering huge financial 
losses due to a lack of foot traffic through the mall as the 
shopping center was less than thirty-five percent occupied.  
Pancakes brought suit against the lessee of the shopping center, 
James Romig (“Romig”), Poma re, and Sofos, alleging fraud, 
25

  
    
 
   
  
 intentional and/or negligent misrepresentation, and breach of 
the covenant of good faith and fair dealing against all 
defendants; breach of contract against Romig and Pomare; and 
professional negligence against Sofos. See id. at 288–89, 944 
P.2d at 85–86. 
Sofos tendered the defense of the action to Pomare 
based on the Responsibility Clause. Pomare rejected the tender 
and Sofos filed a cross-claim against Pomare, demanding that 
Pomare honor the Responsibility Clause. See id. at 289, 944 
P.2d at 86. The trial court ultimately ordered Pomare to defend Sofos against Pancakes’s claims, and held Pomare liable for one -
half of accrued attorney’s fees and costs. See id. 
at 289–90, 
944 P.2d at 86–87. Pomare subsequently filed a motion for 
reconsideration on the issue, stating that it had reached a 
settlement with Pancakes, dismissing all claims except the fraud 
and misrepresentation claims against Sofos. Accordingly, Pomare 
argued that the remaining claims were not covered under the Responsibility Clause and therefore Pomare’s duty to defend 
Sofos was extinguished. The trial court denied Pomare’s motion, 
stating that a fully executed agreement had not been submitted 
to the court, leaving “too many unanswered questions.” 
Id. at 
290, 944 P.2d at 87 (brackets omitted). Sofos ultimately 
succeeded in defeating Pancakes’s claims. 
Upon entry of 
26
  
  
 
 judgment, Pomare filed a timely appeal on the issue of its duty 
to defend Sofos. See  id. 
On appeal, the ICA made the following determinations 
as to the scope of the duty to defend as presented in non-
insurance indemnity contracts. 
First, the ICA noted that the duty to defend as 
presented in insurance  contracts is “fairly broad and separate 
and distinct from the duty to indemnify.” Id.  at 291, 944 P.2d  
at 88. The “complaint allegation rule” is followed with respect to these contracts, i.e., “where a suit raises a potential for 
indemnification liability of the insurer to the insured, the 
insurer has a duty to accept the defense of the entire suit  even 
though other claims of the complaint fall outside the policy’s 
coverage.” Id. (quoting  Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co. v. 
Industrial Indem. Co. , 76 Hawai i 166,  169, 872 P.2d 230, 233 
(1994)). The ICA then acknowledged that “ Hawaii has not yet  
expanded the insurer’s duty to defend based on the complaint 
allegation rule to non-insurance indemnity contracts,” but that 
it could “discern no logical reason why the duty to defend based 
on indemnity contracts should not follow the same philosophy 
used in the insurance context.” Id.  at 291–92, 944 P.2d at 88 – 
89. The ICA noted that “[a] number of jurisdictions have freely imported the common law reasoning from insurance cases to 
27

  
  
 
 
 
 
     
     contractual indemnity cases.” Id. at 292, 944 P.2d at 89 (cases 
cited). 
Finally, the ICA concluded: 
The duty to defend, to have any effect at all, must be 
determined when the complaint is filed. Otherwise, an indemnitor can simply refuse to [accept a] tender [of] 
defense whenever a suit alleges claims that are not covered 
by the indemnity provision. This kind of result would 
defeat the purpose of a duty to defend provision by forcing 
the indemnitee to shoulder the entire cost of defending suits that raise the potential for indemnification. 
In our opinion, the procedure used to determine the 
duty to defend based on indemnity contracts can follow the same procedure used in the insurance context. 
If a 
complaint alleges claims that fall within the coverage of 
the indemnity provision, then, according to the complaint 
allegation rule, the duty to defend begins. This is 
separate and distinct from the duty to indemnify.  Once the 
trier of fact makes a determination on the claims in the 
lawsuit, the duty to indemnify will either arise or lie 
dormant. Claims falling within the indemnity provision 
will trigger the duty to indemnify, while claims falling 
outside the provision will relieve the indemnitor of his or 
her duty to indemnify. In our view, this is the only equitable interpretation that gives life to non -insurance 
indemnity clauses and prevents indemnitors from benumbing 
the duty to defend until after a case has been litigated.  
Id.   In applying this legal framework to Pomare’s appeal, the 
ICA held that Pomare’s duty to defend arose when Pancakes filed 
its initial complaint because Pancakes made at least some claims that fell within the scope of the Responsibility Clause, and 
Sofos’s conduct fell within the purview of the management and 
leasing agreement. 
See id.   at 295, 944 P.2d at 92.  
2. Pancakes does not apply to construction contracts. 
HRS § 431:10-222 makes clear that the legislature does  
not view all non-insurance indemnity contracts the same.  
Rather, as a matter of public policy, the legislature  
28

  
   
 
 
                         
   
 statutorily limited the  enforceable terms in construction 
contracts, as promises to indemnify or defend “the promisee 
against liability for bodily injury to persons or damage to 
property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence or 
wilful misconduct of the promisee, the promisee’s agents or 
employees, or indemnitee” are voided by HRS § 431:10 -222.    
Accordingly, the holding in Pancakes   does not apply to 
9 this case.   In  Pancakes , the court applied the complaint  
allegation rule to the management and leasing agreement between 
Sofos and Pomare after it “discern[ed]  no logical reason why the 
duty to defend based on indemnity contracts should not follow the same philosophy used in the insurance context.”   Pancakes, 
85 Hawai i at 291 –92, 944 P.2d at 88 –89.  Here, however, there is 
a cogent reason why a cons truction contract’s duty to defend 
should not necessarily follow insurance law: HRS § 431:10-222 and the legislature’s express intent that  each party to a 
construction contract be responsible for  its “sole negligence or 
wilful misconduct.”     
C. 
	The Scope of a Promisor’s Duty to Defend That Is Imposed by 
a Construction Contract Is Determined at the End of 
Litigation 
HRS § 431:10-222 does not expressly provide whether a 
contractual duty to defend (outside the prohibited bounds of HRS 
We do not, and need not, determine whether Pancakes is applicable to all 
non-insurance indemnity contracts.     
29
 9  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 § 431:10-222) is determined at the outset of litigation based on 
the complaint allegation rule, or whether it is determined at 
the culmination of litigation based only on meritorious claims.  
It clearly prohibits, however, a promisor in a construction 
contract from being contractually required to defend a promisee 
against “liability for bodily injury to persons or damage to 
property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence or 
wilful misconduct of the promisee, the promisee’s age nts or 
employees, or indemn itee.” See HRS § 431:10-222; Part IV.A.  
Thus, if the complaint allegation rule were to apply, it is 
possible in a case where initial allegations were brought 
against multiple parties, for example, that a promisor would be 
compelled to defend a promisee against negligence claims where 
ultimate liability is attributed solely to the promisee.  Such a 
result contravenes HRS § 431:10-222 and our caselaw holding that 
“contracts of indemnity are [to be] strictly construed” against 
the indemnitee.  Kamali v. Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 54 Haw. 153, 161, 
504 P.2d 861, 866 (1972)
.    
As such, we hold that with respect to a duty to defend 
in a construction contract, the scope of a promis
or’s duty to 
defend is determined at the end of litigation. HRS § 431:10-222 effectively renders coextensive the duties to indemnify and 
defend in construction contracts. 
30
  
   
  
  
    
 
   
     
   
 
     
 
   
    V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s June 8, 
2015 Judgment on Appeal entered pursuant to its February 27, 
2015 Opinion, and remand this matter to 
the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Kevin P.H. Sumida           
for petitioners, Sato and  
Associates, Inc. and Daniel  
S. Miyasato /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
Brad S. Petrus  
for respondent, Kamehameha  
Investment Corporation  /s/ 
Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ R. Mark Browning 
Michiro Iwanaga and  
Wayne M. Sakai 
for respondent, Coastal  
Construction Co., Inc.  
 
31
 