***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
ALEXANDER MIRANDA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-17-0000660  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000660 ; CR. NO. 16-1 -0315) 
 
JUNE 4, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
  A defendant in a criminal pr osecution has a 
constitutionally protected right to cross- examine a witness for 
potential bias or motive.  In this case, the defendant argues 
that this right was violated when the circuit court prevented 
defense counsel from cross-examining the complainant about Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000660
04-JUN-2020
07:53 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 (continued . . .)  
 disciplinary action the complainant might have faced as a United 
States Marine for instigating a fight in violation of its code 
of conduct provisions.  We conclude that because the defense  was 
precluded from questioning the complainant about this potential 
source of bias, the jury did not have sufficient information 
from which to make an informed appraisal of the complainant’s 
motives or bias .  We also provide guidance concerning the 
admissibility of other evidence as to the contents  of a 
destroyed video recording under Hawai i Rules of Evidence Rules  
1004 and 403.  
I. BACKGROUND  AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
  On March 27, 2015, 
Alexander Miranda was involved in 
an altercation in which complainant David M etts’ jaw and nose 
were broken.  Miranda was subsequently charged by felony 
information, on March 2, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court) with committing the offense of assault 
in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 707- 711(1)(a) or (b).1  Miranda pleaded not guilty to the 
charge. 
                     
 1 HRS § 707-711(1) (2014) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second 
degree if:  
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes 
substantial bodily injury to another;  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3 
 A. Pre-Trial Proceedings 
  
Prior to trial, Miranda filed a motion to dismiss the 
charge, arguing that the State’s delay in bringing the charge 
violated his due process right to a fair trial.  In a 
declaration submitted with the motion, defense counsel averred 
the following facts.  The altercation occurred on the sidewalk 
in front of an ABC store in Waik īk
ī around midnight  on March 27, 
2015.  Shortly after, in the early morning of  March 28, Miranda 
and his friend Steven Rodriguez were arrested for their 
involvement in the incident.  After their arrest, O fficer Arthur 
Gazelle of the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) reviewed 
security camera footage from the ABC store, which recorded the 
altercation.  Officer Gazelle took a photograph of t he video 
screen when it showed Rodriguez and Metts, but not Miranda.  HPD 
Detective (Det.) Michael Burger was thereafter  assigned to 
investigate the incident.  According to Det. Burger’s closing 
report, he contacted Newell Hirata, an ABC employee, sometime 
during his investigation and Hirata informed him that the 
surveillance video was no longer available.2  Miranda maintained 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or substantial 
bodily injury to another[.]  
 2 At the hearing on the mot ion, Miranda’s counsel argued that he 
had contacted Hirata, who would testify that he never received a request for 
the video.  However, counsel declined the circuit court’s offer to continue 
the hearing in order to subpoena Hirata.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 
 that the loss of the video was caused by the State’s delay in 
bringing the charge, and because the video would have shown that 
Metts was the first aggressor and Miranda acted in self-defense, 
the loss of the video 
violated his right to a fair trial.   
  
At the hearing on the motion to dismiss ,3 Officer 
Gazelle testified that the relevant portion of the video lasted 
about four minutes and showed an argument between Metts, his 
companion Casey Smith, Miranda, Rodriguez, and multiple other 
individuals.  According to Officer Gazelle, Metts and Smith did 
not strike Miranda or Rodriguez, and it did not appear that they 
were instigating the fight.  Miranda threw the first punch, 
striking Metts in the face, and after moving 10 to 15 feet away 
from the group, he suddenly ran back to punch Metts again.  
Officer Gazelle also stated that he took a p
hotograph of the 
video and that it showed Metts and Rodriguez.  The court denied 
the motion, concluding that Miranda had not proven that he 
suffered actual prejudice from the video’s destruction because 
the testimony indicated that the video was not exculpatory and 
would not have supported his claim of self-defense.   
                     
 3 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided over the hearing.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 
 B. Trial and Post -Trial Proceedings 
  
A jury trial commenced with motions in limine on April 
10, 2017.4  The State sought  permission to present Officer 
Gazelle’s testimony regarding  the contents of the video.  
Miranda filed a written opposition and a separate motion in 
limine seeking an order precluding 
Officer Gazelle’s testimony 
as to the video’s contents.  The court ruled that Officer 
Gazelle could testify that he viewed the video, but he would be 
precluded from describing its contents.   
  
Defense counsel then informed the court that the 
defense would seek to admit the photograph that Officer Gazelle 
had taken of the security video screen into evidence.  Counsel 
asked the court to make a ruling as to the admissibility of the 
photograph, which according to the officer’s report showed the 
moment before Rodriguez punched Metts ’ face.  Miranda was not in 
the picture, counsel explained, and  it was consistent with 
Miranda’s defense that he had walked away after throwing one 
punch in self-defense to stop the fight.   The court stated that 
it was unable to determine the relevance of the photograph 
without knowing what the testimony of the witnesses would be.  
Defense counsel proposed to give an offer of proof, but the 
court stated that the issue could be decided at the bench or 
                     
 4 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided over the trial proceedings.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 
 during recess after the relevant witnesses had testified.  The 
State maintained that allowing the photograph into evidence 
would open the door to 
Officer Gazelle’s testimony as to the 
video’s contents.  The court  noted that it was “one picture in 
an entire video” and that its introduction might open the door 
to testimony regarding the contents of the video recording.   
 
 The State called Samuel Wight as its first witness.  
Wight testified that on the night of the incident, he was 
walking in Waik īkī when he heard shouting
 and cursing.  He 
turned around and saw three people confronting two other people; 
the trio was yelling at the other two individuals , who were not 
yelling back.  According to Wight, the taller male of the three 
individuals, who he later identified as 
Miranda, was standing 
about a meter away from Metts , who had his hands up with his 
palms facing forward.  Miranda took a step toward Metts and 
punched him with an uppercut.  Wight said that he heard a loud 
cracking sound and saw Metts start spitting blood
.  Wight ran 
over to the group and Miranda was cocking his fist back as if he 
was going for another hit, but he did not punch Metts again.  
Wight acknowledged that he did not include in his written 
statement to police that he witnessed a “fist cocked back” or 
heard a loud cracking sound.  Wight also stated that he did not 
see anyone else punch 
Metts and did not see Metts push or punch 
anyone in the other group or get into a fighting stance.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 
   Metts , who was enlisted in the United States Marines 
at the time of the incident,  testified that on the evening of 
March 27, 2015, he was at a bar in the Waikīkī area just before 
midnight with Smith, also a marine.   He stated t hat he had no 
more than three drinks at the bar and was not drunk.  Metts said 
that he and Smith encountered Miranda and two other men on the 
sidewalk in Waik īkī.  As they passed the group,  he turned his 
body to let them by and was shoulder-bumped .  When he turned 
around to see what had happened, the three males were looking 
back at them.  O ne of the three males stood “forehead to 
forehead” with Smith, whose shoulder was in a sling.  Metts said 
that he shifted his focus to Smith when he saw the sling get 
ripped off Smith’s shoulder and that he was then struck across 
the face.  He immediately felt blood fill his mouth and his 
mouth felt different.  H e believed he was struck again, but he 
was no longer positive and only remembered being hit once.  
Metts testified that he never touched Miranda or any of his 
friends.  
 
 On cross- examination, M etts acknowledged that he said 
he had shoved someone during an interview with a detective, but 
that now he did not remember shoving anyone or saying that he 
did.  He also acknowledged 
telling the detective in the 
interview that he had been punched twice.   Metts stated that 
during a field lineup, he singled out Miranda as the person who ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 
 punched him and stated that both Miranda and the person next to 
him in the lineup were part of the group.  Audio from the 
recorded interview was played for the jury.  In the recording, 
Metts stated that he was hit twice by the same person while 
trying to keep one of the males away from his friend, and that 
during the identification proced ure he pointed out two of the 
males in the lineup but could not say which one hit him.5   
  
Defense counsel then asked Metts about t he “Marine 
Corps . . . code of conduct, ” (code of conduct)  but the State 
objected to the question as irrelevant.  The following exchange 
took place:  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL ]: What’s the policy --
what’s the code of 
conduct on alcohol?  
 
[METTS]: I don’ t know it verbatim.  
 
  [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Just tell me what your recollection is of it.  
 
[METTS]: Don’t get overly drunk and make a fool of 
yourself.  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL ]: Okay.  What are the consequences if you 
violate that code of conduct?  
 
[PROSECUTOR ]: Objection.  Relevance.  
 
THE COURT: Sustained.   
Defense counsel asked for a bench conference and argued that the 
questions went to bias and motive.  The court replied there was 
no evidence that Metts was overly drunk or acting out and it 
                     
 5 Metts acknowledged the inconsistency in his testimony.  On re -
direct examination, Metts  testified he was on painkillers at the time he gave 
his interview, his voice in the audio was “slower and slurrier,” his 
“thinking” at the time was slower, and it was harder to focus.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 
 would not “allow [defense counsel] to place that on trial here.”  
The State argued that, because Metts was no longer in the 
Marines, “bias, interest, and motive is gone.”  Defense counsel 
responded, “This is at the time of the offense --” to which the 
court replied, while counsel was in mid-sentence , “Right.  I 
understand,” and ended the bench conference.     
  Defense counsel then attempted to ask Metts about the 
code of conduct with regard to fighting, and the State’s 
objection was sustained before Metts could respond:   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: What is the Marine code of conduct in 
terms of fighting?  
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Objection, Your Honor.  
 
THE COURT: Sustained.  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. Okay. 
 
  Dr. Jerry Beckham, who attended to Metts’ injuries 
after the incident, testified that Metts stated he had been hit 
twice in the face and complained  of jaw and nose pain.  Metts 
had a jaw fracture in two places and a nose fracture, and his  
injuries were consistent with blunt force trauma to the face.  
The doctor stated that he could not say how many times Metts had 
been hit and that his injuries could be consisten
t with being 
punched once or more than once. 
  HPD Officer Riley Saunders, who arrived at the scene 
after the incident occurred, testif ied that he apprehended 
Miranda, Rodriguez, and Victor Vargas as they were running away ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 
 from the scene.  He placed the three men in a field lineup with 
a male bystander who had not been involved in the incident.  
Wight and Metts both identified Miranda and Rodriguez  as males 
that had hit Metts.  Officer Saunders stated that, at some point 
after the identification, Miranda said, “Office r, to be honest, 
I did it.  I hit the kid.”   The officer further testified that 
during booking he noticed Rodriguez  wince as his handcuffs were 
removed and that his right hand “look[ed] a little puffy”; the 
officer did not recall observing any injuries to Miranda’s 
hands.  
  O fficer Gazelle testified that on the night of  the 
incident he was flagged down in response to an assault- type case 
that occurred in front of an ABC store.  The officer stated that 
he viewed a surveillance video from the ABC store but was unable 
to obtain a copy of it at the time .  He left a form with the 
manager requesting a copy of the video.  Officer Gazelle 
indicated that he took one picture of the surveillance video 
with his phone. 
  Det. Burger testified that he interviewed Metts in the 
early morning of March 28, 2015, in an emergency room at Tripler 
Medical Army Hospital.   He prepared two separate  photographic 
lineups, one containing a photograph of Miranda and the other 
containing a photograph of Rodriguez, prior to meeting with 
Metts and Smith at the hospital.  Neither Metts nor Smith was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11 
 able to identify anyone depicted in the photographs as being a 
suspect in the case.  Det. Burger testified that he learned 
during his investigation that Rodriguez may have assaulted 
Metts.  The detective also explained that he obtained an 
administrative subpoena request ing the video surveillance from 
the ABC store and was eventually told the video had been written 
over.   
 
 Miranda testified that he, Rodriguez , and Vargas were 
enlisted in the United States Army and stationed on O ʻahu at the 
time of the incident
.  That evening, as they were walking toward 
an ABC store in Waik īkī, one of his friends was teasing him 
about an ex-girlfriend and pointing in the direction she used to 
live; they began laughing and continued walking.   Miranda heard 
someone say, “What the fuck?  What the fuck did you just say to 
me?  I’ll fuck you up?” and he, Rodriguez , and Vargas  turned 
around.  Metts and Smith were yelling at them, and Rodriguez 
headed toward the two men as they headed toward them, until 
Rodriguez and Metts were face to face.  Metts shoved and grabbed 
Rodriguez, Miranda stated.  He told Metts and Smith  to relax and 
that they were not talking about them.  Metts replied that he 
“[didn’t] give a fuck, he’ll fuck me up,” and came towards him ; 
Miranda stated that he then defended himself with one punch to 
the right side of Metts ’
 face, aiming for the nose.   He started 
to walk away and turned around again when he noticed that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12 
 neither of his two friends had followed him,  and he saw 
Rodriguez in a scuffle with Metts.   He went over to grab 
Rodriguez, and the two walked  away.  Miranda s aid that they were 
stopped by police and after the field lineup he told officers, 
“to be honest . . . I hit the kid in self- defense.”   
  During Miranda’s testimony, d efense counsel attempted 
to introduce the photograph of the surveillance video into 
evidence, and a bench conference was held.  The State argued 
that if Miranda introduced the photograph, it  should be allowed 
to call Officer Gazelle in rebuttal to give context as to what 
the photograph showed and what was in the video.  The court 
stated that it agreed.  Miranda ’s counsel  responded that the 
photograph’s purpose was to show the area where the incident 
happened, there was no dispute as to the photograph ’s accuracy, 
and testimony  would not be elicited about any actions depicted  
in the photograph.  Rather, the photograph was to explain the 
area and to show who was pictured in it .  The court ruled that 
the officer would be allowed to testify as to the video’s 
contents if the photograph was introduced, noting that its  
introduction would be prejudicial without the officer’s 
testimony and that Miranda was not even in the picture.  Counsel 
replied, “Right, that supports our defense.”  The  court stated 
it had ruled.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 
   Miranda was then shown the photograph.  The photograph 
fairly and accurately depicted the front of the ABC store, 
Miranda stated, and Metts, Rodriguez, and Vargas  were pictured, 
but he was not.  Rodriguez was holding a hat in the photograph, 
Miranda testified , and Rodriguez  had been wearing the hat prior 
to the photograph being taken and as they passed the ABC Store.    
  After Miranda’s testimony, the State called Officer 
Gazelle as a rebuttal witness.  Defense counsel objected  to the 
testimony as hearsay and disputed that the  introduction of the 
photograph had opened the door to Gazelle’s testimony .  The 
court overruled the objection, and Officer Gazelle testified 
that he viewed surveillance video capturing the time frame from 
about 11:30 p.m. until 11:34 p.m.  The officer testified that at 
some point during the video, Met ts, Smith, Miranda, Rodriguez, 
and Vargas appeared, an d that Miranda and Rodriguez  seemed to be 
“calling out Metts and Smith. ”  The officer explained that 
Miranda’s and Rodriguez ’ body language was “more forward” and 
they had “clenched fists” while Metts and Smith put their hands 
up at some points and their body language indicated that they 
did not want trouble.  Miranda approached Metts and Rodriguez 
approached Smith, the officer testified, and at some point, 
Metts had his hands up and stepped  to the side, and Miranda 
threw a punch toward Metts.   At a different point Rodriguez 
threw a punch at Smith.  The officer could not recall whether ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 
 Miranda or Rodriguez threw the first punch.   After the initial 
punches were thrown, bystanders began to intervene and broke up 
the fight.  Miranda, Rodriguez , and Vargas walked away, but 
Miranda returned about thirty seco nds later and punched Metts 
one time before walking away again.   The officer  saw at least 
three, maybe four, punches being thrown in the video, and that 
at least two of the punches hit Metts and at least one punch hit 
Smith.   
  O fficer Gazelle testified that  he was rushed when he 
was watching the video and was not in control of the rewinding, 
fast-forwarding, pausing, or stopping of the video while he 
watched.  The officer acknowledged  that his report included only 
three sentences about the surveillance video, he had testified 
to some facts that were not in his report, and he wrote in his 
report that the photograph depicted “the moment before Rodrigue s 
punched Metts’ face.”  Officer Gazelle testified , however, that 
he did not now remember if Rodriguez actually threw the punch or 
not.  The officer said that he did not recall taking any notes 
while he watched the video, he did not remember seeing any 
shoulder bump in the video, and he did not know how the argument  
began. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 
   At the close of the evidence, the court instructed the 
jury as to accomplice liability.6  Defense counsel objected to 
this instruction as submitted to the jury, arguing that it 
misstated the law as set out in applicable precedent
.7   
  
The jury found Miranda guilty as charged.  
Subsequently, Miranda filed a motion to set aside the verdict 
and enter a judgment of acquittal or in the alternative for a 
new trial (motion to set aside the verdict) .  At the hearing on 
the motion, defense counsel maintained that an investigator had 
contacted Hirata, the ABC employee, following the jury’s verdict 
and learned that Hirata did not receive, and had never received, 
any administrative subpoena relating to the security video.  The 
                     
 6 The accomplice instruction read as follows:  
 
 A defendant charged  with committing an offense may be 
guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in the 
commission of the offense.  The prosecution must prove 
accomplice liability beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 A person is an accomplice of another in the 
commission of  an offense with the intent -- if, with the 
intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the 
offense, he aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other 
person in the planning or commission of the offense.    
 Mere presence at the scene of an offense or knowledge that 
an offense is being committed, without more, does not make a 
person an accomplice to an offense.  However, if a person plans 
or participates in the commission of an offense with the intent 
to promote or facilitate the offense, he is an accomplice to the 
commission of the offense . 
 
 7 During jury deliberations the court received two jury 
communications regarding the accomplice liability instruction.  In its first 
communication to the court, the jury asked: “Reference page 39.  Could you 
please clarify accomplice.”  The court’s reply instructed the jury to “Please 
refer to your jury instructions.”  In its second communication, the jury 
asked: “Is it required to first establish whether or not the defendant caused 
the substantial bodily injury befor e we consider the accomplice provision?”  
The court replied: “Please consider your instructions as a whole.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16 
 court denied the motion, concluding that the defense had 
opportunities to contact Hirata both prior to and during trial 
but failed to do so.   
  On July 12, 2017, the circuit court sentenced Miranda 
to four years of probation (circuit court judgment).  Miranda 
timely appealed the circuit court judgment to the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA).   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  
Miranda argued before the ICA that the circuit court 
erred, inter alia, in precluding the defense from cross-
examining Metts on the Marine Corps ’ code of conduct and for 
allowing Officer Gazelle to testify as to the contents of the 
security video.  The ICA concluded that Miranda had been given a 
constitutionally adequate opportunity to demonstrate
 to the jury 
any bias or motive to lie 
Metts may have had because the jury 
knew that Metts was a marine at the time of the incident, that 
the Marine Corps has a code of conduct, and that the code 
provides that marines should not become overly intoxicated.8  The 
ICA also noted that Metts was no longer in the military at the 
time of trial and that any bias he may have had with respect to 
his military career was no longer relevant.  Additionally, the 
ICA held that the admission of Officer Gazelle’s testimony about 
                     
 8 The ICA’s memorandum opinion can be found at State v. Miranda, 
No. CAAP- 17-0000660, 2019 WL 5099617 (App. Oct. 11, 2019) (mem.).  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17 
 the contents of the video was not erroneous.  The ICA stated 
that defense counsel was warned that introduction of the 
photograph would open the door to the testimony, the evidence at 
trial showed that the video was lost and thus supported 
the 
testimony’s admission, and Miranda had not proven that 
the video 
was lost in bad faith.9   
III.  STANDARD S OF REVIEW 
A. Relevance of Evidence  
  A trial court’s determination regarding the relevance 
of evidence is a conclusion of law.  Walsh v. Chan , 80 Hawai ‘i 
212, 215, 908 P.2d 1198, 1201 (1995).  Conclusions of law are 
reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard of review.  
State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai ‘i 409, 421, 453 P.3d 229, 241 (2019) 
(citing Maria v. Freitas, 73 Haw. 266, 270, 832 P.2d 259, 262 
(1992)).   
B. Constitutional Questions  
  Questions of constitutional law are reviewed de novo 
under the right/wrong standard.  
State v. Ui,  142 Hawai ‘i 287, 
292, 418 P.3d 628, 633 (2018) (quoting State v. Friedman, 93 
Hawai‘i 63, 67, 996 P.2d 268, 272 (2000)). 
                     
 9 Additionally, Miranda appealed the denial of his pre -trial motion 
to dismiss, the instruction given to the jury on accomplice liability, and 
the denial of the post -trial motion to set aside the verdict.  The ICA also 
affirmed the circuit court rulings as to these points of error.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18 
 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Violation of Miranda’s Right of Confrontation D eprived 
Him of a Fair Trial.   
1. The Circuit Court Erred in Precluding Cross- Examination on 
the Source of Metts’ Potential Bias . 
 
 The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution 
and article I, section 14 of the Hawai ‘i Constituti
on guarantees 
an accused the right to confront adverse witnesses.   State v. 
Balisbisana, 83 Hawai‘i 109, 115, 924 P.2d 1215, 1221 (1996).  
“Indeed, the main and essential purpose of confrontation is  to 
secure for the opponent the opportunity of cross- examination[,] 
. . . [and] the exposure of a witness ’ motivation in testifying 
is a proper and important function of the constitutionally 
protected right of cross examination.”   Id. (alterations in 
original) (quoting Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 678-79 
(1986)).  Additionally, Hawai‘i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 
609.1(a) (2016) provides that the “credibility of a witness may 
be attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive.”   This 
court has established that “bias, interest, or motive is  always 
relevant under HRE Rule 609.1.”   State v. Levell , 128 Hawai‘i 34, 
40, 282 P.3d 576, 582 (2012) (brackets omitted) (quoting State 
v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 220, 738 P.2d 812, 823 (1987)).   
  Our decisions have displayed a commitment to 
protecting an accused ’s constitutional right to demonstrate the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19 
 bias or motive of a  witness in cross-examination.   In 
Balisbisana, the defendant was charged with abuse of a family or 
household member.  83 Hawai ‘i at 111, 924 P.2d at 1217.
  The 
trial court excluded reference to the complainant’s conviction 
for harassing the defendant, and the defendant was subsequently 
convicted.  Id. at 112-13, 924 P.2d at 1218 -19.  On appeal, we 
held that the trial court’ s exclusion of the prior conviction 
violated the defendant’s right to confront the witness and 
expose evidence of the complainant ’s motive for bringing false 
charges against him.  Id. at 113-16, 924 P.2d at 1219-2 2.  This 
court explained that the appropriate inquiry  is whether “the 
jury had sufficient information from which to make an informed 
appraisal of [the complaining witness ’s] motives and bias, 
absent evidence of her conviction for harassing [the 
defendant].”  Id. at 116, 924 P.2d at 1222.  In not permitting 
defense counsel “to expose the fact from which the jurors could 
appropriately draw inferences relat ing to [the complainant ’s] 
motive or bias,” we concluded that the trial court abused its 
discretion as “a reasonable jury might have received a 
significantly different impression ” of the complain ant’s 
credibility.  Id.   
  In State v. Marcos , the defendant, who was convicted 
of abuse of a family or household member, was not allowed to 
cross-examine the complaining witness about a pending family ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 
 court case concerning the custody of their child.  106 Hawai ‘i 
116, 117-20, 102 P.3d 360, 361-6 4 (2004).  On appeal, the 
defendant argued that the complaining witness had a motive to 
fabricate the allegations against him and that his right to 
cross-examine the complainant to demonstrate motive was 
violated.  Id. at 117, 102 P.3d at 361.  In vacating the ICA ’s 
affirmance of defendant’s conviction, we held that the 
defendant’s right of confrontation  was violated as “the jurors 
were entitled to have the benefit of the defense theory before 
them so that they could make an informed judgment as to the 
weight to place on complain ant’s testimony .”  Id. (brackets 
omitted).   
  I n Levell, we again confirmed “the appropriate inquiry
is whether the trier of fact had sufficient information from 
which to make an informed appraisal of the witness ’s motives and
bias.”  128 Hawai ‘i at 40, 282 P.3
d at 582.   In that case, the 
defendant , who was charged with harassment for allegedly shoving
the complainant , was not permitted to cross- examine the 
complainant as to whether she had stolen and used the 
defendant ’s credit cards after his  arrest.  Id. at 35, 40 , 282 
P.3d at 577 , 582.  The ICA upheld  the conviction.  On  review, 
this court  concluded that the defendant’s constitutional right 
to confront the witness had been violated.  Id.   We explained 
that if the defendant had been allowed to ask about the alleged  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 
 theft, he might have elicited testimony tending to show that the 
complainant was biased or motivated to fabricate or exaggerate a 
story about harassment
, which may have affected the trial 
court’s view of the complain ant’s testimony and,  ultimately, 
whether the State had proven its case.  Id.    
  In State v. Acacio , the defendant was convicted of 
terroristic threatening based on a domestic dispute between the 
defendant and his ex- girlfriend, the complaining witness.  140 
Hawaii
 92, 94, 398 P.3d 681, 683 (2017).  The trial court 
precluded the defense from cross-examining the complainant with 
regard to her knowledge of the defendant’s immigration status.  
Id.  The defense had sought to show that the complainant knew 
that the defendant could be deported if he was arrested and her  
desire to have him deported motivated her to exaggerate or 
fabricate her allegation.  Id. at 101, 398 P.3d at 690.  On 
appeal, the ICA affirmed the conviction, holding the jury had 
sufficient information 
to appraise the credibility of the 
complaining witness because the court permitted evidence that 
the complainant wanted the defendant out of the house and that  
she was angry with him for not leaving when asked and before 
speaking to police.  Id. 
  On certiorari review, this court held that the trial 
court’s exclusion of this evidence violated the defendant’s 
right to confrontation.  Id.  We stated that the “ cross-***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 
 examination of the complaining witness is not sufficient if the 
defendant is deprived of an opportunity to present evidence 
about the source of the complaining witness ’s potential bias or 
motive.”  Id.  Since the complaining witness’s knowledge of the 
defendant’s immigration status may have motivated the 
complainant to fabricate the abuse allegation, the trial court’s 
exclusion of the evidence prevented the jury from having 
sufficient information from which to make an informed assessment 
of the witness’s bias or motive .  Id.   
  These cases demonstrate  that the appropriate inquiry 
when reviewing an alleged violation of a defendant’s 
constitutionally protected right to demonstrate bias or motive 
is whether the trier of fact had sufficient information, 
including as to its source, from which to make an informed 
appraisal of the witness ’s potential motiv e and bias .  See 
Acacio, 140 Hawai i at 100-01 , 398 P.3d at 689 -90; State v. 
Brown, 145 Hawai i 56, 61- 62, 446 P.3d 973, 978 -79 (2019)  
(complainant’s probation status created a potential interest to 
shape her testimony that was different in nature than other 
admitted evidence).  Once the  defendant is afforded the 
threshold level of inquiry under the confrontation clause, the 
trial court may conduct a balancing test to weigh the probative 
value of any additional motive evidence against its potential ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23 
 for undue prejudice.  Acacio, 140 Hawai i at 99, 398 P.3d at 688 
(“[T]he trial court’ s discretion becomes operative ‘only  after 
the constitutionally required threshold level of inquiry has 
been afforded the defendant .’” (quoting Levell, 128 Hawaii at 
39, 282 P.3d at 681)).   
  In this case, Metts testified that he had been 
drinking at a bar immediately prior to the altercation,  he was 
not drunk on the evening of the incident, and the altercation 
was initiated by a shoulder bump from Miranda ’s group.  Metts 
also stated at trial that Miranda was the person who punched him 
and that he did not remember shoving anyone during the incident
.  
Defense counsel questioned Metts about several inconsistent 
statements made to Det. Burger after the incident, including 
that Metts could not remember if it was Miranda or Rodriguez 
that hit him, whether he was hit twice, and  whether he had 
shoved someone.  Defense counsel then attempted to question 
Metts about his knowledge of the consequences he would be 
subjected to as a marine for violating its code of conduct on 
drinking alcohol.  The State objected, and Miranda argued that 
the evidence went to Metts’ bias and motive.  The court stated 
that it would not allow inquiry into this area because there was 
no evidence that Metts was overly drunk that night.  The court 
sustained the objection, thus precluding the defense from ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 
 questioning Metts as to his knowledge of any consequences he 
might have suffered as a marine with regard to his alcohol 
consumption.   Defense counsel then  sought to question Metts as 
to the code of conduct ’s provision s on fighting.  The court 
sustained the State’s objection before Metts could  respond to 
the question.    
  Defense counsel ’s questions sought to  show that  Metts 
had an interest or motive to be un truthful in his statements to 
police in order to avoid military discipline for his conduct 
with regard to alcohol consumption and fighting.  T he source of 
this motive was  Metts’ awareness  of the consequences he would be 
subject to as an enlisted marine for engaging in prohibited 
conduct with regard to drinking and fighting.    
  T he circuit court entirely precluded cross -examination 
as to the code of conduct with regard to fighting.   The jury had 
heard conflicting testimony during trial about who was 
responsible for instigating the argument,  whether Metts shoved 
anyone, and how many punches were thrown.  However, t he jury did 
not receive any testimony about Metts’ knowledge  of the 
discipline that may have been triggered for  fighting .  Awareness 
of the conduct proscribed by the code of conduct regarding 
fighting,  that may have motivated Metts to exaggerate Miranda’s 
participation in instigating the fight and minimize his own 
culpability to avoid disciplinary  consequences,  might have ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 
 affected the jury’s view of  the veracity of Metts’ testimony.  
In other words, without knowing what Metts knew or believed 
regarding the consequences for violating the code of conduct as 
to fighting, the jury was not presented with the “source” of 
Metts’ potential bias
, and it therefore had insufficient 
information from which to make an informed appraisal of Metts’ 
motives and biases.  Acacio, 140 Hawai i at 101,  398 P.3d at 690; 
Brown, 145 Hawai i at 61-62, 446 P.3d at  978-79.  
  The ICA  nevertheless  concluded that Miranda was given 
an adequate opportunity to demonstrate Metts ’ bias because the 
jury was informed that Metts was a marine, the Marine Corps has 
a code of conduct, and the code proscribes becoming “overly 
intoxicated.”  The ICA’s analysis did not discuss the circuit 
court’s preclusion of cross -examination as to provisions in the 
code of conduct regarding fighting, except to say that any 
motive Metts would have had to deflect responsibility for the 
fight would have been apparent to the jury.  But any assumption 
by the ICA that the jury would have necessarily inferred there 
were provisions in the code of conduct concerning  fighting would 
be flawed because the defense was not allowed to elicit this 
evidence.  Moreover, such an inference would not have informed 
the jury as to the source of Metts ’ motivation  to shape his 
testimony because defense counsel was prevented from eliciting ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26 
 testimony regarding Metts’ awareness of the consequences he 
would face for violating provisions of the code of conduct for 
fighting.  Had defense counsel been allowed to elicit Metts ’ 
knowledge of such consequences, the jury might have been left 
with a different impression about 
whether Metts had an incentive 
to minimize his actions to avoid punishment .  The ICA’s reliance 
on evidence that did not disclose the source of Metts’ bias or 
motive was therefore error.  See  Brown, 125 Hawai i at 61-62, 446 
P.3d at 978-79 (“Giving a defendant ‘considerable latitude’ 
during cross- examination  of the complaining witness is not 
sufficient if the defendant is deprived of an opportunity to 
present evidence about the source of the complaining witness’s 
potential bias or motive.”  (brackets omitted) (quoting Acacio , 
140 Hawai i at 101, 398 P.3d at 690)).   
  
The ICA also concluded that because Metts was no 
longer in the military at the time of trial, any motive or bias 
he may have had at the time of the incident was no longer at 
issue.  However, any motive to fabricate or exaggerate 
statements that Metts may have had at the time of the incident 
is clearly relevant to the veracity of statements he made at 
that time, as is an  intent or natural inclination to provide 
trial testimony consistent with his prior statements although he 
was no longer serving in the military.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 
   Accordingly, the circuit court erred in precluding the 
defense from asking Metts about his knowledge of the code of 
conduct regarding fighting and the potential consequences that a 
marine would be subject to 
for violation of its provisions.  
Because Miranda was not given an opportunity to present evidence 
about the source of Metts ’ potential bias or motive, Miranda was 
not afforded “the threshold level of inquiry required  under the 
confrontation clau se” that would have provided the jury with 
sufficient information from which to make an informed decision 
of Metts’ “‘motives and bias’ as to [his] testimony .”  Brown, 
145 Hawai i at 62, 446 P.3d at 979.  Thus, Miranda’s right to 
confront adverse witnesses to show bias, interest, or motive 
under article I, section 14 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution was 
violated, and the ICA erred in affirming the circuit court’s 
ruling on this issue.10 
2. The Error Was Not Harmless Beyond a Reasonable Doubt. 
  
The denial of a defend ant’s constitutional right to 
impeach the credibility of a  witness is subject to harmless 
error review.  Acacio, 140 Hawai i
 at 102, 398 P.3d at 691.  “In 
                     
 10 In light of our resolution, we do not address the circuit court’s 
restriction of cross- examination regarding provisions in the code of conduct 
as to drinking.  Additionally, because we conclude that Miranda was not 
provided the threshold level of inquiry required under the confrontation 
clause, no further inquiry is required regarding application of HRE Rule 403.  
Acacio, 140 Hawai i at 101 n.3, 398 P.3d at 690 n.3 (noting that this step in 
the analysis is not necessary when the threshold level of inquiry under the 
confrontation clause is not met).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 
 applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard the 
court is required to examine the record and determine whether 
there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of 
might have contributed to the conviction.”  Id. (quoting State 
v. Pond, 118 Hawai i 452, 461, 193 P.3d 368, 377 (2008)).  
Several factors may be considered in determining whether a 
violation of a defendant’s constitutional right to impeach was 
harmless, including: “the importance of the witness’ testimony 
in the prosecution’s case, whether the testimony was cumulative, 
the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or 
contradicting the testimony of the witness on material points, 
the extent of cross- examination otherwise permitted, and, of 
course, the overall strength of the prosecution’s case.”   Id. 
(quoting Levell, 128 Hawaii at 42, 282 P.3d at 584).  
  Metts testified that the incident was instigated by 
Miranda’s group, the group was making derogatory arguments 
toward them,  and he did not recall shoving anyone.  Miranda 
stated that  Metts and Smith engaged his group first, Metts was 
making threatening remarks, and he hit Metts in self- defense.  
Metts’ testimony therefore stood in direct conflict with 
Miranda’s explanation that he acted in self-defense.    
  While two other witnesses presented testimony of what 
happened during and after the incident, neither witness provided ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 
 evidence as to how the altercation was initiated.  Wight stated 
that he became aware of the incident when he heard yelling and 
that he witnessed the punch soon after he turned around from 
about 50 feet away.  Officer Gazelle testified that he did not 
know how the argument began and did not recall seein g a shoulder 
bump in the video.  The officer had only seen the video once, 
two years prior, and did not take any notes while watching the 
video.  Addit ionally, there were several conflicting accounts as 
to the number of punches thrown, the types of punches thrown, 
the persons who threw the punches, and the number of times Metts 
was hit.11  As such, Metts ’ account of how the incident began and 
unfolded was crucial to rebutting Miranda’ s self-defense 
testimony, and the case essentially turned on the credibility of 
Metts and Miranda.   
  
Because the jury’s perception of Metts’  credibility 
could have been affected by the knowledge of a potential bias or 
motive to fabricate or shape his testimony, there is a 
                     
 11 Metts testified that he was hit once and did not remember if he 
was hit twice.  However, in a recorded interview with Det. Burger played for 
the jury, Metts stated he was hit twice.  Miranda stated he had only hit 
Metts once and that he was aiming for Metts ’ nose.  Dr. Beckham testified 
that Metts said he had been hit twice and that Metts had suffered fractures 
to his jaw and nose, which could be consistent with being hit once or more 
than once.  Wight testified that he saw Miranda “uppercut” Metts once and 
that Miranda cocked back his fist as if he were going to strike Metts once 
more, but he did not punch Metts again.  Officer Gazelle stated that the 
video showed Metts getting punched at least two times and Smith getting 
punched at least once and that he did not remember whether Rodriguez also 
threw any punches, although he acknowledged that his report stated he “took a 
screenshot depicting the moment before Rodrigues punched Metts face.”     
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30 
 reasonable possibility that the circuit court’s error might have 
contributed to Miranda’s conviction.  The error was therefore 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   
B. The Circuit Court Erred in Determining that Miranda “Opened 
the Door” to Testimony about the Contents of the Surveillance 
Video.12 
  
Miranda argues that the circuit court erred in finding 
that the introduction of the photograph “opened the door” to 
Officer Gazelle’s testimony regarding the surveillance video.  
  This court has stated that the doctrine of “opening 
the door” is essentially a rule of expanded relevancy.13  State 
v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai ‘i 409, 422, 4 53 P.3d 229, 242 (2019) 
(quoting State v. James, 677 A.2d 734, 742 (N.J. 1996)).  
Pursuant to this doctrine, when one party presents inadmissible 
evidence to the jury, the opposing party is permitted to adduce 
pertinent evidence that would otherwise be inadmissible in order 
to rebut the improperly introduced evidence.  Id.   The extent of 
this doctrine is limited, and it does not allow a party to 
                     
 12 Although we conclude that the violation of Miranda’s right to 
cross-examine the witness denied him a fair trial, we consider the admission 
of the testimony about the contents of the video to address the ICA’s 
analysis and to provide guidance in the event the issue arises in subsequent 
proceedings.   
 13 This rule has also been referred to as the doctrine of “curative 
admissibility” or “fighting fire with fire.”  State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 
462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997).  This court has not determined whether to 
adopt the doctrine.  State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai i 409, 424, 453 P.3d 229, 244 
(2019) (“[E]ven if we were to adopt the doctrine of curative admissibility, 
it would not be applicable to the present case .” (quoting Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 
at 497, 946 P.2d at 67)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31 
 adduce inadmissible evidence for the purpose of rebutting 
inferences raised by the introduction of admissible evidence.  
Id. at 422- 23, 453 P.3d at 242- 43 (“Admissible evidence 
therefore does not ‘open the door’  to otherwise inadmissible 
evidence.” (citing State v. Middleton, 998 S.W.2d 520, 528 (Mo. 
1999))); State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 462, 497,  946 P.2d 32, 67 
(1997) (holding that defense counsel did not “open the door” to 
the introduction of inadmissible evidence by eliciting 
admissible evidence).   
  In this case, defense counsel sought to admit the 
photograph Officer Gazelle took of the security video into 
evidence.  As an offer of proof, counsel stated that the picture 
was an accurate depiction of the sidewalk where the altercation 
occurred on the night of the incident.  The State maintained 
that the introduction of this picture would open the door to 
testimony as to the rest of the video but did not dispute that 
the picture accurately depicted the scene, and Miranda testified 
that the picture was a fair and accurate representation of the 
scene.  It is well- settled that a photograph of the scene should 
be admitted so long as a witness who is familiar with the scene 
and competent to testify verifies the photograph as an accurate 
representation of the scene at the time in question.  Territory 
v. Hays, 43 Haw. 58, 65 (Haw. Terr. 1958);  State v. Sequin, 73 
Haw. 331, 338, 832 P.2d 269, 273 (1992) (affirming trial court’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 
 exclusion of a photograph that did not accurately depict the 
relevant area).  The photograph  was thus admissible evidence of 
the appearance of the area where the altercation occurred on the 
night of the incident.  Additionally, Officer Gazelle’s police 
report stated that the photograph depicted the moment before 
Rodriguez punched Metts’ face , and its admissibility was not 
disputed at trial.  Because Miranda was not attempting to 
introduce inadmissible evidence but instead admissible 
photographic evidence of the scene, the “opening the door” 
doctrine is not applicable.14     
  It is noted that the prosecutor and the court appeared 
to be concerned that the photograph would be misleading to the 
jury as it only represented a single snapshot of the entire 
incident and Miranda was not shown in the photograph.  The 
concerns of the prosecutor and the court could have been 
addressed by providing 
a cautionary instruction.  See, e.g., 
Hawaii Standard Jury Instruction Criminal 2.01 Cautionary 
Instruction--Recess (“ [K]eep an open mind until all the evidence 
has been presented, the Court has instructed you on the law that 
applies in this case and final arguments have been given.”); 
                     
 14 Because we find that the opening the door doctrine is 
inapplicable in this case, we do not reach the issue of whether this court 
should adopt the doctrine.  See Lavoie, 145  Hawaii at 424, 453 P.3d at 244; 
Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i at 497, 946 P.2d at 67.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 
 2.04 Cautionary Instruction During Trial Regarding Transcript of 
a Recording.  T he prosecutor could have requested and the court 
could have fashioned a cautionary instruction that , for example,  
informed the jury that the photograph depicted a single snapshot 
of the entire incident and the jury must consider the weight to 
be given to the photo graph in light of all the other evidence 
that was admitted for its consideration.   
  While we conclude that defense counsel did not open 
the door to Officer Gazelle’s testimony regarding the 
surveillance video, the State argues, and the ICA appears to 
have concluded, that the evidence was nevertheless admissible 
under HRE Rule 1004 (2016 ).  Under HRE Rule 1004(1), “ The 
original or a duplicate is not required, and other evidence of 
the contents of a writing, recording, or photograph is 
admissible if . . . . [a]ll originals are lost or have been 
destroyed, unless the proponent lost or destroyed them in bad 
faith.”  We have previously held that testimony can serve as a 
duplicate of an original under HRE Rule 1004.  
State v. 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai i 127, 135, 176 P.3d 885, 893 (2008).  Here, 
Officer Gazelle and Det. Burger testified that they attempted to 
get a copy of the surveillance video but were unsuccessful,  and 
there was no evidence that the surveillance video was destroyed 
in bad faith.  Additionally, Officer Gaz elle’s testimony as to 
what he viewed in the video was other evidence of the contents ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 
 of a recording.  See Espiritu , 117 Hawai i at 135, 176 P.3d at 
893 (stating testimony about the contents of a destroyed text 
message was admissible under HRE Rule 1004 as other evidence).  
The government accordingly satisfied the criteria for admission 
of the testimony under HRE Rule 1004.   
  But  because the circuit court allowed Officer Gazelle 
to testify regarding the contents  of the video based on its 
ruling that the defense had opened the door to this testimony, 
it appears that the circuit court did not consider and did not 
make any determination on the record as to whether the evidence 
should have been excluded under HRE Rule 403 (2016) .  HRE Rule 
403 “applies to all evidence.”  State v. Plichta, 116 Hawaii 
200, 231 n.15, 172 P.3d 512, 543 n.15 (2007) (Acoba, J., 
dissenting); United States v. Chapman, 765 F.3d 720, 726 n.1 
(7th Cir. 2014) (“[Federal Rule of Evidence  (FRE)] Rule 403 
applies to all evidence[.] ”); HRE Rule 403.   The rule itself 
provides that otherwise admissible evidence “may be excluded if 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.”  HRE Rule 403.  
Here, one critical determination in the admission of the 
testimony of the contents of the video was whether the probative ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 
 value of the evidence was substantively outweighed by its danger 
of unfair prejudice to Miranda.15 
  Officer Gazelle testified about the contents of the 
four-minute video that he viewed once two years earlier.  The 
officer testified that he was rushed when he was watching the 
video and was not in control of the rewinding, fast- forwarding, 
pausing, or stopping of the video while he watched.  Officer 
Gazelle’s testimony was the only evidence of the contents of the 
video besides the single photograph of the video taken by the 
officer.  While Officer Gazelle’s testimony regarding his 
recollection of the video clearly has probative value, it served 
as essentially an eyewitness account by a law enforcement 
officer of the entirety of the incident, potentially raising 
concerns that the evidence would be unfairly prejudic ial. 
  This concern is compounded by the fact that Miranda 
appeared to have been hampered in cross-examining the officer 
about the video’s contents.  There is no contention that d efense 
counsel had viewed the video prior to it being destroyed,  and 
counsel was without any other effective means-- such as 
                     
 15 “Unfair prejudice . . . means an undue tendency to suggest 
decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional 
one.”  HRE Rule 403 cmt. (quoting Advisory Committee’s Note to Federal Rules 
of Evidence 403); see also   State v. Rosario, 966 A.2d 249, 259 (Conn. App. 
Ct. 2009) (“Unfair prejudice exists when the evidence tends to have some 
adverse effect upon [the party against whom the evidence is offered] beyond 
tending to prove the fact or issue that justified its admission into 
evidence.” (alteration in original)) .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
36 (continued . . .)  
 contemporaneous notes or a detailed report-- to determine if 
there were inconsistencies with the officer’s recollection and 
the video or to cross-examine the officer to show that he might 
have misremembered, embellished, or omitted facts in recounting 
the video’s contents.16   
  On remand, the court should evaluate the admissibility 
of the officer’s testimony of the video’s contents under HRE 
Rule 403.17   
                     
 16 See, e.g., United States v. Brown, No. 08- 0098, 2009 WL 2338112, 
at *2 (W.D. Pa. July 29, 2009) (reasoning that it would be “extremely 
difficult” for defense counsel to cross -examine the witnesses about a video 
viewed four years prior because “counsel [had] not viewed the video and [did] 
not have any other objective account of the content of the tape with which to 
compare” and concluding that the probative value of the evidence was 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice and other FRE 403 
considerations); United States v. Ortiz, No. 1 1-251-08, 2013 WL 101727, at *5 
(E.D. Pa. Jan. 7, 2013) (holding that it was not unfairly prejudicial for two 
witnesses to testify about their recollection of a deleted video recording 
because the witnesses had created contemporaneous notes and reports at the 
time they watched the video recording, allowing defense counsel to 
effectively cross- examine the witnesses); Olabisi v. Farmington Ave. Prof’l 
Bldg., LLC, No. CV095028880S, 2012 WL 1139190, at *4 (Conn. Super. Ct. Mar. 
19, 2012) (“[T]he witness had viewed the videotape . . . over four years 
before the trial.  It would have been extremely difficult for the plaintiff’s 
attorney to cross- examine her regarding her testimony about what was on the 
videotape when he had no opportunity to view it and no means to verify that 
the tape was in truth a tape of the plaintiff’s activities on the day of the 
incident.”).   
 
 17 Miranda also argues that the ICA erred in holding that the loss 
of the video did not violate his right to a fair trial.  At trial, Officer 
Gazelle and Det. Burger testified that they attempted to retrieve the video 
but were unsuccessful, and the video was ultimately written over.  While 
Miranda cites a declaration by Hirata submitted post trial seeming to 
contradict these statements, Hirata did not testify at the pre- trial hearing 
on the motion to dismiss, during trial, or during post -trial motions.  The 
record therefore does not establish that the State’s delay caused the loss of 
the evidence.  See State v. Dunphy, 71 Haw. 537, 543, 797 P.2d 1312, 1315 -16 
(1990) (holding that the prejudice to the defendant’s defense was caused by 
the loss of tapes due to the police department’s unreasonable delay).  The 
issue may be subject to further hearing on remand.  Further, we conclude that 
Hirata’s declaration did not provide “new evidence” such that the circuit ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
37 
 V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the forego ing, we vacate the ICA’s judgment 
on appeal and the circuit court judgment and remand the case to 
the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.  
 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
court erred in denying his motion to set aside the verdict and enter a 
judgment of acquittal.  
  In light of our disposition, it is unnecessary to address whether 
there was sufficient evidence to support an accomplice instruction and 
whether the accomplice instruction was consistent with our law on accomplice 
liability.  We also reject Miranda’s argument subsumed within his questions 
presented in his application for writ of certiorari that there was 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction based upon our review of the 
evidentiary record viewed in the most favorable light to the State.  See 
State v. Williams, 146 Hawai i 62, 76, 456 P.3d 135, 149 (2020) (“ The test on 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial  evidence to support the conclusion of the trier 
of fact.” (quoting State v. Richie, 88 Hawai ‘i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998))).  Dwight C.H. Lum 
for petitioner 
 
Chad M. Kumagai
for respondent  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
