 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,

  
WITH NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
JOINS
  
 
 
  
  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-12-0001011 21-JUN-2016 09:56 AM 
---oOo---
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
  
 
vs.
  
 
GREGORY A. KAZANAS, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
  
SCWC-12-0001011
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-12-0001011; CR. NO. 11-1-1592)
 
JUNE 21, 2016
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
I. Introduction 
This month marks the fiftieth anniversary of the United 
States Supreme Court’s landmark decision
, Miranda v. Arizona, 
384 U.S. 436 (1966). In that case, the Court held that “the 
prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory or 
inculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of [a]         
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defendant unless it demonstrates the use of procedural 
safeguards effective to secure the privilege against self-
incrimination.” 384 U.S. at 444.  The Court envisioned the 
following procedural safeguard: “Prior to any questioning, the 
person must be warned that he [or she] has a right to remain 
silent, that any statement he [or she] does make may be used as 
evidence against him [or her], and that he [or she] has a right 
to the presence of an attorney, either retained or appointed. ” 
Id.   
The 
Miranda 
advisement provides “concr ete constitutional 
guidelines for law enforcement agencies and courts to follow.” 
384 U.S. at 442. At the time the Court announced the Miranda  
rule, it had become increasingly alarmed by the psychologically 
coercive nature of police interrogations. 384 U.S. at 448 
(“[C]oercion can be mental as well as physical . . . [T]he blood 
of the accused is not the only hallmark of an unconstitutional 
inquisition.”) (citing Blackburn v. Alabama, 361 U.S. 199, 206 
(1960)). 
Although none of the petitioners in the Miranda case 
was the victim of “overt physical coercion or patent psychological ploys,” the Court was no netheless concerned  that 
the police officers who questioned the petitioners did not  
“undertake to afford appropriate safeguards at the outset of the 
interrogation to insure that the statements were truly the 
product of free choice.” 384 U.S. at 457.  
2

         
 
 
 
   
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In this appeal, we decide whether an arrestee not advised 
of his Miranda rights was “interrogated” in the constitutional 
sense. Briefly stated, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Gregory 
Kazanas (“Kazanas”) was charged with one count of Criminal 
Property Damage in the First Degree and one count of 
Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the First Degree 
(“UEMV”). The charges stemmed from events alleged to have taken 
place on Halloween 2011. Kazanas was accused of breaking the 
back windshield of a car then rea ching through the driver’s side 
open window to punch the driver in the face. Kazanas was identified by the complaining witness and arrested. The Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) police officer assigned to 
accompany Kazanas to Queen ’s Medical Center knew the reason for 
the arrest. In an apparent effort to make small talk and calm Kazanas down, she asked him how his Halloween went.  During the 
conversation, Kazanas stated, “If people didn’t upset me, I 
wouldn’t have to punch them.” The statement was adm itted at 
trial, and Kazanas was ultimately convicted of UEMV. 
We hold that, although the officer testified that she did 
not intend her small talk to provoke an incriminating response, 
she “should have known that her words were reasonably likely to 
elicit an incriminating response from the person in custody.” 
State v. Joseph, 109 Hawai i 482, 495, 128 P.3d 795, 808 (2006) 
(“Interrogation involves any practice reasonably likely to 
3
         
 
 invoke an incriminating response without regard to objective 
evidence of the intent of the police.”).   The questioning  in 
this case was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response as the events of the night culminated in Kazanas’s  
arrest for UEMV. The officer knew how Kazanas’s Halloween went. Thus, her question was  reasonably likely to elicit from Kazanas 
details about the alleged crime. In other words, the police 
officer subjected Kazanas, a person in custody pursuant to an 
arrest, to interrogation; accordingly, Kazanas was entitled to 
be advised of his 
Miranda  rights before the small talk  
conversation began. As Kazanas’s right against self -
incrimination was violated, his statement should have been suppressed at trial.  
 
  On certiorari, Kazanas also argues that the circuit court 
abused its discretion in admitting prior bad act evidence that 
Kazanas had run, jumped, and punched two  people in 2007 and  
punched another person in the face, arms, and legs, then struck her in the face with a cane in  2006, incidents that occurred  
before the Halloween 2011 incident. On certiorari, Kazanas no 
longer disputes that he opened the door to the admission of the 
evidence when he testified he was physically incapable of 
running, jumping, and punching ever since he sustained serious 
injuries in a nine-story fall from a hotel balcony in 2005.  
Rather, on certiorari, Kazanas challenges the circuit court’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4

         
 
 
weighing of the evidence’s probative value versus the danger of 
prejudice under Hawai i Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 403 
(1980). We hold that the circuit court abused its discretion  in 
admitting evidence of the 2006 prior bad acts, as only the 2007 
incident was necessary to counter Kazanas’s testimony, and the 
probative value of the 2006 acts was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.     
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
                     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In sum, the ICA erred in concluding that Kazanas’s 
statement was not procured in violation of his Miranda rights 
and therefore admissible
.  The ICA also erred in concluding that 
the circuit court properly permitted the State to introduce 
evidence of Kazanas’s 2006 prior bad acts. Therefore, the ICA’s 
Judgment on Appeal and the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s1 
(“circuit court”) Judgment of Conviction of Probation Sentence 
are vacated, and this case is remanded for a new trial.  
II. Background 
A. Indictment and Pre-Trial Motions 
On November 3, 2011, Kazanas was charged by Indictment of 
one count of Criminal Property Damage in the First Degree, in 
violation of Hawai i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 708 -820(1)(a) 
The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
5
 1         
 
 
 
    
 Kazanas filed his Motion in Limine #1 seeking exclusion of 
the following evidence:  
 
 
 
 
 Before trial, the State filed its Notice of Intent to Use 
Evidence of Prior Acts.   Specifically, the State sought to admit 
evidence of (1) a 2007 assault in the third degree conviction, 
stemming from an incident in which  Kazanas and another person 
attacked two men from behind, then ran from police and jumped a 
fence; and (2) a 2006 abuse of family or household member 
conviction, stemming from an incident in which Kazanas ambushed his ex-girlfriend in her apartment; punched her on her face, 
arms, and legs; and struck her in the face with a cane.  
                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2014)2, and one count of Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle 
in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-836.5(1) (2014).3 
(a) Testimonial or documentary evidence relating to the 
defendant’s prior criminal record, including any reference 
to defendant’s conviction and being placed on probation in 
CR. NO. 06-1- 0995; and 
. . . . 
 
(c) Statements made by the defendant to Honolulu Police 
Officer CHRIST Y-LYNN AVILLA on November 1, 1011 [sic] at 
approximately 0050 hours at the Queen’s Medical Center .. . 
. 
2   HRS § 708- 820(1)(a) provides, as it did at the time of the alleged 
offense, “A person commits the offense of criminal property damage in the first degree if by means other than fire . . . [t]he person intentionally or 
knowingly damages property and thereby recklessly places another person in 
danger of death or bodily injury. . . .”  
3   HRS § 708- 836.5(1) provides, as it did at the time of the alleged 
offense, “A person commits the offense of unauthorized entry into motor 
vehicle in the first degree if the person intentionally or knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a motor vehicle, without being invited, licensed, or 
otherwise authorized to enter or remain within the vehicle, with the intent 
to commit a crime against a person or against prop erty rights.”  
6
         
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
  
  
  
 She further testified that at the  hospital, Kazanas began 
“making comments that were rude and other patients could hear *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Before trial, the State also filed a Motion to Determine 
the Voluntariness of Defend ant’s Statement to the Police. The 
motion sought orders from the court 
1. Finding and concluding that the statements made by 
Defendant Gregory A. Kazanas . . . to Officer Christy -Lynn 
Avilla . . . on November 1, 2011, were voluntarily made. 
2. Prohibiting the defense from commenting upon or making 
reference to the substance of Defendant’s statement to the 
police, unless the prosecution first introduces evidence of the same. 
The specific statements Kazanas made to Officer Avilla were, “I 
wouldn’t have to punch people if they didn’t upset me,” and “If 
you didn’t catch me now for this, you would’ve caught me later 
for something else.” 
Immediately before trial, the circuit court held a hearing 
on the State’s motion. Officer Avilla testified as follows: 
She transported Kazanas to Queen ’s Medical Center in the early 
morning hours of November 1, 2011.  Kazanas was transported to the hospital because he had injuries on his right hand. Officer 
Avilla told Kazanas “multiple times” that he was under arrest 
for UEMV, first when she handcuffed him, next during transport, 
and lastly at the hospital. Although she did not inform him 
that he had the right to remain silent, she did tell him, upon 
his arrest, “that he was not allowed to talk about the case or 
say anything about what he had been arrested for.” 
7
         
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
 According to Officer Avilla, it was Kazanas who decided to 
“spontaneously utter[], ‘If people didn’t upset me, I wouldn’t 
have to punch them.’”   She  further testified that Kazanas’s 
statement was not in response to any questions she asked him.   
Although she was not sure how much time had passed between her 
small talk questions and his statements, Officer Avilla 
testified that his statements were made “just out of the blue, 
that was out of context of what we were talking about,” 
referring to the conversation about Halloween and costumes.   
After Kazanas made his statement, Officer Avilla told him “his case was still under investigation and to stop what he was 
saying, because it could be used against him in a court of law.”   
Kazanas then apologized; about a minute or so later, he then *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it. . . .”   Avilla moved Kazanas to an HPD room within the 
hospital. Avilla and Kazanas sat about six feet away from each other, with Kazanas in handcuffs.   Although Officer Avilla did 
not detect alcohol on Kazanas’s breath, his “demeanor made it seem that he was under the influence o f something. . . .”    
In order to “help him calm down and get his mind off of 
saying . . . 
rude things,” she began asking Kazanas “questions 
about if he enjoyed Halloween that night, what kind of costumes did he see, but nothing along the lines in reference to the 
investigation. . . .” Officer Avilla testified she did not know 
what his responses would be. 
8
         
 
 
 
     
 The circuit court granted in  part and denied in part the 
State’s Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Defendant’s 
Statement to the Police.   The court granted the motion in part, 
finding that “Defendant’s statement to Officer Avilla, ‘I wouldn’t have to punch people if they didn’t upset me’ was a 
voluntary statement and is admissible.”   The circuit court 
excluded, however, Kazanas’s second statement to Officer Avilla 
(“If you didn’t catch me now for this, you would have caught me 
later for something else”); the circuit court reasoned t hat the 
statement, while voluntary, was unfairly prejudicial to Kazanas.  
 
 
  
 
  
      
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated, “If you didn’t catch me now, you would have caught me 
for something else later.” 
The circuit court also took up the State’s notice of intent 
to use Kazanas’s prior bad acts, namely the 2007 assault and a 
2006 abuse of family or household member arrests that led to 
convictions. The circuit court precluded use of Kazanas’s prior 
bad acts but stated that it would revisit its ruling if the defense opened the door to that evidence. 
B.  Trial Testimony 
1. The State’s Case in Chief 
The State called former HPD Police Officer James Easley.  
He testified that he saw Kazanas dressed as a knight on Halloween in Waikiki. He recognized Kazanas from his police 
officer days. Years before (in 2005), Easley had responded to 
9
         
 
 
the Aloha Surf Hotel after Kazanas had fallen from a ninth floor 
balcony. When Easley arrived, Kazanas was still coherent.   
Easley testified he would never forget Kazanas’s name or face 
because the incident  had an impact upon him.   
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Easley testified that he saw Kazanas, who was holding 
something i
n his hand, “str[ike] the back window of a white 
sedan that was stopped there in t raffic, shattering the glass.” 
Kazanas then “ran around to the front of the car and he jumped 
on the hood of the car, kind of rolling on over, and then he 
approached the driver’s side window of the vehicle and began 
punching the driver through the . . . open window.” After the 
incident ended, Easley contacted his police officer friends on 
duty and identified Kazanas as the suspect. 
The State then called complaining witness Geoffrey Ross.  
He testified that it was about midnight on Halloween when he was 
driving on Kuhio Avenue with friends, to see “the craziness, the 
festivities, what people were doing.” Ross testified that a 
group of about a dozen or two dozen people ran across the street 
in front of the car.  They were running to observe a fist fight. 
“Out of the blue,” Ross testified, “one more person [came] 
charging across the street . . . and ran headlong into the right 
front corner of the car. . . .” Ross wondered if the person was 
injured, when the person “[a]ll of a sudden . . . bounce[d] up and continue[d] right through . . . to where the fight was.” 
10
         
 
 
Ross sensed that people who had just witnessed what happened 
thought he was “a person who had just hit a pedestrian” and 
“converged on the car to accuse [him]” and stop him from getting 
away.    
 
  
  
 
  
      
 After the attack, Ross drove slowly up Kuhio Avenue towards 
some police cars and reported the incident.   Not long after the 
incident, Ross was taken to do a drive-by identification of the 
suspect. He was “[a]s certain as [he] could be” that he 
identified Kazanas as his assailant during the drive-by identification. On cross-examination, Ross testified that he 
“didn’t believe that” the person who punched him was “the person 
who broke the glass because [he] couldn’ t see how a person could *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As he slowly moved his car over to the curb, a crowd of 
people began yelling, pounding on the windows of the car, and 
rocking the car. 
Someone broke the back windshield, but Ross 
could not see who it was; Ross had a passenger in the back seat at the time. Someone with heavy shoes or boots was also on the 
hood of the car, stomping against the windshield in an attempt 
to crack it. That person “hopped off to the left side of the 
car” and came up to Ross’s open window. He “encircle[d Ross’s] 
neck and h[e]ld onto it, and then -- with the one arm, and then 
with the other . . . punch[ed] the side of [Ross’s] face with a 
closed fist.” Ross was struck “two, three times” to the “[l ]eft 
side cheek and ear area, jaw.” 
11
         
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
        
 At the hospital, Kazanas “was being rude and saying things 
that were verbally offensive to other people in the area,” so 
Officer Avilla moved him to the HPD patient room away from other 
patients. In order to “take his mind off of what he was 
saying,” she engaged Kazanas in conversation.   Officer Avilla 
“ask[ed] him how was his Halloween, did he enjoy the costumes, 
things along that matter, but never about the in vestigation.”   
Kazanas then stated, “If people didn’t upset me, I wouldn’t have 
to punch them.”   Officer  Avilla testified that Kazanas made the 
statement even though she “was not asking him anything about the 
investigation.”   She then immediately told Kaza nas “that 
whatever he said can be used against him in a court of law, and 
to stop what he was saying.”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
break the glass and in that short of a time . . . then appear on 
the front of the car.”  
The State next called Officer Avilla, who had been with HPD 
for five years at the time of trial. 
She testified that on 
Halloween night in 2011, she was on patrol when she was 
instructed to stand by Kazanas on Kuhio Avenue to await a field 
show-up identification. After a positive identification was 
made, Kazanas was placed under arrest. Officer Avilla’s role 
was to transport Kazanas to Queen ’s Medical Center. She noticed 
Kazanas had cuts, scrapes, and redness on his right hand. 
12
         
 
 
 
    
  
  
 
    
  
   
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. The Defense’s Case in Chief 
Kazanas’s defense was, not only did he not commit the 
offenses, he was physically incapable of committing the 
offenses. Kazanas called his friends Simon Farrington and Hans 
Kolbisen, who were both with him on Halloween. Both testified 
that Kazanas was not the person who broke the car windshield and 
punched the driver. 
Kazanas also testified in his own defense. He stated that 
a group of friends met at his house before heading into Waikiki 
on Halloween night. Kazanas was briefly separated from the 
group. During the time he was separated, someone drop-kicked him to the ground. He explained that red marks on his knuckles 
were the result of his labored attempts to “[s]tand[] up a fter 
[he] had been kicked . . . .” 
During this part of his testimony, Kazanas elaborated on 
his physical condition.  According to Kazanas, his “wrist doesn’t bend back . . . [due to] a do uble compound fracture from 
falling off the nine-story building,” and his right arm cannot 
extend beyond 90 degrees. Due to the limitations in his wrist 
and right arm, Kazanas was “unable to get to the upright 
position placing both of [his] hands on the ground, so [he had] 
to use [his] knuckles [to] push [himself] off up the ground. . . 
.” His right leg also does not bend beyond 90 degrees. He 
explained that the nine-story fall resulted in “four lumbar 
13
         
 
 
 
  He resumed his testimony about Halloween night, stating 
that after he got up from being drop-kicked, he “shuffled away” 
because he “can’t run.”   Kazanas then returned to his group of 
friends and witnessed the incident involving Ross.   Kazanas 
testified that he was not the one who smashed the car’s back window. He also testified that he did not jump on the hood of 
the car, because he would only have been able to “crawl up onto 
the hood” because he “can’t jump.”   He elaborated, “My legs 
restrict me to jump. I have about 37 screws and seven rods in 
my legs from my hips to my feet; it’s like I’m wearing a pair of 
steel-toe boots all the time.  I can barely jump an inch or two 
off the ground.”       
 Kazanas also denied reaching into the car  to punch Ross; he 
testified, “I wouldn’t have been able to reach into the car 
. . . I have limited range of motion on my arm, my right arm 
specifically.”   Kazanas explained that he has “calcium deposits 
in [his] elbow restricting any movement,” as we ll as calcium 
deposits in his knee that render him barely able to “walk up a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
vertebrae [shattering], double compound fractures on  [his] 
wrists, double compound fractures on both of [his] thighs and 
both of [his] shins, and broke[n] . . . arms and elbows and 
shoulders. . . .”   Kazanas recalled that he was in a “medically -
induced coma for three weeks [and] three weeks in recovery, in traction. . . .”    
14

         
 
 
 
    
 
  
     
 As a result of Kazanas’s testimony that he was not 
physically capable of committing the charged offenses, the State 
sought to revisit the issue of Kazanas’s prior bad acts.   The 
State argued that Kazanas “opened the door” to the admission of prior bad act evidence when he argued that he was physically 
incapable of breaking the car windshield and punching Ross 
because of injuries he suffered from the nine-story fall.   The 
defense counter-argued that the prior bad acts were dissimilar 
to the acts for which Kazanas was on trial: first, Kazanas was 
the one injured in the 2007 assault; second, the 200  6 abuse o f 
family or household member involved Kazanas’s striking someone with a walking stick, and there was no allegation in the instant 
case that Kazanas struck anyone with an implement.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
set of steps without kicking the top rung.” Kazanas 
characterized himself as “disabled.” Kazanas stated that when 
the incident was over, he walked away. 
When asked why he told Officer Avilla, “I wouldn’t have to 
punch people if they didn’t upset me,” Kazanas explained that he 
was “under stress” and “was just speculating to the fact that 
[the police officers] said that I was under arrest for an 
assault.” On cross-examination, Kazanas affirmatively answered 
the State’s question that he “couldn’t have done this attack 
because [he] physically can’t attack a person. . . .” 
15
         
 
 
 The circuit court allowed the admission of the prior bad 
act evidence as follows:  
 
  [W]hat is abundantly clear in the record thus far is 
that Mr. Kazanas as a result of the injuries that he 
sustained in 2005 from the fall from the ninth floor lanai 
of I believe it’s the Aloha Surf . . . that he sustained 
some very serious and significant injuries that rendered 
him essentially and in his words disabled and physically 
incapable of engaging in certain types of physical conduct or actions.  
 And so given that, the State’s request to question 
the defendant regarding these prior incidents is not the 
typical situation where it’s going to some sort of 404(b) 
type of purpose such as to establish intent, knowledge, 
modus operandi, absence of mistake, any of those things. 
In this particular instance, the Court believes that the 
information  that is contained within the State’s notice, at 
least selected and very limited portions of it, would appear to be relevant to the jury’s assessment of the defendant’s, number one, his credibility, because he’s made 
statements here in court that he doesn’ t have certain 
physical capabilities, yet as documented in these reports there are several references to him punching individuals, 
to him running away, to him jumping . . . and to the extent that the fact that there is contrary evidence that would 
bear upon the credibility of the defendant’s testimony, 
clearly that would be relevant.  
 Also, it would be relevant just squarely on the issue 
of whether he has these physical capabilities or not. It’s up to the jury to decide. 
I’m not going to decide. But 
this evidence in that limited capacity would appear to be  
appropriate.  
 
The circuit court also noted that it was “absolutely crucial    
. . . that a cautionary instruction would have to be given. . . 
.”   The circuit court further warned the State that the “onl y 
thing that [it was] going to be permitted to ask the defendant are things that related to his physical actions in those prior 
incidents,” as related in the respective police reports, but not 
the facts of arrest or conviction.   The circuit court also noted 
for the record that it performed a HRE Rule 403 balancing test and “believe[d] the probative value of the proffered evidence as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
16

         
 
 
limited by the Court outweigh[ed] any concern of any unfair or 
substantial prejudice to the defendant.”  
 
  Before the State cross-examined Kazanas on his prior bad 
acts, the circuit court instructed the jury as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
You may hear evidence relating to one or more prior 
incidents involving the defendant. 
This evidence is 
admitted for a specific limited purpose and only may be 
considered by you as bearing upon the credibility of the 
defendant and whether the defendant may or may not have 
certain physical capabilities. 
You are specifically instructed that you may not 
consider this evidence as establishing any violent or bad character of the defendant, or that it proves that he acted 
in conformity therewith during the events underlying the 
alleged offenses in this case. 
You are prohibited f rom considering this evidence on 
any other issue or for any other purpose besides what the Court has ordered. 
The State then cross-examined Kazanas about these prior bad 
acts, which Kazanas acknowledged happened after his 2005 fall.    
Kazanas admitted that in 2007, he ran “as fast as [he could]” 
down the street after two men before jumping over a  waist-high 
picket fence. Then he and another individual punched the two 
men in the face. Kazanas also admitted that in 2006, he struck 
a woman in the face with his cane and punched her on the face, arms, and legs.  
On redirect examination, Kazanas 
testified that he used a 
cane to get around after his nine-story fall. With regard to 
the punching incidents, Kazanas testified that he punched with 
his left arm because his right arm was in a cast. He also 
17
         
 
 
 
       
 
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
 In a published opinion, a majority of the ICA affirmed 
Kazanas’s Judgment of Conviction of Probation  Sentence, 
rejecting both of Kazanas’s points of error, discussed in 
greater detail below.   State v. Kazanas,  134 Hawai i 117, 129, 
336 P.3d 217, 229 (2014)  .   
 
    
 As to Kazanas’s argument that his incriminating statement 
should have been suppressed at trial, the ICA held the 
following: *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that in the 2007 incident, he and another individual 
were punching a person who had assaulted him earlier.  
3. Verdict 
The jury acquitted Kazanas of Count 1 (Criminal Property 
Damage in the First Degree) and convicted Kazanas of Count 2 
(UEMV). The circuit court entered a Judgment of Acquittal as to 
Count 1, and a Judgment of Conviction of Probation Sentence as 
to Count 2. Kazanas was sentenced to five years’ probation , 
with a special condition of 90 days’ imprisonment . Kazanas 
timely appealed. 
C.  ICA Appeal 
On appeal, Kazanas raised two points of error:  
A. The trial court erred in allowing Defendant’s statement 
to Officer Avilla into evidence.  
B. The trial court erred in allowing prior incidents 
involving the Defendant into evidence.  
1
. Admission of Statement to Officer 
18
         
 
 
 
  
134 Hawai i at 119, 336 P.3d  at 219.  The ICA noted that there  
was “no dispute that Kazanas was in custody when he made the 
challenged statement to Officer Avilla,” thus limiting its 
analysis to “whether Kazanas was subjected to ‘interrogation’ 
when he made the statement.” 134 Hawai i at 126, 336 P.3d  at  
226. 
 The ICA observed, “The United States Supreme Court defines 
‘interrogation’ for Miranda  purposes as referring to ‘express 
questioning or its functional equivalent.’” Id.  (citing Rhode 
Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 300-01 (1980)).  The ICA also  
quoted Innis  for the proposition that “the definition of 
interrogation can extend only to words or actions on the part of 
police officers that they should have known  were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response.” Id.   (citing 446 
U.S. at 301-02) (footnote omitted; emphasis added by ICA).   
According to the ICA, t his definition of “interrogation” was 
adopted by the Hawai i Supreme Court in Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 
119, 34 P.3d at 1018, as follows: “[T]he ultimate question becomes whether the police officer should have known that his or *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We conclude that Officer Avilla did not subject Kazanas to 
“interrogation” for purposes of  Miranda  and that Kazanas’s 
statement was not in response to “interrogation” by the 
Officer. Therefore, the absence of prior Miranda  warnings 
by Officer Avilla did not provide a basis to suppress 
Kazanas’s spontaneous and volunteered statement. Under the 
circumstances presented, we hold that the trial court 
properly permitted the State to introduce Kazanas’s 
statement at trial.  
19

         
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response from the person in custody.” Id.  
(brackets omitted). The ICA noted that Ketchum  held that 
whether “interrogation” has occurred depends upon the “totality 
of the circumstances . . . with a focus upon the officer’s 
conduct, the nature of the question (including whether the 
question is a ‘routine booking question’), and any other 
relevant circumstance.” 97 Hawai i at 121, 34 P.3d at 1020.   
Further, the ICA noted, “[V]olunteered confessions or 
admissions, obtained independent of express police questioning 
or its functional equivalent, are admissible.” Kazanas, 134 
Hawaii at 126, 336 P.3d at 226 (citing  , inter alia ,  State v. 
Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563,  566, 698 P.2d 281,  284 (1985)).   
The ICA then examined Ikaika
, a case in which this court 
held that the defendant was not subjected to interrogation.  67 Haw. 563, 698 P.2d 281. In that case, Lieutenant Richard 
Bartolome, who was acquainted with the defendant (Ikaika), asked 
him while he was booking and fingerprinting him, “What’s 
happening? Must be heavy stuff for two detectives to bring you 
down here?” 67 Haw. at 565, 698 P.2d at 283. Ikaika “responded 
that he had been picked up for questioning about [a] murder,” 
then, “[w]ithout further comment by Bartolome,” Ikaika blurted 
out, “Bartolome I cannot lie to you, you’ve done a lot for me 
20
         
 
 
 
  Analogizing Ikaika  to the instant case, the ICA concluded, 
“under the totality of the circumstances, that Kazanas’s 
statement, ‘If people didn’t upset me, I wouldn’t have to punch 
them,’ was volunteered, un solicited, and spontaneous, and was 
not in response to any interrogation by Officer Avilla.” 
Kazanas, 134 Hawai i at 127, 336 P.3d at 227. Therefore, the ICA 
held that prior Miranda  warnings were not required. Id.   The 
totality of the circumstances incl uded (1) Officer Avilla’s 
warning that Kazanas was not allowed to talk about the case or 
say anything about what he had been arrested for; (2) the “small 
talk” nature of Officer Avilla’s questions about Halloween, akin 
to the “pleasantry” in Ikaika; (3) the non-responsive and “out -
of-the-blue” nature of Kazanas’s statement about punching people; (4) the period of time that had passed between Officer 
Avilla’s small talk questions and Kazanas’s statement; and (5) 
Kazanas’s own explanation that he made the sta tement because he 
was “under stress” and “just speculating to the fact that [the 
police] said that [he] was under arrest for an assault.” 134 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and you have been too nice to me. I shot the haole.” Id.   This 
court held that Bartolome’s question was just a “pleasantry,” and that Ikaika’s confession “was of the nature of an 
unsolicited, spontaneous statement made in the absence of any 
police questioning.” 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 285.  
21

         
 
 
 
   
 
 Judge Foley dissented. 134 Hawai i at 129, 336 P.3d  at 229  
(Foley, J., dissenting). To Judge Foley, “Kazanas’ statement 
was obtained as a result of a custodial interrogation because 
Avilla was aware of the circumstances of Kazanas’ detention, and 
Avilla asked an open-ended question, the subject matter of which 
was the same as that for which Kazanas was detained.” 134 
Hawaii at 130, 336 P.3d  at 230 (Foley, J., dissenting) (footnote  
omitted). Unlike Lieutenant Bartolome in the Ikaika  case, 
Officer Avilla “was familiar with [the detainee’s ] case, the two 
were not previously acquainted, and [ the detainee’s ] statement . 
. . was responsive to the police officer’s question.” Id.  
(Foley, J., dissenting).   Judge Foley considered Officer 
Avilla’s explanation that she asked about Halloween to calm 
Kazanas down to be “nothing more than a post hoc rationalization 
for asking the question.” Id.  (Foley, J., dissenting) (citing 
Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 119, 34 P.3d at 1018.    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaii at 127-28, 336 P.3d at 227-28.  The ICA then held that 
the circuit court did not err in permitting the State to 
introduce Kazanas’s volunteered statement at trial. 134 Hawai i 
at 128, 336 P.3d at 228. 
Judge Foley then analogized Kazanas’s case to Ketchum, a 
case in which this court held that police officers who asked a 
detainee for his home address should have reasonably known that 
22
         
 
 
 
  
 
  
 As to Kazanas’s second point of error, the ICA held “that 
the trial court did not err in permitting the State to introduce 
prior incidents involving Kazanas that were relevant to his 
physical capabilities, after Kazanas opened the door to such 
evidence.” 134 Hawai i at 119, 336 P.3d at 219.  Kazanas opened 
the door by testifying that after his 2005 nine-  story fall, “he 
was physically incapable of engaging in the conduct alleged by 
[Ross], namely, jumping on the hood of the car and reaching into 
the car and punching [Ross].” 134 Hawai i at 129, 336 P.3d at *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
asking the question would elicit an incriminating response, as 
the detainee lived at a residence, which was identified in a 
search warrant, in which drugs had just been found. Id. (Foley, 
J., dissenting) (citing Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 128, 34 P.3d at 
1027). Judge Foley stated, “[S]ince Avilla knew the events of 
Halloween night led to Kazanas’ arrest, asking how his night went invited Kazanas to describe events underlying his arrest.” 
134 Hawai i at 131,  336 P.3d at 231 (Foley, J., dissenting).  
Judge Foley believed the circuit court erred in admitting the 
statement, and that the error was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt, as Kazanas’s case rested upon the credibility 
of his witnesses versus those of the State.  
Id.  (Foley, J., 
dissenting).  
2.  
Admission of Prior Bad Acts 
23
         
 
 
 
  
   
 Whether an accused’s right against self -incrimination under 
the Hawai i constitution was protected through the use of a 
Miranda warning is a question of constitutional law, which this 
court reviews 
de novo   under the right/wrong standard.  State v. 
Jenkins, 93 Hawai i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26 (2000) (citations 
omitted). We “exercise our own independent constitutional 
judgment[,] based on the facts of the case[,]” to answer 
questions of constitutional law. Id.       
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
229. The ICA also concluded, “[W]e cannot say that the Circuit 
Court abused its discretion in balancing the probative value of 
the evidence regarding the prior incidents against the risk of 
unfair prejudice,” further noting that the circuit court’s 
limiting instruction “served to mitigate any unfair prejudice 
resulting from the evidence of the prior incidents.” Id.  
(citation omitted).  Judge Foley did not dissent to this 
holding. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Violation of Miranda Rights 
B. HRE Rules 404(b) and 403 
“Prior bad act” evidence under [HRE]  Rule 404(b) . . . is 
admissible when it is 1) relevant and 2) more probative 
than prejudicial. A trial court’s determination that 
evidence is “relevant” within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 . . . is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review. 
However, a trial court’s balancing of the probative value 
of prior bad act evidence against the prejudicial effect of 
such evidence under HRE Rule 403 . . . is reviewed for an 
abuse of discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs when 
the court clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
24
         
 
 
 
  
    
   
 
 
  
  
    
 The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
states, in relevant part, that no person “shall be compelled in 
any criminal case to be a witness against himself. . . .” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disregards rules or principles of law to the substantial 
detriment of a party litigant.  
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai ʻi 90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168 
(2010) (brackets and ellipses in original) (citation omitted). 
IV. 	Discussion 
A. 	Kazanas’s Right against Self -Incrimination Was 
Violated. 
On certiorari, Kazanas argues, “There [were] no exigent 
circumstances nor legitimate purpose for Officer Avilla to engage in such conversation with Petitioner Kazanas while in her custody which involved ‘Halloween’ events which were related to 
the circumstances of his arrest.” Kazanas argues that Officer 
Avilla, who had five years’ experience with HPD at the time of Kazanas’s arrest, “should have known that such conversation was 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from 
Petitioner Kazanas.” The State, in its Response, counter-argues 
that Kazanas “seems to have omitted numerous crucial details 
that are part of the ‘totality of the circumstances’ surrounding 
his utterance.” The State endorses the ICA majority’s detailing 
of the totality of the circumstances, as well as its conclusions that Officer Avilla’s questions did not constitute interrogation 
and that Kazanas’s statement was volunteered. 
25
         
 
 
Similarly, Article I, section 10 of the Hawai i Constitution  
provides, in relevant part, that “[n]o person sha ll . . . be 
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against oneself.” 
This section of the Hawai i  Constitution “provides ‘an 
independent source’ from that of the fifth amendment to the 
United States Constitution for the ‘protections which the Unite d 
States Supreme Court enumerated’ in Miranda . . . .” Ketchum, 97 
Hawaii at 116, 34 P.3d at 1015 (citing  State v. Santiago, 53 
Haw. 254, 266, 492 P.2d 657, 664 (1971)). “[A]s a matter of state constitutional law,” id., “before the State may use 
statements stemming from custodial interrogation, it must first 
demonstrate the use of procedural safeguards effective to secure 
the privilege against self-incrimination.” Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 
566, 698 P.2d at 283-84 (citing, inter  alia, Miranda, 384 U.S. 
at 467). 
 
  A critical safeguard is the Miranda  warning: an accused 
must be “warned that he or she had a right to remain silent, 
that anything said could be used against him or her, that he or 
she had a right to the presence of an attorney, and  that if he 
or she could not afford an attorney one would be appointed for 
him or her.” Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 116, 34 P.3d at 1015  
(brackets and citation omitted). The Santiago  Court held that 
“every accused must be informed of the fact that he or she h as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
26

         
 
 
certain rights under the Hawai i  Constitution.” Ketchum,  97 
Hawaii at 116, 34 P.3d at 1016 (citing  Santiago, 53 Haw. at 267, 
492 P.2d at 665) (brackets omitted). To be thus informed 
“maintains the value of protecting the accused’s privilege to 
freely choose whether or not to incriminate himself or herself,” 
because “to convict a person on the basis of a statement  
procured in violation of his or her constitutional rights is 
intolerable.” Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 116 -17, 34 P.3d at 1015-16 
(citing Santiago, 53 Haw. at 267, 492 P.2d at 665) (brackets and 
ellipsis omitted).  
 
  We have held that the “ Miranda  rule” is a “constitutionally 
prescribed rule of evidence that requires the prosecution to lay a sufficient foundation” before adducing at trial evidenc e of 
statements made by a defendant subjected to custodial 
interrogation. 97 Hawai i at 117, 34 P.3d at 1016 (footnote  
omitted). If a defendant was not Mirandized before providing 
such statements, then the statements may not be used either as 
direct evidence or to impeach the defendant’s credibility. See  
State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai i 17, 33, 881 P.2d 504, 520 (1994).  A  
defendant seeking to suppress his or her  statement at trial 
“must establish that his or her statement was the result of (1) ‘interrogation’ that occurred while he or she was (2) ‘in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
27

         
 
 
 
  
 
 There is no dispute that Kazanas, who was under arrest by 
the time Officer Avilla engaged him in conversation about 
Halloween, was “in  custody”; therefore, we examine whether 
Officer Avilla’s Halloween questions constituted 
“interrogation.”   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
custody.’” Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 118, 34 P.3d at 1017 
(citations omitted). 
As a preliminary matter, we clarify that determining 
whether “interrogation” has taken place is not measured by the 
“totality of the circumstances,” as Ketchum held; rather, 
“interrogation” occurs when police know or should know that 
their words or actions are reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response from the suspect, as Innis held. The 
United States Supreme Court in Innis addressed the situation, 
similar to this case, in which a defendant was in custody, and the only question was whether the police officers “interrogated” 
him. In other words, the Court did not address the meaning of 
“custodial interrogation” as a single integrated determinant in 
applying Miranda; rather, the court addressed only the meaning 
of the “interrogation” prong under Miranda
. See  446 U.S. at 298 
(“It is . . . uncontested that the respondent was ‘in custody’ 
while being transported to the police station.  The issue, 
therefore, is whether the respondent was ‘interrogated’ by the 
police officers in violation of the respondent’s undisputed 
28

         
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
right under  Miranda   to remain silent until he had consulted with  
a lawyer.”) (footnote omitted). The Innis  Court defined “the 
term ‘interrogation’ under Miranda” as “not only . . . express 
questioning, but also . . . any words or actions on the part of 
the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and 
custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to 
elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.” 446 U.S. at 
301 (footnotes omitted). Notably, the United States Supreme 
Court did not reference a “totality of the circumstances” 
standard for measuring when interrogation has occurred.   
This court first adopted the Innis definition of 
“interrogation” in State v. Paahana,  66 Haw. 499, 666 P.2d 592 
(1983). Paahana  discussed the distinction between the Innis  
test for interrogation and the totality of the circumstances test as follows: 
To be considered custodial interrogation, an officer’s 
questions or actions must be of such a nature that would 
“‘subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner’ and 
thereby undermine the privilege against compulsory sel f-
incrimination.” Rhode Island v. Innis , 446 U.S. 291, 299 
(1980) (quoting Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436, 457- 58 
(1966). In determining whether the defendant’s statement 
was made in a custodial context, the totality of circumstances must be considered, including the time, place and length of the interrogation, the nature of the 
questions asked, the conduct of the police at the time of  
the interrogation, and any other pertinent factors.  See  
State v. Melemai , 64 Haw. 479, 481, 643 P.2d 541, 544 
(1982), State v. Sugimoto, 62 Haw. 259, 265, 614 P.2d 386, 
391 (1980), State v. Patterson, 59 Haw. 357, 361, 581 P.2d 
752, 755 (1978). In determining whether an officer’s 
questions constitute interrogation, the test is whether the officer should have known that his words and actions were 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from 
defendant. Innis, 446 U.S. at 301.  
29         
 
 
 
  
Paahana,  66 Haw. at 502-03, 666 P.2d at 595-96 (emphasis added).  
This court, like the Innis  Court, made no mention of a  “totality 
of the circumstances” review of the officer’s words and actions  
in evaluating whether “interrogation” had taken place .    
Instead Paahana  cited Melemai,  Sugimoto , and Patterson, for the 
proposition that  the “totality of the circumstances”  test 
applies in determining when on-the-scene and/or investigative 
questioning by the police develops into custodial interrogation, 
in the sense that the defendant is deprived of his or her  
freedom of action in any significant way. In other words, in Melemai, Sugimoto, and  Patterson, there was no dispute that the 
defendants had been interrogated by the police; at issue in those cases was whether  the defendants were “in custody”  as a 
result of the defendant being subjugated to the will of the 
examining officer by the interrogation.  
 
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In 
Melemai
, a jogger was struck by a pick-up truck.  64 
Haw. at 480, 643 P.2d at 485. Eyewitnesses gave the police the 
truck’s license plate number, and the police visited the 
residence of the truck’s registered owner, the defendant. Id. 
Without Mirandizing him, the police asked the defendant if he 
had hit anyone with his car and why. Id. In analyzing whether 
the defendant was in custody when the police questioned him, the Melemai court stated: 
30

         
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Since defendant was “interrogated” within the mean ing of  
Miranda,  the determinative issue is whether defendant was 
in custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action 
in any significant way. This determination is to be made 
by objectively appraising the totality of the 
circumstances. These include  the place and time of the 
interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature 
of the questions asked, the conduct of the police, and all 
other relevant circumstances.  
 
64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544 (emphasis added and citations 
omitted). 
Similarly, Sugimoto involved police questioning of an 
individual who voluntarily came to the police station to speak about a crime and who was not, at that time, a suspect and was 
not Mirandized. 62 Haw. at 265, 614 P.2d at 391. The defendant 
later became a suspect and was charged and tried for the crime, 
and he argued that “because the questioning took place at the 
police station, Miranda 
warnings should have been given to him 
even though at the time of the interrogation he was not a suspect in the investigatio n.” 
Id.  In other words, 
“interrogation” standing alone was not at issue; rather, at 
issue was whether the defendant was “in custody when he was questioned.” This court stated 
To determine whether custodial interrogation occurred and  
Miranda  warnings were required, we must objectively examine  
the totality of the circumstances   at the time of the 
questioning. Factors for our consideration include the  
time and place of the interrogation, the length of the 
interrogation, the questions asked, the behavior of the 
police officer, and any other pertinent circumstances. . .  
We hold that the fact that the questioning occurred in the 
police station is but one factor, albeit an important once, 
in deciding whether the defendant -appellant was in custody  
when he was questioned.  
 
Id. (emphasis added). 
31

         
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Lastly, Patterson  involved investigative questioning by the 
police when they encountered the defendant at the scene of a 
burglary in progress. 
59 Haw. at 358, 581 P.2d at 366. The 
police asked the defendant if he lived at the property and whether he had permission to be there; if he owned the car he 
was standing next to; and whether personal property seen on the 
front seat of the car belonged to him. Id.  After the defendant 
answered the questions in the negative, the police arrested him upon probable cause that he committed burglary.  Id. The 
defendant successfully moved to suppress these statements, arguing that he was not Mirandized at the time. 59 Haw. at 366, 581 P.2d at 753. This court reversed the suppression order, 
noting 
Where the police, prior to questioning the individual, are 
in possession of facts sufficient to effect an arrest 
without a warrant based upon probable cause, it is less 
likely that the person confronted would be allowed to come and go as he pleases. The degree of this likelihood may, 
of course, depend upon the nature and gravity of the 
offense, as well as other circumstances. In any event, 
whether the defendant was in custody  or otherwise deprived 
of his freedom of action for Miranda purposes is to be 
determined from the totality of the circumstances, 
objectively appraised. These would include the place and 
time of the interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of the 
police, and all other relevant circumstances.  
 
59 Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at 755 (emphasis added and citations 
omitted). In short, all of these cases utilized a “totality of 
the circumstances” test in determining whether defendants, who 
were plainly subjected to police questioning, were “in custody.” 
32

         
 
 
 
  We recognize (as did the ICA) that this court stated in  
Ketchum,  “[W]hether a police officer has subjected a person to  
‘interrogation’ is determined by objectively assessing the 
‘totality of the circumstances.’” 97 Hawai i at 119, 34 P.3d at 
1018 (citing State v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawai i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 
731 (2000); and Ikaika , 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 284). The 
cases cited for the “totality of the circumstances” standard for 
analyzing whether “interrogation” has taken p lace do not support 
the Ketchum  court’s statement. Taking the older case, Ikaika,  
first, we note that that case held, “As it is undisputed that the Defendant in the instant case was in[]custody at the time 
his incriminating statements were made, our inquiry will focus 
on whether he was subject to interrogation. The test is whether  
the police officer should have known that his words or actions  
were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from  
the Defendant.” 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 284 (citing Innis, 
446 U.S. at 301) (footnote omitted). Ikaika footnoted the  
“totality of the circumstances” test, listing “time, place and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In the instant case, the situation is precisely the reverse:  
there is no dispute that Kazanas was “in custody” because he was  
under arrest; at issue in this case is whether he was 
“interrogated.” Therefore, the “totality of the circumstances” 
test does not apply to this determination.  
33

         
 
 length of interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the 
conduct of the police at the time of the interrogation, and any 
other pertinent factors,” but only to note that the test is used 
for purposes of “determining whether Defendant’s statements were 
made in 
a custodial context ,” i.e., not for purposes of 
determining whether a defendant was “interrogated.” 67 Haw. at 567 n.2, 698 P.2d at 284 n.2 (emphasis added). Far from 
adopting a “totality of the circumstances” test for 
interrogation, Ikaika  reaffirmed that “[t]he test” for 
“interrogation” is the Innis  test. 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 
284 (citing Innis, 446 U.S. at 301) (footnote omitted).    
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The second case cited by Ketchum
, Ah Loo
, similarly does 
not support the proposition that the “totality of the 
circumstances” test is used in determining “interrogation.” Ah 
Loo
 involved facts similar to Melemai and Sugimoto
, in that a  
defendant was subjected to on-the-scene express questioning by 
police. In 
Ah Loo, the defendant was asked his age by a police 
officer who encountered him at a scene where underage drinking 
was suspected.  94 Hawaii at 209, 10 P.3d at 730. The police 
officer “subjected Ah Loo to ‘express questioning;’” thus, there 
was no doubt Ah Loo was “interrogated.” 94 Hawai i at 210, 10 
P.3d at 731. Like Melemai and Sugimoto , and unlike the instant 
case, therefore, “the outcome dispositive issue” in the Ah Loo 
case was “whether Ah Loo was ‘in custody.’” Id. This court 
34

         
 
 
 
  Further underscoring the fact that Ketchum  misstated the 
test for interrogation, we note that we have used the “totality  
of the circumstances” test only once since Ketchum’s 
publication, see State v. Naititi  , 104 Hawai i 224, 236, 87 P.3d 
893, 905 (2004), and mentioned it only once in passing in State 
v. McKnight, 131 Hawai i 379, 392, 319 P.3d 298, 311 (2013). 
Furthermore, we have continued to refer solely to the Innis  test 
in analyzing interrogation under Miranda  without conducting or 
even referring to a “totality of the circumstances” review. See  
Joseph, 109 Hawai i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808; Eli, 126 Hawai i at 
                     
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
held, “To determine whether ‘interrogation’ is ‘custodial,’ we 
look to the totality of the circumstances, focusing on ‘the 
place and time of the interrogation, the length of the 
interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of 
the police, and [any] other relevant circumstances.” Id. 
(citing, inter alia, Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544;  
Sugimoto, 62 Haw. at 265, 614 P.2d at 391; and Patterson, 59 
Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at 755). In short, the statement in Ketchum that “interrogation” is determined by looking at the 
“totality of the circumstances” finds no basis in Ikaika  or Ah 
4  Loo  or this court’s prior case law.   
The Dissent acknowledges that it relies on only what it sees as an 
“implicit” application of a “totality of the circumstances” interrogation 
test in Innis and Ikaika in supporting Ketchum ’s statement.  Dissent at 5. 
35
 4         
 
 
 
    
 There is no need to overrule Ketchum, however, because the 
case properly “reaffirm[ed Innis’] principle that  
‘interrogation’ consists of any express question –  or, absent an 
express question, any words of conduct –  that the officer knows  
or reasonably should know is likely to elicit an incriminating 
response.” 97 Hawai i at 121, 34 P.3d at 1020. Ketchum  also 
delineated the Innis  principle as “the ultimate question” in 
evaluating whether the police have interrogated a defendant in 
custody. 97 Hawai i at 120, 34 P.3d at 1019. We agree and 
reaffirm that the touchstone in analyzing whether 
“interrogation” has taken place is whether the police officer 
“should have known that his [or her] words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the 
defendant.” Paahana, 66 Haw. at 503, 666 P.2d at 595-96 (citing 
Innis, 446 U.S. at 301).     Dissent at 3.  
                     
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
522, 273 P.3d at 1208. This suggests that Ketchum’s formulation 
does not constitute “the clear state of Hawa ii law” on 
interrogation under Miranda, contrary to the Dissent’s 
5assertion.
Further, the Dissent maintains that we “denounce” the totality of the 
circumstances test in evaluating whether interrogation has occurred. Dissent 
at 1, 8. We do not “denounce” the test; we simply clarify that the 
appropriate test to use under a careful reading of our precedent is “whether 
the officer should have known that his words and actions were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response from defendant.” Paahana
, 66 Haw. 
at 503, 666 P.2d at 595 -96 (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 301) 
36
 5         
 
  In this case, in analyzing whether Kazanas was 
“interrogated,” the majority of the ICA relied heavily upon 
Ikaika, a case in which this court held that a defendant’s 
confession that he “shot the haole” to his police lieutenant 
acquaintance was “of the nature of an unsolicited, spontaneous 
statement made in the absence of police questioning.”   67 Haw. 
at 565, 698 P.2d at 283. Indeed, the court held the police 
lieutenant’s words (“What’s happening? Must be heavy stuff for 
two detectives to bring you down here?”) were merely a 
“pleasantry.” 67 Haw. at 567, 69 8 P.2d at 285. Ikaika is  
inapposite because under the facts of that case, Ikaika had not 
been “interrogated.” As Judge Foley noted in dissent in this 
case, unlike Bartolome  and Ikaika, Avilla and Kazanas were not 
previously acquainted with each other. 134 Hawai i at 130, 336 
P.3d at 230 (Foley, J., dissenting). Also unlike Bartolome, 
Avilla knew the circumstances behind her detainee’s police 
involvement. Id.   (Foley, J., dissenting). Therefore, when 
Avilla asked Kazanas how his night was going, her words cannot be understood as a mere pleasantry like Bartolome’s; it was  
reasonably likely that  her question would  have elicited 
Kazanas’s incriminating statement. This court in Ikaika  noted 
that Bartolome, on the other hand, “[a]t most . . . could have 
expected that the Defendant respond to his pleasantry by 
informing him of the reasons for the Defendant’s being booked 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
37

         
 
 
 
  Rather,  Kazanas’s situation is more analogous to Joseph, 
109 Hawai i 482, 128 P.3d 795, and  State v. Eli , 126 Hawai i 510,  
273 P.3d 1196 (2012), which both involved police speaking with 
non-Mirandized suspects.  In Joseph, the police engaged the 
defendant in a “pre -interview,” in which they asked him 
questions about his involvement in a shooting without first 
reading him his Miranda  rights; after the pre-interview, the 
police Mirandized the defendant then audiotaped a formal 
interview with him. 109 Hawai i at 484, 487, 128 P.3d at 797,  
800. The defendant was then charged with murder and firearm 
offenses, and he successfully moved to suppress his pre-interview and formal interview statements to the police. 109 
Hawaii at 487-88, 492, 128 P.3d at 800 -01, 805.  This court 
affirmed the circuit court, holding that “it [was] evident 
Miranda warnings, as independently grounded in the Hawai i 
Constitution, were required prior to the pre-interview.” 109 Hawaii at 495, 128 P.3d at 808.    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and the case he was involved in.” Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 567, 698  
P.2d at 284-85. Instead, Ikaika’s full -blown confession was, in 
those circumstances, voluntary. We agree with the dissent that 
Ikaika does not govern this case.    
Similarly, in Eli
, after a defendant had turned himself in 
for assaulting his daughter, he was arrested but not Mirandized, 
38
         
 
 
then invited to give “his side of the story” to an HPD detective 
in a pre-interview.  126 
Hawaii at 514, 273 P.3d at 1200.  This  
court held that “after arrest the police practice of inviting an 
arrestee to make a statement and to give his or her ‘side of t he 
story’ or similar entreaties in a ‘pre -interview’ before Miranda  
warnings are given, violates the defendant’s right against self -
incrimination, article I, section 10, and right to due process, 
article I, section 5, of the Hawai
i  Constitution.” 126 Hawaii  
at 513, 273 P.3d at 1199 (footnotes omitted).  
 
    
  
 
                     
 Innis  6   The Dissent argues that Joseph  and  Eli   are distinguishable from this 
case, inter alia, because the pre -interviews in those cases “occurred at the 
police station in an interview setting,” and “Officer Avilla asked Kazanas 
general questions about his Halloween while they were waiting at the hospital.”  Dissent at 16 . It is unclear why the location of the questioning 
should make a difference in determining, under
and 
Paahana, “whether 
the officer should have known that his words and actions were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response from defendant.” Paahana, 66 Haw. 
at 503, 666 P.2d at 595 -96 (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 301). The Dissent’s 
distinction wrongly suggests that a court should more readily find that 
“interrogation” has taken place if questioning occ urs at the police station. 
That suggestion finds no support in Innis  or Hawai i case law. Further, such 
a rule could encourage police officers to question suspects outside the 
confines of the police station in order to take advantage of a relaxed 
standard for reviewing whether interrogation has occurred based simply upon 
where questioning has taken place.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Eli and Joseph both involved express police questions about 
the circumstances giving rise to offenses later charged. 
Kazanas’s case differs only in degree.6 In determining whether 
Kazanas was “interrogated,” we look to the test articulated in 
Paahana (and Eli and Joseph), which was “whether the officer 
should have known that his words and actions were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response from defendant.” 
39
         
 
 
Paahana
 
  
 The Dissent argues that the Innis  analysis cannot be 
performed without a totality of the circumstances review. 
Dissent at 8. There is a difference, however, between 
considering the words and actions of the police officer  and the 
“totality of the circumstances.”  We view a “totality of the circumstances” review as sweeping in any circumstance, without 
limitation, for the court’s consideration. See, e.g., Ketchum , 
97 Hawai i at 119, 34 P.3d at 1018 (listing the following 
considerations under a “totality of  the circumstances” review:  
“the conduct of the police, the nature of the questions asked, and any other relevant circumstance . . . .” (emphasis added).   
The Innis  test itself, however, set limits on what courts should 
consider in determining whether a po lice officer “should have 
known [his or her words or actions] were reasonably likely to 
elicit an incriminating response.” 446 U.S.at 302. Those 
limits were as follows:  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
, 66 Haw. at 503, 666 P.2d at 595-96 (quoting Innis, 446 
U.S. at 301); Eli, 126 Hawai i at 522, 273 P.3d at 1208; Joseph, 
109 Hawai i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808. Under this test, we look to
the words and actions of the police officer, not to  the totality
of the circumstances.    
 
 
[T]he term “interrogation” under Miranda refers not only to 
express questioning but also to any words or actions on the 
part of the police . . . that the police should know are 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from 
the suspect. The latter portion of this definition focuses 
40
         
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
primarily upon the perceptions of the suspect  rather than 
the intent of the police. This focus reflects the fact 
that the Miranda  safeguards were designed to vest a suspect 
in custody with an added measure of protection against coercive police practices, without regard to objective 
proof of the underlying intent of the police.  
 
446 U.S. at 301 (emphasis added). Thus, a police officer’s 
words and actions evaluated under Innis would generally not 
include evidence of police intent. Conducting a “totality of 
the circumstances” review to include evidenc e of Officer 
Avilla’s intent, like the Dissent has (Dissent at 13), goes 
against Innis’s express holding. 
It is true that the Innis court footnoted that police 
intent may be relevant where, for example, “a police practice is designed to elicit an incriminating response from the accused,” 
as it would be “unlikely that the practice will not also be one 
which the police should have known was reasonably likely to have 
that effect.” 446 U.S. at 301 n.7. In other words, evidence 
that the police know that they have designed a practice reasonably meant to elicit incriminating responses should be 
relevant in analyzing whether interrogation has taken place.  
That is not the case here, where evidence of Officer Avilla’s 
subjective intent (that she was trying to calm Kazanas down) was 
used by the Dissent to excuse the reasonable consequence of her 
conduct, which was that her conversation about Halloween 
elicited an incriminating response from Kazanas. Dissent at 12. 
Innis’s exception for considering police intent does not stretch 
41
         
 
 
that far. See also   Joseph, 109 Hawai i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808 
(holding that “[i]nterrogation involves any practice reasonably 
likely to invoke an incriminating response  without regard to 
objective evidence of the intent of the police ,” and citing 
State v. Jenkins, 1 Haw. App. 430, 437-38, 620 P.2d 263, 269 
(1980),  for the following statement: “That the matron may not 
have subjectively intended  the question to yield a confession or 
an incriminating statement is irrelevant .”) (emphasis added).  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In short, police intent is one of those circumstances that 
would not be considered in reviewing a police officer’s words 
and act
ions. In this case, the Dissent’s conclusion that 
Kazanas was not interrogated relies heavily upon Officer Avilla’s testimony about her subjective intent: “that the 
questions she asked Kazanas were made in an attempt to calm 
Kazanas down, and were nothing more than small talk that did not 
have to do with the investigation.” Dissent at 12. The 
Dissent’s analysis of the interrogation issue illustrates how using the improper legal test yields an incorrect result. The 
proper test is “whether the officer shou ld have known that his 
words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from defendant.” Paahana, 66 Haw. at 
503, 666 P.2d at 595-96 (quoting Innis , 446 U.S. at 301). 
In this case, Officer Avilla took Kazanas alone to HPD’s 
private room in the hospital. Although she did not expressly 
42
         
 
 ask Kazanas about punching Ross and smashing the car’s rear 
windshield, she did ask him how his Halloween went. As the ICA 
dissent points out, Officer Avilla knew how Kazanas’s Halloween 
went, as she encountered him at the tail end of his night at the  
field show-up identification, and she was directed to transport him to Queen’s Medical Center  after his UEMV arrest, which had 
occurred about an hour earlier. As such, from Officer Avilla’s 
stance,  it was “reasonably likely” that Kazanas would answer the  
question about how his Halloween went with an incriminating  
statement about the events leading to Kazanas’s arrest. 
Therefore, Officer Avilla “should have known that [her] words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response’ from the person in custody.”  
Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at  
119, 34 P.3d at 1018 (citation omitted). In other words, 
Officer Avilla subjected Kazanas to “interrogation,” without the 
protection of a Miranda  advisement, thus  rendering inadmissible 
his statement. See  Naititi, 104 Hawai i at 237, 87 P.3d at    906  
(“[I]f a defendant’s Miranda  rights against self-incrimination 
have been violated, then any resulting statement will be 
inadmissible at trial as a per se   matter. . . .”)  
 
  To conclude that Officer Avilla’s question did not 
constitute “interrogation” (as the ICA majority and the Dissent 
have done) would undermine  Kazanas’s right against self-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
43

         
 
 
incrimination under Article I, Section 10 of the Hawai i 
Constitution and encourage police officers to engage suspects in  
custody in non-Mirandized and seemingly harmless conversations 
about “how their night was going” in the hope that the suspects 
may make incriminating statements about the events leading up to 
their arrest. As the United States Supreme Court has observed, the
 Miranda  warning “may serve to make the individual more 
acutely aware that he is faced with a phase of the adversary system --  that he is not in the presence of persons acting 
solely in his intere st.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 469. In this 
case, Officer Avilla was attending an arrestee at Queen ’s 
Medical Center; although she testified that she intended her “small talk” to calm Kazanas down, her role as a police officer 
rendered her part of a system that was adversarial to Kazanas at 
that moment, and engaging in conversation at that point could 
not be “solely in his interest.” Kazanas had a right to know 
that then, via a proper Miranda  advisement.  
 
  As Kazanas’s statement was procured without a proper 
Miranda advisement, the circuit court erred in admitting the 
statement at trial. See Hoey , 77 Hawai i at 33, 881 P.2d at 520. 
We cannot say that this error is harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. This case turned on the credibility of the State’s 
versus Kazanas’s witnesses. See State v. Fetelee , 117 Hawai i *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
44

         
 
 
 
    
 The use of a criminal defendant’s voluntary 
statements and admissions as evidence at trial is a 
critical component of our criminal justice system. 
Voluntary statements and admissions are reliable. They 
provide key evidence necessary to solve crimes and 
facilitate our search for the truth.  They provide 
assurance to the public that the culprit has been brought 
to justice and promote faith and confidence in our judicial 
system.  
 
      
  
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
53, 86, 175 P.3d 709, 742 (2008) (“In light of the [improper 
admission of evidence] and the fact that this case turns on the 
credibility of [the trial witnesses], we cannot say that the  
trial court’s admission of the evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.”) There was a reasonable possibility that the 
admission of the statement contributed to his conviction.       
Lastly, we address the ICA majority’s incomplete statement 
about confessions: 
Kazanas, 134 Hawai i 
 at 118, 336 P.3d at 218. A defendant’s 
statements are only admissible when a defendant, subjected to 
custodial interrogation, is first advised of his or her Miranda 
rights, and, if so advised, nevertheless voluntarily, 
intelligently, and knowingly waives his or her constitutional rights. A defendant in custody and subjected to interrogation 
has a right to be advised of the consequences of foregoing his 
or her right against self-incrimination so “that there can be 
any assurance of real understanding and intelligent exercise of 
the privilege.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 469.  Then, should a 
Mirandized defendant decide to waive his or her right against 
45
         
 
 
 
                      
   
 
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
self-incrimination, the State must show that the waiver was  made  
“voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently.” State v. Amorin , 61 
Haw. 356, 358, 604 P.2d 45, 47 (1979). A court reviewing such 
a waiver must “examine the entire record and make an independent 
determination of the ultimate issue of voluntariness based on 
the totality of circumstances.” McKnight , 131 Hawai i at 393, 
319 P.3d at 312 (citations omitted).  Thus,   the use of a 
defendant’s statements at trial often requires a rigorous review 
 beyond a simple determination of “voluntariness.”7    Therefore,  
8    the ICA majority’s statement is incomplete.
7 In Eli, we explained the difference between the Miranda inquiry and the 
voluntariness inquiry as follows: 
It must be emphasized that the  Miranda   requirement, based 
on article 1, section 10 of the Hawai i Constitution, 
requires warnings to be given prior to questioning in a 
custodial setting, while constitutional due process, based 
on article 1, section 5 of the Hawai i Constitution, 
requires a statem ent to be “voluntary” in order to be 
admissible. “Put differently, if a defendant’s Miranda  
rights against self -incrimination have been violated, then 
any resulting statement will be inadmissible at trial as a 
per se matter, obviating the need for any [voluntary] due process inquiry into whether the defendant’s confession has 
been coerced[.]” “Correlatively, having been properly 
Mirandized, if a defendant who is subjected to custodial 
interrogation makes a statement, then, depending on the 
circumstances, an inquiry into whether the defendant’s 
right to due process of law has been violated via coercion, 
may be warranted.”  
Eli
, 126 Hawai i at 520 n.17, 273 P.3d at 1206 n.17 (citations omitted). 
8 The Dissent defends the ICA majority’s view that Kazanas’s statement 
was voluntary, asserting 
This case does not involve long periods of isolation  or 
interrogation, an atmosphere of intimidation, or purposeful subjugation of  the defendant to the will of the police 
officer. Furthermore, this case does not involve the 
“dangers of false confessions” that accompany an 
intimidating interrogation atmosphere. If anything, the 
majority’s holding in this case undermines the truth 
(continued. . .) 
46
         
 
 
 
       
    
 
 
 
  “[W]hen evidence of other crimes, wrongs, and acts [under 
HRE Rule 404(b)] is offered by the prosecution, the problem for 
                                                                  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. 	The Circuit Court Abused Its Discretion in 
Applying Rule 403.
 
Kazanas argues on certiorari that “allowing references to 
the prior aggressive conduct [i.e., punching and striking other 
persons on separate occasions] was definitely prejudicial and 
outweighed the probative value relating to Petitioner Kazan as’s 
phsycial [sic] capabilities.” In other words, Kazanas 
challenges the circuit court’s weighing of probative value versus prejudicial effect of the evidence under HRE Rule 403. 
(continued. . .) 
seeking function of the judicial system by suppressing 
statements  that were made without the influence of an  
interrogation atmosphere.  See State v. Flores , 131 Hawai i 
43, 56, 314 P.3d 120, 133 (2013) ( “Our courts are . . . 
forums for the discovery of truth .”); see  also Miranda, 384 
U.S.  at 478 ( “Any statement given freely and voluntarily 
without any compelling influences is, of course, admissible 
in evidence.”)  
Dissent at 18
-19.  First, the constitutional test does not require 
proof of an intimidating interrogation atmosphere. The relevant 
inquiry is whether Kazanas was subjected to interrogation. 
Second, the Flores case cited by the Dissent does not stand for 
the proposition that suppressing statements hinders the truth -seeking 
function of trial. Rather, Flores held that a jury should be 
instructed of the option of convicting a defendant of a lesser included offense in order to ascertain the truth and render an accurate verdict. 
131 Hawai i at 56, 314 P.3d at 133. 
Lastly, we respectfully believe the Dissent takes the Miranda 
proposition about voluntary statements out of context. 
The Miranda 
quotation goes on to state, “There is no requirement that police stop a 
person who enters a police station and states that he wishes to confess 
a crime, or a person who calls the police to offer a confession or any 
other statement he desires to make.” 384 U.S. at 478. The United 
States Supreme Court sought to reassure law enforcement that its 
decision would not render all voluntary confessions inadmissible in evidence. Kazanas’s case does n ot involve a voluntary unburdening of 
the offenses committed on Halloween. Rather, his statements were made 
in response to Officer Avilla’s interrogation. 
47
         
 
 
the trial court is one ‘of classifying and then balancing[, if 
necessary]. . . the prejudicial impact of the evidence [with] 
its probative worth.’” State v. Castro , 69 Haw. 633, 644, 756 
P.2d 1033, 1041 (1988) (first set of brackets in original; second set of brackets added). 
The factors the trial court 
balances are:  
 
  
 
 
 In its Response, the State argues that the balance of 
Castro factors tipped in favor of admitting the prior bad act 
evidence: 
 The strength of the evidence regarding the prior 
incidents was relatively substantial inasmuch as [Kazanas] 
admitted to running jumping, and punching other people. 
The similari ties between [Kazanas’s] conduct at issue in 
the prior incidents and the conduct in which he engaged 
while committing the unauthorized entry into the CW’s car 
were readily apparent. The period of time between the 
prior incidents and the crime the  jury convicted [Kazanas] 
of committing in the instant case also mitigated in favor 
of allowing the deputy prosecutor to question him about the 
prior incidents. The instant crime occurred after 
[Kazanas’s] fall in 2005 while he was allegedly still 
suffering from the debilitating effects of the fall.  The 
record also reveals that the deputy prosecutor demonstrated a legitimate and compelling need for the evidence regarding 
the prior incidents, inasmuch as the evidence would refute 
[Kazanas’s] claim that he “couldn’t  have done this attack 
because [he] physically [could not] attack a person[.]”  
 Moreover, the record does not reveal and [Kazanas] 
does not contend  that the deputy prosecutor had more 
effective alternate proof to refute his claim regarding the 
allegedly lasting and debilitating effects of his fall. 
Significantly, there is no reason to conclude the evidence 
regarding the prior incidents “probably rouse[d] the jury 
to overmastering hostility,” inasmuch as the deputy *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the 
interval of time that has el apsed between the crimes, the 
need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof, 
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse 
the jury to overmastering hostility. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
48
         
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prosecutor generally limited the questions to that which 
was reasonably necessary to establish [Kazanas’s] physical 
abilities.  
 
Further, the State argues that the jury was given a limiting 
instruction on the use of the prior bad act evidence 
(immediately before the prosecutor’s questioning of Kazan as 
about the prior bad acts, as well as at the end of trial), which the jury was presumed to have followed, and which dispelled any 
potential for unfair prejudice to Kazanas due to the admission 
of the evidence. The State argues, “[T]he ICA concluded 
correctly that ‘we cannot say that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in balancing the probative value of the evidence 
regarding the prior incidents against the risk of unfair 
prejudice, in allowing the State to introduce evidence of the 
prior incidents.” 
In this case, it is clear that evidence of the 2007 assault 
was properly admitted under Rule 403 for all the reasons 
expounded by the State above. The 2007 assault incident 
involved witness statements that Kazanas and another individual 
ran up to two men, punched them in the face, then ran from police, physical acts Kazanas testified he was incapable of 
performing after the 2005 accident. Kazanas even jumped a fence 
in the 2007 incident an attempt to elude the police. 
Upon the admission of the evidence of the 2007 assault, 
however, evidence of the 2006 abuse of family or household 
49
         
 
 
member incident was  an abuse of discretion.   Preliminarily, it 
should be noted that the 2006 abuse incident involved two sets 
of prior bad acts occurring contemporaneously: first, the 
complaining witness stated that Kazanas punched her on the face, 
arms, and legs; second, the complaining witness and another 
witness stated that Kazanas struck the complaining witness on 
the face with his cane.   It is true that the evidence of the 
2006 abuse bad acts was strong (based on similar evidence as the 2007 assault incident, namely police  reports and witness 
statements). Kazanas’s act of striking the complaining witness in the face with a cane, however, was not similar to the physical acts of punching, running, and jumping that he was 
accused of in the instant case, and that he denied the physical 
ability to perform after the 2005 accident. Therefore, the 
evidence was not needed. Alternative evidence of  the 2007 
assault incident, which the State was allowed to present, was more efficacious on the issue of Kazanas’s physical ability to 
punch, run, and jump. Moreover, the fact that Kazanas struck a woman in the face with his cane carried with it the potential to 
rouse the jury to overmastering  hostility against Kazanas.  The 
circuit court, in short, abused its discretion in weighing the probative value versus potential prejudicial effect of the 2006 
cane strike bad act evidence.  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
50

         
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to the punches to the complaining witness’s face, arms, 
and legs in the 2006 abuse incident, while that evidence might 
have been similar to the punch in the instant case, it was also 
not needed, as the State already had been allowed to present 
efficacious, alternative proof of the same physical capabilities 
(i.e., evidence of the 2007 assault). And again, evidence that 
Kazanas punched a woman in the face, arms, and legs could have 
potentially roused the jury to overmastering hostility against 
Kazanas. Therefore, the circuit court abused its discretion in 
weighing the probative value versus potential prejudicial effect 
of the 2006 punching bad act evidence. 
Consequently, the ICA erred when it held that it could not 
conclude that the circuit court abused its discretion in 
performing the HRE Rule 403 balancing test.  We cannot say that 
this error is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. This case 
turned on the credibility of the State’s versus Kazanas’s 
witnesses. See Fetelee , 117 Hawai i at 86, 175 P.3d at 742.  
There was a reasonable possibility that the admission of the 
2006 bad act evidence contributed to his conviction. 
V. Conclusion 
Kazanas was subjected to interrogation when Officer Avilla 
asked him about his Halloween. Article I, Section 10 of the 
Hawaii Constitution therefore required Officer Avilla to have 
51
         
 
 advised Kazanas of his 
Miranda  rights prior to engaging him in 
the conversation. Further, as his right against self-
incrimination was not safeguarded during the conversation with 
Officer Avilla, Kaz anas’s statement should have been suppressed. 
Therefore, the ICA majority erred in holding that Kazanas’s statement was voluntary and therefore admissible at trial. With 
respect to the 2006 incident, the ICA also erred in concluding   
that it could not be said that the circuit court abused its discretion in performing its HRE Rule 403 balancing in admitting 
evidence of Kazanas’ prior bad acts. The ICA’s Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit   court’s  Judgment of Conviction of 
Probation Sentence are vacated, and this case is remanded for   
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
 
  
       
        
        
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
52
 