***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
MUKADIN GORDON,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
JODIE F. MAESAKA- HIRATA; PETRA CHO; and STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, 
Respondents/Defendants- Appellees.  
_____________________________________________________________  
 
SCWC-14-0000914  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0000914; CIV. NO. 11-1 -2482) 
 
NOVEMBER 2, 2018  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,  
WITH WILSON, J. , DISSENTING 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I. Introduction 
 Pretrial detainees — individuals who have been arrested and 
charged, but remain in jail while awaiting trial — have a due 
process right to be free from punishment until convicted of a 
crime.  Bell v. Wolfish , 441 U.S. 520, 535 (1979).  Mukadin 
Gordon (“Gordon”)  filed suit because he was held in solitary Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000914
02-NOV-2018
09:19 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 confinement by State of Hawai ʻi (“
State”) prison officials for  
more than nine months following his arrest in August 2010.  
Gordon requested monetary damages pursuant to Title 42, Section 
1983 of the United States Code (“U.S.C.”) and state tort law.  
Following a jury-waived trial, the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (“circuit court”)1 entered judgment in favor of the 
defendants on all claims .  The Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(“ICA”) affirmed. 
 
We hold that Gor don’s placement in solitary confinement for 
more than nine months constituted unlawful pretrial punishment 
in violation of the due process clauses of the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, 
Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi.  We also 
hold, however, that although the circuit court applied an 
incorrect standard for federal qualified immunity, defendant 
Petra Cho (“Cho”) is not liable for damages under 42 U.S.C. § 
1983 for the federal constitutional violation because the basis 
of her decision to retain  Gordon in pretrial solitary 
confinement did not violate a clearly established constitutional 
right of which every reasonable official would have known.  We 
also hold the circuit court did not err by concluding Cho has no 
negligence liability 
based on state qualified immunity 
                     
1  The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 principles.  In addition, as the State has not waived sovereign 
immunity for damages claims based on  state constitutional 
violations, the State is not liable for damages  for the state 
constitutional violation.  
  We therefore overrule the ICA’s memorandum opinion insofar 
as it conflicts with our conclusions  herein, but affirm the 
ICA’s judgment on appeal in favor of the defendants. 
II. Background 
A. Circuit Court Pretrial Proceedings 
 Gordon filed a civil complaint arising from his pretrial 
detention at the Oahu Community Correctional Center (“OCCC”) and 
the Halawa Correctional Facility (“HCF”).  He alleged he was 
incorrectly classified as a maximum security pretrial detainee 
and placed in solitary confinement for a total of nine months 
and twenty-two days between 2010 and 2011.2   
 
In this opinion, we address only the claims asserted by 
Gordon in his amended complaint against Cho and the State 
(collectively, “the Defendants”) that he continues to assert on 
appeal.3  Through h is first cause of action, Gordon  alleges a 42 
                     
2  Gordon’s Application  for Writ of Certiorari  asserts he spent  nine 
months and twenty- two days in solitary confinement.  His am ended complaint 
alleges it was about nine months and twenty -four days.  At trial, Gordon’s 
counsel represented the time period lasted 296 days.  
 
3  Many of the original individual defendants were dismissed or replaced 
as parties at or prior to trial.  Gordon’s original complaint included claims 
against defendants Clayton Frank, Francis Sequiera, William Rushing, Faatuila 
Pula, Michael Taamilo, Aaron Mirafuentes, and Gene Pomeroy.  Clayton Frank 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
 U.S.C. § 1983 claim for violat ion of his right to due process 
under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
against Cho; he also alleges  a violation of his right to due 
process under Article I, Section 5 of the Constitution of the 
State of Hawai
ʻi against the State.   Through  his fourth cause  of 
action, he alleges negligence against Cho.  Gordon seeks 
general, special, and punitive damages, attorneys’ fees and 
costs, and such other relief  as deemed appropriat e.   
B. Circuit Court Trial  
 The circuit court conducted a  two-day jury-waived/bench 
trial that decided Gordon’s federal 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim 
against Cho in her individual capacity and his state negligence 
claim against Cho.   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
was replaced by Jodie F. Maesaka -Hirata in Gordon’s amended complaint.  
Faatuila Pula was dismissed by stipulation before trial.  At trial, Gordon 
orally moved to dismiss the claims against Francis Sequiera, William Rushing, 
Michael Taamilo, Aaron Mirafuentes, and Gene Pomeroy.  An order dismissing 
with prejudice all claims against those defendants  was filed after trial.    
 Many causes of action were also dismissed or are no longer being 
pursued on appeal.  In his first cause of action, Gordon originally asserted 
42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims for alleged violations of his rights under the 
Fourth, Eighth, and Ninth Amendments to the  United States Constitution, and 
he also alleged violations of Article I, Sections 2, 6, 7, 8, and 12 of the 
Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi.  He also alleged intentional infliction 
of emotional distress against the individual defendants in the second  cause 
of action, negligent infliction of emotional distress in the third cause of 
action, and negligent training, supervision, and/or discipline by Jodie F. 
Maesaka- Hirata and the State  in the fifth cause of action.  
 Before trial, the circuit court granted  the Defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment in part, dismissing Gordon’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims against 
the State and the individual defendants in their official capacities, but 
denying the motion with respect to Gordon’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and negl igence 
claims against Cho.   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
  The circuit court’s f indings of fact 1.
 The circuit court found the following facts relevant to the 
issues on certiorari.    
a.   Gordon’s pretrial d etention 
 On August 22, 2010, Gordon was arrested on charges of seven 
counts of sexual assault in the first degree, one count of 
attempted sexual assault in the first degree, four counts of 
sexual assault in the third degree, one count of promoting 
prostitution, and one count of kidnapping in the first degree.  
From August 26, 2010, to June 1 6, 2011, Gordon  was held in 
maximum security custody at OCCC and HCF while he awaited trial 
on his criminal case.  
b.   Initial custody classification and conditions 
 
On August 26, 2010, Department of Public Safety (“DPS”) 
employee Faatuila Pula (“Pula”) conducted Gordon’s initial 
intake interview at OCCC and filled out a  Jail Initial Custody 
Instrument (“Initial Custody Instrument”) to  determine his 
custody status.  This document was completed using information 
from the Hawai
‘i Criminal Justice Inquiry System,  the National 
Crime Information Center, and  a brief interview with Gordon.4  
                     
4  The Initial Custody Instrument established Gordon’s custody status by 
assigning predetermined point values to various aspects of his personal, 
criminal, and institutional history.  Specifically, the Initial Custody 
Instrument evaluated Gordon’s age, the severity of his current charges, his 
prior convictions, his “history of assaultive behavior,” his escape history, 
and his “pending charges or detainer.”  Gordon’s history of prior convictions 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 After completing the Initial Custody Instrument, 
Pula determined 
that Gordon had a total of nineteen “points” and  accordingly 
5classified Gordon as a 
maximum custody detainee.    
 
Based on this custody classification, Gordon was placed in 
maximum security custody in the OCCC Holding Unit for thirty 
days.  While there, Gordon  was alone in a small cell for twenty-
three hours per day, had limited access to showers and reading 
materials, and was not permitted any phone calls.  Gordon 
requested mental health services during the one-month detainment 
in the OCCC Holding Unit, but was never provided with any.   
c.   September 2010 custody evaluation 
 
On September 22, 2010, an administrative program committee 
(“the Committee”) conducted a hearing to further evaluate 
Gordon’s security custody classification, programming needs, and 
whether housing at OCCC was appropriate for him.  Cho, a DPS 
correctional supervisor, was the Committee’s chairperson.6  When 
evaluating an inmate’s security classification and housing 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
and “history of assaultive behavior” both took into account the number and 
severity of his prior convictions, including petty misdemeanors, 
misdemeanors, and felonies.   
 
5  According to the Initial  Custody Instrument, a score of zero to eight 
points yielded a security classification of minimum custody, a score of nine 
to seventeen points resulted in a classification of medium  custody, and a 
score of eighteen points or greater resulted in a maximum custody 
classification.   
 
6  The other members of the Committee were Aaron Mirafuentes and  Michael 
Taamilo, who were dismissed as defendants at trial.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 needs, the Committee can consider  “all aspects regarding an 
inmate,” including the inmate’s institutional file, current 
charges, prior convictions, and the inmate’s own testimony.  
Accordingly, Cho and t he Committee considered Gordon’s own 
statements that he did not think he should be a maximum custody 
detainee, had done reasonably well at OCCC, and that there was 
an error concerning his initial custody classification because 
it was based in part on charges that were not actually pending.7   
 The Committee decided
, however,  that Gordon sho uld remain 
at the maximum custody level and should be housed at HCF High 
Security.  It notified him of this decision in a written 
document designated as an “Amended Notice of Programming 
Results” (“Programming Results”).  The Programming Results 
acknowledged that Gordon had “ not received any major 
misconduct
s” since being admitted to OCCC.  However, Cho and the 
Committee decided that Gordon should remain as a maximum custody 
detainee, in solitary confinement, for the following reasons: 
- The nature and seriousness of his current charges;  
- The number and kind of his prior convictions;  
- His extensive criminal history and numerous periods 
of incarceration;  
- His failure to comply with two residential drug 
treatment programs;  
                     
7  Based on her review of  the Hawai‘i Criminal Justice Inquiry System , Pula 
believed  that Gordon had an unrelated but pending Sex Assault in the First 
Degree charge in Hawai ‘i, and Gordon’s fa ilure to appear at a hearing for that 
charge was counted as a pending or no -show appearance for calculating  his 
custody status.  Sometime after his initial classification, it was discovered 
that Gordon did not actually have a pending sexual assault charge;  the 2006 
charge had in fact been resolved before he was arrested in August 2010.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
 - Leaving the state without permission while on 
probation;  
- His extradition to Hawaii;  
- The fact that [Gordon] was on probation when charged 
with his current offenses;[8] 
-
 His $1,000,000.00 bail amount; and  
- [O]ther factors identified in the committee’s Amended 
Notice of Programming Results.  
 
Additionally, the Committee noted Gordon’s probation status, 
unpaid restitution amounts, and the opinion of his probation 
officer that his case was “questionable.”9  The Committee 
provided final comments explaining its decision:   
The Committee concurs with [the 
Initial Custody Instrument]  
that classified Mr. GORDON as MAX and also recommends that 
he be housed accordingly at Halawa High Security.  The 
Committee deems MR. GORDON a  high-risk inmate and also, a 
high flight risk.  OCCC is inappropriate housing for Mr. 
GORDON because OCCC is not able to provide MR. GORDON with 
the high degree of direct supervision that he requires.  
 
 According to Cho , an inmate classified as maximum security 
“needs more direct supervision” by correctional officers, 
especially when outside of his or her cell, and the Committee 
felt that OCCC was unable to provide the level of supervision 
required for Gordon.  In evaluating his custody status, Cho 
                     
8  The State represents that “Gordon was arrested and detained as a 
pretrial detainee” [39:2] and does not argue that Gordon was held in custody 
for alleged violations of conditions of probation for offenses for which he 
had already been convicted.  This case is therefore analyzed based on the 
constitutional rights of pretrial detainees, who cannot be subjected to 
punishment.  Bell, 441 U.S. at 535.  Regardless, post -conviction defendants 
still have constitutional rights against cruel and unusual punishment.  See 
Bell, 441 U.S. at 535 n.16 (“A sentenced inmate . . . may be punished,  
although that punishment may not be ‘cruel and unusual’ under the Eighth 
Amendment.”); State v. Guidry , 105 Hawai‘ i 222, 237, 96 P.3d 242, 257 (2004) 
(explaining the proportionality test of the prohibition on “cruel and 
unusual” punishment in Article I, Section 12 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution).  
 
9  The Programming Results did not indicate when or how the Committee 
learned the probation officer’s opinion, nor did it indicate which case — 
Gordon’s pending case or his probation case — was “questionable,” or what 
“questionable” meant. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 never harbored malice or ill- will toward Gordon and did not 
believe Gordon was punished when he was placed in maximum 
custody conditions.   
 Gordon filed a grievance challenging the Committee’s 
decision on September 29, 2010.   
d.   October 2010 Exception Case Form 
 On October 5, 2010, Cho received a memorandum from her 
supervisor, Lance Rabacal (“Rabacal”).  The memorandum 
instructed Cho to “adhere to the directive process that has been 
consistently utilized at our facility pertaining to MAX custody 
inmates,” which was attached.  That memorandum , originally 
written by a former OCCC warden in November 1996, laid out the 
State’s “arrangement with the ACLU” (“ACLU Memo”) regarding 
procedures for processing maximum custody pretrial detainees.  
The ACLU Memo provided that pretrial detainees classified as 
maximum custody “shall be housed in the [OCCC] Holding Unit for 
30 days,” and “[i]f the inmate remains misconduct free and is 
not a management problem, OCCC shall then reduce the inmate’s 
custody to Medium and re- house in general population.”  It also 
provided that “if the inmate incurs misconducts during the 30 -
day period, and/or is a management problem, he shall be 
transferred to HCF as a Max custody.”  According to Rabacal, the 
ACLU Memo was “used as a guideline to deter mine when a 
recommendation to reduce custody” should be considered.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
  On or about October 12, 2010, an Exception Case Form was 
started for Gordon under Cho’s name.  Th is form noted that 
Gordon had “not shown nor accrued any institutional behavioral 
misconducts within the OCCC holding unit” and recommended a  
medium custody classification “[b]ased on 10/5/10 OCCC MAX 
CUSTODY INMATES directive from Lance Rabacal.”  The Exception 
Case Form was sent to the DPS Classification Office, which 
considers the totality of the circumstances when making the 
decision to reduce or maintain an inmate’s custody level.   
 Linda Chun (“Chun”), an officer in the Classification 
Office, denied Gordon’s Exception Case Form on October 19, 2010.  
Chun recorded the reasoning for her decision on the Exception 
Case Form itself, noting  Gordon’s behavior in the OCCC Holding 
Unit had been satisfactory thus far, but explaining that she 
thought he should remain in maximum custody for the following 
reasons:  
[T]his case still presents a number of risk factors.  
Current charges are serious & violent in nature.  As a 
result, subject has a high bail amount.  Subject has an 
extensive criminal history & also has had numerous periods 
of incarceration.  Subject has failed to profit from 
previous experience with probation and incarceration.  
Substance abuse issues have not been addressed due to 
subject’s discharge from program for non -compliance with 
program rules.  
 
Chun believed, based on her training, experience, and the 
reasons she cited, that it was reasonable to place a pretrial 
detainee in maximum security housing.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
  The disapproved Exception Case Form was submitted to Deputy 
Director of Corrections Tommy Johnson (“Johnson”) for review.  
On October 21, 2010, Johnson denied Gordon’s r equest because he 
believed Chun’s statement s on the Exception C ase Form were true, 
although he had no personal knowledge of the basis for the 
statements .  Johnson did not believe Gordon’s  custody level was 
punishment.    
e.   Subsequent grievances and conditions at HCF 
 Fro m September 29, 2010, through March 24, 2011, Gordon 
filed eight Inmate Complaint/Grievances challenging his 
classification and placement in solitary confinement.  Gordon 
sought reclassification to medium custody and transfer to OCCC, 
but none of his  grievances were granted.   
 Gordon was transferred to HCF on October 25, 2010, and was 
placed in maximum custody.  As a pretrial detainee at HCF, he 
was alone in his cell for twenty- three hours per day, was given 
forty-five minutes to an hour of recreational time five days a 
week, had no access to a shower on weekends, and was only 
allowed noncontact visits with his attorney.  He was strip 
searched daily and searched again each time he returned to his 
cell.  Gordon had limited access to phone calls, did not have 
access to a commissary, and was denied access to programs.
 According to Monica Lortz (“Lortz”), an HCF Corrections 
Supervisor, DPS policy requires the custody status of every ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 maximum custody inmate, whether pretrial detainee or sentenced 
prisoner, to be reassessed once a year.  In June 2011, at the 
instruction of the deput
y warden and after Gordon had been at 
HCF for eight months, Lortz  reevaluated Gordon’s custody status 
using a Jail Inmate Custody Review Instrument (“Custody Review 
Instrument”).  After completing the Custody Review Instrument, 
Lortz assigned Gordon
 a total of thirteen points, which 
corresponded to a medium custody level.10  Gordon’s custody level 
was therefore reduced from maximum to medium, and he was 
returned to OCCC on June 16, 2011.   
 After Gordon was sentenced for his pending charges in 
September 2011, he was returned to HCF.11  At the time of the 
trial in his civil case, Gordon was held at HCF in medium 
security custody.   
 2.  The circuit court ’s conclusions of law  
 The circuit court rendered the following conclusions of law 
relevant to the issues on certiorari. 
                     
10  The Custody Review Instrument employed a point system similar to the 
Initial Custody Instrument, but limited its consideration of Gordon’s 
criminal history to felony convictions and escapes within the past ten years, 
and institutional misconduct within the past twelve months.  According to the 
Custody Review Instrument, male inmates with a total of zero to nine points 
resulted in a security classification of minimum custody, ten to fifteen 
points resulted in a medium custody classification, and a point total greater 
than sixteen resulted in a maximum custody classification.   
 
11  Gordon testified  that he was eventually convicted of “sex assault, 
promotion of prostitution, kidnapping, and drug promotion” in August 2011, 
and was sentenced to ten years of imprisonment with the  possibility of 
parole, with a mandatory minimum of three years and four months.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 a.   Gordon’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim  
 Citing  the United States Supreme Court’s opinion in  Bell, 
the circuit court stated that pre -trial detainees have a 
substantive due process right against custodial restrictions 
that amount to punishment,  but also that not every condition 
imposed during pretrial detention amounts to punishment.  To 
determine whether a condition is punishment, the circuit court 
determined that it must look to whether the restrictions evince 
a punitive purpose or intent, and in the absence of an express 
intent to punish, it must then consider whether punitive intent 
can be inferred from the nature of the restriction.  The circuit 
court further noted that whet her punitive intent can be inferred 
generally turns upon whether a n alternative purpose to which the 
restriction may rationally be connected is assignable for it, 
and whether the restriction appears excessive in relation to the 
alternative purpose assigned to it.    
 The circuit court concluded that Gordon’s constitution al 
rights were not violated based on the lack of substantive 
evidence showing that Defendants categorized him as a maximum 
custody pre-trial detainee purely to impose punishment upon him.  
Furthermore, the circuit court concluded the conditions to which 
Gordon was subject as a maximum custody detainee were 
“reasonably related to a legitimate government objective which 
is to maintain a safe and secure correctional facility,” and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
 were no different from the restrictions and conditions of any 
other maximum custody inmates.  The circuit court also concluded 
that Gordon did not prove “that the conditions of maximum 
custody imposed by Defendants to maintain a safe and secure 
correctional facility were excessive to accomplish such 
objective nor expressly intended as punishment, ” and that “the 
restrictions and conditions [Gordon] was subjected to did not 
amount to punishment.”12   
 Determining that Cho complied with the guidelines of the 
ACLU Memo, the circuit court also concluded that Cho was 
                     
12  The circuit court compared Gordon’s case to a number of earlier federal 
cases: 
  
Based on the totality of the facts, various documents in 
evidence and credible trial testimony and the lack of any 
evidence to the contrary, the court concludes that the 
restrictions and conditions [Gordon] was subjected to did 
not amount to punishment.  Compare [Bell, 441 U.S. 520] 
(holding that double -bunking, body -cavity searches, the 
prohibition against the receipt of packages, or the room -
search only rule did not amount to punishment under the 
facts of the case), and Brock v. Rutherford , 468 U.S. 576 
(U.S. 1984) (holding that a blanket prohibition on contact 
visits with pretrial detainees and shakedown searches of 
pretrial detainees’ cells outside their presence does not 
amount to punishment), with Anela v. Wildwood , 790 F.2d 
1063 (3rd Cir. N.J. 1986) (holding that failing to provide 
beds or mattresses and food and drinking water amounted to 
punishment), and Demery v. Arpaio , 378 F.3d 1020, 1033 (9th 
Cir. Ariz. 2004) (holding that the sheriff’s policy of 
transmitting live images over the internet of pretrial 
detainees by webcam was an excessive response to the 
purpose assigned to it).  
 
 None of these  cases dealt with solitary confinement, although  Bell and 
Brock addressed searches and non -contact visitation similar to what Gordon 
experienced.  G ordon’s claim appears to challenge  his maximum security 
classification as a whole, rather than any specific procedure.  We therefore 
address whether maximum security custody as a whole, as Gordon experienced 
it, amounted to punishment.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
 entitled to qualified immunity from Gordon’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 
claims “because she did not knowingly violate [Gordon’s] 
Constitutional rights ” and Gordon did not suffer punishment.   
b.  Gordon’s negligence claim  
 The c ircuit court determined  that “Cho, individually, is 
afforded the protections of a qualified privilege as to 
[Gordon]’s state law claims because [Gordon] did not prove by 
clear and convincing evidence that Defendant Cho was motivated 
by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose.”  Accordingly, 
the circuit court ordered judgment 
to be entered for Cho.13   
C. ICA Proceedings 
 On appeal, Gordon challenged the circuit court’s findings 
and conclusions that (1) Gordon’s initial custody classification 
was correct; (2) the conditions to which he was subjected  did 
not constitute punishment; (3) the Defendants acted reasonably 
in their application of their classification procedure; and (4) 
Cho was entitled to qualified immunity.  
 
In a memorandum opinion, the ICA affirmed the circuit 
court’s judgment.  Gordon v. Maesaka-Hirata, No. CAAP -14-914 
(App. May 30, 2017) (mem. op.) at 2 , 28.  The ICA noted that in 
                     
13  The circuit court did not address Gordon’s state c onstitutional due 
process claim.  It also did not specifically address Gordon’s intentional 
infliction of emotional distress claim.  In any event, the circuit court 
concluded the Defendants were not liable for negligent infliction of 
emotional distress, which required less proof, and Gordon does not pursue the 
emotional distress causes of action on certiorari.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 deciding to keep Gordon in maximum security custody, Cho and the 
Committee, as well as Chun in the Classification Office, relied 
on factors such as “ the nature of the current charges, bail 
amount, criminal history, failure to complete probation, and 
unaddressed substance abuse issues [.]”   Gordon, mem. op. at 19
-
20.  The ICA concluded that these factors, among other things, 
provided “substantial evidence [to] support . . . the Circuit 
Court’s conclusion that the individual prison officials acted 
reasonably in keeping Gordon in Max Custody.”   
Gordon, mem. op. 
at 19.   
 The ICA acknowledged that “while Gordon has no 
constitutional right to a certain classification, he possesses a 
right to be free from punishment prior to an adjudication of 
guilt.”  Gordon, mem. op. at 
23.  “[O]n the totality of the 
record of this case, ” the ICA concluded that the circuit court 
did not err “in determining that Gordon’s Max Custody did not 
constitute pre-trial punishment.”  Gordon, mem. op. at 20.   In 
the ICA’s view, “Gordon cite[d]  no evidence or legal authority 
that his Max Custody classification constituted punishment ” and 
“the evidence led to the conclusion that the conditions were 
reasonably related to legitimate government objectives related 
to the safety and security of the correctional facilities and 
that they were not excessive for that purpose.”  Gordon, mem. 
op. at 19-20.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
  
The ICA determined  Gordon did not show evidence of punitive 
intent and failed to show there was no alternative reason for 
his treatment other than punishment
, or that his treatment was 
excessive in relation to its alternative purpose.  Gordon, mem. 
op. at 24.  The ICA also  observed that Gordon “failed to 
establish that the procedure detailed in the ACLU Memo is 
guaranteed to him” or that it otherwise overrides the deference 
owed to prison officials.  Gordon, mem. op. at 24-25.  The ICA 
concluded, instead, that “[t]he reasons for keeping Gordon in 
Max Custody were clearly articulated and appear to be related to 
the legitimate nonpunitive governmental objective of security 
and safety.  Gordon has not shown that he was subject to an 
arbitrary action of government.”   Gordon , mem. op. at 25, 
(citing Wolff v. McDonnell , 418 U.S. 539, 558 (1974)).    
 Finally,  with respect to Cho’s state law qualified 
immunity, the ICA held that the circuit court did not err and  
that Gordon failed “ to meet his burden under [Towse  v. State , 64 
Haw. 624, 647 P.2d 696 (1982),] to establish that Cho was 
motivated by malice or otherwise improper purpose. ”  Gordon, 
mem. op. at 26- 27.     
D. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
 Gordon presents three questions in his application for writ 
of certiorari (“Application”):  
A. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the 
restrictions and conditions of Petitioner’s solitary ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
 confinement in Maximum Custody for nine months and twenty -
two days did not constitute unlawful pretrial punishment 
where, inter alia, (1) Petitioner was locked in an 
isolation cell for approximately twenty -three hours each 
day, (2) Petitioner was generally  allowed only non- contact 
visits with his attorney, and (3) Petitioner was subjected 
to multiple strip searches on a daily basis.  
 
B. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that [DPS] 
officials did not act arbitrarily and capriciously in 
holding Petitioner in Maximum Custody where (1) 
Petitioner’s initial custody level was calculated 
incorrectly; (2) DPS failed to abide by established inmate 
classification policies and procedures; and (3) Petitioner 
was not an escape risk, had never assaulted anyone while  in 
prison, and had never been a threat to prison discipline 
and good order.  
 
C. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that Respondent 
PETRA CHO was entitled to qualified immunity and that 
Petitioner failed to establish that Respondent CHO was 
motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose 
in confining Petitioner to Maximum Custody where (1) the 
incorrect calculation resulting in Petitioner’s initial 
custody level was known to Respondent CHO, and (2) 
Respondent CHO refused to correct Petition er’s erroneous 
custody classification within a reasonable period of time.  
 
[SC DOC 1:2]   
III.   Standard s of Review 
 A trial court’s findings  of fact are reviewed under the 
clearly erroneous standard: 
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite 
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is 
left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the 
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. 
A finding of fact is also clearly erroneous when the record 
lacks substantial evidence to  support the finding.  We have 
defined ‘substantial evidence’ as credible evidence which 
is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  
 
In re Grievance Arbitration Between State of Haw. Org. of Police  
Officers  (“SHOPO”), 135 Hawai ‘i 456, 461 –62, 353 P.3d 998, 1003 –
04 (2015)  (quoting Daiichi Haw. Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter , 
103 Hawai‘ i 325, 337, 82 P.3d 411, 423 (2003) ). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
  Conclusions of law are ordinarily reviewed under the 
right/wrong standard.  Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State , 
113 Hawai‘ i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007) .  A conclusion of 
law that is supported by the trial court’s  findings  of fact and 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be 
overturned.  113 Hawai ‘i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523.  However, when 
a conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we 
review it under the clearly erroneous standard because the 
court’s conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances 
of each individual case.  113 Hawai ‘i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523.  
Additionally, in reviewing a trial court’s decisi on, that 
court’s label of a finding of fact or conclusion of law is not 
determinative of the standard of review.  Crosby v. State Dep’t 
of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai ʻi 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308  
(1994). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Gordon’s  42 U.S.C. § 1983 Claim 
 In establishing a civil action for deprivation of rights, 
42 U.S.C. § 1983 provides, in relevant part, as follows: 
Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or 
the District of Columbia,  subjects, or causes to be 
subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person 
within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any 
rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the 
Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured 
in
 an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper 
proceeding for redress . . . .  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1996). 
 Gordon ’s 42 U.S.C. 1983 claim  arises from his assertion 
that the conditions of his pretrial detainment, more than nine 
months in what amounted to solitary confinement, constituted 
punishment in violation of his due process r
ights under the 
Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.14  [SC 
DOC 1:7]  “To make out a cause of action under section 1983, 
plaintiffs must plead that (1) the defendants acting under color 
of state law (2) deprived plaintiffs of rights secured by the 
Constitution or federal statutes. ”  Gibson v. United States , 781 
F.2d 1334, 1338 (9th Cir. 1986) (citation omitted).  A defendant 
acts “under color of state law” wh en the defendant exercises 
power “possessed by virtue of state law and made possible only 
because the wrongdoer is clothed with the authority of state 
law.”  United States v. Classic, 313 U.S. 299, 326 (1941) 
(citations omitted).  The Defendants have never disputed that 
Cho, a DPS correctional supervisor, acted under color of state 
law when she and the Committee rendered their custody decision.  
                     
14  Gordon’s Amended Complaint asserted that the Defendants violated his 
due process rights under the Hawai ‘i State Constitution as well.  However, 42 
U.S.C. § 1983 claims can only arise under federal laws and the federal 
constitution.  See  Baker v. McCollan , 443 U.S. 137, 144 n.3 (1979) (“ It is 
for violations of such constitutional and statutory rights that 42 U.S.C. § 
1983 authorizes redress; that section is not itself a source of substantive 
rights, but a method for vindicating federal rights elsewhere conferred by 
those parts of the United States Constitution and federal statutes that it 
describes. ”).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 Rather, this case turns on whether Gordon proved that Cho 
violated his rights under federal law.15   
 Under the due process clause of  the Fourteenth Amendment to 
the United States Constitution, “a detainee may not be punished 
prior to an adjudication of guilt in accordance with due process 
of law.”16  Bell, 441 U.S. at 536.  “A person lawfully committed 
to pretrial detention has not been adjudged guilty of any 
crime,” and therefore while “the Government concededly may 
detain him to ensure his presence at trial and may subject him 
to the restrictions and conditions of the detention facility,” 
the government may only do so if those conditions of confinement 
“do not amount to punishment, or otherwise violate the 
17Constitution.”   441 U.S. at 536-37.  
                     
15  Although Gordon’s Application does not explicitly restrict his 42 
U.S.C. § 1983 claim to Cho, such actions are available against government 
officials in their individual capacity only.  See Ashcroft v. Iqbal , 556 U.S. 
662, 676 (2009) ( “Because vicarious liability is inapplicable to  Bivens and § 
1983 suits, a plaintiff must plead that each Government -official defendant,  
through the official’ s own individual actions, has violated the  
Constitution.”).   Furthermore, it appears Gordon ’s  claims against Jodie F. 
Maesaka- Hirata involve only state law negligent supervision and training 
theories, which Gordon has not pursued on certiorari.   
 
16  Bell addressed conditions at a federal detention facility, and 
therefore rested on the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment .  441 U.S. 
at 530.  However, the Bell court noted that when states seek to impose 
punishment without an adjudication of guilt, “the pertinent constitutional 
guarantee is the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.”  Bell, 441 
U.S. at 535 n.16 (quoting Ingraham v. Wright , 430 U.S. 651, 671 n.40 (1977)).  
17  Pretrial detainees may be punished for violating prison rules if they 
are afforded due process for those violations.  See, e.g., Mitchell v. 
Dupnik, 75 F.3d 517, 524 (9th Cir. 1996) (opining that Bell recognized prison 
officials’ need to preserve “internal order and discipline,” and holding 
“pretrial detainees may be subjected to disciplinary segregation only with a 
due process hearing to determine whether they have in fact violated any 
rule.”).  What Bell makes clear is that prison officials cannot, even 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
  “Not every disability imposed during pretrial detention 
amounts to ‘punishment’ in the constitutional sense,” and 
indeed, pretrial detainees are to expect some lawful curtailment 
of their liberties.  See Bell, 441 U.S. at 537 (“[T]he fact that 
. . . detention interferes with the detainee’s understandable 
desire to live . . . with as little restraint as possible during 
confinement does not convert the conditions or restrictions of 
detention into punishment.”).  Restrictions “that are reasonably 
related to the institution’s interest in maintaining jail 
security do not, without more, constitute unconstitutional 
punishment, even if they are discomforting and are restrictions 
that the detainee would not have experienced had he been 
18released while awaiting trial.”  441 U.S. at 540.  
 Courts must therefore decide whether the condition of 
confinement “is imposed for the purpose of punishment or whether 
it is but an incident of some other legitimate governmental 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
unintentionally, punish detainees for the crimes for which they were arrested 
until there has been “an adjudication of guilt in accordance with due process 
of law” —  in other words, a conviction.  441 U.S. at 535; accord Sandin v. 
Conner, 515 U.S. 472, 484  (1995)  (characterizing Bell as expressing “concern 
that a State would attempt to punish a detainee for the crime for which he 
was indicted via preconviction holding conditions” ).  
18  Bell, a case challenging the constitutionality of conditions of 
confinement in a federally operated short -term custodial facility, held that  
“double- bunking” of inmates; a rule prohibiting inmates from receiving 
hardback books unless mailed directly from a publisher, bookstore, or book 
club; a rule prohibiting inmates from receiving packages of food or personal 
property except for one package at Christmas; a rule prohibiting inmates from 
observing unannounced room inspections; and visual body cavity strip searches 
after every contact visit with a person from outside the institution, did not 
constitute unconstitutional punishment of pretrial detainees.  441 U.S at 
541-42, 548- 49, 553, 555, 558, 560 -61.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
 purpose.”  441 U.S. at 538 (citation omitted).  The  Bell court 
elaborated on this standard: 
Absent a showing of an expressed intent to punish on the 
part of detention facility officials, that determination  
generally will turn on “whether an alternative purpose to 
which [the restriction] may rationally be connected is 
assignable for it, and whether it appears excessive in 
relation to the alternati ve purpose assigned [to it].”  
Thus, if a particular condition or restriction of pretrial 
detention is reasonably related to a legitimate 
governmental objective, it does not, without more, amount 
to “punishment.”  Conversely, if a restriction or condition 
is not reasonably related to a legitimate goal — if it is 
arbitrary or purposeless — a court permissibly may infer 
that the purpose of the governmental action is punishment 
that may not constitutionally be inflicted upon detainees 
qua detainees.  
 
441 U.S. at 538-39 (citations and footnotes omitted).  Thus, 
under Bell , a pretrial detainee’s treatment amounts to  
punishment when:  (1) there is “ a showing of an expressed intent 
to punish on the part of detention facility officials ;” (2) the 
condition or restriction is  not “reasonably related to a 
legitimate goal ;” or (3) the condition or restriction is 
“excessive in relation to the alternative purpose assigned to 
it.”  441 U.S. at 538 -39. 
 Courts must be mindful that a pretrial punishment claim 
triggers due process inquiries that “spring from constitutional 
requirements and . . . judicial answers to them must reflect 
that fact rather than a court’s idea of how best to operate a 
detention facility.”  441 U.S. at 539.  Because prison 
administration is difficult and its problems are not readily 
ascertained or solved by the judiciary, “[p]rison administrators ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 . . . should be accorded wide- ranging deference in the adoption 
and execution of policies and practices that in their judgment 
are needed to preserve internal order and discipline and 
maintain institutional security.”  441 U.S. at 547 (citations 
omitted).   
 The deference owed to prison officials is not unlimited,
 
however, and must yield to constitutional principles.  See Brown 
v. Plata, 563 U.S. 493, 511 (2011) (“Courts may not allow 
constitutional violations to continue simply because a remedy 
would involve intrusion into the realm of prison 
administration.”) (citation omitted); accord Wolff, 418 U.S. at 
555-56 (“There is no iron curtain drawn between the Consti tution 
and the prisons of this country.”) .  Courts should defer to the 
expert judgment of prison officials unless there is “substantial 
evidence in the record to indicate that the officials have 
exaggerated their response to ” their institutional order, 
discipline, and security considerations.   Bell, 441 U.S. at 548 
(quoting Pell v. Procunier , 417 U.S. 817, 827 (1974)).   
 Because Gordon argues all three parts of the Bell standard, 
we address each part in turn.  
 The circuit court did not err by concluding that 1.
Gordon’s treatment was not the result of Cho’s  express 
intent to punish him.  
 Gordon asserts he demonstrated the Defendants ’ “expressed 
intent to punish” him because he showed that when they ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 classified him, they emphasized his criminal history, pending 
charges, and “failure to ‘profit’ from prior law enforcement 
contacts.”  Their focus on these factors, he argues, makes it 
“apparent that DPS officials intended for [Gordon’s] solitary 
confinement to serve as retribution and deterrence, which the 
United States Supreme Court has recognized as ‘the traditional 
aims of punishment[.]’”   
 Gordon’s only remaining 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim is against 
Cho.  What t he other State employees may have intended is not at 
issue on certiorari.  Although Bell did not explain the term 
“expressed intent,”  something is “express [ed]” when it is 
“[c]learly and unmistakably communicated” or “stated with 
directness and clarity.”  Black’s Law Dictionary 701 (10th ed. 
2014).  The circuit court not only found the Defendants had no 
expressed intent to punish Gordon, but that Cho,  specifically, 
“testified credibly that she has never had any malice or ill -
will towards [Gordon] or would knowingly violate [Gordon’s] 
constitutional rights and [Gordon] produced no evidence to the 
contrary.”  These findings of fact, which are based upon the 
circuit court’s credibility determinations, are not clearly 
erroneous.  See Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc. , 97 Hawai ʻi 
86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 (2001) (“[T]he credibility of witnesses 
and the weight to be given their testimony are within the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be 
disturbed on appeal.”) . 
 The circuit court did not err in concluding Cho did not 
express intent to punish Gordon .  Indeed, in addition to the 
circuit court’s finding with respect to Cho, t he testimony of 
multiple witnesses indicates the  DPS personnel handling Gordon’s 
case believed they were following established procedure, and 
thought maximum security custody was not punishment for pretrial 
detainees with Gordon’s history.19  For the reasons below, 
however, we nevertheless hold that the circuit court clearly 
erred in concluding t he restrictions and conditions of Gordon ’s
detainment did not amount to punishment.    
 The circuit court err ed by concluding that Gordon’s 2.
treatment was reasonably  related to a legitimate 
government purpose.  
 In the absence of expressed  intent to punish, “a court must 
look to see if a particular restriction or condition, which may 
                     
19  Pula calculated Gordon’s initial custody level  using only a standard 
DPS form and the information she had at the time.  Chun denied Gordon’s case 
exception because, based on her experience,  she thought
 it reasonable to 
place pretrial detainees in maximum security for the reasons Cho and the 
Committee considered.  Likewise, in reviewing Gordon’s Exception Case Form, 
Johnson believed Chun’s  statements and therefore thought it was reasonable to 
keep Gordon in maximum custody.  
 These subjective beliefs, however, are not relevant to consideration of 
the objective parts of the Bell test discussed below.  See Bell, 441 U.S. at 
538-39 (providing two ways to identify punishment in the absence of expressed 
intent to punish);  see also Kingsley v. Hendrickson , 135 S.Ct. 2466, 2473 -74 
(2015) (opining that “proof of intent (or motive) to punish” is not required 
to prevail on a Bell punishment claim, and “a pretrial detainee can prevail 
by providing only objective evidence” that his or her treatment lacked 
rational relationship or was excessive in relation to a legitimate 
governmental purpose).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 on its face appear to be punishment, is instead but an incident 
of a legitimate nonpunitive governmental objective.”  Bell, 441 
U.S. at 539 n.20.  “[I]f a particular condition or restriction 
of pretrial detention is reasonably related to a legitimate 
governmental obj ective, it does not, without more, amount to 
‘punishment. ’”  441 U.S. at 539.  However, “if a condition or 
restriction is arbitrary or purposeless, a court may permissibly 
infer that the purpose of the government action is 
punishment[.]”   Bell, 441 U.S. at 539.  Some legitimate 
interests that detention facility officials may seek to further 
include ensuring the detainee’s presence at trial, maintaining 
order and security at the institution, and preventing contraband 
from reaching detainees.  441 U.S. at 540 .  “Retribution and 
deterrence,” the Bell court made clear, “are not legitimate 
nonpunitive governmental objectives.”  441 U.S. at 539 n.20.        
 Gordon disputes the existence of a legitimate reason for 
his classification and segregation, and argues that his 
treatment by Cho violated his rights because it was “arbitrary 
20and capricious.”   The circuit court 
concluded “the Defendants’ 
                     
20  Gordon cites Coulter v. State , 116 Hawai ‘i 181, 185, 172 P.3d 493, 497 
(2007), for the proposition that “[g]overnment action may . . . be found to 
be arbitrary and capricious where an agency fails to follow the rules it sets 
out for itself.”  Coulter  had to do with the Hawai ‘i Paroling Authority’s 
(“HPA”) failure to follow its own minimum term guidelines, which it was 
required by statute to adopt and then obey.  116 Hawai‘ i at 185, 172 P.3d at 
497. 
 Because we decided the HPA violated its own guidelines, we explicitly 
declined to reach the constitutional due process question.  116 Hawai ‘i at 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
 conditions imposed on individuals categorized as maximum custody 
and, experienced by [Gordon], [
were] reasonably related to a 
legitimate government objective which is to maintain a safe and 
secure correctional facility.”  The ICA agreed, opining the 
Defendants’ reasons  for keeping him in solitary confinement were 
“clearly articulated” and related to prison security and safety.   
Gordon, mem. op. at 11.   
 Upon our r eview of the circuit court’s conclusion that the 
reasons Cho gave as Committee chair for continuing Gordon in 
maximum custody or solitary confinement were reasonably related 
to a legitimate government purpose, we are left with a definite 
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.  We conclude 
Cho’s treatment of Gordon was not reasonably related to a 
legitimate, nonpunitive
 government interest, and therefore was 
punishment.   
 Among other things
, Gordon as serts his treatment was 
arbitrary because his initial custody level was based on 
inaccurate information, which Cho failed to correct, and also 
because Cho failed to follow the dictates of the ACLU Memo.  
With respect to the ACLU Memo, the circuit court con cluded that 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
185, 172 P.3d at 497.  However, we did note “[t]he proposition that the 
government must follow the rules it  sets out for itself is not 
controversial,” and cited other authority holding that “[e]ven if an agency 
is not required to adopt a rule, once it has done so it must follow what it 
adopted.”   116 Hawai‘ i at 185, 172 P.3d at 497  (citing Peek v. Thompson , 980 
P.2d 178, 181 (Or. App. 1999)).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
 “by submitting the Exception Form, . . . Cho did comply with the 
guidelines of the [ACLU] Max Custody Memo.”  The ACLU Memo , 
however, does not characterize itself as a “guideline” and does 
not address Exception Case Forms or approval by the 
Classification Office; instead, it plainly instructs OCCC 
Holding Unit staff to (1) house all new inmates classified as 
maximum custody in the Holding Unit for thirty days; and (2) 
reduce the inmate’s custody status to medium and return that 
inmate to the OCCC general population “[i]f the inmate remains 
misconduct free and is not a management problem[.]”   
 Cho’s testimony at trial was that she actually did not know 
the ACLU Memo existed when the Committee met to review Gordon’s 
custody status, although she “was aware that after 30 days [the 
Committee] could review the inmate.”  It is unclear why 
Cho was 
unaware of the ACLU Memo, or whether the procedures stated 
within it had been officially modified or abandoned.  But, 
whether or not the ACLU Memo was a guideline  or a binding 
directive , Cho’s treatment of Gordon was  the result of 
generalized assumptions of dangerousness and flight risk not 
21supported by the facts.
   
                     
21  The record reveals the Defendants employed at least four different 
methods of evaluating Gordon’s classification:  Pula set Gordon’s initial 
classification using the Initial Custody Instrument,  Cho and the Committee  
performed a second evaluation , a third custody review by Chun was reviewed by 
Johnson, and Gordon’s final evaluation was done by Lortz, using the Custody 
Review Instrument.   
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
  Cho and the Committee’s review of Gordon’s custody status 
was subjective:  they were permitted to consider any factor 
deemed relevant, with
 apparently unlimited discretion in 
weighing those factors.22  To justify Gordon’s continued 
placement in maximum security custody, Cho and the Committee 
based their September 22, 2010 decision on factors that were not 
reasonably related to a legitimate government purpose.  They 
asserted Gordon was a “high -risk” and “high flight risk” 
detainee based on his pending charges, prior convictions, 
“discharge and failure to comply with 2 residential drug 
treatment programs while on probation,” non -compliance with 
reporting to his probation officer when leaving Hawai ‘i, 
extradition back to Hawai ‘i while on probation, and the bail 
amount for his pending charges.  The se facts, however,  were not  
relevant to ach ieving the Defendants’ “ legitimate government 
purposes” of ensuring that Gordon appeared for trial  and did not 
disrupt institutional order and security in the meantime.   
 Cho did not identify what kind of “high risk” Gordon 
presented.  There is nothing in the record that identifies the 
kind of conduct she feared Gordon would engage in while 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 We address only Cho’s conduct because she is the sole defendant against 
whom Gordon’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim  is pursued .   
 
22  It is unclear whether DPS policy or guidelines with respect to 
classification review existed at the time of trial.  No written policies, 
aside from the ACLU emo, were offered as evidence.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
31 
 detained.  Although Gordon did leave Hawai ‘i while on probation, 
resulting in his extradition, there was no explanation as to how 
absconding while on probation relates to escape from a secure 
jail facility
, such that Gordon would automatically be a “high 
flight risk.”   Furthermore, despite six prior incarcerations, 
there was no evidence that Gordon  had committed any 
institutional misconduct, leaving little in the record to  
support Cho’s belief that Gordon was a “high risk” inmate.   
Indeed, there is no evidence in the record that Cho and the 
Committee knew the factual bases for Gordon’s prior convictions 
or pending charges.     
 
Defendants  never explained how Cho and the Committee’s 
cited facts were predictors for disciplinary or management 
problems in custody.
  It is obvious that solitary confinement 
would effectively detain Gordon and guarantee his appearance at 
trial, but, under t he circumstances, solitary confinement was 
not reasonably related to any legitimate, nonpunitive purpose.  
In the absence of a link between Gordon’s treatment and the 
resolution of any real management or  security problem, Gordon’s 
conditions of confinement only achieved retribution and 
deterrence — “the traditional aims of punishment”  — which “are 
not legitimate nonpunitive governmental objectives. ”  Bell, 441 
U.S. at 539 n.20 (citing Kennedy v. Mendoza -Martinez, 372 U.S. 
144, 168 (1963));  accord Demery v. Arpaio , 378 F.3d 1020, 1030-***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
32 
 31 (9th Cir. 2004) (“[D]eterrence does not qualify as a 
nonpunitive goal with regard to pretrial detainees.”) (citation 
omitted).     
 We acknowledge that courts should ordinarily defer to 
priso
n administrators’ knowledge and expertise.  Bell, 441 U.S. 
at 547-48.  On the facts in this record, however, it is apparent 
that Cho and the Committee ’s response to the threat Gordon 
allegedly posed was exaggerated.  See Bell , 441 U.S. at 548 
(encouraging deference to prison officials, unless substantial 
evidence in the record suggests their response to an 
institutional problem was exaggerated).  Gordon’s maximum 
security status meant that he was alone in a cell for twenty-
three hours per day with forty -five to sixty minutes of 
recreational time only five days per week, no access to a shower 
on the weekends, only non- contact visits with his attorney, and 
23strip searches every day and each time he returned to his cell
.   
These conditions were imposed upon Gordon because C ho had non-
specific concerns about his future behavior, based on his past 
conduct.  Cf. Bell , 441 U.S. at 559 (upholding the use of visual 
inspection of body cavities where officials were specifically 
                     
23  The circuit cou rt found the Defendants “presented evidence that all MAX 
custody inmates, whether pretrial or not, [were] treated under the same 
conditions as” Gordon, but that the Defendants “also presented evidence that 
[Gordon] was afforded additional benefits such as personal calls that were 
not given to other inmates on the same floor.”  The fact that Gordon received 
additional privileges does not demonstrate that he was not punished, but 
rather, could show that he was punished less than others.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
33 
 concerned about concealment of drugs and contraband, and there 
had been at least one instance of attempted trafficking of 
contraband). 
 Because Cho relied on factors that we re not relevant to  
assessing Gordon’s present security needs,  and focused  on his 
past conduct without a logical connection to present or future 
threat, the circuit court and ICA clearly erred by concluding 
Gordon’s 
 placement in solitary confinement was reasonably 
related to a legitimate government purpose.24  A pretrial 
detainee can present serious and persistent threats to 
institutional safety, security, and order, such that maximum 
security conditions may be necessary to restrain them.  See 
Bell, 441 U.S. at 546 n.28 (“There is no basis for concluding 
that pretrial detainees pose any lesser security risk than 
convicted inmates.  Indeed, it may be that in certain 
circumstances they present a greater risk to jail security and 
order.”).  However, the record in this case does not support the 
Defendants’ assertions that Gordon presented such a threat .  
                     
24  The record shows  Chun relied on similar reasoning in denying Gordon’s 
exception case form, and Johnson accepted Chun’s reasoning when reviewing 
that decision.  Chun and Johnson, however, were never defendants in this 
case.   
 We note that other aspects of Gordon’s treatme nt may have been 
inconsistent with achieving the Defendants’ legitimate nonpunitive goals.  
For example, the Initial Custody Instrument counted Gordon’s misdemeanor and 
petty misdemeanor convictions not once, but twice:  first as part of Gordon’s 
history of prior convictions, and again as part of his “history of assaultive 
behavior.”  In contrast, the Custody Review Instrument counted only felonies 
within the last ten years, and focused on Gordon’s institutional history.  It 
is unclear why these evaluation methods differed to such an extent.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
34 
 Thus, we conclude the circuit court clearly erred by concluding 
Gordon’s treatment by Cho was reasonably related to a legitimate 
governmental objective, and therefore was not punishment.   
 The circuit court clearly erred by concluding Gordon’s 3.
treatment was not excessive in relation to a 
legitimate government purpose.  
 Under Bell, "the determination whether [pretrial]  
restrictions and practices constitute punishment in the 
constitutional sense depends on whether they are rationally 
related to a legitimate nonpunitive governmental purpose and 
whether they appear excessive in relation to that purpose."  441 
U.S. at 561.   Therefore, even if a pretrial detainee’s treatment 
“is reasonably related to a legitimate governmental objective,” 
a court may infer that the treat ment is punishment if “it 
appears excessive in relation to the alternative purpose  
assigned [to it].”  Bell, 441 U.S. at 538- 39 (citations and  
footnotes omitted).  For example, although “loading a detainee 
with chains and shackles and throwing him in a dungeon may 
ensure his presence at trial and preserve the security of the  
institution,” those harsh conditions would support a conclusion 
that they were imposed to punish the detainee, in light of “so 
many alternative and less harsh methods” that could achiev e the 
same objectives.  Bell, 441 U.S. at 539 n.20.     
Gordon asserts that even if there was a legitimate reason 
for his classification and segregation, the conditions of his ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
35 
 confinement were excessive in relation to any alternative 
purpose assigned to it.
  Bell, 441 U.S. at 538.  In support of 
his argument, he emphasizes that he was held in highly 
restrictive conditions
 for more than nine months despite the 
fact that he had shown “exemplary inmate behavior.”  The circuit 
court concluded “there was no evide nce produced by [Gordon] to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the conditions of 
maximum custody imposed by Defendants to maintain a safe and 
secure correctional facility were excessive to accomplish such 
objective[.]”  The ICA agreed.  Gordon, mem. op. at 11.   
 Gordon was retained in solitary confinement because Cho  and 
the Committee suspected that he posed a “high risk” or suspected 
he would engage in “high flight risk” behavior .  No witness 
testified to any incidents of misbehavior by Gordon during the 
incarceration period at issue, or during any of his prior 
incarcerations.  No witness testified to any  specific threats to 
institutional safety or order by Gordon.  Even after spending 
thirty days in the OCCC Holding Unit with no inci dents of 
misconduct, Cho and the Committee decided Gordon was  generally a 
“high risk” and “high flight risk” detainee  based on his 
criminal history and current charges , among other things.  Any 
justification for maximum security conditions should have 
dissipated after the thirty- day holding period, during which 
Gordon failed to exhibit the problematic behavior his past ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
36 
 convictions and pending charges supposedly indicated.    
 The record in this case shows 
that Cho imposed serious 
restraints on a pretrial detainee who did not demonstrate a 
serious threat to institutional safety or order.  While solitary 
confinement was undoubtedly effective at ensuring Gordon’s 
appearance at trial, like the “chains and shackles” of Bell’s 
hypothetical dungeon, the existence  of less harsh methods of 
achieving the same security goals supports the inference that 
Gordon’s treatment was punishment.   See Bell, 441 U.S. at 539  
n.20 (opining that harsh conditions, “ employed to achieve 
objectives that could be accomplished in so many alternative and 
less harsh methods,”  can support  the conclusion that the 
25conditions were imposed to inflict punishment).    
 We emphasize  that Gordon’s maximum security conditions were 
harsh — solitary confinement has long been recognized as an 
“infamous punishment” used to “mark [prisoners] as examples of 
the just punishment of the worst crimes of the human race.”  In 
re Medley, 134 U.S. 160, 168-170 (1890).   This point has been  
effectively summarized by other courts.   See, e.g., Davis v.  
                     
25  In light of the deference accorded to prison administrators in the 
“adoption and execution of policies and practices . . . needed to preserve  
internal order and discipline and to maintain institutional security,” B ell, 
441 U.S. at 521, the availability of alternatives and less harsh methods does  
not end a reviewing court’s inquiry as to whether a particular pretrial 
restriction constitutes punishment.  Rather, the existence of such  
alternatives may indicate that the  restriction imposed is excessive in 
relation to the legitimate governmental purpose of maintaining institutional  
safety and security. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
37 
 Ayala, 135 S.Ct. 2187, 2209-11 (2015) (Kennedy, J., concurring) 
(summarizing the history and effects of long-term solitary 
confinement).  We also note that scientific research now 
suggests even a few days in solitary confinement can have 
negative effects on inmates’ mental health, even in inmates not 
previously diagnosed with mental illness.  See, e.g., Williams  
v. Sec’y Pa. Dept. of Corr. , 848 F.3d 549, 562, 566- 69 (3d Cir.  
2017), cert. denied  138 S.Ct. 357 (U.S. Oct. 16, 2017) (Nos. 17-
53, 17-5116) (summarizing scientific studies on the effects of 
solitary confinement).  
We conclude  that, in light of the lack 
of articulable concerns and the harshness of Gordon’s 
confinement, the circuit court clearly erred by concluding 
Gordon’s treatment by Cho was not excessive in relation to a 
legitimate nonpunitive goal.  
 Because w e conclude that Gordon has established a 
constitutional violation for his 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim against 
Cho, we must now address whether Cho is entitled to qu alified 
immunity.    
 Cho is not liable to Gordon under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 due 4.
to qualified i mmunity under federal l aw. 
 The circuit court identified the federal qualified immunity 
standard as follows:   
 12.  Government officials who perform discretionary 
functions have qualified immunity from liability for civil 
damages when “their conduct does not violate clearly 
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a 
reasonable person would have known.”  Johnson v. Fankell , ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
38 
 520 U.S. 911, 914 -15 [(1997)]; Gabbert v. Conn , 131 F.3d 
793, 799 (9th Cir. 1997).  
 13.  The qualified immunity inquiry is two -pronged. 
The Court must ask whether the “conduct violated a 
constitutional right” and whether “the right was c learly 
established” at the time of the alleged misconduct.  The 
Court may conduct this two -pronged inquiry in any order. 
Alston v. Read , 663 F.3d 1094, 1098 (9th Cir. Haw. 2011).  
  
The circuit court concluded Cho was entitled to qualified 
immunity “because she did not knowingly  violate [Gordon’s] 
Constitutional rights[.]”  In so concluding, the circuit court 
clearly erred. 
 As the circuit court initially correctly noted, the 
“clearly established right” portion of the  two-part qualified 
immunity standard employs a reasonableness test.   Johnson , 520 
U.S. at 914-15 (citing Harlow v. Fitzgerald , 457 U.S. 800, 818 
(1982)).  To be more specific, federal courts employ a 
“reasonable official” test:  a right is clearly established 
“when, at the time of the challenged conduct, [t]he contours of 
[a] right [are] sufficiently clear that every reasonable 
official  would have understood that what he is doing violates 
that right.”  Ashcroft v. al- Kidd, 563 U.S. 731, 741 (2011)  
(quoting Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 640 (1987))  
(emphasis added) .  This standard “do[es] not require a case 
directly on point, but existing precedent must have placed the 
statutory or constitutional question beyond debate.”26  al-Kidd,  
                     
26  The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals previously characterized the clearly 
established law standard as requiring “fair warning,” meaning that state 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
39 
 563 U.S. at 741 (emphasis added); accord Reichle v. Howards , 566 
U.S. 658 (2012).     
   The United States Supreme Court has said that 
“[q]ualified immunity gives government officials breathing room 
to make reasonable but mistaken judgments about open legal 
questions.  When  properly applied, it protects ‘all but the 
plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law .’”  
al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 743 (quoting Malley v. Briggs , 475 U.S. 
335, 341 (1986)) (emphasis added).  However, an official’s  
subjective mental state is  irrelevant to the qualified immunity 
inquiry:  rather, a court must evaluate the “objective legal 
reasonableness” of the official’s  conduct “in light of the legal 
rules that were ‘clearly established’ at the time[.]”  Anderson, 
483 U.S. at 639.   
 Thus, alth ough the Court stated that qualified immunity 
does not protect those who “knowingly” violate the law, t he 
circuit court erred when it concluded Cho was entitled to  
qualified immunity because she did not knowingly violate 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
officials are not entitled to qualified immunity “where the contours of the 
right have been defined with sufficient specificity that a state official had 
fair warning that [his or her] conduct deprived a victim of his [or her] 
rights[.]”  Serrano v. Francis , 345 F.3d 1071, 1077 (9th Cir. 2003) 
(citations omitted).  However, it appears the United States Supreme Court now 
requires  greater specificity with respect to whether the law was “clearly 
established.”  See District of Columbia v. Wesby , 138 S.Ct. 577, 592 (2018) 
(“It is not enough that the rule is suggested by then -existing precedent.  
The precedent must be clear enough that every reasonable official would 
interpret it to establish the particular rule the pl aintiff seeks to apply.”)   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
40 
 Gordon’s rights.  In other words, a lthough Cho would not be 
entitled to qualified immunity if she knowingly violated 
Gordon’s rights, she is not entitled to qualified immunity just 
because she did not knowingly do so.  Rather, the issue is 
whether Gordon’s rights were sufficiently clear in September 
2010 so that every reasonable official  in Cho’s position would 
have understood that Gordon’s constitutional rights were being 
violated; the test is objective, not subjective.   
 Whether a right was clearly established under federal law 
at the time the defendant acted is a “purely legal” question.  
Mitchell v. Forsyth , 472 U.S. 511, 528 n.9 (1985).  That 
question of law is reviewable de novo on appeal.  Elder v. 
Holloway, 510 U.S. 510, 516 (1994).  Thus, even if the circuit 
court did not apply the proper standard, whether Gordon’s rights 
were clearly established at the time Cho and the Committee made 
their maximum custody/solitary confinement decision is a legal 
question that we review de novo.  
 Upon a careful review, with respect to the first prong of 
the qualified immunity inquiry, we have concluded for the 
reasons stated in Part IV, Section A, subsections 2 and 3 above, 
that Cho’s conduct violated Gordon’s Fourteenth Amendment due 
process right to be free from pretrial punishment.  With respect 
to the second prong of the inquiry, however, we conclude that 
Cho was entitled to qualified immunity because Gordon’s rights ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
41 
 were not sufficiently clear at the time Cho acted in 2010 so 
that every reasonable official  in Cho’s position would have 
understood that Gordon’s constitutional rights were being 
violated.   
 In 1979, Bell made clear that pretrial detainees may not be 
punished for the crimes for which they were arrested before an 
adjudication of their guilt.  441 U.S. at 535.  Under  Bell, 
courts may infer that conditions of confinement are punishment 
if they are the result of an expressed intent to punish, if they 
are not rationally related to a legitimate alternative purpose, 
or if they are excessive in relation to that legitimate 
alternative purpose.  441 U.S. at 538-39.  In evaluating an 
official’s claim of qualified immunity,  however,  courts should 
not “define clearly established law at a high level of 
generality.”   al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 742.  I nstead, the clearly 
established law inquiry “m ust be undertaken in light of the 
specific context of the case, not as a broad general 
proposition.”  Brosseau v. Haugen , 543 U.S. 194, 198 (2004) ( per 
curiam) (internal citation omitted).  Turning to the specific  
context of this case, we conclude that in 2010, the law was not 
sufficiently clear so that every reasonable official in Cho’s 
position would have understoo d that keeping Gordon in maximum 
security custody, based on the criteria applied, would amount to 
punishment in violation of his due process ri ghts.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
42 
  In Bell, the conditions challenged were imposed on all 
pretrial detainees, and prison officials’ explanations of the 
necessity of those conditions were therefore based on broad, 
facility- wide concerns.  441 U.S. at 541- 58.  In Gordon’s case , 
prison officials imposed highly restrictive conditions on him as 
an individual and, at the time Cho acted, federal law provided 
little guidance to prison officials with respect to making 
security assessments of individual detainees.   In 2010, it was 
at least clear that pretrial detainees may not be placed in 
highly restrictive conditions simply because they are pretrial 
detainees.  See Lock v. Jenkins , 641 F.2d 488, 494 (7th Cir. 
1981) (concluding that placing all pretrial detainees in 
“conditions more burd ensome than those imposed on the general 
population of convicted felons,” regardless of their individual 
characteristics, “amount[ed] to punishment under Bell”).  
However, c ourts largely deferred to officials’ expertise in 
prison management.  See, e.g., Block v. Rutherford , 468 U.S. 576 
(1984) (upholding a ban on contact visits for pretrial detainees 
because “responsible, experienced administrators have 
determined, in their sound discretion, that such visits will 
jeopardize the security of the facility.”) .  Because the law on 
what conditions amount to punishment was not sufficiently 
developed when Cho acted in 2010 , we cannot say that every 
reasonable official in Cho’s position would have known that ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
43 
 keeping Gordon in solitary confinement, based on the reasons 
provided, was a violation of his constitutional due process 
rights.   
 To reiterate, Cho and the Committee based their September 
22, 2010 decision to retain Gordon in solitary confinement based 
on their assessment that Gordon was a “high -risk” and “high 
flight risk” detainee due to his pending charges, prior 
convictions, “discharge and failure to comply with 2 residential 
drug treatment programs while on probation,” non -compliance with 
reporting to his probation officer when leaving Hawai ‘i, 
extradition back to Hawai ‘i while on probation, and the bail 
amount for his pending charges. 
 
At the time Cho acted in September of 2010, even though 
some federal district courts had previously found that solitary 
confinement was punishment when it was based only on pending 
charges or vague allegations of dangerousness, those cases are 
distinguishable.  United States v. Lopez , 327 F. Supp. 
2d 138, 
142-43 (D.P.R. 2004), found that a detainee’s automatic 
placement in administrative detention because he faced the death 
penalty excessive in relation to prison officials’ legitimate 
purposes.  United States v. Gotti , 755 F. Supp. 1159, 1164- 65 
(E.D.N.Y. 1991), found detainees’ placement in administrative 
detention excessive in relatio n to prison officials’ security 
concerns where the only justification proffered was their ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
44 
 pending charges, with no evidence that the detainees posed a 
serious threat to other inmates or the institution
.  Boudin v. 
Thomas, 533 F. Supp. 786, 791- 92 (S.D.N.Y. 1982), ruled that  
placing a pretrial detainee in administrative detention because 
of “[t]he nature of her crime [and] her . . . unsubstantiated 
affiliation with a terrorist organization” was excessive in 
relation to the prison warden’s legitimate purposes .  In 
Gordon’s case, additional factors to those  cited in these cases 
were given as reasons by Cho and the Committee for keeping 
Gordon in solitary confine ment.  In addition, although “the 
views of the federal courts of appeals do not bind [a state 
supreme court] when it decides a federal constitutional 
question[,]”  Johnson v. Williams , 568 U.S. 289, 305 (2013), 
they can be persuasive.  In this regard, the Seventh Circuit 
Court of Appeals held in Rapier v. Harris , 172 F.3d 999 (7th 
Cir. 1999), a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 case, that even if keeping a 
pretrial detainee in administrative segregation constituted 
prohibited punishment, defendants enjoyed qualified immunity 
because, at the time the defendants acted, the law was not 
sufficiently clear to apprise them that maintaining the 
defendant in segregation was not sufficiently related to the 
legitimate government objective of maintaining good order and 
discipline within the facility.  172 F.3d at  1006.  In addition, 
as late as 2017, the Second Circuit held in Almighty Supreme ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
45 
 Born Allah v. Milling , 876 F.3d 48 (2d Cir. 2017), that “the  
general principle articulated in [ Bell] does not clearly 
establish that a substantive due process violation would result 
from [the pretrial inmate’s] placement in Administrative 
Segregation based solely on his prior assignment to (and failure 
to complete) that [Administrative Segregation] program [during a 
previous incarceration].”  876 F.3d at 59.  Holding that the 
defendants were entitled to qualified immunity, the Second 
Circuit noted, “[n]o prior decision of the Supreme Court or of 
this Court (or, so far as we are aware, of any other court) has 
assessed the constitutionality of that particular practice.”   
876 F.3d at 59-60.  Likewise, we see no cases that assessed the 
constitutionality of the criteria evaluated by Cho and the 
Committee in reaching a decision that Gordon should be continued 
in solitary confinement.      
 
Gordon cited as supplemental authority four federal cases 
that are distinguishable from this case and do not demonstrate,  
at the time of Cho and the Committee ’s decision to retain Gordon 
in pretrial solitary confinement, a vio lation of a “clearly 
established” constitutional right of which every reasonable 
official would have known of at the time the official acted.  
Proctor v. LeClaire , 846 F.3d 597 (2d Cir. 2017)
, involved a 
convicted defendant, not a pretrial detainee.27  Gordon also 
                     
27  We note, however, that the ABA Criminal Justice Standards and federal 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
46 
 cited to Almighty, discussed in the paragraph above, which 
28actually held that qualified immunity applied.   Likewise, 
Williams v. Secretary Pennsylvania Department of Corr ections, 
848 F.3d 549, cert. denied  138 S.Ct. 357 (U.S. Oct. 16, 2017) 
(Nos. 17-53, 17-5116), prospectively held that inmates on death 
row whose death sentences have been vacate
d have a due process 
right to avoid continued placement in solitary confinement 
absent meaningful protections discussed therein, but also found 
qualified immunity applied as to the prison official defendants 
in that case.  Finally, the last supplemental authority cited by 
Gordon, V.W. by and through Williams v. Conway , 236 F. Supp.  3d 
554 (N.D.N.Y. 2017), ruled that summary judgment had improperly 
been granted in favor of a school district in a purported class 
action brought on behalf of juveniles subjected to solitary 
confinement, but had yet to address actual liability or the 
possible applicability of qualified immunity, if liability was 
found.  
 Thus,  like in Almighty, we see no cases that assessed the 
combination of criteria evaluated by Cho and the Committee in 
reaching their decision that Gordon may be continued in solitary 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
prison policy factors we discuss in Section IV( C) below for assessing when 
solitary confinement may be used  also apply to convicted defendants.  
 
28  Gordon also cited to that case  when the April 25, 2018 petition for  
certiorari was pending before the United States Supreme Court, but the 
certiorari petition was dismissed by the Court on September 4, 2018.  See 
Docket No. 15 -8654 in the United States Supreme Court.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
47 
 confinement.  The circuit court’s conclusion that Cho was 
entitled to qualified immunity because she did not knowingly  
violate Gordon’s rights was erroneous  because it was based on an 
improper standard of law .  However, because whether a right was 
clearly established under federal law at the time a defendant 
acted is a “purely legal” question reviewable de novo, and 
because we conclude that Gordon’s rights were not sufficiently 
clear in 2010 that every reasonable official
 in Cho’s position 
would have known that keeping Gordon in solitary confinement 
based on the criteria 
applied violated his constitutional 
rights, Cho is nevertheless entitled to qualified immunity.   
 This opinion clearly  establishes for Hawai ʻi prison 
officials, however, that holding a pretrial detainee in solitary 
confinement under Gordon’s circumstances violates a pretrial 
detainee’s Fourteen th Amendment due process right to be free 
from punishment.   With respect to the reasons given by Cho and 
the Committee29 to maintain Gordon in maximum security and  
solitary confinement , “the nature and seriousness of [a 
detainee’s] current charges”  may bear some relationship to 
institutional order and security if the underlying facts or 
nature of the charges correspond  to the ABA Criminal Justice 
Standards and federal prison policy factors for solitary 
                     
29  Similar reasons were later given by Chun and Johnson.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
48 
 confinement discussed in Section IV(C) below, but because 
defendants did not know the factual basis for Gordon's pending  
charges or explain how his charges could indicate a threat to 
institutional order and security, defendants failed to show the 
conditions of Gordon's pretrial custody were reasonably related 
to any legitimate government purpose on this basis.  “The number 
and kind of his prior convictions” and “[h]is extensive criminal  
history and numerous periods of incarceration” might have been 
reasonably related to a legitimate government purpose to the 
extent they included assaultive behavior; however, in Gordon’s 
case, he had committed no institutional misconduct during prior  
incarcerations.  Likewise, “[h]is failure to comply w ith two 
residential drug treatment programs” might have been reasonably 
related to a legitimate government purpose if the failure 
related to possible disruption of institutional order and 
security; in Gordon’s case, however, no such evidence existed.  
In addition, there was no explanation as to how Gor don’s 
“[l]eaving the state without permission while on probation ” and 
“extradition to Hawaii” relat ed to possible escape from OCCC, a  
secure facility.  His being “on probation when charged with his  
current offense” likewise did not bear on institutional or der or 
security.  Gordon’s “$1,000,000 bail amount” also did not  
directly bear on possible institutional security issues, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
49 
 especially in light of the lack of any institutional misconduct 
during prior incarcerations.30   
Just as “loading a detainee with chain s and shackles and 
throwing him in a dungeon may ensure his presence at trial and 
preserve the security of the institution,” unless there is a 
legitimate government purpose, placement of a pretrial detainee 
in solitary confinement can support a conclusion that it was 
imposed to punish the detainee, in light of “so many alternative 
and less harsh methods” that could achieve the same objectives.  
Bell, 441 U.S. at 539 n.20. The ABA Standards and federal prison 
policies discussed in Section IV(C) below provide guidelines on 
when solitary confinement might be reasonably related to a 
legitimate government purpose so as not to violate a pretrial 
detainee’s due process rights.   
B. Gordon’s State Law Negligence Claim  
 With respect to his 
negligence  claim against Cho, 
individually, Gordon’s Application argues Cho was not entitled 
to qualified immunity under Towse.  In Towse, we clarified our 
state law qualified immunity standard for non- judicial 
officials:   
 Our courts have held that a non -judicial governmental 
officer does not enjoy an absolute immunity for his 
tortious acts. . . . [W]hen an official “in exercising his 
                     
30  Cho was not responsible for Gordon’s initial custody evaluation that, 
in addition to these factors, also considered his age.  See supra, n.5.  We 
express no opinion at this time whether prison officials can consider age in 
evaluating custody classifications.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
50 
 authority is motivated by malice, and not by an otherwise 
proper purpose, . . . he should not escape liability for 
the injuries he c auses.”  
 
64 Haw. at 630-31, 647 P.2d at 701-02 (citation omitted).   
 
The circuit court concluded Gordon did not prove by a 
31preponderance of the evidence that Cho acted with malice
;   
accordingly, Gordon did not meet his burden of proving malice by 
32clear and convincing evidence.   See Medeiros v. Kondo, 55 Haw. 
499, 504, 522 P.2d 1269, 1272 (1974) (placing “the burden of 
adducing clear and convincing proof that [the] defendant was 
motivated by malice” on the plaintiff )
.  The circuit court’s 
findings and conclusions with respect to Cho’s qualified 
immunity for Gordon’s  state law  negligence claim are  not clearly 
erroneous.  
C. Gordon’s State Due Process Claim 
 The circuit court did not specifically address Gordon’s 
state due process claim under Article I, S ection 5 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution, which provides that “[n] o person shall be deprived 
of life, liberty or property without due process of law . . . .”   
Although the State of Hawai ‘i has not waived its sovereign 
                     
31  It does not appear the State raised any arguments based on the State 
Tort Liability Act, under which “[t] he State . . . waives its immunity for 
liability for the torts of its employees and shall be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as a private individual under like 
circumstances.”  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 662- 2 (2016).  We therefore 
do not address whether a private individual could be held liable for 
negligence in setting the custody status of a pretrial detainee.  
  
32  All of the circuit court’s findings, “ [u]nless otherwise indicated, 
. . . have been proven to be prob ably more true than not true.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
51 
 immunity to suits seeking monetary damages for constitutional 
violations, Figueroa v. State , 61 Haw. 369, 383, 604 P.2d 1198, 
1206-07 (1979), we address Gordon’s state law due process claim 
because of the importance of the constitutional issue at stake 
and to provide guidance pursuant to our supervisory powers under 
33Hawaii Revised Statutes § 602-4 (2016).    
 Like the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States 
Constitution, Article I, Section 5 of the Hawai ‘i State 
Constitution guarantees all persons a right to be free from 
punishment prior to an adjudication of guilt in accordance with 
due process of law.   Compare Haw. Const. art. I, § 
5 (“No person 
shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due 
process of law[.]”)  with U.S. Const. amend. XIV, §  1 (providing 
that no state shall “deprive any person of life, liberty, or 
property, without due process of law[.]”).    
 We hereby adopt the Bell standard for determining whether 
an Article I, Section 5 due process violation has occurred under 
the circumstances of this case.  Thu s, a court may infer that a 
condition or set of restrictions amounts to punishment of a 
pretrial detainee when:  (1) there is “ a showing of an expressed 
                     
33  Section 602- 4 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes provides: 
 
Superintendence of inferior courts.   The supreme court 
shall have the general superintendence of all courts of 
inferior jurisdiction to prevent and correct errors and 
abuses therein where no other remedy is expressly provided 
by law.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
52 
 intent to punish on the part of detention facility officials ;” 
(2) the condition or restriction is not “ reasonably related to a 
legitimate goal
;” or (3) the condition or restriction is 
“excessive in relation to the alternative purpose assigned to 
it.”  441 U.S. at 538 -39.  We note that under our constitution, 
however, pretrial detainees may be guaranteed greater due 
process protection than convicted prisoners. 
 Accord State v. 
Bayaoa, 66 Haw. 21
, 25 n.2, 656 P.2d 1330, 1333 n.2 (1982) 
(agreeing with the dissenting Bell
 justices that, at least in 
the context of Fourth Amendment searches, “the rights of persons 
not yet convicted of crimes must be more closely scrutinized 
than the rights of prisoners. ”) (citing Bell, 441 U.S. at 568 
(Marshall, J., dissenting); 441 U.S. at 579 (Stevens, J., 
dissenting)).   
 We also note that model  practices acknowledge solitary 
confinement as a legitimate administrative and penological tool, 
but reserve its use for particularized and serious problems.  
For example, t he American Bar Association’s (“ABA”) Criminal 
Justice St andards on the Treatment of Prisoners (“ABA 
Standards”) generally advise using solitary confinement or 
“segregated housing” sparingly or not at all, except to manage 
34specific concerns.   ABA, 
ABA Criminal Justice Standards: 
                     
34  “Segregated housing”  is defined as “housing of a prisoner in conditions 
characterized by substantial isolation from other prisoners, whether pursuant 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
53 
 Treatment of Prisoners , Standard  23-2.7(a) (3d ed. 2011).  Long-
term segregated housing —- segregation that “is expected to 
extend or does extend for a period of time exceeding 30 days” — - 
may be used to impose discipline for a “very severe disciplinary 
infraction, in which safety or security was seriously 
threatened,” to curtail “a credible continuing and serious 
threat to the security of others or to the prisoner’s own 
safety,” or to prevent the spread of “airborne contagion.”  Id., 
Standards 23-1.0(o), 23-2.7(a)(i-iii).  Further, the ABA 
Standards advise that prisoners should not be placed in long
-
term segregated housing based on a  security risk posed by the 
prisoner unless: 
[L]ess restrictive alternatives are unsuitable in light of 
a continuing and serious threat  to the security of the 
facility, staff, other prisoners, or the public as a result 
of the prisoner’s:  
(i)  history of serious violent behavior in 
correctional facilities ; 
(ii) acts such as escapes or attempted escapes  from 
secure correctional settings;  
(iii) acts or threats of violence likely to 
destabilize the institutional environment to such a 
degree that the order and security of the facility is 
threatened ; 
(iv)  membership in a security threat group  
accompanied by a finding based on specific and 
reliable information that the prisoner either has 
engaged in dangerous or threatening behavior directed 
by the group or directs the dangerous or threatening 
behavior of others; or  
(v)  incitement or threats to incite group 
disturbances  in a correctional facility.   
 
Id., Standard 23-2.7(b) (emphases added).   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
to disciplinary, administrative, or classification action.”   ABA Standards , 
Standard 23 -1.0(r).
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
54 
  Federal prison policy is in accord with the  ABA Standards.  
The Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) requires pretrial detainees to be 
held in the least restrictive conditions consistent with their 
security needs.  BOP Program Statement 7331.04 on Pretrial 
Inmates, § 6 (January 31, 2003).  P retrial detainees may be held 
in a “special housing unit” (“SHU”), which amounts to solitary 
confinement, but such confinement must always serve a specific 
penological purpose, and an inmate’s status must be reviewed 
within three work days of placement in the SHU, again at seven 
calendar days, and then every thirty days after that.  BOP 
Program Statement 5270.11 on Special Housing Units, § 1(a), 7 
(Nov. 23, 2016).  
 
The issue of whether current DPS solitary confinement 
policies and procedures comports with state due process 
35standards is not before us
.  In this case, however, for the 
reasons explained in Part IV, Section A, subsections 2, 3, and 
4, Gordon’s placement in solitary confinement was not reasonably 
related, and was excessive in relation to, any legitimate 
government purpose.  Therefore , Gordon’s due process right under 
Article I, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi 
                     
35  We must express our serious concern, however, with the DPS policy 
referenced in this case that only required the custody status of a maximum 
custody inmate, whether pretrial detainee or sentenced prisoner, to be 
reassessed once a year.  It appears this annual review policy would not pass 
constitutional muster; as noted, even federal prisons require thirty day 
reviews.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
55 
 was also violated. 
 Because the State has not waived its sovereign immunity for 
damages claims against the State for state constitutional 
violations, however, there is no damages remedy  for the state 
constitutional due process violation .  Additionally , the only 
possible “further and additional relief” for this violation, as 
requested by Gordon in his Amended Complaint,  would have been 
injunctive or declaratory in nature.  At the time of trial in 
this case,  Gordon was already being held in medium custody, thus 
injunctive relief would have been unnecessary.  To provide 
future guidance, however, we note that Gordon’s due process 
rights under Article I, S ection 5 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution 
36were violated.   
V. Conclusion 
 We conclude that Gordon was subjected to unlawful pretrial 
punishment when he was detained in solitary confinement for over 
nine months.  His treatment was a violation of his rights under 
                     
36  In Bell, pretrial detainees sought immediate relief from their 
conditions of confinement and brought their claim by petition for writ of 
habeas corpus, which the court declined to comment upon.  441 U.S. at 526 n.6 
(“[W]e leave to another day the question of the propriety of using a writ of 
habeas corpus to obtain review of the conditions of confinement[.]”).   
 In our jurisdiction, the writ of habeas corpus is still available in 
the pre- conviction context .  See HRS § 660-3 (2016) (“The supreme court . . . 
and the circuit courts may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which 
persons are unlawfully restrained of their liberty[.]”) ; see also Oili v. 
Chang, 57 Haw. 411, 412, 557 P.2d 787, 788 (1976) (noting that habeas  
petitions that would require an evidentiary hearing must be filed in the 
circuit court).  The writ  has, however, been abolished in the post -conviction 
context.  See Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40(a) (2006) (creating a 
post-conviction proceeding that encompasses and supersedes “all common law 
and statutory procedures for the same purpose, including habeas corpus ”).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
56 
 the due process clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment of the 
United States Constitution and Article I, Section 5 of the 
Hawai
‘i State Constitution.  We therefore overrule the ICA’s 
memorandum opinion to that extent.  However, we conclude that 
Cho was entitled to qualified immunity under federal and state 
qualified immunity principles for her part in Gordon’s 
confinement.  Accordingly,  the ICA’s July 6, 2017 judgment on 
appeal, filed pursuant to its May 30, 2017 memorandum opinion, 
is affirmed on other grounds.  
Eric A. Seitz   
(Della A. Belatti,  
Bronson Avila, and  
Sarah R. Devine with 
him on the briefs)  
for petitioner  
  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
   
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama   
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  
     /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
Kendall J. Moser 
(Russell A. Suzuki and
Caron M. Inagaki with 
him on the briefs)  
for respondents  
