                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000556 14-DEC-2015 08:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
DAVID PANOKE, Petitioner/Claimant-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
REEF DEVELOPMENT OF HAWAII, INC.,
Respondent/Employer-Appellee, and SEABRIGHT
INSURANCE COMPANY, Respondent/Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 
SCWC-11-0000556
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000556; CASE NO. AB 2005-243 (2-04-07185))
 
DECEMBER 14, 2015
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,
WITH NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
David Panoke was injured while he was working for his
 
former employer, Reef Development of Hawaii, Inc. This appeal
 
concerns Panoke’s subsequent workers’ compensation claim made
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
against Reef and its insurance carrier, Seabright Insurance
 
Company.
 
Panoke was involved in a work accident in which he
 
initially stated that he had injured his back. Reef and
 Seabright accepted responsibility for Panoke’s back injury. 
Shortly thereafter, Panoke also began experiencing pain in both
 shoulders. MRIs of Panoke’s shoulders showed that Panoke had
 labral tears and rotator cuff tendon tears in both shoulders. 
Reef and Seabright denied liability for Panoke’s shoulder
 injuries.
 
Panoke argues that pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes 
1
(HRS) § 386-85,  the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board
(LIRAB) was required to presume that Panoke’s shoulder injuries
 were work-related in the absence of substantial evidence to the
 contrary. 
The LIRAB concluded that Reef and Seabright adduced
 
substantial evidence that rebutted the presumption that Panoke’s
 
1 HRS § 386-85 (1993) provides:
 
In any proceeding for the enforcement of a claim
for compensation under this chapter it shall be
presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to
the contrary:
 
(1) That the claim is for a covered work injury;
(2) That sufficient notice of such injury has been
given;
(3) That the injury was not caused by the intoxication
of the injured employee; and
(4) That the injury was not caused by the wilful
intention of the injured employee to injure oneself or
another.
 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shoulder injuries were covered work-related injuries. The LIRAB
 
also limited Panoke’s Temporary Total Disability (TTD) benefits
 based on deficiencies in the certificates of disability submitted
 by Panoke’s attending physicians. The ICA affirmed the LIRAB’s
 decision and order.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that the LIRAB
 
erred in concluding that Reef and Seabright adduced substantial
 evidence that rebutted the presumption that Panoke’s shoulder
 injuries were related to his work accident. We also hold that
 the LIRAB erred in relying on the deficiencies in Panoke’s
 physicians’ reports in limiting his TTD benefits. We therefore
 vacate the ICA’s judgment and the LIRAB’s decision and order and
 remand the case to the LIRAB for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion. 
I. Background
 
A. Panoke’s June 17, 2004 Work Accident
 
Panoke began working for Reef as an ironworker on
 
February 19, 2004. His job involved heavy manual labor,
 including welding, climbing scaffolding, carrying heavy
 equipment, pulling forty to fifty pound buckets up to the
 scaffolding using ropes, using jackhammers, and using pulleys,
 which involved pulling down on chain or rope with his arms to
 lift heavy objects. Panoke was able to perform his job duties
 
-3­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
without any physical restrictions or symptoms from February 19,
 
2004 until June 17, 2004. 
On June 17, 2004, Panoke was working for Reef at a
 
construction site. Panoke’s work involved installing concrete
 wall panels on a building. The crew used a pulley mechanism to
 lift the heavy panels. While the crew members were guiding one
 of the panels into place, the panel slipped downwards in the
 chain that was holding it. As the panel slipped, Panoke was
 guiding it with his hands underneath it, with his knees slightly
 bent. The panel fell around two feet and stopped short of the
 ground, but Panoke’s body was jerked forward slightly while he
 held onto the panel, and then he let go and moved back to prevent
 the panel from landing on his toes. Panoke later recalled that
 he immediately felt a sharp pain in his right lower back, but
 felt no pain in his shoulders at the time. 
B.	 Panoke’s Subsequent Medical Treatment and Workers’
Compensation Claims
 
Immediately after the June 17, 2004 work accident,
 
Panoke was taken to Concentra Medical Center (Concentra). At
 
Concentra, Dr. Diaz-Ordaz diagnosed Panoke with a lower back
 strain and placed Panoke off work duty for the rest of the day,
 informing Panoke that he could return to work the next day with
 modified duties. On June 18, 2004, Reef completed a WC-1
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“Employer’s Report of Industrial Injury” form, and did not
 
contest that the back strain had occurred at work or that it was
 covered by workers’ compensation. Panoke returned to Concentra
 on June 21, 2004, and June 28, 2004, and was informed on both
 occasions that he could return to work with modified duties. 
However, Panoke did not return to work because he felt he could
 not handle even light duties, and instead, on June 30, 2004, he
 visited a new doctor, Dr. Scott McCaffrey, at Work Star
 Occupational Health Systems. 
In his first visit to Work Star, Panoke complained of
 
pain in his upper left back, right buttock, and right knee. Dr.
 McCaffrey diagnosed Panoke with a lumbar strain or sprain, and
 right leg sciatica, and placed Panoke “off duty” but did not
 specify a date when Panoke could return to work. Panoke next
 visited Work Star on July 2, 2004, when he complained of pain in
 his upper left back, lower back, and right hip. Dr. McCaffrey
 again recorded Panoke’s work status as “off duty.” Panoke
 returned to Work Star on July 6, 2004, complaining of upper and
 lower back and right buttock pain, and was also diagnosed with a
 left shoulder sprain. On July 13, 2004, Panoke complained to Dr.
 McCaffrey of pain in his neck, mid back, right buttock, and right
 hamstring. Again, Dr. McCaffrey placed Panoke “off duty.” 
On July 16, 2004, in addition to back pain, Panoke
 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
complained to Dr. McCaffrey of pain in his left shoulder. On
 
July 30, 2004, Panoke began to complain of pain in both
 shoulders. Panoke continued regular visits to Work Star from
 July 2004 until July 2007 with various pain complaints, including
 pain in his legs, feet, hips, back, and shoulders. 
On August 31, 2004, Panoke saw Dr. Gary Okamura, an
 
orthopedic surgeon, for the pain in his shoulders. Dr. Okamura
 noted that Panoke had previously fractured both of his shoulders
 in 1991, but did not have surgery at that time. Panoke told Dr.
 Okamura that he had not noticed the shoulder pain until a few
 days after the work accident because his back had been so sore. 
Dr. Okamura stated that his initial impression was that Panoke
 had tendinitis and labral tears in both shoulders, but requested
 permission to obtain an MRI on both Panoke’s shoulders. 
On September 8, 2004, Reef and Seabright sought a
 
second opinion on Panoke’s condition from Deborah Agles, M.D. 
Dr. Agles examined Panoke and his medical records, and noted that
 Panoke had been involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1991 that
 resulted in fractures to both of his shoulders and
 hospitalization for one week. Dr. Agles opined that Panoke’s
 current shoulder injuries had not been caused by the June 17,
 2004 work accident due to the lack of close temporal proximity
 between the shoulder pain and the accident, Panoke’s inability to
 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
account for the development of the shoulder symptoms, and
 
Panoke’s history of prior shoulder injuries. Seabright then
 informed Dr. McCaffrey, the State Disability Compensation
 Division (DCD), and Panoke’s attorney that Reef and Seabright
 were controverting Panoke’s bilateral shoulder injury diagnoses. 
On November 6, 2004, Reef and Seabright denied Dr.
 
McCaffrey’s request for the shoulder MRIs based on Dr. Agles’s
 report. Panoke then requested a DCD hearing to review the
 denial. On February 15, 2005, Seabright obtained another medical
 opinion regarding Panoke’s shoulders from Clifford Lau, M.D., an
 orthopedic surgeon. Dr. Lau agreed with Dr. Agles that Panoke’s
 shoulder injuries were not a result of his June 17, 2004 work
 accident. Dr. Lau also opined that Panoke’s ongoing back pain
 was more likely a result of psychological factors than the
 June 17, 2004 accident. Based on Dr. Lau’s report, Reef and
 Seabright terminated Panoke’s TTD benefits effective April 6,
 2005. Panoke then amended his request for a DCD hearing to
 include review of Reef’s termination of TTD. 
On June 13, 2005, the DCD Director determined that
 
Panoke’s shoulder injuries were a result of the June 17, 2004
 accident, and that “[Reef] ha[d] not provided sufficient evidence
 to support its denial of a shoulder injury.” The Director
 therefore ordered Reef to pay for medical care, services, and
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
supplies for Panoke’s injuries, including both shoulder injuries. 
The Director also ordered Reef to pay TTD compensation for the
 periods of June 20, 2004 through June 22, 2004 and June 30, 2004
 through April 5, 2005. Reef and Seabright filed a notice of
 appeal to the LIRAB, and a motion to stay the payments ordered by
 the Director. The LIRAB denied Reef and Seabright’s motion to
 stay on August 5, 2005. 
Panoke underwent Dr. Okamura’s recommended shoulder
 
MRIs, and Dr. Okamura diagnosed him with labral tears and rotator
 cuff tendon tears in both shoulders, and requested permission to
 perform surgery. Reef and Seabright authorized the shoulder
 surgery, but reserved their right to seek reimbursement for any
 medical expenses paid in the event that the LIRAB overturned the
 Director’s order. Dr. Okamura performed surgery to repair the
 rotator cuff and superior labral on Panoke’s right shoulder on
 February 3, 2006. 
Between March and June 2006, the parties disputed
 
whether TTD was due to be paid to Panoke. Panoke argued that
 “[t]here can be no dispute that [Panoke] has been disabled
 following his surgery, however, [Seabright] has failed to pay
 TTD.” Reef and Seabright, however, argued that they “ha[d] not
 received certificates of disability from [Panoke’s] treating
 physicians.” As a result of this dispute, on June 7, 2006,
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Panoke moved for temporary remand to the DCD to request the
 
Director to compel Reef and Seabright to pay TTD and assess
 penalties against them. On June 26, 2006, the LIRAB temporarily
 remanded the case to the DCD. 
Reef and Seabright argued to the Director that the
 
disputed period of TTD payments dated from April 6, 2005 (the day
 after the last day of TTD ordered by the Director on June 13,
 2005) through February 2, 2006 (the day before Panoke’s right
 shoulder surgery). Reef and Seabright stated that they had paid
 TTD for the period dating from February 3, 2006 to September 15,
 2006, while Panoke was recovering from surgery, and for the
 periods previously ordered by the Director. Reef and Seabright
 claimed that their denial of TTD payments for the disputed period
 was justified, first because of Dr. Lau’s opinions that Panoke’s
 shoulder injuries were not caused by the June 17, 2004 accident
 and that Panoke could return to light work, and, second, because
 Dr. McCaffrey had not submitted any valid certifications of
 disability. 
On October 13, 2006, the Director issued a decision. 
The Director credited Dr. McCaffrey’s reports, and ordered Reef
 and Seabright to pay TTD benefits for the period of April 6, 2005
 through September 19, 2006. The Director also ordered Reef and
 Seabright to pay additional TTD payments upon the receipt of
 
-9­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
future medical certifications. However, the Director declined to
 
impose penalties against Reef and Seabright for late TTD
 payments. Reef and Seabright appealed the Director’s decision to
 the LIRAB, and filed a motion to stay payments. On December 8,
 2006, the motion to stay payments was denied. Panoke underwent
 surgery on his left shoulder on October 20, 2007. 
C. Appeal to the LIRAB
 
The LIRAB trial was held on April 9, 2010. The issues
 
relevant to this appeal that were to be determined at the trial
 
were:
 
a. Whether Claimant sustained bilateral shoulder
 
injuries on June 17, 2004, arising out of and in the
course of employment.
. . .
 
c. What is the period of temporary total disability
resulting from the work injury of June 17, 2004.
 
d. Whether Employer is liable for a penalty for late
payment of temporary total disability benefits for the
period April 6, 2005 to February 2, 2006.
 
Two witnesses testified at the trial, Dr. Peter Diamond
 
and Panoke. After Dr. Diamond was qualified as an expert in the
 
area of orthopedic surgery, he testified to the following. Dr.
 Diamond determined that the injuries to both of Panoke’s
 shoulders were the result of degenerative, long-term conditions,
 including arthritis. The arthritis may have been caused by a
 previous trauma injury, such as a fracture. Dr. Diamond also
 determined that the labral and rotator cuff tears in Panoke’s
 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shoulders were most likely not the result of the June 17, 2004
 
work accident. 
Dr. Diamond gave several reasons for his opinion that
 
the tears were not caused by the June 17, 2004 work accident. 
First, the mechanism of Panoke’s injury that caused his back
 injury was not consistent with the shoulder injuries. Usually,
 tears in the shoulder like Panoke’s are caused by a compression
 injury of the shoulder joints, rather than a pulling (traction)
 injury, which is what occurred in Panoke’s case. According to
 Dr. Diamond, it is possible to cause tearing of the labrum or
 rotator cuff through a traction injury, but this would usually
 also cause damage to the biceps, which Panoke lacked. Second, it
 is very unlikely that someone would have a sudden tear of the
 labrum and not have any pain symptoms immediately. Dr. Diamond
 also opined that it is unlikely that Panoke’s back pain would
 have masked his shoulder pain, particularly when Panoke
 complained of pain in his knee immediately following his back
 injury. 
On cross-examination, Dr. Diamond was questioned as to
 
whether Panoke’s general job duties as an ironworker, such as
 pulling up objects by rope, or pulling down on a rope or chain,
 could have resulted in Panoke’s degenerative shoulder conditions.
 Dr. Diamond answered that although heavy labor such as Panoke’s
 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
might increase the risk of arthritis, it is uncommon for heavy
 
work to cause degenerative shoulder problems. Dr. Diamond also
 testified that a patient with preexisting labrum tears would be
 more susceptible to traction injuries resulting in labrum tears. 
When asked if it was possible that Panoke’s June 17, 2004 work
 accident had aggravated Panoke’s arthritic condition or the
 labral tearing “even to the slightest degree,” Dr. Diamond
 responded that it was possible, but later testified that he did
 not think it was probable. Dr. Diamond testified that he
 estimated a twelve- to eighteen-month recovery time from Panoke’s
 shoulder surgery. 
Panoke testified to the following. When the concrete
 
panel Panoke was helping to move slipped, he let go of the panel
 to move away after straining against the weight for a few
 seconds, and his body was jerked forward. He experienced an
 immediate, sharp, and excruciating pain in his back, but he did
 not have any shoulder pain. Panoke’s shoulder pain started
 “maybe a week, a week and a half, maybe two weeks later [than the
 accident].” At first it was not intense, but the pain got worse
 over time, and Panoke still experienced significant pain at the
 time of the LIRAB trial. Following his second shoulder surgery,
 Panoke’s TTD checks had stopped coming, and he was living on the
 beach because he had no other place to go. 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross-examination, Panoke testified that after his
 
second shoulder surgery, Dr. McCaffrey told him he could return
 
to work with modified light duty, but that Reef did not have any
 light duty work at that time. Panoke did not look for work
 outside of Reef. Panoke also testified that in 1990 or 1991, he
 broke both of his shoulders after he fell from a moped and landed
 with both arms. 
In their post-hearing brief, Reef and Seabright relied
 
on the reports of Drs. Agles and Lau, and the trial testimony of
 Dr. Diamond, to support their argument that Panoke’s shoulder
 injuries were not caused by the June 17, 2004 work accident. 
Reef and Seabright further argued that Panoke was not
 
entitled to TTD benefits beyond December 17, 2005, based on Dr.
 Diamond’s opinion that Panoke’s back injury had achieved maximum
 medical improvement eighteen months after the June 17, 2004
 accident. 
Panoke argued in his post-hearing memorandum that his
 
shoulder injuries were caused by the June 17, 2004 work accident. 
Panoke argued that this was established because he was able to
 perform his work duties before June 17, 2004 without problem,
 there were no intervening incidents between June 17, 2004, and
 the onset of his shoulder pain, his previous shoulder injuries
 had resolved, and his attending physicians concluded that his
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shoulder injuries were work-related. 
Panoke also argued that the reports of Drs. Agles and
 
Lau could not be relied upon because Dr. Agles had not examined
 
Panoke’s shoulders, and because neither Dr. Agles nor Dr. Lau
 considered whether the June 17, 2004 accident could have
 exacerbated Panoke’s pre-existing condition. Panoke further
 argued that Dr. Diamond’s reports were flawed because Dr. Diamond
 failed to consider whether the June 17, 2004 accident exacerbated
 Panoke’s shoulder injuries, and because Dr. Diamond’s testimony,
 that the type of tears Panoke suffered to his shoulders “usually”
 involve compression mechanisms or bicep injuries, was irrelevant. 
Panoke next argued that he was entitled to continuing
 
TTD benefits from June 21, 2004 through July 12, 2007. Panoke
 relied on the Work Star reports for this period placing Panoke
 off work. 
Finally, Panoke argued that Reef and Seabright should
 
have been required to pay a twenty percent penalty for late
 payments of TTD under HRS § 386-92. 
On June 14, 2011, the LIRAB issued its decision. The
 
LIRAB made the following findings of fact (FOF) relevant to this
 appeal:
 
7. On July 2, 2004, Claimant sought treatment
with Todd M. Uchima, [physician assistant] for Dr.
McCaffrey and/or Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
 
-14­   
 
     
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in his upper back, lower back, and right hip.
Claimaint’s Pain diagram noted that he
experienced burning pain in his posterior right
shoulder, aching in his left scapular region, and low
back burning and stabbing pain, and pins and needles
in his right hip.  Claimant rated his pain at 10/10. 
The [LIRAB] notes, however, that two other pain
diagrams of the same date do not indicate any right
shoulder symptoms.
. . .
 
10. On July 16, 2004, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in his low back and left shoulder.  According to
Claimant’s July 16, 2004 pain diagram, he had pain in
his right and left shoulder, his right hip, and his
right leg.
. . .
 
18. On August 31, 2004, Claimant informed
Gary Y. Okamura, M.D. that he first noticed shoulder
pain a few days after the subject accident, because
his back was so sore.  Claimant rated the pain on his
right shoulder at 6/10 and on the left shoulder at
4/10.
. . .
 
20. At Employer’s request, Deborah A. Agles,
M.D. examined Claimant on September 8, 2004. 
Claimant’s pain drawing noted right shoulder aching. 
Claimant informed Dr. Agles that his right shoulder
began hurting about one week after the June 17, 2004
work accident.  He was unable to describe how the
 shoulder was injured, but assumed it was due to the
heavy lifting.  Claimant had no complaints regarding
the left shoulder.  Dr. Agles did not, however,
examine Claimant’s shoulders. 
. . .
 
29. By letter dated January 31, 2005, Dr.
McCaffrey opined that Claimant sustained a
“[b]ilateral shoulder sprain with chronic persistent
dysfunction, right greater than left.”  Dr. McCaffrey
noted that Claimant had no history of ongoing shoulder
problems or medical treatment for the shoulders, and
that Claimant “fully and totally” recovered from the
prior motor vehicle accident-related shoulder trauma,
without residual symptoms or impairment.  Dr.
 McCaffrey further noted that Claimant had been
involved in heavy work activities and recreational
pursuits and was clinically asymptomatic before the
subject work accident.
. . .
 
31. Clifford K.H. Lau, M.D. examined Claimant
at Employer’s request.  In his report dated
February 15, 2005, Dr. Lau noted Claimant’s report
that he developed pain in the front of his right
 
-15­   
 
 
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shoulder and the back of his left shoulder about a
 
week after the subject accident.  Claimant also
 informed Dr. Lau that he had no problems with his
moped accident-related shoulder injuries after they
healed.
 
Dr. Lau opined that Claimant’s subject
complaints exceeded his objective findings and that
his examination showed “multiple inconsistencies.”
Dr. Lau opined that Claimant suffered a strain
to his lower back as a result of the June 17, 2004
work injury and that Claimant’s current problems were
not related to that work injury.  He further opined
that, based on the “time sequence and development of
the shoulder complaints,” Claimant’s shoulder
complaints were not related to the subject work
accident.  Dr. Lau explained that “development of neck
pain and severe shoulder pain at 3-4 weeks following
an injury is not medically probable unless there was
loss of consciousness or change to his mental status.”
. . .
 
43. A September 21, 2005 MR arthogram [sic]
(“MRA”) of [Panoke’s] left shoulder revealed:
 
1.	 . . . evidence of degenerative joint 
disease.
 
2.	 Moderate degenerative joint disease
of the AC joint . . . .
 
3.	 High grade partial tear of the
supraspinatus tendon . . . .  There
 is also a tear involving the . . . 
infraspinatus tendon.
 
4.	 Stellate tear and degeneration of
the superior labrum which extends
into the posterior labrum.  The
 anterior labrum is grossly normal.
 
44. A September 21, 2005 MRA of [Panoke’s]
right shoulder revealed:
 
1.	 Degenerative changes of the
glenohumeral joint and AC
joint. . . .
 
2.	 Partial tear along the articular
surface of the supraspinatus tendon
near its insertion site.
 
3.	 Superior labral tear near its base.
The superior labrum is of increased
intensity related to degeneration.
. . .
 
-16­   
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
45. By letter dated September 30, 2005, Dr.
Okamura reported his impressions as:
 
1.	 Right shoulder superior labral tear
 
2.	 Right shoulder partial rotator cuff
tendon tear.
 
3.	 Left shoulder superior labral tear.
 
4.	 Left shoulder partial versus full
thickness rotator cuff tear.
 
. . .
 
47. Dr. Lau prepared a supplemental report
dated October 28, 2005.  He acknowledged that Claimant
 had a “pain problem.”  He continued to opine, however,
that Claimant’s shoulder conditions were not related
 to the June 17, 2004 work injury.  If the work
 accident caused the rotator cuff and labral tears to
 both shoulders, the significant force would have been
applied to both shoulders, and “the pain would have
been substantial and presentation would have occurred
immediately or at least within several days to a
week.”
 
48. Dr. Agles prepared a supplemental report
dated November 15, 2005.
 . . . .
 
[Dr. Agles] continued to opine that Claimant’s
shoulder symptoms were not related to the subject
accident, given the lack of temporal association and
Claimant’s inability to describe how the shoulders
were injured.  Dr. Agles noted Claimant’s pre-existing
shoulder pathology wherein Claimant had bilateral
fractures and a left shoulder strain that was
 sustained while resisting arrest.
. . .
 
50. On December 9, 2005, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. Baloy with complaints of pain in
both shoulders, his lower back, buttocks, right upper
leg, and right foot.  Dr. Baloy noted Claimant’s “work
status” as “off duty.”
 
51. On December 30, 2005, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. Baloy with complaints of pain in
both shoulders, his lower back, buttocks, right leg,
and right foot.
. . .
 
53. On January 26, 2006, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in both shoulders, his mid to low back, right buttock,
and right posterior thigh.  Dr. McCaffrey noted
Claimant’s “work status” as “off duty.”
 
-17­   
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . .
 
57. On March 9, 2006 and April 11, 2006,
Claimant sought treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with
complaints of pain in both shoulders, his lower back,
buttocks, and right leg. 
58. On April 11, 2006 . . . Dr. McCaffrey
noted that Claimant was not able to work light duty,
pending a left shoulder surgery.  He anticipated a
return to work six months after left shoulder surgery.
. . .
 
62. On May 2, 2006, Claimant sought treatment
with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain in both
shoulders, his low back, and right leg. 
. . .
 
67. . . .  Dr. Diamond opined that Claimant’s
shoulder complaints were not directly related to the
subject accident because:
 
•	 There is a definite history of prior
significant trauma to the shoulder, with a
history of bilateral fracture.
 
•	 [Claimant] has documentation in the
records of prior shoulder complaints.
 
•	 [Claimant] also has remarkably symmetrical
complaints, and I suspect, findings.
 
•	 [Claimant] demonstrates multiple positive
2
Waddell’s findings,  tending to de­
empha
size the importance of non-documented
history and question the relationship of
clinical findings to pain generators.
 
Dr. Diamond also explained that “the mechanism
of injury is not typical of the shoulder pathology
found.”  He explained that although it is debatable, 
“SLAP
 lesions[3] usually involve a
compression mechanism, such as seen in
overhead throwing, rather than a traction
mechanism.  In the rare cases where
 traction mechanism is implicated, SLAP
lessions usually involve a biceps
 
2
 Waddell findings are exaggerated responses to pain, not
 
necessarily intentionally exaggerated, but which do not make sense in terms of
the patient’s anatomical condition.
  
3
 In his testimony at the LIRAB trial, Dr. Diamond explained that
 
“SLAP” stands for “severe labrum from anterior to posterior.” 
-18­   
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
avulsion, as well as other pathology.”
 
Dr. Diamond noted that Dr. Okamura found that
 
Claimant’s biceps tendon was normal and that the
operative note documented “extensive debridement due
to glenohumeral joint arthritis,” which was suggestive
of long term pathology.
. . .
 
71. On October 31, 2006, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in both shoulders, his low back, buttocks, and right
leg.  Claimant’s “work status” was noted as “modified
 duty.”
. . .
 
73. On March 3, 2007, Claimant sought “Urgent
Care Walk-In” treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with
complaints of pain in his left shoulder, low back,
left buttock, and right leg. 
74. On March 29, 2007, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in his left shoulder, low back, left buttock, and
right leg.  Claimant’s “work status” was noted as
 [“]off duty.”
 
75. On April 19, 2007, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in his left shoulder, low back, left buttock, left
thigh, right knee, and left foot. 
76. On May 31, 2007, Claimant sought treatment
with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain in both
shoulders, his low back, left buttock, and right leg,
and left leg and foot. 
77. On June 21, 2007, Claimant sought
treatment with Dr. McCaffrey with complaints of pain
in both shoulders, his low back, left buttock, and
both legs and left foot. 
. . .
 
80. In Claimant’s Answers to Employer’s First
Request for Answers to Interrogatories . . . Claimant
. . . revealed that he broke both shoulders in a moped
accident in 1990 or 1991, wherein he “flew off the
moped and landed with both arms extended”.
. . .
 
92. Claimant was deposed on January 27, 2006. 
Claimant testified that at the time of the June 17,
2004 work accident, his arms were straight out
approximately three feet from the ground as he helped
support a panel weighing 800 to 1200 pounds. The
 panel then fell approximately two-and-a-half feet in
approximately two seconds or less.  It stopped falling
 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
approximately six inches from the ground.
 
93. Claimant did not feel immediate pain to
the shoulders.  He first experienced pain to both
shoulders one to one-and-a-half-weeks later. He
 believed the pain in his shoulders was 4/10 or 5/10,
but increased to 6/10 or 7/10 by the third week after
the June 17, 2004 work accident.
 
94. At the trial on April 9, 2010, Dr. Diamond
testified that Claimant had . . . a history of
previously asymptomatic neck and shoulder pain, a
history of prior bilateral shoulder fractures,
multiple Waddell’s findings.
Dr. Diamond testified that most of the
 
impressions noted from the right shoulder MRA were
indicative of long-standing (5-10 years) degenerative
conditions.  However, the changes noted in the
supraspinatus could be considered acute and were not
necessarily long-standing.  The left shoulder MRA
 showed similar degenerative changes.
He further testified that the labral and rotator
 
cuff tears that resulted in Claimant’s surgeries were
not related to the subject work accident, because the
mechanism of the subject accident was not consistent
with such injuries.  He stated that he could
 definitely say that the labral tearing and
degenerative arthritis were not acute injuries.
Dr. Diamond testified that heavy lifting could
cause degenerative conditions of the rotator cuff, but
it would depend upon the position of the rope and
arms.  It would take abduction and positioning of the
arms overhead to irritate the rotator cuff.  Reaching
overhead to pull down on a rope would likely lead to a
biceps tendonitis rather than a rotator cuff
tendonitis.  Further, “heavy work” could lead to
rotator cuff and labral degeneration.
Labral tearing occurs with compressive injuries,
where the humeral head grinds into the labrum, like a
fall onto outstretched arms.  Although it is possible
to tear the labrum on the basis of a traction accident
 as in this case, but that usually involves damage to
the biceps, which is not present [sic].  Therefore,
can exclude [sic] traction as the mechanism of injury
for the labral tear and arthritis, and the same
reasoning applied to rotator cuff injuries.  He opined
that more likely than not, the tears and degenerative
changes pre-existed the June 17, 2004 work accident.
Further, if the tears as seen on the MRA
occurred from the work injury, Claimant, more likely
than not, would have felt pain immediately.  It would
 also be probable that he would have felt the shoulder
pain from the tears immediate [sic], regardless of
pain in his back.  Dr. Diamond pointed out that
Claimant had a complaint of knee pain, and, the back
 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pain he experienced did not mask that pain.
Dr. Diamond opined that although possible, it
was “
more likely than not” that the June 17, 2004
accident did not cause, aggravate, or accelerate
Claimant’s labral tears.  He would expect immediate
symptoms given the amount of tears noted on the MRA.
Dr. Diamond further testified that it was
 
virtually impossible to develop the advanced arthritic
changes seen on the MRA during the period since the
June 17, 2004 work accident.
With regard to Claimant’s low back, Dr. Diamond
testified that Claimant reached medically stability
[sic] approximately one year after the June 17, 2004
work accident.
 
He further testified that he would generally
tell his patients that it would take 12-18 months to
fully recover strength after a shoulder surgery.
Dr. Diamond clarified that the supraspinatus
changes seen on the MRA in this particular case were
not related to the subject work accident for the same
reasons.
 
95. At trial, 
Claimant testified that he first
noticed symptoms in his shoulders one to two weeks
after the June 17, 2004 work accident, while he was
washing rice.  The pain in his shoulders thereafter
 intensified.
 
96. The [LIRAB] credits the opinion of Dr.
Diamond and finds that Claimant’s bilateral shoulder
 conditions pre-existed the June 17, 2004 work accident
and was [sic] not caused, aggravated, or accelerated
by said accident.  The [LIRAB] credits Dr. Diamond’s
expert opinion that Claimant would have experienced
immediate symptoms if his shoulder conditions were
caused by the June 17, 2004 work injury.  Claimant’s
 argument that his shoulder symptoms were masked by his
low back injury is inconsistent with the report of
knee symptoms immediately after the June 17, 2004 work
accident.  The [LIRAB] also credits Dr. Diamond’s
opinion that Claimant’s shoulder conditions are not
consistent with a traction type mechanism of injury.
 
The LIRAB also made the following conclusions of law
 
(COL):
 
“Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 386-85(1)
creates a presumption in favor of the claimant that
the subject injury is causally related to the
employment activity. . . .  Furthermore, this
presumption may be rebutted by “substantial evidence
to the contrary . . . .”  § 386-85, HRS.  The Board
 
-21­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
has applied the rebuttable presumption of
compensability.
 
1. The [LIRAB] concludes that Claimant did
not sustain bilateral shoulder injuries on June 17,
2004, arising out of and in the course of employment. 
Employer has adduced substantial evidence to rebut or
overcome the presumption of compensability.
Although Claimant argues, in part, that his
shoulder conditions could have been incurred over the
 period of his work for Employer, [the LIRAB] makes no
determination as to Claimant’s cumulative trauma
 contention, where such theory or contention was raised
for the very first time at the trial and in Claimant’s
Post Hearing Memorandum.
 
2. The [LIRAB] concludes that Claimant’s
periods of [TTD] resulting from the work injury of
June 17, 2004 are:
June 20, 2004 through June 22, 2004
June 30, 2004 through December 17, 2005
April 11, 2006 through May 11, 2006
As stated in Alexis v. Kasseebeer v. Paul J.
 
Samarin, AB 2007-207 (October 2, 2009):
 
A medical certification of [TTD] requires
an attending physician to certify that a
claimant’s absence from work is due to
 disability attributed to a specific work
injury or condition.  Without such
 certification, an award of temporary total
disability is not proper.
 
The [LIRAB] interprets the laws and rules to
require certifications of disability by the attending
physician to be contemporaneous, in writing, and
including the date of accident and work injury-related
condition(s) for which such disability is certified.
Statements that Claimant’s work status as [sic]
“off duty” or that he is significantly impaired is
[sic] insufficient as a certification of disability
without a statement that such impairment or disability
is due to the work injury.
The record before the [LIRAB] does not include
statements of certification that Claimant remained
 temporarily and totally disabled due to a work-related
injury.  For the period April 11, 2006 through May 11,
2006, the [LIRAB] credits Dr. McCaffrey’s Work
Restriction Profile and concludes that Claimant was
 disabled due to the June 17, 2004 work injury.
The [LIRAB] makes no determination as to
Claimant’s entitlement to TTD benefits after
 September 4, 2007, which was the medical reports
deadline.
 
-22­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. The [LIRAB] concludes Employer is not liable
for a penalty for late payment of [TTD] benefits for
the period April 6, 2005 to February 2, 2006.  There
 is no evidence to indicate that payments were
untimely.  Further, the [LIRAB] determined that except
for the period April 11, 2006 through May 11, 2006,
Claimant was not entitled to TTD benefits after
 December 17, 2005.
 
D. Appeal to the ICA
 
On July 21, 2011, Panoke filed a notice of appeal of
 
the LIRAB’s decision to the ICA. Panoke raised essentially the
 
same arguments to the ICA that he raised before the LIRAB. 
Panoke also argued that it was error for the LIRAB to
  
limit his TTD benefits to certain time periods when Work Star had
  
provided clinical reports that kept Panoke off work from June 30,
 
2004 through July 12, 2007. 
Panoke further asserted that it was error for the LIRAB
 
to fail to assess a penalty against Reef and Seabright because
 Reef and Seabright’s WC-3 form showing TTD payments made for the
 year 2005 indicated that payments were only made until April 5,
 2005, but the LIRAB awarded TTD until December 17, 2005, and
 there were no grounds for the Director to excuse penalties. 
Reef and Seabright argued that Panoke’s shoulder
 
injuries were not caused by the June 17, 2004 accident, relying
 on the reports of Dr. Lau and Dr. Agles, and on Dr. Diamond’s
 testimony. 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Reef and Seabright argued that it was not error for the
 
LIRAB to limit Panoke’s TTD benefits to certain time periods. 
Reef and Seabright asserted that the Work Star reports were not
 sufficient to certify Panoke as disabled because they did not
 indicate the dates when his disability started, and when he would
 be able to return to work, as required by HRS § 386-96. 
Reef and Seabright also argued that no penalties for
 
late TTD payments were due because the Director’s decision of
 June 13, 2005, only awarded TTD benefits until April 4, 2005. 
After that, according to Reef and Seabright, the disability was
 disputed, therefore no TTD benefits were due until October 13,
 2006, when the Director extended the TTD period beyond April 5,
 2005. 
In a summary disposition order (SDO) filed on June 30,
 
2014, the ICA affirmed the LIRAB’s ruling. The ICA first held
 that the opinions of Drs. Agles, Lau, and Diamond constituted
 substantial evidence sufficient to rebut the presumption of
 coverage. In doing so, the ICA rejected Panoke’s argument that
 the opinions were generalized and therefore irrelevant because
 the opinions “identified specific reasons as to why the shoulder
 injuries were not work related and why the industrial accident
 did not exacerbate Panoke’s pre-existing condition.” The ICA
 then held that, even though there was some evidence to the
 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contrary in the form of Dr. McCaffrey’s and Dr. Okamura’s
 
opinions, the LIRAB did not err in giving more weight to the
 “high quantum of evidence” presented by Reef and Seabright. 
The ICA next determined that, although the LIRAB’s
 
requirement that each disability certification contain a specific
 statement that the disability is due to work injury was
 “questionable,” any error by the LIRAB in this regard was
 harmless because the LIRAB did not err in determining the TTD
 periods. The ICA concluded that the LIRAB’s determination of the
 TTD periods was not error because the first period, from June 20,
 2004 to June 22, 2004, was based on a statutory three-day waiting
 period after the accident and the initial reports of Dr. Diaz-
Ordaz. The second period, from June 30, 2004, to December 17,
 2005, started when Dr. McCaffrey first placed Panoke off duty,
 and ran for eighteen months from the June 17, 2004 accident,
 based on Dr. Diamond’s opinion that Panoke’s back injury had
 achieved maximum medical improvement after eighteen months. 
The ICA also agreed with Reef and Seabright that the
 
LIRAB did not err in failing to assess penalties. The ICA held
 that Panoke’s argument that he had not received TTD benefits
 since April 2005 was without merit because the Director’s order
 extending benefits beyond April 2005 was not issued until
 October 13, 2006. 
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. The LIRAB’s decision
 
Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by
HRS § 91-14(g) (1993), which states that: 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case
with instructions for further proceedings; or it
may reverse or modify the decision and order if
the substantial rights of the petitioners may
have been prejudiced because the administrative
findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or
statutory provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority
or jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the
reliable, probative, and substantial
evidence on the whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or
characterized by abuse of discretion
or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
We have previously stated: 
[Findings of Fact] are reviewable under the
clearly erroneous standard to determine if the
agency decision was clearly erroneous in view of
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on
the whole record. 
[Conclusions of Law] are freely reviewable to
determine if the agency’s decision was in
violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions, in excess of statutory authority or
jurisdiction of agency, or affected by other
error of law.
 
A [Conclusion of Law] that presents mixed
questions of fact and law is reviewed under the
clearly erroneous standard because the
conclusion is dependent upon the facts and
circumstances of the particular case.  When
 mixed questions of law and fact are presented,
an appellate court must give deference to the
agency’s expertise and experience in the
particular field.  The court should not
 substitute its own judgment for that of the
 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
agency.
 
Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai' i 402, 405-06, 38 P.3d 570, 
573-74 (2001) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
 
in original omitted) (quoting In re Water Use Permit
 Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 431 (2000)). 
[A finding of fact] or a mixed determination of law
and fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding or
determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to
support the finding or determination, the appellate court is
left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake
 has been made.  We have defined “substantial evidence” as
 credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion.
 
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i at 119, 9 P.3d at 
431 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
B. The LIRAB’s statutory interpretation
 
An appellate court 
generally reviews questions of statutory
interpretation de novo, 'Olelo v. Office of Info. 
Practices, 116 Hawai 'i 337, 344, 173 P.3d 484, 491
(2007), but, “[i]n the case of . . . ambiguousstatutory language, the applicable standard of reviewregarding an agency’s interpretation of its owngoverning statute requires this court to defer to theagency’s expertise and to follow the agency’sconstruction of the statute unless that construction is palpably erroneous,” Vail v. Employees’ Ret. Sys.,75 Haw. 42, 66, 856 P.2d 1227, 1240 (1993). 
Gillan v. Gov’t Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai' i 109, 114, 194 
P.3d 1071, 1076 (2008).
 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The LIRAB erred in concluding that the employer presented
substantial evidence to rebut the presumption that Panoke’s
shoulder injuries were a covered employment-related injury
 
In COL 1, the LIRAB concluded that “[Panoke] did not
 
sustain bilateral shoulder injuries on June 17, 2004, arising out
 
of and in the course of employment” because “[Reef and Seabright]
 ha[ve] adduced substantial evidence to rebut or overcome the
 presumption of compensability.” In support of this conclusion,
 the LIRAB stated that it “credits the opinion of Dr. Diamond and
 finds that [Panoke’s] bilateral shoulder conditions pre-existed
 the June 17, 2004 work accident and was not caused, aggravated,
 or accelerated by said accident.” 
Panoke argues that the LIRAB clearly erred because it
 
should not have relied on the “generalized” reports of Drs. Agles
 and Lau and the testimony of Dr. Diamond. Panoke also claims
 that his degenerative shoulder conditions made him more
 susceptible to injury, that his shoulders were asymptomatic prior
 to June 17, 2004, that he did not immediately feel pain in his
 shoulders because it was masked by his back pain and pain
 medication, and that his prior shoulder injuries had completely
 
-28­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
resolved.4
 
As discussed below, the LIRAB erred in finding that
 
Reef and Seabright presented substantial evidence sufficient to
 
overcome the presumption that Pankoke’s shoulder injuries were
 work-related. Although Reef and Seabright presented reports from
 three physicians opining that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were not
 caused by the June 17, 2004 work accident, none of these
 physicians explained why the June 17, 2004 accident could not
 have aggravated Panoke’s pre-existing shoulder injuries, or,
 similarly, why Panoke was asymptomatic prior to June 17, 2004,
 but then started suffering from shoulder problems shortly
 afterwards. As a result, the medical reports of the employer’s
 physicians do not provide a sufficient degree of specificity to
 constitute substantial evidence to rebut the presumption that
 Panoke’s shoulder injuries were work-related.
 
When determining whether a workers’ compensation claim 
is work-related, it is well established in Hawai' i that “it shall 
be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the contrary . . . [t]hat the claim is for a covered work injury[.]” HRS § 386-85 (1993). As indicated in Acoustic, Insulation & 
4
 Panoke also argues that the LIRAB erred in declining to consider
 
the possibility that his shoulder injuries were caused cumulatively as a
result of his heavy labor at work.  Because of our holding, we do not reach
 this issue.
 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Drywall, Inc. v. Labor and Indus. Relations Appeal Bd., 51 Haw. 
312, 316, 459 P.2d 541, 544 (1969), to rebut the presumption, the employer has the burden of going forward with the evidence, which is the burden of production, as well as the burden of persuasion. The burden of production means that “the employer must initially introduce substantial evidence that, if true, could rebut the presumption that the injury is work-related.” Nakamura v. State, 
98 Hawai' i 263, 267, 47 P.3d 730, 734 (2002) (citation omitted). 
In evaluating whether the burden of producing substantial evidence has been met, “the slightest aggravation or acceleration of an injury by the employment activity mandates compensation.” Van Ness v. State, Dep’t of Educ., 131 Hawai' i 545, 562, 319 P.3d 
464, 481 (2014) (citation omitted). 
If the employer meets the burden of production, the 
burden of persuasion requires that “the trier of fact . . . weigh the evidence elicited by the employer against the evidence elicited by the claimant.” Igawa, 97 Hawai' i at 409, 38 P.3d at 
577 (citation omitted). In evaluating whether the burden of persuasion has been met in the workers’ compensation context, “the broad humanitarian purpose of the workers’ compensation statute read as a whole requires that all reasonable doubts be resolved in favor of the claimant[.]” Van Ness, 131 Hawai' i at 
558, 584 P.3d at 477 (quoting Lawhead v. United Air Lines, 59 
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Haw. 551, 560, 584 P.3d 119, 125 (1978)) (emphasis omitted); see
 
also Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408,
 495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972). In this case, the employer failed to
 meet its initial burden of producing substantial evidence, and we
 therefore do not reach the burden of persuasion.
 
In the workers’ compensation context, “substantial 
evidence” means “a high quantum of evidence which, at the minimum, must be relevant and credible evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable [person] that an injury or death is not work connected.” Id. at 
267-68, 47 P.3d at 734-35 (quoting Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai' i 
70, 79, 9 P.3d 382, 391 (2000)). As this court explained in Van Ness, this is a “high burden” placed on the employer, which is necessary because of the purpose of Hawaii’s workers’ compensation law: 
The legislature has decided that work injuries are
among the costs of production which industry is
required to bear.  Workmen’s compensation laws were
enacted as a humanitarian measure, to create legal
liability without relation to fault.  They represent a
 socially enforced bargain:  the employee giving up his
right to recover common law damages from the employer
in exchange for the certainty of a statutory award for
all work-connected injuries.
 
131 Hawai' i at 558, 319 P.3d at 477 (quotation marks, brackets, 
and citation omitted). 
Two decisions by this court--
Akamine and Nakamura-­
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
illustrate the “substantial evidence” standard.
 
In Akamine, the claimant died from a heart attack, and
 
the employer’s experts, relying on the fact that heart disease
 
originates early in life and physical exercise generally reduces
 the risk of heart disease, testified that there was no connection
 between the employee’s heart condition and his physical exertion
 at work. 53 Haw. at 410-12, 495 P.2d at 1167-68. This court
 held that such testimony was generalized and thus did not rebut
 the presumption of coverage. Id. at 412-14, 495 P.2d at 1168-69. 
This court also noted that “[t]he primary focus of the medical
 testimony should have been a discussion on whether the employment
 effort, whether great or little, in any way aggravated Mr.
 Akamine’s heart condition which resulted in his death.” Id. at
 
412, 495 P.2d at 1168.
 
In Nakamura, the claimant, an employee of the 
University of Hawai' i (UH), claimed he had sustained a 
psychiatric stress injury at work due to “‘long term inhumane treatment’ and harassment . . . .” 98 Hawai' i at 264, 47 P.3d 
730 at 731. Nakamura claimed his inability to work was a result of this treatment by his supervisors and also an IRS garnishment of his wages. Id. at 264-65, 47 P.3d at 731-32. At trial, 
Nakamura’s regular psychiatrist testified that she believed Nakamura had a pre-existing psychiatric illness that was 
-32­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
exacerbated by both the IRS garnishment and the UH work
 
environment. Id. at 266, 47 P.3d at 733. UH relied on the
 
report of another psychiatrist, Dr. Ponce, who had examined
 Nakamura at UH’s request and testified that Nakamura had a pre­existing psychiatric illness that was exacerbated by the IRS
 garnishment but not his treatment by UH supervisors. Id. The
 
LIRAB credited Dr. Ponce’s testimony, and thus found that
 Nakamura’s work did not cause his injury. Id. 
This court in Nakamura clarified the Akamine decision, 
and stated that “the court [in Akamine] was intending to illustrate that a reasonable degree of specificity is required in order for medical opinion evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability.” 98 Hawai' i at 269, 47 P.3d at 736. This court 
went on to affirm the LIRAB’s decision and held that Dr. Ponce’s opinion constituted substantial evidence because 
Dr. Ponce did more than opine generally that Nakamura
had an illness predating his employment with UH.  Dr.
 Ponce identified symptoms of paranoia and accompanying
behaviors attributable to Nakamura’s pre-existing
illness as the source of Nakamura’s pre-garnishment
work-related difficulties, pointing out that the
behaviors were similar to difficulties that Nakamura
 had encountered before starting work at UH.
 
Id.
 
In the present case, Reef and Seabright bore the
 
initial burden of producing substantial evidence to rebut the
 
presumption that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were the result of
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the June 17, 2004 work accident. Reef and Seabright rely on the
 
testimony of Dr. Diamond, and the reports of Drs. Agles and Lau,
 and argue that these met their burden to produce substantial
 evidence. 
At trial, Dr. Diamond testified that the labral and
 
rotator cuff tears found in the MRIs of Panoke’s shoulders were
 most likely not the result of the June 17, 2004 work accident. 
Dr. Diamond’s reasons for this opinion were that the traction
 mechanism of Panoke’s June 17, 2004 accident was inconsistent
 with the shoulder injury, Panoke lacked any injury to his biceps,
 Panoke did not complain of pain in his shoulders for
 approximately two weeks after the June 17, 2004 work accident,
 and, according to Dr. Diamond, Panoke’s shoulder injuries were
 more consistent with degenerative changes over time resulting
 from his previous shoulder fractures, rather than the June 17,
 2004 accident. Drs. Agles and Lau also opined that Panoke’s
 shoulder injuries were not related to the June 17, 2004 accident
 because of Panoke’s delayed pain complaints in his shoulders.
 
However, Panoke’s treating physician, Dr. McCaffrey,
 
concluded in a January 31, 2005 letter that Panoke’s shoulder
 injuries were related to the June 17, 2004 accident. As the
 LIRAB noted in FOF 29, Dr. McCaffrey explained that Panoke had no
 shoulder complaints or ongoing problems with his shoulder prior
 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the June 17, 2004 accident and had “fully and totally”
 
recovered from his 1991 vehicle accident in which he fractured
 his shoulders “without residual symptoms or impairment.” Dr.
 McCaffrey also noted that Panoke had been involved in heavy work
 activities immediately prior to June 17, 2004, and had been
 “clinically asymptomatic” until the June 17, 2004 accident.
 
None of the medical reports submitted by Reef and 
Seabright, or Dr. Diamond’s testimony at the LIRAB hearing, rebutted these bases for Dr. McCaffrey concluding that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were related to the June 17, 2004 accident. Moreover, all three of the employer’s physicians focused almost entirely on explaining why Panoke’s work accident on June 17, 2004 could not have caused his shoulder injuries without adequately explaining how the accident could not have caused “the slightest aggravation or acceleration of an [existing] injury.” Van Ness, 131 Hawai' i at 562, 319 P.3d at 481. Instead, the 
focus of the employer’s medical reports “should have been a discussion on whether the employment . . . in any way aggravated Mr. [Panoke’s] [shoulder] condition which resulted in his [injury].” Akamine, 53 Haw. at 412, 495 P.2d at 1168 (emphasis 
added). 
Given that Panoke had a history of shoulder injuries
 
and his MRI scans showed degenerative arthritis in both
 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shoulders, which Dr. Diamond acknowledged was both “longstanding”
 
and most likely pre-existing (because, as the LIRAB noted in FOF
 94, “it was virtually impossible to develop the advanced
 arthritic changes seen on the MRA during the period since the
 June 17, 2004 work accident”), evidence showing why Panoke’s
 June 17, 2004 accident could not have aggravated these conditions
 was necessary for the employer to adduce “substantial evidence”
 and overcome the presumption of coverage.
 
Indeed, at the LIRAB trial, Dr. Diamond even
 
acknowledged that it was “possible” that the June 17, 2004
 accident might have aggravated labral tears that pre-existed in
 Panoke’s shoulders. Although Dr. Diamond testified that he
 thought that it was “more likely than not” that the work accident
 had not aggravated Panoke’s shoulder injuries, his only
 explanation was that “[h]e would expect immediate symptoms given
 the amount of tears” Panoke suffered. However, this explanation
 was not sufficient to constitute “substantial evidence.” First,
 one of the employer’s own physicians, Dr. Lau, acknowledged that
 the pain experienced with the type of injuries Panoke suffered
 would not necessarily be immediate, but could have manifested
 “within several days to a week.” Second, although it is not
 necessary for the employer to provide evidence showing
 definitively what was the cause of the claimant’s injury (i.e.,
 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
something other than the work accident), there is nothing in the
 
record to explain why Panoke would have started experiencing
 serious shoulder pain approximately two weeks after the work
 accident if the work accident had not caused the injury or
 aggravated some pre-existing injury. 
Thus, unlike the physician in Nakamura, Reef and 
Seabright’s physicians did not do more than “opine generally that [Panoke] had an [injury] predating his employment,” Nakamura, 98 Hawai'i at 269, 47 P.3d at 736, because the physicians did not 
consider how Panoke’s prior injury might have been affected or aggravated by the June 17, 2004 accident. As a result, the LIRAB erred in concluding that Reef and Seabright had adduced substantial evidence to overcome the presumption that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were related to the June 17, 2004 work accident as he alleged. 
We therefore vacate the LIRAB’s ruling and remand the
 
case to the LIRAB for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion, including a determination on the merits of Panoke’s
 eligibility for TTD benefits.
 
B.	 The LIRAB erred in denying Panoke’s TTD benefits based on
deficiencies in the certifications of disability submitted
by Panoke’s physicians
 
In COL 2, the LIRAB concluded that:
 
Claimant’s periods of [TTD] resulting from the work
 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
injury of June 17, 2004 are:
June 
20, 2004 through June 22, 2004
June 30, 2004 through December 17, 2005
April 11, 2006 through May 11, 2006
 
As st
ated in Alexis v. Kasseebeer v. Paul J.
 
Samarin, AB 2007-207 (October 2, 2009):
 
A medical certification of [TTD] requires
an attending physician to certify that a
claimant’s absence from work is due to
 disability attributed to a specific work
injury or condition.  Without such
 certification, an award of temporary total
disability is not proper.
 
The [LIRAB] interprets the laws and rules to
require certifications of disability by the attending
physician to be contemporaneous, in writing, and
including the date of accident and work injury-related
condition(s) for which such disability is certified.
Statements that Claimant’s work status as [sic]
“off duty” or that he is significantly impaired is
[sic] insufficient as a certification of disability
without a statement that such impairment or disability
is due to the work injury.
The record before the board does not include
 
statements of certification that Claimant remained
 temporarily and totally disabled due to a work-related
injury.  For the period April 11, 2006 through May 11,
2006, the Board credits Dr. McCaffrey’s Work
Restriction Profile and concludes that Claimant was
 disabled due to the June 17, 2004 work injury.
The [LIRAB] makes no determination as to
Claimant’s entitlement to TTD benefits after
 September 4, 2007, which was the medical reports
deadline.
 
The LIRAB therefore discredited Panoke’s Work Star
 
reports because they did not indicate that Panoke’s “off work”
 
status was due to a work injury--in this case Panoke’s back
 injury. The ICA noted that the LIRAB’s requirements that
 physicians’ reports must include the dates of the accident and
 the disability “were based upon statutory authority [in HRS
 § 386-96] and were not error as a matter of law.” The ICA then
 
-38­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
held that although “the LIRAB’s requirement that each
 
certification of disability contains a specific statement that
 the impairment/disability is due to work injury is
 questionable . . . the LIRAB did not err in its determination of
 the TTD benefits period.” 
Panoke argues that although the Work Star reports did
 
not include all of the information required by the LIRAB, the
 reports nevertheless sufficiently certified Panoke as disabled
 because “[a] claimant should not be penalized simply because his
 physician failed to properly fill out a report.” Therefore,
 according to Panoke, the LIRAB should have awarded him TTD
 benefits for the entire period for which the Work Star reports
 placed him off work duty. 
Although part III.A of this opinion vacates and remands
 
Panoke’s claim to the LIRAB for redetermination of the TTD
 benefits he is due, clarification of the relevant law is
 warranted.
5 We hold that the LIRAB may not deny a claimant
 
5 Compare Zhang v. State, Dept. of Land & Natural Res., No. CAAP-11­
0001106 (App. Sept. 15, 2014) (SDO) (holding that a physician’s document “did
not comport with the [statutory] requirement that it include the ‘dates of
disability’ because it simply constituted a plan for future treatment and did
not specify any range of time the document was supposed to cover”); Boydstun
v. Polynesian Cultural Ctr., No. CAAP-11-0000803 (App. Sept. 11, 2014) (SDO)
(affirming the LIRAB’s determination that “there were no contemporaneous
medical certifications” for unaddressed “gap” periods); Custino v. State,
Dept. of Transp., No. CAAP-11-0000570 (App. May 15, 2014) (SDO) (holding that
the failure of a physician to include the information required in HRS § 389­96(2), including the dates of disability and the return to work date, violates
(continued...)
 
-39­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
benefits based on deficiencies in a physician’s certifications of
 
disability.
 
6
HRS § 386-96  requires a physician to include in
5(...continued)
HRS §
 389-96(2) as an improper certification, and thus justifies a denial of
the claimant’s TTD benefits) with Alayon v. Urban Management Corp., No. CAAP
11-0000676 (App. Dec. 31, 2014) (SDO) (vacating the LIRAB’s ruling that the
claimant was not entitled to TTD benefits because “the [LIRAB] cannot deny a
claimant’s request for TTD benefits based solely on a physician’s failure to
submit the certifications of disability in the proper form”). 
6 HRS § 386-96 reads:
 
(a) Any physician, surgeon, or hospital that has given any
treatment or rendered any service to an injured employee shall
make a report of the injury and treatment on forms prescribed by
and to be obtained from the department as follows:
 
(1) Within seven days after the date of first attendance or
service rendered, an initial report shall be made to the
department and to the employer of the injured employee in
the manner prescribed by the department;
 
(2)
 Interim reports to the same parties and in the same
manner as prescribed in paragraph (1) shall be made at
appropriate intervals to verify the claimant’s current
diagnosis and prognosis, that the information as to the
nature of the examinations and treatments performed is
complete, including the dates of those treatments and the
results obtained within the current reporting period, the
execution of all tests performed within the current
reporting period and the results of the tests, whether the
injured employee is improving, worsening, or if “medical
stabilization” has been reached, 
the dates of disability,
any w
ork restrictions, and the return to work date.  When an
 
injured employee is returned to full-time, regular, light,
part-time, or restricted work, the attending physician shall
submit a report to the employer within seven calendar days
indicating the date of release to work or medical
stabilization; 
. . .
 
(b) No claim under this chapter for medical treatment, surgical
treatment, or hospital services and supplies, shall be valid and
enforceable unless the reports are made as provided in this
section, except that the director may excuse the failure to make
the report within the prescribed period or a nonsubmission of the
report when the director finds it in the best interest of justice
(continued...)
 
-40­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reports all of the information listed in HRS § 386-96(2),
 
including the “dates of disability.” In addition to the required
 information, HRS § 386-96 provides the consequences of not
 including such information: “[n]o claim under this chapter for
 medical treatment, surgical treatment, or hospital services and
 supplies, shall be valid and enforceable unless the reports are
 made as provided in this section[.]” HRS § 386-96(b) (emphasis
 added). 
Similarly, the Department of Labor and Industrial 
Relations (DLIR) administrative rule on this issue also allows for the denial of payment to the physician in the event that a disability certification does not comply with the reporting requirements. Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-15-80 
provides: 
(a) Any provider of service required by chapter 386,
HRS, this chapter, or any related rules to make and
submit reports of an injury and treatment shall:
 
(1) Submit those reports to the director and the
self-insured employer, or the insurer of the
employer when the employer is not self-insured,
whichever is applicable; and
 
(2) Itemize its statement of services rendered
in a manner showing the date of injury,
diagnosis, date of each visit or service, the
appropriate code number used as the basis for
the charge, and the fee not to exceed the
maximum allowed under the medical fee schedule.
 
(...continued)
to do so.
 
-41­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
No service charge for preparing and submitting
reports required by section 386-96, HRS, and any
related rules shall be allowed.
 
(3) Interim WC-2 reports shall be submitted
monthly with the corresponding billing invoice,
if applicable, to the employer and shall include
the following:
 
(A) Current diagnosis and prognosis;
 
(B) Complete information as to the nature
of the examination(s) and treatments
performed, dates of those treatments, and
the results obtained within the current
 reporting period;
 
(C) A complete listing of all tests
performed within the current reporting
period and the results of the tests;
 
(D) A statement of whether the injured
employee is improving, worsening, or if
“medical stabilization” has been reached;
and
 
(E) Dates of disability, work
restrictions, if any, and return to work
date.
 
(c) The repeated failure of a physician, surgeon,
hospital, or provider of service to comply with
chapter 386, HRS, and any related rules shall be a
reasonable basis for an employer to refuse to pay or
withhold payment for services rendered.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Therefore, according to a plain reading of the rule,
 
the consequence of a physician not including the required
 
information on a report is that the physician  may not be
 
compensated for medical services rendered. Moreover, HAR § 12­15-80(c) provides that this sanction may only be applied after a
 physician’s “repeated failure” to comply with the requirements. 
However, even though HRS § 386-96 and HAR § 12-15-80
 
-42­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
permit denial of payment to a physician who fails to comply with
 
the reporting requirements, neither the statute nor the
 administrative rule provides that an employee’s claim for TTD
 benefits must be denied due to a physician’s non-compliance. 
Moreover, those provisions must be read in pari materia with the
 rest of the workers’ compensation statute, and in particular, the
 provision that establishes the employee’s entitlement to TTD, HRS
 § 386-31(b) (Supp. 2013). That section provides that when “a
 work injury causes total disability not determined to be
 permanent in character, the employer, for the duration of the
 disability, but not including the first three calendar days
 thereof, shall pay the injured employee” the prescribed benefits. 
There is nothing in that provision which prescribes a
 
particular method of proof, or that suggests that information not
 presented in accordance with HRS § 386-96 and HAR § 12-15-80
 cannot be considered. To be sure, the LIRAB must assess the
 quality of the evidence that is presented, to determine whether
 the necessary showing has been made. However, in doing so it
 cannot rely on the physician’s failure to comply with the
 certification requirements set forth in those provisions. To the
 extent that the Board’s analysis in COL 2 suggests otherwise, it
 is clearly erroneous, and the ICA erred in finding that the LIRAB
 properly determined Panoke’s benefits period. 
-43­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.	 The LIRAB did not err in denying Panoke’s request for
additional penalties against Reef
 
The LIRAB held in COL 3 that “[Reef and Seabright]
 
[are] not liable for a penalty for late payment of [TTD] benefits
 
for the period April 6, 2005 to February 2, 2006” because
 “[t]here is no evidence to indicate that payments were untimely.” 
Panoke argues that the LIRAB erred because Reef and Seabright
 were required to pay TTD benefits to Panoke as they accrued for
 the period January 5, 2005 through December 17, 2005, but that
 Reef and Seabright did not pay the TTD benefits for this period
 until much later.
7 Panoke states that in June 2005, the Director
 
ruled that Panoke had suffered compensable injuries to his back
 and shoulders, and that Panoke’s physician submitted disability
 certificates throughout 2005 certifying him as off work duty. 
According to Panoke, HRS § 386-31(b) requires payment of TTD
 
7 Panoke contends that “[t]he WC-3 reports . . . for 2004 and 2005
 
demonstrated that [Reef and Seabright] failed to pay TTD benefits “from
1/5/2005 - 12/17/2005 and from 5/6/2005 - 12/17/2005[.]”  However, the 2004
WC-3 form shows that in 2004, Reef and Seabright paid TTD benefits to Panoke
for the periods of June 20, 2004 through June 22, 2004, and June 30, 2004
through January 4, 2005.  The 2005 WC-3 shows that Reef and Seabright paid TTD
benefits to Panoke for the period of January 5, 2005 through April 5, 2005.
Panoke has not pointed to any other evidence that the payments for the period
January 1, 2005 through April 5, 2005, were late.  Panoke’s argument appears
to be based on the fact that payments for the period January 5, 2005 through
April, 5, 2005 did not appear on the WC-3 for 2004 . However, as Panoke
acknowledges, the employer is required to file the WC-3 by January 31 of each
year, showing payments made for the previous year.  Payments from January
through April 2005 therefore could not have appeared on the 2004 WC-3.
Therefore, the only evidence in the record of any late payments, based on the
2005 WC-3, is for the period April 6, 2005 through December 17, 2005, because
it is clear from the 2005 WC-3 that Reef and Seabright did not make these
payments in 2005.
 
-44­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
without waiting for a decision from the Director, so the ICA
 
therefore erred in holding that TTD was not due until the
 Director issued its second decision on October 13, 2006,
 extending TTD benefits beyond April 5, 2005. Panoke contends
 that “[a] carrier should not be allowed to withhold TTD, gambling
 that on appeal there may be a ruling that TTD was not due.” 
The timing of TTD payments and the penalties for
 
untimely payments are governed by HRS §§ 386-31 and 386-92. 
HRS § 386-31(b) (Supp. 2012) provides, in relevant part:
 
The employer shall pay temporary total disability
benefits promptly as they accrue to the person
entitled thereto without waiting for a decision from
the director, unless this right is controverted by the
employer in the employer’s initial report of
industrial injury. The first payment of benefits
shall become due and shall be paid no later than on
the tenth day after the employer has been notified of
the occurrence of the total disability, and thereafter
the benefits due shall be paid weekly except as
otherwise authorized pursuant to section 386-53.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
HRS § 386-31(b) therefore requires that an employer pay
 
TTD benefits to an employee within ten days of the employer being
 
notified of the disability, without waiting for a decision from
 the Director, unless the employer controverts the employee’s
 claim “in the employer’s initial report of industrial injury.” 
HRS § 386-92 (Supp. 2012) provides:
 
If any compensation payable under the terms of a final
decision or judgment is not paid by a self-insured
employer or an insurance carrier within thirty-one
days after it becomes due, as provided by the final
 
-45­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision or judgment, or if any temporary total
disability benefits are not paid by the employer or
carrier within ten days, exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays, after the employer or carrier
has been notified of the disability, and where the
right to benefits are not controverted in the
employer’s initial report of industrial injury or
where temporary total disability benefits are
terminated in violation of section 386-31, there shall
be added to the unpaid compensation an amount equal to
twenty per cent  thereof payable at the same time as,
but in addition to, the compensation, unless the
nonpayment is excused by the director after a showing
by the employer or insurance carrier that the payment
of the compensation could not be made on the date
prescribed therefor owing to the conditions over which
the employer or carrier had no control.
 
(Emphasis added). 
The legislative purpose behind HRS § 386-92 is “to
 
assess a [20]% penalty[8] in cases where an employer or his [or
 
her] insurance carrier is notified of a work injury, does not
 
deny liability for said injury under the law, and still neglects
 to pay compensation to a [TTD] worker within 10 days of such
 notification.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 216, in 1971 Senate
 Journal, at 878; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 757, in 1971 House
 Journal, at 1007 (emphasis added). Further comments in the
 committee reports also suggest that the legislature did not
 intend for employers contesting a determination of liability by
 the Director to be required to pay ongoing TTD benefits while the
appeal is pending:
  
8
 The penalty was changed from ten percent to twenty percent in
 
1995.  1995 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 234, § 14 at 613.
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Even upon the issuance of such an order [by the
Director], the employer or insurance carrier can still
wait until the 30 day appeal period has run before
making payment.
This Bill proposes to grant the director
discretion to add a 10% penalty on the compensation
payments in cases where liability is not denied and
there is no question that the compensation is due the
injured worker.
 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 216, in 1971 Senate Journal, at 878
 
(emphasis added); see also H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 757, in 1971
 House Journal, at 1007. 
Here, the LIRAB did not err in declining to assess
 
penalties against Reef and Seabright. First, TTD payments for
 the period dating from April 5, 2005 to December 17, 2005 did not
 become due as a result of a “final judgment” after the Director’s
 June 13, 2005 decision because Reef and Seabright timely appealed
 to the LIRAB. A decision by the Director shall be “final and
 conclusive between the parties . . . unless within twenty days
 after a copy has been sent to each party, either party appeals
 therefrom to the appellate board . . . .” HRS § 386-87 (1993)
 (emphasis added). The Director’s decision therefore was not
 “final” according to the statute. 
Although Reef and Seabright’s motion to stay payments
 
was denied, this related only to the payments ordered by the
 Director, i.e., TTD payments through April 5, 2005. The Director
 
-47­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did not order ongoing payments beyond that date.9
 
Second, although Reef and Seabright were notified of
 
Panoke’s disability during the period dating from April 5, 2005
 
through December 17, 2005, they are not subject to penalties for
 not making immediate payments because the claim was still
 controverted. HRS § 386-31(b) provides that the employer or
 carrier must pay TTD benefits within ten days after notification
 “unless this right is controverted by the employer in the
 employer's initial report of industrial injury.” Here, Reef and
 Seabright were unable to controvert Panoke’s shoulder injury in
 the initial report because Panoke had not complained of any
 shoulder injury. Reef and Seabright did, however, controvert the
 shoulder injuries as soon as Panoke made those claims. Holding
 that Reef and Seabright had not controverted Panoke’s shoulder
 injury for the purposes of HRS § 386-92, merely because they had
 not done so in the initial injury report of June 17, 2004, would
 have the effect of allowing employees to subsequently add any
 injuries to their claims and prevent their employers from
 controverting them without paying a penalty.
 
Furthermore, Panoke’s shoulder injury claims were still
 
controverted after the Director’s June 13, 2005 decision. Reef
 
9
 This differed from the Director’s October 13, 2006 decision, in
 
which the Director did order ongoing payments, and with which Reef and
Seabright appear to have complied. 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and Seabright immediately appealed the decision, so it was not a
 
final judgment with respect to whether Panoke’s shoulder injuries
 were compensable work-related injuries. The Director also made
 no determination as to Reef and Seabright’s obligation to pay TTD
 benefits after April 5, 2005. Because coverage for Panoke’s
 shoulder injuries was still in dispute for the period dating from
 April 5, 2005 to December 5, 2005, and payments for that period
 had not been subject to a final judgment, Reef and Seabright are
 not liable for additional penalties under HRS § 386-92.
 
V. Conclusion
 
The LIRAB erred in concluding that Reef and Seabright
 
adduced substantial evidence sufficient to overcome the
 presumption that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were related to his
 June 17, 2004 work accident. Further, the LIRAB erred in relying
on deficiencies in Panoke’s treating physicians’ disability
 certifications when it limited Panoke’s TTD benefits. We
 therefore vacate the ICA’s July 31, 2014 judgment on appeal and
 the LIRAB’s June 14, 2011 decision and order, and remand to the
 LIRAB for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
 
Wayne H. Mukaida
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Colette H. Gomoto
 
for respondent /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
-49­