***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
QUINCY L.F. CHOY FOO, III, Petitioner/Defendant- Appellee.  
_____________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-13-0000636 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13-0000636; CR. NO. 12- 1-0000829)  
 
MARCH 16, 2018 
 
McKENNA, PO LLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I. Introduction 
  
 This appeal stems from the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit’s (“circuit court”)1 grant of Quincy L.F. Choy Foo, III’s 
(“Choy Foo”) Motion to Dismiss Charges for Violation of Hawai i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (“HRPP”)  Rule 48 (2000) (“motion to 
                     
1  The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.  
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0000636
16-MAR-2018
08:30 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 
 
 dismiss”).  On April 5, 2013, the circuit court granted Choy 
Foo’s motion to dismiss the char ge with prejudice.2     
 Choy Foo seeks review of the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ 
(“ICA”) December 29, 2016, opinion, which vacated the dismissal 
order and remanded the case.  The ICA held that a twenty- one day 
period between Choy Foo’s arraignment and a hearing on his 
waiver or demand of jury trial (“waiver/demand hearing”) was 
excludable from HRPP Rule 48 calculations under subsections 
(c)(1) and (c)(8).  The ICA concluded that Choy Foo’s HRPP Rule 
48 rights had therefore not been violated.  Although n ot 
necessary to its holding because it held that Rule 48 had not 
been violated and the case should not have been dismissed, t he 
ICA also stated the circuit court erred in failing to consider 
and articulate its analysis of the factors identified in State 
v. Estencion , 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981), in dismissing 
the case with prejudice.    
 For the reasons below, we hold the twenty- one day period 
between Choy Foo’s  arraignment and  the first setting of the 
waiver/demand hearing was not excludable pursuant to  HRPP Rule 
48(c)(1) or (c)(8).  The circuit court therefore correctly ruled 
                     
2  A dismissal with prejudice prohibits the State from re -filing the 
charges and re- starting prosecution of the case.  See Dismissal with 
prejudice  Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014)  (“A dismissal . . . barring 
the plaintiff from prosecuting any later law suit on the same claim.”)  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 
 
 the case must be dismissed because Choy Foo’s HRPP Rule 48 
rights had been violated.  We agree with the ICA, however, that 
upon remand, the circuit court must properly apply the Estencion
 
factors to determine whether the case should be dismissed with 
or without prejudice.    
II. Background 
A. District Court Proceedings 
 On February 22, 2012, the State filed a  complaint alleging 
Choy Foo committed  the offense of Sexual As sault in the Fourth 
Degree, in violation of Section 707 -733(1)(a)  (2014) of the 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”).  At his appearance on March 15, 
2012, the State gave Choy Foo, who was without counsel at the 
time, a copy of the complaint.   The complete transcript of the 
March 15, 2012 proceeding reads:  
[THE STATE:] APA 003, Quincy Choy Foo III.  Can you come 
forward, please.  Can you state your name.  
[CHOY FOO:] Quincy Choy Foo III.  
[THE STATE:] And for the record, I’m handing Mr. Choy Foo 
III a copy of the (indiscernible) complaint.  
(Indiscernible).  
THE COURT:  So you understand what you’re charged with, 
this is a full misdemeanor.  Up to a $2,000 fine, one year 
in jail, or both is the maximum penalties.  
[CHOY FOO:] Yeah.  
THE COURT:  So, we need to set this for demand or waiver of 
your right to a jury trial.  So, we’re going to set it for 
three weeks.  I’m going to give you a referral to public 
defend – - defenders, excuse me, and you need to call them 
right away for an appointment.  Okay?  And the bond to 
continue.  Thank you very much.  
[CHOY FOO:] Thank you.  
THE COURT: You have a seat.  We’ll get your paperwork.  
(Proceedings concluded.)    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 
 
 The district court set the waiver/demand hearing for April 5, 
2012.   
 On April 5, 2012, Choy Foo appeared without counsel, 
explaining that he called the Office of the Public Defender 
(“OPD”) and that he was told to request a continuance.  Choy Foo 
further explained that he had an appointment with the OPD on May 
8, 2012.  The court re- set the jury waiver/demand hearing for a 
week after that appointment.    
 On May 15, 2012, Choy Foo appeared at the waiver/demand 
hearing, again without counsel.  Choy Foo explained the OPD had 
told him to request another continuance because the office was 
in training and he had an appointment scheduled for May 22, 
2012.  The district court continued the hearing to May 30, 2012.   
 
The waiver/demand hearing was finally held on May 30, 2012,  
and Choy Foo, who was represented by a deputy public defender 
(“DPD”) at this time, demanded his right to a jury trial.  The 
district court set the arraignment for June 12, 2012,  in the 
circuit court.    
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
 Choy Foo was arraigned in the circuit court on June 12, 
2012, and entered a not guilty plea.  Trial was set for the week 
of July 23, 2012.  The case was continued twice at Choy Foo’s 
request and three times due to court congestion.  During a trial ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 
 
 readiness hearing on January 14, 2013, the deputy prosecuting 
attorney (“the State”) notified the court the HRPP Rule 48 
deadline for the case would be March 3, 2013.  The circuit court 
set the case for trial on February 11, 2013, but on that day 
continued the case due to court congestion.    
 On March 11, 2013, Choy Foo filed his motion to dismiss.  
Choy Foo contended that a total of 189 includable days had 
passed since the inception of the case, and that this clearly 
exceeded the six-month, or 180 day, period within which trial 
must commence under HRPP Rule 48.3  As such, Choy Foo requested 
that the circuit court dismiss his case with prejudice.    
 The State filed a memorandum in opposition to Choy Foo’s 
motion to dismiss on March 12, 2013.  The State argued that the 
time from Choy Foo’s arraignment on March 15, 2012, until the 
first waiver/demand hearing on April 5, 2012 should be excluded 
from the 180 day period for “good cause” pursuant to HRPP Rule 
                     
3  HRPP Rule 48(b)(1) provides, in relevant part:  
 
(b) By court. Except in the case of traffic offenses that 
are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on 
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or 
without prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not 
commenced within 6 months:  
   (1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the 
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense 
based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal 
episode for which the arrest or charge was made[.]  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 
 
 48(c)(8).4  The State contended that, therefore, the Rule 48 
deadline was not until March 24, 2013.    
 On March 25, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing on the 
motion to dismiss.  At the outset, the circuit court clarified, 
and the parties confirmed, that the only time frame in dispute 
was the twenty-one day period from March 15, 2012, until April 
5, 2012.  The DPD provided the circuit court with background 
information regarding the district court’s HRPP Rule 48 
practice, specifically regarding the routine three- week 
continuance for waiver/demand hearings: 
[DPD:] [A misdemeanor case]  is the only type of case in the 
first circuit where a defendant has a right to a jury trial 
where . . .  the defendant has to demand that right before 
he’s entitled to the jury trial.  
THE COURT:  Yeah.  In other words, in every other kind of 
situation, the defendant’s court is chosen for him.  
[DPD:] Yes, Your Honor.  
THE COURT:  Right.  
[DPD:] And the way the process works in district court is 
there’s an initial appearance.  At the time the defendant 
is released on bail , he’s given this initial appearance.  
At that time, he’s not given any charges.  He’s not being 
told what he’s charged with.  He’s not told that he should 
get an attorney.  
 If an –- if a defendant wishes to hire private 
counsel prior to that, they can do that. But, at the same 
time, he hasn’t been advised of the counsel, so –- his 
right to counsel or what he’s actually been charged with.  
 As a matter of course in district court, even if a 
defendant appears with an attorney at the initial 
appearance, the case is continued for waiver or demand 
regardless of what the defendant wants to do.  
                     
4  HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) provides, in relevant part:  
 
(c)  Excluded periods. The following periods shall be 
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:  
. . . . 
(8) other periods of delay for good cause.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 
 
  In this case –- anytime there’s a –- anytime the 
total period exceeds 180 days, it becomes the state’s 
burden to prove that a period is excludable.  You know,
 
generally, in  district court, this period is charged to the 
state for Rule 48 purposes.  That’s the general practice in 
district court amongst all the district court judges.   
      
(Emphases added).  The DPD reiterated that setting the 
waiver/demand hearing for three weeks after arraignment is the 
standard practice of the district court: 
THE COURT:  And that’s standard procedure.  And what you’re 
saying is that’s the standard of what’s done in the 
district court?  
[DPD:] Yes, Your Honor.  And that’s done by court.  Mr. 
Choy Foo doesn’t come in and ask for a continuance.  He 
doesn’t say, you know, I want counsel before I make this 
decision.  At that time, generally, if you’re not 
represented as a defendant, discovery is not provided to 
you by the state.  So, there’s a whole procedure that’s set 
up that’s basically done for the convenience of the 
district court, because more people in district court waive 
jury trial than demand.  This is the system they’ve set up.  
 Other –- easily, the system could be that your case 
goes to circuit court, and if you choose to waive, then it 
goes back to district court.  So, essentially, in –- if 
that period is charged to the defendant, you’re forcing the 
defendant to choose between his right to speedy trial and 
his right to jury trial.  You’ re forcing him to waive one 
or the other.  And there’s an equal protection argument, 
because if a defendant is able to secure private counsel 
prior to the initial appearance and that makes some sort of 
difference, it’s still going to get set for three week s for 
waiver/demand.  
 
The DPD also confirmed that when the district court performs 
HRPP Rule 48 calculations, it does not exclude the continued 
time period for waiver/demand hearings.  The State conceded that 
with respect to the time between arraignment and waiver demand 
“it is the practice of district court to charge that time to the 
state.”  However, the State argued that based on this court’s 
opinions in State v. Senteno , 69 Haw. 363, 742 P.2d 369 (1987), ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 
 
 and State v. Samonte , 83 Hawai i 507, 928 P.2d 1 (1996), the 
district court’s practice was incorrect.    
 After the parties finished their arguments, the circuit 
court orally dismissed the case with prejudice and offered the 
following explanation: 
[HRPP Rule 48]  appears to be technical.  It assigns certain 
delays to parties regardless of whether there actually was 
a delay.  And I’m going to follow the district court 
practice and find that the period of time before this jury 
waiver is not excludable and that it counts so that the 
period between March 15th and April 5th does count against 
the state, and that 189 days have run, and, therefore, that 
the –- the Rule 48 has been violated by nine days, and 
therefore, that the matter is dismissed with prejudice.  I 
do so despite the fact that the nature of the charge is one 
of the more troubling ones, to say the least, in our 
culture. 
 
On April 5, 2013, the circuit court entered a written order 
granting Choy Foo’s motion to dismiss the charges with prejudice 
for violation of HRPP Rule 48, but it did not state its reasons 
for doing so.    
C. Appeal to the ICA 
 1. The State’s Opening Brief  
 The State raised two points of error in its opening brief 
before the ICA.  First, the State contended  that because the 
three-week delay was for Choy Foo’s benefit, and was not 
“unreasonably long ,” the circuit court erred in failing to 
exclude that period from the HRPP Rule 48 calculations.   Quoting 
State v. Canencia, No. 29345, 2009 WL 3151221 (App. Sept.  30, 
2009) (mem.), an unpublished ICA memorandum opinion , the State ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 
 
 asserted 
that “[i]t is well established that a period of time in 
which the defendant is not represented by counsel is an 
excludable period.”   Second, the State argued that the circuit 
court abused its discretion in failing to articulate and weigh 
the factors from Estencion  when dismissing this case with 
prejudice.5    
 
2. Choy Foo’s Answering Brief  
 In his answering brief, Choy Foo contended the State 
incorrectly relied on Canencia.   The ICA should not consider 
Canencia  persuasive or applicable, Choy Foo asserted, because 
the case was unpublished and did not address the unique 
procedural issues in Choy Foo’s case .  Specifically , Choy Foo 
argued the cases cited in Canencia, namely,  Samonte and Senteno, 
were distinguishable from Choy Foo’s case in two ways .      
 First, Choy Foo asserted that the defendants in Samonte  and 
Senteno faced felony charges brought in the circuit court, and 
                     
5  In Estencion, this court adopted the following language of the Federal 
Speedy Trial Act, making it a requirement for the application of HRPP Rule 
48(b): 
 
In determining whether to dismiss the case with or without 
prejudice, the court shall consider, among others, each of 
the following factors: the seriousness of the offense; the 
facts and the circumstances of the case which led to the 
dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the 
administration of this chapter and on the administration of 
justice. 
 
63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (citing §  3162(a)(1) of the Federal Speedy 
Trial Act, 18 U.S.C.A. (1969), Supp.1980)). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 
 
 therefore they were not subject to the automatic three
-week 
continuance Choy Foo faced in the district court for his 
misdemeanor charge.
  Second, Choy Foo argued the time periods in 
question in Samonte  and Senteno were excludable because the 
court granted the defendants’  motions for withdrawal of counsel.  
Choy Foo noted that he did not request that a previous attorney 
withdraw from the case; instead, he made his initial appearance 
without any representation,  and the district court set a  
waiver/demand hearing without a motion by either party.  In sum, 
Choy Foo argued no binding legal authority addressed the 
specific circumstances of his case.          
 As to the State’s second point of error, Choy Foo conceded 
the circuit court should have analyzed and applied the Estencion 
factors when it dismissed his case with prejudice.  Choy Foo 
therefore requested that the ICA vacate the dismissal with 
prejudice and remand the case to allow the circuit court to 
weigh the Estencion  factors to properly d etermine whether the 
case should be dismissed with or without prejudice.    
 3. The ICA Opinion 
 As an initial matter, the ICA agreed with Choy Foo’s 
concession 
on the State’s second point  of error, concluding that 
“at a minimum[] the Dismissal Order must be vacated and the case 
remanded for consideration of the Estencion  factors and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 
 
 articulation of necessary findings.”  State v. Choy Foo , 139 
Hawaii 339, 342, 389 P.3d 934, 937 (App. 2016), as amended  (Feb. 
14, 2017) (citing State v. Hern, 133 Hawai i 59, 64-65, 323 P.3d 
1241, 1246-47 (App. 2013)).    
 The ICA characterized the first point of error as: 
“[W]hether the twenty- one day delay between March 15, 2012, and 
April 5, 2012, during which Choy Foo was referred to the Public 
Defender’s Office to see k appointed counsel, constituted 
excludable delay under HRPP Rule 48.”  Choy Foo, 139 Hawai i at 
342, 389 P.3d at 937.  Viewing that issue in the context of “the 
fundamental importance of the right to counsel,” the ICA held 
that the period was excludable and that the circuit court erred 
in granting Choy Foo’s motion to dismiss.  139 Hawai i at 343, 
389 P.3d at 938. 
 The ICA concluded that the twenty- one day period in 
question fell within HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) .6  It opined the purpose 
of the waiver/demand continuance was to ensure Choy Foo was 
represented by counsel, which was the same purpose as delays for 
                     
6 HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) provides:  
 
(c)  Excluded periods. The following periods shall be 
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:  
   (1) periods that delay the commencement of trial and are 
caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning the 
defendant, including but not limited to penal 
irresponsibility examinations and periods during which the 
defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions, 
interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges[.]  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 
 
 withdrawal of counsel and appointment of new counsel, delays for 
which are excludable under HRPP Rule 48(d)(1).  139 Hawai i at 
344, 389 P.3d at 939.  In support of its position, the ICA cited 
this court’s opinion in Senteno
 and its own unpublished 
memorandum opinion, Canencia.  139 Hawai i at 345, 389 P.3d at 
940.  Opining the facts of Canencia  were similar to t hose of the 
case at hand, the ICA quoted its reasoning in Canencia : 
It is well established that a period of time in which the
defendant is not represented by counsel is an excludable  
period.  See [Samonte, 83 Hawai i at 515- 16, 928 P.2d at 9 -
10]; [Senteno , 69 Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 373]; HRPP Rule 
48(d)(1).  Canencia was without counsel at his first 
appearance on September 28, 2007.  The district court could 
not proceed to taking Canencia ’s plea and if Canencia  
pleaded not guilty, to setting a trial date, while Canencia 
was not represented by counsel and had not waived his right 
to counsel. Consequently, the district court had no choice 
but to defer the case for the appointment of counsel, which 
began with the referral of Canencia to the Public Defender. 
Canencia did not object to the delay of proceedings and 
referral to the Public Defender.  
 
Choy Foo , 139 Hawai i at 345, 389 P.3d at  940 (emphasis added) 
(quoting Canencia, mem. op. at *2).  The ICA reiterated that its 
conclusion that the twenty- one day period was excludable was 
supported by “the recognition of a defendant’s fundamental right 
to be represented by counsel and the inability of a court to 
proceed to trial” found in Senteno and Canencia.  Id. 
 The ICA  decided, alternatively, that the waiver/demand 
continuance was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) as a 
“period[] of delay for good cause.”  Id.  Noting that this court ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 
 
 has said “the good cause provision ‘is provided to take care of 
unanticipated circumst ances’ and that good cause means ‘a 
substantial reason that affords legal excuse,’” the ICA 
analogized Choy Foo’s case to this court’s decision in Senteno.  
Choy Foo, 139 Hawai i at 345-46, 389 P.3d at  940-41 (citing State 
v. Abregano , 136 Hawai i 489, 497, 363 P.3d 838, 846 (2015)).  
Although Choy Foo had never been represented by counsel and thus 
his delay involved initial appointment of counsel, the ICA 
reasoned that this situation was still like the delay caused by 
withdrawal of counsel in Senteno, because “trial in both cases 
‘could not proceed in the absence of trial counsel or a waiver 
of counsel.’”  Choy Foo , 139 Hawai i at 346, 389 P.3d at 941 
(citing Senteno, 69 Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 369)). 
 Finally, the ICA was unpersuaded by Choy Foo’ s argument 
that the twenty-one day delay was a common occurrence in the 
district court, and was therefore not an “unanticipated” 
circumstance.  Choy Foo , 139 Hawai i at 346 , 389 P.3d at 941.  
The ICA determined that because the district court cannot know 
in advance which defendants will appear without counsel at their 
initial appearance, the district court cannot “address the 
defendant’s need for representation by counsel until the 
defendant appears in court.”  Id.  Thus, the ICA held that “Choy 
Foo’s appearance without counsel was an unanticipated ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 
 
 circumstance and that the twenty- one day delay to afford him the 
opportunity to seek counsel through the Public Defender’s Office 
was a period of delay for ‘good cause’ under HRPP Rule 
48(c)(8).”  Id. 
D. Applicati on for writ of certiorari and oral argument 
 Choy Foo timely applied for writ of certiorari , raising  a 
single point of error:  
Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the twenty -
one day period between Petitioner’s arraignment in District 
Court and the  next hearing set sua  sponte by the District 
Court to determine whether Petitioner would demand or waive 
his right to a jury trial was excludable under Hawaii Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48(c)(1) and/or HRPP Rule 
48(c)(8). 
 
   With respect to exclusion under HRPP 48(c)(1), Choy Foo 
makes two distinct arguments:  (1) the waiver/demand hearing was 
not a proceeding concerning the defendant that delayed trial; 
and (2) the ICA erred in inferring that the purpose of the 
twenty-one day period was to provide Choy Foo with an 
opportunity to seek counsel, and reliance on that inferred 
purpose resulted in an erroneous decision.
  With respect to 
exclusion under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8), Choy Foo argues that: (1) 
the ICA erred in relying on inapplicable law to reach its 
decision; and (2) that Choy Foo’s appearance without counsel at 
arraignment was not an “unanticipated circumstance” that 
amounted to “good cause” within the meaning of HRPP Rule 
48(c)(8).    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 
 
  At oral argument, Choy Foo
 again stated that the 
waiver/demand hearing is routinely set three weeks after 
arraignment by the district court,  even for defendants who are 
already represented by counsel, and that the delay is routinely 
included in HRPP Rule 48 calculation.  State v. Choy Foo , SCWC-
13-000636, Oral Argument, available at  
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/oral- argument-before -the-supreme -
court-of-hawaii- no-scwc-13-0000636 , at 5:05, 7:15, 7:25 
(hereinafter “Oral Argument”).  Both parties again acknowledged 
that the circuit court erred in dismissing the case with 
prejudice without considering and explaining its application of 
the Estencion factors.  Id. at 15:45, 35:45. 
III. Standard s of Review 
A. HRPP Rule 48 Dismissal  
 The appellate court reviews a trial court’s decision on a 
HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss under both the “clearly 
erroneous” and “right/wrong” tests:  
A trial court’ s findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding an HRPP 
48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review.  An FOF is clearly erroneous 
when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been committed.  However, 
whether tho se facts fall within HRPP 48(b)’ s exclusionary 
provisions is a question of law, the determination of which 
is freely reviewable pursuant to the “ right/wrong”  test.   
 
Samonte, 83 Hawai
i at 514, 928 P.2d at 8 (quoting State v. 
Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 328-29, 861 P.2d 11, 22 (1993)).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 
 
 B. Interpretation of Court Rules 
 The interpretation of a court rule is reviewed de novo, 
Sierra Club v. Dep’ t of Transp. , 120 Hawai i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009), and “[w]hen interpreting rules promulgated by 
the court, principles of statutory construction apply.”   Gap v. 
Puna Geothermal Venture , 106 Hawai i 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 
(2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  This 
court’s construction of statutes is guided by the following 
rules:
 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.  
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.   
State v. Wheeler , 121 Hawai i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 
(2009) (quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 114 Hawai i 184, 193, 
159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)). 
IV. Discussion  
 “HRPP [Rule] 48 is  intended not only ‘to ensure speedy 
trial for criminal defendants,’ . . . but also ‘to relieve 
congestion in the trial court, to promptly process all cases ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 
 
 reaching the courts[,] and to advance the efficiency of the 
criminal justice process.’”  State v. Hoey , 77 Hawai i 17, 29, 
881 P.2d 504, 516 (1994) (citing State v. Coyaso , 73 Haw. 352, 
355, 833 P.2d 66, 68 (1992); Estencion , 63 Haw. at 268, 625 P.2d 
at 1043).  To accomplish this end, HRPP Rule 48(b) requires the 
court to dismiss the charge, upon the d efendant’s motion, “if 
trial is not commenced within 6 months” of a relevant triggering 
date.7  Section (c) of HRPP Rule 48 provides eight categories of 
delay that are to be excluded from calculating the time within 
which trial must commence.8  In other words, all time periods are 
counted in HRPP Rule 48 calculation unless excluded by 
subsection (c).    
 At issue here is HRPP Rule 48(c)(1), which excludes 
“periods that delay the commencement of trial and are caused by 
collateral or other proceedings concern ing the defendant[.]”  
When applying HRPP Rule 48(c)(1), the trial court’s two 
                     
7  Specifically, HRPP Rule 48(b) begins its six month calculation as 
follows: 
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the 
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner . . . or 
(2) from the date of re -arrest or re -filing of the charge, 
in cases where an initial charge was dismissed upon motion 
of the defendant; or  
(3) from the date of mistrial, order granting a new trial 
or remand, in cases where such events require a  new trial.  
 
8  The text of HRPP Rule 48(c) states that it relates to “computing the 
time for trial commencement.”  However, in practice this language is more 
accurately interpreted as “computing the time within which trial must 
commence.”   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 
 
 inquiries are: (1) whether the period actually delays the 
commencement of trial;9 and (2) whether the period is “caused by 
collateral or other proceedings concerning the defenda nt.”  For 
a period to be excluded from calculation, both of these 
inquiries must be answered in the affirmative.   
 
The record does not reflect whether the twenty- one day time 
period at issue actually delayed the commencement of trial.10  
The parties’ core dispute, and the focus of the ICA’s decision, 
was instead whether the time period  in question was caused by a 
“collateral or other proceeding[] concerning the defendant” 
within the meaning of HRPP Rule 48(c)(1), and whether the period 
constituted “good cause” within the meaning of HRPP Rule 
48(c)(8).  For the following reasons, we conclude that it was 
neither. 
A. Exclusion was i nappropriate under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1)  
 The court’s interpretation of HRPP Rule 48 must begin with 
the plain language of the rule.  See Wheeler , 121 Hawai i at 390, 
219 P.3d at 1177.  Although HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) does not define 
                     
9  This court has previously noted that “to be excludable under HRPP 
[Rule] 48(c), a time period must actually delay a defendant’s trial.” Hoey, 
77 Hawai i at 30, 881 P.2d at 517. 
 
10  Choy Foo’s trial was actually set several times within the 180 -day 
period:  it was initially set for the week of July 23, 2012, continued three 
times due to court congestion and twice at Choy Foo’s request, and then 
eventually set for February 11, 2013 before being continued once more due to 
court congestion.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 
 
 “collateral or other proceeding[] concerning the defendant,” it 
does provide a list of examples of excludable periods, 
“including but not limited to penal irres ponsibility 
examinations and periods during which the defendant is 
incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions, interlocutory 
appeals and trials of other charges.”  Section (d) provides some 
insight for the application of HRPP Rule 48(c)(1).  Subsection 
(d)(1) lists motions that are deemed to create “periods of delay 
resulting from collateral or other proceedings concerning the 
defendant” and must be excluded from calculation.11  Conversely, 
subsection (d)(2) lists periods attributable to specific motions 
or other court papers that must be included in calculation. 12  
                     
11  HRPP Rule 48(d)(1) provides:  
 
For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule, the period 
of time, from the filing through the prompt disposition  of 
the following motions filed by a defendant , shall be deemed 
to be periods of delay resulting from collateral or other 
proceedings concerning the defendant: motions to dismiss, 
to suppress, for voluntariness hearing heard before trial, 
to sever counts or defendants, for disqualification of the 
prosecutor, for withdrawal of counsel including the time 
period for appointment of new counsel if so ordered, for 
mental examination, to continue trial, for transfer to the 
circuit court, for remand from the circuit court, for 
change of venue, to secure the attendance of a witness by a 
material witness order, and to secure the attendance of a 
witness from without the state.  
 
(Emphases added). 
 
12  HRPP Rule 48(d)(2) provides:  
 
For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule, the period 
of time, from the filing through the prompt disposition  of 
the following motions or court papers , shall be deemed not 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 
 
 Subsection (d)(3) provides that motions that do not fall within 
(d)(1) or (d)(2) should be evaluated by the criteria of section 
(c).13   
 
Continuances for the appointment of counsel or for 
waiver/demand hearings are not identified as excludable periods 
in HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) or (d)(1), and subsection (d)(2) does not 
specifically include these periods.  Additionally, neither 
appointment of counsel nor waiver/demand hearings fall within 
any of the other section (c) categories that subsection (d)(3) 
directs the court to consider.14   
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
to be excluded in computing the time for trial 
commencement: notice of alibi, requests/motions for 
discovery, and motions in limine, for voluntariness hearing 
heard at trial, for bail reduction, for release pending 
trial, for bill of particulars, to strike surplusage from 
the charge, for return of property, for discovery 
sanctions, for litigation expenses and for depositions.  
 
(Emphases added). 
 
13  HRPP Rule 48(d)(3) provides: “The criteria provided in section (c) 
shall be applied to motions  that are not listed in subsections (d)(1) and 
(d)(2) in determining whether the associated periods of time may be excluded 
in computing the time for trial commencement.”  (emphasis  added). 
14 Section (c) also excludes time periods caused by the following:  
 
(2) . . . congestion of the trial docket when the 
congestion is attributable to exceptional circumstances;  
(3) . . .a continuance granted at the request or with the 
consent of the defendant or defendant’s counsel;  
(4) . . . a continuance granted at the request of the 
prosecutor [and]  
 
. . . .  
 
(5) the absence or unavailability of the defendant[.]  
 
(continued. . .)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 
 
  Subsection (d)(1) excludes the time period to resolve 
motions
 “for withdrawal of counsel including the time period for 
appointment of new counsel if so ordered.”  The ICA reasoned 
that appointment of new counsel should be treated like motions 
for withdrawal of counsel under subsection (d)(1), and therefore 
be excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1), as they both “ensure 
that a defendant . . . is represented by and has the assistance 
of counsel.”  Choy Foo , 139 Hawai‘ i at 344, 389 P.3d at 939.  
However, withdrawal of existing counsel and initial appointment 
of counsel are procedurally quite different.  First, as 
explicitly provided in HRPP Rule 48(d)(1), the exclusion for 
withdrawal of counsel is based on the filing of a motion.  
Second, subsection (d)(1) specifically excludes the time from 
filing of the withdrawal motion to disposition  of the motion, 
which means the that the time from filing of the motion to 
appointment of substitute counsel is excluded.  In contrast, the 
initial appointment of counsel is largely a ministerial act, 
done with little court involvement, let alone the filing of a 
motion.  See HRS § 802- 4 (1974) (permitting public defenders to 
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(2)- (5)(emphasis added).  Subsection (c)(6) excludes “the 
period between a dismissal of the charge by the prosecutor to the time of 
arrest or filing of a new charge[,]” and subsection (c)(7) excludes “a 
reasonable period of delay when the defendant is joined for trial with a 
codefendant[.]”  “[O]ther periods of delay for good cause” are excluded under 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) but, for the reasons discussed below, exclusion based on 
this category is also inappropriate here.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 
 
 make indigence determinations, subject to court review, unless 
the court orders otherwise); HRS § 802- 5 (2015) (providing for 
the court to appoint counsel for indigent defendants).  
 Furthermore, the canon of construction expressio unius est 
exclusio alterius holds that “to express or include one thing 
implies the exclusion of the other, or of the alternative.”  
Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014).  Indeed, “the contrast 
between a specific subject matter which is expressed and one 
which is not mentioned leads to an inference that the latter was 
not intended to be included within the statute.”  Int’l Sav. and 
Loan Ass’n v. Wiig , 82 Hawai i 197, 201, 921 P.2d 117, 121 
(1996).  The fact that initial appointment of counsel was not 
placed among the examples of “collateral or other proceedings” 
in subsections (c)(1) or (d)(1) suggests that it was not 
intended to be treated like the items on those lists.   
 Additionally, as noted, subsections (d)(1), (d)(2), and 
(d)(3) all explicitly relate to time periods created by the 
filing of motions.  Specifically, HRPP Rule 48(d)(1) pertains to 
time periods “from the filing through the prompt disposition of 
. . . motions filed by a defendant ,” subsection (d)(2) concerns 
periods related to “motions or court papers,” and subsection 
(d)(3) applies to “motions that are not listed in subsections 
(d)(1) and (d)(2)[.]”   All motions that are excluded by ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 
 
 subsection (d)(1) and included by subsection (d)(2) require 
disposition by the court.  The automatic continuance for a 
waiver/demand hearing is not initiated by a motion.  The time 
period at issue here was generated by the district court’s 
choice to set a hearing.  Whether that hearing was for 
waiver/demand or for appointment of counsel, or both, the time 
period it created does not fall within the plain language of 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(1).  This plain language conclusion is 
undergirded by several additional considerations.   
 First, HRPP Rule 48 is clear:  if a time period is not 
excluded from calculation by the rule, it is included in the 
calculation.  Time periods for waiver/demand hearings or for 
appointment of counsel are not excluded by the rule, therefore 
those periods are included in calculating the time within which 
trial must commence.  Even if HRPP Rule 48 were ambiguous with 
respect to its excludable time periods, the rule of lenity would 
require us to construe it strictly, and in favor of the 
defendant.  See State v. Jing Hua Xiao , 123 Hawai‘i 251, 262, 231 
P.3d 968, 979 (2010) (“[W]here a criminal statute is susceptible 
of more than one construction, the narrower or stricter 
construction should be adopted pursuant to the rule of lenity. ”) 
(citing State v. Bayly , 118 Hawai
‘i 1, 15, 185 P.3d 186, 200 
(2008)). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 
 
  Second, we note that the district court appears to apply 
its waiver/demand hearing practice to all defendants, whether 
they have counsel or not.  This practice, implemented by the 
district court without the request of the parties, and applied 
uniformly without taking into consideration the needs of each 
case, does not “concern” any particular defendant, let alone 
“the defendant” to whom Rule 48 refers.  See HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) 
(excluding from calculation “ periods that delay the commencement 
of trial and are caused by collateral or other proceedings 
concerning the defendant [.]”) (emphasis added).  Rather, the 
waiver/demand hearing continuance “concerns” the efficiency of 
the district court calendar, as described below, rather than the 
particularities of any defendant’s case.     
 Third, in this regard, the district court’s continuance of 
the waiver/demand hearing appears to be a practice developed to 
avoid the possible procedural inefficiencies that would result 
from the requirements of HRPP Rule 5 and HRS § 604 -8.  Under HRS 
§ 604-8(a) (2001), the district court loses jurisdiction over a 
misdemeanor case once the defendant demands a jury trial, but 
retains jurisdiction if the defendant does not make a jury 
demand “on the date of arraignment or within  ten days 
thereafter.”  HRPP Rule 5(b)(3) further specifies that if the 
defendant does not waive the right to a jury trial “at or before ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 
 
 the time of entry of a plea of not guilty,” the district court 
must “commit the defendant to the circuit court for tria l by 
jury.”  However, if the defendant waives the right to a jury 
trial at the circuit court, the case may be remanded to the 
district court.  HRPP Rule 5(b)(3)(iii).  In any event, neither 
court may proceed with the case until the waiver/demand decision 
is made.15  The waiver/demand hearing is therefore  a practical 
way for the district court to address a  process that is unique 
to misdemeanor cases.  It would be unfair to defendants to 
exclude the time for a hearing set by the district court as part 
of its responsibilities under the HRPP and the HRS.  And, 
indeed, it is the district court’s standard practice to include 
this waiver/demand hearing time in calculating when the trial 
must commence. 
 
Fourth, at oral argument, the State did not dispute 
Choy Foo’s representation that it is a regular practice to 
include the three-week continuance for a waiver/demand hearing 
in the HRPP Rule 48 calculation.  In other words, the trial 
courts already factor in the 21 day continuance for a 
waiver/demand hearing in the tim e period within which a 
                     
15  We agree with the Dissent that waiver or demand of the defendant’s 
right to a jury trial is a “critical stage” at which the defendant is 
entitled to have counsel.  Dissent at I.B.1.  However, we respectfully 
maintain that the defendant’s right to an attorney should not come at the 
expense of his or her HRPP Rule 48 rights.    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 
 
 misdemeanor defendant’s trial must commence.  Therefore, our 
ruling merely comports with the status quo, and would not create 
new problems, as theorized by the Dissent.   Dissent at Section 
I.B.2.  In addition, our decision does not prolong the time 
period to bring a misdemeanor defendant to trial, in contrast 
with the ICA and Dissent’s position, which contravenes an 
important purpose of Rule 48:  to ensure speedy trial for 
defendants in criminal cases.  
Fifth, and finally, if the dist rict court’s regular three 
week continuances were truly created to allow defendants to 
exercise their right to counsel, those continuances would be 
unjustified for defendants who already have counsel at 
arraignment.  Further, it would be particularly unfai
r to 
indigent defendants for the court to exclude this period when it 
coincides with their referral to the public defender’s office to 
exercise their right to appointment of counsel provided by 
statutory and constitutional law.16  If a defendant later appears 
without counsel, for whatever reason, that time may be properly 
                     
16  The court is required to refer an indigent person without counsel to 
the public defender’s office.  Haw. Const. art. I, § 14 (“The State shall 
provide counsel for an indigent defendant charged with an offense punishable 
by imprisonment.”); HRS § 802 -1 (2015) (providing that all indigent people 
faced with potential imprisonment are entitled to be represented by a public 
defender); HRS § 802- 2 (1985) (requiring the court to advise all defendants 
in criminal cases who appear without counsel that they have a right to 
counsel and that counsel may be appointed at no cost to them if they cannot 
afford counsel). 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 
 
 excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(3) if a continuance is granted at 
the defendant’s request.   However, an initial referral to the 
public defender is an indigent defendant’s statutory and 
constitutional right that should not be afforded to them at the 
expense of their HRPP Rule 48 rights.    
 Consequently, we conclude that the twenty
-one day period 
caused by the waiver/demand hearing was not excludable under 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(1).17  
B. Exclusion wa s also inappropriate under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) 
 HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) provides
, in relevant part, that “other 
periods of delay for good cause ” shall be excluded from trial 
commencement calculation.  This court has defined “good cause” 
to mean “a substantial re ason which affords a legal excuse,”  
Senteno, 69 Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 373 (citing Estencion , 63 
Haw. at 267, 625 P.2d at 1042), and has held that the good cause 
provision “is provided to take care of unanticipated 
circumstances,” State v. Gillis , 63 Haw. 285, 288, 626 P.2d 190, 
192 (1981).  Additionally, “a period is excludable as good cause 
                     
17  We also note that to the extent that Canencia  holds “a period of time 
in which the defendant is not represented by counsel is an excludable 
period,” it is overruled.  The text of HRPP Rule 48 does not support so broad 
a rule, and to hold otherwise would produce anomalous results.  See 
Keliipuleole v. Wilson , 85 Hawai i 217, 221- 22, 941 P.2d 300, 304- 05 (1997) 
(“A rational, sensible and practicable interpr etation [of a statute] is 
preferred to one which is unreasonable or impracticable” (alterations in 
original) (quoting State v. Lobendahn , 71 Haw. 111, 112, 784 P.2d 872, 873 
(1989)). 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 
 
 under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) if the events causing the delay are 
unanticipated and not reasonably foreseeable.”  Abregano , 136 
Hawaii at 498, 363 P.3d at 847 .  Most importantly, this court 
has said that “[w]hether a period of time is excludable as ‘good 
cause’ under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) is dependent on the facts of 
each case.”  136 Hawai i at 498–99, 363 P.3d at  847–48 (citation 
omitted).   
 As an alternate basis for its ruling in this case, the ICA 
concluded that the twenty-one day time period was excludable for 
good cause because the district court cannot anticipate whether 
a defendant will have counsel or will need counsel appointed for 
them until his or her first appearance in court.18  Choy Foo , 139 
Hawaii at 346, 389 P.3d at 941.  Respectfully, we disagree.  
Although the district court faces uncertainty with respect to 
individual defendants, i t is “reasonably foreseeable” that many 
defendants will make their initial appearance in district court 
without an attorney.  The district court can also foresee that 
indigent defendants will not already be represented by a private 
attorney, and cannot be represented by a public defender at 
their initial appearance: it is the district court itself that 
issues a referral to the public defender’s office.    
                     
18  The record indicates, however, that the district court continues cases 
for waiver/demand hearings even when defendants make their first appearance 
already represented by counsel.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 
 
  With respect to Choy Foo, the fact that he appeared without 
counsel at his first appearance was not unanticipated or 
reasonably unforeseeable, and therefore does not constitute 
“good cause” within the meaning of HRPP 48(c)(8).  
C. Application of Estencion Factors  
 The State argued, and Choy Foo conceded, that the circuit 
court erred in failing to evaluate and apply the Estencion  
factors before dismissing this case with prejudice.  See Hern, 
133 Hawai i at 64, 323 P.3d at 1246 (holding that “in determining 
whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice under HRPP 
Rule 48(b), the trial court must not only consider the Estencion  
factors, but must also clearly articul ate the effect of the 
Estencion factors and any other factor it considered in 
rendering its decision.”).  Although a party’s concession of 
error is not binding on this court, we conclude that it is well -
founded in this case.  See State v. Eduwensuyi , 141 Hawaii 328, 
___, 409 P.3d 732, 737 (January 18, 2018) (citing Territory v.  
Kogami, 37 Haw. 174, 175 (Haw. Terr. 1945) (holding that a 
prosecutor’s concession of error is entitled to “great weight,” 
but is not binding upon the appellate court )).  
 According ly, we remand the case to the circuit court for 
application of the Estencion  factors and articulation of 
necessary findings.  The factors the circuit court must consider ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 
 
 include, but are not limited to: “ the seriousness of the 
offense; the facts and the circumstances of the case which led 
to the dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the 
administration of this chapter and on the administration of 
justice.”  63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (citation omitted); 
see also State v. Fukuoka , 141 Hawai ‘i 48, 404 P.3d 314 (2017) 
(considering the principles applicable to the Estencion  factors 
that guide a trial court in exercising its discretion to dismiss 
a case with or without prejudice for a violation of HRPP Rule
 
48). 
V. Conclusion 
 The foregoing analysis is intended to clarify the 
application of HRPP Rule 48 to the district court’s practice in 
setting waiver/demand hearings for misdemeanor defendants.  When 
the district court initiallly  sets a misdemeanor case for 
waiver/demand hearing or continues arraignment for a waiver or 
demand of jury trial, this time period is not excludable from 
HRPP Rule 48 calculation under either subsection (c)(1) or 
(c)(8).  The circuit court did not err in dismissing this case 
for violation of HRPP Rule 48; however, the case 
must be 
remanded for proper consideration and application of the 
Estencion  factors as to whether the dismissal should have been 
with or without prejudice. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 
 
  We therefore vacate the ICA’s February 14, 2017 Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s April 5, 2013 “Order Granting 
Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss Charges for Violation of HRPP Rule 
48” to the extent it dismissed the charge against Choy Foo with 
prejudice and remand this case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Audrey L. Stanley 
for petitioner 
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
     /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
Brian R. Vincent 
for respondent   
 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 
