 1  
 
 
   
 
  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I  
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
HYE JA CHOI,  
Petitioner/Appellant-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
TACHIBANA ENTERPISES, LLC and  
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, 
Respondents/Appellees-Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-22-0000374 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-22-0000374; CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0001364) 
 
June 4, 2026 
 
DEVENS, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., AND  
CIRCUIT JUDGE HOLMA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
I. Introduction 
This secondary agency appeal arises out of the denial of 
unemployment benefits based on alleged “misconduct.”  As 
explained below, we hold that none of the three incidents 
alleged by the employer constituted misconduct as defined by Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-22-0000374
04-JUN-2026
07:58 AM
Dkt. 35 OP 2 Hawaiʻi unemploym ent law, and that the employee is therefore 
entitled to unemployment benefits.   
Hye Ja Choi (“Choi”) was terminated from her employment as 
a part-time airport guide at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic 
by her employer, Tachibana Enterprises, LLC (“Tachibana”).  She 
applied for unemployment benefits.  Tachibana asserted Choi was 
terminated due to three work-related incidents constituting 
misconduct that disqualified her from receiving unemployment 
benefits.  A Department of Labor and Industrial Relations’ 
Employment Security Appeals Referees’ Office (“DLIR”) appeals 
officer agreed with Tachibana and deemed Choi ineligible to 
receive unemployment benefits.  The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”)
1 and the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(“ICA”) affirmed.  This certiorari proceeding follows. 
Hawaiʻi’s unemployment law, Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) 
Chapter 383, was “enacted for the beneficent and humane purpose of relieving the stress of economic insecurity due to 
unemployment.”  Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216-17, 685 P.2d 
794, 797 (1984).   
“
Misconduct” that disqualifies an employee from receiving 
unemployment benefits is not “inefficiency, unsatisfactory 
conduct, poor performance because of inability or incapacity, 
 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.  
  3 isolated instances of ordinary negligence or inadvertence, or 
good-faith errors in judgment or discretion,” but instead are 
actions that “show a wilful or wanton disregard of the 
employer’s interests, such as deliberate violations of or 
deliberate disregard of the standards of behavior which the 
employer has a right to expect of an employee, or carelessness, 
or negligence of such a degree or recurrence as to show wrongful 
intent or evil design.”  Hawai‘ i Administrative Rules (“HAR”) § 
12-5-51(c) (eff. 1981).  
We hold that, under the circumstances of this case, 
Tachibana failed to meet its burden of proving that any of the 
three incidents upon which Tachibana relied satisfied this definition and standard of misconduct.  Hence, Choi is entitled 
to unemployment benefits.  We therefore vacate the DLIR, circuit 
court, and ICA decisions; and we remand to the DLIR for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion, including a 
determination of the amount of unemployment benefits to which 
Choi is entitled.   
 
II. Background 
A. Factual background From September 19, 2016 through March 30, 2020, Choi was 
employed as a part-time airport tour guide by Tachibana, a tour operations company that caters to Japanese speaking tourists.   4 Choi primarily worked at the Honolulu airport, escorting 
Japanese speaking guests to various Waikīkī locations by bus.   
At the time she was hired in 2016, Choi was issued and 
signed a 2012 employee handbook that contained an at-will 
employment clause.  Around the end of 2019, Tachibana revised 
the handbook and issued a directive for all employees to review 
and electronically sign a form acknowledging the revised 
handbook, which also contained an at-will clause.   
The stated deadline for employees to sign the 
acknowledgment was January 31, 2020.  But the Tachibana tour guide assistant manager responsible for informing Japanese 
speaking tour guides (Choi is not proficient in English and 
speaks Japanese and Korean) did not notify the tour guides 
regarding the acknowledgment requirement until February 7, 2020 
because she was “so busy at the time” and was unable to send the 
email to the guides by the January 31, 2020 deadline, “[s]o it 
was kind of late[.]”  
 
This was all occurring during the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic.  On March 4, 2020, then Governor Ige issued his first emergency proclamation in response to the pandemic.  See For Our 
Rights v. Ige, 151 
Hawai‘i 1, 3, 507 P.3d 531, 533 (App. 2022)  
   5 (detailing the State of Hawai‘i’s COVID-19 response).2  The 
Hawaiʻi Legislature announced it was recessing on March 16, 2020.  
S.C.R. 242, 30th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2020).  By this date, Choi 
was apparently the only Tachibana employee who had not signed 
the acknowledgement form.   
Choi
 said she did not sign the acknowledgement form because 
she did not understand the at-will clause and wanted an explanation meeting with Tachibana (and apparently did not know 
an at-will provision was already in the handbook she had signed 
at the outset of her employment).  The introduction page of the 
handbook instructed employees to read the handbook “carefully” 
before signing the “acknowledgment form” and further directed 
that if they did not understand or had any questions “about any 
information” in the handbook, they were to ask their supervisor about it, which is exactly what Choi did.   
At a March 16, 2020 meeting with Tachibana, Choi received 
what was titled a “Progressive Counseling and Corrective Action 
Notice” due to her “[r]efus[al] to submit Employee Handbook 
Acknowledgment, which was due on January 31, 2020, to her 
manager.”  This was the first written warning Choi had received 
as a Tachibana employee under its progressive discipline policy.  
 
2  Although the government’s response to the COVID- 19 pandemic is not in 
the record on appeal, we take judicial notice of it.  See State v. Kwong, 149 
Hawai‘i 106, 117, 482 P.3d 1067, 1078 (2021) (holding appellate courts have 
discretion to take judicial notice in the interests of justice).  
  6 The warning said that to correct her action, Choi was 
“[r]equired to submit all mandatory documents, whether it’s 
company or department required,” by April 14, 2020.  The written 
warning also said that her failure to comply by the April 14, 
2020 deadline, or any future violations, “may result in further 
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.”  This was 
the first time Choi was told by Tachibana that her failure to 
sign the acknowledgment form could lead to termination.   
Despite expressly telling Choi that she had until April 14, 
2020 to sign the acknowledgment, Tachibana terminated Choi on March 30, 2020, approximately two weeks before Tachibana’s 
corrective action deadline.  The termination notice said Choi 
had been given both a verbal and first written warning.  The 
termination notice further stated there had been “numerous 
complaints received on [Choi’s] unprofessional conduct, and 
insubordination towards management.”  The notice included 
descriptions of February 17 and February 20, 2020 customer service incidents not mentioned in the March 16, 2020 written 
warning, which allegedly violated Tachibana’s rules of conduct.   
B. DLIR proceedings 
After her termination from Tachibana’s employment, Choi 
filed for unemployment benefits.  On June 3, 2020, DLIR’s 
Unemployment Insurance Division (“UID”) initially granted Choi’s 
request for unemployment benefits (“UID Decision”).    7 Tachibana appealed the UID Decision, asserting Choi had 
been “involuntarily terminated for unprofessional conduct and 
insubordination.”  In its letter of appeal, Tachibana claimed 
that Choi was the “only employee to not submit the 
acknowledgment in on time[,]” although Tachibana’s internal emails showed that at least two other employees had not signed 
off on the handbook acknowledgment as of March 10, 2020.  
(Emphasis in original.)   
On July 8, 2020, a telephonic hearing was held before a 
DLIR appeals officer.  Three Tachibana representatives appeared: a human resources manager, a director, and a tour guide 
assistant manager.  Choi was apparently sent a copy of the 
hearing notice, but did not attend the July 8th hearing.   
At this hearing, Tachibana presented evidence about three 
incidents it contended constituted workplace misconduct by Choi: 
(1) her refusal to sign the acknowledgement form receiving the 
revised employee handbook; (2) an airport employee’s complaint of Choi’s unauthorized attempted use of a TSA gold lane for a 
family with a baby on February 17, 2020; and (3) a Japan 
Airlines complaint about Choi allegedly yelling at its staff on 
behalf of a Tachibana customer on February 20, 2020.
3   
 
3 Tachibana representatives also testified that Choi had several customer 
complaints dating back to 2018, but did not submit evidence on these prior 
incidents.     8 Although Tachibana briefly mentioned prior customer service 
complaints, it had made clear in the hearing that the first 
reason it had for termination was insubordination for Choi’s 
refusal to sign the acknowledgment form.   
On July 9, 2020, the appeals officer reversed the UID 
Decision, finding Choi was discharged for misconduct and 
therefore disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits.  
After Choi requested a reopening of the case, the appeals officer held a second telephonic hearing on August 24, 2020.  
Choi was provided a Japanese interpreter through a telephonic 
interpretation service.  The same three Tachibana 
representatives were present.   
Choi contested Tachibana’s characterization of the three 
incidents.  Because her testimony through the interpreter was 
difficult to understand, the appeals officer entered Choi’s 
documents into the record, which Choi apparently agreed would 
serve as her rebuttal to Tachibana’s evidence of discharge for misconduct.   
On September 4, 2020, the appeals officer issued his 
“DECISION IN THE MATTER OF: 2004430 (REOPENING)” (“DLIR appeals 
officer’s decision”), which reaffirmed his initial decision  
   9 reversing the UID Decision.  The appeals officer ruled that the 
three incidents led to Choi’s discharge due to misconduct:  
1. Insubordination: The hard copy Employee Handbook, 
initially issued in 2012 was revised and electronically 
posted on- line effective January 1, 2020.  Ex. 16.  In 
December 2019, employer issued a directive for all 
employees to review and electronically sign their 
acknowledgment that they had read the revised Employee 
Handbook.  The deadline to do this was January 31, 2020.  
The only major change was converting the timekeeping process from manual to on- line.  There was no change to 
the employment provision (EP) that the employer was an “at will employer.”  By mid- March 2020, [Choi] was the 
only employee who had not complied, alleging that she did not sign because she disagreed with parts of the handbook, particularly the EP, which she also claimed 
she did not understand.  As a result of her repeated 
non-compliance, [Choi] was issued a written warning for 
insubordination on March 16, 2020 and told to comply as soon as possible.  
2. February 17, 2020 Customer Service Complaint: [Choi]’s supervisor received a complaint from an airport staff 
person that [C hoi] had attempted to but was prevented by 
Airport TSA from having a regularly ticketed passenger 
with a baby go through the “Gold Lane” security 
checkpoint instead of the regular ticketed security 
checkpoint.  This was a violation of TSA airport 
security regulations which [Choi] should have been aware 
of based on her past training.  The airport staff person also reported that her interaction with [C hoi] was 
unpleasant, and that this was not the first time that [Choi] had tried to improperly use the “Gold Lane.” 
 
3. February 20, 2020 Customer Service Complaint: While [Choi] was assisting her tour group in checking in for 
their flight with an important airline/business partner 
of the employer, someone in the tour group requested a 
seat change.  While the airline staff was making the 
change, [Choi] directed a loud false statement to the airline staff that the change process was taking too 
long and that the seat change requestor was complaining.  
When the airport staff manager came out to apologize to 
the requestor, he/she reported that they were not 
complaining and understood the delay and that the airline staff was doing them a favor.  Airline staff 
management reported the incident to the employer to 
remind [Choi] about acting appropriately to maintain a 
good business partner relationship.  
 
   10 +The appeals officer further summarized Choi’s testimony 
and her response to Tachibana’s appeal: 
In her reopening request, Ex15, and at the reopened 
hearing, [Choi] explained that she did not sign the 
acknowledgment because she did not understand it; she was being forced to sign to acknowledge policies and procedures 
that were not in the handbook; she was subjecting herself 
to disciplinary action including termination at any time, 
without prior notice and without cause; she had never 
signed such an employment document; and she was afraid and felt under duress.  Regarding the February 17, 2020 
customer service complaint, [Choi] maintained that she did 
not do anything wrong.  She alleged that TSA staff told her that they recently changed their “Gold Lane” rules.  
Regarding the February 20, 2020 customer service complaint, she again maintained she did not do anything wrong.  Her 
clients/passengers had been waiting too long and [Choi] 
felt it was her responsibility to speak up on their behalf.  
Finally, [Choi] asserted that she was wrongfully terminated 
in retaliation for filing complaints about upper management’s alleged wrongdoing. 
 
Because Choi was an at-will employee, the appeals officer 
explained that the relevant determination was whether she was 
discharged for misconduct, not whether she was wrongfully 
terminated.  Referring to misconduct factors outlined in HAR § 
12-5-51, the appeals officer concluded:  
The prior training and warnings [Choi] received were an 
indication of [Tachibana]’s efforts to maintain her 
employment despite her continual unsatisfactory work 
performance and insubordinate conduct.  The evidence shows 
that [Choi], instead of recognizing her performance and 
conduct shortcomings and trying to improve and comply as expected, disregarded these efforts as evidenced by her 
recurring customer/client service complaints and 
insubordinate refusal to electronically sign the Employee 
Handbook Acknowledgement for no valid reason.  Although [Choi] has denied committing any deliberate wrongdoing 
associated with the two complaints, and it remains in 
dispute as to what actually happened, there is no dispute 
that [Choi]’s actions were construed to be so objectionable 
as to warrant filing a complaint with the employer.  Such 
actions had an adverse and undermining effect on the employer’s business operations.  Therefore, it is concluded 
that [Choi]’s recurring customer service complaints and her 
continual deliberate disobedience to a reasonable employer directive to acknowledge the revised employee handbook were  11 attributed to a gross neglect of duty and a deliberate 
disregard of the standards of behavior an employer has a 
right to expect of an employee in [Choi]’s position.  
Accordingly, [Choi] was discharged for misconduct connected 
with work. 
C. Appellate proceedings 
1. Circuit court proceedings 
Choi appealed the DLIR appeals officer’s decision, which 
after oral argument, was affirmed by the circuit court.4  In a 
May 11, 2022 written order, the circuit court concluded: 
1. There is no basis in the record or in the written or 
oral arguments to show any abuse of discretion by 
Appellee DLIR; 
2. There is adequate support in the record for all 
factual conclusions made by Employment Security 
Appeals Referees’ Office’s (ESARO) Appeals Officer, 
James Hom; 
3. There is no error by the ESARO Appeals Officer James 
Hom; and 
4. None of the provisions of HRS § 9l- l4(g) are present 
to justify reversal, modification, or remand of this 
case. 
 
The circuit court entered its final judgment on the same day.   
2. ICA proceedings 
Choi timely appealed to the ICA, raising arguments 
regarding (1) the evidence considered by the DLIR appeals officer and circuit court, and (2) the quality of the language 
interpretation services provided to her.  Choi also argued the 
circuit court and DLIR failed to provide written notices in her 
native language and a competent interpreter, which she contended 
 
4 A transcript of the April 1, 2022 oral argument before the circuit 
court is not in the record.  From the circuit court’s minutes, it appears a 
Korean-English interpreter interpreted for C hoi.   
  12 was in direct violation of HRS § 321C-3 (Supp. 2012).5  Tachibana 
argued that the 
DLIR appeals officer’s findings were not clearly 
erroneous and that Choi was provided with interpreter services 
as required by law.   
The ICA 
agreed with Tachibana and rejected Choi’s 
arguments.  Choi v. Tachibana Enters., LLC, No. CAAP-22-0000374, 
2025 WL 1541655, at *3 (Haw. App. May 30, 2025) (SDO).  The ICA concluded the appeals officer did not clearly err in determining that Choi “was discharged for misconduct connected with work” 
due to a March 16, 2020 insubordination warning and two customer 
service complaints in February 2020 and was provided with an 
opportunity to present her arguments with interpreters present.  
Id.  
 
5 HRS § 321C-3 states in relevant part: 
 
(a)  Each state agency and all covered entities shall take 
reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to services, 
programs, and activities by limited English proficient 
persons, which will be determined by a totality of circumstances
[.] 
 
. . . .
 
 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a), each state agency and covered entity shall provide competent, timely oral 
language services to limited English proficient persons who 
seek to access services, programs, or activities.
 
 
(c)  Subject to subsection (a), each state agency and covered entity shall provide written translations of vital 
documents to limited English proficient persons who seek to 
access services, programs, or activities
[.] 
  13 3. Certiorari proceedings  
In her certiorari application, Choi, continuing as a self-
represented litigant with limited English proficiency,6 raised 
the same arguments she raised below.  Neither Tachibana nor the 
DLIR filed a response.   
At oral argument, Choi was represented by counsel appointed 
through the Appellate Pro Bono Project.7   
III.  Standard of Review 
On secondary appeal, “[t]he standard of review is one in 
which this court must determine whether the circuit court was 
right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth 
in HRS § 91-14(g) to the agency’s decision[.]”  Flores v. Bd. of 
Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawaiʻi 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 475 (2018) 
(cleaned up).   
 
6  Choi apparently used Google translate to translate documents in the 
record from Japanese or Korean into English.  
 
7  At oral argument, Korean- English interpretation was provided to Choi 
pursuant to Hawai‘i Judiciary Policy #12, which provides:   
 
The Hawai‘ i State Judiciary is committed to providing 
meaningful access to court processes and services to 
persons with limited English proficiency.  In all case 
types, the Judiciary shall reasonably provide, free of 
charge, and in a timely manner, competent court interpreters for parties, witnesses and individuals with a 
substantial interest in a case.  It shall also provide language assistance services at points of contact with the 
Judiciary, including over
-the-counter and over- the-
telephone encounters for all Judiciary- related business.  
The Judiciary shall notify the public of the Judiciary’s language assistance commitment.
 
 
  14 HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016) provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions;  
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency;  
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;  (4) Affected by other error of law;  
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized b y 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise 
of discretion. 
 
“Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable 
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding 
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under 
subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of discretion under 
subsection (6).”  Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 
Hawaiʻi 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004) (cleaned up). 
IV. Discussion 
A. “Misconduct” that disqualifies an employee from receiving 
unemployment benefits law 
Hawaiʻi’s unemployment law was “enacted for the beneficent 
and humane purpose of relieving the stress of economic 
insecurity due to unemployment” and must therefore be liberally 
construed for the benefit of the public.  Camara, 67 Haw. at 
216-17, 685 P.2d at 797.  The intent of the unemployment law is 
to pay benefits to those who become involuntarily unemployed  15 through no fault of their own.  Medeiros v. Dep’t of Lab. & 
Indus. Rels., 108 258, 266, 118 P.3d 1201, 1209 (2005). Hawaiʻi 
These underlying purposes were particularly salient during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, which gave rise to an estimated forty 
percent unemployment rate in March and April of 2020 in Hawaiʻ i’s 
tourism industry.  See Department of Business, Economic 
Development & Tourism, Hawaii’s Labor Market Impact During COVID-19 (Apr. 2021).
8  
But entitlement to unemployment benefits is not absolute.  
The law disqualifies employees who were discharged or suspended 
for misconduct.  HRS § 383-30(2) (2015) provides: 
An individual shall be disqualified for benefits: 
 
. . . . 
 (2)  Discharge or suspension for misconduct . . . For any 
week beginning on and after October 1, 1989, in which the individual has been discharged for misconduct connected 
with work, and until the individual has, subsequent to the 
week in which the discharge occurred, been paid wages in covered employment equal to not less than five times the 
individual’s weekly benefit amount as determined under 
section 383- 22(b). 
 
HAR § 12–5–51(c) defines what actions constitute the 
misconduct that can disqualify an employee from receiving 
unemployment benefits:   
(c)  Misconduct connected with work consists of actions 
which show a wilful or wanton disregard of the employer’s 
interests, such as deliberate violations of or deliberate 
disregard of the standards of behavior which the employer 
has a right to expect of an employee, or carelessness, or negligence of such a degree or recurrence as to show 
 
8  https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/archive/reports/COVID-
19%20Labor%20Market%20Impact.pdf [https://perma.cc/24PF- BWKT].  16 wrongful intent or evil design.  Mere inefficiency, 
unsatisfactory conduct, poor performance because of 
inability or incapacity, isolated instances of ordinary 
negligence or inadvertence, or good- faith errors in 
judgment or discretion are not misconduct.  The misconduct shall be related to the work of the individual or the individual’s status as an employee. 
 
HAR § 12–5–51(d) then lists the evidence the DLIR is to 
consider in determining whether misconduct exists:  
(d)  In determining whether an individual’s act constituted “misconduct” the [DLIR] shall consider any relevant 
evidence presented which relates to: 
 
(1)  Employee’s reasons for the act or omission, and efforts to avoid the act or failure to act;  
(2)  The relevant circumstances of the case and any 
causative effect therefrom upon the employee’s 
actions;  
(3)  The nature and importance to the employer of the offended interest of the employer; 
 
(4)  Any lawful and reasonable company policy or 
custom;  
(5)  Employer’s actions to curtail or prevent, if possible, the objectionable conduct; and  
(6)  The nature of the act or failure to act. 
 
HAR § 12–5–51(e) provides specific examples of misconduct:   
(e)  Situations where misconduct may be found include, but  
are not limited to, the following where the evidence 
demonstrates: 
(1)  Unexcused absence or recurring unexcused tardiness; or 
(2)  Altercation at work; or (3)  Material false representations by the employee 
to the employer; or  (4)  Employee’ s gross neglect of duty; or  
(5)  Employee’ s wilful disobedience of employer’ s 
directives or employee’ s insubordination; or  
(6)  Intentional conversion of employer's property by 
the employee; or  (7)  Employee’ s unauthorized use of intoxicants on 
the job; or  (8)  Employee’ s wilful and substantial abuse of the 
employer’ s equipment or property. 
 
As can be seen, the law sets a relatively high bar to 
establish misconduct disqualifying an employee from receiving 
unemployment benefits — which effectuates HRS Chapter 383’s  17 broad humanitarian purpose.  And the burden of proof is on the 
employer to show that the claimant was discharged for 
misconduct.  Medeiros, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 262, 118 P.3d at 1205.   
We now discuss some relevant case law. 
In Camara, this court held that a gas company truck driver, 
who was terminated for crossing a solid line on the highway 
resulting in a traffic accident, was not disqualified from 
receiving unemployment benefits based on misconduct.  67 Haw. at 
214, 685 P.2d at 796.  This court noted the employee felt he 
could safely pass and would have safely passed absent negligence 
by another vehicle.  67 Haw. at 218, 685 P.2d at 798.  In light 
of this evidence, this court held the driver’s conduct was inconsistent with the DLIR appeals officer’s conclusion the 
employee acted in wilful and wanton disregard of the employer’s 
interest.  Id.   
But in Hardin v. Akiba, 84 Hawai ʻi 305, 316, 933 P.2d 1339, 
1350 (1997), we held “the wilful or wanton disregard of the 
employer’s interests” requirement had been met.  There, an 
employee was discharged based on an unexcused absence after 
numerous counseling sessions and notice from her employer 
regarding her poor dependability.  Hardin, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 318, 933 
P.2d at 1352.  The employer had engaged the employee in its 
formal progressive disciplinary process, and the employee had   18 received numerous formal and informal counseling sessions on her 
absenteeism.  Hardin, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 308, 933 P.2d at 1342.   
This court indicated that the employer’s progressive 
discipline practices are to be considered in determining whether 
an employee acted in wilful or wanton disregard of the 
employer’s interests.  Hardin, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 318, 933 P.2d at 
1352.  In that case, the final incident of absenteeism 
constituted misconduct justifying denial of unemployment 
benefits because of the surrounding circumstances and the 
employer’s previous actions to curtail the objectional conduct.  
Id.  The employee “knew or should have known that her job would 
be in jeopardy” and still made a conscious decision in face of 
this risk to have an unexcused absence, which demonstrated a 
wilful or wanton disregard of employer’s interests.  Id.  
Similarly, in Keanini v. Akiba, 93 Hawaiʻ i 75, 82, 996 P.2d 
280, 287 (App. 2000), a bus driver was terminated after his 
driver’s license was suspended, including for not having no-
fault insurance coverage.  The ICA concluded the employee “knew 
or should have known that his job would be in jeopardy if he 
chose to drive uninsured,” and that he made a “conscious 
decision in the face of this risk” to do precisely that, which 
demonstrated a “wilful or wanton disregard” and constituted 
misconduct.  Keanini, 93 Hawaiʻi at 82-83, 996 P.2d at 287-88 
(cleaned up).  Although the employer never explicitly told the  19 employee to maintain his license, the ICA ruled it “goes without 
saying” that an employee must maintain their license to be a 
truck driver, and that his conduct in driving without insurance 
and getting his license suspended was in wilful and wanton 
disregard of the employer’s interest.  Keanini, 93 Hawaiʻ i at 83, 
996 P.2d at 288. 
In Medeiros, this court ruled that “the level of 
culpability required to show wilful or wanton disregard is not 
subjective intent, but conscious disregard of a known (or which 
should have been known) risk with respect to a result of the 
conduct.”  108 Hawaiʻ i at 268, 118 P.3d at 1211.  There, an 
employee was terminated after placing her hands around her co-worker’s neck.  108 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 118 P.3d at 1214.  This court 
concluded that the employee “knew or should have known that her 
job would be in jeopardy” if she violated her employer’s zero 
tolerance policy regarding violence in the workplace.  Id. 
We now apply the law defining misconduct to the incidents 
alleged by Tachibana. 
B.
 Tachibana did not meet its burden to prove that Choi was 
discharged for workplace misconduct  
Here, the DLIR appeals officer determined that Choi was 
terminated due to work related misconduct based on three 
incidents: (1) Choi’s refusal to sign an acknowledgement of 
receiving a revised employee handbook; (2) an airport employee’s   20 complaint of Choi’s attempted unauthorized use of a TSA gold 
lane for a family with a baby; and (3) a Japan Airlines 
complaint about Choi yelling at its staff on behalf of a 
Tachibana customer.   
For the reasons that follow, we hold that, under these 
circumstances, Tachibana did not meet its burden of establishing 
that any of the incidents satisfied the definition of misconduct 
under Hawaiʻ i law governing unemployment benefits. 
 1. Failure to sign employee handbook acknowledgement 
As noted, Tachibana alleged that it directed all its 
employees to review and electronically sign by January 31, 2020 
an acknowledgement that they had read the revised employee handbook.  However, the tour guide assistant manager testified 
at the second DLIR hearing that the initial email notification 
to the tour guides requesting their signed acknowledgment was 
sent on February 7, 2020, a week after the January 31, 2020 
deadline had passed.
9  The assistant manager was asked, “why was 
it sent out at that time after the date of January 31st?”  She explained that it was sent out “late” because she “was so busy at the time, so I couldn’t, uh, uh, send the email to the 
guides, by, uh, January 31st.  So it was kind of late [.]”  In 
other words, Tachibana’s claim that Choi “refused” to sign the 
 
9  The email sent by the tour guide assistant manager requesting that Choi 
and the other tour guides sign the acknowledgment form was actually dated 
February 8, 2020.    21 acknowledgment by the stated deadline of January 31, 2020 was 
actually due to the tardy request sent to Choi after the 
deadline had already lapsed.  Thus, Tachibana’s March 16, 2020 written warning issued to Choi stating that she had “refused” to 
submit the handbook acknowledgment “which was due on January 31, 
2020,” misstated the uncontroverted factual record.   
Choi also apparently did not sign the acknowledgement form 
because she did not know an at-will provision was already in the handbook she had signed at the outset of her employment and 
wanted to meet with Tachibana for an explanation of the 
provision.  As stated, the handbook directed an employee who had 
questions about the handbook to “ask your supervisor/manager,” 
which is the course of action Choi pursued.   
At the March 16, 2020 meeting, Tachibana issued Choi a 
written warning, noting it was her first written warning, due to 
her “[r]efus[al] to submit Employee Handbook Acknowledgment, 
which was due on January 31, 2020, to her manager.”  As noted earlier, Tachibana did not send an email to the tour guides 
regarding the acknowledgment requirement until February 7, 2020, 
indicating that the deadline was actually flexible.    
In line with our reasoning in Hardin, the employer’s 
application of its disciplinary process to the discharged 
employee is evidence to be considered in determining whether an 
employee’s act constituted misconduct.  84 Hawaiʻ i at 318, 933  22 P.2d at 1352; see HAR § 12-5-51(d)(4)-(5) (noting the DLIR shall 
consider relevant evidence as it relates to the “[e]mployer’s 
actions to curtail or prevent, if possible, the objectional 
conduct” and “lawful and reasonable company policy or custom”).   
Critically, here, the March 16, 2020 written warning, which 
was Choi’s first, gave her until April 14, 2020, to submit her 
signature.  The written warning also told her for the first time 
that her failure to sign, by April 14, 2020, “may result in 
further disciplinary action, up to and including termination.”  
The DLIR appeals officer’s finding that the written warning told 
Choi she must comply “as soon as possible” was therefore clearly 
erroneous.  And despite giving Choi until April 14, 2020 to 
sign, Tachibana, without further warning, prematurely terminated 
Choi’s employment on March 30, 2020.  
 As Tachibana terminated Choi’s employment before the 
reasonable corrective deadline it had set, it failed to follow 
its own progressive discipline policy.  Under these circumstances, Tachibana did not meet its burden of proving that 
Choi’s failure to sign the acknowledgement form constituted 
misconduct.  
Whether or not Choi’s failure to sign the acknowledgement 
form by March 30, 2020 constituted “unsatisfactory conduct” or 
“good-faith errors in judgment or discretion,” it clearly was 
not an action that “show[ed] a wilful or wanton disregard of the   23 employer’s interests, such as deliberate violations of or 
deliberate disregard of the standards of behavior which the 
employer has a right to expect of an employee, or carelessness, 
or negligence of such a degree or recurrence as to show wrongful 
intent or evil design,” as required by HAR § 12-5-51(c).  Not 
when Tachibana had set an April 14, 2020 deadline and first 
notified Choi that she needed to sign the handbook 
acknowledgement after the initial January 31, 2020 deadline had expired. 
 2. February 17 and 20, 2020 customer service complaint 
  incidents 
 
Tachibana also argues that Choi was terminated for 
misconduct because she violated its standards prohibiting “[d]iscourtesy in any form or disrespect, rudeness or otherwise unprofessional behavior to customers or employees” based on the 
two complaints for incidents on February 17 and 20, 2020.   
Tachibana also failed to meet its burden of establishing 
that the incidents constituted unemployment benefit-
disqualifying misconduct.  Neither incident displayed a “wilful 
or wanton disregard of the employer’s interests.”  See § HAR 12-
5-51(c).   
On February 17, 2020, Choi attempted to allow a regularly-
ticketed family with a baby through a TSA gold priority lane.  
On February 20, 2020, she apparently raised her voice at an   24 airline agent in an attempt to expedite seat changes for her 
Tachibana customers.  Neither constituted “a wilful or wanton 
disregard of the employer’s interests.”  
Granted, repeated incidents of this nature could eventually 
lead to a finding of a “wilful or wanton disregard of the 
employer’s interests,” as Tachibana has a clear interest in 
maintaining good relationships with TSA and airline 
representatives.  But although Tachibana listed these incidents as reasons for Choi’s termination in the March 30, 2020 
termination notice, it did not mention them in the March 16, 
2020 progressive discipline written warning.  The written 
warning said that any future violations after March 16, 2020 
“may result in further disciplinary action, up to and including termination.”  But Tachibana did not provide evidence of any 
violations after the written warning was issued. 
We note that Keanini and Medeiros discussed above 
demonstrate that one act or omission of an employee can sometimes constitute misconduct as a “wilful and wanton 
disregard of an employer’s interest.”  See Keanini, 93 Hawaiʻ i at 
82, 996 P.2d at 287; Medeiros, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 118 P.3d at 
1214.  Also, Hardin shows that a single incident that otherwise 
would not qualify as misconduct could lead to a misconduct 
determination based on repeated violations through a progressive 
discipline policy.  See 84 Hawaiʻ i
 at 318, 933 P.2d at 1352.     25 Tachibana had such a progressive discipline policy.  The 
DLIR appeals officer referred to nondescript customer service 
complaint incidents involving Choi mentioned by Tachibana during 
the hearings, which had apparently led to verbal warnings from 
Tachibana.   
But no prior incidents had led to any written warnings from 
Tachibana.  And Tachibana made it clear at the hearing that the 
first reason it had for termination was “insubordination” for her refusal to sign the acknowledgment form.  Then, the March 
16, 2020 warning was Choi’s first written warning, and only 
mentioned Choi’s failure to sign the acknowledgment form.  It 
did not mention anything else.   
We stress that the issue here is not whether Choi, an at-
will employee, was wrongfully terminated.  The issue is whether 
she was terminated for misconduct as defined by Hawai
ʻi 
unemployment law.  We hold that, under the facts and 
circumstances of this case, Tachibana failed to meet its burden 
of proving that any of the three incidents constituted such 
misconduct.   
As Tachibana failed to prove that Choi was discharged for 
actions constituting misconduct and she is therefore entitled to unemployment benefits, we need not address her argument that the 
impending COVID-19 pandemic played a role in her discharge.
   26 For the same reasons, we need not reach Choi’s assertions 
regarding inadequate language access services.  We note, 
however, that in civil cases, HRS Chapter 321C regarding 
language access and Judiciary Policy #12 animate rights inhering 
in Article I, Section 5 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution.10 
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the ICA’s July 8, 
2025 judgment on appeal that affirmed the circuit court’s May 
11, 2022 order and final judgment, which affirmed the DLIR 
appeals officer’s September 4, 2020 decision.  We remand to the 
DLIR for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Lance D. Collins   
for petitioner    
Hye Ja Choi    
 Jessica M. Sneed-Wong  for respondent   
Tachibana Enterprises, LLC   /s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
  
  
     /s/ Karin L. Holma 
 
  
     
 
10  Article I, Section 5 provides: 
 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property 
without due process of law, nor be denied the equal protection of the laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the 
person’s civil rights or be discriminated against in the 
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or ancestry.
  
