*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
JAMES B. NUTTER & COMPANY, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
ELTON LANE NAMAHOE, SR., 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT,
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-17-0000496 
 
CERTIORARI FROM THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000496; CIVIL NO. 12-1-0113) 
 
MARCH 31, 2023 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
 Elton Lane Namahoe, Sr. lost his home to a judicial 
foreclosure of a reverse mortgage after he allegedly failed to Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000496
31-MAR-2023
07:46 AM
Dkt. 24 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
2 
 make $500.00 worth of repairs.  The lender, James B. Nutter 
Company (JBNC), brought a foreclosure proceeding against Namahoe 
for allegedly “default[ing] in the observance and performance of 
the terms, covenants and conditions [of his mortgage] by failing 
to repair the property as required by the Repair Rider to the 
Loan Agreement in a timely manner.”     
In the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, JBNC filed 
a Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure against 
Namahoe, which the court granted.  More than two and a half 
years after the foreclosure, Namahoe filed a 
Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b) (2006) Motion for Relief from 
Judgment, specifically citing subsections 60(b)(3), (4), and (6).  The circuit court denied these motions, in addition to 
Namahoe’s subsequently filed HRCP Rule 59 (2000) Motion for 
Reconsideration.
1   
  On appeal to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), Namahoe argued that JBNC sought foreclosure on impermissible 
grounds and that: (1) the circuit court abused its discretion in 
denying Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion because JBNC and its 
attorneys committed fraud in seeking the foreclosure; (2) under 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), the circuit court’s judgment was void because he was not properly served; (3) under HRCP Rule 
 
1  The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
3 
 60(b)(6), JBNC committed fraud on the court by failing to 
disclose the facts supporting foreclosure and by failing to 
satisfy statutory attorney affirmation requirements; and (4) the 
circuit court erred in denying his HRCP Rule 59 Motion for 
Reconsideration.   
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s judgment in favor 
of JBNC.  James B. Nutter & Co. v. Namahoe, No. CAAP-17-0000496, 
2022 WL 899896 at *12 (App. March 28, 2022).  In his application for certiorari, Namahoe asks this court to vacate the ICA’s 
judgment affirming the circuit court’s denial of his motions brought under HRCP Rule 60(b) and Rule 59.   
  We resolve Namahoe’s appeal as follows.  We agree with 
the ICA that the circuit court did not err in finding that 
Namahoe was time-barred from raising a HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion 
and that, under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), the judgment was not void, 
because he was personally served.  Further, the ICA and circuit 
court did not err in rejecting Namahoe’s Rule 59 Motion for Reconsideration.  
  
 But we conclude that the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of Namahoe’s request for relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6).  Specifically, we hold that there are 
grounds for relief both on a fraud on the court theory and under 
the equitable principles governing foreclosure.  JBNC submitted 
a materially deficient attorney affirmation to the circuit court *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
4 
 (continued . . .) in support of its motion for summary judgment, and the balance 
of equities weighed strongly against foreclosure.  Accordingly, 
we reverse the circuit court’s denial of Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 
60(b)(6) motion and vacate the Decree of Foreclosure insofar as 
it would otherwise preclude Namahoe from asserting a wrongful 
foreclosure counterclaim. 
II.  BACKGROUND 
A.  
Foreclosure and Circuit Court Proceedings 
 
This case centers around a home equity conversion 
mortgage (reverse mortgage)2 on Elton Lane Namahoe, Sr.’s home, 
which is located in Kurtistown, Hawaiʻ i.  Namahoe’s lender, JBNC, 
through its former attorneys Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice & 
Nervell (Clay Chapman), brought a foreclosure action against 
Namahoe for allegedly “default[ing] in the observance and 
performance of the terms, covenants and conditions by failing to 
repair the property as required by the Repair Rider to the Loan 
Agreement in a timely manner.”  Specifically, JBNC sought 
foreclosure based on Namahoe’s alleged failure to complete 
$500.00 worth of repairs to his home.3   
 
2  Although the loan at issue is more precisely a home equity 
conversion mortgage, this opinion refers to the broader term “reverse 
mortgage” for the sake of consistency with the parties’ briefs, circuit court 
orders, and ICA opinion.  
   
3  Lenders are required to set aside 150% of the estimated cost of 
repairs.  24 C.F.R. § 206.19(f)(1) ( 2009).  Because the Repair Rider set *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
5 
 1.  
Reverse mortgage loan agreement 
   On October 19, 2009, Namahoe executed a promissory 
note (Note) in favor of JBNC for the maximum principal sum of 
$189,000.00.  The agreement also included a home equity 
conversion loan agreement (Loan Agreement) and a Repair Rider.  
Namahoe also executed, as mortgagor, an adjustable rate home 
equity conversion mortgage (Security Instrument) securing the 
Note and Loan Agreement and incorporating his property located 
at 16-1218 ʻ Ōpeʻapeʻa Road, Kurtistown (Property) into the 
mortgage.  According to the Loan Agreement, out of a “Principal 
Limit” of $67,536.00, Namahoe was to receive a “Loan Advance” of 
$52,462.48.  The remaining balance was to cover the “Servicing Fee Set Aside,” closing costs, and funds designated for repairs.   
2.  Alleged breach of the Repair Rider 
 
JBNC alleged that Namahoe “defaulted in the observance 
and performance of the terms, covenants and conditions” of the Repair Rider by failing to make timely repairs on the Property.  
The Repair Rider, in relevant part, states: 
THIS REPAIR RIDER is made on October 19, 2009, 
and is incorporated into and shall be deemed to 
supplement the Loan Agreement of the same date made 
by the undersigned Lender and the undersigned Borrower and the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development (“S ecretary”). 
 
(. . . continued)  
aside a total of $750.00 for repairs, this indicates an estimated $500.00 
cost of repairs.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
6 
 I.  Lender’s Promises 
A.  The Lender shall set aside $750.00 from the 
initial Principal Limit under the Loan 
Agreement to be used for the purpose of 
bringing the Property up to the property 
standards required by the Secretary [of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD)] by repairing:  
The hall and carport ceiling shows evidence of 
water stains due to roof leak.  The Front stair 
rail showed evidence of
 water rot.  All to be 
repaired. 
 
. . . 
 
C.  The Lender shall require one or more inspections by a
 HUD-approved inspector during 
the course of the repair work.   The Lender 
shall not release any funds for work which is not complete and which is not approved by a 
HUD-approved inspector.  The Lender certifies 
by executing this Repair Rider that the repairs 
which are funded under this Repair Rider will 
be completed in a manner to meet HUD property 
standards required by the Secretary as 
determined by a HUD- approved inspector. 
 
. . . 
 
E.  Until a HUD
-approved inspector finds that 
all repairs required by Section I.A. of this 
Repair Rider have been completed in a satisfactory manner, the Lender shall not 
release funds in excess of (i) the total value 
of work satisfactorily completed, and (ii) the 
value of materials or equipment delivered to, and suitably stored at, the site but not yet incorporated in the work, less (iii) ten 
percent heldback, less (iv) prior advances 
under this Repair Rider. 
 
II.  Borrower’s Promises 
A.  The Borrower will complete all repairs 
required by Section I.A. of this Repair Rider so that the Property meets the property 
standards required by the Secretary as determined by a HUD- approved inspector. 
 
B.  Borrower shall cause work to begin on 
October 19, 2009.  Borrower shall have work 
completed by October 18, 2010.  Work is to be 
performed with reasonable diligence.  Should 
Borrower fail to comply with these terms, until 
all repair work is satisfactorily completed 
Borrower shall not request and Lender shall not 
make any further payments under the Loan 
Agreement except for payment of repairs *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
7 
 required by Section I.A. of this Repair Rider 
and Loan Advances required under Section 4.5. 
of the Loan Agreement. 
 
. . . 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
 
As a result of Namahoe’s alleged failure to complete 
the enumerated repairs, JBNC demanded immediate payment in full 
of all outstanding principal and accrued interest arising from 
the reverse mortgage.4  Although the Repair Rider does not 
include an acceleration provision, section 9(b) of the Security 
Instrument states that JBNC may require “immediate payment in 
full of all sums secured by this Security Instrument, upon 
approval by an authorized representative of the Secretary, if: . 
. . (iii) [a]n obligation of the Borrower under this Security 
Instrument is not performed.”  Thus, a failure to satisfy the 
duty to repair under the Repair Rider may qualify as a 
sufficient breach to require immediate payment.   
JBNC was required to notify Namahoe and the Secretary 
of HUD (Secretary) if the loan ever became due and payable under 9(b), and was limited in its right to pursue foreclosure by the 
terms of the Security Instrument:  
 
4  Compliance with the Repair Rider was to be determined by a    
HUD-approved inspector.  As set forth below, the record does not establish 
whether any HUD- approved inspectors surveyed the repairs or reported any 
deficiencies with Namahoe’s repair work.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
8 
 Lender shall not have the right to commence 
foreclosure until Borrower has had thirty (30) days 
after notice to either: 
 
(i) Correct the matter which resulted in the 
Security Instrument coming due and payable; or 
 
(ii) Pay the balance in full; or  
(iii) Sell the Property for the lesser of the 
balance or 95% of the appraised value and 
apply the net proceeds of the sale toward 
the balance; or 
 
(iv) Provide the Lender with a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure. 
 
   The Loan Agreement and Note outlined the process for 
notice.  The Loan Agreement provided, in relevant part:  
6.3.  Notices.  Any notice to Borrower provided for in this 
Loan Agreement shall be given by delivering it or by 
mailing it by first class mail unless applicable law 
requires use of another method.  The notice shall be 
directed to the property address shown in the Security 
Instrument or any other address all Borrowers jointly 
designate.   
 
  The Note provided: 
  
9.  GIVING OF NOTICES 
Unless applicable law requires a different method, any 
notice that must be given to Borrower under this Note will 
be given by delivering it or by mailing  it by first class 
mail to Borrower at the Property address above or at a 
different address if Borrower has given Lender a notice of 
Borrower’s different address. 
 
(Emphases added.)  
JBNC mailed a letter to Namahoe’s P.O. Box on  
November 16, 2011 titled “Notice of Intent to Foreclose.”  The 
letter stated:  
  Our records reflect that a default now exists on the 
above referenced loan.  The default consists of the failure 
to repair the property as required by the Repair Rider to 
the Loan Agreement in a timely manner.  As a result your 
loan has been called due and payable because of non-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
9 
 compliance with the Deed of Trust/Mortgage securing the 
Promissory Note underlying this home loan.  
 
. . . 
 
 
 This letter serves as further notice that [JBNC] 
intends to enforce the provisions of the Note and Deed of 
Trust (Mortgage).  Unless you cure the default on or before 
30 days from the date of this letter, this shall serve as 
further notice to you that immediately thereafter, and without further demand or notice to you, [JBNC] shall accelerate the entire amount due of both principal and 
interest, which shall become immediately due and payable, 
invoke any remedies provided for in the Note and Deed of 
Trust (Mortgage), including but not limited to the 
foreclosure sale of the property. 
 
On April 6, 2012, JBNC sent another letter to Namahoe 
at his P.O. Box.  It stated, “[y]ou did not comply with the 
Repair Rider to the Loan Documents in that you failed to repair 
the property in a timely manner.  Therefore, the Lender has 
called the loan immediately due and payable.”   
Namahoe’s alleged violation of the Repair Rider 
triggered the acceleration of his total remaining balance.  Thus, for a $500.00 deficiency, Namahoe was presented with a 
bill for $75,946.58 plus interest, and he ultimately lost his 
home.   
3.  Foreclosure proceeding in the circuit court 
 
On March 6, 2012, JBNC filed its foreclosure complaint
against Namahoe in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit.  Robert A. Estacion, a civil process server, failed to serve the complaint on Namahoe during his first three attempts.  
Estacion’s stated reasons for non-service include “NO ONE HOME”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
10 
 and “NOT LIVING AT THIS ADDRESS (per neighbor and friend down 
the street).”  JBNC then filed two Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) requests seeking information related to Namahoe’s mailing 
address.  In response to the FOIA request for a physical address 
associated with Namahoe’s P.O. Box, the post office provided the 
  
conducted a “skip trace”  on Namahoe and confirmed the Property 
address as his current address.   5Road.  JBNC also asserted that it address as 16-1218 ʻŌpeʻape ʻa
  On November 13, 2012, Estacion filed a Return and 
Acknowledgment of Service which included what appeared to be 
Namahoe’s signature, indicating personal service of the 
complaint at Namahoe’s home.  Based on the record, Namahoe did not subsequently answer or otherwise respond to the Complaint.
6   
On May 20, 2013, JBNC filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure, exclusively relying on the 
allegation that Namahoe had failed to repair the property in a 
timely manner.7   
In support of the motion, JBNC attached a Declaration 
of Indebtedness signed by JBNC’s Vice President Bruce Huey, 
 
5   Here, “skip trace” refers to a LexisNexis Accurint report. 
 
6  Four years later, in his declaration submitted in support of his 
HRCP Rule 60(b) motion, Namahoe attested that he did not recall signing the 
Return and Acknowledgement of Service and that he “would not have understood 
it anyway.”   
 
7  JBNC did not expressly inform the circuit court that Namahoe’s 
alleged default concerned only $500.00 of repairs.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
11 
 attesting that he had personal knowledge that “based on [his] 
review of the records and files related to the mortgage loan” 
Namahoe “defaulted in the observance and performance of the 
terms, covenants and conditions by failing to repair the 
property, as required by the Repair Rider to the Loan Agreement, 
in a timely manner.”  Huey’s declaration included a copy of 
HUD’s approval of JBNC’s request to call the loan due and 
payable, and specified that written notice was given to Namahoe 
regarding his obligation to pay in full all outstanding 
principal and accrued interest due on the loan.   
JBNC also attached an attorney affirmation signed by 
Robert M. Ehrhorn, Jr. of Clay Chapman, pursuant to Hawaiʻ i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 667-17 (Supp. 2012) (repealed 2017) 
(current version at HRS § 667-18), which stated: 
2.  On May 3, 2013, I received a written 
communication from Bruce Huey, Vice President of James B. 
Nutter & Company, who informed me that he personally 
reviewed [JBNC’s] documents and records relating to this loan file . . . [and] confirmed the factual accuracy of the 
allegations set forth in the Motion for Summary Judgment[.] 
 
3.  Based upon the communication from the person 
identified in Paragraph 2 above, as well as upon my own inspection and other reasonable inquiry under the 
circumstances, I affirm that, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, the Motion for Summary Judgment, 
and other papers filed or submitted to the Court in this 
matter contain no false statements of fact or law and that 
[JBNC] has legal standing to bring this foreclosure action.  
I understand my continuing obligation to amend this 
Affirmation in light of newly discovered material facts 
following its filing. 
 
4.  To the best of Declarant’s knowledge, 
information, and belief the allegations contained in the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
12 
 Motion for Summary Judgment are warranted by existing law 
and have evidentiary support. 
 
(Emphases added.)  
   Other than these declarations, JBNC did not provide 
any evidence of Namahoe’s breach of the reverse mortgage terms 
and failure to cure the default.  
Namahoe did not oppose the Motion for Summary Judgment 
and Decree of Foreclosure, and he did not appear before the 
circuit court.  The circuit court’s relevant Findings of Fact 
and Conclusions of Law were as follows: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 . . . 
 
3.  [Namahoe] defaulted in the observance and 
performance of the terms, covenants and conditions by 
failing to repair the property, as required by the Repair Rider to the Loan Agreement, in a timely manner.  [HUD] 
approved [JBNC’s] Request to Call The Loan Due And Payable, 
for immediate payment in full of all outstanding principal 
and accrued interest as required by paragraph 7(B)(iii) of 
the Note. 
   
4.  Written notice was given to [Namahoe] that 
because of his failure to repair the property as required 
by the Repair Rider to the Loan Agreement in a timely manner, [JBNC] required immediate payment in full of all outstanding principal and accrued interest due on the loan.  
However, despite said notice the default was not cured and 
the loan has not been paid off.
 
 
. . .  
. . .  CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
 
3)  [JBNC] is entitled to have its Mortgage 
foreclosed, a commissioner appointed to take possession of and sell the mortgaged property . . . and the proceeds of 
sale applied, first, to the payment of delinquent of real  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
13 
 property taxes, then to the amounts due on [JBNC’s] 
Mortgage and the balance, if any, as determined by the 
Court. 
 
(Emphasis in original.) 
  Subsequently, JBNC purchased Namahoe’s home for $85,904.96, and Namahoe was served with a Writ of Ejectment on 
June 22, 2014.
8   
4.  Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion for Relief 
 
On January 3, 2017, more than two and half years after 
being served with the Writ of Ejectment, Namahoe filed a HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion for Relief from Judgment, citing subsections 
60(b)(3), (4), and (6).
9   
 
8  According to Namahoe, the loss of his only home caused him to 
become unsheltered.   
 
9  HRCP Rule 60(b) states, in relevant part:  
Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly discovered 
evidence; fraud, etc.   On motion and upon such terms as are 
just, the court may relieve a party or a party’s legal 
representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding 
for the following reasons: . .  . (3) fraud (whether 
heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation,  or  other misconduct of an adverse 
party; (4) the judgment is void; . . . or (6) any  other 
reason justifying relief from the operation of the 
judgment.  The motion shall be made within a reasonable 
time, and for reason[] . . .(3) not more than one year 
after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered or 
taken.  A motion under this subdivision (b) does not affect 
the finality of a judgment or suspend its operation.  This rule does not limit the power of a court to entertain an 
independent action to relieve a party from a judgment, order, or proceeding, or to set aside a judgment for fraud 
upon the court. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
14 
   
 Namahoe also submitted a declaration in which he 
attested that he timely made the required repairs pursuant to 
the Repair Rider, and that JBNC had no right to foreclose: 
5.  I understood I was supposed to make repairs after 
I received the money.  A neighbor (name forgotten) who was 
a tenant of Nick Rapoza helped me repair the entire front 
porch railing and I bought putty and we plugged the leak in 
the carport roof and repaired the surface.  There was no 
leaking after the repairs were done.  This was all done 
right after I got the money and was simple to do.  I used 
my own money and some labor to make the repairs. 
 
[ . . . 
] 
 
7. 
 I do not remember [Estacion] handing me the 
foreclosure Complaint on November 9, 2012.  [Nor] do I 
recall signing any paper that I received the Complaint.  I 
would not have understood it anyway. 
 
 8.  My first memory about the foreclosure was a 
telephone call from an attorney who said he wanted to inspect my house and property because it was his job to 
sell my
 house at a foreclosure auction.  I was shocked!  I 
did not know of any foreclosure.  How come no one wrote me, telephoned me, or came to the house.  I was always there because I had no car, very little money and only a few 
neighbors and relatives.  I had to hitch rides from my 
house in remote Hawaiian Acres to shop for food and collect 
my mail at my post office box in Hilo.  I was angry and 
upset and never heard again from the attorney. 
 
  Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion argued that JBNC 
committed fraud by (1) failing to obtain an inspection by a HUD-
approved inspector as required by the Repair Rider, (2) failing 
to use the $750.00 in set aside funds for repairs, and (3) 
failing to give Namahoe a “realistic opportunity to have the mortgage reinstated.”
10  Namahoe also argued that JBNC’s 
attorneys, the law firm of Clay Chapman, committed fraud by 
 
10  Namahoe does not provide any additional factual basis for these 
claims beyond his declaration.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
15 
  failing to include pertinent facts and disclosures in its 
attorney affirmations as required by HRS § 667-17.  
Specifically, Namahoe alleged that Clay Chapman failed to 
disclose the aforementioned instances of alleged fraud in their 
HRS § 667-17 affirmation, and that the attorneys failed to amend 
the affirmation after the companion Domingo case clarified that 
noncompliance with a similar repair rider was an inadequate 
basis for foreclosure.   James B. Nutter & Co. v. Domingo, No. 
CAAP-15-0000659, 2016 WL 5920412 (App. Oct. 11, 2016) (SDO).  Namahoe also argued that his motion was timely because the “final act” in the foreclosure proceeding was March 26, 2016, 
when JBNC allegedly sold the Property to a third party.
1211
   
 
 
11  We take judicial notice of the court records in the unpublished 
Domingo case, in accordance with Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201 
(1993).  James B. Nutter & Co. v. Domingo, No. CAAP- 15-0000659, 2016 WL 
5920412 (App. Oct. 11, 2016) (summary disposition order).  Because the 
unpublished Domingo case figured prominently in the pleadings and oral 
argument in this case, a brief summary is provided here. 
     
The Domingo foreclosure was similar to the Namahoe foreclosure, 
including a nearly identical repair rider and loan called due for alleged failure to make repairs.  Id. at *1.  Both Domingo and Namahoe asserted that 
they completed necessary repairs.  See id. at *1—2.  
 
 The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s ruling that JBNC’s 
assumption that Domingo had failed to make the required repairs was not a sufficient justification to accelerate the mortgage note and seek 
foreclosure.  Id.
  The ICA affirmed the order and clarified that “JBNC’s 
burden, . . . was to prove that at trial Domingo would be unable to prove 
that the required repairs were done.”  Id. at *2. 
   
The Domingo foreclosure action discussed above is distinct from 
the Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1- 0249, CAAP- 17-0000324, 
wrongful foreclosure action pending before the ICA.  The latter action is discussed in further detail below.  
(continued . . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
16 
   
 Next, Namahoe asserted that the Decree of Foreclosure 
was void under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) because, as a result of JBNC 
allegedly “knowingly mailing notices to an address where there 
was no mail delivery,” Namahoe was deprived of notice of the 
foreclosure proceeding and an adequate opportunity to defend 
against the action.13   
Finally, Namahoe raised a HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) claim, 
arguing that JBNC committed fraud on the court.  Unlike his HRCP 
Rule 60(b)(3) fraud claim which centered on JBNC’s acts and 
omissions in relation to Namahoe, the HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion focused on an alleged “pattern of mortgage abuse” by lenders 
such as JBNC who make it a part of their business operations to 
bring “unfounded” foreclosure actions.   
JBNC did not present any new evidence rebutting the 
statements in Namahoe’s declaration.  Rather, in response to 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion, JBNC responded that the 
motion was untimely because the relevant final act in this casewas the July 2, 2013 Decree of Foreclosure.  With regard to  
(. . . continued)  
12  Evidence of the alleged sale to a third party is not in the 
record.  However, JBNC did not dispute Namahoe’s claim that the property had 
been sold on March 26, 2016.   
 
13  Namahoe did not present a factual basis for this allegation 
beyond that he “believes that in accordance with the standard practice of the 
United States Postal Service [JBNC] was receiving the returned envelopes 
marked undeliverable,” and that JBNC subsequently mailed pleadings to 
Namahoe’s P.O. Box after JBNC “already knew that the post office box had been 
closed.”  (Emphasis added.) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
17 
 Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion, JBNC maintained that 
Namahoe was personally served with the Complaint on November 9, 
2012, and that neither JBNC nor the circuit court had an 
affirmative duty to “track Namahoe down” due to Namahoe’s 
failure to inform the court of any changes to his mailing 
address.  Finally, on Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) claim, JBNC 
responded that even if it had committed fraud, which JBNC 
disputes, the “substance of [Namahoe’s] allegations” fails to 
rise to the level of “corruption of the judicial process itself”
as required by Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie.  125 
Hawaiʻi 128, 144,
254 P.3d 439, 455 (2011) (quoting Schefke v. Reliable CollectionAgency, Ltd., 96 Hawai
ʻi 408, 431 n.42, 32 P.3d 52, 75 n.42 
(2001), as amended (Oct. 11, 2001)).  Rather, JBNC’s alleged 
acts of fraud only concerned “a single litigant.”  JBNC did not 
present any additional evidence of Namahoe’s alleged 
noncompliance with the terms of the reverse mortgage.      
 
 
   The circuit court denied Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) 
motion in full.  With regard to Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) 
fraud on the court argument, the court determined:  
  Regarding the fraud on the court type theories I’m 
going to think that that’s more properly addressed in 
[Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1- 0249, 
CAAP-17-0000324].[14]  I see that case as being that 
 
14  Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1- 0249, CAAP- 17-
0000324, is pending before the ICA.  It involves Domingo and Namahoe’s 
wrongful foreclosure claims against JBNC.  We take judicial notice of the 
court records in this related case, in accordance with HRE Rule 201.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
18 
 independent action that’s mentioned under Rule 60(b).  And 
my impression is that independent action is not really a 
60(b) type motion.  
 
  There’s still a fraud on the court type claim for 
relief by Mr. Namahoe against Clay Chapman.  And Mr. 
Namahoe would have at least the opportunity to attempt to 
amend the pleadings in that case to state, let’s say, clear 
claims for relief a gainst [JBNC].  So that's what the 
Court’s belief is. 
 
. . . 
 
I think Mr. Namahoe still has a claim for relief 
against . . . Clay Chapman.  And then you have the 
opportunity to amend.  I’m thinking that you already have that action already . . . . You did not need to go forward 
on the . . . case regarding those theories cause they’re in the [Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1- 0249, 
CAAP-17-0000324] action.  You already have the forum for 
that.  It’s not as if I -- you know, the Court has to set 
aside the judgment here for you to be able to address your 
issues in the other case.  It’s my thinking. 
 
(Emphases added.)  
The circuit court presented Namahoe with a catch-22.  
The circuit court required Namahoe to pursue his fraud on the 
court claim against JBNC in the wrongful foreclosure action, Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1-0249,      
CAAP-17-0000324.  However, as noted at oral argument, Namahoe was precluded by the circuit court from asserting a wrongful 
foreclosure claim in that action due to the issuance of the 
Decree of Foreclosure below.  Thus, Namahoe’s path to recovery 
was effectively blocked, and his only opportunity for relief is 
the instant case.     On April 13, 2017, Namahoe filed a HRCP Rule 59 motion
for reconsideration of the circuit court’s order denying his  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
19 
 motion for relief, arguing that Hungate v. Law Off. of David B. 
Rosen, 139 Hawaiʻ i 394, 391 P.3d 1 (2017), established the 
importance of notice to foreclosure proceedings.   He added that
JBNC was aware that the notices mailed to the Property’s 
physical address and the P.O. Box were deemed undeliverable and any alleged personal service was ineffective because Namahoe’s 
serious health conditions and his use of marijuana to treat his 
pain impeded his comprehension.  The circuit court denied 
Namahoe’s motion on the grounds that HRCP Rule 5(a) only 
required JBNC to serve Namahoe with the Complaint, and that 
Hungate did not provide an adequate basis for altering or 
amending the denial of Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) motion.  See HRCP Rule 5(a) (2019).     15  
B.  ICA Appeal 
 
On appeal to the ICA, Namahoe raised two points of 
error, arguing first that the circuit court erred in denying 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) motion because (a) the Decree of 
Foreclosure was obtained through JBNC’s fraud, 
misrepresentation, and misconduct; (b) JBNC failed to provide 
adequate notice to Namahoe; and (c) JBNC and its attorneys 
 
15  Hungate was decided in the context of a non- judicial foreclosure, 
in which there is, by definition, no judicial officer to supervise and ensure 
the integrity of the foreclosure process.  139 Hawaiʻi at 398,  391 P.3d at 5.  
Accordingly, Hungate is distinguishable from the immediate case and need not 
be discussed further.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
20 
 committed fraud on the court, all of which prevented Namahoe 
from fairly presenting his case.  Namahoe next argued that the 
circuit court abused its discretion by denying Namahoe’s HRCP 
Rule 59 motion for reconsideration. 
  
With regard to his HRCP Rule 60(b) arguments, Namahoe 
largely reiterated points raised before the circuit court.  
Namahoe reasserted the claims underpinning his HRCP Rule 
60(b)(3) motion, arguing that JBNC had no legal authority to 
seek foreclosure because (1) Namahoe did not receive notice of 
the proceedings; (2) JBNC did not notify Namahoe of his right to reinstatement; (3) JBNC did not perform a HUD inspection 
required by the Repair Rider; and (4) JBNC’s attorneys failed to 
include the previous facts in its affirmation and failed to 
amend the affirmation to include the related Domingo foreclosure 
action, which involved JBNC, their same attorneys, and “the same justification for the reverse mortgage foreclosure” which the 
circuit court found improper and in violation of HRS § 667-17.   
Namahoe again raised his HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) claim, 
asserting that the Decree of Foreclosure was void because Namahoe lacked adequate notice of the proceeding, thus depriving 
Namahoe of due process.  
 
In his HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) claim, Namahoe argued that 
he was entitled to relief from the Decree of Foreclosure because 
JBNC and its attorneys did not disclose all relevant facts to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
21 
 the circuit court.  Specifically, Namahoe asserted that JBNC’s 
conduct rose to the level of fraud on the court because its 
attorneys submitted an insufficient and misleading attorney 
affirmation, as required by HRS § 667-17, despite the plain 
language of the reverse mortgage not permitting foreclosure 
under the circumstances.  Namahoe also reasserted his HRCP Rule 
60(b)(3) fraud arguments, stating that JBNC had not informed 
Namahoe of his right to reinstatement, did not inspect the 
property using a HUD-approved inspector, and pursued foreclosure 
despite the ruling in the Domingo foreclosure action.  These errors by JBNC “went to the very heart of the circuit court’s 
jurisdiction and [JBNC’s] ability to even foreclose.”   
With respect to the circuit court’s denial of 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 59 Motion for Reconsideration, Namahoe 
argued that the circuit court mistakenly concluded that JBNC’s 
notices were sufficient.  Namahoe maintained that new evidence 
provided in support of his HRCP Rule 59 motion demonstrated that (1) JBNC was aware that Namahoe was not receiving mail at his 
physical address and (2) Namahoe’s serious health conditions at 
the time of the proceedings impeded his comprehension.   
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s orders denying 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for relief and HRCP Rule 59 
motion for reconsideration.  James B. Nutter & Co. v. Namahoe,
No. CAAP-17-0000496, 2022 WL 899896 at *12 (App. March 28,  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
22 
 2022).  First, the ICA held that Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) 
motion asserting fraud was untimely, as the applicable 
“judgment, order, or proceeding” in this case was the Decree of 
Foreclosure entered on July 2, 2013 — nearly four years before 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion.  Id. at *7.  Second, the 
ICA determined from the record that Namahoe was personally 
served with the Complaint and was therefore not denied due 
process.  Id. at *7—9.  Third, the ICA held that the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Namahoe relief 
under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) on the grounds that Namahoe could seek appropriate relief in an alternate forum, i.e., his separate 
wrongful foreclosure action against JBNC raised in Domingo v. 
James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1-0249, CAAP-17-0000324.  
Id. at *10—11.  The ICA also noted that by the time the JBNC 
wrongful foreclosure suit was initiated by Domingo and Namahoe, 
Namahoe’s property had already been purchased by JBNC at auction 
and sold to a third party.  Id. at *11.  
 
Finally, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s denial 
of the Rule 59 motion and rejected Namahoe’s claims of new evidence, finding that much of the evidence was not in fact new, 
and that no “cogent argument” was raised as to why the allegedly 
“new” evidence could not have been presented earlier.  Id. at 
*11—12.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
23 
 C.  
Supreme Court Proceedings 
 
Namahoe filed a timely application for a writ of 
certiorari. 
  First, he argues that the ICA erred in affirming the 
lower court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion because (1) the one-year deadline began running on March 26, 2016, when 
JBNC allegedly sold the property to a third party; (2) it did 
not take into account the fact that JBNC’s foreclosure was based 
on “allegedly unrepaired repairs” worth $500.00 and that JBNC 
was aware that Namahoe actually made those repairs; and (3) it “leave[s] the door open” for other bad actors to instigate 
“bogus proceedings.”  (Emphasis in original.)   
  Second, he argues that the ICA erred in affirming the 
lower court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) motion based on 
the Return and Acknowledgement of Service.  Namahoe asserts that 
the fact that the signature on the Return and Acknowledgement of 
Service is “markedly different” from his signature on the Note, Loan Agreement, and Repair Rider should have been sufficient to 
rebut the prima facie evidence of notice.  He also argues that 
the entire proceedings were void under Hungate, 139 Hawai‘ i 394, 
391 P.3d 1 (2017), because statutory notice requirements are 
trumped by the more “stringent” notice requirements included in 
the specific “loan/note/mortgage documents.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
24 
  
 Third, Namahoe asserts that the ICA erred in affirming 
the circuit court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion 
because the circuit court failed to reach the merits of the 
issue and “merely punted” it by declaring that Namahoe could 
bring the claim in the separate wrongful-foreclosure action.   
  Lastly, Namahoe asserts that the ICA erred by 
affirming the circuit court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 59 motion, 
because his counsel presented new information — after the 
conclusion of his HRCP Rule 60(b) motion — regarding his P.O. 
Box being closed in September 2013.  He further argued that the ICA “missed the issue” in distinguishing Hungate because it 
actually “stands for the proposition” that when loan and mortgage documents require additional notice requirements on top 
of those required by the statutes, “failure to comply” with the 
additional requirements is “fatal to the foreclosure itself.”  
Hungate, 139 Hawai‘ i at 404, 391 P.3d at 11. 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. HRCP Rule 60(b) Relief From Judgment or Order 
“[T]he trial court has a very large measure of 
discretion in passing upon motions under [HRCP] Rule 60(b) and
its order will not be set aside unless we are persuaded that under the circumstances of the particular case, the court’s 
refusal to set aside its order was an abuse of discretion.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
25 
 Haw. Hous. Auth. v. Uyehara, 77 Hawai‘ i 144, 147, 883 P.2d 65, 68
(1994) (quoting Paxton v. State, 2 Haw. App. 46, 48, 625 P.2d 
1052, 1054 (1981)).  Therefore, the circuit court’s decisions 
related to Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) motion are reviewed for an 
abuse of discretion.  “The burden of establishing abuse of discretion [in denying a HRCP Rule 60(b) motion] is on the 
appellant, and a strong showing is required to establish it.”  
Ditto v. McCurdy, 103 
Hawai‘i 153, 162, 80 P.3d 974, 983 (2003).  
Notwithstanding this general rule, “under HRCP Rule 
60(b)(4), an order is ‘void only if the court that rendered it 
lacked jurisdiction of either the subject matter or the parties 
or otherwise acted in a manner inconsistent with due process of 
law.’”  In re Haw. Elec. Co., Inc., 149 Hawai‘ i 343, 362—63, 489 
P.3d 1255, 1274—75 (2021).  As such, a denial of a HRCP Rule 
60(b)(4) motion is reviewed de novo.  See id. 
B. HRCP Rule 59 Motion for Reconsideration 
 
As this court has often stated, “[t]he purpose of a 
motion for reconsideration is to allow the parties to 
present new evidence and/ or arguments that could not have 
been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion.”   
Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should 
have been brought during the earlier proceeding. 
 
Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai‘ i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000) 
(citations omitted) (quoting First Ins. Co. of Haw. Ltd. v. 
Lawrence, 77 Hawai‘ i 2, 17, 991 P.2d 489, 504 (1994)).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
26 The appellate court reviews a “trial court’s ruling on 
a motion for reconsideration . . . under the abuse of discretion 
standard.”  Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua, 100 
Hawaiʻi 
97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002).  An abuse of discretion occurs 
if the trial court has “clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.”  Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 
(1992). C. Foreclosure Actions
Foreclosure is an equitable action.  “Courts of 
equity have the power to mold their decrees to conserve the 
equities of the parties under the circumstances of the 
case.”  A court sitting in equity in a foreclosure case has 
the plenary power to fashion a decree to conform to the 
equitable requirements of the sit uation.  Whether and to 
what extent relief should be granted rests within the sound 
discretion of the court and will not be disturbed absent an 
abuse of such discretion. 
Peak Cap. Grp., LLC v. Perez, 141 Hawaiʻ i 160, 172, 407 P.3d 116, 
128 (2017) (citations omitted) (quoting Honolulu, Ltd. v. 
Blackwell, 7 Haw. App. 210, 219, 750 P.2d 942, 948 (1988)). 
A circuit court abuses its equitable discretion “by 
issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregard[s] rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant.”  Hawaii Nat’l Bank v. 
   2, 7, 58 P.3d 60, 65 (2002) (quoting Shanghai Cook, 100 Hawaiʻi*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
27 Inv. Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 Hawaiʻ i 482, 493, 993 P.2d 516, 526 
(2000)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Introduction
We hold that the ICA did not err in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of Namahoe’s motions under HRCP Rule 59, 
Rule 60(b)(3), and Rule 60(b)(4).  However, the ICA erred in 
affirming the circuit court’s denial of relief under HRCP Rule 
60(b)(6) for two reasons.  First, the record establishes that 
JBNC failed to comply with HUD regulations and Hawaiʻ i state law 
in pursuit of foreclosure against Namahoe.  Thus, JBNC lacked 
legal authority to foreclose and its attorneys provided the 
lower court with an inadequate and misleading HRS § 667-17 
attorney affirmation.  This conduct constitutes fraud on the 
court for purposes of HRCP Rule 60(b)(6).   
Second, the balance of equities weighs heavily against 
a decree of foreclosure for the alleged failure to complete $500.00 worth of repairs.  HRCP Rule 60(b) allows courts to 
relieve a party from a final judgment or order “upon such terms 
as are just[.]”  Here, justice requires Namahoe to be afforded 
an effective remedy.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
28 
 B.  
The Legal Framework Protecting Homeowners 
Before analyzing JBNC’s conduct toward Namahoe in 
isolation, a brief review of reverse mortgages and the relevant 
regulatory landscape is warranted.  Reverse mortgages are 
distinct from conventional mortgages both in their function and 
purpose.  Reverse mortgages, of which home equity conversion 
mortgages (HECMs) make up a significant portion,16 are loans that 
allow senior homeowners to withdraw a portion of their home’s equity in the form of cash.  Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau, Reverse Mortgages: Report to Congress 5—6 (June 2012).  
This provides seniors with capital to pay for living expenses and other costs, with the loan only reaching maturity when the 
borrower dies, sells the home or moves out, or fails to maintain 
the property or pay necessary fees and taxes.  Id. at 5—6, 22; 
see also HRS § 506-10 (2008) (listing the events that make a 
reverse mortgage loan due).  This transaction for cash at the 
expense of ownership of one’s home — the largest and most significant asset most Americans possess — has significant 
ramifications for senior citizens, their families, and the 
communities in which they live.  Protecting Seniors: A Review of  
 
16  The mortgage at issue in this case is specifically a home equity 
conversion mortgage.  HECMs are only available for seniors above 62 years of 
age who own a property and occupy it as their principal residence.  For 
consistency with the briefs, circuit court documents, and ICA Memorandum 
Opinion, this court uses the broader term “reverse mortgage.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
29 
 the FHA’s Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) Program: 
Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Housing, Community Development, 
and Insurance of the H. Comm. on Financial Services, 116th Cong. 
2 (2019) (statement of Rep. Wm. Lacy Clay, Chairman, H. Subcomm. 
on Hous., Cmty. Dev., and Ins.) (“The racial wealth gap is 
exacerbated as countless families[, largely racial minorities,] 
are deprived of the chance to pass on their homes and other 
property to their children and other heirs, leading to . . . 
gutted city blocks, and less overall wealth.”)   
Seniors face a significant risk of abuse by lenders, 
and the consequences of reverse mortgages can be unclear at the time of signing, but disastrous for mortgagors.  See Reverse 
Mortgages: Polishing Not Tarnishing the Golden Years: Hearing 
Before the Senate Special Comm. on Aging, 110th Cong. 1 (2007) 
(statement of Senator Herb Kohl, Chairman, Special Comm. on Aging) (“[Reverse mortgage] [a]gents are targeting seniors 
aggressively in ways that this Committee has seen before: through direct mail, celebrity endorsements, and free lunch 
seminars.  Marketers often gloss over the risks of a reverse 
mortgage, but they convey the pay-off quite clearly.”);  Sarah 
B. Mancini & Odette Williamson, Reversing Course: Stemming the 
Tide of Reverse Mortgage Foreclosures Through Effective 
Servicing and Loss Mitigation, 26 Elder L.J. 85, 86—87, 119—20 
(2018) (“[o]lder adults who have taken out reverse mortgages are *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
30 
 particularly resource
-constrained.  They tend to take out these 
loans as a last resort, motivated by a lack of sufficient income 
to cover rising medical costs and other essential expenses.”).  
Namahoe appears to have been targeted in a similar manner; 
according to his declaration: “some folks came to my door and 
told me I could obtain a loan and not pay back anything while I 
lived and resided at the property.  I believed them and I 
obtained what I understand was a reverse mortgage. . . . I spent 
the money over the years paying bills and buying food.”   
Due to the significant risks of abuse by lenders and 
inadequate understanding of reverse mortgage agreements by many senior citizens, reverse mortgages and foreclosures are subject 
to stringent rules and regulations promulgated by both federal 
and state authorities.  Lenders offering loans backed by HUD, of 
which reverse mortgages and HECMs are one type, are required to 
make reasonable efforts to conduct face-to-face interviews with 
delinquent mortgagors, 24 C.F.R. § 203.604 (2009), conduct loss mitigation efforts to cure defaults, 24 C.F.R. §§ 203.605 (2009) 
and 203.501 (2009), conduct pre-foreclosure review, 24 C.F.R.   
§ 203.606 (2009), and facilitate reinstatement of the mortgage, 
24 C.F.R. § 203.608 (2009).  Failure to comply with these 
regulations may result in civil penalties or the withdrawal of a 
mortgagee’s HUD approval.  24 C.F.R. § 203.500 (2009).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
31 
 Our state legislature has also acted to combat 
predatory lending in the context of reverse mortgages.  Lenders 
are required to refer borrowers to HUD-approved counselors, and 
must be presented with a signed certification confirming that 
the borrower has received counseling prior to accepting an 
application for a reverse mortgage loan.  HRS § 506-10.   
Further, in the aftermath of economic crash and 
foreclosure crisis in the early-2010s, the legislature passed 
HRS § 667-17.  The language of the attorney affirmation even 
refers to the conditions that gave rise to the statute: 
During and after August 2010, numerous and widespread 
insufficiencies in foreclosure filings in various courts 
around the nation were reported . . . , including failure 
to review documents and files to establish standing and other foreclosure requisites; filing of notarized 
affidavits that falsely attest to such review and to other critical facts in the foreclosure process; and 
“robosignature” of documents. 
 
HRS § 667-17.  
 
Importantly for this appeal, HRS § 667-17 requires 
attorneys filing on behalf of mortgagees seeking foreclosure to 
sign and submit an affirmation that the attorney has verified the accuracy of filed documents, and confirm that the lender has 
an adequate factual and legal basis for pursuing foreclosure.
17  
As officers of the court, attorneys for mortgagees seeking 
 
17  HRS § 667- 17 states, “[a]ny attorney who files on behalf of a 
mortgagee seeking to foreclose on a residential property under this part 
shall sign and submit an affirmation that the attorney has verified the 
accuracy of the documents submitted, under penalty of perjury and subject to 
applicable rules of professional conduct.”  HRS § 667- 17.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
32 
 (continued . . .) foreclosure must affirm not only the accuracy of the factual 
allegations underlying foreclosure, but also the legal 
sufficiency of foreclosure claims.   Id.  Attorneys are also 
under a “continuing obligation to amend” the affirmation in the event of newly discovered material facts after filing.  Id. 18
It is within this expansive legislative and regulatory 
framework that JBNC and its attorneys at Clay Chapman pursued 
foreclosure on Namahoe’s only home — all on the basis of a 
$500.00 repair obligation.  C.  The ICA Did Not Err in Affirming the Circuit Court’s Denial 
of Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 59, Rule 60(b)(3), and Rule 60(b)(4) 
Motions 
 
1.  HRCP Rule 59 Motion for Reconsideration 
Namahoe asserts that the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 59
19 motion for 
 
 
18  One of the form affirmations in § 667- 17 states: 
 
Based upon my communication with [the foreclosing 
entity], as well as upon my own inspection and other 
reasonable inquiry under the circumstances, I affirm that, 
to the best of my knowledge, information, a
nd belief, the 
Summons, Complaint, and other papers filed or submitted to 
the Court in this matter contain no false statements of 
fact or law and that plaintiff has legal standing to bring 
this foreclosure action.  
 (Emphasis added.) 
 
19  HRCP Rule 59 states, in relevant part: 
 
(a) Grounds.  A new trial may be granted to all or 
any of the parties and on all or part of the issues (1) in 
an action in which there has been a trial by jury, for any 
of the reasons for which new trials have heretofore been *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
33 
 reconsideration despite (1) the existence of “new evidence” 
showing the P.O. Box was closed in September 2013; and (2) the 
supreme court decision in Hungate, decided shortly before his 
HRCP Rule 60(b) motion, which stands for the proposition that 
failure to comply with the terms of a mortgage is fatal to the 
foreclosure itself.   Hungate v. Law Off. of David B. Rosen, 139 20
Hawaiʻi 394, 391 P.3d 1 (2017). 
This court has stated, “[t]he purpose of a motion for 
reconsideration is to allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the 
earlier adjudicated motion.”  Amfac, 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at
27.  “Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should have  
(. . . continued)  
granted in actions at law in the courts of the state; and 
(2) in an action tried without a jury, for any of the 
reasons for which rehearings have heretofore been granted 
in suits in equity in the courts of the State.  On a motion 
for a new trial in an action tried w ithout a jury, the 
court may open the judgment if one has been entered, take 
additional testimony, amend findings of fact and 
conclusions of law or make new findings and conclusions, 
and direct the entry of a new judgment.  
 
20  The ICA correctly distinguished Hungate.  In Hungate, this court 
held that in a non- judicial foreclosure, the mortgagee has a duty to follow 
statutory and contractual notice requirements in order to ensure the borrower 
receives adequate notice of the foreclosure proceeding.  Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻ i 
at 403-04, 391 P.3d at 10- 11.  While Namahoe is seeking to void a judgment in 
a reverse- mortgage judicial- foreclosure proceeding, Hungate instead dealt 
with non- judicial foreclosure — a distinct procedure.  See id. at 399, 391 
P.3d at 6.  That is, Hungate is premised on clarifying the burdens on the 
mortgagee in the context of a proceeding in which “[t]here is no neutral 
party, such as a court, [to] supervis[e] the sale and ensur[e] a fair and 
reasonable process.” Id. at 409, 391 P.3d at 16.  Such is not the case here, 
where the judgment of foreclosure was rendered by the circuit court.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
34 
 been brought during the earlier proceeding.”  Sousaris, 92 
Hawai
‘i at 513, 993 P.2d at 547 (2000).   
In order for reconsideration to be granted on the 
basis of newly discovered evidence: “(1) it must be previously 
undiscovered even though due diligence was exercised; (2) it must be admissible and credible; (3) it must be of such a 
material and controlling nature as will probably change the 
outcome and not merely cumulative or tending only to impeach or 
contradict a witness.”  Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri 
Products, 86 Hawai‘ i 214, 251, 948 P.2d 1055, 1092 (1997) 
(quoting Orso v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 56 Haw. 241, 250, 534 
P.2d 489, 494 (1975), overruled on other grounds by Kahale v. 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 104 Hawai‘ i 341, 90 P.3d 233 (2004)). 
Here, the ICA correctly noted that Namahoe’s arguments 
regarding notice were already made as part of his HRCP Rule 
60(b) motion.  James B. Nutter & Co. v. Namahoe, No. CAAP-17-
0000496, 2022 WL 899896 at *11—12.  Most importantly, as the ICA concluded, “there is no cogent argument as to why the ‘new’ evidence and arguments concerning proper notice could not have 
been presented earlier.”  Id. at *11. 
2.  HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) 
Namahoe asserts that the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of his HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion for *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
35 
 untimeliness.  According to the circuit court, the event that 
triggered the countdown to the one-year deadline was the circuit 
court’s July 2, 2013 Decree of Foreclosure.  Namahoe filed his 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion on January 3, 2017, well past the one-
year deadline.  Namahoe contends that the “final act” was when 
JBNC sold the property to a third party in 2016, thus making his 
motion timely.   
We disagree with Namahoe, and hold that his HRCP Rule 
60(b)(3) motion was untimely.  The ICA correctly noted that 
“Namahoe argued that [JBNC’s] fraud, misrepresentation, and misconduct occurred when [JBNC] sought and obtained foreclosure 
against Namahoe on impermissible grounds.”  James B. Nutter & 
Co. v. Namahoe, No. CAAP-17-0000496, 2022 WL 899896 at *7 (App. 
March 28, 2022) (emphasis added).  As a result, Namahoe was seeking “relief from the Foreclosure Judgment itself . . . [and] 
not from the sale of the Property to a third party after the 
Property’s sale to [JBNC] was confirmed.”  Id. at *7.  Thus, the 
final judgment, for purposes of HRCP Rule 60(b)(3), was the 2013 
Decree of Foreclosure and Namahoe’s motion was untimely.   
3.  HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) 
Namahoe next argues that the Decree of Foreclosure was
void due to lack of service, because JBNC allegedly mailed notices to Namahoe’s home address despite that address not  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
36 
 receiving mail delivery.   However, the November 9, 2012 Return 
and Acknowledgment of Service was signed by Namahoe, comprising 
prima facie evidence of valid service.  Namahoe was served with 
all required documents, including the Complaint, Foreclosure 
Mediation Notice and Foreclosure Mediation Request, and Summons.  
[ICA Dkt. 35:81]  Furthermore, had Namahoe wanted to contest the 
signature, HRS § 634-22 (2013) provides the means for him to 
examine the process server.  Namahoe requested no such 
examination.  21
  Having established that the above documents were 
properly served, Namahoe was not deprived of notice.  As the ICA 
correctly states — and Namahoe does not challenge — under HRCP 
Rule 5(a), “no service need be made on parties in default for 
failure to appear, except that pleadings asserting new or 
additional claims for relief against them shall be served upon 
them in the manner provided for service of summons in Rule 4 of 
these Rules.”  HRCP Rule 5(a) (2000) (emphasis added).  Therefore, once the complaint was personally served on Namahoe, 
JBNC was not required to serve subsequent filings, as long as it 
did not assert additional claims.   
 
21  Namahoe also alleges that JBNC continued sending mail to 
Namahoe’s P.O. Box despite knowing that it had been deactivated. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
37 
  D.  
The ICA Erred in Affirming the Circuit Court’s Denial of 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) Motion 
 
Namahoe is entitled to relief pursuant to his HRCP 
Rule 60(b)(6) motion on two grounds: (1) JBNC and its attorneys 
committed fraud on the court, and (2) principles of equity 
necessitate relief from the operation of the foreclosure 
judgment.  Accordingly, we reverse the ICA’s decision affirming the circuit court’s denial of Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) 
motion, and vacate the Decree of Foreclosure insofar as it would 
preclude Namahoe from asserting a wrongful foreclosure claim 
against JBNC.
22  
1.  JBNC committed fraud on the court   
This case presents an opportunity to clarify the 
applicability of a HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) fraud on the court theory 
to this set of facts.  Namahoe asserts that the circuit court 
abused its discretion in “merely punt[ing]” his fraud on the 
court claim in the separate Domingo wrongful foreclosure action 
against JBNC, which is currently on appeal.  We agree that the circuit court’s denial of a remedy was an abuse of discretion, 
and that Namahoe was entitled to relief in the immediate action.   
This court has defined fraud on the court as “a wrong
against the institutions set up to protect and safeguard the  
 
22  This decision has no bearing on the judgment confirming sale. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
38 
 public, institutions in which fraud cannot complacently be 
tolerated consistently with the good order of society.”  Schefke 
v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 
Hawaiʻi 408, 430, 32 P.3d 
52, 74 (2001) (quoting Kawamata Farms, 86 Hawai
‘i at 256, 948 
P.2d at 1097).  Our case law has provided examples of what rises 
to the level fraud on the court.  As this court further 
explained: 
Not any fraud connected with the presentation of a case 
amounts to fraud on the court.  It must be a “ direct 
assault on the integrity of the judicial process.”  Courts 
have required more than nondisclosure by a party or the 
party’s attorney to find fraud on the court.  Examples of 
such fraud include “bribery of a judge,” and “the 
employment of counsel in order to bring an improper influence on the court.” 
 
Schefke, 96 Hawai‘ i at 431, 32 P.3d at 75 (citations omitted). 
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(6), courts have broad 
authority to provide relief from final judgments obtained by 
fraud on the court, upon a motion made “within a reasonable 
time.”23  Unlike other motions for relief or reconsideration of a 
judgment, courts retain flexibility to exercise this power in the face of fraud on the court, precisely because a decision 
obtained through such means cannot be final.  See Kenner v. 
Comm’r of Internal Revenue, 387 F.2d 689, 691 (7th Cir. 1968) 
(“[I]t can be reasoned that a decision produced by fraud on the 
court is not in essence a decision at all, and never becomes 
 
23  The “reasonable time” limit notably contrasts with the one- year 
limit on HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) fraud claims.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
39 
 final.”); see also PennyMac Corp. v. Godinez, 148 
Hawaiʻi 323, 
328—329, 474 P.3d 264, 269—270 (2020) (noting that the purpose 
of HRCP Rule 60(b) motions “is to authorize the reopening of a 
closed case or a final order,” and that “[Appellant’s] HRCP Rule
60(b) motion was not a new action but rather a continuation of the original foreclosure case.”).  Further, we have expressed a 
“preference for judgments on the merits over the finality of 
judgments procured through fraud.”  Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de 
Nemours and Co., 102 Hawai‘ i
 149, 157—58, 73 P.3d 687, 695—96 
(2003).  
Fraud on the court cannot be neatly defined, but it is 
understood by courts, including this court, to affect more than 
the litigants in the underlying dispute.  Cvitanovich-Dubie, 125 
Hawaiʻi at 144—46, 254 P.3d at 455—57.  Like other jurisdictions, 
we narrowly interpret fraud on the court.  Compare id., with Ray 
v. Ray, 647 S.E.2d 237, 239 (S.C. 2007) (“Generally speaking, 
only the most egregious misconduct . . . in which an attorney is 
implicated will constitute fraud on the court.”) (citation omitted), and SEC v. N. Am. Clearing, Inc., 656 F. App’x 947, 
949 (11th Cir. 2016) (stating that the fraud on the court standard “is more exacting than the standard for fraud under 
[Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP)] Rule 60(b)(3), 
encompassing only the most egregious misconduct . . . .”).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
40 
 Otherwise, judgments would remain subject to challenge in 
perpetuity, and the one-year time limitation on motions for 
relief predicated on regular fraud pursuant to HRCP Rule 
60(b)(3) would be hollowed.   
Despite the high threshold for a finding of fraud on 
the court, we find that JBNC committed fraud on the court in 
pursuit of this foreclosure against Namahoe. 
Namahoe’s fraud on the court claim is premised on 
JBNC’s initiation of foreclosure proceedings “without fully 
disclosing to the lower court the facts supporting the foreclosure.”  Specifically, Namahoe argues that JBNC did not 
diligently verify whether he actually failed to make the 
required repairs through use of a HUD-approved inspector, and 
JBNC did not provide the court with evidence of Namahoe’s 
alleged failure to make the repairs.     
In response to Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion, 
JBNC did not present evidence of Namahoe’s alleged failure to make the repairs.  JBNC instead reiterates its assertion that 
Namahoe failed to make the repairs, and argues that it was 
simply following HUD protocol in calling the loan due and 
payable — and pursuing foreclosure — as a result of Namahoe’s 
failure to comply with the Repair Rider.  JBNC also responds 
that its actions in this case do not pass the threshold to 
support a finding of fraud on the court because they involve the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
41 
 parties to the case only.  In other words, their conduct does 
not implicate the judicial process writ large.  However, JBNC’s 
conduct does not just involve Namahoe.   
Attorneys representing foreclosing lenders must verify 
and affirm to the court the accuracy of documents proffered by 
the lender/client in order to prevent unwarranted foreclosures.  
HRS § 667-17.  Attorney affirmations in foreclosure proceedings 
are a statutory means of protecting homeowners from wrongful 
foreclosure, as they prevent the courts from advancing fraud by 
lenders in foreclosure actions.  Id.  According to the statutory 
mandate, attorneys shall file an affirmation with the court 
“that the attorney has verified the accuracy of the documents 
submitted, under penalty of perjury and subject to applicable 
rules of professional conduct.”  Id.  The purpose of the statute 
“is to prevent unwarranted foreclosure actions on residential property by requiring an attorney who files a judicial 
foreclosure . . . to also submit a signed affidavit to the court . . . stating that the attorney has verified the accuracy of the 
document submitted.”  H. Stand Comm. Rep. No. 697-14, in 2014 
House Journal, at 1127.  The statute specifically notes that:  
During and after August 2010, numerous and widespread 
insufficiencies in foreclosure filings in various courts 
around the nation were reported by major mortgage lenders 
and other authorities, including failure to review 
documents and files to establish standing and other 
foreclosure requisites; filing of notarized affidavits that 
falsely attest to such review and to other critical facts *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
42 
 in the foreclosure process; and “robosignature” of 
documents. 
 
HRS § 667-17. 
Failure to submit adequate documentation, including 
the attorney affirmation, has been determined to be an adequate 
basis for denial of a motion for summary judgment.  Wells Fargo 
Bank, N.A. v. Fong, 149  249, 252, 255—56, 488 P.3d 1228, Hawaiʻi
1231, 1234—35 (2021).  It is reasonably inferred that to require 
attorney affirmations is to also require them to be accurate and 
complete.  Anything less would render the statutory requirement 
meaningless.  See In re City & Cnty. of Honolulu Corp. Counsel, 
54 Haw. 356, 373, 507 P.2d 169, 178 (1973) (“It is a cardinal rule of statutory construction that a statute ought upon the 
whole be so construed that, if it can be prevented, no clause, sentence or word shall be superfluous, void, or 
insignificant.”); Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Haw. v. 
Sullivan, 87 Hawaiʻ i 217, 230, 953 P.2d 1315, 1328 (1998) (courts 
can consider “[t]he reason and spirit of the law, and the cause 
which induced the legislature to enact it . . . to discover its 
true meaning.”) (bracket and ellipsis points in original).  
Because attorney affirmations are representations to the court, 
an inaccurate, incomplete, or otherwise misleading HRS § 667-17 
affirmation may constitute a misrepresentation to the court.  
Accordingly, an inadequate attorney affirmation may rise to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
43 
 level of fraud on the court.  In these instances, relief from
the Decree of Foreclosure is justified.
   24 
Here, the attorney affirmation submitted in support of 
the foreclosure of Namahoe’s home was inaccurate and incomplete 
in several respects.  JBNC appears to have initiated foreclosure 
despite having knowledge that it failed to comply with the 
Repair Rider — the violation of which triggered the foreclosure.  
According to the Repair Rider attached to JBNC’s complaint, the 
burden was on JBNC to certify “that the repairs which are funded 
under this Repair Rider will be completed in a manner to meet HUD property standards required by the Secretary as determined 
by a HUD-approved inspector.”  However, the record is devoid of 
any admissible evidence of Namahoe’s alleged failure to carry 
out the repairs.  As the ICA stated in its Memorandum Opinion, 
“there is no declaration or other evidence in the record of the 
 
24  The circuit court in the Domingo and Namahoe foreclosure 
action in Domingo v. James B. Nutter & Co., Civil No. 16-1- 0249,         
CAAP-17-0000324, highlighted the importance of the attorney affirmation: 
If the representations contained in the affirmation 
required under HRS § 667- 17 are not directed to the 
mortgagor, then to whom are they directed?  Quite clearly 
they are directed to the Court presiding over the 
foreclosure case.  The Court implicitly relies upon the 
attorney affirmation.  The attorney affirmation “helps 
ensure that Hawaiʻi’s courts are not used as instruments of 
fraud in foreclosure actions.”  Conf. Comm. Rep.
 No. 62-12, 
in 2013 House Journal, 27th Leg., Reg. Sess. a t 1632 (Haw. 
2013). 
Since the attorney affirmation contains 
representations to the Court, if the attorney affirmation 
contains misrepresentations they are misrepresentations to 
the Court.  Sanctions
 and remedies may be available as a 
result of these misrepresentations to the Court.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
44 
 particular repairs Namahoe allegedly failed to complete.”  No. 
CAAP-17-0000496, 2022 WL 899896 at *11 n.10 (App. March 28, 
2022) (emphasis added).  Furthermore, nowhere in the record does 
JBNC confirm that Namahoe’s property had been inspected by a 
HUD-certified inspector.   Pursuant to the Repair Rider, JBNC 
had the independent duty to ensure that a HUD-approved inspector had inspected Namahoe’s property prior to initiating foreclosure 
proceedings.   25
By submitting an attorney affirmation in support of 
foreclosure against Namahoe, without first verifying that there was an adequate factual and legal basis for foreclosure pursuant 
HRS § 667-17, the attorney affirmation falsely affirmed the 
sufficiency of the basis for the foreclosure.  This failure by 
JBNC and its attorneys supports a finding of fraud on the court.    
In its Memorandum Opinion, the ICA concluded that the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it denied 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b) motion because “the foreclosure proceedings were final and unappealable, Namahoe had been 
ejected from his home, and the Property had been purchased by 
[JBNC] and sold to a third party.”  Id. at *11.  Implicit in its 
decision, and more directly addressed in JBNC’s Answering Brief, 
 
25  Based on the current record, it is unknown whether any inspectors 
were sent to survey the state of repairs on Namahoe’s property.  Namahoe 
attests that two individuals inspected his property, but that none indicated 
any problems with Namahoe’s repairs.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
45 
 is that “any need for Namahoe to reopen these proceedings was 
substantially outweighed by the value of finality in this 
litigation.”  However, JBNC’s conduct toward Namahoe and the 
subsequent filing of a legally and factually deficient attorney 
affirmation led the circuit court to conclude that applicable 
statutes, regulations, and contractual provisions were followed.  
These failures pass the threshold to constitute fraud on the 
court, and, accordingly, the circuit court erred in denying 
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion for relief insofar as it 
would otherwise preclude Namahoe from asserting a wrongful foreclosure counterclaim.   
2.  
Principles of equity necessitate relief  
 
Namahoe’s claim for relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) 
should also have been granted because JBNC had no equitable basis to pursue foreclosure in these specific circumstances.  We 
hold that the circuit court abused its discretion in denying 
Namahoe relief.   
The function of the court in a foreclosure proceeding 
is to ascertain the precise amount due under the mortgage.  
Honolulu, Ltd. v. Blackwell, 7 Haw. App. 210, 219, 750 P.2d 942, 
948 (1988).  A key factor in the court’s determination of whether and to what extent to provide equitable relief is 
whether forfeiture would be harsh and unreasonable under the 
circumstances.  Jenkins v. Wise, 58 Haw. 592, 597—98, 574 P.2d *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
46 
 1337, 1341 (1978).  We can think of no better example of a harsh 
and unreasonable forfeiture than foreclosure of one’s home based 
on an alleged default of a $500.00 agreement.   
A court’s discretionary decision shall not be set 
aside “unless manifestly against the clear weight of the 
evidence.”  Id. at 598, 574 P.2d at 1342.  Here, because JBNC 
failed to disclose all pertinent evidence, the circuit court issued its judgment and denied equitable relief without availing 
itself of all relevant facts.  A careful review of the record 
leads us to conclude that the Decree of Foreclosure was in error.  
As we explained in Jenkins, “[e]quity, . . . abhors 
forfeitures and where no injustice would thereby result to the 
injured party, equity will generally favor compensation rather 
than forfeiture against the offending party.”  Id. at 597, 574 
P.2d at 1341.  We have also held in the wrongful foreclosure context that “where the property has passed into the hands of an innocent purchaser for value, . . . an action at law for damages 
is generally the appropriate remedy.”  Delapinia v. Nationstar 
Mortgage LLC, 150 Hawai‘ i 91, 101-02, 497 P.3d 106, 116-17 (2021) 
(quoting Mount v. Apao, 139 Hawai‘ i 167, 180, 384 P.3d 1268, 1281 
(2016)).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
47 
 Accordingly, we hold that Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) 
motion should have been granted on this alternate ground, and 
that, accordingly, he should not be precluded from seeking 
relief in the form of a wrongful foreclosure counterclaim 
against JBNC.   
3.  
Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion is not time barred 
 
Unlike HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) fraud, which imposes a one-
year time limit, a party seeking relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) must bring their motion “within a reasonable time.”  HRCP Rule 
60(b).  We have interpreted HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) as requiring litigants to establish “the existence of ‘extraordinary 
circumstances’ that prevented or rendered [them] unable to 
prosecute an appeal” within the “reasonable time” period.  Haw. 
Hous. Auth. v. Uyehara, 77 Hawaiʻ i 144, 148—49 , 883 P.2d 65, 69—
70 (1994).  Under the similar federal rule, relief is available 
under FRCP Rule 60(b)(6) (2007) “within a reasonable time.”  
FRCP Rule 60(c)(1) (2007).  This phrasing has been interpreted 
to mean that relief is available “only where extraordinary 
circumstances prevented a litigant from seeking earlier, more 
timely relief.”  U.S. v. Alpine Land & Reservoir Co., 984 F.2d 
1047, 1049 (9th Cir. 1993).   
Our case law sets a high bar.  In Uyehara, Uyehara 
filed his Rule 60(b) motion over three-and-a-half years after  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
48 
 the entry of the order.  77 
Hawaiʻi at 149, 883 P.2d at 70 
(1994).  Uyehara claimed that his delay in filing was “not 
unreasonable because, throughout this period, [Uyehara] was 
attempting to obtain counsel.”  Id.  This court concluded, 
however, that “even under the more relaxed time limitations of HRCP Rule 60(b)(6), it is unreasonable for Uyehara to claim that
three and one-half years is a reasonable time expenditure for 
obtaining an attorney.”  Id.; see Aiona v. Wing Sing Wo Co., 45 
Haw. 427, 432, 368 P.2d 879, 882 (1962) (“‘There must be an end 
to litigation someday, and free, calculated, deliberate choices 
are not to be relieved from.’  Three years is far in excess of a
reasonable time within which to make a decision as to choice of remedy.”) (quoting Ackermann v. U.S., 340 U.S. 193, 198 (1950)). 
 
   
Here, Namahoe has demonstrated extraordinary 
circumstances that would justify waiting more than three years 
from the filing of the Decree of Foreclosure — and more than two 
years from the filing of the Order Confirming Sale — to file his 
Rule 60(b) motion.  Namahoe recounted that he had “no memory of 
being served or signing a paper that I was served,” and that he 
was receiving care for an illness.  Namahoe further claims that 
after the Writ of Ejectment was served, he was forced to live in a van “until it broke down.”  This inquiry is fact-specific and 
determined on a case-by-case basis.  See Alpine Land, 984 F.2d *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
49  /s/ Todd W. Eddins    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson    
 
 
  
     
 
 
at 1049.  Here, Namahoe has shown that the delay was warranted 
due to his personal circumstances which were, in significant 
part, generated by JBNC’s conduct.     
V.  CONCLUSION 
Namahoe presented two valid bases for relief from the 
Decree of Foreclosure issued by the circuit court.  We find that JBNC committed fraud on the court, and that the balance of 
equities weighed against foreclosure in this case.  Thus, the 
circuit court’s denial of Namahoe’s HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) motion is 
hereby reversed, and the Decree of Foreclosure is vacated insofar as it would preclude Namahoe from asserting a wrongful 
foreclosure claim.  We remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.
Kai K.A. Lawrence,
William J. Rosdil,
for petitioner   
  
 
David J. Minkin, 
for respondent  
   
 
 
 