 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER** 
Electronically Filed  
Supreme Court  
SCWC-22-0000698  
07-AUG-2026 
10:06 AM Dkt. 50 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 ________________________________________________________________ ---o0o---
STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
 CURTIS RYAN BEKKUM,   
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant.  
 ________________________________________________________________ 
SCWC-22-0000698  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-22-0000698; CASE NO. 2CPC-22-0000240)  
 
August  7, 2026  
 
DEVENS, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., AND  
CIRCUIT JUDGE MALINAO, IN PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, C.J., RECUSED  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
I. Introduction 
Defendant Curtis Ryan Bekkum ( “Bekkum”) was convicted by a 
jury on two counts of sexual assault in the fourth degree for 
engaging in sexual contact by “compulsion.”  Hawaiʻi Revised 
Statutes (“HRS”) § 707 -700 (2014), defines “compulsion” as 
“absence of consent, or a threat, express or implied, that  
   
 
  
 
    
     places a person in fear of public humiliation, property damage, 
or financial loss.”  The State of Hawaiʻi (“the State”) 
prosecuted the charges on the grounds the complaining witness 
(“CW”) had not consented to the sexual contact engaged in by 
Bekkum.  
On appeal, Bekkum asserted for the first time that the 
charges against him were fatally defective because they did not 
include the statutory definition of compulsion. The 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) agreed and reversed the 
convictions, ruling that the omission of the statutory 
definition from the charges failed to provide Bekkum with fair 
notice of the charges aga inst him. The ICA address ed some but 
not all of Bekkum’s other points of error on appeal. We granted 
the State’s application for certiorari regarding the validity of 
the charges . 
We seek to clarify our case law governing the validity of 
charges depending on when they are challenged, which has used 
language that can cause confusion. At bottom, w hen a defendant 
challenges the sufficiency of charges for the first time on 
appeal, the charges are presumed valid and a conviction is not 
to be reversed unless the defendant can show (1) the defendant 
was prejudiced; or (2) the charge cannot reasonably be construed 
to charge a crime (“the Motta/Wells rule”). State v. Brown, 157 
Hawaiʻi 354, 384, 577 P.3d 1045, 1075 (2025) (citing State v. 
2  
     
 
 
 
  
   
     
  
   
 
  Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1019, 1019 (1983) & State v. 
Wells, 78 Hawaiʻi 373, 382, 894 P.2d 70, 78 (1995) ). 
Here, the charges against Bekkum contained all required 
elements and Bekkum was not prejudiced as he knew that the 
State’s theory of compulsion was based on a lack of consent. We 
therefore reverse the ICA’s judgment on appeal and remand to the 
ICA to address Bekkum’s remaining points o f error on appeal. 
II. Background 
A. Complaint 
On February 10, 2022, the State charged Bekkum via 
complaint with two counts of sexual assault in the fourth degree 
in violation of HRS § 707 -733 (Supp. 2016). 
Under HRS § 707-733(1)(a), a person commits sexual assault 
in the fourth degree if “[t]he person knowingly subjects another 
person, not married to the actor, to sexual contact by 
compulsion or causes another person, not married to the actor, to have sexual contact with the actor by compulsion[.]”  
HRS § 707-700 defines “compulsion” as “absence of consent, 
or a threat, express or implied, that places a person in fear of 
public humiliation, property damage, or financial loss.”  
The complaint alleged: 
COUNT ONE :  (18-020246-001)  
 That on or about the 29th day of September, 2017, in 
the Division of Wailuku, County of Maui, State of Hawaii, 
CURTIS RYAN BEKKUM did knowingly subject [CW], a person not 
married to him, to sexual contact by compulsion and/or 
cause her to have sexual contact with him by compulsion, to 
3  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   wit, by touching and/or grabbing her breast, thereby 
committing the offense of Sexual Assault in the Fourth 
Degree in violation of Section 707 -733(1)(a) of the Hawaii 
Revised Statutes. 
COUNT TWO : (18-020246-002) 
That on or about the 30th day of September, 2017, in 
the Division of Wailuku, County of Maui, State of Hawaii, 
CURTIS RYAN BEKKUM did knowingly subject [CW], a perso n not 
married to him, to sexual contact by compulsion and/or 
cause her to have sexual contact with him by compulsion, to 
wit, by touching and/or pressing against her buttocks with 
his penis, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault 
in the Fourth Degree in violation of Section 707 -733(1)(a) 
in the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
As can be seen, the complaint tracked the language of HRS § 
707-733(1)(a) and did not include the statutory definition of 
compulsion. 
Bekkum pled not guilty and demanded a jury trial. 
B. Jury trial 
At trial, the State’s theory was that Bekkum had engaged in 
sexual contact without the CW’s consent. The CW was the State’s 
only witness, whose testimony is summarized as follows. 
The CW moved to Maui in 2003 and worked for a former state 
senator until he resigned around 2021. 
In 2015, when she was in her 50s, the senator helped the CW 
get a job as a live-in hospice care provider for an individual 
in Hana. Bekkum, who is a physician, was close friends with the 
senator.  The CW met Bekkum when he interviewed her to ensure 
she was qualified to provide the requisite hospice care.    
4  
  
  
  
     
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
  The CW suffered from stenosis of the spine, which caused 
her pain and compromised her mobility. In the fall 2017, CW 
moved from Hana to Haʻikū and driv ing to and from work aggravated 
her back pain. Bekkum offered to provide her with cortisone 
shots, which she accepted. Bekkum administered three cortisone 
shots without payment. 
The CW then told Bekkum she was thinking of asking her 
doctor for a pla telet-rich plasma (“PRP”) shot, in which her own 
blood would be drawn, a centrifuge would be used to separate out 
the platelets, and the platelets would be injected into the scar 
tissue in her back. Bekkum contacted the CW saying he was now 
offering PRP shots and could come to her home with to perform 
the procedure. The CW agreed, and on September 29, 2017, Bekkum 
arrived at her home around 6:00 PM. 
Bekkum insisted the CW put on a paper gown, even though she 
did not think it was necessary. The CW then straddled a chair, 
and Bekkum injected a needle into her lower back. Bekkum then 
placed one hand under the paper gown, grabbed her breast with 
his right hand, and his left hand moved across her thigh and her 
belly into her crotch area. He said something like, “[O]h, did 
I hurt you?” 
The CW pushed the chair onto the ground, turned to Bekkum 
and demanded that he leave, then went into her bedroom and 
locked the door. She got dressed, exited her bedroom, then went 
5  
   
 
 
  
    
 
   
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
  to the kitchen door to let in her two la rge dogs. Bekkum asked 
her to at least let him watch her dress as a payment for his 
services. As he was leaving, the CW told him to bill her. 
Bekkum suggested there would be other things she could do to pay 
him back. 
The next day, the CW woke up to a text message from Bekkum 
on her phone. She ignored it, but Bekkum continued texting her 
throughout the day and asked over Facebook messenger if he could 
come over. The CW said no. She eventually turned off her phone 
but then heard banging on her kitche n door. It was Bekkum, who 
said there was an emergency involving the senator. 
Bekkum let himself in then asked her if he could check her 
injection site. The CW did not think it was necessary, but she 
allowed him to check it. Bekkum then excused himself to use the 
bathroom, and the CW started doing the dishes at her kitchen 
sink. Bekkum came up behind her and put his arms around her. 
He pushed his erect penis into her tailbone area. Bekkum also 
tried to kiss her, but she turned away and guided him ou t the 
door, then shut and locked it behind him. 
The CW waited seven months to report the incidents to the 
police because she was afraid of retaliation and of losing her 
job with the senator. She eventually reported the incidents 
after speaking with her daughter, as well as her doctor, the 
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, and her therapist. 
6  
     
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 1 The jury found Bekkum guilty as charged on both counts of 
sexual assault in the fourth degree. The circuit court 
sentenced Bekkum to one year of pr obation and thirty days 
imprisonment on each count, to run concurrently. 
C. ICA proceedings 
Bekkum appealed his conviction, challenging for the first 
time the validity of the complaint.1 He contended the complaint 
was defective because it did not include the statutory 
definition of compulsion, which he argued does not comport with 
its common meaning. 
The State pointed out that because Bekkum challenged the 
validity of the 2022 complaint for the first time on appeal, the 
Motta/Wells “post-conviction liberal construction rule” applied. 
It argued that under the Motta/Wells standard, the complaint 
must be presumed valid and should not be vacated unless Bekkum 
could show prejudice or that the complaint cannot reasonably be 
construed to allege a crime. The State argued that the 
complaint was valid and that by the time Bekkum challenged the 
Bekkum raised six other points of error: that the circuit court erred 
in failing to (1) enter a judgment of acquittal, (2) instruct the jury 
regarding the State’s burden of proving timeliness beyond a reasonable doubt, 
and (3) instruct the jury to disregard certain hearsay testimony that was 
stricken and in admitting certain hearsay evidence. Bekkum also asserted 
that (4) his due process rights were violated due to prosecutorial 
misconduct, (5) his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance of counsel, 
and (6) the circuit court abused its discretion in denying his motion for a 
new trial. The ICA addressed the first two points listed above but did not 
address the others because it vacated Bekkum’s conviction after holding the 
complaint was deficient. None of the points listed above are at issue in 
this certiorari proceeding and will not be further discussed. 
7  
   
  
 
  
 
   
 validity of the complaint, he was fully apprised of the charges 
against him. 
The ICA vacated Bekkum’s conviction based on Bekkum’s 
challenge to the charges. State v. Bekkum, 156 Hawaiʻi 154, 570 
P.3d 1121, 2025 WL 1673691, at *4 (App. June 13, 2025) (SDO).   
The ICA acknowledged applicability of the Motta/Wells  rule 
because Bekkum challenged the validity of the complaint for the 
first time on appeal. Id.   But it ruled that “[u]nder the  
Motta/Wells  rule, a charge will only be adequate when it 
provides the accused with fair notice of the offense’s essential 
elements, which are conduct, attendant circumstances, and 
results of conduct.” Id.  (citing State v. Kauhane, 145 Hawai ʻi 
362, 370, 452 P.3d 359, 367 (2019)).   
The ICA concluded that the omission of the statutory 
definition of compulsion failed to provide Bekkum with fair 
notice of the charges. Id. It cited its own unpublished 
decision holding that “the statutory definition of ‘compu lsion’ 
departs from the commonly understood definitions of the term to 
such an extent that charging [the defendant] in the language of 
the statutes failed to provide him with fair notice of the 
charges.” Id. (quoting State v. Aledo , 145 Hawaiʻi 297, 452 P.3d 
765, 2019 WL 6127474, at *3-4 (App. Nov. 18, 2019) (SDO) ). 
The ICA held that the failure to include the statutory 
definition of compulsion rendered the complaint defective and 
8  
                    
  
 
 
 
     
  
 
  
  
  ordered a remand for the circuit court to dismiss the case 
without prejudice. Id. 
C. Certiorari proceedings 
On certiorari, the State argues the ICA applied the wrong 
standard of review when it vacated Bekkum’s conviction. The 
State also contends the ICA failed to evaluate the complaint’s 
validity in light of all the information Bekkum had prior to his 
appeal, including the State’s proposed jury instructions that 
set forth the statutory definition of compulsion. 
Bekkum maintains the omission of the statutory definition 
of compulsion rendered the complaint defective regardless of 
whether the ICA properly considered the record as a whole. He 
argues that the complaint cannot reasonably be construed to 
charge a crime. 
III. Standard of Review 
“Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements of 
a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under 
the de novo, or right/wrong standard.” State v. Baker , 146 
Hawaiʻi 299, 305, 463 P.3d 956, 962 (2020) (citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
As set forth below, we conclude the ICA did not properly 
apply the Motta/Wells rule. 
The statutory definition of compulsion did not add an 
additional element and did not need to be included in the 
9  
  
 
 
   
 
 complaint.   Thus, Bekkum has failed to show that the charges 
against him cannot reasonably be construed to allege crimes.  
Furthermore, the record demonstrates that Bekkum knew the 
State’s theory was that Bekkum acted by compulsion because there 
was an absence of consent. Thus, Bekkum also failed to show he 
was prejudiced by the non -inclusion of the statutory definition 
of compulsion. 
 Therefore, because Bekkum can neither show (1) that the 
complaint cannot reasonably be construed to allege a crime nor 
(2) that he was prejudiced, Kauhane, 145 Hawai ʻi at 370, 452 P.3d 
at 367, the ICA erred by ruling the charges must be dismissed.  
A.  The ICA applied the standard applicable to timely, early 
challenges instead of the Motta/Wells  rule applicable to a 
challenge first made on appeal  
1. The Motta/Wells rule of liberal construction applies 
to this case 
When a criminal defendant challenges the sufficiency of a 
charge in a timely manner, an appellate court will uphold that 
charge if: (1) it contains the elements of the offense; and (2) 
it sufficiently apprises the defendant of what the defendant 
must be prepared to meet; in other words, the relevant inquiry 
is whether or not the charge has provided the accused with fair 
notice of an offense’s essent ial elements.   Kauhane, 145 Hawaiʻi 
at 369–70, 452 P.3d at 366 –67.   In addition, in a timely 
challenge, if a charge contains generic terms, proscribing 
10  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 different types of conduct or different definitions in the 
disjunctive, then fair notice can require tha t the State provide 
specificity in the charge. State v. Jardine , 151 Hawaiʻi 96, 101, 
508 P.3d 1182, 1187 (2022). 
But a different standard applies where a defendant 
challenges charges after conviction . In a post -conviction 
challenge to a charge, the cha rge is presumed valid and will be 
invalidated only if the defendant can show (1) the charge cannot 
reasonably be construed to allege a crime ; or (2) the defendant 
was prejudiced : 
Under the Motta/Wells  rule, charges challenged for the 
first time on appeal  are presumed valid. Accordingly, we 
will only vacate a defendant’s conviction under this 
standard if the defendant can show: (1) that the charge 
cannot reasonably be construed to allege a crime; or (2) that the defendant was prejudiced.  
Kauhane, 145 Hawaiʻi at 370, 452 P.3d at 367 (cleaned up). 
Here, because Bekkum challenged the sufficiency of the 
complaint for the first time on appeal, the Motta/Wells  rule 
applies. Therefore, the only bases for a challenge are  that (1) 
the charges cannot reasonably be construed to allege crimes; or 
(2) that Bekkum was prejudiced. But the ICA invalidated the 
charges on a different basis. It stated that “[u]nder the 
Motta/Wells  rule, a charge will only be adequate when it 
provides the accused with fair notice of the offense’s essential 
elements, which are conduct, attendant circumstances, and 
results of conduct[,]” Bekkum, 2025 WL 1673691, at *4, and cited 
11  
  
  
 
 
   
    
 
   
    
   
 
  
  
 
  
   to Kauhane at 145 Hawaiʻi at 370, 452 P.3d at 367. The ICA cited 
to a passage from Kauhane that applies to timely challenges to 
charges. 
However, as stated in Kauhane, it is only when a charge is 
timely challenged that a court is to evaluate whether the charge 
provides “fair no tice of an offense’s essential elements. ” In 
other words, even if a charge contains all essential elements, 
it is possible that the charge would not provide “fair notice. ” 
But under the Motta/Wells rule governing post -conviction 
challenges, the inquiry is whether a charge can reasonably be 
construed to allege a crime, which only requires that a ll 
essential elements be included in the charge . The Motta/Wells 
rule does not impose the “fair notice” requirement of Kauhane 
because when a defendant has been c onvicted , whether through a 
trial or by change of plea, the defendant is presumed to have 
had “fair notice” of the charge. In other words, t he 
Motta/Wells rule is designed to discourage “technical claims of 
invalidity” first raised after trial. Motta, 66 Haw. at 91, 657 
P.2d at 1020. Here, the ICA may have conflated the standard 
applicable to timely, early challenges to a criminal charge with 
the standard governing post-conviction challenges. 
But as this was a challenge raised for the first time on 
appeal, the Motta/Wells rule applies. Neither criterion for 
setting aside the charge exists here, (1) that the charge cannot 
12  
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  reasonably be construed to allege a crime, or (2) that the 
defendant was prejudiced . Therefore, the ICA erred by ordering 
that the charges be dismissed. 
2. Bekkum has failed to show that the charges against him 
cannot reasonably be construed to allege crimes 
because the statutory definition of compulsion did not 
create an additional element 
Regardless of when a criminal charge is c hallenged, there 
are basic requirements it must fulfill to “reasonably be 
construed to allege a crime ,” as required by the first prong of 
the Motta/Wells analysis. As this court stated in State v. 
Jendrusch , 58 Haw. 279, 281, 567 P.2d 1242, 1244 (1977 ): 
The accusation must sufficiently allege all of the essential 
elements of the offense charged. This requirement obtains whether 
an accusation is in the nature of an oral charge, information, 
indictment, or complaint, and the omission of an essential element 
of the crime charged is a defect in substance rather than of form. 
A charge defective in this regard amounts to a failure to state an 
offense, and a conviction based upon it cannot be sustained, for 
that would constitute a denial of due process. 
58 Haw. at 281, 567 P2d at 1244 (cleaned up). Thus, even under 
the Motta/Wells rule, a charge must include all essential 
elements of the crime charged. 
Under HRS § 702 -205, the elements of an offense are such 
(1) conduct, (2) attendant circumstances, and (3) results of 
conduct as are specified by the definition of the offense. 
“Attendant circumstances” are any circumstances defined in an 
offense that are neither conduct nor the results of conduct. 
State  v.  Aiwohi,  109 Hawaiʻi  115,  127, 123 P.3d  1210, 1222 (2005).   
In addition, requisite states of mind must also be included in 
13  14 
  
 
 
 
 
 criminal charges. State v. Garcia , 152 Hawaiʻi 3, 7, 518 P.3d 
1153, 1157 (2022). 
Thus, under the Motta/Wells  rule, a charge need only 
contain requisite elements to “reasonably be constr ued to allege 
a crime.” The ICA deemed the charges invalid because they did 
not include the statutory definition of “compulsion.” But 
Motta/Wells  only requires that charges include all essential 
elements. Thus, a statutory definition need only be included if it  actually creates  an additional element.  
Different standards apply when a charge is challenged in a 
timely manner. As we stated in Garcia, which involved a timely 
challenge: 
Notice plays the central role in evaluating the 
sufficiency of a  charging  document. Article I, section 5 of 
the Hawaiʻi Constitution (right to due process) and article 
I, section 14 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution (right “to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation”) 
inspire the criteria we use to measure the adequacy of a 
charge: charging documents must include the elements of an 
offense and sufficiently describe the nature and cause of 
the accusation. See,  e.g., State  v.  Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻi 383, 
391, 219 P.3d 1170, 1178 (2009) (holding that “the 
sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured, inter  
alia,  by whether it contains the elements of the offense 
intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the 
defendant of what [they] must be prepared to meet”) (cleaned up).  
Garcia, 152 Hawaiʻi at 6, 518 P.3d at 115 6. 
Generally, “[w]hen a criminal defendant challenges the 
sufficiency of a charge in a timely manner, an appellate court 
will uphold that charge if: (1) it contains the elements of the 
offense; and (2) it sufficiently apprises the defendant of what  
  
 
  
  
   
 the defendant must be prepared to meet; [i]n other words, the 
relevant inquiry is whether or not the charge has provided the 
accused with fair notice of the  offense’s essential elements .”   
Kauhane, 145 Hawaiʻi at 369–70, 452 P.3d at 366 –67  (emphasis 
added) (cleaned up).  And if a charging document tracks an 
offense’s statutory language, then the State does not need to “load it with definitions of words defined elsewhere.”  Garcia, 
152 Hawaiʻ i at 8, 518 P.3d at  1158. But if a charge contains 
generic terms, proscribing different types of conduct or 
different definitions in the disjunctive, then fair notice can 
require that the State provide specificity in the charge.   
Jardine, 151 Hawai ʻi at 101, 508 P.3d at  1187.
    2
But this case involves a post -conviction challenge. Here, 
the charges against Bekkum tracked the statutory definition of 
2   In State v. Kaakimaka , 156 Hawai ʻi 302, 310, 574 P.3d 767, 775 (2025), 
we stated that in a timely challenge, “the State needs to provide the 
statutory definition of a term only when it creates an additional essential 
element of the offense, 
and  the term itself does not provide a person of 
common understanding with fair notice of that element .”  (emphasis added). In 
Kaakimaka, we held that (1) although “in any private place” is an attendant 
circumstances element of the charged offense, the statutory definition of 
“private place” does not create an additional attendant circum stance element; 
(2) “private place” is not a generic term requiring further particulars; and 
(3) based on other information provided up to the time of his motion to 
dismiss, Kaakimaka was informed of the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him and had actual knowledge of what was alleged to be the “private 
place.”  156 Hawai ʻi at 305, 574 P.3d at 770.  
Although it would not have changed the result in the case, Kaakimaka 
erroneously used “and” instead of “or.” In a timely challenge, even if a 
charge includes all elements, those elements must also provide fair notice. 
This error would not have changed the result in Kaakimaka , as we specifically 
held that the defendant was informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation against him and had actual knowledge of what was alleged to be the 
“private place” by the time he filed his motion to dismiss. 
15  
   
   
  
  
  
 
  
 sexual assault in the fourth degree and included all requisite 
elements. The charges included the (1) conduct (touching and/or  
grabbing breast/touching and/or pressing against her buttocks with his penis), (2) the attendant circumstance (by compulsion); 
and (3) results of conduct (sexual contact); as well as the 
state of mind (knowingly).   Critically, the statutory definition 
of compulsion did not create an additional element; “by 
compulsion” itself was the attendant circumstance  element.  
In deeming the charges against Bekkum insufficient, the ICA 
cited its own earlier unpublished summary disposition order in 
State v. Aledo , 2019 WL 3127474 . But Aledo involved a timely 
challenge to indictment . 2019 WL 3127474 , at *2. In Aledo, the 
ICA concluded that the dictionary definition of “compulsion” did 
not “rise to the level of specificity of the statutory 
definition of ‘compulsion ’ under HRS § 707 -700.” 2019 WL 
3127474, *4. And in a timely challenge, the relevant inquiry is 
whether or not the charge has provided the accused with fair 
notice of an offense’s essential elements . 
But the “fair notice” requirement does not apply to a p ost-
conviction challenge. In a post -conviction challenge governed 
by the Motta/Wells rule, a charge must include the statutory 
definition of a term only if it creates an additional essential 
element of the offense; in post -conviction challenges, fair 
16  
   
  
 
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 notice is presumed. Therefore, the ICA erred by relying on its 
holding in Aledo in this post -conviction challenge. 
Here, the statutory definition of compulsion did not create 
an additional essential element. The definition did not create 
an additional attend ant circumstance, as in Wheeler (that the 
defendant’s conduct occurred upon a public way, street, road, or 
highway). 121 Hawaiʻi at 392, 219 P .3d at 1179. It did not 
create an additional result of conduct, as in Kauhane (of 
rendering a highway impassable without unreasonable 
inconvenience or hazard). 145 Hawaiʻi at 371, 452 P.3d at 368. 
To summarize , under the Motta/Wells rule governing post -
conviction challenge s to criminal charge s, a defendant’s 
conviction can only be vacated if the defendant can show (1) 
that the charge cannot reasonably be construed to allege a 
crime; or (2) that the defendant was prejudiced. Bekkum has 
failed to show that the charges against him cannot reasonably be 
construed to allege crimes. As explained next, Bekkum has also 
failed to show he was prejudiced by the non -inclusion of the 
statutory definition of compulsion. Therefore, the charges 
should h ave been upheld in this post -conviction challenge. 
3. Bekkum has also failed to show he was prejudiced by 
the non-inclusion of the statutory definition of 
compulsion in the complaint 
A criminal charge ensures that an accused’s rights under 
the Hawaiʻi Constitution are upheld.  State v. Nesmith , 127 
17  
  
  
 
    
 
  
 Hawaiʻi 48, 52, 276 P.3d 617, 621 (2012).  One of those 
fundamental rights is enshrined in Article I, Section 14, which 
mandates that “the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be informed of the nature and c
ause of the accusation[.]” Haw. 
Const. Art. I, § 14. Therefore,  “[n]otice plays a central role 
in our analyses of charging documents’ adequacy.” State v. Van 
Blyenburg, 152 Hawai ʻi 66, 74, 520 P.3d 264, 272 (2022).  
But the notice requirement is not meant “to facilitate 
obtuse technical arguments about . . . what complex statutory 
definitions should or should not be included in a charging 
document. It is, rather, to safeguard an accused’s fundamental 
right to know what they must defend against to avoi d 
conviction.” Id. And in post -conviction challenges, fair 
notice of charges is presumed. 
Here, Bekkum did not challenge the charges until he appealed 
his convictions. He knew what he had to defend against to avoid 
conviction. He knew the State’s theory was that he had engaged 
in sexual contact by compulsion on the grounds the CW had not 
consented to the sexual contact alleged in the charges. In 
fact, he requested standard jury instruction 7.05 regarding 
“consent,” which generally provides that a CW’s consent is a 
defense to a prosecution. 
Also, in the ICA and in this court, Bekkum never claimed he 
did not know the State’s theory was that absence of consent 
18   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
    
 
      constituted “by compulsion” or that he was prejudiced by the 
non-inclusion of the statutory definition of compulsion in the 
charges against him.   His challenges to the complaint were not 
based on an alleged violation of his right to know what he had to defend against to avoid conviction.  Rather, he raised an 
obtuse, technical post-conviction challenge.   
Bekkum therefore failed to show he was prejudiced by the 
non-inclusion of the statutory definition of compulsion in the 
complaint. 
Hence, his challenge to the complaint fails under the 
Motta/Wells rule. 
V. Conclusion 
For these reasons, we reverse the ICA’s July 17, 2025 
judgment on appeal and remand this case to the ICA to address 
Bekkum’s remaining points of error on appeal. 
Richard B. Rost  
for petitioner   
Hayden Aluli   
for respondent   /s/ Vladimir P. Devens  
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 /s/  Todd W. Eddins  
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
/s/ Clarissa Y. Malinao  
 19 