***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
ALBERT BATALONA,  
Petitioner and Respondent /Petitioner- Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAII, 
Respondent and Petitioner /Respondent -Appellee.  
 
 
SCWC-15-0000569 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000569; S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0096; CR. NO. 99-1549) 
 
MARCH 19 , 2018 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case arises from a challenge by Albert Batalona 
to the order of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court) that den ied without a hearing Batalona’s  post-conviction 
petition, which raises twenty-four grounds for relief.   Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000569
19-MAR-2018
08:21 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 
 On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
held that the circuit court erred in denying without a hearing 
Batalona’s claims in his petition relating to defense counsel’s 
failure to challenge a prospective juror for cause and to secure 
at trial the attendance of a co- participant in the robbery whose 
out-of-court statement was admitted against Batalona.  The ICA  
otherwise affirmed the circuit court’s order denying the 
petition.   
Both the State of Hawaii and Batalona  applied to this 
court for a writ of certiorari.  In his certiorari application, 
Batalona contests  the ICA’s decision insofar as it affirmed the 
circuit court’s order as to the other twenty -two grounds raised 
in his petition.  T he State’s application  challenges the ICA’ s 
determination that defense counsel’s failure to  attempt to 
obtain the co-participant’s  attendance at trial raises a 
colorable claim for relief.    
First, with regard to  Batalona’s certiorari 
application,  we hold that grounds 8 and 10 of his petition, 
which assert that defense counsel’s failure  to challenge the 
denial of Batalona’s request for a copy of discovery materials  
resulted in the impairment of  his right to present a complete 
defense and adversely affected his  waiver of the right to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 
 testify, raise  colorable claims  for relief.  We otherwise affirm 
the ICA’s denial of a hearing with regard to the remaining 
grounds set forth in the petition except as to ground 18, which 
we dismiss without prejudice. 
Second, with respect  to the State’s certiorari 
application, we affirm the ICA’s determination that ground 20(f) 
of Batalona’s petition,  which asserts that defense counsel 
failed to exercise a good faith effort to obtain the co-
participant’s attendance at trial , raises a colorable claim for 
relief.   
Accordingly, we remand  this case to the circuit court 
for further proceedings in accordance with  this opinion.  
I. BACKGROUND 
On July 12, 1999, Batalona, Sean Mat sunaga, and Jacob 
Hayme were charged by complaint with bank robbery, in violation 
of 18 United States Code § 2113(a),  in the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawaii.  Matsunaga and Hayme 
were additionally charged with firearm violations.  The 
complaint against Batalona was subsequently dismissed without 
prejudice at the request of the United States Attorney.   
On August 11, 1999, a circuit court grand jury 
indicted Batalona on seventeen counts under state law , including ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 
 the following: robbery in the first degree in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-8 40(1)(b)(ii)1 (count 1); 
attempted murder in the first degree in violation of HRS §§ 705-
500,2 707-701(1)(b),3 and 706-6564 (count 2);  carrying, using, or 
                     
 1 A person commits the offense of robbery in the first degree 
if, in the course of committing theft:  
   . . .  
   (b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument 
and:  
    . . .  
    (ii) The person threatens the imminent use of 
force against the person of anyone who is present with 
intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping 
with the property.  
 
HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(ii) (Supp. 1998).  
 2 (1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if 
the person:  
   (a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances were as 
the person believes them to be; or  
   (b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the 
circumstances as the person believes them to be, 
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct 
intended to culminate in the person’s commission of the 
crime.   
  (2) When causing a particular result is an element of the 
crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime 
if, acting with the state of mind required to establish 
liability with respect to the attendant circumstances 
specified in the definition of the crime, the person 
intentionally engages in conduct which is a substantial 
step in a course of conduct intended or known to cause such 
a result.   
  (3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step 
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of 
the defendant’s criminal intent.  
 
HRS § 705- 500 (1993).  
 3 “A person commits the offense of murder in the first degree if 
the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of: . . . A peace 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 
 threatening to use a firearm in the commission of a separate 
felony in violation of HRS § 134- 6(a) and (e)5 (count 3); and 
possession of a prohibited firearm in violation of HRS § 134-
8(a)6 (count 17) .  The State thereafter filed a motion for nolle 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
officer, judge, or prosecutor arising out of the performance of official 
duties[.]”  HRS § 707 -701(1)(b) (1993). 
 4 “Persons convicted of first degree murder or first degree 
attempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment without the 
possibility of parole.”  HRS § 706 -656(1) (1993).  
 5 HRS § 134 -6 (repealed 2006) provided in relevant part as follows:  
 
 (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly 
carry on the person or have within the person’s immediate 
control or intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm 
while engaged in the commission of a separate felony, 
whether the firearm was loaded or not, and whether operable 
or not . . . .  
  . . .  
 (e) Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall 
be guilty of a class A felony.  Any person violating this 
section by carrying or possessing a loaded firearm or by 
carrying or possessing a loaded or unloaded pistol or 
revolver without a license issued as provided in section 
134-9 shall be guilty of a class B felony.  Any person 
violating this section by carrying or possessing an 
unloaded firearm, other than a pistol or revolver, shall be 
guilty of a class C felony.  
 
HRS § 134- 6(a), (e). 
 6 The manufacture, possession, sale, barter, trade, gift, 
transfer, or acquisition of any of the following is 
prohibited: assault pistols, except as provided by section 
134-4(e); automatic firearms; rifles with barrel lengths 
less than sixteen inches; shotguns with barrel lengths less 
than eighteen inches; cannons; mufflers, silencers, or 
devices for deadening or muffling the sound of discharged 
firearms; hand grenades, dynamite, blasting caps, bombs, or 
bombshells, or other explosives; or any type of ammunition 
or any projectile component thereof coated with teflon or 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 
 prosequi of counts 4 through 16, which the circuit court 
granted.   
A. Pretrial Request for Discovery  
 
 At a  pretrial hearing, defense counsel requested 
permission from the circuit court to give  Batalona a redacted 
copy of the discovery that defense counsel had received.7  
Defense counsel indicated that he had been provided 
approximately 3,000 pages of discovery
 and that it was important 
for Batalona to receive the discovery because each witness was 
going to testify as to events that occurred on the day of the 
incident.  The circuit court denied defense counsel’s request, 
expressing its concern that, if Batalona were permitted to have 
a copy of the discovery, then the court will “have every 
defendant always asking for information. ”  The court added that 
“there’s very few information that any defendant really needs to 
understand in terms of the details of a case” a nd that defense 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
any other similar coating designed primarily to enhance its 
capability to penetrate metal or pierce protective armor; 
and any type of ammunition or any projectile component 
thereof designed or intended to explode or segment upon 
impact with its target.  
 
HRS § 134- 8(a) (1993).  
 7 Counsel informed the court that the discovery materials would be 
redacted to remove any personal information of the witnesses.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 
 counsel “can go to the prison and discuss it with [Batalona] .”  
Defense counsel responded that it would probably take about one 
to two months to review the discovery with Batalona because
 he 
was incarcerated and
 argued that Batalona was entitled to review 
the reports and witness statements against him “word by word .”  
The court responded that “[t]here are other ways”  and denied 
counsel permission to provide a copy of the redacted discovery 
to Batalona.   
B. Pretrial Motions 
 
 
 Hayme and Matsunaga , who were co -participants in the 
robbery, both reached plea agreements with the federal 
government.  In Matsunaga ’s Memorandum of Plea Agreement,  he 
admitted his involvement in the robbery and identified Batalona  
as the person who was responsible for shooting at the office r.  
Two days later, Matsunaga provided a recorded statement in which 
he implicated himself as the person who shot at the officer.  
Hayme also provided a recorded statement, in accordance 
with his 
Memorandum of Plea Agreement, which was both inculpatory and 
exculpatory as to his involvement in the charged offenses in 
this case.8   
                     
 8 In their respective plea agreements, Hayme and Matsunaga agreed 
to plead guilty to bank robbery and a firearm offense in exchange for the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 
   On July 17, 2000, the State filed a motion in limine 
seeking to preclude, inter alia, the admission of Matsu naga’s 
recorded statement at trial .  In its motion, the State noted 
that it did not appear that either  Hayme or Matsunaga would be 
testifying at trial.  Batalona opposed the State’s motion, 
arguing, inter alia, that Matsunaga’s recorded statement was 
admissible pursuant to the hearsay exceptions regarding public 
records and reports and statements against interest.   
 
 The State’s motion was  heard on July 20, 2000, and the 
State reiterated that Matsunaga would not testify at trial.9  The 
State contended, alternatively, if Matsunaga’s  statement was 
admitted into evidence, his  Memorandum of Plea Agreement, as 
well as Hayme’s recorded statement,  would also have to be 
admitted.  In response, Batalona maintained that Matsunaga’s  
recorded statement was admissible 
and additionally noted that it 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
United States’ agreement to dismiss one count of the information, to not 
charge them with any additional charges arising from the July 7, 1999 bank 
robbery, and, in its discretion, to move the sentencing court to reduce the 
sentence based on the assistance provided.  Hayme and Matsunaga also agreed 
to testify truthfully at any federal or state trials, hearings, or other 
proceedings involving codefendants and others.  They further agreed not to 
assert any privilege to refuse to testify in any federal or state trial 
involving or related to the crimes for which they were charged.   
 9 The Honorable Marie N. Milks presided over all proceedings 
related to the trial in this case.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 
 was the defense’s desire to call Hayme and Matsunaga to 
determine whether they would invoke their privilege against 
self-incrimination.  Batalona  argued that he had a 
constitutional right to confront witnesses and a constitutional 
right to present his defense.   
The circuit court ruled that, if Batalona introduced  
Matsunaga’s recorded statement, both that statement and 
Matsunaga’s Memorandum of Plea Agreement would be admitted as 
evidence.  As to Hayme’s  recorded  statement, the court 
determined that the introduction of that statement alone-- so 
long as the statement was inculpatory to Hayme and fell within a 
hearsay exception--would be permitted.  T he court suggested that 
both parties should attempt to get live witnesses, to which the 
State responded, “We can’t get them.”  The court reiterated that 
“you should first try that,” and the State responded, “We’ve 
tried that.”   
On July 24, 2000, the State filed a motion for 
redaction of Hayme’s and Matsunaga’s statements, attaching both 
statements and requesting that specific pages and lines be 
redacted.  The following day, Batalona filed a second 
supplemental motion in limine, seeking an order precluding any 
references to portions of any statement that do not fall within ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 
 an exception to the hearsay rule or that violate Batalona’s 
constitutional right to confrontation.   
A hearing on both parties’ motions  was held on July 
31, 2000.  The transcript of this  portion of the hearing is not 
part of the record on appeal.   
C. Trial and Appeal  
A jury trial took place from July 27, 2000,  through 
August 11, 2000.  At trial, t he following evidence was adduced.  
On July 7, 1999, Batalona, Hayme, Matsunaga, and Roger Dailey 
were involved in an armed robbery of the American Savings Bank 
located at 1215 Hunakai Street in Kahala, Hawai i.  At 
approximately 10:00 a .m., Batalona, Hayme, Matsunaga, and Dailey 
entered the bank wearing ski masks and dark clothes; bank 
employees and customers were ordered to get on the floor and 
keep their eyes on the ground.  The  four men  removed 
approximately $120,000 from the cash drawers and the tellers ’ 
cash dispensers  and exited the bank.  Batalona  and Matsunaga 
were each carrying an AR -15 military assault rifle,  Dailey held 
a .357 revolver, and Hayme was armed with an AK -47 military 
assault rifle.    
At approximately 10:03 a.m. on that day , Honolulu 
Police Department (HPD)  Officer Frederick Rosskopf --who was on ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 
 duty and in uniform-- was dispatched to the American Savings Bank 
in Kahala to investigate the activation of the  bank’s silent  
alarm.  Officer Rosskopf parked his car on the side of the 
street on which  the bank was located and then  walked along the 
sidewalk toward the bank.  A s he approached the ban k’s parking 
lot, Officer Rosskopf saw a male  wearing a dark ski mask and 
dark clothing, who appeared to be standing behind a vehicle--
“like a roof of a car in front of him .”  The masked male had a 
rifle to his right shoulder, which was aimed directly at Officer 
Rosskopf.  T he masked male immediately opened fire upon seeing 
Officer Rosskopf, causing Officer Rosskopf to dive for cover 
behind a white compact car.  The rate of fire quickened, pinning 
Officer Rosskopf behind the car.  Some of the rounds hit the car 
that Officer Rosskopf used as cover.  Officer Rosskopf returned 
fire but took cover again as the masked male continued firing at 
him.  The rate of fire eventually slowed to a stop.  Officer 
Rosskopf received some scratches and bruises as a result of the  
incident.   
Dailey testified that Batalona stood “in the door jamb 
on the passenger side ” of the vehicle during the exchange of 
gunfire, Batalona’s weapon was pointed in the direc tion of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 
 Officer Rosskopf’s car, Batalona fired first, and  Hayme and 
Matsunaga were still in the bank when the shooting started.10   
Siosaia Talakai, a friend 
whom Batalona stayed with 
following the robbery, and who was called as a witness by the 
State, testified that Batalona told him that he did not intend 
to kill Officer Rosskopf and that hi
s main concern was to get 
away.   
Following the exchange of gunfire, Officer Rosskopf 
saw a white Blazer-- which was used as a  getaway car --exiting the 
parking lot of the American Savings Bank driven by a man wearing 
a black ski mask and dark clothing.  After providing dispatch 
with a description of the vehicle and the vehicle’s direction of 
travel, Officer Rosskopf proceeded toward the bank parking lot.  
Upon reaching a wooden fence, Officer Rosskopf saw a nother male 
wearing a dark ski mask running toward Kahala Mall.  Officer 
Rosskopf could not tell whether that masked male was the same 
person who shot at him.   
                     
 10 Dailey also reached a plea agreement with the federal government 
in which he agreed to plead guilty to bank robbery in exchange for the United 
States’ agreement to not c harge him with any additional charges arising from 
the July 7, 1999 bank robbery, and, in its discretion, to move the sentencing 
court to reduce the sentence based on the assistance provided.  The other 
terms of the plea agreement were similar to Hayme’s and Matsunaga’s plea 
agreements.  See supra note 8.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 
 Hiroshi Inouye, a delivery driver for the Makiki Bake 
Shop, was delivering bread and other bake d goods using the 
shop’s van when a man wearing a ski mask came in front of the 
vehicle, causing Inouye to stop the van.  The masked man, who 
was carrying what appeared to be an automatic rifle, opened the 
van door, asked for the keys , and ordered Inouye out of the van; 
Inouye complied.  T he masked man then drove off with the van.  
The State argued in closing argument that Batalona was the 
masked man who shot at Officer Rosskopf and who took the van.   
The van was recovered by police and returned to the 
owner of the Makiki Bake Shop the day after the robbery.  
Approximately two weeks later, a rifle magazine was discovered 
in the passenger side door of the van.  The  magazine , which had 
four remaining cartridges,  was turned over to police by the Bake 
Shop owner and later admitted into evidence at trial .   
Pursuant to an investigation conducted by HPD, it was 
discovered that two weapons were fired on the day of the 
robbery: the AK -47 that was later recovered fr om Hayme’s home 
and one of the AR-15s .  In addition, officers learned that, 
about two or three weeks prior to the bank robbery, Batalona, 
Dailey, Hayme, and Matsunaga went  pig hunting at Waiahole Ranch, 
where Batalona fired an AR -15 rifle .  Police also learned that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 
 Batalona was a range instructor at the Diamond Head Gun Shop.  
HPD recovered, inter alia, twenty- nine cartridge casings and a 
magazine containing thirty cartridges from the bank parking lot 
and twenty shell casings from Waiahole Ra
nch.  The two AR-15 
rifles that were apparently used in the course of the robbery 
were not recovered.   
Hayme did not testify, but 
a redacted version of his  
recorded statement was offered by the State, admitted into 
evidence,11 and played for the jury.12  The recorded statement was 
given--as part of his plea agreement with the federal 
government--the day after Hayme pled guilty to robbery and a 
firearm violation in federal court.  In his statement, Hayme 
said that all four robbers were on the passenger side of the 
Blazer during the exchange of gunfire.  Hayme stated that he  did 
not fire his weapon until after shots were fired.  He also  
stated that one person was mounted on top of the Blazer; that 
                     
 11 The redacted version of Hayme’s recorded statement was admitted 
into evidence on August 2, 2000.  Defense counsel indicated that there was no 
objection to its admission into evidence except for whatever had been 
discussed previously.  The previous discussions regarding Hayme’s statement 
appear to relate to the hearings that were held on July 20, 2000 and July 31, 
2000. 
 12 The redacted version of Hayme’s recorded statement that was 
admitted into evidence is not included in the record on appeal and is not 
available.  As a result, the substance of Hayme’s admitted statement is drawn 
from the State’s and the defense’s closing arguments.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 
 person--who was not Hayme--was firing at Officer Rosskopf.  
Hayme further s aid that he fired about two rounds “ [m]aybe just  
in the air” and that he did not shoot at Officer Rosskopf.   
The State also presented the testimony of Curtis Kubo 
and Charles Davis, experts in firearms and ballistics.  The 
firearms and ballistics evidence indicated that the magazines 
recovered from the bakery van and the bank parking lot were 
manufactured to function with either an AR- 15 or an M -16 rifle.  
In addition, twenty-five of the twenty-nine cartridge casings 
recovered from the bank parking lot were fired from an AR-15, 
which was the same AR-15 that fired the twenty cases recovered 
from the ranch.  The AR
-15 is also chambered for the type of 
ammunition found in the magazine recovered from the bakery van.   
Following the conclusion of the State’s case -in-chief, 
the defense moved for judgment of acquittal, which motion the 
court denied.  The defense offered a redacted version of the 
recorded statement of Matsunaga, who did not 
testify.  The 
redacted statement was admitted into evidence and played for the 
jury.13  In his statement, Matsunaga said that on the day of the 
                     
 13 Matsunaga’s redacted statement, as admitted at trial, is also not 
included in the record on appeal and is not available.  Hence, the substance 
of Matsunaga’s recorded statement that was played for the jury is drawn from 
the parties’ closing arguments.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 
 incident he was the last person out of the bank, he had an AR-15 
rifle, and he shot at Officer Rosskopf. 
 Matsunaga’s recorded 
statement contradicted 
his version of events as set forth in his 
Memorandum of Plea Agreement, in which he stated that Batalona 
fired numerous rounds at Officer Rosskopf.14   
The circuit court  subsequently advised Batalona of his 
rights to testify and not to testify; Batalona elected not to 
testify, and the defense rested.   
The circuit court instructed the jury on the lesser 
included offenses of attempted murder in the first degree,  
attempted assault in the first and second degree , and reckless 
endangering in the first degree.  Batalona requested that the 
court also instruct the jury on attempted murder in the second 
degree, attempted reckless manslaughter, and assault against a 
police officer, which instructions the court refused.  The 
parties then presented closing arguments.   
The jury found Batalona guilty as charged on all four 
counts.  The circuit court sentenced Batalona to the following: 
count 1, twenty years imprisonment with a mandatory minimum term 
                     
 14 During the State’s case -in-chief, Matsunaga’s Memorandum of Plea 
Agreement and the proffer letter he received from the United States 
Attorney’s Office were stipulated into evidence --subject to Batalona’s prior 
objections.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 
 of fifteen years imprisonment; count 2, life imprisonment 
without the possibility of parole; count 3, twenty  years 
imprisonment with a mandatory minimum term of fifteen years 
imprisonment; and count 17, five  years imprisonment with a 
mandatory minimum term of five years.  All of the terms of 
imprisonment were ordered to run concurrently unless there were 
other sentences for which Batalona was already serving.  The 
court also imposed restitution in the amount of $6,244.02.  
Judgment of conviction and sentence was entered on October 11, 
2000, from which Batalona appealed.  On October 9, 2003, this 
court affirmed the judgment of conviction and sentence in a 
summary disposition order
.  State v. Batalona , No. 23820
, 2003 
WL 22311769 (Haw. Oct. 9, 2003) (SDO).   
D. Petition for Post -Conviction Relief  
  On December 8, 2010, Batalona-- proceeding  pro se--
filed a petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to Hawai i 
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 (p etition), asserting twenty -
two grounds for relief.  Batalona filed a motion to supplement 
his petition with ground 23, which the circuit court granted.  
Batalona later filed a supplemental ground 24 .  Of the twenty -
four grounds raised in the petition, nineteen  involve 
allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel; three involve ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 
 allegations of illegality in the sentence Batalona received; one  
involves an allegation of post -conviction denial of access to 
discovery; and one involves an allegation of cumulative errors 
and omissions that would  preclude instructions on lesser 
included offenses in a retrial.   
 
 Following a series of ex parte motions by the State to 
extend the time to file its response,  which were primarily 
related to the State’s ongoing efforts to obtain a declaration 
from defense counsel, the State filed its  answer to t he petition  
on November 17, 2011.15  Batalona thereafter filed  a reply to the 
State’s answer.   
  
On January 25, 2012, the State filed a supplemental 
answer to the petition, which includes  a declaration from 
defense counsel (Declaration).16  In his D eclaration, defense 
counsel stated that any error or omission on his part relating 
to Batalona’s claims of in effective assistance of counsel, as 
alleged in grounds 1-6, 8-9, 13 -17, 19-21, and 23 of the 
petition, did not result in the substantial impairment of a 
                     
 15 After the State filed its answer to the petition, it moved for 
issuance of an order to show cause in order to obtain defense counsel’s 
declaration.   
 16 Batalona’s counsel at trial and on direct appeal was David Klein, 
Esq.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 
 meritorious claim or defense and/or was the result of a 
strategic or tactical decision.  As to ground 10, which involves  
an allegation relating to counsel’s advice that Batalona should 
not testify at trial, defense counsel stated that the circuit 
court conducted a colloquy with Batalona regarding his right to 
testify as required by Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawaii 226, 900 
P.2d 1293 (1995), adding that any privileged communications 
between Batalona and him would not be disclosed without a court 
order indicating the privilege was waived.  As to grounds 7, 11-
12, 18, and 22, which involve allegations regarding the 
propriety of Batalona’s sentence, post -conviction denial of 
access to discovery, and cumulative errors and omissions 
relating to a retrial, defense counsel declared that these 
allegations did not relate to a claim of ineffective assistance 
of counsel.   
  On July 1, 2015, the circuit court issued its 
“Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying 
Petition for Post- Conviction Relief Without a Hearing”  (Order).17  
The court concluded
 that Batalona’s claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel in grounds 1- 6, 8-10, 13-17, 19-21, and 23 
                     
 17 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided over the post -
conviction proceedings.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 
 were “patently frivolous and without a trace of support”  because 
Batalona failed to point to specific errors or omissions by 
defense counsel resulting from a lack of skill, judgment, or 
diligence.18  The circuit court also concluded that grounds 7, 
11, 12, 18, and 22 were patently frivolous and without a trace 
of support either in the record or 
from the evidence submitted 
by Batalona.  Concluding that Batalona failed to demonstrate the 
existence of a colorable claim that would have required  a 
hearing before the circuit court, the court denied Batalona’s 
petition without a hearing.19  Batalona filed a notice of appeal 
to the ICA.   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS  
In his opening brief, Batalona asserted that the 
circuit court erred in denying  a hearing on twenty-one of the 
twenty-three grounds raised in the petition and in not 
addressing ground 24
.20  Specifically, with regard to ground 1 , 
                     
 18 The circuit court provided no further explanation for its ruling 
on Batalona’s claims relating to ineffective assistance of counsel.   
 19 The circuit court did not address supplemental ground 24, in 
which Batalona argues that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to 
call witnesses to show that Batalona was inside the bank when shots were 
fired.   
 20 Batalona did not challenge the circuit court’s denial of a 
hearing on grounds 11 and 12.  With regard to the other twenty -two grounds, 
Batalona’s contentions on appeal parallel those stated in his petition.  The 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 
 Batalona argued that defense counsel provided ineffective 
assistance by being compelled to use peremptory challenges-- that 
Batalona wanted to use to excuse other jurors-- on two 
prospective jurors who should have been challenged  and excused 
for cause.   
  As to ground 20(f), Batalona argued  that defense 
counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to secure the 
attendance of Hayme and Matsunaga at trial
.  Batalona submitted 
that Hayme and Matsunaga gave investigators recorded statements 
that were both favor able and contrary to Batalona’s interests .  
Redacted versions of those statements, Batalona  continued,  were 
admitted into evidence and published to the jury in violation of 
his right to confrontation of witnesses.   
In its answering brief, the State argued, inter alia, 
that Batalona’s claim in ground 1  failed as a matter of fact 
because Batalona did not demonstrate that the prospective jurors 
who allegedly should have been excused for cause were in fact 
selected as jury members in Batalona’s trial.  In the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
ICA’s memorandum opinion individually addres sed grounds 1 and 20(f), and 
therefore these grounds are summarized here.  The remaining grounds in the 
petition that were denied without a hearing and that Batalona raised on 
appeal and certiorari will be addressed infra.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 
 alternative, the State contended that Batalona’s claim failed as 
a matter of law because Batalona did not show that the 
prospective jurors had biases favoring law enforcement.   
As to ground 20(f) of Batalona’s petition, the State 
asserted that the transcr ipts and the recordings of Hayme’s and 
Matsunaga’s statements were admitted into evidence as defense 
exhibits.21  In addition, the State argued that defense counsel 
used Hayme’s and Matsunaga’s statements in closing argument to 
support the defense theory that Batalona was not the person who 
shot at Officer Rosskopf.  The State contended that the decision 
to call a witness to testify is a tactical one that is typically 
within the judgment of defense counsel.   
In his reply brief,  Batalona contended  that the issue 
in ground 1 was not whether the prospective jurors actually 
served on the jury, but rather, counsel’s  expending  of 
peremptory challenges on  prospective jurors who m the circuit 
court should have excused  for cause  had they been so challenged.  
Thus, according to Batalona, he was left with no peremptory 
challenges to use on other
 jurors having ties to law enforcement 
and who ended up serving on the jury in his case .   
                     
 21 The transcript  indicates that Hayme’s redacted statement was 
admitted as State’s Exhibit 160.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 
 As to ground 20(f), Batalona replied  that the use of 
the recordings and the transcripts of Hayme’s and Matsunaga’s 
statements would have been permitted if  Hayme and Matsunaga were  
unavailable, which they were not.  Batalona reiterated that 
defense counsel’s failure to secure the attendance of Hayme and 
Matsunaga violated his right to confrontation.   
  In  its memorandum opinion, the ICA determined as to 
ground 1 that  it was unclear whether defense counsel  would have 
succeeded in having the first of the two prospective jurors 
identified by Batalona excused for cause,  as the juror show ed no 
bias in favor of law enforcement.  However, the ICA concluded 
that the second prospective juror may have demonstrated 
sufficient bias against Batalona that defense counsel  could have 
succeeded in challenging that  juror for cause , thus preserving 
one of his  peremptory challenges to excuse  another prospective 
juror.  Concluding that  defense counsel ’s basis for not 
challenging the  second prospective juror for cause was unclear 
and that his Declaration did not provide an adequate 
explanation, the ICA held that Batalona raised a colorable claim 
and that the circuit court therefore erred in denying grou nd 1 
of Batalona’s petition without a hearing.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 
 Turning to ground 20(f), the ICA held that the 
admission of Matsunaga’s recorded statement did not violate 
Batalona’s Sixth Amendment right to confrontation because 
Batalona himself introduced Matsunaga’s st atement at trial.  As 
to Hayme’s statement , the ICA determined that the statement was 
testimonial and that the record was unclear whether Hayme was 
really unavailable.  The ICA foun d that, while Hayme apparently 
refused to testify, there did not appear to be any evidence that 
the State made an  effort in good faith to secure Hayme’s 
attendance at trial.  Had Hayme testified, the ICA continued, 
Batalona may have cast reasonable doubt on the State’s theory 
that Batalona  shot at Officer Rosskopf because, as the State 
conceded, Hayme also fired his weapon during the robbery.  As a 
result, if defense counsel did not subpoena Hayme, the ICA 
determined that such a failure may have resulted in the 
withdrawal or the substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  Because defense counsel ’s Declaration did 
not adequately address his decision not to subpoena Hayme,  the 
ICA concluded that the circuit court should have held a hearing 
on this portion  of ground  20(f) of Batalona’s petition.    
Accordingly, the IC A vacated the circuit court’s Order 
and remanded the case for a hearing on grounds 1 and 20(f).   As ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 
 to the remaining grounds, the ICA  affirmed the circuit court’s 
denial of a hearing,  concluding --without individual ly 
addressing--that “the other twenty -one separate grounds, as well 
as the other subparts of Ground 20 in Batalona’s Rule 40 
Petition . . . are patently frivolous and [are] without a trace 
of support either in the record or from other evidence submitted 
by [Batalona].”   
  Batalona filed an applic
ation for a writ of certiorari 
challenging the ICA’s decision that affirmed the circuit court’s 
denial of a hearing on the other  twenty-one grounds.   The State 
also filed an application, arguing that the ICA erred in holding 
that the circuit court should have held a hearing on ground 
20(f) regarding defense counsel’s failure to subpoena Hayme .22   
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
  “The question on appeal of a denial of a Rule 40 
petition without a hearing is whether the trial record indicates 
that Petitioner’
s application for relief made such a showing of 
a colorable claim as to require a hearing before the lower 
court.”  Dan v. State , 76 Hawai i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 
                     
 22 The State did not challenge the ICA’s ruling on ground 1 that 
defense counsel’s failure to challenge a juror for cause raises a colorable 
claim. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 
 (1994) (emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Allen , 7 Haw. App. 
89, 92-93, 744 P.2d 789, 792-93 (1987)).  In determining whether 
a Rule 40 petition raises a colorable claim, “the appellate 
court steps into the trial court ’s position, reviews the same 
trial record, and redecides the issue.”  Id.  
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Batalona’s Application  for Writ of Certiorari  
1. Colorable Claims f or Relief  
In his application, Batalona asserts twenty-two of the 
twenty-four grounds for relief that are raised in his petition.23  
Among those grounds is a claim that defense counsel provided 
ineffective assistance at trial for failing to challenge the 
circuit court’s denial of Batalona’s request for a copy of 
discovery materials.  Based on this failure, Batalona 
respectively contends in grounds 8 and 10 that his right to 
participate in his own defense was impaired and his right to 
voluntarily waive the right to testify was affected.   
Batalona specifically asserts in ground 8  that defense 
counsel erred in asking the court’s permission  to release 
discovery materials to him  when Rule 16(e)(3) of the Hawaii 
                     
 23 Although the grounds are numbered differently in the petition and 
the application, they are identical in substance and will be referenced as 
numbered in the petition.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 
 Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) places the burden on the State 
to show cause why Batalona should not be provided a copy of the 
discovery materials.   
Batalona ’s counsel, on February 15, 2000, made a 
pretrial request to provide Batalona with a redacted copy of the 
discovery that had been disclosed by the prosecutor.  The 
request was denied by the circuit court.   At the time of 
Batalona’s pretrial  request, HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) provided  as 
follows: 
Any material furnished to an attorney pursuant to these 
rules shall remain in the attorney’s exclusive custody and 
be used only for the purposes of conducting the attorney’s 
side of the case, and shall be subject to such other terms 
and conditions as the court may provide.  
 
HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) (1993 ).  Hence, HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) stated 
that discovery materials we re to remain in an attorney’s 
exclusive custody but that they “shall be subject to such other 
terms and conditions as the court may prov ide.”  Counsel 
informed the court that the discovery consisted of approximately 
3,000 pages and that it was important for Batalona to receive 
the discovery because each witness was going to testify as to 
events that occurred on the day of the incident.  De fense 
counsel also explained that it would probably take about one to 
two months to review the discovery with Batalona.  In denying 
defense counsel’s request, the court stated that, if Batalona’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 
 request was granted,  then every defendant will be asking for a 
copy of discovery and that counsel could instead go to the 
prison to discuss the discovery materials with Batalona.   
  E ffective July 1, 2000, HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) was amended 
to read as follows: 
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any 
discovery material furnished to an attorney pursuant to 
these rules shall remain in the attorney’s exclusive 
custody and be used only for the purposes of conducting the 
attorney’s side of the case, and s hall be subject to such 
other terms and conditions as the court may provide.  The 
attorney may provide the defendant with a copy of any 
discovery material obtained if the attorney gives the 
prosecutor written notice of the attorney’s intent to do so  
and the prosecutor does not file a motion for protective 
order within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice.  
 
HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) (2000) (emphasis added).   Based on the rule 
amendment, an attorney was authorized  without court permission 
to provide a defendant with a copy of discovery materials, so 
long as notice of the intent to do so was communicated to the 
prosecutor in writing and the prosecutor did  not move for a 
protective order within ten days of receiving notice.24   
                     
 24 The dissent argues that ground 8 of Batalona’s petition relates 
only to the pre- 2000 version of HRPP Rule 16(e)(3).  Dissent at 8.  On the 
contrary, Batalona contends in ground 8 that HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) “places the 
burden on the prosecution to show cause why Batalona should not be provided 
with discovery.”  (Capitalization omitted.)  And indisputably, it was the 
2000 amendment to HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) that allowed a defense counsel to 
provide a copy of the discovery to the defendant, placing the burden on the 
prosecutor to move for a protective order upon receiving notice from a 
defense counsel that a copy of the discovery was to  be provided to the 
defendant.  Thus, Batalona’s reliance on the 2000 amendment to HRPP Rule 
16(e)(3) is markedly apparent.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 
   Trial in this case did not commence until July 27, 
2000.  Following the amendment to HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) on July 1, 
2000, defense counsel could have notified the prosecutor
 in 
writing that he was going to provide Batalona with a copy of the 
obtained discovery while also requesting  the circuit court to 
modify its prior ruling  in light of the amended rule.  Notice to 
the prosecutor would have allowed the State ten days to file a 
motion for a protective order.  If the prosecutor had objected, 
the circuit court would have decided, based upon a showing of 
cause, whether to deny, limit, or postpone Batalona’s access to 
the discovery, or “make such other order as is appropriate. ”  
HRPP Rule 16(e)(4) (2000).25  However,  nothing in the record 
indicates that defense counsel gave the prosecutor written 
notice of an intent to provide Batalona with copies of the 
discovery, renewed Batalona’s request for discovery after HRPP 
Rule 16(e)(3) was amended
, or requested that the circuit court 
modify its previous ruling.   
                     
 25 HRPP Rule 16(e)(4) provides in relevant part as follows:  
  Upon a showing of cause, the court may at any time order 
that specified disclosures or investigatory procedures be 
denied, restricted, or deferred, or make such other order 
as is appropriate, provided that all material and 
information to which a party is entitled shall be disclosed 
in time to permit counsel to make beneficial use thereof.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 
   “The constitutio nal right to the assistance of counsel 
in a criminal case . . . is satisfied only when such assistance 
is ‘effective.’”  State v. Kahalewai , 54 Haw. 28, 30, 501 P.2d 
977, 979 (1972) (quoting Powell v. Alabama , 287 U.S. 45, 71 
(1932)).  This court has recog nized that “effective” counsel 
means “counsel whose assistance is ‘ within the range of 
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. ’”  Id. 
(quoting McMann v. Richardson , 397 U.S. 759, 771 (1970)).  “A 
primary requirement is that counsel must conduct careful factual 
and legal investigations and inquiries with a view to developing 
matters of defense in order that he [or she] may make informed 
decisions on [the] client’s behalf,  . . . both at pretrial 
proceedings . . . and at trial.”  State v. Aplaca , 74 Haw. 54, 
70, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 (1992) (third and fourth alterations in 
original) (quoting Kahalewai, 54 Haw. at  30-31, 501 P.2d at 979-
80).  In a similar fashion, Standard 4-1. 2(b) of the American 
Bar Association (ABA) Defense Function Standards for Criminal 
Justice (3d ed. 1993) [hereinafter ABA Defense Function 
Standards] provides that the basic duty of defense counsel is 
“to render effective, quality representation.”   
  Additionally, t o fulfill their duty as advocates, 
“lawyers must take pains to guarantee that . . . their knowledge ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 
 [is] up-to-date.”  ABA Defense Function Standards § 4-1.2 cmt. 
at 123.  Defense counsel in this case thus had a duty in the 
course of representing Ba
talona to keep apprised of rules and 
amendments that were in place at the time of Batalona’s trial  
and to act accordingly.   See ABA Defense Function Standards §
 4-
1.2 cmt. at 123.   
  T he record does not support a finding that defense 
counsel acted in response to the amendment to HRPP Rule 
16(e)(3), which related critically to the ability of Batalona 
and counsel to prepare for trial upon a charge that carried a 
sentence of mandatory life imprisonment without parole upon 
conviction.  Batalona contends that the denial of access to 
discovery violated
 his right to present a complete defense and 
also adversely impacted his waiver of the right to testify.26   
                     
 26 The dissent maintains that the 2000 amendment to HRPP Rule 
16(e)(3) “permitted, but did not require, defense counsel to provide the 
defendant with copies of dis covery materials.”  Dissent at 9  (emphases 
omitted).  In this case, there were approximately 3,000 pages of discovery, 
which included reports and statements of witnesses adverse to Batalona who 
would testify at trial regarding the incident.  Defense counsel underscored 
to the court the importance for Batalona to review these reports and 
statements “word by word” and contended that Batalona was entitled to review 
the discovery materials.  The circuit court summarily rejected counsel’s 
reasons, stating that “there’s very few information that any defendant really 
needs to understand in terms of the details of a case.”  But it was 
Batalona’s inability to review the discovery that he asserts later played a 
pivotal role in the trial.  Batalona states in ground 10 of his petition that 
although he wanted to testify, defense counsel told him that his testimony 
would jeopardize defense counsel’s trial strategy because “Batalona was 
prohibited from having any discovery.”  Thus, while HRPP Rule 16(e)(3) may 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 
 i. Right to Present a Complete Defense 
 
 “Central to the protections of due process is the 
right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a 
complete defense.”  State v. Tetu, 139 Hawai i 207, 219, 386 P.3d 
844, 856 (2016) (quoting State v. Kaulia , 128 Hawai i 479, 487, 
291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013)).  This court has recognized “the well -
established principle that ‘all defendants must be provided with 
the basic tool[s] of an adequate defense. ’”  Id. (alteration in 
original) (quoting State v. Scott, 131 Hawai i 333, 352, 319 P.3d 
252, 271 (2013)).   
  Batalona contends in ground 8 that the discovery 
materials consisted of crucial evidence, including  witness 
statements, indicating that he was not the shooter and that all 
four robbers carried rifles.  Batalona states  that because he 
was denied access to copies of discovery materials, he had no 
knowledge of the extent of the State’s evidence against him.  
Without the discovery materials, Batalona asserts that he was 
unable to exercise his right to defend himself with the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
not “require” a defense counsel to provide a copy of discovery to a defendant 
in every case, it was plainly imperative under the circumstances of this case 
for Batalona’s counsel to have taken the necessary steps to provide the 
discovery to Batalona, particularly when Batalona was charged with an offense 
carrying a sentence of life imprisonment without parole.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 
 effective assistance of counsel.  Batalona submits that, had he 
been provided access to discovery, he could have used the 
knowledge gained to guide  defense counsel toward  viable defense 
options, including the presentation of factual evidence that 
would disprove that he was the shooter
.   
  
As counsel for Batalona failed to act in response to 
the amendment to HRPP Rule 16(e)(3), ground 8 presents a 
colorable claim of ineffective assistance of counsel “because i f 
the facts therein were taken as true, they could change the 
verdict” given the crucial information described by Batalona to 
be in the discovery material
s, of which he was not aware.   See 
Wilton v. State , 116 Hawai i 106, 122, 170 P.3d 357, 373 (2007) 
(citing Barnett v. State , 91 Hawai i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 
(1999)).  Defense counsel’s Declaration did  not address 
Batalona’s contentions in ground 8 except to state that any 
omission on his part “did not substantially impair a meritorious 
claim or defense, and/or resulted from a strategic or tactical 
decision.”
  Therefore, the circuit court erred in denying 
without a hearing ground 8 of Batalona’s petition . 
ii. Waiver of the Right to Testify 
  Batalona asserts in ground 10 that he wanted to 
testify but defense counsel repeatedly urged him not to do so.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 
 According to Batalona, defense counsel told him that his 
testimony “would jeopardize [counsel’s]  trial strategy” because 
“Batalona was prohibited from having any discovery.”  Batalona 
contends that defense counsel told him “the state will cut you 
to pieces –
 just let me do my job.”  “ But for counsel’s repeated  
urging of Batalona not to testify, ” Batalona continues,  he would 
not have waived his right to testify and his testimony could 
have established a defense that he was not the shooter.27   
  It is  a fundamental constitutional guarantee that a 
defendant in a criminal trial has a right to testify and a right 
not to testify.  State v. Monteil , 134 Hawai i 361, 369, 341 P.3d 
567, 575 (2014) (citing Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai i 226, 900 
P.2d 1293 (1995)).   Consistent with these rights,  this court has 
recognized that a defendant’s waiver of the right to testify 
must be voluntary, knowing, and intelligent.  Tachibana , 79 
Hawaii at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303 (citation omitted).  The 
decision whether to relinquish the right to testify “must . . . 
not [be] the product of coercion or undue influence.”  State v. 
                     
 27 Batalona states that counsel never informed him about the “many” 
eyewitness accounts indicating that all four robbers had rifles.  According 
to Batalona, he told counsel prior to trial that he modified an AR -15 rifle 
for Dailey in exchange for proceeds from the robbery and that the modified 
AR-15 rifle was used by Dailey at Waiahole Ranch and during the robbery.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 
 Silva, 78 Hawai i 115, 123, 890 P.2d 702, 710 (App. 1995) 
(citation omitted), abrogated on other grounds by Tachibana , 79 
Hawaii 226, 900 P.2d 1293.   
  Batalona contends that defense counsel repeatedly 
urged him not to testify because he had not been provided any of 
the discovery materials and, as a result, counsel’s trial 
strategy would be jeopardized
.  If taken as true, the alleged 
facts in ground 10 of the  petition indicate that Batalona’s 
waiver of the right to testify may  not have been  voluntary.  
Defense counsel’s Declaration did not specifically address 
Batalona’s contentions in ground 10 except to say that the court 
conducted a colloquy pursuant to Tachibana  and that any 
privileged communications between counsel and Batalona would not 
be disclosed without an order from the court.  Hence, ground 10 
raises a colorable claim of ineffective assistance of counsel,  
as Batalona’s waiver of the right to testify may have been “ the 
product of coercion or undue influence” because he had not been 
provided a copy of the discovery due to defen se counsel’s 
failure to act in response to the amendment to  HRPP Rule 
16(e)(3).  See Silva, 78 Hawaii at 123, 890 P.2d at 710, see 
Barnett v. State , 91 Hawai i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 
 (citing HRPP Rule 40(f)).  Therefore, the circuit court erred in 
denying without a hearing ground 10  of Batalona’s petition .   
2. Batalona’s Other Claims for Relief 
In ground 19 of his petition, Batalona asserts that 
defense counsel provided ineffective assistance on appeal by 
failing to raise a claim that the circuit court erred in not 
instructing the jury on the included offense of assault against 
a police officer.  Batalona contends that there was ample 
evidence at trial to permit a jury instruction on this offense.   
At trial, Batalona orally 
requested that the circuit 
court instruct the jury on the offense of assault against a 
police officer.28  The court denied the requested instruction on 
the basis that the offense was not supported by the evidence.   
                     
 28 The requested instruction read as follows:  
 
 If and only if you find the defendant not guilty of 
Assault in the Second  Degree, or are unable to reach a 
unanimous verdict as to this offense, then you must 
determine whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of 
the included offense of Assault against a Police Officer.  
 A person commits the offense of Assault against a 
Police Officer if he intentionally engages in conduct which 
is a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or 
known to cause bodily injury to a police officer who is 
engaged in the performance of duty.  
 There are 4 material elements of this offense each of 
which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 These 4 elements are:  
 1. That, on or about the 7th day of July, 1999, in 
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, the 
Defendant intentionally engaged in conduct; and  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 
 HRS § 701-109(5) provides that the court is not 
obligated to instruct the jury on an included offense “unless 
there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting 
the defendant of the included offense .”  HRS § 701-109(5) 
(1993).29  As applied in this case, the circuit court was 
required to consider whether there was a rational basis in the 
evidence that Batalona “[i]ntentionally, knowingly, or 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
 2. That the Defendant’s conduct was a substantial 
step in a course of conduct intended or known by the 
Defendant to cause bodily injury to Frederick Rosskopf, a 
police officer; and  
 3. That the Defendant was aware, at the time, that 
Frederick Rosskopf was a police officer; and 
 4. That the Defendant acted intentionally or 
knowingly to cause bodily injury to Frederick Rosskopf 
because of the police officer’s performance of official 
duties. 
 
While Batalona orally requested an instruction for “assault against a police 
officer,” the instruction included language both for the substantive offense 
and for the attempt offense.   
 29 Assault against a police officer is an included offense of 
attempted murder in the first degree pursuant to HRS § 701 -109(4) (1993).  
Under HRS § 701- 109(4), an offense is included in another when  
 
(a) It is established by proof of the same or less than all 
the facts required to establish the commission of the 
offense charged;  
(b) It consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged 
or to commit an offense otherwise included therein; or  
(c) It differs from the offense charged only in the respect 
that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same 
person, property, or public interest or a different state 
of mind indicating lesser degree of culpability suffices to 
establish its commission.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 
 recklessly cause[d] bodily injury to [Officer Rosskopf] who 
[wa]s engaged in the performanc e of duty”  and that  the statutory 
requirements for attempted murder in the first degree were not 
met.  HRS § 707-712.5(1)(a) (1993); HRS §  701-109(5). 
Batalona argued that the evidence showed that the jury 
could reasonably find that he did not intend to shoot at Officer 
Rosskopf but that his firing in Officer Rosskopf’s direction 
recklessly placed the officer at risk of bodily i
njury.  The 
evidence adduced at trial showed that Officer Rosskopf had 
received abrasions as a result of the shooting that had occurred 
outside of the bank.  In addition, Batalona was a range 
instructor who taught shooting and thus, Batalona argued, a jury 
could reasonably infer that he may have deliberatively shot in 
the direction of, but not directly at, the officer.  Further, 
according to the State’s witness, Talakai, Batalona informed him 
that he was just trying to get away.  Thus, there was a rational 
basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting Batalona of 
attempted murder in the first degree and convicting Batalona of 
assault against a police officer.  See HRS § 701-109(5).   
On direct appeal, defense counsel did not challenge 
the circuit court’s refusal to instruct on the offense of 
assault against a police officer.   To determine whether defense ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 
 counsel rendered ineffective assistance on appeal, a petitioner 
must show that counsel did not raise an “appealable issue,” 
which is an error or omission by counsel that results in the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  Briones v. State , 74 Haw. 442, 465-66, 848 
P.2d 966, 977 (1993).  If an appealable issue is omitted, the 
question becomes whether, “in light of the entire record, the 
status of the law, and the space and time limitations inherent 
in the appellate process, a reasonably competent, informed and 
diligent criminal attorney would not have omitted that issue.”  
Domingo v. State , 76 Hawai i 237, 242, 873 P.2d 775, 780 (1994) 
(citing Briones, 74 Haw. at 466-67, 848 P.2d at 977-78).   
  In this case,  there was a rational bas is in the 
evidence for the circuit court to instruct the jury on the 
included offense of assault against a police officer
.  The 
failure by the court to submit this instruction to the jury was 
an “appealable issue” in Batalona’s appeal.  However, i n 2001, 
while Batalona’s case was on direct appeal, this court held that 
a trial court’s error in failing to give an appropriate 
instruction on an included offense was harmless when the 
defendant was convicted of the greater offense.  State v.  
Haanio, 94 Hawai i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001), overruled  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 
 by State v. Flores , 131 Hawaii 43, 314 P.3d 120 (2013).  The 
decision in Haanio overruled State v. Kupau , 76 Hawai i 387, 879 
P.2d 492 (1994), as to the effect of a trial court’s error in 
not instructing on an included offense having a rational basis 
in the evidence.  As applied to Batalona’s case, Haanio would 
thus hold that the circuit court’s error in not instructing the 
jury on assault against a police officer was harmless, given 
that the jury convicted Batalona of attempted murder in the 
first degree.30  Because Haanio was controlling law that was 
recently established at the time of Batalona’s direct appeal, 
Batalona has not shown a colorable claim that defense counsel’s 
failure to challenge
 the circuit cour t’s refusal to instruct on 
assault against a police officer constituted ineffective 
assistance of counsel.31  Accordingly, the circuit court did not 
err in denying ground 19 without a hearing.   
                     
 30 The record reveals that counsel for Batalona was aware of Haanio 
at the time he filed the direct appeal, as he questioned the harmless error 
holding of Haanio in challenging the circuit court’s refusal to instruct on 
two other offenses.   
 31 As set forth in the State’s answering brief, “ Haanio was in turn 
overruled by State v. Flores , 131 Hawai i 43, 314 P.3d 120 (2013).”  The 
Flores decision was issued after Batalona filed his petition, and thus we do 
not address this decision in our consideration of the petition.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 
 The remaining grounds for relief that a re asserted in 
the petition, which Batalona restates in his application, fall 
into five groups.  First, in grounds 2, 4, and 20(c), Batalona 
raises claims of ineffective assistance of counsel on appeal.32  
Second, in grounds 3, 6, 9, 13, 14, 15, and supplemental grounds 
23 and 24, Batalona raises claims of ineffective assistance of 
counsel at trial as it relates to his
 state and federal 
prosecution and the evidence
 at trial.33  Third, Batalona 
challenges in grounds 5, 16, 17, and 21 counsel’s failure to 
                     
 32 Ground 2 challenges the circuit court’s purported delay in 
responding to a jury communication; however, the record lacks any showing of 
prejudice.  Ground 4 maintains that Batalona could not have been convicted of 
count 17 because it is an included offense of counts 1 and 3; however, this 
assertion is incorrect, see HRS § 701- 109(4).  Ground 20(c) submits that 
counsel wasted space on a frivolous issue in the opening brief on appeal, but 
Batalona does not indicate in this ground specific issues that should have 
been argued instead. 
 33 Batalona’s allegation in ground 3 of improper dismissal of 
federal charges is not properly before this court, and his prosecution in 
federal and state court is not barred by HRS § 701 -112 (1993).  Ground 6 
incorrectly contends that count 3 improperly joined two offenses in a single 
count.  Grounds 9 and 13 maintain that counsel failed to argue selective 
prosecution; however, these grounds fail to assert a factual basis for a 
showing of selective prosecution, see State v. Kailua Auto Wreckers, Inc. , 62 
Haw. 222, 225- 27, 615 P.2d 730, 734 -35 (1980).  Ground 14 contends, without 
requisite factual allegations, that counsel failed to challenge the State’s 
use of Dailey’s testimony, which counsel purportedly knew to contain false 
statements.  Ground 15 also fails to present factual allegations in support 
of Batalona’s contention regarding counsel’s failure to move to suppress the 
AR-15 rifle magazine recovered from the bake shop van.  Supplemental grounds 
23 and 24 relate to the calling of witnesses and the presentation of evidence 
at trial, but the grounds do not identify who counsel should have called and 
how such witnesses’ testimonies would have helped the defense.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 
 contest the adequacy of several  jury instructions.34  
Fourth, in 
grounds 20(a), 20 (b), 20(d), 20(e), and 20(g), Batalona claims 
that counsel failed to raise matters that were of “critical 
importance” to his defense.35  And fifth, in grounds 7, 18, and 
22, Batalona challenges matters relating to post- conviction, his 
sentence of life imprisonment without parole, and a potential 
retrial.36  Inasmuch as the aforementioned grounds do not raise a 
                     
 34 Ground 5 contends that the circuit court failed to instruct the 
jury that Batalona cannot be convicted of both count 1 and count 2; however, 
Batalona was charged with count 1 under HRS § 708 -840(1)(b)(ii), not HRS § 
708-840(1)(b)(i).  See  State v. Ah Choy , 70 Haw. 618, 622, 780 P.2d 1097, 
1100-01 (1989).  Grounds 16, 17, and 21 challenge the jury instructions on 
attempted murder in the first degree, proof beyond a reasonable doubt, and 
criminal attempt; however, when read and considered as a whole, the 
instructions were not prejudicially erroneous or insufficient.  
 35 Ground 20(a) incorrectly contends that the AK -47 rifle should not 
have been taken inside the jury room during deliberations.  See State v. 
Robinson , 79 Hawai i 468, 473, 903 P.2d 1289, 1294 (1995).  Ground 20(b) lacks 
factual support for its assertion that the State did not have a good faith 
basis for its PowerPoint presentation.  Ground 20(d) asserts  error in 
counsel’s failure to call a ballistics expert without identifying who counsel 
should have called and how that expert’s testimony would have been favorable 
to Batalona’s defense.  Ground 20(e) pertains to the sufficiency of the 
evidence on the attempted first -degree murder conviction, upon which this 
court has previously ruled.  See State v. Batalona , No. 23820, 2003 WL 
22311769, at *2 (Haw. Oct. 9, 2003) (SDO).  Ground 20(g) erroneously 
maintains that counsel failed to challenge the State’s ballistics evidence.   
 36 Ground 7 relates to Batalona’s inability to timely file a federal 
habeas corpus petition, which is not properly before this court.  Ground 18 
maintains that Batalona’s sentence of life imprisonment without parole is 
unlawful because the commutation provision is injudiciously applied and the 
sentence is cruel and unusual.  We do not address ground 18 at this time in 
light of the remand for a hearing; therefore, ground 18 is dismissed without 
prejudice.  Finally, ground 22 incorrectly asserts that cumulative errors and 
omissions would preclude instructions on lesser included offenses in a 
retrial.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 
 colorable claim for relief, the circuit court did not err in 
denying a hearing on these grounds. 
B. State’s Application  for Writ of Certiorari 
  
In its application, the State contends that the ICA 
erred in holding that the circuit court should have held a 
hearing on ground 20(f) of Batalona’s petition on the basis that 
there was a colorable claim that defense counsel was ineffective 
for not attempting to secure the attendance of Hayme at trial.  
At trial, the circuit court admitted as evidence the redacted 
statement of Hayme, a co- participant in the robbery who was not 
present to testify.   Hayme’s statement had the extremely 
prejudicial effect of implicating Batalona in the offense of 
attempted murder in the first degree while exculpating himself 
as to involvement in that offense.  See infra. 
  Under the Hawaii Rules of Evidence, hearsay is 
generally inadmissible at trial unless it qualifies as an 
exception to the hearsay rule.37  Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 802 (1993).  Hayme’s redacted statement was admitted as a 
                     
 37 Pursuant to Rule 802 (1993) of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
(HRE), “[h]earsay is not admissible except as provided by these rules, or by 
other rules prescribed by the Hawaii supreme court, or by statute.”  As 
defined, “‘[h]earsay’ is a statement, other than one made by the declarant 
while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the 
truth of the matter asserted.”  HRE Rule 801 (1993).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 
 statement against interest.  An out-of -court statement may 
potentially be admitted as a statement against interest under 
HRE Rule 804(b)(3) (1993) if the declarant is unavailable as a 
witness.  “Unavailability as a witness” includes, in relevant 
part, situations in which the declarant “[i]s exempted by ruling 
of the court on the ground of privilege from testifying 
concerning the subject matter of the declarant’s statement.”  
HRE Rule 804(a)(1) (1993).   
 
 To demonstrate a declarant’s unavailability, a showing 
must be made that good faith efforts were expended to locate and 
produce the declarant.  State v. Moore , 82 Hawai
i 202, 223, 921 
P.2d 122, 143 (1996) (citing State v. Ortiz , 74 Haw. 343, 363, 
845 P.2d 547, 556-57 (1993)).  In establishing good faith 
efforts, the party “must confirm on the record at the time of 
trial both the declarant’s unavailability and that vigorous and 
appropriate steps were taken to procure the declarant’s presence 
at trial.”38  Id. (quoting Ortiz, 74 Haw. at 363, 845 P.2d at 
556-57).   
                     
 38 While the caselaw in this jurisdiction has focused on the 
prosecution as the party having the burden to locate and produce a declarant, 
under the circumstances of this case, counsel’s duty to provide effective 
representation included, as the ICA held, e fforts to secure Hayme’s presence 
at trial to allow Batalona to cross -examine him regarding his account of the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 
   The admission of Hayme’s recorded statement was the 
subject of some discussion at a hearing on the State’s first 
motion in limine.  At that hearing, counsel for Batalona 
informed the court that the defense wanted to call Hayme as a 
witness to determine whether he would invoke his privilege 
against self- incrimination.  Counsel’s duty to render effective 
representation in this case included attempting to secure 
Hayme’s attendance  at trial so as to prevent the admission of 
Hayme’s statement without the opportunity to cross- examine him.  
The record indicates that counsel was aware that the court had 
determined in the pretrial hearing to admit Hayme’s statement , 
as counsel responded at trial that there was no objection to the 
statement’s introduction into evidence except for what had been 
discussed previously.  However, there is no indication that 
defense counsel took any steps to procure Hayme’s attendance at 
trial, whether by process or by other reasonable means.  Nor did 
counsel establish on the record that he made a good faith 
attempt to secure the presence of Hayme at trial.  Counsel’s 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
incident.  Because Hayme did not appear, his recorded statement was admitted 
at trial. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 
 Declaration did  not explain why he took no steps to obtain 
Hayme’s presence  at trial. 
  The State argues that Hayme was unavailable to testify 
at trial because he had personally invoked his privilege against 
self-incrimination at the hearing that was held on July 31, 2000 
and that the circuit court indicated as much at that hearing.  
However, the transcript of the July 31, 2000 hearing is not part 
of the record on appeal.  Therefore, it is unclear whether Hayme 
was unavailable to testify at trial, as the ICA observed.   
  Even assuming that Hayme invoked his privilege against 
self-incrimination at the hearing and the court declared him 
unavailable to testify, it was imperative for defense counsel to 
undertake all feasible measures  to secure Hayme’s live testimony  
two days later at trial in order to cross- examine him.  Hayme as 
part of his plea agreement with the federal government had 
agreed to testify truthfully at any hearing or trial if called 
to do so.  Additionally, Batalona contends that Hayme was in 
federal custody during the course of his trial.  T here is no 
indication in the record, however,  that defens e counsel 
exercised a good faith attempt to subpoena or otherwise procure 
Hayme’s attendance at trial.  Engaging in such  effort was 
critical to Batalona ’s defense, given that Hayme’s absence at ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 
 trial allowed for the admission of Hayme’s recorded statement, 
which was immensely prejudicial to Batalona.  See infra.  
Defense counsel should not have assumed that because Hayme had 
invoked his privilege against self- incrimination two days prior 
to the admission of his statement, he would again invoke the 
privilege if called to testify.  This assumption is even more 
problematic in light of Hayme’s plea agreement that required him  
to testify at any hearing or trial if called to do so and his 
express agreement not to assert any privilege to refuse to 
testify in a state trial involving a co
-participant.   
  The State cites to State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai i 148, 
871 P.2d 782 (1994),  in support of its argument that Hayme was 
unavailable to testify, maintaining that, like the co-defendant 
in McGriff , Hayme invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against 
self-incrimination.  However, in McGriff, the State served a 
trial subpoena on the co- defendant, which the co- defendant’s 
attorney moved to quash.  76 Hawai i at 153, 871 P.2d at 787.  
The court denied the motion to quash, and the co -defendant 
appeared at trial.  Id.  Upon being called as the State’s next 
witness, the co-defendant took the stand and thereafter invoked 
his Fifth Amendment privilege.  Id.  Unlike the co -defendant in 
McGriff, Hayme was not served with a subpoena requiring his ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 
 attendance at trial, and Hayme did not appear at trial to invoke 
his Fifth Amendment privilege.   
  A failure to subpoena Hayme may have substantially 
impaired a potentially meritorious defense in this case.  The 
State conceded and the evidence showed that Hayme fired his 
weapon during the robbery
, and as the ICA concluded , if Hayme 
had testified, Batalona may have cast reasonable doubt on the 
State’s theory that it was Batalona who shot at Officer 
Rosskopf.  Accordingly, Batalona’s contention in ground 20(f) of 
his petition that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to 
secure Hayme’s attendance  at trial  raises a colorable claim for 
relief.   
  In addition to the unavailability prong that must be 
satisfied before Hayme’s statement could have been admitted at 
trial, the statement must qualify as a “statement against 
interest.”  A statement against interest is one  
which was at the time of its making  so far contrary to the 
declarant’s pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so far 
tended to subject the declarant to  civil or criminal 
liability , or to render invalid a claim by the declarant 
against another, that a reasonable person in the 
declarant’s position would not have made the st atement 
unless the declarant believed it to be true.  
HRE Rule 804(b)(3) (emphases added).  In Williamson v. United 
States, the United States Supreme Court held that the statement 
against interest exception to the hearsay rule “does not allow ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 
 admission of non-self-inculpatory statements, even if they are 
made within a broader narrative that is generally self-
inculpatory.”  512  U.S. 594, 600 -01 (1994).  Thus, each 
statement within the broader narrative must be carefully 
examined to determine if it is against the declarant’s interest.  
Id. at 600-04.  If an individual declaration is not a statement 
against the declarant’s interest, then that particular 
declaration is not admissible.  Id.  
  As noted, the record does not contain Hayme’s redacted 
statement that was admitted at trial.  However, the parties’ 
closing arguments indicate that portions of Hayme’s statement 
were not truly inculpatory.39  For example, Hayme’s statement 
recounted that he did not shoot at Officer Rosskopf.  Hayme also 
said in his statement that the person who was shooting at 
Officer Rosskopf was mounted on top of the Blazer.  These 
declarations implicated Batalona given
 Dailey’s testimony that 
Batalona stood “in the door jamb on the passenger side of the 
Blazer,” that Batalona’s weapon was po inted in the direction of 
Officer Rosskopf’s car, and that Hayme and Matsunaga were the 
last to exit the bank.  Additionally, Hayme stated that he did 
                     
 39 We do not address the circumstances under which the recorded 
statement was elicited  with respect to its inculpatory nature.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 
 not fire his weapon until after shots were fired.  Hayme also 
stated that he fired maybe two rounds “just  in the air, ” which 
would have excluded him as the person shooting at Officer 
Rosskopf.  Unquestionably, each of these statements within 
Hayme’s narrative did not implicate Hayme as the person who 
fired multiple rounds at Officer Rosskopf.  Rather, many of 
Hayme’s statements in his broader account--whether standing 
alone or in conjunction with other evidence introduced by the 
State--directly implicated Batalona and were “ non-self-
inculpatory statements.”  Williamson , 512 U.S. at 600 -01.  
Therefore, the admission of Hayme’s statement as a statement 
against interest under HRE Rule 804(b)(3) raises a colorable 
claim for relief.40   
  
The receiving into evidence of Hayme’s record ed 
statement may also have violated  the federal and state 
constitutions.  Batalona contends in ground 20(f) that he had 
state and federal rights to confront Hayme at trial and that 
                     
 40 HRE Rule 804(b)(3) is identical with Federal Rules of Evidence 
(FRE) Rule 804(b)(3).  The Advisory Committee Notes of FRE Rule 804(b)(3) 
warn that “a statement admitting guilt and implicating another person, made 
while in custody, may well be motivated by a desire to curry favor with the 
authorities and hence fail to qualify as against interest.”   Hayme’s recorded 
statement was provided to investigators in the presence of the Assistant 
United States Attorney who was prosecuting him in federal court.  The 
statement was provided the day after Hayme reached a plea agreement with the 
United States Attorney’s Office.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 
 confrontation of Hayme would have allowed the jury to assess 
Hayme’s truthfulness.  This court has recognized that the Sixth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, 
section 14 of the Hawai i Constitution “guarantee criminal 
defendants the right to confront and cross- examine adverse 
witnesses.”  State v. Haili , 103 Hawai i 89, 103, 79 P.3d 1263, 
1277 (2003) (citing Moore, 82 Hawai i at 222, 921 P.2d at 142).  
“The right of confrontation affords the accused both the 
opportunity to challenge the credibility and veracity of the 
prosecution’s witnesses and an occasion for the jury to weigh 
the demeanor of those witnesses.”  State v. Sua , 92 Hawaii 61, 
70, 987 P.2d 959, 968 (1999) (quoting Ortiz, 74 Haw. at 360, 845 
P.2d at 555).  Thus, the right to cross- examine one’s accuser is 
chief among the interests secured by the confrontation clause.  
McGriff, 76 Hawai i at 155, 871 P.2d at  789 (citing Ohio v.  
Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 63 (1980)). 
  For testimonial hearsay to be admissible, the 
confrontation clause demands a showing that the declarant is ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 
 unavailable.41  State v. Fields , 115 Hawai i 503, 513, 168 P.3d 
955, 965 (2007) (citing Crawford v. Washington , 541 U.S. 36, 59 
(2004)).  The discussion set forth supra regarding 
unavailability is fully pertinent here.  To reiterate, the 
record fails to establish that defense counsel made a good faith 
attempt to obtain Hayme’s attendance at trial.   Nor did defense 
counsel confirm on the record at trial that Hayme was 
unavailable or that vigorous steps had been taken to procure his 
attendance at trial.  And, as the ICA found , the record also 
does not indicate that the State made a good faith attempt to 
secure Hayme’s attendance at trial.   
  The confrontation clause restricts the admission of 
testimonial hearsay in a second way.  At the time of Batalona’s 
trial, the standard pursuant to Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, was as 
follows: “[u]pon demonstrating that  a witness is unavailable,” 
the party must show that the statement to be admitted “bear[s] 
adequate indicia of reliability.”  Sua, 92 Hawai i at 71, 987 
P.2d at 969.  Reliability may be inferred if the statement falls 
within a firmly rooted exception to th e hearsay rule, or it “may 
                     
 41 Statements provided as a result of police interrogations are 
testimonial under the Sixth Amendment.  Crawford v. Washington , 541 U.S. 36, 
68 (2004). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
53 
 be demonstrated ‘upon a showing of particularized guarantees of 
trustworthiness.’”  Id. (quoting Ortiz, 74 Haw. at 361, 845 P.2d 
at 556).  In 2004, the United States Supreme Court held in 
Crawford that for testimonial hearsay to be admissible the 
confrontation clause demands a showing of unavailability and a 
prior opportunity for cross- examination.  541 U.S. at 68.  Thus, 
under the second part of the confrontation analysis, instead of 
determining whether an unavailable declarant’s statement bears 
“adequate indicia of reliability,” the analysis  is whether the 
defendant had a meaningful opportunity to cross- examine the 
declarant about the statement.42  See id.   
  If  the Roberts  test is applied to Batal ona’s case , the 
circumstances under which Hayme’s statement was made and the 
non-self-inculpatory statements within its general narrative may 
raise a question as to the reliability of Hayme’s statement .  If 
the Crawford  test is applicable, the record does not indicate 
that Batalona had a prior opportunity to cross- examine Hayme 
about his statement.  Thus, under either test, Batalona has 
raised a colorable claim for relief. 
                     
 42 This court has not addressed the applicability of the Crawford 
rule to cases in which the underlying conviction was already final at the 
time the Crawford decision was rendered. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
54 
   In sum,  the record does not indicate that defense 
counsel exercised  a good faith attempt to procure Hayme’s 
attendance at trial , which was critical to Batalona’s defense.  
If counsel failed to do so, such failure may have resulted in 
the substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense 
because, if Hayme had testified, Batalona may have cast 
reasonable doubt on the State’s theory that Batalona was the 
person who fired multiple rounds at Officer Rosskopf.  In 
addition, as a result of Hayme’s absence at trial, his recorded 
statement-- although only partly self-inculpatory and at the same 
time extremely prejudicial to Batalona-- was admitted as a 
“statement against interest, ” and it may also have been admitted 
in violation of Batalona’s right to confrontation.  Counsel’s 
Declaration did  not adequately respond to Batalona’s claims  
regarding the failure to obtain Hayme’s presence at trial .  
Therefore, the ICA correctly concluded that th e portion of 
ground 20(f) of Batalona’s petition regarding Hayme’s statement 
raises a colorable claim for relief that warrants a hearing 
before the circuit court. 
V. CONCLUSION  
Accordingly, we affirm the ICA’s Judgment on Appeal 
insofar as it held that grounds 1 and 20(f) of Batalona’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
55 
 petition raise colorable claims for relief.  We vacate the ICA’s 
Judgment on Appeal in its affirmance of the circuit court ’s 
Order denying the petition with regard to the follow ing grounds: 
as to grounds 8 and 10, Batalona has raised colorable claims for 
relief such that he is entitled to a hearing,  and as to ground 
18 it is dismissed without prejudice.   We otherwise affirm the 
ICA Judgment on Appeal to the extent that it denied a hearing on 
the remaining grounds in the petition.   This case is remanded to 
the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
Albert Batalona 
pro se 
 
Brandon H. Ito
for respondent 
 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
