***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
MANUEL SANDOVAL, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
SCWC-18-0000636 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000636, CAAP-18-0000637, and CAAP-18-0000638;  
CASE NOS. 1PC141001782, 1PC151001156, and 1PC161000563) 
 
JUNE 3, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE AYABE, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Manuel Sandoval is the defendant in three separate 
criminal cases related to repeated violations of an injunction 
against harassment.  The injunction was put in place against 
Sandoval by Complaining Witness 1 (CW1), a woman with whom Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000636
03-JUN-2021
08:24 AM
Dkt. 21 AMOP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
2 Sandoval used to work.  Sandoval pleaded no contest in two cases 
to a total of 
eleven counts of violating an injunction against 
harassment; in both cases, he was sentenced to probation.   
Two years later, he was convicted after a bench trial 
of one count of violating an injunction against harassment, and 
one count of second-degree assault of Complaining Witness 2 
(CW2).  At sentencing, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court) revoked Sandoval’s probation in the two prior 
cases based on Sandoval’s stipulation that he had violated the 
terms of his probation.  Following the revocation of his probation, the court sentenced Sandoval to consecutive one-year 
terms for each of the twelve total counts of violating the 
injunction against harassment and five years for the assault 
conviction, for a total of seventeen years of imprisonment.  The 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed, and we granted 
Sandoval’s application for a writ of certiorari. 
We conclude that before accepting a defendant’s 
stipulation to a probation violation, the trial court must 
ensure that the defendant knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily enters into the stipulation.  A stipulation to a 
violation of the terms of one’s probation can have significant 
consequences, including - as was the case here - the potential 
for extended incarceration.  The record does not reflect that 
Sandoval understood the consequences of stipulating to the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
3 State’s motions to revoke probation, and accordingly, the 
stipulation should be vacated.  Moreover, at Sandoval’s 
resentencing hearing, the circuit court did not sufficiently justify the imposition of consecutive sentences for each count 
while considering the factors in 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 706-606 (2014).  Thus, we vacate Sandoval’s sentence and 
remand for further proceedings related to Sandoval’s probation 
revocation and resentencing.   
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Change of Plea Hearing, 1PC-14-1-001782 (Case 1)  
  On May 18, 2015, the circuit court1 held a change of 
plea hearing in Case 1 at which Sandoval pleaded no contest to 
nine counts of violating an injunction against harassment of CW1 
pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5(i) (2016),2 and the State agreed to 
nolle prosequi the remaining four counts.   
After a colloquy, the court found that Sandoval 
“knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently entered his plea with 
an understanding of the nature of the charges against him,” 
                     
1  The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided over proceedings in 
all three cases. 
 
2  HRS § 604- 10.5(i) states, “A knowing or intentional violation of 
a restraining order or injunction issued pursuant to this section is a 
misdemeanor[.]” ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
4 accepted the change of plea, and adjudged Sandoval guilty as 
charged as to all nine counts.   
The State and Sandoval’s counsel agreed on a 
recommended sentence: 180-day jail term with credit for time served, one year of probation, a “stay-away order” from CW1 and 
the restaurant where she worked (which Sandoval’s mother owned), 
and mental health assessment and treatment.  The court imposed 
this sentence on each count as “a concurrent sentence meaning 
everything . . . will run together.”   
2. Change of Plea Hearing, 1PC-15-1-001156 (Case 2) 
On March 21, 2016, the court heard Sandoval’s change 
of plea in Case 2, for two counts of violating the injunction 
against harassment of CW1.  The court again accepted Sandoval’s 
plea of no contest after a colloquy.   
Noting that Sandoval had seventeen prior convictions 
for violating a restraining order or injunction against harassment - plus the two counts to which he pleaded that day -
the State requested one year of probation and mental health 
assessment and treatment.  Sandoval agreed and also requested 
credit for time served.  The court followed the recommendations 
and imposed one year of probation with 100 days imprisonment on 
both counts (the amount of time he had already been 
incarcerated), to run concurrently.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
5 3. Trial, 1PC-16-1-0563 (Case 3)  
  In March 2018, Sandoval was tried on one count of 
second-degree assault of CW2 in violation of HRS § 707-711 (2014 
& Supp. 2018)3 and one count of violating an injunction against 
harassment of CW1.  The bench trial stemmed from the events of April 8, 2016, where Sandoval twice visited the restaurant where 
CW1 worked, once around 8:00 p.m. and again around 10:00 p.m.  Both visits culminated in physical altercations, and Sandoval 
was charged with violating the injunction against harassment of 
CW1 for the 8:00 p.m. incident and with second-degree assault of 
CW2 for the 10:00 p.m. incident.  Conflicting versions of the 
events of the day emerged at trial.  In Sandoval’s version of 
the 8:00 p.m. incident, RR, CW1’s coworker, along with CW2, 
attacked Sandoval.  When Sandoval returned at 10:00 p.m. to gather belongings he had left at the scene, CW2 approached 
                     
3  HRS § 707-711 (2014 & Supp. 2018) states in relevant part: 
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second 
degree if: 
 
(a) The person intentionally, knowingly, or 
recklessly causes substantial bodily injury to 
another; 
 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious bodily injury to another; 
 
. . .
 
 
(d) The person intentionally or knowingly causes 
bodily injury to another with a dangerous 
instrument[.] 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
6 Sandoval, and Sandoval defended himself with his fists, thinking 
CW2 intended to attack him again.  Sandoval acknowledged that he 
“str[uck] [CW2] first” during the 10:00 p.m. incident.  But according to several witnesses, CW2 did not hit Sandoval during 
the 8:00 p.m. incident, and Sandoval attacked CW2 with a knife 
when Sandoval returned to the scene at 10:00 p.m.  The State 
introduced photos of two cuts on CW2’s face: one on his left 
cheek and one on the right side of his face in the space between 
his nose and mouth.  CW2 went to Wahiawā General Hospital, where 
he got stitches.   
The circuit court found Sandoval guilty on both 
counts.   
4. Motions for Revocation of Probation and Resentencing, 
Cases 1 and 2, and Sentencing, Case 3  
The State moved to revoke Sandoval’s probation on 
various grounds in Cases 1 and 2.  At the hearing on the State’s 
motion, Sandoval’s counsel began by stating that Sandoval would 
stipulate that the convictions in Case 3 violated the terms and 
conditions of his probation.  The parties and the court had the 
following exchange: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Judge, I’ve had a chance to speak to Mr. 
Sandoval about the two motions for revocation of probation.  At this point in time, although he knows he has the right 
to have a contested hearing to have [his probation officer] 
come in and testify to the Court about violations, he would 
not be doing that.  And he would be stipulating that the 
convictions here violated the terms and conditions of his probation. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
7 THE COURT: Thank you. 
 
[THE STATE]: You need to get that from the defendant 
directly. 
 
THE COURT: Mr. Sandoval; is that correct?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.  At the times of probation 
I did check in, but I’m not going to deny that I did not 
pick up a new charge, or I’m not saying – 
 THE COURT: There are other reasons as to why the motions 
were filed. 
 
THE DEFENDANT: Oh and I did have it appointed, I just – 
‘cause I got rearrested, I was not able to make an 
appointment.  So I did not –  
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: For the substance abuse assessment. 
 
THE DEFENDANT: - I wasn’t able to comply. 
 
THE COURT: [Defense counsel], would you like to take a few 
minutes and go over -   
[THE STATE]: Actually, I think to make it easier I would orally supplement both motions to indicate that he has been 
convicted of a felony which requires the Court to revoke 
the probation if he will stipulate that he did receive the 
terms and conditions that were included in each motion, and 
he is the same person and he understood everything.   
 
The circuit court recessed so that Sandoval could 
review this information with his counsel.  After the recess, the 
following exchange occurred: 
THE COURT: Is he still stipulating to both motions? 
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, Judge, with an explanation, if you 
would bear with us. 
 THE COURT: Alright. 
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah.  My explanation, I was out for three 
weeks, Your Honor.  And I did see my probation officer.  
And I did get a full- time job . . . even though some of 
supervise[d] release the prosecutor said that, oh, they 
couldn’t confirm that[.]  
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: But – but, Judge, Mr. Sandoval, even 
though he was working, he did not provide the information 
to his probation officer ‘ cause he was arrested shortly 
thereafter.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
8   
. . . . 
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  And, of course, we’re also agreeing 
that he did get arrested for violating the restraining 
order. 
 
. . . . 
 THE COURT: Mr. Sandoval, the motions then will be granted 
and you will be resentenced in those two misdemeanor cases; do you understand?
 
 THE DEFENDANT: Yes, ma’am. 
 
THE COURT: In addition to the felony case today.  
During the sentencing portion of the hearing, the 
State first discussed whether probation would be appropriate, 
addressing every factor listed in HRS § 706-621 (2014),4 the 
                     
4  HRS § 706- 621 states: 
 
The court, in determining whether to impose a term of 
probation, shall consider: 
 
(1) The factors set forth in section 706- 606 to the extent 
that they are applicable; 
 
(2) The following factors, to be accorded weight in favor of withholding a sentence of imprisonment: 
 (a) The defendant’s criminal conduct neither caused 
nor threatened serious harm; 
 (b) The defendant acted under a strong provocation; 
 
(c) There were substantial grounds tending to excuse 
or justify the defendant’s criminal conduct, though 
failing to establish a defense;  
(d) The victim of the defendant’s criminal conduct 
induced or facilitated its commission;  
(e) The defendant has no history of prior delinquency or criminal activity or has led a law- abiding life 
for a substantial period of time before the commission of the present crime; 
 
     (continued . . .) 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
9 statute governing probation.  Since the circuit court 
subsequently adopted the State’s analysis, we quote it at length 
here: 
2-A.  The defendant’s criminal conduct neither caused nor 
threatened serious harm.  The Court has found that it did 
cause a substantial bodily injury.  Also, with this being 
the nineteenth conviction for either violation of TRO or 
injunction against harassment taken out by the same 
petitioner, [CW1].  Although each violation may not seem 
like so much, it most certainly adds up, especially to the mental well- being of the petitioner.  That factor goes 
against the defendant.  
B.  The defendant acted under a strong provocation.  Though 
he testified to that effect, the Court found the other witnesses to be credible and, thus, consistently would not 
find that his claims of provocation are true.  That factor 
goes against the defendant. 
 
[C.] There was substantial grounds tending to excuse or justify the defendant’s criminal conduct, though failing to 
establish a defense.  Same thing again.  He was in the 
midst of a fight.  He tried to claim that a ring of his cut 
the cheek of [CW2].  The Court did not find that credible.  
And there’s really nothing else that would otherwise constitute an excuse not enough to be a defense. 
 
[D.] The victim of defendant’s conduct induce[d] or 
facilitate[d] its commission.  It goes against the 
defendant again.  The defendant has no history of prior delinquency.  I mentioned [nineteenth] conviction for 
violation of injunction against harassment.
 
 
                     
(f) The defendant’s criminal conduct was the result 
of circumstances unlikely to recur; 
 
(g) The character and attitudes of the defendant indicate that the defendant is unlikely to commit 
another crime; 
 
(h) The defendant is particularly likely to respond 
affirmatively to a program of restitution or a probationary program or both; 
 
(i) The imprisonment of the defendant would entail 
excessive hardship to the defendant or the 
defendant’s dependents; and  
(j) The expedited sentencing program set forth in 
section 706- 606.3, if the defendant has qualified for 
that sentencing program. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
10 [E.] Although we do acknowledge that this is his first 
felony, which is something to consider.  Usually, given the 
history and when this came up, this is also clearly an 
escalation, which I will be getting into further.  
2-F.  Defendant’s criminal conduct was the result of 
circumstances unlikely to reoccur.  Briefly on this point.  
The Court has heard the defendant’s testimony in court.  
Has had him appear multiple times.  But I will focus on his 
testimony and his statement in the [presentence report 
(PSR)].  
He is fixated on [CW1].  And what was long ago recognized 
to be a[n] unhealthy way, he maintains that fixation.  He 
went up on the stand and made several claims that [CW1] 
tells him that she loves him.  And the State had to bring her back on and other people he said come up to him and 
tell him that [CW1] loves him.  And they all had to make it 
clear that, no, I never said that sort of thing. 
 
But this is not a fixation that rises to the level of 704, lack of penal responsibility.  That was something that was 
considered.  The defendant, having been found fit, decided 
to withdraw[] consideration of that.  But it is this 
fixation which shows that this is just going to continue.  
And I will get back to the e[s]calation that’s occurred while it’s continued at least [nineteen] times that he’s 
been convicted for. 
 
[G.] The character and attitude of the defendant indicate 
that the defendant is unlikely to commit another crime.  Nineteenth conviction on the violation of the injunction 
against harassment.  And it will be counting if he’s 
released. 
 
[H.] The defendant’s particularly likely to respond affirmatively to program of restitution or probationary 
program or both.  And this is probably one of the most 
important parts for criteria for probation. 
 
This defendant is now -  has just been revoked on [twelve] 
of the prior [eighteen] counts.  The other ones lapsed, I 
guess, at this point.  But he has been consistently 
violating a court order which simply tells him to remain 
away from [CW1], have no contact with her, and not go to 
her business, which everyone knows is his family’s restaurant.  He knows not to go there.  Even in his 
testimony he proffers no basis for why he should be in 
there. 
 
 Since he can’t follow [the] simpl[e]st of court orders, an affirmative court order against him, there’s no basis to 
find that probationary terms will work.  This is in 
addition to the PSR - w ell, I’m just covering over lightly 
the PSR goes into some detail of correction on his prior probations.  They haven’t worked.  And it’s not for lack of services, it’s not for lack of the court, it is lack of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
11 defendant’s willingness to follow court orders.  And that 
does not look like it’s going to change. 
 
I.  The imprisonment of the defendant would be -  would 
entail excessive hardship to the defendant or the defendant’s dependents.  There’s no dependents involved here.  Jail is a hardship.  It’s meant to be a hardship.  
That’s part of the point.  There’s nothing to indicate that this would be excessively a hardship.  And it’s going to 
have to be weighed to the factors in 706- 606, which I’ll be 
getting to momentarily.
 
 J.  The expedited sentencing program set forth in 706- 606.3 
if the defendant is qualified, which he hasn’t.  Basically, every factor goes against probation.
    
 
The State next addressed each of the factors to be 
considered in imposing a sentence, set forth in HRS § 706-606:5 
I wanted to set [the probation statute] aside first because 
then we go to 706- 606.  And we most certainly can cross out 
2-D, to provide the defendant with needed education or 
vocational training, or, I’m sorry, medical care or other 
                     
5  HRS § 706-606 provides:  
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be 
imposed, shall consider:  
 
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the 
history and characteristics of the defendant;  
 (2) The need for the sentence imposed:  
 
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to 
promote respect for law, and to provide just 
punishment for the offense; 
 
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal 
conduct;   
(c) To protect the public from further crimes of the 
defendant; and  
 
(d) To provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other 
correctional treatment in the most effective manner;  
 
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and   (4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities 
among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct.   
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
12 correctional treatment in the most effective manner.  He’s 
not amenable to probation.  He’s not amenable to these 
treatments.  To the degree that he is, they are separate 
and apart from him following simple court orders and 
respecting the wishes of [CW1], let alone not physically 
hurting members of his own family [CW2], granted by marriage, not by blood.   
 
The nature and circumstances of the offense and the history 
of the characteristics of the defendant, I will get to 
that.  
The need for the sentence imposed. 2- A, to reflect the 
seriousness of the offense.  To promote respect for law and provide for just punishment of the offense [B].  And, C, to 
protect the public from further crimes of the defendant.  
And the State does point out that in this case public 
includes just any member of the public.  [CW1] should not 
have to [] continually suffer the intentions of this 
defendant simply because she is one person, one member of the public. 
 
C is highly applicable here.  I still want to touch on A 
and C, but I want to touch very briefly on B, to afford 
adequate deterrence to the defendant’s criminal conduct.  
Nothing is going to do that.  Absolutely nothing is going 
to do that at this point, Your Honor[.] 
 
It might be curbed for a time.  Particularly the level of 
violence that might be used at any particular point, but not enough.  And of all the defendants I’ve had, this is 
the defendant that I’m worried is going to kill someone.  
He may not mean to going in, I acknowledge that.  He may 
try to be a good person, I acknowledg[e] that.  But this is 
where I’m getting to with the escalation. 
 
  The State further argued that the Court should impose 
consecutive sentences based on the same factors, stating: 
But [if] the Court does not make these consecutive.  The 
defendant already having served about two years of the 
five.  Three years he’s out and then what?  I would much 
rather have a rehabilitative program, but I don’t know of anything given the history at this point.  If it comes up, 
even if this is consecutive terms, again, the parole board 
can consider that. 
 
In response, Sandoval’s counsel stated that the Hawai‘ i 
Paroling Authority does not deal with misdemeanor cases; thus, 
the suggestion that Sandoval would be released on parole even if ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
13 the court imposed a long sentence was incorrect.  Counsel asked 
for probation.   
When Sandoval himself had a chance to speak, he stated 
that some of the injunction violations arose from his family getting CW1 to report falsely that he had committed a violation.  
He told the court that he “would never hurt [CW1], never, 
because [he] love[d] her with all of [his] heart.”  He also 
stated that CW1 lied when she testified at trial - although she 
said that Sandoval was merely a coworker, on cross-examination 
she admitted that they sometimes ate ice cream together.  Further, Sandoval asserted that they also went on breakfast and 
lunch dates.  Sandoval continued at length, pointing out 
inconsistencies in the State’s case, describing his relationship 
with CW1, CW2, and family members, and asserting that many 
people involved in the case (including CW1) were lying about his 
conduct.  He stated, however, that he continued to believe that 
CW1 loved him and was his girlfriend
.   
After Sandoval finished his statement, the court 
stated: 
I’ve looked at the sentencing factors set forth in Section 
706-606 of the Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes and the factors to 
be considered in imposing a term of probation under Section 
706-621.  [The State] discussed each of these factors and I 
agree with his assessment.
 
 I believe that the factors to be considered in imposing a 
term of probation in each of these cases, they all weigh 
against you for the reasons stated, for the reasons which 
are reflected in the record.  The factors to be considered 
in imposing a sentence.  I’m very concerned about the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
14 manner in which you are thinking, the manner in which you 
are expressing yourself. . . . And I agree with [the 
State]’s assessment as to the factors in 706- 606.  
 
The court further stated, “It concerns me greatly that 
you’re saying, I want to get out and get my girl back.  Which 
indicates to the Court that if you are released from custody 
you’re going to be violating the restraining order [CW1] may 
have in place at this time.”  After further statements from 
Sandoval, the court then said: 
Mr. Sandoval, I am concerned about the Assault 2 incident.  
I’m very concerned about the TRO violations.  And I’m very 
concerned about [CW1]’s safety and well- being.  There are a 
number of factors which I feel weigh against you in terms 
of placing you on probation.  Among them are that you have 
significant mental health issues that you are denying.  The 
records indicate at times that you had a serious substance 
abuse issue.  You still believe that [CW1] is your 
girlfriend and loves you.  And you believe that your family 
and others are conspiring against you.  
 
 After Sandoval made further statements and a 
brief recess, the court continued, at times with 
interjection from Sandoval: 
You appear to lack insight into the personal issues you’re 
facing in your life and that you are dealing with.  You 
blame others for your circumstances and not yourself.  Your 
behavior reflects that you have acted violently and aggressively in the past.  And that you at times have posed 
a danger to others. 
 
. . . . 
 
The record also reflects, as the State has pointed out, 
that your conduct, your behavior has been escalating.  You 
have all of these TRO violation charges.  You have the 
Assault [2] felony charge now. 
 
 
The Court, “looking at everything, [and] taking into 
consideration the totality of the circumstances,” sentenced ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
15 Sandoval to five years for the second-degree assault conviction 
and one year for each of the twelve TRO violations, to be served 
consecutively (seventeen years total) with credit for time served.   
B. ICA Proceedings
1. Sandoval’s Points of Error
Sandoval raised five points of error in the ICA,
rephrased for clarity as follows: (1) whether the circuit court 
erred when it concluded that Sandoval’s no-contest pleas in 
Cases 1 and 2 were entered into voluntarily, intelligently, and 
knowingly; (2) whether the circuit court abused its discretion 
when it imposed consecutive sentences because it failed to 
advise Sandoval of the potential for consecutive sentences when 
it accepted Sandoval’s stipulation to revoke probation; (3) 
whether the circuit court erred by failing to state the specific 
factors it considered when imposing consecutive sentences; (4) 
whether the circuit court erred by relying on Sandoval’s refusal 
to admit guilt when imposing consecutive sentences; and (5) 
whether there was substantial evidence to support Sandoval’s 
conviction of second-degree assault in Case 3.    
As to his first point of error, Sandoval specifically 
challenged four aspects of his no-contest plea: (1) “the trial 
court failed to advise [him] of the maximum penalty provided by 
law for the adjudicated offenses”; (2) “the trial court failed***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
16  
      (continued . . .) to advise [him] of the impact a consecutive sentence would 
have”; (3) “the trial court failed to advise [him] that he had 
the right to a jury trial,” and (4) “the trial court failed to inquire whether [his] ‘willingness to plead guilty was a result 
from a plea agreement as required by [Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 11(d).’”   (Quoting State v. Solomon, 107 
6
                     
6  HRPP Rule 11 provides in relevant part: 
 
(b) No contest.  A defendant may plead no contest only with 
the consent of the court.  Such a plea shall be accepted by 
the court only after due consideration of the views of the 
parties and the interest of the public in the effective 
administration of justice. 
 
(c) Advice to defendant.  The court shall not accept a plea of guilty or no contest without first addressing the 
defendant personally in open court and determining that the 
defendant understands the following: 
 
(1) the nature of the charge to which the plea is 
offered; and 
 
(2) the maximum penalty provided by law, and the 
maximum sentence of extended term of imprisonment, 
which may be imposed for the offense to which the plea is offered; and 
 
(3) that the defendant has the right to plead not 
guilty, or to persist in that plea if it has already 
been made; and  
(4) that if the defendant pleads guilty or no contest 
there will not be a further trial of any kind, so 
that by pleading guilty or no contest the right to a 
trial is waived. 
 
(d) Advisement concerning alien status.  Prior to entry of 
a plea of guilty or no contest, or admission of guilt of 
sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under 
state law, except those offenses designated as infractions, 
the court shall read the advisement in [§ 802E-2], Hawaiʻ i 
Revised Statutes, on the record to the defendant.  
 17 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***   
2. The ICA’s Memorandum Opinion
The ICA held that it lacked jurisdiction to consider
Sandoval’s challenge to the voluntariness of his no-contest 
pleas because he only appealed from the circuit court’s post-judgment orders of resentencing.  Because Sandoval did not 
appeal the underlying judgments of conviction in Cases 1 and 2, 
and the underlying judgments were not “preliminary rulings upon 
which the [post-judgment resentencing orders were] predicated,” 
the ICA said it could not review those underlying judgments for 
the voluntariness of Sandoval’s no-contest pleas.  (Quoting Cook 
v. Surety Life Ins. Co., 79 Hawai‘ i 403, 409, 903 P.2d 708, 714
(App. 1995)).
The ICA further rejected Sandoval’s contention that 
the circuit court should have advised him of the maximum penalty 
he could face by stipulating to the motions to revoke probation.  Noting that Sandoval waived this point of error by failing to 
make a supporting argument, the ICA also rejected the contention 
on its merits.  The ICA quoted HRS § 706-625(5) (2014), which 
(e)[E]nsuring that the plea is voluntary.  The court shall
not accept a plea of guilty or no contest without first
addressing the defendant personally in open court and
determining that the plea is voluntary and not the resultof force or threats or of promises apart from a plea
agreement.  The court shall also inquire as to whether the
defendant’s willingness to plead guilty or no contest
results from any plea agreement.Hawaiʻi 117, 127, 111 P.3d 12, 22 (2005)). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
18 states, “When the court revokes probation, it may impose on the 
defendant any sentence that might have been imposed originally 
for the crime of which the defendant was convicted.”  Based on this language, the ICA concluded that there was no legal basis 
for the argument that the circuit court was required to notify 
him of the consequence of probation revocation before he 
stipulated to the motions to revoke probation.  Additionally, 
the ICA pointed out that “the record reveals that when Sandoval 
stipulated to the motions to revoke probation, he had notice 
that consecutive sentences could be imposed” based on his signatures on the no-contest plea form and the form stating the 
terms and conditions of his probation, and his attorney’s 
statements at the change of plea hearing.  
 
Third, the ICA addressed Sandoval’s contention that 
the circuit court improperly imposed consecutive sentences.  The 
circuit court had discretion to order that Sandoval serve 
consecutive terms of imprisonment, and was required to consider 
the factors set forth in HRS § 706-606.7  HRS § 706-668.5 (Supp. 
2015) (giving sentencing courts discretion to impose consecutive 
sentences after considering the § 706-606 factors).  The ICA 
identified the portions of the record in which the circuit court 
considered the statutory sentencing factors and stated reasons 
                     
7  For the text of HRS § 706-606, see supra, note 5. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
19 for the sentence that related to those factors.  For example, 
[t]he [c]ircuit [c]ourt also identified several concerns 
that related to the sentencing factors, including that 
Sandoval had repeatedly failed to comply with the terms of 
his probation (HRS § 706-606(2)(a)- (d)); showed escalating 
behavior (HRS § 706-606(1) and (2)(c)); made statements 
suggesting he would continue violating the [i]njunction (HRS § 706-606(1) and (2)(a)- (d)); and lacked insight into 
personal issues, blamed others for his circumstances, and posed a danger to others (HRS § 706-606(1) and (2)(c)). 
 
  The ICA further concluded that the circuit court 
satisfied the requirement set forth in State v. Hussein, 122 
Hawai‘i 495, 509-10, 229 P.3d 313, 327-28 (2010), that a 
sentencing court state its reasons for imposing consecutive 
sentences.  In the ICA’s view, the circuit court “identified the 
specific facts or circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the court considered,” and stated that it was 
imposing consecutive sentences based on the totality of the 
circumstances identified.   
  The ICA also rejected Sandoval’s contention that the 
circuit court at sentencing improperly relied upon his refusal 
to admit guilt.  In reviewing the transcript of the sentencing 
hearing, the ICA could not identify any statements of the circuit court that supported Sandoval’s assertion.   
 
 Finally, the ICA disagreed with Sandoval’s argument 
that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for second-degree assault.  As the ICA noted, at the time 
Sandoval was charged, the statute defined the offense as, in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
20 relevant part, “intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] substantial 
bodily injury to another,” “recklessly caus[ing] serious or 
substantial bodily injury to another,” or “intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] bodily injury to another with a dangerous 
instrument[.]”  The ICA concluded that, taking the evidence in 
the light most favorable to the State, there was substantial 
evidence to support Sandoval’s conviction.  
 
  In his application for writ of certiorari, Sandoval presents the same points of error he presented to the ICA.   
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Acceptance of No-Contest Plea 
 The trial court is vested with wide discretion to 
accept or refuse a nolo contendere plea, and the acceptance 
or refusal of a no contest plea is therefore reviewed for 
abuse of that discretion. . . .  An abuse of discretion 
occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds 
of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.   
 
State v. Merino, 81 Hawai‘ i 198, 211, 915 P.2d 672, 685 (1996) 
(quotation marks, citations, brackets, and footnote omitted).  
B. Sentencing  
 A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in 
imposing a sentence.  The applicable standard of review for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its 
decision.  
 Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse of 
discretion are arbitrary and capricious action by the judge 
and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant’s contentions.  And, generally, to constitute an abuse it 
must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.   
 
State v. Rivera, 106 Hawai‘ i 146, 154-55, 102 P.3d 1044, 1052-53 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
21 (2004) (block quotation format altered) (quotation marks, 
brackets, and citations omitted) (overruled on other grounds by 
Flubacher v. State, 142 Hawai‘ i 109, 414 P.3d 161 (2018)).   
 In order to facilitate appellate review for abuse of 
a trial court’s sentencing discretion, and whenever a 
defendant is qualified for sentencing alternatives and the 
sentence imposed is unsatisfactory to the defendant, we 
strongly encourage and recommend that . . . the sentencing 
court . . . state its reasons for imposing the particular 
sentence.   
 
State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai‘ i 127, 144, 890 P.2d 1167, 1184 (1995) 
(quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted).  
  In addition, “[t]he weight to be given the factors set 
forth in HRS § 706-606 in imposing [a] sentence is a matter generally left to the discretion of the sentencing court, taking 
into consideration the circumstances of each case.”  State v. 
Akana, 10 Haw. App. 381, 386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334 (1994).  
C. Substantial Evidence 
 Substantial evidence as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  And as 
trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make all 
reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in 
evidence, including circumstantial evidence.  
 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai‘ i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996) 
(quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Pone, 
78 Hawai‘ i 262, 265, 892 P.2d 455, 458 (1995)).   
  “Further, in reviewing whether substantial evidence 
exists to support a conviction, due deference must be given to 
the right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
22 the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact from the 
evidence adduced.”  State v. Taliferro, 77 Hawaiʻ i 196, 201, 881 
P.2d 1264, 1269 (App. 1994) (citing State v. Naeole, 62 Haw. 
563, 565, 617 P.2d 820, 823 (1980)). 
D. Acceptance of a Stipulation  
  The validity of a defendant’s waiver of their due 
process rights “presents a question of state and federal 
constitutional law.  We answer questions of constitutional law 
by exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case.  Thus, we review questions of 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.”  State v. 
Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai‘ i 465, 468-69, 312 P.3d 897, 900-01 
(2013) (quotation marks and ellipses omitted) (quoting State v. 
Friedman, 93 Hawai‘ i 63, 67, 996 P.2d 268, 272 (2000)).   
IV. DISCUSSION  
A. The ICA Properly Rejected Sandoval’s Challenge to His No-
Contest Pleas in Cases 1 and 2  
  Sandoval failed to timely challenge the judgments of 
conviction in Cases 1 and 2.  We therefore do not have 
jurisdiction to review the voluntariness of Sandoval’s no-
contest pleas.  Pursuant to HRS § 641-11 (2016) and Hawai
‘i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(b)(1), a defendant in a 
criminal case has 30 days to appeal a judgment of the circuit 
court.  An untimely appeal generally deprives the reviewing ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
23 court of jurisdiction to consider it.   Cabral v. State, 127 
Hawai
‘i 175, 184, 277 P.3d 269, 278 (2012).    8
Additionally, Sandoval’s timely appeal of his 
resentencing orders does not confer jurisdiction upon the 
reviewing court to examine his underlying conviction.  This comports with the approaches taken by the federal courts.  See, 
e.g., United States v. Cate, 971 F.3d 1054, 1057-58 (9th Cir. 
2020) (concluding that a supervised release hearing was not the 
proper proceeding for a defendant to challenge his underlying 
federal conviction); United States v. Wallace, 335 F.3d 76, 78 
(2d Cir. 2003) (holding that a defendant could not, at a supervised release revocation proceeding, collaterally attack 
the conviction or sentence which resulted in his supervised 
release); United States v. Torres-Flores, 624 F.2d 776, 780 (7th 
Cir. 1980) (“However meritorious this defendant’s . . . claim 
may be, an appeal from a probation revocation is not the proper 
avenue for a collateral attack on the underlying conviction.”); 
United States v. Francischine, 512 F.2d 827, 828-29 (5th Cir. 
1975) (holding that the underlying validity of a conviction 
                     
8  One exception is when “defense counsel has inexcusably or 
ineffectively failed to pursue a defendant’s appeal from a criminal 
conviction in the first instance.”  State v. Knight, 80 Hawai‘ i 318, 323, 909 
P.2d 1133, 1138 (1996) (quoting Grattafiori v. State, 79 Hawai‘ i 10, 13- 14, 
897 P.2d 937, 940- 41 (1995)).  Since Sandoval does not allege ineffective 
assistance of counsel prevented him from challenging his no- contest pleas in 
Cases 1 and 2, that exception is not applicable here.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
24 cannot be asserted as a defense in a probation revocation 
proceeding).   
 
 This is also consistent with the approach we have 
taken in civil cases: “[W]hen an order is properly certified 
pursuant to [Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] Rule 54(b), 
the certification necessarily renders every preliminary ruling 
upon which it was predicated final and appealable as well.”  
Weinberg v. Mauch, 78 Hawai‘ i 40, 46, 890 P.2d 277, 283 (1995) 
(quotation marks and citation omitted).  The Weinberg language 
implies that prior rulings leading up to an appealable order are 
only reviewable where the appealed order is predicated on those 
prior rulings.  The ICA adopted this interpretation in Cook v. 
Surety Life Insurance Co., 79 Hawai‘ i 403, 903 P.2d 708 (App. 
1995), when it considered whether it could review orders granting summary judgment in addition to the Rule 54(b)-
certified order enforcing a settlement agreement, stating:   
[W]e agree with [Appellee’s] assertion that this court has 
no jurisdiction to consider Appellants’ appeal of the 
orders granting summary judgment in favor of Appellees.  
Irrespective of whether the Order was a collateral order or 
an order certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), this court will only consider other orders which were preliminary 
rulings upon which the subject Order was predicated or were 
part of the series of orders which collectively led to that 
Order.  Weinberg, 78 Hawai‘ i at 46, 890 P.2d at 283 (on Rule 
54(b) certified order)[;] [s]ee Security Pac. Mortgage 
Corp. v. Miller, 71 Haw. 65, 71, 783 P.2d 855, 858 (1989) 
(review is limited to parameters of orders appealed from).  
The summary judgment orders concern the merits of the case, 
and the settlement order in issue has no bearing on the merits.  While the outcome of the summary judgment motions 
may have affected the parties’ supposed willingness to 
negotiate as a practical matter, the summary judgment 
orders were not a prerequisite necessary to the Order. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
25  
Id. at 409, 903 P.2d at 714. 
  Thus, after an order revoking probation and 
resentencing, a defendant may appeal that order to challenge the 
revocation or the imposition of the new sentence.  See, e.g., 
State v. Delima, 78 Hawai‘ i 343, 346, 893 P.2d 194, 197 (1995) 
(reviewing the defendant’s sentence imposed upon resentencing 
from revocation of probation).  But the merits of a person’s 
original conviction cannot be challenged on appeal from a subsequent probation revocation or resentencing.  For that 
reason, the ICA was correct to determine that it lacked 
jurisdiction to consider the voluntariness of Sandoval’s no-
contest pleas in Cases 1 and 2.  If Sandoval wishes to challenge 
these convictions, the proper vehicle is a HRPP Rule 40 
petition. 
B. Due Process Requires that a Defendant Knowingly, 
Voluntarily, and Intelligently Stipulate to a Probation Violation  
  Sandoval argues that he was not properly informed of 
the consequences of stipulating to the State’s motion to revoke 
probation.  Specifically, he argues that he was unaware of the 
possibility that such a stipulation could result in him being 
resentenced to consecutive sentences in Cases 1 and 2.  We agree. 
  The rights a defendant gives up when stipulating to a ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
26 probation violation – particularly the right to have the State 
prove the probation violation – are similar in kind to those 
that accompany a guilty plea.  The consequences are alike, too: revocation of probation may result, as it did here, in 
incarceration.  In part for these reasons, the United States 
Supreme Court has held that due process protections apply when a 
defendant stipulates to revoke parole.  See Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 
411 U.S. 778, 781-82 (1973) (“Even though the revocation of parole is not a part of the criminal prosecution, . . . the loss 
of liberty entailed is a serious deprivation requiring that the parolee be accorded due process”).   
  Indeed, many jurisdictions recognize that a probationer’s due process rights includes the requirement that 
entering into a stipulation of a probation violation be done 
knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently.  For instance, the 
Georgia Supreme Court has held that a reviewing court may vacate 
a probation revocation when “there is independent evidence in 
the record suggesting that admission of probation violations was 
not knowing and voluntary.”  Meadows v. Settles, 561 S.E.2d 105, 
108-09 (Ga. 2002) (quotation marks and ellipses omitted) (citing 
United States v. Pelensky, 129 F.3d 63, 68 (2d Cir. 1997)).  
Likewise, the Court of Appeals of Massachusetts held that “a defendant’s agreement to waive a probation revocation hearing – 
such as by stipulating to violations – must be knowing and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
27 voluntary and that such waiver can be assessed under the 
totality of the circumstances[.]”  Commonwealth v. Sayyid, 17 
N.E.3d 469, 470 (Mass. App. Ct. 2014); see also State v. Lavoy, 
614 A.2d 1077, 1079 (N.J. Sup. Ct. App. Div. 1992) (“The 
requirement that the court personally address the defendant 
before accepting a guilty plea [to a probation violation] is 
designed to assure that the defendant understand the charges, 
that a factual basis for the plea exists and that the plea is 
voluntary.”); Hersch v. State, 562 A.2d 1254, 1256-57 (Md. 1989) 
(recognizing that “[a] probation revocation proceeding can, and 
often does, result in immediate deprivation of liberty,” and 
that “certain fundamental rights [ ] can be waived only where 
the record affirmatively discloses a voluntary, knowing, and 
intelligent relinquishment of the right by the defendant 
himself.”); Commonwealth v. Bell, 410 A.3d 843, 844 (Pa. Super. 
Ct. 1979) (requiring that some on-the-record showing be made to 
determine whether a probationer’s waiver of a hearing is 
voluntary); People v. Hardin, 245 N.W.2d 566, 568 (Mich. Ct. 
App. 1976) (recognizing that “in order to insure that a 
defendant’s admission of [a] probation violation is ‘knowing and 
voluntary’ prior to the court’s acceptance of the plea, it is 
necessary that the defendant be at least advised of his due 
process rights to a hearing”); In re Jankowski, 157 A.3d 573, 
581 (Vt. 2016) (“Whether or not an on-the-record colloquy is***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
28 required [before accepting a defendant’s stipulation to waive a 
hearing on probation revocation], the totality of the 
circumstances must nonetheless demonstrate that the waiver was 
knowing and voluntary[.]”).   
Stipulating to revocation is both an admission of 
culpability for the violation and, in effect, a waiver of the 
defendant’s right to constitutionally protected procedures.  
Thus, many jurisdictions agree that the record must demonstrate 
that a stipulation to revoke probation is made knowingly, 
voluntarily, and intelligently.  And indeed, such a requirement 
is consistent with our law protecting several critical choices a 
defendant may make over the course of a criminal proceeding to 
ensure no defendant is wrongly denied the rights the 
constitution guarantees.  See State v. Casey, 51 Haw. 99, 100, 
451 P.2d 806, 808 (1969) (waiver of right of confrontation); 
State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 614, 619, 673 P.2d 1036, 1041 
(1983) (waiver of right to counsel); State v. Ibuos, 75 Haw. 
118, 121, 857 P.2d 576, 578 (1993) (waiver of right to trial by 
jury); Wong v. Among, 52 Haw. 420, 425, 477 P.2d 630, 634 (1970) 
(guilty plea); State v. Hernandez, 143 Hawai ‘i 501, 515, 431 P.3d 
1274, 1288 (2018) (no contest plea).  For these reasons, we hold 
that before accepting a stipulation to revoke probation and 
resentence a defendant, courts must consider whether the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
29 defendant knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently entered into 
the agreement. 
  Although jurisdictions agree that the record must 
demonstrate a stipulation to revoke probation was made knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently, only a few 
jurisdictions require that the trial court engage in a colloquy 
with the defendant to ensure that a defendant’s rights are 
adequately protected.  See, e.g., Lavoy, 614 A.2d at 1081 
(recognizing that a colloquy between the court and the defendant is necessary “to obtain a factual basis for the plea [to a probation violation] and to establish that the defendant is 
pleading voluntarily and knowingly”); Hersch, 562 A.2d at 1258 
(recognizing that an on-the-record colloquy “goes a long way toward ensuring essential fairness in an important proceeding 
while imposing only a small additional burden upon the trial 
judge”).  A majority of courts, including the federal courts, 
have rejected requiring a colloquy.  Settles, 561 S.E.2d at 107 
(“[T]he Federal courts that have addressed the issue have concluded that ‘due process of law does not require a court to elicit a formal waiver from a defendant who has admitted to 
violating the terms of probation.’” (citation omitted)); United 
States v. Pelensky, 129 F.3d 63, 68 (2d Cir. 1997) (declining to 
adopt a colloquy requirement as a matter of federal law).  
Following the majority of courts, we decline to adopt a formal, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
30 full colloquy requirement.  Although trial courts have 
discretion to decide how best to ensure that a defendant’s 
rights are adequately protected,  the trial courts must ensure 
that the record demonstrates that the court “canvas[es] the 
matter with the accused to make sure he has a full understanding 
of what the plea connotes and of its consequences,” including, 
most importantly, the defendant’s knowledge of the maximum 
sentence that he may face when stipulating to a probation 
violation.  Settles, 561 S.E.2d at 109 (citation, quotation 
marks, and brackets omitted).   9
  Because the record before us does not reflect that 
Sandoval’s stipulation was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary, 
vacatur is the appropriate remedy.  The exchange between the 
parties and the court does not reflect that Sandoval knew he was 
agreeing that he had violated his probation by being convicted 
of a crime; rather, Sandoval addressed other, more minor 
probation violations when addressed by the court, which might 
not sufficiently justify revoking probation .  See State v. 
                     
9  We note that, in the interest of sound judicial administration, 
an on-the-record colloquy is an effective way to ensure that a defendant’s 
rights are adequately protected.  However, we find the Michigan Court of 
Appeals’ reasoning in declining to adopt a formal, full colloquy requirement 
persuasive.  Hardin, 245 N.W.2d at 568- 69 (“In holding today that a defendant 
who desires to admit a probation violation must first be informed, on the 
record, of his right to have a hearing, it is not our intent to lock the 
trial judge into any ‘check list’ type of situation.”).   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
31 Nakamura, 59 Haw. 378, 380, 581 P.2d 759, 762 (1978) (“The 
court may revoke a defendant’s probation only where it is 
satisfied ‘that the defendant has inexcusably failed to comply 
with a substantial requirement imposed as a condition of 
[probation.]’” (emphasis added)).    10
Nor does the record confirm that Sandoval was 
informed of the potential penalty at the time he purportedly 
stipulated to his violations.  See Wong, 52 Haw. at 425, 477 
P.2d at 634 (“[A waiver of one’s trial rights via entry of a 
guilty plea] is not constitutionally acceptable unless made 
voluntarily and with full understanding of the consequences.”).  
Most notably, it does not appear that Sandoval was aware that 
he could be sentenced consecutively on all counts.   
Accordingly, we cannot conclude that Sandoval 
stipulated to the probation violations knowingly, 
intelligently, and voluntarily, and thus, the stipulation must 
be vacated. 
10The Nakamura court quoted a now- repealed statute governing 
probation revocation, but the current scheme requires the same.  HRS § 706-
625(c) (2014) provides: 
The court shall revoke probation if the defendant has 
inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement 
imposed as a condition of the order or has been convicted 
of a felony.  The court may revoke the suspension of 
sentence or probation if the defendant has been convicted 
of another crime other than a felony. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
32 C. The Circuit Court Did Not Sufficiently Justify its 
Imposition of Consecutive Sentences  
Pursuant to HRS § 706-668.5,11 a sentencing court may 
use its discretion to order that a person convicted of more than 
one offense serve terms of imprisonment concurrently or 
consecutively.  That statute requires that the sentencing court 
consider the factors set forth in HRS § 706-606 to make this 
determination.12 
We held in State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai‘ i 321, 389 P.3d 
916 (2016), that when imposing multiple consecutive sentences, 
the circuit court must “explain its rationale for each 
consecutive sentence in order to inform the defendant and appellate courts of the specific factors underlying each 
sentence.”  Id. at 337, 389 P.3d at 932 (emphasis added).  We 
further explained, “While the same factors could be sufficiently 
aggravated to justify imposing more than one consecutive 
                     
11  HRS § 706-668.5 states in relevant part: 
 
(1) If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a 
defendant, whether at the same time or at different times, 
or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant who is already subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, 
the terms may run concurrently or consecutively.  Multiple 
terms of imprisonment run concurrently unless the court orders or the statute mandates that the terms run 
consecutively. 
 
(2) The court, in determining whether the terms imposed are 
to be ordered to run concurrently or consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in section 706- 606. 
 
12  For the factors set forth in HRS § 706-606, see supra, note 5. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
33 sentence, the sentencing court should specify that basis or 
identify another basis for determining how many consecutive 
sentences to impose.”  Id.  Indeed, the instant case illustrates 
why our law requires a rationale for each and every consecutive 
sentence: thirteen consecutive sentences on each of Sandoval’s 
convictions for violation of an injunction exposed him to a term 
of imprisonment thirteen times the maximum sentence that could 
have been imposed for each individually.  Such “a large 
disparity between the maximum statutory sentence for each 
offense and the aggregate consecutive sentence imposed by the court” requires that the court provide “a clearly articulated 
rationale.”  Id. at 338, 389 P.3d at 933. 
  The rationale on the record here is not sufficient to meet that standard.  At sentencing, the State specified the 
facts relevant to each subsection of § 706-606; the circuit 
court indicated that it agreed with the State’s analysis.  The 
circuit court also stated that it was concerned about Sandoval’s 
repeated violation of the TRO, and that his statements about CW1 
suggested he would continue to violate the TRO.  Additionally, the circuit court noted Sandoval’s apparent lack of self-
reflection into his personal issues and lack of respect for 
CW1’s wishes.  But while this may suffice to justify the 
imposition of a consecutive sentence, it is not sufficient to 
justify consecutive sentences for each of Sandoval’s thirteen ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
34 convictions.  The record does not sufficiently reflect that the 
sentencing court considered whether each of those consecutive 
sentences was necessary to further the ends of HRS § 706-606.  Accordingly, the circuit court’s observations did not explain 
the reasoning behind imposing all of Sandoval’s sentences to run 
consecutively, as Barrios requires.   
  Based on this record, the circuit court erred in imposing 
consecutive sentences because it failed to specify why it 
imposed each of the thirteen sentences consecutively.13 
D. There was Substantial Evidence to Support Sandoval’s 
Conviction for Second-Degree Assault  
  Taking the evidence adduced in the light most 
favorable to the State, substantial evidence supports Sandoval’s 
conviction for second-degree assault.  In his testimony, 
Sandoval maintained that he was acting in self-defense because 
he thought that CW2 was about to punch him.  Self-defense to a 
criminal charge contains both a subjective and an objective 
prong: the defendant must believe that force is necessary, and 
that belief must be reasonable.  State v. Augustin, 101 Hawai‘ i 
127, 128, 63 P.3d 1097, 1098 (2002) (citing HRS §§ 703-304, 703-
305). 
                     
13  In light of our disposition on this issue, we need not consider 
whether the sentencing court improperly relied upon Sandoval’s alleged 
unwillingness to admit guilt.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
35 The question is therefore whether the State presented 
substantial evidence to disprove that Sandoval acted in self-
defense.  Upon review of the record, we conclude that it did.  Both CW2 and Sandoval testified that Sandoval threw the first 
punch during the 10:00 p.m. incident, which was confirmed by 
another witness at the scene.  Sandoval also testified that he 
voluntarily returned to the restaurant around 10:00 p.m., 
calling into doubt his testimony that he was afraid CW2 would 
attack him.  Two bystanders testified that they saw a knife in 
Sandoval’s hand during the fight with CW2.  And the photos of CW2’s face show deep cuts.  Thus, taking the evidence adduced in 
the light most favorable to the State, substantial evidence 
supported Sandoval’s conviction for second-degree assault.  
V. CONCLUSION  
 For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s 
December 20, 2019 judgment on appeal and the circuit court’s July 17, 2018 orders of resentencing and revocation of probation 
in 1PC-14-1-001782 and 1PC-15-1-001156.  We additionally vacate 
the circuit court’s July 17, 2018 order sentencing Sandoval in 1PC-16-1-0563.  We otherwise affirm the circuit court’s May 18, 
2015 and March 21, 2016 acceptance of Sandoval’s no contest 
pleas in 1PC-14-1-001782 and 1PC-15-1-001156, and the circuit 
court’s July 17, 2018 judgment of conviction for second-degree 
assault and violation of an injunction against harassment in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
36 1PC-16-1-0563.  We thus remand the case to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Walter J. Rodby 
for petitioner 
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
  /s/ Bert I. Ayabe 
      
Chad M. Kumagaifor respondent   
  
 
      
       
 