 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-21-0000478 29-DEC-2023 08:12 AM Dkt. 45 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF 
 ---o0o---HAWAIʻ
I  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,   
Respondent/Plaintiff
-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
KUMULIPO IWA COYOTE SYLVA,  
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.  
SCWC-21-0000478  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-21-0000478; CASE NO  . 2CPC-18-0000240
)  
 
DECEMBER 29, 2023   
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA AND EDDINS, JJ.,   
CIRCUIT JUDGE KAWASHIMA IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED,  
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE  NAKAMOTO IN PLACE OF   WILSON, J., RECUSED  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
Defendant Kumulipo Iwa Coyote Sylva (“Sylva”) was charged 
by indictment with second-degree murder 
for killing Eduardo 
Alejandro Cerezo (“ Cerezo”). Sylva admitted to killing Cerezo 
but asserted the affirmative defense of a physical or mental   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disease, disorder, or defect excluding penal responsibility 
(“insanity”). 
Sylva’s jury trial turned largely on the testimony of three 
medical examiners appointed by the  Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (“circuit court”). The examiners testified conc erning 
Sylva’s mental state pursuant to Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”)
§ 704-410 (2014).   All three examiners  agreed Sylva was affected  
by a mental disease, disorder, or defect at the time of the  
conduct.  Two of the examiners further opined that, as a resul  t, 
Sylva lacked capacity under the legal standard for insanity  , 
thus excluding criminal responsibility.  One examiner disagreed.  
 
The circuit court struck parts of the testimony of one of 
the examiners who had opined that Sylva lacked capacity, 
psychiatrist Martin Blinder, M.D. (“Dr. Blinder”). Defense 
counsel had asked Dr. Blinder to explain the basis for his 
opinion. The prosecutor objected to the “last phrase” of Dr. 
Blinder’s answer, in which Dr. Blinder stated Sylva was not a “bad man who goes around hurting people.” (Emphasis added.) 
But after a sidebar, the circuit court instructed the jury to 
disregard Dr. Blinder’s “last response .” (Emphasis added.) The 
circuit court also sustained the prosecutor ’s objection to Dr. 
Blinder’s later testimony that to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability, but for Sylva’s mental illness, he would not have 
2   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
    
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
killed Cerezo.  The circuit court stated before the jury, “I 
ordered it stricken earlier. I’ll order it stricken again.” 
Sylva was convicted of manslaughter based on extreme mental 
or emotional disturbance (“ EMED”).  
We hold the circuit court erroneously struck parts of Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony because (a) a reasonable juror could have 
believed the circuit court instructed them to disregard Dr. 
Blinder’s entire answer explaining his opinion that Sylva lacked 
capacity; (b) HRS § 704-410(4) provides that medical examiners 
appointed pursuant to that chapter “shall be p ermitted to make 
any explanation reasonably serving to clarify” their opinion; 
and (c) the circuit court’s error was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt because Sylva’s insanity defense turned largely 
on the medical examiners’ testimonies. 
We also hold the circuit court properly instructed the jury 
on the application of the insanity defense to manslaughter based 
on EMED. 
We therefore vacate the circuit court’s January 24, 2020 
judgment, conviction, and sentence; as well as the Intermediate 
Court of Appeal’s (“ ICA”) January 3, 2023 judgment on appeal. 
We remand to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. 
3   
 
   
  II. Background 
A. Factual background 
  
  
  
  
 
     
  
   
     
  
   
   
 
 
 
                     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On March 18, 2018, Sylva 
was arrested for killing Cerezo 
with a cane knife.1 
According to eyewitness Kyle Keoho (“Keoho”) , earlier that 
afternoon, Keoho and Cerezo had boarded a bus in Pukalani, Maui. 
While on the bus, they noticed another passenger, Sylva, 
“looking at [Cerezo] mean.” Cerezo called Sylva a “pussy” and 
threatened to beat him up. When the bus arrived at the Queen 
Kaʻahumanu Center in Kahului, Sylva, Keoho, and Cerezo got off 
the bus. Sylva challenged Cerezo to a fight. Cerezo said he 
did not want to fight. Sylva stormed off. 
Shortly after, Cerezo and Keoho made a purchase and entered 
a mall restroom. Sylva entered the restroom with a cane knife.  Sylva said, “you guys are like demons . I send them to the 
moon.” Sylva struck Cerezo’s neck with the cane knife, killing 
him.  Sylva stated, “Oh, I guess he was a demon,” and told 
Keoho, “Believe it or not, he was a dem on.” 
Witnesses at trial testified that Sylva then fled the 
scene, stopping to hide his jacket and the cane knife.  Sylva 
was apprehended by police at Kahului Community Center Park. 
The parties and witnesses at times refer to the weapon as a machete. 
4 1   
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
                     
    
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sylva made various other references to demons before and 
after his arrest. 
B. Circuit court proceedings2 
Sylva was charged by indictment3 with the offense of murder 
in the second degree in violation of HRS § 707-701.5 (2014).  
Sylva did not deny that he caused Cerezo ’s death but asserted 
the affirmative defense of insanity. 
1. Medical examination 
Sylva filed a motion for examination to determine fitness 
to proceed and/or penal responsibility.   Pursuant to  HRS § 704 -
400 (2014), a person is not criminally responsible under the 
Hawai‘i Penal Code if , “at the time of the conduct  as a result of 
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect the person lacks 
substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness of 
the person’s conduct or to conform the person’s conduct to the 
requirements of law. ”   The circuit court appointed three 
individuals to examine Sylva’s penal responsibility pursuant to 4 
2 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided over Sylva’s trial . 
3 The State of Hawai ‘i (“the State”) first filed a complaint in the 
District Court of the Second Circuit (“district court”) charging Sylva with 
second-degree murder.  After Sylva was indicted in the circuit court, the 
district court case was dismissed without prejudice. 
4 The circuit court twice suspended the proceedings to examine Sylva’ s 
fitness to proceed, but the parties ultimately stipulated Sylva was fit to 
proceed based on the uncontested findings of medical examiners appointed pursuant to HRS § 704 -404 (Supp. 2016). 
5   
 
    
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
   
                     
  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 704-407.5 (Supp. 2016):  (1) Melissa Vargo, Psy.D. (“Dr. 
Vargo”), (2) Dr. Blinder, and (3) George C. Choi, Psy.D. (“Dr. 
Choi”).5 The examiners submitted reports opining on Sylva’s 
mental state at the time of the conduct. 
2. Medical ex aminers’ trial testimonies 
At trial, amongst various other witnesses, Sylva called Dr. 
Vargo and Dr. Blinder to testify, and the State called Dr. Choi. 
All three examiners opined Sylva was affected by a mental 
disease, disorder, or defect at the time of the conduct.  Only 
Dr. Choi opined that mental state did not substantially impair 
Sylva’s capacity so as to exclude penal responsibility. 
a.  Dr. Vargo 
First, Dr. Vargo, a clinical psychologist, opined that at 
the time of the conduct, Sylva suffered from schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type, causing Sylva to experience 
hallucinations and delusions as well as mania and depression.  
Dr. Vargo further opined that to a degree of psychological certainty, Sylva lacked the “capacity to appreciate the 
wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his behavior to the 
conduct of the law” at th at time.  Dr. Vargo explained the basis 
Dr. Vargo and Dr. Blinder were originally appointed by the district 
court in the related district court proceedings. See supra note 3. The 
parties stipulated to incorporate the earlier examinations of Dr. Vargo and 
Dr. Blinder in the circuit court. 
6 5   
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for her opinion, including that Sylva had told her he did not 
believe killing Cerezo was wrong because Cerezo was a demon; it 
was a service to God. 
b.  Dr. Blinder 
Next, Dr. Blinder, a forensic  psychiatrist, opined  that 
Sylva suffered from a psychotic disability profoundly affecting his ability to think clearly and his interpretation of  what he 
sees. Dr. Blinder also opined Sylva’s criminal responsibility 
was  “utterly lacking” at t he time he killed Cerezo, and that 
Sylva’s disorder “resulted in a lack of capacity to control 
conduct under the law or appreciate wrongfulness.”   
Defense counsel asked Dr. Blinder  to explain the  basis for 
his opinion: “And could you help us explain why that is your 
opinion.”  Dr. Blinder responded:  
Let me tell you how I go about making these 
judgments. The first thing that I look at when there’s a 
homicide i s whether or not there’s a reasonable reason for 
the defendant to have done what he did. I’m not saying a 
good reason. There’s never a go od reason to kill someone. 
But maybe a drug bust –  a drug deal that went bad, guy is 
supposed to give him drugs, he pays him and doesn’t get the 
money, he takes his life, or he’s insulted on a racial 
basis or something that we wouldn’t a pprove of but we can 
understan d, that there’s been a longstanding conflict 
between the killer and the person that he kills, and it’s unforgivable but understandable.  
I look for that. If I find that, then it’s pretty 
well the end of my participation. So even if he’s got a 
mental illness, I don’t care. We’ve got a rational reason 
for doing it. A doubt –  being paranoid is not therapeutic, 
but that’s irrelevant.  I’m done. As far as I’m concerned, 
he does not meet that standard that you just heard.  
In the case of Mr. Sylva, there is no  rational 
reason. There’s a very superficial reason, but the basic reason is he’s got a mission, he’s go t a mission to rid the 
world of demons, and he was just getting started. This was obviously, in h is delusional mind, a dangerous demon, and 
7   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for some reason, he –  he’s been anointed by what he reads 
in the Bible to take care of this problem.  
And that’ s nutty and it’s c razy, and absent for that 
nutty, crazy thing, he wouldn’t have hurt anybody. He’s 
not, you know, a bad man who goes around hurting people .   
But when he –  
(Emphasis added.) 
The prosecutor then objected, “Your honor, I’m sorry, I’m 
going to object to the last phrase and ask that it be stricken.” 
(Emphasis added.) Defense counsel asked on what grounds, and 
the circuit court stated, “that wasn’t the question that was 
asked.” The parties then approached the bench for a sidebar. 
The following discussion was held outside the hearing of the 
jury: 
THE COURT: Sorry. So here’s what he said in the 
answer: “If it wasn’t for this nutty thing, he wouldn’t 
have hurt anybody. He’s not a bad man.”  
 What part of that was the opinion that went to the 
question you asked?  
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I think he was explaining why he 
arrived to that opin ion.  
 THE COURT: No,  no. I get that part, and that part 
he can answer.  
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay.  
 THE COURT: But he says –  he’s just editoriali zing, 
saying if it wasn’t for this, this wouldn’t happen and he’s not a bad man. If that was the question you asked, that would be okay, but that’s not the question you asked. And 
the State is correct, I think, in s aying he’s going beyond 
the opinion.  
 . . . .  
 THE COURT:  I mean, saying that he’s not a bad man, 
that’s not the issue. So I’ll sustain the ob jection –  . . 
. . and have it stricken.  
When they returned, the circuit court  stated to the jury, 
“Ladies and gentlemen, I’ll ask you to disregard the last 
response  made by the witness and order that it be stricken.” 
(Emphasis added.)  
8   
 
    
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defense counsel then continued direct examination of Dr. 
Blinder, and the circuit court again struck a portion of Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony explaining the basis for his opinion: 
BY [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
Q. Your opinion is based in part  on the fact that 
there is no  rational explanation, correct?  
A. Yes. Based  –  to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability, there does not appear to be a rational basis 
for his action, and that but for his psychotic illness, he 
would not have taken the life of this man .  
[PROSECUTOR]: Your Honor, I’m going to object, move 
to strike that. It’s speculative.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Your Honor, it is his opinion and 
he’s explaini ng why.  
THE COURT: It’s his opinion that he suffers from –  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL6]:   It’s the second part .  
THE COURT:  I kno w.  I  heard. He’s –  it’s his 
opinion th at he suffers from a mental disease, and he’s 
giving a conclusion –  or, excuse me, the word  opinion about 
that. He’s adding on t o that at the end of the answer. I 
ordered it stricken earlier. I’ll order it stricken again .  
Ladies and gentlemen, when the Court orders something 
stricken, you’re not to consider it in your deliberations in any way. I’ ll give you an instruction on that later.  
(Emphases added.) 
On cross-examination, the prosecutor also questioned Dr. 
Blinder concerning the basis for his opinion: 
Q. So, Doctor, you – something you said earlier was 
that the first thing you look to is for a reasonable reason for committing a crime, correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And even though it might not be reasonable, let’s 
say, to us – you gave the example, I think , of a drug – 
drug deal gone bad was one of the reasons, right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Okay. So what you’re saying is, of course, the 
normal person who is not involved in drug deals wouldn’t 
kill over those types of things, right?  But as a forensic 
psychologist looking for a reasonable or rational basis for 
9 6   The transcript states defense counsel made this statement, but  as the 
ICA noted, the context indicates it may have actually been made by the prosecutor.  See  State v. Sylva, No . CAAP-21-0000478, 2022 WL 17350568, at *3  
n.6  (Haw. App. Dec. 1, 2022) (SDO).    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a killing, that is an example of something that you would 
find reasonable or rational, correct? 
A. Yeah. Specifically I’m looking for a non -mental 
illness reason. 
Q. . . . .  
    Another thing you said was something like a –  
someone receives a racial insult, right?  
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. 
So, for example, . . . Cerezo and . . . 
Keoho got on the bus in this case and there’s a ver bal 
altercation between those two and [Sylva], . . . they taunt 
him. Would that be one of the things that you might be 
looking for? 
A. That’s a hypothetical that I certainly would 
consider, yes. 
Q. Certainly if it – let’s say those taunts or – or 
name calling got to the point where the defendant felt that he was ready to fight them on the bus or right after they 
got off. I mean, that’s addi tional information in a 
hypothetical setting that might be helpful to you, correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And specifically in looking for that rational or 
reasonable – reasonable basis for the crime, for the 
killing, right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. And those are the types of things that 
would weigh in favor or at least make you think twice about 
whether or not there was some sort of rational or 
reasonable basis for a killing, correct? 
A. Right. We have two possibilities: One, as I 
say, but for a psychosis, they would not have killed; the other is, did this altercation or hypothetical provocation 
from the decedent reach that requisite reasonable response 
that a nonpsychotic person would act in the way that Mr. 
Sylva did? And that’s t he very first thing I look at in a 
case like this. 
That testimony was not stricken. 
c.  Dr. Choi 
The State called the third examiner, Dr. Choi, a clinical 
psychologist.  Dr. Choi opined Sylva was suffering from  
schizoaffective disorder.  However, unlike the other two 
examiners, Dr. Choi also opined that although Sylva was  
suffering from mental illness, “his capacity, cognitive and 
volitional capacity, did not reach a threshold of substantial 
10   
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
impairment” at the time of the conduct.  Dr. Choi testified his 
opinion was based on various factors including that (1) Sylva 
used marijuana either on the day of or the day before the 
killing; (2) Sylva did not have a history of violent behavior 
towards “demons” or anyone else, indicating an ability to 
differentiate between right and wrong; (3) Sylva utilized emergency rooms to get medications, indicating Sylva was aware 
of his condition and knew how to get help;  (4) Sylva attempted 
to hide his jacket and cane  knife after killing Cerezo, 
indicating he knew he did something wrong; and (5) it appeared 
Cerezo provoked Sylva on the bus and that Sylva wanted to teach  
Cerezo a lesson, indicating goal -oriented behavior.  
3. Jury instructions 
After closing arguments, the circuit court instructed the  
jury on the insanity and EMED affirmative defenses as follows:  
Instruction No. 25 
11  
The defendant has raised the affirmative defense  of 
physical or mental disease, disorder or defect excluding 
criminal responsibility. Before you may consider this affirmative defense, you must first determine whether the 
prosecution has proven all of the elements of Murder in the 
Second Degree or  the included offense of Manslaughter 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  If you unanimously find that 
the prosecution has not proven all of the elements of  
Murder in the Second Degree or the included offense of 
Manslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt, then you must find  
the defendant not guilty of that offense without  
considering the affirmative defense. If you  unanimously 
find that the prosecution has proven all of the elements of 
Murder in the Second Degree or the included offense of 
Manslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt, then you must 
consider the affirmative defense.  
. . . .  
If you unanimously find that the defendant has proven 
both elements of the affirmative defense by  a preponderance   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the evidence, then you must find the defendant not 
guilty of Murder in the Second Degree or the included 
offense of Manslaughter by reason of physical or mental 
disease, disorder or defect excluding criminal  
responsibility. If you unanimously find that the defendant has not proven both elements of the affirmative defense by  
a preponderance of the evidence, then you must consider the 
affirmative defense of Extreme Mental or Emotional 
Disturbance.  (See instruction No. 26)  
. . . .  
Instruction No. 26  
 
If and only if  you unanimously find that all of the 
material elements of Murder in the Second Degree have been proven by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, or you 
unanimously find that all of the material elements of the 
included offense of Manslaughter have been proven by the 
prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, and you unanim  ously 
find that the defendant has not proven  the elements of the 
affirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorder  
or defect excluding criminal responsibility by a 
preponderance of the evidence, then you must consider the 
affirmative defense of Extreme Mental or Emotional 
Disturbance.   
 
(Emphases added.) Sylva did not object. 
4. Jury verdict, conviction, and sentencing 
The jury returned a verdict of guilty of manslaughter based 
on EMED. Accordingly, on January 24, 2020, the circuit court 
entered its judgment, conviction, and sentence; in which it 
found Sylva guilty of manslaughter based on EMED and sentenced 
him to twenty years of incarceration. 
C. ICA proceedings 
Sylva appealed. Sylva asserted the circuit court (1) 
erroneously instructed the jury to disregard parts of Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony , and (2) failed to instruct the jury that if 
it found Sylva guilty of manslaughter based on EMED, it must 
consider the affirmative defense of insanity. 
12  . . . .  
 
                      
  
 
 
 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Pursuant to its summary disposition order filed December 1, 
2022, the ICA affirmed Sylva’s con viction.   Sylva, 2022 WL 
17350568, at *5.  
First,  the ICA determined “no reasonable juror could have 
understood the circuit court to have instructed them to 
disregard Dr. Blinder’s entire explanation for his opinion.”  
Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *2. Citing Wakabayashi v. Hertz 
Corp., 66 Haw. 265, 272, 660 P.2d 1309, 1314 (1983),  the ICA 
also concluded that even if the circuit court did erroneously 
strike Dr. Blinder’s entire l ater statement that   “[b]ased –  to a 
reasonable degree of medical probability, there does not appear to be a rational basis for his action, and that but for his 
psychotic illness, he would not have taken the life of this 
man,”
7  the error was harmless because the testimony was 
cumulative.   Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *3.  
It appears the ICA conflated Sylva’s arguments concerning th e two 
disputed portions of Dr. Blinder’s testimony. Concerning the second portion 
of stricken testimony, the ICA stated, 
Sylva argues that the circuit court struck Dr. Blinder’s 
entire answer: there did not appear to be a rational basis for Sylva’s actions, and but for Sylva’s ps ychotic illness 
he would not have taken [Cerezo’s ]  life. The State 
contends that only the second part of the answer was 
stricken.  
Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *3.  But Sylva had made only the following   
argument concerning the admissibility of the second portion of stricken 
testimony: “The trial court compounded its error when it also instructed the 
jury that it also could not consider Dr. Blinder’s opinion that ‘to a 
reasonable degree of medical probability,’  but for Sylva’s psychotic illness, 
he would not have killed Cerezo.”   
 
13   
 
  
 
 
    
   
 
  
 
  
 
                     
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In concluding any error was harmless, the ICA cited the 
following testimony by Dr. Blinder, which the jury was allowed 
to consider: (1) Dr. Blinder’s opinion that criminal 
responsibility was “utterly lacking” in Sylva’s case; (2) Dr. 
Blinder’s explanation for his opinion that Sylva was psychotic, 
and why Sylva’s running away from the sc ene and hiding the 
weapon and his jacket were not inconsistent with a lack of 
criminal responsibility;8 and (3) Dr. Blinder’s defense of h is 
opinion on cross-examination. Id. 
Second, the ICA framed Sylva’s jury inst ruction argument as 
concerning “the order in which the jury was instructed to decide 
the issues.” Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *4. The ICA concluded 
it made sense for the jury to consider the affirmative defense 
of insanity before the mitigating defense of EMED, rather than 
the other way around, because if the jury accepted Sylva’s 
insanity defense, there would be no need to consider whether he 
was under the influence of EMED. Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at 
*5.  Hence, the ICA also rejected Sylva ’s jury instruction 
argument. Id. 
D. Certiorari proceedings 
On certiorari, Sylva contends that the ICA gravely erred in 
concluding the circuit court did not (1) erroneously strike 
As explained infra , we do not agree that a reasonable juror would have 
believed they were allowed to consider this explanation. 
14 8   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
parts of Dr. Blinder’s testimony  explaining the basis for his  
opinion that Sylva lacked capacity; or (2) commit instructional  
error regarding the application of the insanity defense  to 
manslaughter based on EMED.   
  
  III. Standards of Review 
A. Statutory interpretation 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
that this court reviews de novo. When construing a 
statute, our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give 
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to be  
obtained primarily from the language contained in the 
statute itself. And we must read statutory language in the 
context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner 
consistent with its purpose.  
State v. Abion, 148 Hawai ‘i 445, 454, 478 P.3d 270, 279  (2020)  
(cleaned up). 
B. Jury instructions 
“The standard of review for jury instructions that 
were not objected to at trial w
as clarified in  State v. 
Nichols,  111 Hawai ‘i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006)[.]”   State v. 
DeLeon, 131 
Hawaiʻi 463, 479, 319 P.3d 382, 398 (2014). In 
Nichols, we held that  
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error 
are to be reviewed under [Hawai ‘i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(“HRPP”)] Rule 52(b) [(1977)] plain error standard of 
review, in the case of erroneous jury instructions, that 
standard of review is effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 
52(a) harmless error standard of review because it is the 
duty of the trial court to properly instruct the jury. As 
a result, once instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was 
made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error 
contributed to the defendant’ s conviction, i.e., that the 
erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
15   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
111 Hawai‘i at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted). 
Thus, the appellant must first demonstrate 
instructional error by rebutting the  presumption that 
unobjected -to jury instructions are correct.  If the 
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden 
shifts to the State to prove that the error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt because  [e]rroneous instructions 
are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal 
unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.   However, error is not 
to be viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.  It must be examined in the light of the entire 
proceedings and given the effect which the whole record 
shows it to be entitled.  
If the State  cannot demonstrate that the error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, the conviction must be 
vacated.    
DeLeon, 131 Hawaiʻi at 479, 319 P.3d at 398 (cleaned up). 
  
 
 
  IV. Discussion 
A. The circuit court erroneously instructed the jury to 
disregard parts of Dr. Blinder’s testimony that should have 
been admitted under HRS § 704-410(4) 
Sylva first asserts the ICA gravely erred in concluding (a) 
the circuit court did not erroneously strike  parts of Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony explaining the basis for his opinion that 
Sylva lacked capacity under the legal standard for insanity, and 
(b) that any such error was harmless.  We agree.  
   
  
   1. A reasonable juror could have believed the circuit 
court instructed them to disregard Dr. Blinder’s 
entire answer explaining his opinion 
The ICA erroneously concluded  that  “no reasonable juror 
could have understood the circuit court to have instructed them 
to disregard Dr. Blinder’s entire explanation for his opinion.”   
Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *2.  
16   
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After Dr. Blinder opined Sylva lacked capacity at the time 
of the conduct, defense counsel asked him to explain the basis 
for his opinion. The prosecutor objecte d to the “last phrase” 
of Dr. Blinder’s answer, in which he stated Sylva is not a “bad man who goes around hurting people. ” (Emphasis added.) 
However, after a sidebar, the circuit court instructed the jury to disregard Dr. B linder’s “last response .” (Emphasis added.)  
A reasonable juror could have interpreted the term “response” to 
refer to Dr. Blinder’s entire answer to defense counsel ’s 
question based on its common meaning.  See Response, Cambridge 
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (4th ed. 2013) (defining 
“response” as “an answer or reaction” (emphasis added)). 
The State points to the sidebar discussion to argue the 
circuit court only struck the “last phrase” of Dr. Blinder’s answer.   But although the jurors heard the State obje  ct to the 
“last phrase,” they  were not privy to the sidebar discussion  
concerning which part(s) of  Dr. Blinder’s  testimony were  
objectionable and why. The jurors  only heard the circuit court  
instruct them to disregard Dr. Blinder’s “last response.” The 
sidebar discussion is not part of the circuit court’s actual 
instruction to the jury. The jurors  may well have surmised that  
although the objection was to the “last phrase,” based on the 
sidebar, the circuit  court decided to strike the entire “ last 
response.”  
17   
 
  
 
 
    
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Whether or not a reasonable juror could have interpreted 
the circuit court’s instruction to disregard Dr. Blinder’s “ last 
response” as striking Dr. Blinder’s entire answer, a later 
comment by the circuit court would have led them to that 
conclusion. 
Later during  direct examination, Dr. Blinder testified, 
“Based –  to a reasonable degree of medical probability, there 
does not appear to be a rational basis for [Sylva’s]  action, and 
that but for his psychotic illness, he would not have taken the life of this man. ” The circuit court  again sustained the 
prosecutor’s objection and stated in   front  of the jury: “it’s 
his opinion that he suffers from a mental disease, and he’s 
giving a[n] . . . opinion about that. He’s adding on to that at 
the end of the answer. I ordered it stricken e arlier. I’ll 
order it stricken again .” (Emphasis added.)  
Those statements implied to the jury that the circuit court 
had struck more than just the “last phrase” of Dr. Blinder’s 
earlier answer because Dr. Blinder’s statement that Sylva would 
not have killed Cerezo absent his mental disorder was not the 
“last phrase” of Dr. Blinder’s earlier response. It was the 
18   
 
  
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
                     
   
  
 
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
second to last sentence.   And the circuit court said  it had  
“ordered it stricken earlier.”  109
We therefore conclude a reasonable juror could have 
believed the circuit court instructed them to disregard Dr. 
Blinder’s entire answer explaining the basis for his opinion 
that Sylva lacked capacity at the time of the conduct. 
2. HRS § 704-410(4) provides that medical examiners 
“shall be permitted to make any explanation reasonably 
serving to clarify” their opinion 
Dr. Blinder’s stricken answer to defense counsel’s question 
about the basis for his opinion was admissible to clarify his 
opinion under HRS § 704-410(4).  Indeed, HRS § 704-410(4) 
mandates its admission as a significant part of an insanity 
defense “reasonably serving to clarify the examiner’s diagnosis 
and opinion.” 
HRS chapter 704 governs the determination of a defendant’s 
penal responsibility based on the insanity defense.  HRS § 704 -
401 (2014) provides, “ Evidence that the defendant was affected 
by a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect is 
admissible whenever it is relevant to prove that the defendant 
9 The end of Dr. Blinder’s response reads, “ And that’s nutty and it’s 
crazy, and absent for that nutty, crazy thing, he wouldn’t have hurt anybody. 
He’s not, you know, a bad man who goes around hurting people.  But when he –” 
10 The State argues a reasonable juror would have interpreted the circuit 
court’s comment to refer solel y to Dr. Blinder twice “adding on” to the end 
of his answer. We do not find this argument persuasive; at best, a reasonable juror could have been confused as to which parts of Dr. Blinder’ s 
testimony they were allowed to consider. 
19   
 
                      
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did or did not have a state of mind that is required to 
establish an element of the offense. ”  
Where  a defendant’s capacity is at issue, s ection 704-407.5 
provides for the appointment of three qualified examiners to 
report upon the  defendant’s “physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect” “at the time of the conduct” for which the defendant is prosecuted.  See  HRS § 704-407.5(1)-(2).
   Section 
704-410, in turn,  governs testimony by the  appointed examiners.   
See id.  § 704-410.  Subsection (3) of section 704-410  provides  
that 1211
[w]hen an examiner testifies on the issue of the 
defendant’ s responsibility for conduct alleged or the issue 
of the defendant’s capacity to have a part icular state of 
mind which is necessary to establish an element of the offense charged, the examiner shall be permitted to make a 
statement as to the nature of the examiner’s examination, 
the examiner’s diagnosis of the physical or mental 
condition of the defendant at the time of the conduct 
11 In 2020, HRS § 704 -407.5 was amended in part to “authorize the courts 
to enter into agreements to divert into residential, rehabilitative, and 
other treatment those defendants whose physical or mental disease, disorder, 
or defect is believed to have become or will become an issue in a judicial 
case.”  HRS § 704- 407.5 cmt. (Supp. 2020) (citing 2020 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 
26, § 7 at 298- 99).  That process was not available at the time of the 
circuit court proceedings in this case. 
12 Hawai‘i Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Ru le 702 (2016) generally governs the 
admissibility of expert testimony. It provides : 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge 
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or 
to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or 
otherwise. In determining the issue of assistance to the 
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworth iness 
and validity of the scientific technique or mode of 
analysis employed by the proffered expert. 
20   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
alleged, and the exa miner’s opinion of the extent, if any, 
to which the capacity of the defendant to appreciate the 
wrongfulnes s of the defendant’s conduct or to conform the 
defendant’s conduct to the requirements of la w or to have a 
particular state of mind which is necessary to establish an 
element of the offense charged was impaired as a result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect at that 
time. 
Id. § 704-410(3).  Subsection (4) further provides,  “When an 
examiner testifies, the examiner shall be permitted to make 
any explanation reasonably serving to clarify the 
examiner’s  diagnosis and opinion  and may be cross-examined 
as to any matter bearing on the examiner’s competency or 
credibility or the validity of the examiner’s diagnosis or 
opinion.”    Id.  § 704-410(4) (emphases added).  In using the 
language “shall be permitted,” HRS § 704 -410(4) mandates 
that a trial court admit “any explanation” of an examiner 
“reasonably serving to clarify the examiner’s” opinion. 
See State v. Shannon, 118 Hawaiʻ i 15, 25, 185 P.3d 200, 210 
(2008) (“[I]t is a well -established tenet of our 
statutory interpretation  that the use of the wor d ‘shall’ 
generally indicates the legislature’s intention to make a 
provision mandatory, as opposed to discretionary.”  
(citations omitted)).    
In addition, the commentary to HRS § 704-410 explains that
 
[s]ubsections . . . (3) and (4) assure that an expert who 
has examined the defendant will have an adequate 
opportunity to state and explain the expert’s diagnosis of 
the defendant’s relevant physical or mental condition and 
to state and explain the expert’s opinion as to the 
impairment of the defendant’s rele vant capacities without 
21   
 
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
being restricted to examination by means of the 
hypothetical question. 
HRS § 704-410 cmt. 
Here, Dr. Blinder was appointed to report on Sylva’s 
criminal responsibility pursuant to HRS chapter 704  .  At trial, 
Dr. Blinder testified in response to defense counsel’s question 
concerning why it  was his opinion that Sylva’s  psychotic 
disability resulted in a lack of capacity at the time of the 
conduct.   Dr. Blinder’s answer to that question was admissible 
under HRS § 704-410(4) because it reasonably served to clarify   
Dr. Blinder’s opinion.   It is undisputed that at minimum, the 
following part of Dr. Blinder’s answer was admissible:  
Let me tell you how I go about making these 
judgments.  The first thing that I look at when there ’s a 
homicide is whether or not there ’s a reasonable reason  for 
the defendant to have done what he did.  I’m not saying a 
good reason.  There’s never a good reason to kill someone .   
But maybe a drug bust –  a drug deal that went bad, guy is 
supposed to give him drugs, he pays him and doesn ’t get the 
money, he takes his life, or he ’s insulted on a racial 
basis or something that we wouldn ’t approve of but we can 
understand, that there ’s been a longstanding conflict 
between the killer and the person that he kills, and it ’s  
unforgivable but understandable.   
I look for that.  If I find that, then i t’s pretty 
well the end of my participation.  So even if he’ s got a 
mental illness, I don ’t care.  We’ve got a rational reason 
for doing it.   A doubt –  being  paranoid is not therapeutic, 
but that’ s irrelevant.  I’m done.  As far as I’ m concerned, 
he does not meet that standard that you just heard.  
In the case of Mr. Sylva, there is no rational 
reason.  There’s a very superficial reason, but the basic 
reason is h e’s got a mission, he ’s got a mission to rid the 
world of demons, and  he was just getting started.  This was 
obviously, in his delusional mind, a dangerous demon, and 
for some reason, he –  he’s been anointed by what he reads 
in the Bible to take care of this problem.  
But Dr. Blinder’s next sentence, “And that’s nutty and it’s 
crazy, and absent for that nutty, crazy thing, he wouldn’t have 
22   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
                     
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 It was also error for the circuit court  to strike Dr. 
Blinder’s later testimony t hat to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability, “but for [Sylva’s] psychotic illness, he would not 
have taken the life of this man.”   The State argues the circuit 
court properly struck that portion of Dr. Blinder’s testimony as speculative. However, that testimony, too, falls under the 
purview of HRS § 704-410(4) because it similarly reasonably 
served to clarify Dr. Blin der’s opinion  that Sylva lacked 
capacity.  hurt anybody,” was also admissible under HRS § 704 -410(4) 
because it reasonably served to clarify Dr. Blinder’s opinion  
as 
to “the impairment  of the defendant ’s relevant capacities.” See  
HRS § 704-410 cmt.   Thus, it was error for the circuit court to 
instruct the jury to disregard Dr. Blinder’s entire answer.   13  
  
 3. The erroneous striking of parts of Dr. Blinder’s 
testimony explaining his opinion was not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt 
We have said: 
[E]rror is not to be viewed in isolation [or] considered 
purely in the abstract. Recognizing as much, this court applies the harmless error doctrine to errors that occur in 
the trial process . . . . Consistent with the harmless 
error doctrine, we have frequently stated that error must 
be examined in light of the entire proceedings and given 
the effect to which the whole record shows it is entitled. In that context, the real question becomes whether there is 
Because we h old that a reasonable juror could have interpreted the 
circuit court to instruct them to disregard Dr. Blinder’s entire answer, including the above paragraphs, we need not decide whether the “last phrase” 
of Dr. Blinder’s answer, that Sylva is not a “bad m an who goes around hurting 
people,” was p roperly excluded. 
23 13   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a reasonable possibility that the error might have 
contributed to  conviction.  
State v. Aplaca, 96 Hawai ʻi 17, 25, 25 P.3d 792, 800 (20  01)  
(emphasis added) 
(cleaned up).  “[W]here there is a wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show the 
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, errors in the 
admission or exclusion of evidence are deemed harmless .” State 
v. Veikoso, 126 Hawai ‘i 267, 276, 270 P.3d 997, 1006 (2011) 
(quoting State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai ‘i 8, 27, 904 P .2d 893, 912 
(1995)).  “[A] narrow or strict application of the harmless  
error rule appropriately protects a defendant’s rights and the 
integrity of the trial process.” Aplaca, 96 Hawaiʻ i at  27 n.7, 
25 P.3d at 802 n.7  .  
Citing a civil case, Wakabayashi
, 66 Haw. at 272, 660 P.2d 
at 1314, the ICA concluded that even if the circuit court 
erroneously struck Dr. Blinder’s statement that “ [b]ased – to a 
reasonable degree of medical probability, there does not appear to be a rational basis for his action, and that but for his 
psychotic illness, he would not have taken the life of this 
man,” the error was harmless because the testimony was 
cumulative. Sylva, 2022 WL 17350568, at *3. 
However, our holding in civil cases that “where essentially 
the same evidence is given by . . .  other means, the trial 
court’s exclusion of relevant evidence constitutes harmless 
24   
 
    
  
                     
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
error” does not apply to the criminal context.  See  Wakabayashi, 
66 Haw. at 272, 660    P.2d at 1314 (citing    Kekua v. Kaiser Found. 
Hosp., 61 Haw. 208, 219, 601 P.2d 364, 371 (1979)).  The ICA 
erred when it applied that holding to Sylva’s case. Our 
application of the harmless error rule in criminal cases is narrower, and the ultimate standard mus t always be “whether 
there is a reasonable possibility that the error might have 
contributed to conviction  .” See Aplaca , 96 Hawaiʻ i at  25, 27 
n.7, 25 P.3d at 800,  802 n.7 (quoting  State v. Gano, 92 Hawai
ʻi 
161, 176, 988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999)   ).   
Parts of Dr. Blinder’s erroneously stricken explanation for 
his opinion may have been cumulative. On cross-examination by 
the State, the jury heard Dr. Blinder a
gain explain his process 
for determining whether a defendant is criminally responsible; 
that testimony was not struck.14 But Dr. Blinder did not again 
14   Sylva does not raise his constitutional right  to present a complete 
defense, but we emphasize that such right is held by the defendant  and is not 
satisfied solely by evidence elicited by the Sta te. See U.S. Const.  amend. 
XIV; Haw. Const. art. I, § 5; Abion, 148 Hawai ‘i at 45 4, 478 P.3d at  279 
(“Central to the protections of due process is the right to be accorded a 
meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.  Thus, a defendant  has 
the constitutional right to present any and all competent evidence in their 
defense.” (emphasis added)  (cleaned  up)).  
Further, we have maintained that  
[l]ack of penal responsibility is not merely a statutory 
affirmative defe
nse; it reflects a precept that is 
fundamental to due process under the Hawai ‘i Constitution: 
“A defendant who, due to mental illness, lacks sufficient mental capacity to be held morally responsible for his actions cannot be found guilty of a crime.”  
 
(continued. . .)  
25   
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
                                                                  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expressly testify that he determined in Sylva’s case, there was 
merely a “very superficial” reason for the killing – that 
the basic reason  is he’s got a mission . . . to rid the 
world of demons . . . .  This was obviously, in his 
delusional mind, a dangerous demon, and for some reason, . 
. . he’s been anointed by what he read s in the Bible to 
take care of this problem.  
More importantly, because the jury was precluded from 
considering Dr. Blinder’s answer explaining the basis for his 
opinion, the jury may have placed less weight on his opinion, 
which was pivotal to Sylva’s insanity defense.  Additionally, in 
contrast to Dr. Blinder, Dr. Choi testified his opinion was 
partly based on the verbal dispute between Cerezo and Sylva on 
the bus; Dr. Choi testified that Sylva engaged in intentional 
and goal-oriented behavior, indicating no substantial 
impairment, because Sylva wanted to teach Cerezo a lesson after 
Cerezo provoked Sylva on the bus.  There is a reasonable 
possibility that the circuit court’s erroneous instruction to disregard Dr. Blinder’s contrary tes timony that there was only a 
“very superficial” reason for Sylva to kill Cerezo apart from 
his mental disorder might have contributed to Sylva’s 
conviction. See Aplaca, 96 Hawaiʻ i at 25, 25 P.3d at 800. 
(. . . continued) 
Abion, 148 Hawai‘ i at  458, 478 P.3d at 283   (quoting State v. Glenn, 148 
Hawai‘i 112, 116, 468 P.3d 126, 130 (2020)) (holding the circuit   court’s  
wholesale preclusion of a medical examiner from testifying at trial violated  
the defendant’s  constitutional  right to present a complete defense).   
26   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This is not a case where there was a “ wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show ” Sylva was 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, for there was substantial 
evidence to support Sylva’s insanity defense. See Veikoso , 126 
Hawai‘i at 276, 2 70 P.3d at 1006.  The record shows voluminous 
evidence supporting Sylva’s mental disorder, including 
references to demons and aliens, as well as evidence that Sylva 
believed Cerezo was a demon.  All three examiners agreed that 
Sylva suffered from a 
mental disease, disorder, or defect  at the 
time of the conduct, and two of the three opined that  as a 
result, Sylva lacked capacity at the time of the  conduct.  
Because the 
insanity defense in this case turned largely on 
the three medical examiners’ testimonies, the striking of parts 
of Dr. Blinder’s  explanation for his opinion  was not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt. See, e.g., DeLeon, 131 Hawaiʻi at 
486, 319 P.3d at 405 (holding that because  the defendant’s  
“defense depended heavily on ”  the decedent’s  “behavior 
immediately before [the defendant]  shot him, there [was]  a 
reasonable possibility that the exclusion of ”  the expert’s 
testimony about the influence of substances  on the decedent ’s 
behavior “affected the outcome of the trial ”);  Gano, 92 Hawai ʻi 
at 176-77, 988 P.2d  at 1168-69  (holding there was “more than a 
reasonable possibility” that the erroneous admission of evidence 
that contributed to the complainant’s credibility and weighed 
27   
 
                      
    
 
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
against the defendant’s credibility contributed  to the 
defendant’s conviction).   
The State contends that even if the circuit court erred, 
Sylva waived this argument. 
The State alleges Sylva waived any 
argument based on the circuit court’s striking of Dr. Blinder’s 
testimony because Sylva did not then raise an objection to the  
circuit court’s directive  to the jury to disregard Dr. Blinder’s 
“last response.” The State is simply wrong. Sylva had no duty 
to “object” to the court’s sustaining of an objection.    15
15HRE Rule 103 (2016) provides in relevant part: 
Rule 103.  Rulings on evidence. (a) Effect of erroneous 
ruling. Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which 
admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of the party is affected, and: 
(1) Objection. In case the ruling is one admitting 
evidence, a timely objection or moti on to strike 
appears of record, stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground was not apparent 
from the context; or 
(2) Offer of proof. In case the ruling is one 
excluding evidence, the substance of the evidence was 
made known to the court by offer or was apparent from 
the context within which questions were asked. 
Once the court makes a definitive ruling on the record 
admitting or excluding evidence, either at or before trial, a party need not renew an objection or offer of proof to 
preserve a claim of error for appeal. 
This was not a ruling admitting evidence under HRE Rule 103(a)(1). It was a 
ruling excluding evidence under HRE Rule 103(a)(2), which would have required 
an offer of proof if “the substance of the evidence” was unknown.  Here, the 
evidence stricken was clearly known. And pursuant to the rule, once the 
circuit court made its definitive ruling striking the evidence, Sylva was not 
required to renew an objection or present an offer of proof to preserve the 
issue for appeal.  See generally  Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawaiʻi 313, 300 
P.3d 579 (2013).  
28   
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
                     
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sylva has demonstrated error and the State has not 
demonstrated the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
See Aplaca, 96 Hawai ʻi at 25, 25 P.3d at 800.  We therefore  
vacate Sylva’s conviction on these grounds.  
B. The circuit 
court properly instructed the jury on the 
application of the insanity defense to 
manslaughter based 
on EMED 
Sylva also contends the ICA gravely erred in concluding the 
circuit court did not erroneously fail to instruct the jury that 
if it found Sylva guilty of manslaughter based on EMED, it must 
then consider the insanity defense. We hold the circuit court 
properly instructed the jury on the application of the insanity 
defense to manslaughter based on EMED. 
HRS § 707-702(2) (2014)16 provides for the affirmative 
defense of EMED. EMED is referred to as a “mitigating” defense 
because where a defendant establishes the elements of EMED by a 
preponderance of the evidence, first- and second-degree murder 
or attempted murder offenses are reduced to manslaughter or 
16  HRS § 707- 702(2) provided: 
In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the 
first and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, 
which reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted 
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time the defendant caused the death of the other person, under the 
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for 
which there is a reasonable explanation. The 
reasonableness of the explanation shall be determined from 
the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be. 
29   
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
attempted manslaughter. See HRS §§ 707-702(2), 701-115 (2014) 
(defining affirmative defenses and the requisite burden of 
proof); State v. Aganon , 97 Hawai ʻi 299, 302, 36 P.3d 1269, 
1272 (2001) (referring to EMED as a “mitigating defense”).  
HRS § 704-400 lays out the insanity defense.  It provides 
in relevant part that 
[a] person is not responsible, under this Code, for conduct 
if at the time of the conduct as a result of physical or 
mental disease, disorder, or defect the person lacks 
substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness 
of the person ’s conduct or to conform the person ’s conduct 
to the requirements of law. 
HRS § 704-400(1).  If a defendant proves insanity by a 
preponderance of the evidence, they are entitled to acquittal. 
See id. §§ 701-115, 704-400(1), 704-402(1) (2014) (providing 
that insanity is an affirmative defense). 
Sylva does not contend the jury instructions on the 
insanity defense contained incorrect statements of law.  Rather, 
Sylva’s challenge relates to the order in which the circuit 
court instructed the jury to consider the affirmative defenses 
of insanity and EMED. 
We have recognized that “a correct statement of the law  
does not always reflect an appropriate jury instruction in every 
case.” State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻi 442, 457, 60  P.3d 843, 858   
(2002) (citation omitted). The question still remains whether, 
“when considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
30   
 
  
   
  
   
                     
17   In State v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawaiʻ i 489, 979 P.2d 85 (App. 1999), the ICA  
held a trial court must instruct the jury that it is required to “unanimously 
agree that all elements of the charged offenses ha[ve] been established 
beyond a reasonable doubt before considering” an affirmative defe nse. 90 
Hawaiʻi at 500, 979 P.2d at 96; see also Uyesugi   , 100 Hawaiʻ i  at 459, 60 P.3d 
at 860 (“The Miyashiro  analysis is correct.”). Miyashiro did not involve a  
mitigating defense. See  90 Hawaiʻ i at 500, 979 P.2d at 96. But 
“Miyashiro indicated that th  e instructions should be given in a sequence 
consistent with the logical progression of determining acquittal or guilt .” 
State v. Yamada, 99 Hawai ʻi 542, 558, 57 P.3d  467, 483 (2002) (Acoba, J.,  
concurring).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prejudicially insufficient, inconsistent, or misleading.” Id. 
(citing Aganon, 97 Hawai ʻi at 302, 36 P.3d at 1272). 
We have not previously decided the order in which a jury 
should be instructed to consider the insanity and EMED 
defenses.17 
In concurrences in Yamada, 99 Hawai ʻi 542, 57 P.3d 467, and 
Uyesugi, 100 Hawai ʻi 442, 60 P.3d 843, Justice Acoba opined a  s to 
his belief regarding the proper order of the 
insanity and EMED 
jury instructions: “‘ [T]he jury was required to decide the 
insanity defense which would exclude responsibility for first degree murder, before  proceeding to consider the mitigating 
defense of manslaughter, ’  inasmuch as the insanity defense 
completely negates  guilt, while the emotional disturbance 
defense only mitigates  guilt.” Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻ i at  473, 60 
P.3d at 874 (Acoba, J., concurring) (quoting Yamada, 99 Hawai ʻi 
at 561, 57 P.3d at 486 (Acoba, J., concurring)).  
31   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Justice Acoba’s concurrence in Yamada relied in part on a 
New York case, People v. Johns, 122 A.D.2d 74 (N.Y. App. Div. 
1986).  See Yamada , 99 Hawaiʻ i at 561, 57 P.3d at 486 (citing 
Johns, 122 A.D.2d 74).  In Johns, the New York Supreme Court, 
Appellate Division, reversed the trial court’s judgment 
convicting the defendant of manslaughter based on extreme 
emotional disturbance. 122 A.D.2d at 76. The defendant had 
raised the defenses of insanity and extreme emotional 
disturbance under applicable state law. 122 A.D.2d at 75. In 
that case, the trial court charged the jury as follows: 
[I]f the People had proven intentional murder beyond a 
reasonable doubt, the jury was then to consider the 
affirmative defense of extreme emotional disturbance. The 
court further instructed the jury that if it found that the 
defendant suffered from an extreme emotional disturbance, it should report its verdict of guilty of manslaughter in 
the first degree by reason of extreme emotional 
disturbance. If the jury found the defendant guilty of 
intentional murder, not mitigated by extreme emotional 
disturbance, it was to consider the defense of mental 
disease or defect, known as the insanity defense. 
122 A.D.2d at 75-76. 
On review, the appellate court concluded the trial court’s 
jury instructions, though not objected to, improperly “ created 
the misleading impression that the insanity defense did not 
apply if the jury found that the defendant satisfied his burden 
of proving that he was acting while under the influence of an extreme emotional disturbance .” 122 A.D.2d at 76 (citation 
omitted). The appellate court noted the extreme emotional disturbance instruc tion “made no reference to the ins anity 
32   
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defense” and determined the trial court thus “impermissibly 
curtailed the jury’s consideration of the insanity defense.” 
Id. 
In contrast, here, the circuit court instructed the jury to 
consider the insanity defense if the State established all the 
elements of the offense, and to only consider EMED if it 
unanimously found the insanity defense did not apply. In other 
words, the circuit court expressly instructed the jury to 
consider the insanity defense before EMED; the jury was to 
consider insanity regardless of whether EMED applied. 
Unlike in Johns , the EMED instruction here expressly 
referenced the insanity defense. The beginning of the EMED instruction, instruction no. 26, stated, 
If and only if  you unanimously find that all of the 
material elements of Murder in the Second Degree have been 
proven by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, or you 
unanimously find that all of the material elements of the 
included offense of Manslaughter have been proven by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, and you unanimously 
find that the defendant has not proven the elements of the affirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorder 
or defect excluding criminal responsibility by a  
preponderance of the evidence ,  then you must consider the 
affirmative defense of Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance .  
(Emphases added.)   Because the circuit court expressly 
instructed the jury to consider insanity  before EMED, it is 
unlikely that the instructions misled the jurors into  
believing they were  not to consider the insanity defense  
for manslaughter based on EMED.  
33   
 
   
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We agree with Justice Acoba ’s concurrences in Yamada  and 
Uyesugi regarding  the proper order of the jury instructions on 
the insanity and EMED  affirmative defenses.  See Yamada  , 99 
Hawaiʻi at 561, 57 P.3d at 486; Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻ i at  473, 60 
P.3d at 874.  If  the jury had accepted the insanity defense,  it  
would have been required to  
acquit Sylva, and the EMED 
mitigating defense would have been inapplicable.  Hence, the 
circuit court properly instructed the jury to consider the 
insanity defense before EMED.   
There is nothing in the record on appeal indicating those  
jury instructions were  prejudiciall
y insufficient, inconsistent, 
or misleading. See  Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻ i at 457, 60 P.3d at 858.  
Sylva did not mee  t his initial burden to prove error  on this 
issue. See id.  ; 
DeLeon, 131 Hawaiʻ i at 479, 319 P.3d at 398.   
Therefore, the ICA did not gravely err in affirming the circuit 
court as to those  jury instructions.  
V. Conclusion 
Based on the circuit court’s erroneous striking of parts of 
Dr. Blinder’s testimony , 
we vacate the circuit court’s January 
24, 2020 judgment, conviction, and sentence; as well as the ICA’s January 3, 2023 judgment on appeal, and we remand to the 
34   
 
                      
 
 
  
  
   
 
   
  18  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.  18
    
 
        
 
      
 
        
          
 William H. Jameson, Jr. /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
for petitioner 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Richard B. Rost for respondent /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ James S. Kawashima 
/s/ Henry T. Nakamoto 
We note that double jeopardy principles preclude Sylva from being 
retried for second- degree murder because Sylva’s successful use of the EMED 
defense entitled him to an acquittal o f the murder charge. See U.S. Const. 
amend. V; Haw. Const. art. I, § 10; Whiting v. State , 88 Hawai‘ i 356, 360, 966 
P.2d 1082, 1086 (1998) (holding 
double jeopardy principles barred 
reprosecution for second -degree murder because the defendant’s successful use 
of the EMED defense entitled him to an acquittal of the second -degree murder 
charge); see also 
HRS § 701- 115(2)(b) (establishing the burden of proof for 
affirmative defenses, which entitle defendants to an acquittal); HRS § 707-
702(2) (laying out the affirmative defense of EMED). The State may, however, 
retry Sylva for manslaughter. See Whiting , 88 Hawai‘ i at 360- 62 , 966 P.2d at 
1086-88 (noting that reprosecution for the offense of reckless manslaughter 
is the functional equivalent of a retrial for manslaughter based on EMED). 
35 