 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 ________________________________________________________________ ---oOo--
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-18-0000600 29-DEC-2020 09:51 AM Dkt. 47 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
-
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
RAMONCITO D. ABION, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.  
SCWC-
18-0000600  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-18-0000600; CASE NO. 2PC161000043)   
 
DECEMBER 29, 2020  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI, IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J., RECUSED  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY Mc
KENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
We address whether a defendant whose substance use results 
in permanent psychosis is prohibited by the self-induced  
  2   
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intoxication exception from presenting evidence relevant to the 
lack of penal responsibility defense. 
The issue arises from the jury conviction of Ramoncito 
Abion (“Abion”) on one count of assault in the second degree in 
violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 707-711 (2014) 
(“assault second”)1 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(“circuit court”). On January 11, 2016, Temehane Visaya 
(“Visaya”), an employee at the Waiehu Shell gas station, was 
cleaning an oil spill when she saw Abion lying on the sidewalk and talking to himself. Visaya asked Abion to leave. She then 
walked to an alley next to the store, and Abion hit her on the 
back of the head with a hammer. Maui Police Department (“MPD”) officer Charles Taua (“Officer Taua”) responded.  Officer Taua 
stopped Abion about a quarter of a mile away and explained that 
a man matching his description had been seen striking Visaya with a hammer. Abion said that he had done it and that the hammer was in his backpack. Officer Taua noted that Abion 
HRS § 707- 711 provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
(a) The person intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly causes substantial bodily injury to
another;
(b) The person recklessly causes serious bodily
injury to another;
. . . (d) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument[.]  
  3  
   
 
  
 
   
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 2 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
displayed “bizarre behavior,” that he heard voices and saw 
visions, and was “unusually suspicious.” Officer Taua did not 
indicate that Abion appeared intoxicated. 
After Abion was arrested and charged with assault second, a 
panel of three medical examiners deemed Abion fit for trial. 
One of the examiners, Dr. Martin Blinder (“Dr. Blinder”), 
however, opined that Abion suffered from amphetamine psychosis 
and may be entitled to a lack of penal responsibility defense. 
Before trial, the State filed a motion for a finding of 
inadmissibility of the HRS § 704-400 (2014)2 defense (“motion for 
inadmissibility”), seeking to preclude Dr. Blinder from testifying at trial. The State argued that self-induced intoxication precluded a lack of penal responsibility defense 
and that Dr. Blinder’s testimony was therefore irrelevant. The 
circuit court precluded Dr. Blinder from testifying on the 
grounds that State v. Young, 93 Hawaiʻi 224, 999 P.2d 230 (2000), 
had determined a drug-induced mental illness was self
-induced 
HRS § 704- 400 provides: 
(1) A person is not responsible, under this Code, for
conduct if at the time of the conduct as a result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect the personlacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the
wrongfulness of the person's conduct or to conform the
person's conduct to the requirements of law. 
(2) As used in this chapter, the terms “physical or mental 
disease, disorder, or defect” do not include an abnormality
manifested only by repeated penal or otherwise anti -social 
conduct.  
  4  
    
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intoxication prohibited as a defense by HRS § 702-230(1) (Supp. 
2015).3 
Abion was convicted of assault second and the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed  .   Abion’s application for writ 
of certiorari (“Application”) raises the following question:   
Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals gravely err by
tolerating the trial court’s exclusion of Mr. Abion’s only
witness, violating his Due Process right to present 
HRS § 702- 230 provides in relevant part: 
(1) Self- induced intoxication is prohibited as a defense to 
any offense, except as specifically provided in thissection. (2) Evidence of the nonself -induced or pathological 
intoxication of the defendant shall be admissible to proveor negative . . . the state of mind sufficient to establish 
an element of the offense. Evidence of self- induced 
intoxication of the defendant is admissible . . . prove
state of mind sufficient to establish an element of an offense. Evidence of self- induced intoxication of the 
defendant is not admissible to negative the state of mind
sufficient to establish an element of the offense. 
(3) Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute a physical
or mental disease, disorder, or defect within the meaningof section 704- 400. 
(4) Intoxication that is:
(a) Not self- induced; or
(b) Pathological,
is a defense if by reason of the intoxication the defendantat the time of the defendant's conduct lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate its wrongfulness or to
conform the defendant's conduct to the requirements of law.
(5) In this section: “Intoxication” means a disturbance of mental or physicalcapacities resulting from the introduction of substancesinto the body.
“Pathological intoxication” means intoxication grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, towhich the defendant does not know the defendant is susceptible and which results from a physical abnormalityof the defendant. 
“Self-induced intoxication” means intoxication caused by 
substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into
the defendant's body, the tendency of which to cause intoxication the defendant knows or ought to know, unlessthe defendant introduces them pursuant to medical advice or
under such circumstances as would afford a defense to a 
charge of a penal offense.  
  5  
 
  
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence in support of his defense, and undermining the
jury’s exclusive task to resolve ultimate issues of fact? 
A defendant in a criminal case has the right to be accorded 
“a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.”  State 
v.  Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990)  (citation 
omitted).   “Thus, ‘a defendant has the constitutional right to 
present any and all competent evidence in [their] defense.’” 
State v. Acker, 133 Hawai‘i 253, 301, 327 P.3d 931, 979 (2014) 
(citation omitted). 
“[W]here the accused asserts a defense 
sanctioned by law to justify or to excuse the criminal conduct 
charged, and there is some credible evidence to support it, the issue is one of fact that must be submitted to the jury,” and it 
is reversible error for the court to “reject evidence which, if 
admitted, would present an essential factual issue for the trier of fact.”   State v. Horn  , 58 Haw. 252, 255, 566 P.2d 1378, 1380-
81 (1977).   
Abion essentially asserts there was “
competent evidence” 
presenting an “essential factual issue” regarding “a defense sanctioned by law . . . to excuse [his] criminal conduct.” 58 
Haw. at 255, 566 P.2d at 1380. The circuit court and ICA ruled, 
however, that under the circumstances of this case, there was no such defense based on HRS § 702-230(1), which provides that 
“[s]elf-induced intoxication is prohibited as a defense to any  
  6   
 
     
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
    
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
offense[.]” They so ruled based on their interpretation of this 
court’s decision in Young, 93 Hawaiʻi 224, 999 P.2d 230. 
As explained below, however, Young did not consider or 
decide whether HRS § 702-230(1) prohibits a defendant from 
presenting evidence of a permanent mental illness caused by substance use as relevant to a HRS § 704-400 lack of penal 
responsibility defense. We now hold that, based on the language 
and legislative history of HRS § 702-230, the self-induced 
intoxication exception of HRS § 702-230(1) applies only when a defendant is under the temporary influence of voluntarily 
ingested substances at the time of an act. 
Hence, Dr. Blinder would have presented “competent 
evidence” on an “essential factual issue” regarding “a defense sanctioned by law . . . to excuse [Abion’s] criminal conduct.” 
Thus, the circuit court “reject[ed] evidence which, if admitted, would [have] present[ed] an essential factual issue for the trier of fact” and violated Abion’s due process right to present 
a complete defense by precluding Dr. Blinder from testifying at 
trial. Horn, 58 Haw. at 255, 566 P.2d at 1381. 
We therefore vacate the ICA’s April 14, 2020 judgment on 
appeal, which affirmed the circuit court’s June 13, 2018 judgment of conviction and sentence and July 26, 2018 stipulation and order to amend judgment of conviction, and we  
  7  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
    
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remand this matter to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. 
II. Background 
A. Circuit court proceedings 
On January 13, 2016, Abion was charged with assault second 
in violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(a) and/or (b) and/or (d).4 
1. Abion’s motion for HRS § 704-404 examination 
On March 8, 2016, Abion filed a motion for a HRS § 704-4045 
examination to determine whether he was fit to proceed and whether he was suffering from a physical or mental disease, 
defect, or disorder at the time of the alleged offense. Three medical examiners concluded that Abion was fit to stand trial. Two of the examiners determined that Abion’s cognitive and 
volitional capacities were “not substantially impaired because 
of a major mental illness.” 
One examiner, Dr. Blinder, diagnosed Abion with 
“[m]ethamphetamine psychosis,” and noted that “protracted use of methamphetamines causes permanent brain damage at a cellular level, its effects apparent long after an individual has been free of the drug.” Dr. Blinder’s report also noted Abion “was 
not using methamphetamines on the day of his offense or several 
4 See supra note 1 for relevant language of HRS § 707 -711. 
5 See supra note 2 for the language of HRS § 704 -400.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   (continued . . .)  
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 days preceding,” but that “[a]bsent his paranoid psychosis Mr. 
Abion would never have attacked a woman with whom he had no 
quarrel, and absent past use of methamphetamines he would never 
have had an amphetamine psychosis[.]” Dr. Blinder opined that Abion may be entitled to a mental defense because his “commerce with reality was hugely impaired at the time of his assaultive 
conduct[.]” 
2. State’s motion for inadmissibility of
HRS § 704-400 defense 
On September 22, 2017, the State filed a motion for 
inadmissibility of HRS § 704-400 defense, asking the circuit 
court to hold that Abion “may not elicit testimony from Dr. 
Blinder regarding a ‘704’ defense.” The State expected Dr. 
Blinder to testify that Abion’s conduct was the result of 
methamphetamine psychosis, and it argued that “[i]ntoxication 
does not, in itself, constitute a physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect,” citing HRS § 702-230.  Therefore, the State contended that the circuit court should find Dr. Blinder’s 
testimony irrelevant pursuant to  Rules of Evidence 
(“HRE”) Rule 104 (1984).Hawai‘i
6 
HRE Rule 104 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be awitness, the existence of a privilege, or the admissibilityof evidence shall be determined by the court, subject to
the provisions of subsection (b). In making its 
8 6  
  9   
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On October 6, 2017, an evidentiary hearing was held on the 
State’s motion for inadmissibility.7 The State called Dr. 
Blinder as a witness, who testified as follows. 
Dr. Blinder had diagnosed Abion with methamphetamine 
psychosis. Methamphetamine is capable of “caus[ing] structural 
changes in the brain” “powerful enough to render somebody 
periodically psychotic.” “[T]hese changes in the brain are 
permanent long after [a person has] given up methamphetamines,” and the person may “continue to have paranoid thoughts . . . 
[and] be susceptible to auditory hallucinations.” However, not 
everyone experiences these effects from long-term 
methamphetamine use. Dr. Blinder explained that methamphetamine use may also cause people with a genetic predisposition for 
schizophrenia to develop symptoms that would not otherwise have 
manifested: 
A. So -- so let’s say you have a genetic endowment of
some sort of the genes that contribute to the outbreak of
schizophrenia, you don’t have nine or ten, you just have
three or four, you can probably sail through life and never exhibit any psychotic symptoms. You’re okay. But if youuse methamphetamines, you don’t need the whole nine geneticendowments to develop the psychoses. It will eliminate 
this genetic predisposition that, absent the
methamphetamines, you never would have known about. 
determination the court is not bound by the rules of
evidence except those with respect to privileges. 
(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact. When the relevancy of
evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition offact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, theintroduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding ofthe fulfillment of the condition. 
The Honorable Richard T. Bissen presided. 
7  
  10  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, “people with an absolutely clean genetic makeup can 
[also] develop methamphetamine psychoses[.]” 
Dr. Blinder determined that “to a reasonable degree of 
medical probability, [Abion] would not have had [] psychos[i]s 
absent his use of methamphetamine.” Abion also told him that he 
had “an auntie who spent a lot of time in a mental hospital,” which meant “in [Abion’s] genetic pool there’s something 
floating in there that he’d be better off if he didn’t carry 
it.” In Dr. Blinder’s opinion, the incident between Abion and Visaya probably would not have happened absent Abion’s long-term methamphetamine use. 
On cross-examination, Dr. Blinder affirmed his opinion that 
Abion may carry a genetic predisposition for psychosis that was activated by prolonged methamphetamine use. As far as Dr. 
Blinder could tell, Abion was not under the influence of 
methamphetamine during the incident with Visaya, but “rather was suffering from its permanent or long-term effects.” 
Before redirect, the circuit court asked Dr. Blinder how 
the aunt who had spent time in a mental hospital was related to Abion, because “In Hawaii everybody calls everybody auntie.”  Dr. Blinder testified that he did not determine how Abion’s aunt 
was related to him, and “if it’s not a blood relative, then it’s  
  11    
 
 
 
 
 On November 11, 2017, the circuit court issued its findings 
of fact, conclusions of law, and order granting the State’s 
motion for inadmissibility (“order granting motion for  
inadmissibility”).  The circuit court’s order included the 
following conclusions of law (“COLs”):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
totally irrelevant.” However, whether or not Abion’s aunt was a blood relative did not change Dr. Blinder’s opinion: 
THE WITNESS: It doesn’t change it, it just pulls out from
under my conclusions one of its bases, so it makes me lessconfident that this man is carrying some sort of low gradegenetic endowment that predisposes him for psychoses. I t 
shifts all of the responsibility onto the methamphetamine,
since I have indicated earlier, there are some unlucky
people with no genetic predisposition, they use thesedrugs, and that’s enough to send them into a mental hospital. 
1. Preliminary questions concerning the admissibility of
evidence shall be determined by the court. H.R.E. 104(a).
2. Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute a physical
or mental disease, disorder, 
or defect within the meaning 
of HRS Section 704 -400.  H.R.S. 702- 230(3).
3. Intoxication is not a defense to any offense, unless
specifically provided for in H.R.S. § 702 -230.
4. A drug- induced or exacerbated mental illness does not 
constitute a defense. State v. Young, 93 Hawai‘ i 224, 232,
999 P.2d 230, 238 (2000).5. Dr. Blinder’s testimony that Defendant was suffering
from a psychosis caused by long -standing drug abuse does 
not constitute a defense. 6. Further, Defendant cannot now benefit from long -term 
drug abuse by asserting that the voluntary damage he did to
his body now constitutes a defense.
7. Therefore, Dr. Blinder’s testimony is not relevantpursuant to H.R.E. 104, and shall not be admissible attrial. 
The order stated that the “State’s Motion for Finding of 
Inadmissibility of HRS 704-400 Defense is granted.”    
  12      
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Abion’s notice of intent and the State’s motion 
in limine 
On February 28, 2018, Abion filed a notice of intent to 
rely on an HRS chapter 704 defense and call Dr. Blinder to 
testify (“notice of intent”).  On March 1, 2018, the State filed  
its motion in limine no. 2 to preclude Abion from introducing  
evidence inconsistent with the circuit court’s order granting motion for inadmissibility.  
On March 2, 2018, a   hearing was held on the State’s motion 
in limine no. 2.  Defense counsel acknowledged that the court  
“already made a decision” r  egarding Dr. Blinder’s testimony,  but  
explained that the notice of intent was filed “to make the     
record clear that this is a defense that I think should be available.”  
The circuit court granted the State’s motion in limine and 
denied Abion’s notice of intent.  The circuit court stated:  
[THE COURT:] What I’m precluding is Dr. Blinder from coming 
in and testifying, because we already had a full -blown 
hearing on this back in November, that it doesn’t offer any-- any scientific explanation to -- to amount to a defense. 
It was, as far as all the parties  agreed, or the facts came 
out to the examiners, this was voluntary intoxication onthe part of the defendant, and that is not adefense . . . .  
So this case will not include Dr. Blinder, at least
not as to testifying to Mr. Abion being under a self -
induced methamphetamine condition  . . . .  
So I don’t feel there’s any prejudice to the defense
in this case because they’re not precluded from presentingtheir defense, they’re just precluded from calling Dr.
Blinder [from] coming in and calling it a mental defe
nse, 
because that, I find, it’s not.  
So the Court -- I suppose I’m granting the State’s
motion in limine number two, I’m denying the Defense notice
[of] intent to call Dr. Blinder to testify, and we’ll leave
it at that.   
  13  
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
   
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, the circuit court precluded the defendant from calling Dr. 
Blinder as a witness.  
4. Jury trial 
Abion’s jury trial commenced on March 19, 2018.8 Only the 
State called witnesses; Abion did not call any witnesses and did not testify. 
a. Witness testimony 
i.  Alana Kahai 
Alana Kahai (“Kahai”) testified as follows. On January 11, 2016, Kahai and her fiancé, Haumanu Tuuafu 
(“Tuuafu”), went to the Waiehu Shell gas station.  They parked 
the car at the front of the store, and Tuuafu went into the 
store while Kahai waited in the car. Kahai saw Visaya cleaning an oil spill by the gas pumps. Tuuafu came out of the store, 
and as they were leaving, Kahai saw Visaya talking to someone 
near the corner of the gas station. Kahai could not see who she was talking to. As Visaya started to go into the alley next to the store, a man struck her from behind with a hammer, and she 
fell backward. The man then put his backpack on his chest, put 
his right hand with the hammer into the backpack, and started to 
The transcript of proceedings initially indicate that trial was held on
October 19 and October 20, 2018. However, the remainder of the transcripts
and the parties indicate the trial occurred on March 19 and March 20, 2018. 8  
  14  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
walk toward their car. At trial, Kahai identified the man as 
Abion. 
Kahai jumped out of the car, went into the store to get 
Visaya’s coworker, and called 911. While calling 911, Kahai observed the direction Abion left and told the police where he was going. Abion seemed calm as he walked away. 
ii.  Haumanu Tuuafu 
Tuuafu testified as follows. On January 11, 2016, Tuuafu and Kahai went to the gas 
station, and Tuuafu went into the store while Kahai waited in the car. As he pulled out of the parking stall, Tuuafu saw a woman employee. The woman went into the alley next to the store, and Tuuafu saw a man reach into his bag, grab a hammer, 
and hit the woman on the head from behind. At trial, Tuuafu 
identified that man as Abion. After Abion hit the woman, he put the hammer back in the bag and walked toward the road. 
On cross-examination, Tuuafu testified that after striking 
the employee, Abion walked “casually walked” away and did not run. Tuuafu gave a statement to the police and said that he had seen Abion “at the parking lot from time to time,” and that he 
had seen Abion sleep at the gas station. 
iii. Temehane Visaya 
Visaya testified as follows.   
  15  
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On January 11, 2016, Visaya was an employee at the Waiehu 
Shell gas station.  On that day, as she cleaned an oil spill by 
the gas pumps, Visaya saw someone on the sidewalk at the side of 
the building lying on his back and talking to himself.  At trial, Visaya identified the person she saw as Abion. Visaya had seen Abion at the gas station before “[t]wo to three times a 
day.” 
Visaya swept cat litter onto the oil spill about three or 
four feet away from where Abion lay.  She then asked Abion to leave, but he did not respond.  Visaya walked toward the alley 
next to the store to wash the broom and dustpan. After entering the alley, the next thing Visaya remembered was her legs buckling and that she could not breathe. Visaya remembered 
waking up on the ground in the alley, seeing police, and being 
put into an ambulance. Visaya could not remember what happened at the hospital. 
iv.  Officer Charles Taua 
Officer Taua testified as follows. On January 11, 2016, Officer Taua was dispatched to the 
Waiehu Shell gas station.  Officer Taua was given a description 
of the alleged offender, and he saw someone matching that 
description about a quarter of a mile away from the gas station.  At trial, Officer Taua identified the person he saw as Abion.  
  16  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Officer Taua stopped Abion and explained that someone had 
reported that a man matching his description had struck Visaya 
with a hammer. Abion said that he had done it and that the 
hammer was in his backpack. Officer Taua read Abion his Miranda rights, and Abion gave a statement saying he hit “the lady” with a hammer.  When asked at trial if he recalled if Abion said 
Visaya threw dust on him, Officer Taua remembered that Abion had 
said something to the effect of “she did it first,” but he was “confused on what exactly he was referring to.”  Abion was 
“cooperative,” but also “animated.” He did not appear confused 
or incoherent.  Officer Taua asked for Abion’s consent to search his backpack, which Abion granted. There was a hammer inside the backpack. 
On cross-examination, Officer Taua testified that when he 
approached Abion, Abion was not running and did not attempt to hide. Abion did not hide that he had a hammer and did not 
hesitate in providing a statement.  Abion told Officer Taua that 
the woman at the gas station had swept dust into his face and that she had hit him first. Abion did not appear to have any guilt or regrets. When asked if Abion appeared to be 
intoxicated or experiencing withdrawal from drugs or alcohol, 
Officer Taua said he was not sure, but Abion was “really animated” and may have acted “passive” “at times.”  
  17  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Officer Taua prepared an inmate suicide screening report 
for Abion at around 1:30 p.m. on January 11, 2016.  Officer 
Taua’s report noted that Abion displayed “bizarre behavior,” 
that he heard voices and saw visions, and was “unusually suspicious.” The report did not indicate that Abion appeared 
intoxicated or was experiencing drug or alcohol withdrawal. 
v.  Dr. Beth Jarrett 
Dr. Beth Jarrett (“Dr. Jarrett”) testified as follows. Dr. Jarrett was a general surgeon at the Maui Memorial 
Medical Center who treated Visaya on January 11, 2016. Visaya had a laceration on her head, and Dr. Jarrett determined that she had “a couple fractures” and “a hematoma to the skin and soft tissues of the fracture.” Dr. Jarrett opined that a strike 
to the head with a hammer could cause a substantial risk of 
death “especially if the brain is injured,” could cause serious permanent disfigurement, and could cause protractive loss or 
impairment of the brain. 
b. Jury instructions and closing arguments 
Despite pretrial rulings precluding Dr. Blinder's testimony 
and disallowing “a mental defense,” the circuit court instructed the jury not only on self-defense, but also on the “affirmative  
  18     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defense of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect, 
excluding criminal responsibility.”9 
In closing, defense counsel argued that Abion was unable to 
conform his actions to societal norms, as indicated by testimony that he was talking and laughing to himself despite Officer Taua’s report indicating that he was not intoxicated. 
c. Jury verdict and sentencing 
On March 20, 2018, the jury found Abion guilty of assault 
second. 
On June 13, 2018, the circuit court entered its judgment of 
conviction and sentence. Abion was sentenced to five years imprisonment.
10 Abion appealed the June 13, 2018 judgment. 
B. ICA proceedings 1. Abion’s arguments 
Abion raised a single point of error: “the circuit court 
erred in preventing [him] from using Dr. Blinder to explain to 
the jury [he] was suffering from a physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect.” 
9 As discussed, evidence had been received regarding Abion actions and
statements. We do not address whether the circuit court ’s ruling allowing 
the defense, but not Dr. Blinder ’s testimony, is consistent with the circuit 
court’s mistaken but apparent ruling that there was no factual issue that 
Abion’s psychosis was caused by the self -induced intoxication that precluded
a HRS § 704- 400 defense based on HRS § 702 -230(1) as construed by Young. 
10 Abion was also assessed a Crime Victim Compensation Fee of $105 and an
Internet Crimes Against Children Fee of $100.  
  19  
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Abion argued the circuit court violated his constitutional 
right to present a complete defense, citing State v. Tetu, 139 
Hawai‘i 207, 225, 386 P.3d 844, 862 (2016). Abion contended he 
had a right to present Dr. Blinder’s testimony to the jury in 
support of his insanity defense, and that while the prosecution could attempt to rebut his defense by arguing his psychosis was 
caused by intoxication, the circuit court could not preclude Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony. 
Abion asserted that in his case, Dr. Blinder’s testimony 
that he had a genetic predisposition for psychosis showed that 
he suffered from a preexisting condition aggravated by drug use, 
which was “defensible under HRS § 704-400.” Abion argued the 
circuit court’s reliance on Young was misplaced because a drug-
exacerbated mental illness was not at issue in Young.  Abion 
also argued the HRS § 702-230(3) exception “arises only when the [mental] disturbance is directly caused by ‘intoxication . . . in itself.’” 
In a footnote, Abion asserted that “[a]ny reliance on Young 
is perilous at this point” because in State v. Eager, 140 Hawai‘i 
167, 177, 398 P.3d 756, 766 (2017), this court held that “juries must reconcile evidence of a physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect with evidence of intoxication to determine 
if ‘the mental disturbance would excuse the defendant’s cri
minal 
conduct absent the influence of the intoxicant.’”  Abion  
  20  
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contended that Eager had “implicitly overruled Young[.]”  
Therefore, Abion argued the circuit court’s judgment must be 
vacated and his case remanded for new trial. 
2. The State’s arguments 
The State argued that even though the circuit court did not 
allow Dr. Blinder to testify, Abion had not been precluded from presenting other evidence in support of his HRS § 704-400 
defense. The State likened this case to Young and maintained that the 1986 amendment to HRS § 702-230 “specifically precluded 
self-induced intoxication as a defense, subject to certain 
exceptions” for the purpose of “hold[ing] persons acting under self-induced intoxication ultimately responsible for their actions.” 
The State distinguished this case from Eager, where the 
defendant had not taken his prescribed medication and had tested positive for marijuana, and “the trial court did not distinguish 
the effects of medication withdrawal from the effects of 
marijuana consumption.” In comparison, Dr. Blinder testified that Abion had a genetic predisposition for psychosis that would not have manifested absent drug use, not that Abion had a “pre -
existing mental disease, disorder, or defect[.]”  Therefore, there was no question of fact raised as to whether Abion’s mental disturbance would excuse his conduct absent drug use.  
  21    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
    
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Memorandum opinion 
On February 28, 2020, the ICA issued its memorandum opinion 
affirming Abion’s conviction.  State v. Abion, CAAP-18-0000600 
(App. Feb. 28, 2020) (mem.). 
The ICA found no merit in Abion’s argument that his genetic 
predisposition for psychosis was a “preexisting condition” and a 
defense under HRS § 704-400.  Abion, mem. op. at 12. The ICA 
determined that there was no support for Dr. Blinder’s conclusion that Abion had a genetic predisposition for psychosis 
because he had not determined whether Abion’s aunt, who had 
spent time in a mental hospital, was a blood relative. Id. 
Even if Abion had a genetic predisposition for psychosis, Dr. Blinder testified that Abion’s psychosis would not have 
manifested absent long-term methamphetamine use.  Id. The ICA 
ruled Dr. Blinder’s testimony established that Abion suffered 
from “drug-induced psychosis,” which was not a defense under 
Young.  Abion, mem. op. at 12-13. 
The ICA held the circuit court erred to the extent its COL 
4 cited Young for the proposition that a drug-exacerbated mental 
illness does not constitute a defense because that issue was not 
addressed in Young.  Id. The ICA, however, held that this error 
was harmless because Dr. Blinder’s testimony did not establish 
that Abion suffered from a drug-exacerbated mental illness. Id.  
  22  
    
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ICA then addressed Abion’s argument that Eager 
“implicitly overruled Young.” Abion, mem. op. at 14. The ICA 
determined that Eager was distinguishable from this case and 
Young because “Eager presented a case where there was no evidence or finding in the bench trial that substance abuse caused the defendant’s mental disease, disorder, or defect.”  
Abion, mem. op. at 15. By comparison, “Dr. Blinder’s testimony 
provided that Abion’s psychosis was caused by his methamphetamine use[.]”  Id. Similarly, in Young, “the trial 
court concluded that the defendant’s mental illness was caused by the use of intoxicants.” Id. Therefore, the ICA held that 
Eager did not overrule Young. Id. 
On April 14, 2020, the ICA filed its judgment on appeal 
affirming the circuit court’s June 13, 2018 judgment of conviction and sentence and July 26, 2018 stipulation and order to amended judgment of conviction and sentence. C. Application for certiorari 
Abion maintains the circuit court’s exclusion of his only 
witness violated his due process right to present evidence in 
support of his defense and undermined the jury’s exclusive task 
to resolve ultimate issues of fact. Citing Horn, 58 Haw. at 
255, 566 P.2d at 1380, Abion asserts that when “the accused asserts a defense sanctioned by law to justify or excuse the criminal conduct charged, and there is some credible evidence to  
  23  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 The interpretation of a statute is a question of law that     
this court reviews de novo.   State v. Arceo, 84 Hawaiʻi 1, 10, 
928 P.2d 843, 852 (1996).   When construing a statute, our 
foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
support it, the issue is one of fact that must be submitted to 
the jury,” and that it is reversible error for the court to 
“reject evidence which, if admitted, would present an essential 
factual issue for the trier of fact.” 
Abion asserts that this court did not expand the self-
induced intoxication exception to include “preexisting mental 
illnesses aggravated by drug abuse” in Young. Furthermore, he 
contends that the jury “determines if the defendant’s physical 
or mental condition was the result of intoxication,” and that by 
preventing his only witness from testifying at trial, the ICA 
“usurped the jury’s constitutional role to determine ultimate issues of fact.” 
Abion also contends the self-induced intoxication exception 
“should be limited to temporary conditions that arise while a person is under the influence of an intoxicant,” and that the legislative history of HRS § 702-230(3) cited in Young “suggests 
an exception only for those who commit offenses while under the 
influence of an intoxicant.” 
III. Standard of Review 
A. Statutory interpretation  
  24   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. And we must 
read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and 
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
State v. Ruggiero, 114 Hawaiʻi 227, 231, 160 P.3d 703, 707 
(2007) ( 
citation omitted).  
B. Right to present a complete defense “Central to the protections of due process is the right to 
be accorded ‘a meaningful opportunity to present a complete 
defense.’” Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 185, 787 P.2d at 672 (quoting 
California v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479, 485 (1984)).  “Thus, ‘a 
defendant has the constitutional right to present any and all competent evidence in [their] defense.’” State v. Acker, 133 
Hawai
‘i 253, 301, 327 P.3d 931, 979 (2014) (quoting State v. 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai
‘i 493, 514, 193 P.3d 409, 430 (2008)). 
“Nevertheless, a defendant’s right to present relevant evidence is not without limitation and may, in appropriate cases, bow to 
accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial 
process.” Kassebeer, 118 Hawai‘i at 514, 193 P.3d at 430 
(citations omitted).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   (continued . . .)   
 
  
    
  
  
 We first provide context to our discussion.  As we recently 
explained in State v. Glenn, 148 Hawaiʻi 112, 468 P.3d 126 
(2020):   
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
   
 
 IV. Discussion 
A. Young has been misconstrued and the self-induced 
intoxication exception of HRS § 702-230(1) applies only 
when a defendant is temporarily under the influence of a 
voluntarily ingested substance 
In order to commit a crime, a defendant must be capable of
intending to act wrongfully. The bedrock principle that acrime requires a wrongful intent “is as universal andpersistent in mature systems of law as belief in freedom of
the human will and a consequent ability and duty of the
normal individual to choose between good andevil.” Morissette v. United States , 342 U.S. 246, 250, 72 
S.Ct. 240, 96 L.Ed. 288 (1952). For this reason, if amental illness or impairment results in a defendant lacking
substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of
their conduct or to conform their conduct to the law, then
the defendant cannot be held criminally responsible. Hawai ʻi 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704 -400 (2019).
[11] 
148 Hawaiʻi at 115, 468 P.3d at 129 (footnote omitted).12 
As we noted in Young, however, in 1986, the legislature 
11 See supra note 1. 
12 In Glenn, we noted and prospectively held as follows:  
Lack of penal responsibility is not merely a statutory
affirmative defense; it reflects a precept that is 
fundamental to due process under the Hawai ʻi    Constitution: 
“A defendant who, due to mental illness, lacks sufficient
mental capacity to be held morally responsible for his
actions cannot be found guilty of a crime.”  Kahler v. 
Kansas, ––– U.S. ––––, 140 S. Ct. 1021, 1039, 206 L.Ed.2d  
312 (2020) (Brey
er, J., dissenting). Accordingly, we 
prospectively hold that once the court receives notice. . . 
that a defendant's penal responsibility is an issue in the
case, the circuit court must advise a defendant of the
penal-responsibility defense and obtain a knowing waiver of 
the defense.  Cf. Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai
iʻ 226, 236,
900 P.2d 1293, 1303 (1995).   
25  
  26  
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
added subsection (1) to HRS § 702  -230 to prohibit   “self-induced 
intoxication”  as a defense to penal responsibility, except in  
limited circumstances.   93 Hawaiʻi at 232, 999 P.2d at 238.   
Thus, HRS § 702-230 now provides as follows, with relevant  
  
portions underlined:  
(1) Self- induced intoxication is prohibited as a defense to 
any offense, except as specifically provided in this
section. (2) Evidence of the nonself -induced or pathological 
intoxication of the defendant shall be admissible to proveor negative . . . the state of mind sufficient to establish 
an element of the offense. Evidence of self -induced 
intoxication of the defendant is admissible to . . . prove
state of mind sufficient to establish an element of an 
offense. Evidence of self- induced intoxication of the 
defendant is not admissible to negative the state of mind
sufficient to establish an element of the offense . 
(3) Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute a physical 
or mental disease, disorder, or defect within the meaningof section 704- 400. 
(4) Intoxication that is:
(a) Not self- induced; or
(b) Pathological,
is a defense if by reason of the intoxication the defendantat the time of the defendant’ s conduct lacks substantial 
capacity either to appreciate its wrongfulness or to
conform the defendant’ s conduct to the requirements of law . 
(5) In this section: 
“Intoxication” means a disturbance of mental or physicalcapacities resulting from the introduction of substances into the body.
“Pathological intoxication” means intoxication grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, towhich the defendant does not know the defendant is susceptible and which results from a physical abnormality of the defendant. 
“Self-induced intoxication” means intoxication caused by 
substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into
the defendant’ s body, the tendency of which to cause
intoxication the defendant knows or ought to know, unlessthe defendant introduces them pursuant to medical advice or
under such circumstances as would afford a defense to a 
charge of a penal offense. 
148 Hawaiʻ i at 116, 468 P.3d at 130. Glenn’ s prospective holding does not 
apply to Abion’s case. 
In any event, the jury in Abion’s case was given a
lack of penal responsibility instruction.  
  27  
   
 Young must, however, be construed in light of its  
circumstances and factual findings.  In Young, the defendant was *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
According to the State,  Young held that permanent mental  
illness attributable to substance use precludes an  HRS § 704-400 
defense due to the self-induced intoxication exception of HRS   
§ 702-230.  Abion contends that such an “expansive reading of   
the self-induced intoxication exception in Young should be  
abandoned” and the “intoxication exception to the insanity  
defense should be limited to temporary conditions that arise 
while a person is under the influence of an intoxicant .”  The 
circuit court and the ICA agreed with the State.   
The circuit court and the ICA misinterpreted Young.    In 
Young, we did  reject the assertion that  “a drug-induced or 
exacerbated mental illness, in and of itself, constitutes a criminal defense as a matter of law[,]” and  we stated:  
In 1986, the legislature added subsection (1) to  HRS § 702–
230, specifically prohibiting sel f-induced intoxication as 
a defense except in limited circumstances. 1986 Haw. Sess.
L. Act 325, § 2 at 687– 88. The conference committee stated 
that it “believes that when a person chooses to drink, that
person should remain ultimately responsible for [their]  
actions.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 36, in 1986 House Journal,
at 928. HRS § 702 –230(3) provides that intoxication alone  
cannot negate penal responsibility under  HRS § 704– 400. To 
adopt the rule suggested by Young would be contrary to this
statutory scheme. If an intoxicated person cannot escape 
ultimate responsibility for his actions, neither should adefendant who chronically engages in substance abuse. Onlyin the instance when the intoxication causes the person to lack the ability to form the requisite state of mind is
intoxication a defense. The same is also true of someone 
with a drug- induced mental illness.  
93 Hawai‘i at 232, 999 P.2d at 238.  
  28  
 
 
  
     
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
convicted of second-degree murder after repeatedly striking a 
Burger King employee in the head with a hammer after another 
employee had declined his request for some money. 93 Hawaiʻi at 
227, 230, 999 P.2d at 233, 236. Unlike this case, all three 
mental health doctors appointed to examine Young actually testified at the bench trial. Although the trial court found 
that psychosis caused by drugs can last for months after drug use has stopped, it also specifically found that Young drank twelve beers and smoked up to three marijuana joints daily, and also used other illegal drugs in the weeks leading up to the 
offense
. 93 Hawaiʻi at 230, 999 P.2d at 236.13 
Also, Young argued that he suffered brain damage during a 
1997 fight and that this brain damage constituted a physical 
(not mental) disease entitling him to a § 704-400(1) defense.  
Young, 93 Hawaiʻi at 232, 999 P.2d at 238. The trial court found 
that Young did 
not suffer brain damage and his neurological 
functioning was not impaired as a result of the 1997 fight. Id. 
We also stated, “[t]he issue of a preexisting mental illness 
that is aggravated by drug abuse is not presented in this case. ” 
99 Hawaii at 232, 999 P.2d at 238.  In addition, Young also did not address whether a defendant suffering from a permanent 
mental impairment caused by substance abuse but not under the 
The trial court also found that Young was not schizophrenic. 93 Hawai ʻi 
at 230, 999 P.2d at 236. 13  
  29  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
temporary influence of a voluntarily ingested substance at the 
time of an offense is subject to the self-induced intoxication 
exception of HRS § 702-230. 
Thus, in Young, whether a permanent mental illness caused 
by substance use was precluded by the self-induced intoxication 
exception was not at issue. Rather, Young applied the self-
induced intoxication exception to an offense committed by a 
defendant who, at the time of the offense, was temporarily under the influence of voluntarily ingested substances. Young 
therefore involved a temporary impairment resulting from 
voluntary intoxication.  Young did not address whether a defendant suffering from a permanent mental impairment caused by substance abuse is subject to the self-induced intoxication 
exception of HRS § 702-230.
14 
Also, it is the language of HRS § 702-230 that controls. 
The statute indicates that the self-induced intoxication exception applies only when a defendant is under the temporary 
influence of voluntarily ingested substances at the time of an act.  HRS § 702-230(5) defines “intoxication” as “a disturbance of mental or physical capacities resulting from the introduction 
of substances into the body.” (Emphasis added.) It further 
defines “self-induced intoxication” as “intoxication caused by 
Thus, contrary to Abion’ s contention, Eager, 140 Hawaiʻ i 167, 398 P.3d
756, did not implicitly overrule Young. 14  
  30   
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into the 
defendant’s body, the tendency of which to cause intoxication 
the defendant knows or ought to know.”15 Also, the references to 
“the amount of the substance” in the definition of “pathological 
intoxication,” as “intoxication grossly excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, to which the defendant does 
not know the defendant is susceptible and which results from a 
physical abnormality of the defendant[]” further evinces that “intoxication” and “self-induced intoxication” mean a 
defendant’s temporary intoxicated state after voluntary 
ingestion. 
Thus, as we stated in Eager, “the purpose of HRS § 702-230 
‘is to prevent defendants who willingly become intoxicated and 
then commit crimes from using self-induced intoxication as a 
defense.’” 140 Hawaiʻi at 175, 398 P.3d at 764 (citing State v. 
Souza, 72 Haw. 246, 248, 813 P.2d 1384, 1386 (1991) ).  The self
-
induced intoxication exception only applies when a defendant is under the temporary influence of voluntarily ingested substances 
at the time of an act. 
If “self-induced intoxication ” includes permanent mental impairment
caused by ingestion of substances, then whether Abion knew or ought to have
known that his methamphetamine use could cause permanent psychosis would alsobecome an issue. But, as explained, “self-induced intoxication ” does not 
include permanent mental impairment caused by ingestion of substances. 15  
  31  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
If HRS § 702-230(1) is ambiguous, its legislative history 
establishes that the self-induced intoxication exception was 
intended to apply only when a defendant, at the time of an 
offense, is temporarily under the influence of voluntarily ingested substances.  Through enacting the self-induced intoxication exception, the legislature intended to make it 
clear that “when a person chooses to drink, that person should 
remain ultimately responsible for [their] actions.”  Young, 93 
Hawai‘i at 232, 999 P.2d at 238 (quoting Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 36, 
in 1986 House Journal, at 928). 
The legislative history also 
explicitly states that “criminal acts committed while a person 
is voluntarily intoxicated should not be excused by the application of a defense which would negate the offender’s state 
of mind.” Conf. Com. Rep. No. 30-86, in 1986 Senate Journal, at 
736 (emphasis added). 
Hence, we now hold that the self-
induced intoxication 
exception of HRS § 702-230(1) only applies to acts committed 
while a person is temporarily under the influence of voluntarily 
ingested substances. 
Our holding is consistent with the approach of other 
states. A majority of jurisdictions hold that a lack of penal responsibility defense may be available to defendants suffering from permanent or “settled insanity” as a result of voluntary intoxication. See 21 Am. Jur. 2d. Criminal Law § 48 (2020)  
  32   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(describing common law “settled insanity” exception to general 
prohibition against voluntary intoxication as a defense); R. W. 
Gascoyne, Annotation, Modern Status of the Rules as to Voluntary 
Intoxication as Defense to Criminal Charge, 8 A.L.R.3d 1238 (originally published 1966). Among those jurisdictions, some have also clearly held, as we do today, that while permanent 
mental impairment resulting from voluntary intoxication may be a 
defense, temporary impairment resulting from voluntary intoxication is not. See Morgan v. Commonwealth, 464 S.E.2d 
899, 903 (Va. Ct. App. 2007) (holding that voluntary 
intoxication is not a defense unless it produces “permanent insanity”); McNeil v. United States, 933 A.2d 354, 369 (App. D.C. 2007). 
Thus, the circuit court and the ICA erred in precluding Dr. 
Blinder’s testimony based on the self-induced intoxication exception of HRS § 702-230. B. Abion’s constitutional right to present a complete defense
was violated 
Under the Hawai‘i Constitution, “[c]entral to the 
protections of due process is the right to be accorded ‘a 
meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.’”  
Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 185, 787 P.2d at 672 (quoting Trombetta, 467 
U.S. at 485). “Thus, ‘a defendant has the constitutional right 
to present any and all competent evidence in [their] defense.’”  
  33  
   
   
 
 
 
     
 
    
   
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Acker, 133 Hawai‘i  at 301, 327 P.3d at 979 (quoting Kassebeer,   
118 
Hawai‘i at 514, 193 P.3d at 430).   “[W]here the accused 
asserts a defense sanctioned by law to justify or to excuse the 
criminal conduct charged, and there is some credible evidence to 
support it, the issue is one of fact that must be submitted to the jury.”  Horn, 58 Haw. at 255, 566 P.2d at 1380.  
The right to present a complete defense is also a federal 
constitutional right. As stated by the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals in Ellis v. Mullin, 326 F.3d 1122
,  1128 (10th Cir. 2002)
(holding that exclusion of pretrial psychiatric report 
diagnosing defendant as chronic schizophrenic violated 
petitioner’s due process right to present evidence critical to his defense):   
“[S]tate evidentiary determinations ordinarily do not 
present federal constitutional issues . . . . However, the
Supreme Court, in, e.g., Chambers v. Mississippi , 410 U.S. 
284, 302, 93 S.Ct. 1038, 35 L.Ed.2d 297 (1973), and Green 
v. Georgia, 442 U.S. 95, 97, 99 S.Ct. 2150, 60 L.Ed.2d 738
(1979) ( capital sentencing proceeding), has provided an 
exception, under some circumstances, if a state courtapplies the State ’s evidentiary rules unfairly to prevent a 
defendant from presenting evidence that is critical to hisdefense.” Romano, 239 F.3d at 1166. “[T]o determine
whether a defendant was unconstitutionally denied his or
her right to present relevant evidence, we must balance the
importance of the evidence to the defense against theinterests the state has in excluding theevidence.” Richmond v. Embry, 122 F.3d 866, 872 (10th Cir.
1997). Further: 
[T]o establish a violation of . . . due 
process, a defendant must show a denial offundamental fairness . . . . It is the 
materiality of the excluded evidence to the
presentation of the defense that determines 
whether a petitioner has been deprived of afundamentally fair trial. Evidence is materialif its suppression might have affected the  
  34  
 
  
     
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
outcome. In other words, material evidence is
that which is exculpatory- evidence that if 
admitted would create reasonable doubt that did 
not exist without the evidence. 
Richmond, 122 F.3d at 872 (citations and internal quotation
marks omitted). See also Romano, 239 F.3d at 1168 (“[W]e
need ask no more than whether the trial court's applicationof this state evidentiary rule excluded critical
exculpatory evidence.”). 
This court has also recently recognized that defendants 
have a right under the Hawai‘i Constitution to assert a lack of 
penal responsibility defense. Glenn, 148 Hawaiʻi at 116, 468 
P.3d at 1
30: 
Lack of penal responsibility is not merely a statutory
affirmative defense; it reflects a precept that is
fundamental to due process under the Hawai ‘i Constitution: 
“A defendant who, due to mental illness, lacks sufficient
mental capacity to be held morally responsible for his actions cannot be found guilty of a crime.” Kahler v. 
Kansas, ––– U.S. ––––, 140 S. Ct. 1021, 1039, 206 L.Ed.2d 312 (2020) (Breyer, J., dissenting). 
Abion asserts his right to present a complete defense was 
violated when the circuit court precluded any testimony from Dr. 
Blinder. We agree. 
Whether Abion acted during a period of temporary self-
induced intoxication, is, at minimum, disputed. Officer Taua’s report and testimony did not indicate that Abion was intoxicated at the time of the offense. Dr. Blinder opined that Abion’s 
psychosis was activated by methamphetamine use, and that he was 
suffering from the “permanent of long-term effects” of methamphetamine at the time of the offense. Dr. Blinder’s psychiatric report noted, however, that Abion “was not using  
  35  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
methamphetamines on the day of his offense or several days 
preceding,” and at the pre-trial hearing he testified that Abion 
was not under the influence at the time of the offense “as far 
as [he] could tell” based on the reports available to him and his interview with Abion. 
Also, in his psychiatric evaluation of Abion, Dr. Blinder 
opined that Abion may be entitled to a mental defense because his “commerce with reality was hugely impaired at the time of his assaultive conduct[.]” At the pre-trial hearing, Dr. 
Blinder also testified that “to a reasonable degree of medical probability, [Abion] would not have had [] psychoses absent his use of methamphetamine,” and that he may have had a genetic predisposition for psychosis that caused him to develop symptoms 
that would not otherwise have manifested. In Dr. Blinder’s 
opinion, Abion was not under the influence of methamphetamines at the time of the offense, but “rather was suffering from its 
permanent or long-term effects.” 
Although the circuit court instructed the jury on the HRS 
§ 704-400 defense, it precluded Dr. Blinder from testifying at 
trial on the grounds that his opinion was irrelevant under 
Young, which it construed as holding that a drug-induced mental  
  36   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
illness is not a defense pursuant to HRS § 702-230.16 However, 
as we have held, the self-induced intoxication exception of HRS 
§ 702-230(1) only applies to acts committed while a person is 
temporarily under the influence of voluntarily ingested substances. 
Hence, Dr. Blinder would have presented “competent 
evidence” on an “essential factual issue” regarding “a defense sanctioned by law . . . to excuse [Abion’s] criminal conduct.” Horn, 58 Haw. at 255, 566 P.2d at 1380. Thus, the circuit court 
“reject[ed] evidence which, if admitted, would [have] 
present[ed] an essential factual issue for the trier of fact” and violated Abion’s due process right to present a complete defense by precluding Dr. Blinder from testifying at trial. Id. 
Dr. Blinder’s testimony would have aided the jury in 
determining whether Abion suffered from a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect that caused him to lack the 
substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his 
conduct or conform his conduct to the requirements of law at the time of the offense under HRS § 704-400.  His testimony would have also aided the jury in determining whether Abion was under 
the influence at the time of the offense. Therefore, by 
As discussed in the previous section, Young did not determine whether a 
lack of penal responsibility defense is available to a defendant suffering
from a permanent drug -induced mental illness and who was not under the 
influence of drugs or alcohol at the time of the offense. 16  
  37  
  
 V. Conclusion  
 
  
      
  
   
   
      
           
 
 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
precluding Dr. Blinder’s testimony at trial, the circuit court 
violated Abion’s due process right to present a complete defense 
by precluding Dr. Blinder from testifying at trial.  
 
We therefore vacate the ICA’s April 14, 2020 judgment on 
appeal, which affirmed the circuit court’s June 13, 2018 judgment of conviction and sentence and July 26, 2018 
stipulation and order to amend judgment of conviction, and remand this case to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.  
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Abion    
Gerald K. Enriques,for the State    /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti 
