 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 JOHN DOE, Petitioner/Appellant-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
ATTORNEY GENERAL, Respondent/Appellee-Appellee.
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
SCWC-13-0005700
  
 
 
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON,   JJ.,
  
 
 
   
 
     
  *** FOR  PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-13-0005700 18-JUN-2015 
09:05 AM 
---oOo--
-
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
  
(CIV. NO. 13-1-1331
)
 
JUNE 18, 2015
  
OPINION  OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
I. Introduction 
Pro se Petitioner/Appellant
-Appellant John Doe (“Doe”) 
timely applied for writ of certiorari (“Application”) on March 
30, 2015 from a March 25, 2015 Judgment entered by the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) pursuant to its February  
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
                         
 23, 2015 Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”). The ICA affirmed 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ’s (“circuit court[’s]”) 
dismissal of Doe’s agency appeal based on a lack of jurisdiction, holding that the circuit court ’s decision was not 
clearly erroneous. 
At issue in Doe’s Application is whether communication 
between Respondent/Appellee-Appellee Attorney General and Doe 
consists of an administrative decision in response to a 
petition, and whether that decision is appealable to the circuit 
court. 
II. Background 
A. Factual Background 
As a result of pleading guilty in 2011 to two counts 
of a gross misdemeanor under Washington law, “Communication with 
minor for immoral purposes,” Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 9.68A.090 
(West 2010),
1 Doe has been a registered sex offender in 
Washington, and must continue to be registered until 2021. See  
Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 9A.44.140(3) (West 2009, Supp. 2015). A 
gross misdemeanor is a serious misdemeanor though not a felony. 
Black’s Law Dictionary  1150 (10th ed. 2014). 
As he hoped to 
1   Doe stated the following facts in his plea agreement:   
“During the period between October 1, 2009 and October 31, 2009, on two 
separate occasions, I communicated with 
[omitted initials and birthdate of 
minor], a person under 18 years of age, for an immoral purpose of a sexual  
nature. This occurred in King County Washington.”  
2
  
  
  
 
    
                         
  
 
 
   
 vacation in Hawai i with his family, on May 23, 2012, Doe  sent an 
e-mail to the Hawai i  Criminal Justice Data Center (“HCJDC”) ,  
inquiring as to (1) Hawaii’s registration requirements, and  (2) 
whether and how he could petition the attorney general for an 
exemption from those requirements.   HCJDC is “an agency of the 
Department of the Attorney  General in the State of Hawai i,”  
which “administers the State’s sex offender registration 
system.”   Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center , Hawaii.gov, 
http://www.ag.hawaii.gov/hcjdc (last visited June 16
, 2015); 
Department of the Attorney General, Hawaii.gov, 
http://ag.hawaii.gov/about-us/overview/ (last visited June 16, 2015).      
On June 4, 2012, HCJDC replied to Doe
’s e-mail, 
generally paraphrasing registration requirements under the 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”) — that all sex offenders 
convicted of “covered offenses” pursuant to HRS § 846E -1 (Supp. 
2012), “who remain, or expect to remain, in Hawaii for more than 
ten days, or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in 
one calendar year” shall register.2 HCJDC added that certain 
2 HCJDC did not cite to the HRS when relaying this “duration 
condition” to Doe. Indeed, it could not, as the statutory provision 
reflecting this condition was not enacted until April 30, 2013. See  2013 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 64, § 5 
at 116 (amending HRS § 846E -2(a) by adding: 
“Registration under this subsection is required whe never the covered 
offender, whether or not a resident of this State, remains in this State for 
more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one 
calendar year.”) (“duration condition”) . 
(continued . . .) 
3
  
    
  
 
   
  
                  
 (. . . continued)                                                              
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 covered offenders who “establish[] or maintain[] a residence in 
Hawaii . . . may petition the State Attorney General for 
termination of registration requirements,” but that 
“[c]urrently, there is no form available.” 
Approximately ten months after HCJDC e-mailed its 
reply, Doe wrote to then Attorney General David Louie (“Attorney 
General”) by letter dated March 24, 2013. Doe stated that his 
purpose was to “petition termination of sex offender 
registration requirements per Hawaii statute Section 846E- 2(b)”3 
as he was “[p]resently . . . not a resident of Hawaii, . . . but 
The only statutory minimum duration period as of June 2012 was 
contained in HRS § 846E -2(g) (Supp. 2012), which concerns registration with  
the chief of police, and not registration with the attorney general. See HRS  
§ 846E
-2(g) (Supp. 2012)  (“In addition to the requirement under subsection  
(a) to register with the attorney general . . . each covered offender shall 
also register in person with the chief of police where the covered offender 
resides or is present.  . . .  Registration under this subsection  is required 
whenever the covered offender, whether or not a resident of this State, remains in this State for more than ten days or for an aggregate period 
exceeding thirty days in one calendar year. ” (emphasis added)).   
 
3	 A person who establishes or maintains a residence in this State and who has not been designated as a covered offender 
by a court of this State but who has been designated as a 
covered offender . . . or any other sexual offender designation in another state or jurisdiction and was, as a 
result of such designation, subjected to registration or 
community or public notification, . . . without regard to 
whether the person otherwise meets the criteria for 
registration as a covered offender, shall register in the 
manner provided in this section . . . .  A person who meets 
the criteria of this subsection is subject to the 
requirements and penalty provisions of section 846E -9 until 
the person successfully petitions the attorney general for termination of registration requirements . . . . 
HRS § 846E- 2(b) (2014). 
4
  
  
      
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
      
 
  On May 6, 2013, Doe  filed a “Notice of Appeal to t he 
Circuit Court” (“Notice”), with respect to “the decision of 
                         
   
 [he and his family4] [we]re making plans for an extended visit to 
the islands and likely to exceed the 10 day grace period . . . 
.” With his letter, Doe included several State of Washington 
court documents related to his conviction. 
Doe argued that he should be relieved from sex 
offender registration requirements because “Hawaii has no 
comparable criminal sex offense to [his] misdemeanor violation . 
. . , and neither the elements of the conviction nor the conduct 
pled to is comparable to a Hawai i criminal sex offense.” Doe 
sought a “formal determination on this matter,” and provided notice that “if unsatisfied with [the Attorney General’s] 
determination, [he] may appeal [the] decision pursuant to 
Chapter 91.” 
HCJDC replied to Doe on behalf of the Attorney General  
by letter dated April 10, 2013:  
In regards to whether you r Washington State 
conviction of Communication with a Minor for Immoral 
Purposes is a covered offense requiring registration in 
Hawaii, Chapter 846E -2, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
requires you to register in this state before any 
determination can be made . . . . 
As such, you will be required to register in Hawaii 
should you remain in this state for more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar year. You must register . . . no later than three 
working days after your arrival in this state. . . . 
4 Doe uses the pronoun, “we,” in his letter, but does not define 
it. That it appears he refers to he and his family is based on his e -mail. 
5
  
  
  
  
   
                         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Attorney General written on April 10, 2013, denying request for 
declaratory review whether a foreign conviction in violation of 
Washington State RCW 9.68A.090 was a ‘covered offense’ per 845E -
1.” In the Notice, Doe cited to “Chapter 846ER -2(b) [sic], 
Chapter 91-8 and Chapter 91.14 [sic], Hawai i Revised 
Statutes,[5] and Rule 72 of the Hawai i Rules of Civil Procedure” 
in support. 
Upon receiving the Notice, HCJDC issued a letter dated 
May 16, 2013, the purpose of which was to “modify”  its lett er 
dated April 10, 2013. In the May 16 letter, HCJDC (1)  
characterized Doe’s  letter to the Attorney General   as seeking 
“termination of sex offender registration requirements pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) section 846E-2(b),” (2) quoted 
HRS § 846E-2(b), and (3) concluded:  
[B]ecause you were convicted and required to register in 
the State of Washington, under the above -referenced 
5	 Any interested person may petition an agency for a 
declaratory order as to the applicability of any statutory 
provision or of any rule or order of the agency. Each 
agency shall adopt rules prescribing the form of the 
petitions and the procedure for their submission, consideration, and prompt disposition. Orders disposing of 
petitions in such cases shall have the same status as other 
agency orders. 
HRS § 91- 8 (2012). 
Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature 
that deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final 
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is entitled to judicial review thereof . . . . 
HRS § 91- 14(a) (2012). 
6
  
  
 
   
 
      
  
   
  
  
                         
 
 
 statute, if you reside in Hawaii for more than ten days or 
for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one 
calendar year, you are required to register. Registration 
is a prerequisite to your filing of a petition for 
termination of registration requirement [sic]. 
(footnote omitted). 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
The parties filed briefs on the appeal, which were 
received and considered by the circuit court.6 Oral argument was 
held on September 13, 2013.  Doe appeared pro se.  
Although Doe broadly stated in his opening brief t  hat 
“[t]he purpose for the petition is to provide the Appellant with 
assurance of his legal standing and allow for planning regarding 
work, travel, and residency,”  and more generally argued that he 
“should not be required to register as a sex offender while present in Hawaii,”  at no time during the argument at circuit   
court was there a change to Doe’s  intended travels to Hawai i.   
Doe never stated that he would be residing in Hawai i. Instead, 
as previously noted, Doe’s May 23, 2012 e -mail indicated he  
“would like to continue vacationing periodically in Hawaii ,”  and 
his subsequent March 24, 2013 letter to the Attorney General noted he was “making plans for an extended visit to the 
islands.”  Nevertheless, at circuit court, the parties focused 
6 Although Doe ’s Reply Brief was untimely filed on August 26, 2013, 
given that no objections were made by the Attorney General, the c ircuit court 
ruled at oral argument that it would “receive [the Reply Brief] and . . . 
consider [it].” 
7
  
   
    
  their arguments on HRS § 846E
-2(b), which applies only to those 
offenders who “establish[] or maintain[] a residence in this 
State.” HRS § 846E -2(b).   The circuit court  also concentrated  
on subsection (b) when clarifying the law and Doe’s position:  
Now, when I read the registration requirement, 
specifically HRS 846E -2, that pertains to registration 
requirements, it speaks to that a person shall register 
without regard to whether the person otherwise meets the 
criteria for registration as a covered offender.  So what 
I’m hearing from you  [Doe]  is that there is a dispute on 
your part as to whether or not it would be a covered --  
whether or not you are a covered offender, No.  1, on the 
merits of the case.  But without going into the merits as 
to whether or not it pertains to you, nevertheless shall 
register in the manner provided in this section until the 
person successfully petitions the attorney general for 
termination.  
 
So we’re looking at a particular p
rocess.  It sounds 
as if you have to first register and then petition for 
termination and then the --  there’s a determination as to 
whether or not it should be terminated in terms of looking 
-- hearing the merits of your argument.  
   
The circuit court  concluded that  because Doe did not  
follow the designated process, his communications with HCJDC 
“d[id] not . . . present a  contested proceeding” that was 
appealable under HRS § 91-14. On this basis, the circuit court  
dismissed the case for lack  of subject matter jurisdiction under 
HRS Chapter 91.    
C. Appeal to the ICA 
On appeal to the ICA, Doe asserted: 
Appellant researched the registration requirements in 
Hawaii and believes he does not meet the requirements as a 
“covered offender” and therefore should not be subjected to 
the registration requirements if he travels to Hawaii for business or personal reasons, and requested such a  
determination by the Attorney General in a letter.  
 
Doe asserted the following points of error on appeal: 
8

  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
. . . .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 1) that the communication between the Appellant and 
Attorney General did not constitute a contested case, and  
2) that Appellant is first required to register as a sexual  
offender before he was authorized to petition the Attorney 
General as he did.  
In response, the Attorney General argued the circuit 
court appropriately dismissed Doe’s Notice because (1) the 
written communications between Doe and HCJDC did not constitute 
a contested case, (2) Doe’s letter was not a petition for 
termination, and (3) the letter did not amount to a petition for 
a declaratory ruling pursuant to HRS § 91-8 as Doe did not cite 
to that statute, but instead cited only to HRS § 846E-2(b).  The 
Attorney General went on to add: 
To be sure, the Attorney General lacks the statutory 
authority to deem someone “not a covered offender ” prior to 
registration as [ Doe] requests. . . . 
[Nevertheless
], it reasonably appears that [Doe]’s 
[Washington state] conviction for violating RCW § 9.68A.090 
would constitute a “sexual offense ” under HRS § 846E- 1 . . 
. . However, as [Doe] has not yet registered here and 
verified his identity, [HCJDC] has yet to make that 
determination. 
(emphasis in original).  
The ICA concluded that “ [Doe]’s correspondence with 
[HCJDC] did not constitute an appealable contested case hearin g” 
because (1) HCJDC’s correspondence with Doe was “not required by 
law,” and (2) “[HCJDC] ’s responses were merely recitations of 
what registration procedures would apply, if [Doe] were to visit 
Hawaii.” Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the circuit court ’s: 
9

  
  
 
    
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 “(1) ‘Notice of Entry of Final Judgement, ’ filed October 17, 
2013; (2) ‘Final Judgment, ’ filed October 17, 2013; and (3) 
‘Order Dismissing Notice of Appeal to Circuit Court, Filed May 
6, 2013,’ filed October 17, 2013.” 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Jurisdiction 
“[T]he existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that [is] review[ed] de novo under the right/wrong standard.” 
Captain Andy’s Sailing, Inc. v. Dep’t of Land & Natural Res., 
113 Hawai i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 (2006) (internal 
quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
B. Interpretation of a Statute 
“‘The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo. ’” Ka Paakai O Ka aina v. Land Use Comm ’n, 94 
Hawaii 31, 41, 7 P.3d 1068, 1078 (2000) (quoting Amantiad v. 
Odum, 90 Hawai i 152, 160, 977 P.2d 160, 168 (1999)). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Overview of Hawaii ’s Sex Offender Registration Scheme 
Persons who commit sexual offenses out-of-state and 
are subject to the registration requirements of the jurisdiction 
in which those crimes were committed (“out -of-state offenders”), 
who also wish to be present in Hawai i, fall into one of three 
categories: (1) those who remain in Hawai i for no more than ten 
10
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 days or for no more than an aggregate period of thirty days in 
one calendar year (“Group 1”) ; (2) those who remain in Hawai i 
for more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding 
thirty days in one calendar year (“Group 2”) ;7 and (3) those who 
establish or maintain a residence in Hawai i (“Group 3”). These 
categories are based on the following statutes: 
A covered offender shall register with the attorney general 
and comply with the provisions of this chapter for life or 
for a shorter period of time as provided in this chapter.  
Registration under this subsection is required whenever the 
covered offender, whether or not a resident of this State, 
remains in this State for more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar 
year. A covered offender shall be eligible to petition the 
court in a civil proceeding for an order that the covered 
offender’ s registration requirements under this chapter be 
terminated, as provided in section 846E -10. 
HRS § 846E-2(a) (2014); 
A person who establishes or maintains a residence in this State and who has not been designated as a covered offender 
by a court of this State but who has been designated as a 
covered offender . . . or any other sexual offender 
designation in another state or jurisdiction and was, as a result of such designation, subjected to registration or 
community or public notification . . . , without regard to 
whether the person otherwise meets the criteria for 
registration as a covered offender, shall register in the 
manner provided in this section . . . . A person who meets the criteria of this subsection is subject to the 
requirements and penalty provisions of section 846E -9 until 
the person successfully petitions the attorney general for termination of registration requirements . . . . 
HRS § 846E-2(b) (2014). 
7   Because the parties do not take issue with the duration condition 
(whether as codified in 2014 or as expressed in HCJDC’s June 4, 2012 e -mail, 
see supra   note  2) or other 2013 amendments to HRS Chapter 846E-2 , we examine 
Hawaii’s sex offender registration r equirements as they were codified in 2014 
unless otherwise noted.  
11
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
“Temporary residence” means a building, permanent 
structure or unit therein, watercraft, emergency shelter, 
or transitional housing facility where the covered offender 
resides, but does not intend to reside for more than one 
hundred eighty days.”  
 
 
 
 The critical difference between these two subsections 
is that subsection (b) applies only to Group 3 offenders, i.e., 
“person[s]” who are out-of-state offenders who “establish[] o r 
maintain[] a residence in [Hawai i].” HRS § 846E -2(b). HRS 
Chapter 846E does not define “residence” nor does it refer to a 
statutory definition provided elsewhere in the HRS. The 2013 
amendments, however, define “permanent residence” and “temporary 
re
sidence.” 
“Permanent residence” means a building, permanent 
structure or unit therein, or watercraft where the covered 
offender resides and intends to reside indefinitely, or at 
least for the next one hundred eighty days, and which the 
offender owns, rents, or occupies with the consent of the owner.  
 
. . . . 
HRS § 846E-1 (2014). 
The portions of these definitions that concern 
“residence” turn on “where the covered offender  resides. ” Id.  
(emphasis added). “Reside” is defined as: “[t]o dwell 
permanently or continuously; to have a settled abode for a time; 
to have one
’s residence or domicile; specif., to be in 
residence, as the incumbent of a benefice.” Webster’s New Int ’l 
Dictionary 2119 (2d ed. 1960).  Taking these definitions into 
consideration, “residence,” in the context of HRS § 846E -2(b), 
12

  
  
 
   
  
  
     reasonably means “a building, permanent structure or unit 
therein, or watercraft where the covered offender settles to 
dwell permanently or contin uously.”  
Notably, the foregoing is consistent with the 
definition of “residence” provided in HRS § 11 -13 (2009), which 
is used for election purposes only: “The residence of a person is that place in which the person ’s habitation is fixed, and to 
which, whenever the person is absent, the person has the 
intention to return[.]” HRS § 11 -13(1). 
Registration requirements for out-of-state offenders 
in Groups 1 and 3 are straightforward.  Those in Group 1 are not 
subject to Hawaii’s registration requirements, as they do not 
remain in Hawai
i long enough to trigger registration.  See HRS 
§ 846E-2(a). Those in Group 3 are plainly subject to Hawaii ’s 
registration requirements as they are “person[s]” who meet the 
residency criterion : “A person  
who establishes or maintains a 
residence in this State . . . who has been designated as a covered offender, sex offender, . . . or any other sexual 
offender designation in another state or jurisdiction and was, as a result of such designation, subjected to registration 
. . . , 
without regard to whether the person otherwise meets the 
criteria for registration as a covered offender, shall register  
13

  
  
 
    
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
                         
   
 
 
 
 
    
 in the manner provided in this section . . . .” HRS § 846E -2(b) 
(emphasis added).8 
Whether an out-of-state offender in Group 2 — to which 
Doe ostensibly belongs9 — must register is solely dependent on 
whether the out-of-state offense committed is considered a 
“covered offense” under Hawaii law. This is because 
registration under subsection (a) is only required of “cover ed 
offender[s].” HRS § 846E -2(a) (“A covered offender shall 
register with the attorney general and comply with the 
provisions of this chapter . . . .”) (emphasis added) . 
This 
contrasts with subsection (b)’s reference to “person[s].” HRS § 
846E-2(b).  A “covered offender” includes a person who has been 
convicted of a “sexual offense” or a “crime against minors.” 
HRS § 846E-1. 
A “sexual offense” includes any out-of-state 
offense “that under the laws of [Hawai i] would be a sexual 
offense as defined in [HRS § 846E-1, paragraphs (1)–(6), under 
the definition of ‘ sexual offense’].”  Id. A “crime against 
minors” includes any out -of-
state offense “that, under the laws 
of [Hawai i], would be a crime against minors as designated in 
8 As the record does not show Doe has established or maintained a 
residence in Hawai i, and as discussed infra Parts IV.B. —G., the statutory 
subsection applicable to Doe is HRS § 846E- 2(a).  Accordingly, although there 
may be potential issues posed by the register -first-then-petition scheme set 
forth in HRS § 846E- 2(b), this opinion does not address them. 
9 See infra  Part IV.C. 
14
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
     
    
 
 
 
   
   
   [HRS § 846E-1, paragraphs (1)–(4), under the definition of 
‘crime against minors ’].”  Id. 
If the offense is not a “covered offense,” then the 
out-of-state offender does not fall 
under Hawaii’s sex offender 
registration scheme, and therefore the out-of-state offender 
need not register. However, if the out-of-state offense is a 
“covered offense,” the out -of-state offender must register.  See 
HRS § 846E-2(a). This inquiry is not an easy one, as 
acknowledged by the Attorney General in 2013.  See David M. 
Louie & Lance M. Goto, Testimony of the Dep ’t of the Attorney 
Gen. Twenty-seventh Legislature, 2013,
 2–3 (Jan. 29, 2013), 
http://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/Session2013/Testimony/SB1016_TESTI 
MONY_JDL_01-29-
13.pdf (“AG Testimony”) (“In evaluating offenders 
with convictions from other jurisdictions, it sometimes is very difficult to determine whether or not, and how, Hawaii 
registration requirements apply. Some offenses from other 
jurisdictions are very different from Hawaii law.”). 
B. Terminating Registration Requirements under HRS § 846E-2(b) 
for a Group 3 Offender Differs from Determining Whether a Group 
2 Offender’s Out-of-State Offense Is a “Covered Offense” 
Although a Group 3 offender who establishes or 
maintains a residence in Hawai i must register “without regard to 
whether the person otherwise meets the criteria for registration 
as a covered offender,” he or she may “petition[] the attorney 
15
  
     
  
     
 
 
                         
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  general”10 to terminate his or her registration requirements by 
showing that he or she “does not meet the criteria for 
registration as a covered offender under the laws of [Hawai i],” 
i.e., that the out-of-state offense committed is not a “covered 
offense” under Hawai i law.  HRS § 846E-2(b) (emphasis added).11 
In this context, the root legal issue regarding whether 
registration requirements for a Group 3 offender should be 
10 “‘Attorney general’ means the attorney general of the St ate of 
Hawaii, the department of the attorney general, or an authorized 
representative of the attorney general.” HRS § 846E -1. 
11 HRS 846E- 2(b) states in relevant part: 
A person who meets the criteria of this subsection  [HRS 
846E-2(b)]  is subject to the requirements and penalty 
provisions of section 846E -9 until the person successfully 
petitions the attorney general  for termination of 
registration requirements by:   
(1)
 Providing an order issued by the court that 
designated the person as a covered offender, sex offender, 
offender against minors, repeat covered offender, sexually 
violent predator, or any other sexual offender designation 
in the state or jurisdiction in which the order was issued, 
which states that such designation has been removed or 
demonstrates to the attorney general that such designation, if not imposed by a court, has been removed by operation of 
law or court order in the state or jurisdiction in which 
the designation was made, 
and such person does not meet the 
criteria for registration as a covered offender under the 
laws of this State ; or  
(2) Demonstrating that the out -of
-state convictions 
upon which the sexual offender designation was established 
are not covered offenses under section 846E -1, thereby 
showing that such person does not meet the criteria for 
registration as a covered offender under the laws of this 
State.  
HRS § 846E
-2(b) (emphasis added) . Accordingly, termination pursuant to 
either of these two bases rests on whether the out -of-state offender “ does 
not meet the criteria for registration as a covered offender under the laws 
of this State.” 
16
  
   
   
     
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
    
  
      terminated is very similar, if not identical, to that regarding 
whether Hawaii’s registration scheme applies to a Group 2 
offender: is the out-of-state offense a “covered offense” under 
Hawaii law? 
Despite this overlap of the underlying legal questions 
facing offenders in Groups 2 and 3, when that question arises 
for each Group differs. Group 2 faces the question before any 
registration is required, as the inquiry ’s purpose is to 
determine whether the statutory scheme even applies. On the 
other hand, because Hawaii’s registration requirements 
immediately apply to Group 3 by the plain language of HRS 
§ 846E-2(b), offenders in this Group face the question only upon their request for termination of requirements, which occurs 
after mandatory registration. 
How the question is raised by an out-of-state offender 
before an appropriate authority also differs based on whether 
the offender belongs to Group 2 or Group 3.  Pursuant to the 
plain language of the statute, a Group 3 out-of-state offender 
would pose the question to the attorney general for termination of registration requirements. See supra 
note 11 (quoting HRS § 
846E-2(b)). 
An appeal of the attorney general ’s decision can be 
made pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, Hawaii ’s Administrative 
Procedure Act. See HRS § 846E-2(b). 
17

  
   
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
                         
  
 
 
13   Multiple sections within  HRS Chapter 846E  refer to HRS Chapter 
91: HRS § 846E- 2(b), (g)  (2014); HRS § 846E- 3(c), (d) (2014); HRS § 846E  -4(e)  
(2014);  HRS § 846E- 5(b)  (2014); and HRS § 846E   -9(a)(12) (2014)  .  
 
 The statute is not as clear with respect to how the 
question can be raised by a Group 2 offender.  Nothing in HRS 
§ 846E-2(a) outlines the process by which a Group 2 offender may 
seek an authoritative determination as to whether the 
registration scheme applies to him or her.12 Nevertheless, due 
to the attorney general’s role as the administrator of Hawaii ’s 
sex offender registration system, such a request by a Group 2 
offender would be governed by Hawaii’s Administrative Procedure 
Act, see HRS Chapter 91, and the attorney general ’s agency 
rules, see Hawai i Administrative Rules (“HAR”) Title 5 .13 
Specifically, HRS § 91-8 permits “any interest ed 
person [to] petition an agency for a declaratory order [which is afforded the same status as other agency orders] as to the 
applicability of any statutory provision or of any rule or order 
of the agency,” and HAR § 5-1-70 (effective 1993) states in 
relevant part: 
Petition for declaratory rulings.    (a) Any interested 
person may petition the department  [of the attorney  
general] for the issuance of a declaratory order  as to the 
applicability of any statutory provision administered  by 
12 Notably, the subsection provides: “A covered offender shall be 
eligible to petition the court in a civil proceeding for an order that the 
covered offender’s registration requirements under this chapter be 
terminated, as provided in section 846E -10.” HRS § 846E -2(a).  However, this 
civil court procedure is not directed at an out -of-state offender who seeks a 
determination regarding his or her “covered offender” status. 
18
  
  
 
 
 
 the department  or of any rule or order of the department. 
Petitions for the issuance of a declaratory order shall 
state clearly and concisely the controversy or uncertainty, 
shall cite the statutory authority or rule or order 
involved, shall include a detailed statement 
of all the 
facts and the reasons or grounds prompting the petition, 
together with full disclosure of the petitioner ’s interest, 
and shall conform to the requirements of section 5 -1-35. 
HAR § 5-1-70 (emphasis added).    See  Citizens Against Reckless 
Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of App eals, 114 Hawai i 184, 196 –97, 159 P.3d 
143, 155–56 (2007)  (“[T]he declaratory ruling procedure of HRS § 
91-8 is meant to provide a means of seeking a determination of 
whether and in what way some statute, agency rule, or order, 
applies to the factual situation raised by an interested 
person.” (emphasis in original)); Fasi v. State Public Emp ’t 
Relations Bd., 60 Haw. 436, 444, 591 P.2d 113, 118 (1979) (“[HRS § 91-8] is designed to provide a means for securing from an 
agency its interpretation of relevant statutes, rules and 
orders. . . . The declaratory ruling so obtained has effect only as an order of the agency.”) .   “Based on the plain language 
of [HRS § 91-8], . . . interested persons are those ‘affected’ by, or ‘involved’ with, the applicability of ‘any statutory 
provision or of any rule or order of the agency.” AlohaCare v. 
Ito, 126 Hawai i 326, 360, 271 P.3d 621, 655 (2012) (internal 
citations and footnote omitted).      
Accordingly, as an “interested person,” a Group 2 
offender may follow the procedure outlined in the attorney 
general
’s administrative rules and submit a petition to the 
19
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
    attorney general for a declaratory order regarding whether the 
sex offender registration requirements detailed in HRS § 846E-2 
apply to him or her.  If the petitioner is aggrieved by the 
decision, the petitioner may also appeal the declaratory order 
to the circuit court pursuant to HRS § 91-14.  See HRS § 91 -
14(a) (“Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature that 
deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final decision 
would deprive appellant of adequate relief is entitled to 
judicial review . . . .” (emphasis added)); Lingle v. Haw. Gov ’
 t 
Emps. Ass’
n, 107 Hawai i 178, 186, 111 P.3d 587, 595 (2005) 
(“[W]e hold that orders disposing of petitions for declaratory 
rulings under HRS § 91 –8 are appealable to the circuit court 
pursuant to HRS § 91 –14.”); see also AlohaCare , 126 Hawai i at 
342, 271 P.3d at 637 (declining to reach the issue of whether an 
“interested person” who petitions for a declaratory ruling under 
HRS § 91-8 is necessarily a “person aggrieved” pursuant to HRS § 
91-14, but holding that in the given case, the petitioner was a “person aggrieved”). 
C. Doe, by Way of His May 23, 2012 E-mail and March 24, 2013 
Letter, Sought to Petition the Attorney General for a 
Declaration as to Whether He Was Required to Register in Hawai i 
Pursuant to HRS Chapter 846E 
In his May 23, 2012 e-mail to the Attorney General, 
Doe expressed his understanding that Hawai i law did not require 
20
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 him to register if he vacationed in Hawai i, but he wanted to 
know HCJDC’s opinion: 
I was convicted of a gross misdemeanor in Washington State 
. . . . From what I can tell  there is no similar statute 
in Hawaii and that this may not require registration.  
. . .. 
The purpose of my request is, I and my family have in the 
past and would like to continue vacationing periodically  in 
Hawaii, and I need to know what my requirements are, if 
actually required, for registration. 
(emphasis added). Notably, Doe did not state that he intended 
to “establish[] or maintain[] a residence” in Hawaii — the 
condition necessary for HRS § 846E-2(b) to apply — or otherwise 
referred to HRS § 846E-2(b). Nor did he use the word 
“termination” in his e -mail.  
Instead, 
Doe’s e-mail with the subject line, “Sex 
Offender Registration Petition,” stated: “In reviewing Hawaii ’s 
sex offender registration laws, I understand one can petition 
the DOJ/AG to be exempt from registration in Hawaii based on the 
basis the convicted offense is not similar to a 
Hawaii sex 
offense statute. . . . Please let me know the petition process  
and whethere [sic] you have a form for this or not. ” A plain 
reading of the entirety of 
Doe’s request reveals that he sought 
to petition the Attorney General for verification that he would not be subject to Hawaii ’s sex offender registration laws if he 
“vacation[ed] periodically in Hawai i.” In other words, Doe 
sought to petition for a declaratory order, pursuant to HRS 
21
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
    
   
             
 
 
  
  § 91-8, as to whether the sex offender registration requirements 
detailed in HRS § 846E-2 would apply to him in his intended 
travels to Hawai i, i.e., whether his Washington state conviction 
is a “covered offense” under Hawaii law. 
Further underscoring this interpretation is the fact 
that, at the time of Doe’s May 23, 2012 e-mail, HRS § 846E-2(a) 
(Supp. 2012) read in relevant part: “A covered offender shall 
register with the attorney general and comply with the 
provisions of this chapter for life or for a shorter period of 
time as provided in this chapter.” In other words, the statute 
in effect at the time, on its face, required a covered offender to register as soon as the covered offender came within the 
State’s jurisdiction, i.e., a covered offender ’s initial 
presence in Hawai i. Accordingly, given no evident “grace 
period” in the requirements outlined in HRS § 846E -2(a) (Supp. 
2012), it follows that Doe’s inquiry was focused on whether his 
offense is a “covered offense ” that triggers a requirement to 
register if he vacationed in Hawai i. 
The purpose of Doe’s letter dated March 24, 2013 was 
less apparent, but nevertheless ascertainable.  He captioned the letter, “Reference: Petition of Termination of Sex Offender 
Registration Requirements,” and the only Hawai i law he cited was 
HRS § 846E-2(b). The use of “termination” in his caption and 
22
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
                         
  
 
    
 sole legal citation to HRS § 846E-2(b) is unsurprising as the 
petition process detailed in HCJDC’s e -mail response dated June 
4, 2012 was only that contained in HRS § 846E-2(b).  No 
reference was made by HCJDC to HRS § 91-8 or HAR § 5-1-70. 
The factual circumstances presented in the letter had 
not changed from those presented in his e-mail.  That is, he: 
(1) reiterated that he is not a resident of Hawai i (“Presently I 
am not a resident of Hawaii . . . . Even though I am not a 
resident . . . I request that my petition be evaluated 
nonetheless.”); (2) asserted that he planned to “visit” Hawai i 
(“[W]e are making plans for an extended visit to the islands and 
likely to exceed the 10 day grace period[14] triggering 
requirement for in person registration.”) ; and (3) argued that 
his Washington state conviction is not “comparable to any existing Hawaii criminal offense” as “neither the elements of 
the [Washington] conviction nor the conduct pled to is 
comparable to a Hawaii criminal sex offense, ” and attached 
numerous Washington court documents associated with his conviction. In sum, Doe’s circumstances were clearly that of a 
Group 2 offender, not a Group 3 offender. 
14 The ten- day or thirty -day-in-the-aggregate durational condition 
was not yet codified at the time of Doe’ s letter. However, HCJDC’s June 4, 
2012 e-mail communicated the “grace period” to Doe. See also supra 3 & note 
2. 
23
  
    
  
  
    
 
 
  
 
 That Doe wrote in his letter that he was 
“petition[ing] [for] termination of sex offender registration 
requirements per Hawaii statute Section 846E-2(b),” is not 
dispositive of how his pro se letter should have been handled by 
the attorney general, the receiving agency. The case, Dupree v. 
Hiraga
, 121 Hawai i 297, 219 P.3d 1084 (2009), is instructive.  
In Dupree , the Clerk of the County of Maui (“Clerk”), 
received several letters challenging the residency of Solomon P. 
Kahoohalahala, a candidate for the Lāna i seat on the Maui County 
Council (“Candidate”). One of letters was submitted by Lāna i 
resident, Michael D. Dupree (“ Dupree”) , who stated that the 
Candidate “should ‘ run in the district that he currently resides 
in and give a current Lanai resident the opportunity to 
represent their home island.’”  Dupree , 121 Hawai i at 302, 219 
P.3d at 1089. In his issued ruling on the collective complaint 
letters, the Clerk concluded that the Candidate ’s “‘residence 
address of record has always been on Lanai. ’ . . . [T]o the 
extent that the Complaint Letters constitute a challenge to [the 
Candidate’s] right to remain a registered voter in []Lanai[] . . 
. , the challenge is not sustained.” Dupree, 121 Hawai i at 304, 
219 P.3d at 1091. 
The Board of Registration (“Board”) subsequently 
received a pro se appeal letter from Dupree, which was  
24
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 characterized by the Board chair as a “‘challenge to [the 
Candidate’s] right to remain a registered voter on Lanai. ’”  121 
Hawaii at 306, 219 P.3d at 1093.  After holding a hearing, the 
Board sustained Dupree ’s appeal and overruled the Clerk ’s 
decision, holding that “[f]or purposes of this 2008 election, 
[the Candidate] is a resident of Lahaina, Maui.” 121 Hawai i at 
310, 219 P.3d at 1097.  On appeal to this court, the Candidate 
argued that the Board had lacked jurisdiction to hear Dupree ’s 
appeal because Dupree ’s initial letter to the Clerk challenged 
the Candidate’s candidacy, not his voter registration status.  
Id. at 311, 219 P.3d at 1098. 
In holding that the Board had jurisdiction to consider 
Dupree’s appeal, this court observed that Dupree had proceeded 
pro se when he submitted his initial letter to the Clerk, and 
that “[p]leadings prepared by pro se litigants should be 
int
erpreted liberally.” 121 Hawai i at 314, 219 P.3d at 1101 
(citing Giuliani v. Chuck,  1 Haw. App. 379, 385–86, 620 P.2d 
733, 737–38 (1980)). Accordingly, the Clerk “acted within the 
scope of his authority in construing [Dupree ’s] letter[] as a 
challenge to [the Candidate]’s residency . . . and investigating on that basis. . . . The Board therefore . . . had jurisdiction 
to hear Dupree’s appeal from that aspect of [the Clerk]’s 
25

  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 decision.” 121 Hawai i at 315, 219 P.3d at 1102 
(footnote 
omitted).  Specifically, this Court observed: 
[Although] Dupree ’s letter focused on [the Candidate ]’s  
residency for the purpose of challenging his eligibility as 
a candidate from Lāna i, rather than his right to vote on 
Lānai[,] . . . that does not mean that [the Clerk] was 
required to ignore Dupree ’s factual allegations insofar as 
they cast doubt on the legitimacy of [the Candidate ]’s  
voter registration on Lāna i.  
121 Hawai i at 313, 219 P.3d at 1100. 
This reasoning applies to Doe ’s case.  The facts 
alleged in Doe’s letter dated March 24, 2013 indicate that he 
was not a Group 3 offender seeking to terminate registration 
requirements, but rather a Group 2 offender seeking a 
declaration from the attorney general, pursuant to HRS § 91-8, that the registration requirements of HRS § 846E-2(a) would not 
apply to him if he were to vacation in Hawai i for longer than 
ten days. That Doe, proceeding pro se, mis-cited the 
appropriate subsection of the HRS or used the term “termination” 
with respect to registration requirements, does not preclude a 
liberal construction of his letter.  Indeed, when viewed 
together with Doe’s initial e-mail, Doe ’s request as a Group 2 
offender is plain. Moreover, the attorney general ’s office is 
an agency that is familiar with the operation of Hawai i law, and 
would be particularly adept at liberally construing a pro se letter as an HRS § 91-8 petition request.  Thus, for the 
26
  
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 foregoing reasons, the Attorney General could ascertain the true 
nature of Doe’s request. 
Arguably, Dupree can be distinguished on grounds that 
an election clerk has a statutory duty, pursuant to HRS § 11 -
25(a) (2009) and HRS § 12-8(d) (2009), to expeditiously 
investigate posed challenges and objections. Thus, liberally 
construing a complaint letter is not only within the scope of 
the clerk’s authority, but encouraged under the law. In 
contrast, an agency retains the discretion whether to respond to 
an HRS § 91-8 petition, see Citizens, 114 Hawai i at 194, 159 
P.3d at 153; therefore, conceivably, a petition that may be 
liberally construed as one brought pursuant to HRS § 91-8 need not be so construed by an agency such as the attorney general’s 
office. Such reasoning, however, ignores a fundamental tenet of 
Hawaii law — that “[p]leadings prepared by pro se litigants 
should be interpreted liberally.” Dupree, 121 Hawai i at 314, 
219 P.3d at 1101 (citation omitted). Doe’s letter to the 
appropriate agency unequivocally and timely sought to initiate 
administrative proceedings provided for by statute.  
Accordingly, his letter, too, should have been construed 
liberally. See id. (“[P]leadings in administrative proceedings 
are to be construed liberally rather than technically. ” (citing 
27
  
      
   
   
 
 
 
  
                         
  
 Perry v. Planning Comm ’n, 62 Haw. 666, 685 –86, 619 P.2d 95, 108 
(1980))).15 
D. HCJDC’s April 10, 2013 Letter Demonstrates That It 
Construed Doe’s Letter as a Petition Pursuant to HRS § 846E-2(a) 
HCJDC’s initial response to Doe’s letter states in 
relevant part: 
We are responding to your letter on behalf of the 
Attorney General, State of Hawaii, as the Hawaii Criminal 
Justice Data Center is responsible for the maintenance of 
covered offender records in the State of Hawaii.  
In regards to whether your Washington State 
conviction of Communication with a Minor for Immoral 
Purposes is a covered offense requiring registration in 
Hawaii, Chap ter 846E- 2, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
requires you to register in this state before any 
determination can be made. Your petition for termination 
of registration requirements is premature as there has been 
no determination of whether you are required to register as a covered offender, and you have not complied with the 
requirements pursuant to Chapter 846E -10, HRS, for 
termination.  
As such, you will be required to register in Hawaii 
should you remain in this state for more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one 
calendar year.  . . .  
According to this response, it appears that HCJDC  
properly construed Doe’s letter as a “petition for termination 
of registration requirements” pursuant to subsection (a) , not 
subsection (b), of HRS § 846E-2.  This is made apparent by  the 
following portions of its response:  
(1) “In regards to whether your Washington State conviction 
of Communication with a Minor for Immoral Purposes is a covered offense requiring registration in Hawaii . . . . ”   The key issue 
15 This opinion is not intended to limit agencies’ authority to 
reasonably request relevant information from a petitioner. 
28
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
                         
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 identified by HCJDC was whether Doe’s Washington state offense is a “covered offense” ; 
(2) “Your petition for termination of registration 
requirements is premature as there has been no determination of 
whether you are required to register as a covered offender, and 
you have not complied with the requirements pursuant to Chapter 
846E-10, HRS, for termination. ” The two reasons given by HCJDC 
as to why Doe’s request was “premature ” — that there was yet no 
determination of whether Doe is required to register as a covered offender, and that Doe failed to follow the termination 
procedures provided in HRS § 846E-10, a reference to which is 
contained only in HRS § 846E-2(a) — fall solely under subsection 
(a), not subsection (b), of HRS § 846E-2; and 
(3) “[Y]ou will be required to register in Hawaii should 
you remain in this state for more than ten days or for an 
aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar year.” 
16HCJDC based its conclusion on the duration condition and not 
16 The duration condition was not codified as part of HRS § 846E -
2(a) until April 30, 2013. See supra note 2.  However, at the time it sent 
its letter to Doe, HCJDC was already aware of the possible law change to 
subsection (a) as the Attorney General had submitted written testimony on 
behalf of the underlying bill when it was initially introduced, observing: 
Section 846E -2(a), HRS, is being amended to clarify 
the basic registration requirement, and make it clear that 
covered offenders, whether or not residents of this State, 
who remain in the State for more than ten days or for an 
aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar year, must register with the Attorney General.  
AG Testimony at 3. Moreover, by April 10, 2013, the date of HCJDC’s response 
(continued . . .) 
29
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 the “establish[ment] or maint[enance] [of] a residence in 
[Hawaii].” 
Indeed, nothing in HCJDC’s letter indicates that it 
construed Doe’s letter as anything but a request by a Group 2 
offender as to whether his Washington state offense is a 
“covered offense requiring registration in Hawaii.” 
As discussed supra Part IV.B., determining whether a 
Group 2 offender’s out-of-state offense is a “covered offense” 
is a condition precedent for that offender to be required to 
register in Hawai i. Accordingly, HCJDC ’s assertion that Doe 
“will be required to register in Hawaii should [he] remain in 
this state for more than ten days or for an aggregate period 
exceeding thirty days in one calendar year,” without first 
determining whether his offense is a “covered offense,” is an 
inaccurate application of the law. 
E. HCJDC’s May 16, 2013 “Modification” Letter Conflates 
Subsections (a) and (b) of HRS § 846E-2 
As an initial matter, HCJDC’ s May 16, 2013 letter 
issued after Doe filed his Notice of Appeal on May 6, 2013, yet 
was submitted to the circuit court as part of the certified 
(. . . continued)
  
letter, the pending bill containing the duration condition, SB1016 SD1 HD2, 

had already passed a third reading in the form that it was eventually 
enacted. See  Hawaii State Legislature , “2013 Archives, SB1016 SD1 HD2,” 

http://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/Archives/measure_indiv_Archives.aspx?billtype=S
 
B&billnumber=1016&year=2013.
 
30
  
  
Your March 24, 2013 “Petition,” which was received o n 
April 1, 2013, sought termination of sex offender 
registration requirements pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) section 846E -2(b), for a June 23, 2011 
conviction on two counts of “Communication with a Minor for Immoral Purposes.”  
 
  
 
 record on appeal. However, as Doe raised no objections to the 
letter’s inclusion, we proceed to examine the letter .   
The May 16, 2013 letter “modified” HCJDC’s  April 10 
response, stating the following:  
Your Notice of Appeal to the Circuit Court filed on 
May 6, 2013 has caused my office to review the April 10, 
2013 response that was sent to you. That response inadequately conveyed the Department of Attorney General ’s 
response and we use this opportunity to modify the response as follows.  
[quotation of HRS 
§ 846E-2(b) omitted] 
Therefore, because you were convicted and required to 
register in the State of Washington, under the above -
referenced statute  [HRS § 846E- 2(b)], if you reside in 
Hawaii for more than ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar year, you are 
required to register. Registration is a prerequisite to 
your  filing of a petition for termination of registration 
requirement [sic].  
(footnote omitted).   In sum, HCJDC re-  characterized Doe’s letter 
from a petition brought pursuant to subsection  (a), to one 
brought pursuant to  subsection (b), of HRS § 846E-2.   Further, 
despite the Notice’ s clear reference to HRS § 91-8, HCJDC 
declined to address it.  
Even with this  “modification, ”  however, HCJDC’s 
position continued to lack clarity.  Notably, HCJDC’s conclusion 
conflated subsections (a) and (b) when discussing the 
registration requirements of subsection (b). Specifically, 
31

  
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 HCJDC stated: “[B]ecause you were convicted and required to 
register in the State of Washington, under the above-referenced 
statute [HRS § 846E-2(b)], if you reside in Hawaii for more than 
ten days or for an aggregate period exceeding thirty days in one calendar year, you are required to register” (emphasis added). 
In other words, HCJDC did not refer to subsection (b) ’s 
condition that registration under it is required for “[an out -
of-state offender] who establishes or maintains a residence in 
[Hawaii],” but rather , HCJDC supplanted the word “remains” in 
subsection (a)’s duration condition with “reside” and presented 
that as subsection (b) ’s condition. It is inexplicable why 
HCJDC referred to the duration condition of subsection (a) to 
define the residence requirement of subsection (b). 
Additionally, HCJDC ’s fusion of the two subsections is 
problematic, particularly here, where its communication was 
directed to a pro se petitioner who wished to “visit” Hawai i for 
longer than ten days, and who was seeking a declaration 
regarding the law’s application to him. As discussed supra Part 
IV.A., with respect to out-of-state offenders, the registration 
requirements outlined in subsections (a) and (b) do not 
simultaneously apply. Specifically, Hawaii ’s registration 
scheme simply does not reach either Group 1 offenders or Group 2 offenders whose offenses are not “covered offenses”: subsection 
32
  
    
 
  
 
   See  AlohaCare ,
  
  
 
    
  (a) applies to Group 2 offenders whose offenses are “covered 
offenses”; and subsection (b) applies to Group 3 offenders. 
F. The ICA Erred in Affirming the Circuit Court ’s Dismissal of 
Doe’s Notice of Appeal for Lack of Jurisdiction 
Both the ICA and the circuit court  concluded that the  
circuit court lacked jurisdiction to hear Doe’s appeal because 
the written communications between Doe  and HCJDC did not 
constitute a contested case.   Use of the “contested case” 
analytical framework misses the mark because appeals of agency 
responses to petitions by aggrieved persons for declaratory 
orders pursuant to HRS § 91-8 are appealable pursuant to HRS     
§ 91-14.  126 Haw. at 342, 271 P.3d at 637 (“ This 
court has recognized that judicial review of orders disposing of 
petitions for declaratory rulings pursuant to HRS § 91 –8 are 
also subject to judicial review, although those orders may not 
result from contested cases. ” (citation omitted)); see also Part 
IV.B. (cases cited).  The threshold issue, then, is whether Doe’s letter should have been construed as a petition for a 
declaratory order pursuant to HRS § 91-8 (and hence, HCJDC ’s 
response construed as one pursuant to HRS § 91-8) instead of a 
petition for termination of registration requirements under HRS 
§ 846E-2(b). If so, the circuit court would not have lacked the 
jurisdiction to hear Doe’s appeal, but instead would have had 
the authority to consider the merits of his question — whether 
33
  
   
    
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
     
 he is a “covered offender” that must register if he were to 
remain in Hawai i for longer than the duration condition.  
As discussed supra Part IV.C., Doe’s letter should be 
liberally construed as an HRS § 91-8 petition regarding the 
applicability of HRS § 846E-2(a), given the factual 
circumstances asserted by him in his letter and that he had 
proceeded pro se. See Dupree, 121 Hawai i at 314, 219 P.3d at 
1101 (citation omitted). Given that Doe reiterated that he wished merely to “visit” or “vacation” in Hawaii, it was plain 
that Doe cited to the incorrect subsection for his petition, as 
HRS § 846E-2(b) only applies to offenders who “establish[] or 
maintain[] a residence in [Hawai i].” 
Further, as discussed supra Part IV.D., despite Doe’s 
incorrect citation to HRS § 846E-2(b), it appears HCJDC 
nevertheless initially construed Doe’s letter as a petition 
brought with respect to HRS § 846E-2(a), as the statutory 
provisions cited or quoted by HCJDC all point to subsection (a).  
As noted by the Attorney General at oral argument before the 
circuit court, subsection (a) provides an express procedure for 
registered covered offenders to engage in a civil proceeding to 
terminate requirements pursuant to HRS § 846E-10.  At no time 
had Doe requested this kind of proceeding.  See supra note 12. 
But it is precisely because the circumstances laid out in Doe’s 
34
  
   
 
      
     
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 letter do not involve HRS § 846E-10 or an existing registration, 
that the only reasonable construction of Doe’s letter is as a 
petition brought pursuant to HRS § 91-8, inquiring whether he is 
a “covered offender” required to register pursuant to HRS 
§ 846E-2(a) if he visited Hawai i for longer than ten days. 
For the foregoing reasons, a reasonable interpretation 
of HCJDC’s initial letter is as a denial of Doe’s petition for a 
declaratory order. The Attorney General had argued before the 
ICA that Doe’s letter did not amount to a HRS § 91-8 petition 
because the letter cited to subsection (b) and used the word 
“termination,” and therefore did not comply with the attorney 
general’s administrative rules. These rules require, in relevant part, that “petition[s] for declaratory rulings”: 
[(1)] state clearly and concisely the controversy or 
uncertainty, [(2)] . . . cite the statutory authority or 
rule or order involved, [and (3)] . . . include a detailed statement of all the facts and the reasons or grounds 
prompting the petition, together with full disclosure of 
the petitioner’s interest . . . . 
HAR § 5-1-70(a). 
Yet, for the reasons discussed in Parts IV.C.-D., 
Doe’s letter would suffice when a liberal construction is 
afforded, based on the factual circumstances advanced by Doe, a 
pro se petitioner. Moreover, HCJDC had issued a “modification” 
letter — which is part of the instant record on appeal — after 
Doe filed the Notice. Yet, the “modification” lett er wholly 
35
  
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ignores Doe’s repeated references to HRS § 91-8 within the 
Notice, which should have crystallized what Doe sought.  
In any event, even if 
Doe’s letter is construed to be 
flawed, that the attorney general may “summarily dismiss a 
petition for a declaratory order if the petition does not meet 
the requirements of this section,” HAR § 5-1-70(a), does not 
change the nature of Doe’s letter as a petition , regarding which 
a decision was made by the Attorney General, thus affording him the right to appeal that decision to circuit court pursuant to 
HRS § 91-14, if aggrieved. 
Notably, 
before the circuit court, Doe discussed 
Hawaii’s sex offender registration scheme and whether his out -
of-state offense was one that placed him within that scheme.  
Doe emphasized: 
Your Honor, . . . if you take Section 2(b) out, which refers to 
out-of-state convictions, the rest of the statute refers to 
covered -- defines a covered offense as one that would be a sexual offense in this state. Taking Section 2(b) out, if you committed the offense out of the state that would be a sexual 
offense in this state, then the rest of the chapter applies to 
you. That determination has not been made. 
. . . .  
 
The prerequisite requirement 
-- the legislature’ s intent 
was clear. If your offense is not a registrable offense in this 
state based on not being equivalent, defined under Section 1, 
then you should not -- you’ re not required to register. 
Thus, despite proceeding pro se, Doe clarified  that if HRS §  
846E-2(b) did not apply to an out-of-state offender, e.g., he or 
she has not “establish[ed] or maintain[ed] a residence in 
36

  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 [Hawaii],” HRS § 846E-2(b), then the offender need only register 
in Hawai i if his or her out -of-state offense is a “covered 
offense” in this State ; and that this determination must be  made 
before registration is imposed. Thus, although the word 
“termination” was readily used at ora l argument by the circuit 
court and the parties, it is evident that Doe’s dispute concerned his request to the Attorney General for a 
determination as to “whether or not . . . [he, as a Group 2  
offender, is] a covered offender.”  The review of this agency 
determination squarely falls within the circuit court’s 
jurisdiction. 
G. 
The Attorney General ’s Apparent Position That It Cannot 
Determine Whether Out-of-State Offenders Are “Covered Offenders” 
until after They Arrive in Hawai i and Initially Register, Is 
Untenable 
Lastly, we note that the Attorney General appears to 
take the position that whether an out-of-state offender is a 
“covered offender” cannot be determined until that person 
“physically arrives in the State and initially registers, 
including providing his [or her] fingerprints to verify his [or 
her] identity,” as “ the Attorney General lacks the statutory 
authority to deem someone ‘not a covered offender ’ prior to 
registration.” (emphasis omitted). Specifically, with respect 
to Doe, the Attorney General ’s stated position was: 
37
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
                         
   
 
 
 
   
 If [Doe] is found not to be a “covered offender,” then [he] 
will not have to continue 
to register under subsection (a).  
. . . .  
[A]fter [HCJDC] 
verifies [ Doe]’s identity and physical 
presence in the state, [HCJDC] can then request certified 
documents from Washington confirming [Doe]’s convictions , 
run a full criminal history check in state and federal databases, and issue a determination as to whether [Doe] is 
indeed a “covered offender.” 
(emphasis added).   This suggests that  Doe and other Group 2   
offenders —  those who do not establish or maintain a residence 
in Hawai i but who wish to visit  Hawaii for more than ten days or  
for an aggregate period greater than thirty days in a calendar 
year —  are effectively treated like Group 3 offenders  despite 
17   the legislature’s intent  to treat the two groups as distinct.
To the extent there is any confusion regarding the 
law, it is important to clarify Hawaii ’s sex offender 
registration scheme. By way of HRS § 91-8, the legislature intended to foster self-compliance with all agency-administered 
statutes, such as HRS § 846E-2.  Moreover, as a practical 
matter, the sex offender registration scheme relies heavily on 
self-reporting. Requiring Group 2 offenders to register before 
they can determine whether an out-of-stat e offense is a “covered 
offense”
18 in Hawai i effectively deters voluntary self-reporting.  
17 As such, any possible conflict between HRS § 846E -2(b) and HRS 
§ 91-8, as suggested by the Attorney General before the lower courts, does 
not affect the court’s consideration here . 
18 Notably, the Attorney General concedes that whether Doe is a 
“covered offender” is a question of law. 
38
  
    
  
 
 
 
    
 
     
   
     
  
     
 
      Accordingly, advanced inquiries by out-of-state Group 2 
offenders should be encouraged. 
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA ’s 
affirmance of the circuit court ’s dismissal of Doe’s agency 
appeal based on a lack of jurisdiction, and remand this case to 
the Attorney General so that Doe’s petition can be addressed 
consistent with this opinion. 
John Doe, 
petitioner pro se  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Marissa Luning, for respondent 
   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
39
 