***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
DESMOND J. LEWI, Petitioner/Petitioner- Appellant,  
  
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,
 Respondent/Respondent- Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-16-0000090 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000090; S.P.P. NO. 15-1-0003 (CR. NO. 08-1-0483))  
 
NOVEMBER 7, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction 
 We hold that Desmond J. Lewi’s (“Lewi”) Hawai ʻi Rul
es of 
Penal Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 40 petition stated a colorable 
claim that the Hawaiʻi Paroling Authority (“HPA”) violated his 
due process rights by arbitrarily and capriciously determining 
that he was a “Level III” offender for purposes of calculating Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000090
07-NOV-2019
08:17 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
2 
 his minimum term of imprisonment on a manslaughter conviction.  
As we therefore remand this case to the circuit court for a 
hearing as to whether the HPA arbitrarily and capriciously 
maintained Lewi’s Level of Punishment at Level III, Lewi may 
also amend his Rule 40 petition to include his claim on appeal 
that the circuit court did not adequately explain its decision 
to impose a consecutive sentence.  
 We therefore affirm in part, and vacate in part, the ICA’s 
July 13, 2017 judgment on appeal, which affirmed the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit’s1 (“circuit court”) January 27, 2016 
“Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Pet ition 
to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release 
Petitioner from Custody Filed August 14, 2015, Without a 
Hearing.”  This case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
II.  Background 
A.  Underlying Criminal Proceedings 
On October 7, 2008, the State charged Lewi via Complaint 
with five offenses:  Count 1, Murder in the Second Degree, in 
violation of Hawai ʻi Revised Statu
tes (“HRS”) § 707 -701.5(1); 
Count 2, Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the Commission of a 
Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134- 21(a); Count 3, 
                     
1  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
3 
 Carrying or Possessing a Loaded Firearm on a Public Highway, in 
violation of HRS § 134- 26(a); Count 4, Place to Keep Ammunition, 
in violation of HRS § 134- 27(a); and Count 5, Ownership or 
Possession Prohibited, in violation of HRS § 134- 7(b) and (h).2    
The charges stemmed from an incident in which Lewi shot and 
killed his sister’s boyfriend, Cameron Mauga, after a long 
history of conflict.  On the morning of October 5, 2008, the 
extended Lewi family was gathered at Puhi Beach Park for a 
child’s birthday party.   Mauga confronted Lewi, who was seated 
in the driver’s seat of his (Lewi’s) truck.   Lewi’s 6 -year-old 
son was seated in the front passenger seat.  Mauga punched Lewi 
in the head.  Lewi kept a loaded shotgun in his truck, so he 
brandished it, hoping to scare Mauga off.  Instead, Mauga 
                     
2  As to Count 1, HRS § 707 -701.5(1) (Supp. 1992) defines Murder in the 
Second Degree as, in relevant part, “intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] the 
death of another person  . . . .”  As to Count 2, HRS § 134 -21(a) (Supp. 2006) 
defines Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony 
as, in relevant part, “knowingly carry[ing] on the person or hav[ing] within 
the person’s immediate control or intentionally us[ing] o r threaten[ing] to 
use a firearm while engaged in the commission of a separate felony, whether 
the firearm was loaded or not, and whether operable or not  . . . .”  As to 
Count 3, HRS § 134- 26(a) (Supp. 2006), Carrying or Possessing a Loaded 
Firearm on a Public Highway, makes it “unlawful for any person on any public 
highway to carry on the person, or to have in the person’s possession, or to 
carry in a vehicle any firearm loaded with ammunition  . . . .” As to Count 4, 
HRS § 134- 27(a) (Supp. 2006), Place to Keep Ammunition, requires, in relevant 
part, all ammunition to be “confined to the possessor’s place of business, 
residence, or sojourn,” with exceptions for transporting ammunition in an 
enclosed container between locations enumerated in the statute.  As to  Count 
5, HRS § 134- 7(b) and (h) (Supp. 2006), Ownership or Possession Prohibited, 
make it a class C felony for a person who “has been  convicted in this State 
or elsewhere of having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an 
illegal sale of any dr ug” to “own, possess, or control any firearm or 
ammunition therefor.” ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
4 
 grabbed for the gun.  As the two struggled, the gun discharged, 
killing Mauga.    
Lewi was incarcerated at the Hawai ʻi Community Correctional 
Center pending trial, as he was unable to post his $1,000,000.00 
aggregate bail.  After a month of incarceration, Lewi’s bail was 
reduced, and Lewi posted bail.  While released on bail, he was 
placed on electronic monitoring, and he reported to work (as a 
skilled construction worker) and returned home before his curfew 
with no problems.    
On March 23, 2010, Lewi pleaded guilty to the lesser 
offense of manslaughter on Count 1.3  He also pleaded guilty to 
the firearms offenses in Counts 3 and 5.  Lewi signed his change 
of plea form, which stated:  “I understand that the Court may 
impose any of the following penalties for the offense(s) to 
which I now plead:  the maximum term of imprisonment . . . , 
consecutive terms of imprisonment (if more than one charge), . . 
. probation with up to two year[s] of imprisonment and other 
terms and conditions.”   He also acknowledged the following:  “I 
have not been promised any kind of deal or favor or leniency by 
anyone for my plea, except that I have been told that the 
government has agreed as follows. . .:  The State will reduce 
Count 1 to manslaughter and dismiss the counts not plead [sic] 
                     
3  HRS § 707- 702 (1985) defines  “Manslaughter” as, in relevant part, 
“recklessly caus[ng] the death of another person  . . . .” ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
5 
 to.[4]  The State may seek a prison term of 30 years.  I will 
seek probation and any legal sentence . . . .”      
The minutes of the change of plea hearing note that the 
circuit court questioned Lewi and “found he understood the 
consequences of his plea & had made a knowing voluntary & 
intelligent entry of plea & waiver of trial.”5  As part of the 
plea agreement, the State moved to nolle prosequi, with 
prejudice, Counts 2 and 4 (other weapons offenses), and the 
circuit court granted the motion.    
Lewi’s presentence investigation and report (“PSI”) 
included a letter from his deputy public defender to the court 
requesting a sentence of two years ’ imprisonment plus probation.  
At the May 24, 2010 sentencing hearing, Lewi’s counsel objected 
to the PSI’s inclusion of victim impact letters from individuals 
who were not relatives of the victim.  Those letters were 
removed from the PSI.  The minutes o f the sentencing hearing 
also state that Lewi’s counsel “noted various corrections to the 
presentencing report.”    
At the sentencing hearing, the circuit court sentenced Lewi 
to 20 years’ imprisonment on Count 1 (Manslaughter), 10 years 
                     
4  The counts “not pled to” referred to Counts 2 and 4 (other weapons 
offenses), which the State later moved to nolle prosequi.  
 
5  The transcript of the change of plea hearing is not a part of the 
record. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
6 
 imprisonment on Count 3 (Carrying or Possessing a Loaded Firearm 
on a Public Highway), with the sentences in Counts 1 and 3 to 
run concurrently, and 5 years imprisonment on Count 5 (Ownership 
or Possession Prohibited), with the sentence in Count 5 to run 
consecutively to the sentences in Counts 1 and 3.  [13:220]   
The circuit court stated the following regarding its  
imposition of consecutive sentences: 
The question is whether the sentence – or the 
sentences are to run concurrently or consecutively.  It’s 
true there’s a presumption in favor of concurrent 
sentencing.  But what is of concern to the Court is that 
you’re not supposed to have had the firearm in your truck 
to begin with.  Not supposed to have had a firearm in your 
possession, period.  Let alone a  loaded shotgun on a public 
highway.  That possession in and of itself was an illegal 
act.  And after that you acted recklessly in allowing that 
firearm to go off and shoot Mr. Mauga.  
So based upon the seriousness of the offenses and the 
need for punishment and deterrence, consecutive sentence 
would be warranted.  
On the other hand, to your credit you have a limited 
criminal history.  I have read the letters and seems that 
you have a strong prosocial character, yeah.  And you 
apparently are not – although there’s some arguments on the 
other side, didn’t seem as if you were a problem while out 
on bail.  And these factors favor concurrent sentencing.  
And regarding community protection, not sure how that 
cuts.  But balancing these considerations the Court 
believes that it’s appropriate to sentence you to a 25 -year 
indeterminate term, okay.  
 
At the end of the sentencing hearing, the circuit court 
also stated that “if the Paroling Authority maxes the amount on 
both [consecutive sentences], [the circuit court would] be 
willing to look at concurrent [sentencing].”   Defense counsel ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
7 
 responded that she “would place a Rule 35 on the record at this 
time,”6 which the circuit court “[s]o noted.”     
On June 9, 2010, Lewi moved to reduce his sentence from 
consecutive terms totaling 25 years to concurrent terms totaling 
20 years.  Lewi pointed out that this court had issued State v. 
Hussein, 122 Hawai ʻi 495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010), weeks before he 
was sentenced.  In Hussein, we held that a sentencing court must 
state on the record at the time of sentencing “its reasons as to 
why a consecutive sentence rather than a concurrent one was 
required.”  122 Hawaiʻi at 509, 229 P.3d at 328.  Lewi argued 
that the circuit court’s reasons for imposing a consecutive 
                     
6  This reference was to HRPP Rule 35 (2003), which provides: 
 
 Rule 35.  CORRECTION OR REDUCTION OF SENTENCE.  
      (a) Correction of Illegal Sentence.  The court may 
correct an illegal sentence at any time and may correct a 
sentence imposed in an illegal manner within the time 
provided herein for the reduction of sentence. A motion 
made by a defendant to correct an illegal sentence more 
than 90 days after the sentence is imposed shall be made 
pursuant to Rule 40 of these rules. A motion to correct a 
sentence that is made within the 90 day time period shall 
empower the court to act on such motion even though the 
time period has expired.  
      (b) Reduction of Sentence.  The court may reduce a 
sentence within 90 days after the sentence is imposed, or 
within 90 days after receipt by the court of a mandate 
issued upon affirmance of the judgment or dismissal of the 
appeal, or within 90 days after entry of any order or 
judgment of the Supreme Court of the United States denying 
review of, or having the effect of upholding the judgment 
of conviction. A motion to reduce a sentence that is made 
within the time prior shall empower the court to act on 
such motion even though the time period has expired. The 
filing of a notice of appeal shall not deprive the court of 
jurisdiction to entertain a timely motion to reduce a 
sentence.
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
8 
 sentence were insufficient, appending a 
portion of the  
transcript of the sentencing hearing to his motion.      
 The circuit court denied Lewi’s motion to reduce sentence, 
referring back to its statements at the previous sentencing 
hearing, and reasoning as follows: 
The Hussein case does not require the court to make, 
uh, specific findings, but state reasons for imposing 
consecutive, um, sentences; and the court believes that it 
did this.  It did recognize the presumption under H.R.S. 
Section 706 -668.5 in favor of concurrent sentencing and 
addressed the factors under H.R.S. Section 706 -606, and 
came to the conclusion that consecutive terms totaling 25 
years, um, is an appropriate sentence.  
In deciding upon the consecutive terms, um, the court 
did take into consideration the multiplicity of the 
offenses and the impact upon the victim.  And the Hussein  
case expressly recognizes these criteria as bases for 
imposing consecutive sentences.  Regarding the impact upon 
the victim, death is the ultimate impact; and of course Mr. 
Mauga died in regard – in this case.  
And what I’ll – what was of great concern is that 
immediately prior to Mr. Mauga’s death, as stated during 
sentencing, it was illegal for Mr. Lewi to have possession 
of a firearm and it was illegal for him to have a loaded  
firearm on the public highway.  It was Mr. Lewi’s illegal 
acts immediately prior to his contact with Mr. Mauga which 
ultimately resulted in Mr. Mauga’s death.  
The court’s choice of the 25 -year term as compared to 
the 30-year term [requested by the State] was based upon a 
recognition of the mitigating factors previously mentioned, 
a minimal prior criminal history, apparent pro social 
behavior, et cetera.  If the sentence imposed by the court 
was purely based upon considerations of multiplicity of 
offenses and the impact upon the victim, the 30 -year term 
would have been imposed; instead, the 25  year term was 
imposed because of the mitigating factors.  
 
   On September 10, 2010, the HPA set all of Lewi’s minimum 
terms at the maximum duration:  20 years on Count 1, 10 years on 
Count 3, and 5 years on Count 5.  The HPA also set Lewi’s level 
of punishment at Level III, the highest level, for all three 
counts, stating “Significant factors identified in determining ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
9 
 the level of punishment:  (1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of 
Injury/Loss to Person.”    
After HPA set his minimum terms and offender levels, Lewi 
filed his second motion to reduce  sentence on November 26, 2010, 
reminding the circuit court of its statement at the end of the 
initial sentencing hearing, and appending the HPA’s Notice and 
Order of Fixing Minimum Term.  Lewi asked the circuit court to 
reduce his sentence to a concurrent 20 years or a term of 
probation.  The State filed a memorandum objecting to the second 
motion to reduce sentence , alleging “nothing ha[d] changed” 
between the hearing on the first motion to 
reduce and the filing 
of the second motion to reduce  sentence.    
On January 21, 2011, Lewi’s deputy public defender moved to 
withdraw as counsel, declaring that Lewi had accused her of 
ineffective assistance of counsel.  Lewi also sent in a 
handwritten letter to the court accusing the deputy public 
defender of ineffective assistance of counsel.  Three months 
later, the deputy public defender filed a supplement to her 
motion to withdraw as counsel, declaring that she had made 
unsuccessful efforts to contact Lewi.  The circuit court granted 
the deputy public defender’s motion and appointed successor 
counsel on June 15, 2011.  This successor counsel filed an ex 
parte motion to withdraw due to a conflict of interest on April 
9, 2012, which was granted on that day.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
10 
 No disposition of the renewed motion to reduce  sentence 
appears in the record.  No direct appeal was filed from Lewi’s 
original sentence.  
B.  Rule 40 Petition 
 On August 14, 2015, Lewi filed the subject HRPP Rule 407 
petition for Post-Conviction Relief pro se.    
The grounds for Lewi’s Rule 40 petition can be grouped into 
three categories.   
First, he argued ineffective assistance of counsel, 
alleging the deputy public defender induced him to plead guilty, 
failed to appeal his consecutive sentence, and fail
ed to 
challenge HPA’s minimum term decision .   
Second, he argued HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously in 
setting his level of punishment at Level III and in setting his 
minimum terms at the same length as his maximum sentences, 
because HPA did not utilize the “criminal history” and “pro -
social life” guidelines, which he alleged would have cut in his 
                     
7  HRPP Rule 40 is titled “Post -Conviction Proceeding.”  Under HRPP Rule 
40(a)(1), a person (the petitioner) may seek relief from a judgment of 
conviction because (1)
 the judgment was obtained or sentence imposed in 
violation of the United States Constitution or Hawai ʻi Constitution; (2) the 
court rendering the judgment lacked jurisdiction over the person or the 
subject matter; (3) the sentence is illegal; (4) there is newly discovered 
evidence; or (5)  any ground that is a collateral attack on the judgment.  A 
court shall grant a hearing on a Rule 40 petition if the petition alleges 
facts that, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief.  HRPP Rule 
40(f).  On the other hand, a court may deny a hearing if the petitioner’s 
claims are patently frivolous and without a trace of support either in the 
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner.  Id.   
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
11 
 favor.  (Lewi had only one prior petty misdemeanor conviction, 
was a skilled construct
ion worker with strong family and 
community ties, and posed no problems while out on bail.)  
 Third, Lewi argued that his sentence was illegal, because 
he could not be convicted of both manslaughter and weapons 
offenses based on 
State v. Jumila, 87 Hawai ʻi 1, 950 P.2d 1201 
(1988), State v. Christian, 88 Hawaiʻ i 407, 967 P.2d 239 (1989), 
and State v. Van Den Berg, 101 Hawaiʻ i8 187, 65 P.3d 134 (2003).   
On his Rule 40 petition form, Lewi stated that he did not 
raise these challenges earlier because his attorney was 
unresponsive to his requests to challenge HPA’s minimum terms.   
Lewi asked the circuit court to (1) order HPA to give him a new 
hearing to reset his level of punishment to level I or II; (2)  
overturn his illegal sentence and re-sentence him to 20 years on 
the manslaughter conviction, with sentences on any weapons 
convictions to run concurrently; and (3)  remove current counsel 
and appoint new counsel.  Lewi also stated that he was “not 
pulling the Man-Slaughter plea.”    
                     
8  In Jumila, this court held that Murder in the Second Degree is included 
in the offense of Carrying or Using a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate 
Felony; therefore, the defendant there could not be convicted and sentenced 
on both offenses.  87 Hawai ʻi at 4, 950 P.2d at 1201.  In Christian, this 
court applied Jumila to hold that Murder in the Second Degree is included in 
the offense of Use of Deadly or Dangerous Weapon in the Commission of a 
Crime. 88 Hawaiʻ i at 410, 967 P.2d at 242.  In Van Den Berg, this court held 
that a defendant cannot be convicted and sentenced of both Murder in the 
Second Degree and Possession or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Felony.  
101 Hawaiʻ i at 193, 65 P.3d at 140.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
12 
 On September 17, 2015, substitute counsel was appointed to 
represent Lewi for his Rule 40 Petition (“Rule 40 substitute 
counsel”).  On November 16, 2015, Rule 40 substitute counsel 
filed a supplemental memorandum in support of Lewi’s Rule 40 
petition.  He first argued that the HPA misa pplied the “Degree 
of Injury/Loss to Person” factor in its determination that 
Lewi’s offender status should be at Level III.   He argued that 
the HPA Guidelines place an offender on Level III status only if 
“[t]he injury or loss suffered by the victim[s] wa s more than 
those experienced by similarly situated victims[,]”  quoting 
HPA’s Guidelines for Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment 
(“HPA Guidelines”)   at 6 (emphasis added) but that an offender 
should be placed at Level II if “[t]he injury or loss suf fered 
by the victim[s] was comparable  to those experienced by 
similarly situated victims.”   Rule 40 substitute counsel argued 
that because Lewi’s victim died due to a shotgun shot to the 
chest, “death should be considered the normal degree of injury  . 
. . .”  Rule 40 substitute counsel asserted that, as such, in 
considering the “degree of injury/loss to person” guideline, HPA 
should have placed Lewi at Level II, not III.  He did not make 
any arguments about the other criterion HPA used to set Lewi’s 
minimum term, “nature of the offense.”  He also did not argue 
that the HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously in setting ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
13 
 Lewi’s minimum terms at the same length as his maximum 
sentences. 
Rule 40 substitute counsel next argued that Lewi did not 
have the effective assistance of counsel because the deputy 
public defender failed to appe al the HPA’s illegal decision.  He 
did not argue that counsel was ineffective for inducing Lewi’s 
guilty plea or failing to directly appeal his sentence.  Counsel 
also did not include L ewi’s argument that his sentence was 
illegal under Jumila, Christian, and Van Den Berg .  Counsel 
ended his supplemental memorandum with a request that the 
circuit court order a new minimum term hearing before the HPA.    
On December 2, 2015, the State file d an answer to Lewi’s 
Rule 40 petition, as supplemented by Rule 40 substitute 
counsel’s memorandum.   As to Lewi’s argument that his sentence 
was illegal under Jumila , Christian , and Van Den Berg , the State 
argued that the Jumila line of cases is no longer good law, as 
this court overruled Jumila  in State v. Brantley, 99 Hawai ʻi 463, 
56 P.3d 1252 (2002).9  The State also pointed out that the cited 
cases involved the offenses of Murder in the Second Degree 
and/or Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a 
                     
9  In Brantley, this court overruled its holding in Jumila that a 
defendant cannot be convicted of both Carrying or Use of Firearm in a 
Separate Felony and Murder in the Second Degree.  99 Hawai ʻi at 469, 56 P.3d 
at 1258 (footnote omitted).  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
14 
 Separate Felony,10 
two offenses for which Lewi was not convicted, 
as Lewi was convicted of M anslaughter, and the Carrying or Use 
of a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony count was 
dismissed after Lewi pleaded guilty to Manslaughter in lieu of 
Murder in the Second Degree.   
 As to Lewi’s minimum term, the State argued that the HPA 
“classified [Lewi] as a Level III offender, and stated, 
‘Significant factors identified in determining the level of 
punishment:  (1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of Injury/Loss to 
Person.’  The HPA, thereby, complied with its guidelines and 
provided written justification for its decision.”   The State 
also argued that the HPA may set a prisoner’s minimum term of 
imprisonment at the length of time equal to his maximum 
sentence, citing Williamson v. Hawaii Paroling Auth., 97 Hawaiʻi 
183, 191, 35 P.3d 210, 218 (2001).    
 As to Lewi’s ineffective assistance of counsel claims, the 
State asserted that HPA’s minimum term decision “was not in 
violation of its guidelines and [was] neither arbitrary nor 
capricious”; accordingly, “Trial counsel may have believed, 
likewise, and chose not to file an appeal that had no merit.”  
                     
10  This is not an accurate statement, as Christian involved the offense of 
Use of Deadly or Dangerous Weapon in the Commission of a Crime (to wit, a 
knife), not Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate 
Felony.  88 Hawaiʻ i at 410, 967 P.2d at 242.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
15 
 The State asked the circuit court to deny Lewi’s Rule 40 
petition without a hearing.    
On December 30, 2015, Rule 40 substitute counsel filed a 
reply memorandum, essentially re- arguing points previously made.   
On January 27, 2016, the circuit court issued its Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Rule 40 petition 
(“FOFs, COLs, and Order”).   First, as to Lewi’s assertion that 
his sentence was illegal under Jumila, Christian , and Van Den 
Berg, the circuit court construed Lewi’s argument to be “that he 
should not have been sentenced for both carrying or possessing a 
loaded firearm on a public highway (Count 3) and owning or 
possessing a prohibited item (Count 5).”  The circuit court 
cited to HRS § 701- 109(1), which provides that “[w]hen the same 
conduct of a defendant may establish an element or more than one 
offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for each offense of 
which such conduct is an element.”  The circuit court then 
concluded that each of the weapons offenses required proof of 
different elements (i.e., Carrying or Possessing a Loaded 
Firearm on a Public Highway required the firearm to be loaded 
and carried on a highway, while Owning or Possessing a 
Prohibited Item did not; Owning or Possessing a Prohibited Item 
precluded those under indictment or convicted of a felony or 
violent crime from having a firearm, while Carrying or 
Possessing a Loaded Firearm on Public Highway did not).  The ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
16 
 circuit court did not analyze whether the weapons offense were 
included in the offense of manslaughter.  The circuit court also 
concluded that HRS § 706- 668.511 permitted the sentencing court 
to impose consecutive sentences upon Lewi.   
Second, as to Lewi’s argument that HPA acted arbitrarily 
and capriciously in setting his minimum term, the circuit court 
concluded that the HPA complied with its Guidelines by assessing 
Lewi at Level III and indicating that the nature of the offense 
and the degree of injury/loss to person were significant factors 
it considered.  Further, the circuit court concluded that the 
following information in the PSI supported the Level III 
determination:  “ample  evidence that Defendant’s admitted 
practice of carrying a firearm ‘for protection’ in his truck 
constituted behavior which substantially contributed to Mauga’s 
death,” “many letters submitted by persons affected indicate the 
profound consequences of Mauga ’s death on those who survived 
him,” and that “the shooting was witnessed by minors, including 
[Lewi’s] own son.”  The circuit court also concluded that the 
HPA was authorized to set Lewi’s minimum terms of imprisonment 
at the same length of his maximum sentences, citing Williamson.    
                     
11  HRS § 706- 668.5 (Supp. 1992) is titled “Multiple s entence of 
imprisonment.”  Subsection (1) of the statute provides, in relevant part, “If 
multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a defendant, whether at the 
same time or at different times, or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a 
defendant who is already subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, the 
terms may run concurrently or consecutively .”  (Emphasis added.)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
17 
 Lastly, as to Lewi’s claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, the circuit court concluded that “there is no appeal 
provided for by statute of HPA’s decision and Petitioner fails 
to point to any authority to the contrary.  The appropriate 
means to challenge a minimum term of imprisonment is the filing 
of the current petition, the merits of which have been 
considered above.”    
C.  ICA Appeal 
Before summarizing the arguments made on appeal, we first 
note that Lewi has proceeded pro se on this appeal.  On February 
18, 2016, Lewi filed a notice of appeal pro se, followed by a 
jurisdictional statement and a motion for an extension of time.  
Rule 40 substitute counsel then moved to withdraw as counsel.  
The ICA remanded the case to the circuit court to hear the 
motion to withdraw but denied Lewi’s motion to extend time to 
file his opening brief by 60 days.  On remand, on May 27, 2016, 
the circuit court granted Rule 40 substitute counsel’s motion to 
withdraw and appointed new substitute counsel to represent Lewi 
for the purpose of assisting him in pursuing this appeal, but 
this was the same date that Lewi had to file his opening brief, 
which he did pro se.  After the case returned to the ICA, 
however, Lewi wrote a letter to the ICA dated June 20, 2016 
stating that he was not in contact with new substitute counsel.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
18 
 No further filings from 
new substitute counsel appear in the 
record of this appeal, and Lewi filed a reply brief pro se.    
 We also note, however, that according to 
the State and the 
HPA, new substitute counsel was able to secure a new minimum 
term hearing for Lewi before the HPA.  The HPA reduced Lewi’s 
minimum term on Count 1 to 16 years (down from 20 years), his 
minimum term on Count 3 to 5 years (down from 10 years), and his 
minimum term on Count 5 to 3 years (down from 5 years).  The HPA 
also reset Lewi’s punishment level to Level II (down from Level 
III) on Counts 3 and 5.12   
 As to Count 1 (the manslaughter conviction), however, 
Lewi’s punishment level remained at Level III.       
 1.  Lewi’s Opening Brief  
 On appeal before the ICA, Lewi argued that he had a right 
to be present at an October 15, 2015 status conference on his 
Rule 40 petition and that the circuit court erred in denying his 
Rule 40 petition without a hearing because he had raised the 
following colorable claims:  ineffective assistance of the 
deputy public defender, illegality of his consecutive sentence 
under the Jumila line of cases, and arbitrary and capricious 
action by the HPA in setting his minimum terms of imprisonment.      
                     
12  The State clarified that Lewi’s consecutive sentence began with the 
minimum term of imprisonment on Count 5, which he has completed, followed by 
the minimum terms of imprisonment on Counts 1 and 3, which run concurrently.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
19 
  Lewi raised the following bases for his ineffective 
assistance of counsel claim:  that the deputy public defender 
was ineffective because she promised he would be sentenced to 
two years of jail time with probation if he would plead guilty.13  
Lewi also briefly raised the issue that the circuit court was 
obliged to state on the record reasons for imposing a 
consecutive sentence, under Hussein .       
 Lewi asked the ICA to overturn his consecutive sentence, 
overturn his weapons convictions and sentences, re- sentence him 
to 20 years on the manslaughter conviction with any other 
sentences running concurrently with it, and reset his level of 
punishment to Level II.  Lewi again asserted that he was “not 
pulling the man-slaughter pl ea.”    
 2.  The State’s Answering Brief  
 In its answering brief, the State argued that the circuit 
court properly denied Lewi’s Rule 40 petition because Lewi did 
not present any colorable claims.      
The State argued that nothing in the record supported 
Lewi’s claim that the deputy public defender promised him two 
                     
13  For the first time on appeal, Lewi also asserted that substitute 
counsel for his Rule 40 petition was ineffective for “refus[ing] to argue, 
communicate, object to the courts on behalf of [Lewi’s] Rule 40 claims,” for 
continuing to threaten to withdraw from representing him, and for failing to 
prepare Lewi’s Rule 40 petition.  Claims against substitute counsel were not 
part of his Rule 40 petition, but for the  reasons stated by the ICA, see note 
16, infra, these claims are without merit and we do not  address them further.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
20 
 years’ imprisonment with probation in exchange for his guilty 
plea.  
  
The State also pointed out that the HPA had, during the 
pendency of Lewi’s appeal, held a new minimum term hearing.  The 
State argued that, therefore, any failure by the deputy public 
defender to challenge his old minimum term decision and request 
a new hearing was moot.    
As to Lewi’s allegation that his consecutive sentence was 
illegal, the State argued that the circuit court did not err in 
imposing consecutive sentences, as HRS § 706- 668.5 permits 
consecutive sentencing.  The State also acknowledged that under 
Hussein, the sentencing court must state its reasons on the 
record at the time of sentencing justifying consecutive 
sentences.  The State pointed to the portions of the  circuit 
court’s sentencing hearing transcript in the record  as providing 
sufficient justification for consecutive sentencing.  It pointed 
out that, at sentencing, the circuit court expressed its concern 
that Lewi was not supposed to have a firearm, and had the 
firearm not been in Lewi’s truck on the day he and Mau ga were 
involved in the confrontation, Mauga would probably be alive 
today.      
Further, the State again argued that Jumila , Christian, and 
Van Den Berg were no longer good law as Jumila  had been 
overturned by Brantley.  The State reiterated its argument that ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
21 
 those cases involved sentencing for Murder in the Second Degree 
and Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate 
Felony, offenses for which Lewi was not convicted.   
The State therefore asked the ICA to affirm the circuit 
court’s FOFs, COLs, and Order.   
3.  The HPA’s Answering Brief  
In its answering brief, the HPA addressed Lewi’s arguments 
that it acted arbitrarily and capriciously in setting his level 
of punishment at Level III and in setting his minimum terms at 
the same length as h
is maximum sentences.  The HPA pointed out 
that “all of the issues relating to the HPA setting [Lewi’s] 
minimum terms are now moot because in November, 2016, the HPA 
held a new minimum term hearing and set new minimum terms on all 
of Lewi’s sentences.”  HPA also argued it eliminated “degree of 
injury/loss to person” as a justification for setting Lewi’s 
level of punishment at Level III on Count 1 (manslaughter), 
leaving only “nature of offense” as justification.  HPA appended 
as an exhibit to its answering 
brief the new minimum term 
decision.      
Further, HPA cited to St. Clair v. State, CAAP -11-0000359, 
2013 WL 6762256 (App. Dec. 20, 2013) (mem.), which held that 
“[t]he primary injury or loss suffered by victims of 
manslaughter is death,” and that the rec ord did not indicate 
that the deceased victim in the case (who was struck and killed ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
22 
 instantly by a drunk driver) experienced greater suffering than 
other victims of manslaughter.  The ICA had remanded that case 
to the circuit court so that the HPA could hold a new minimum 
term hearing.  Although the HPA did not expressly analogize St. 
Clair to Lewi’s case, it stated that Lewi received a new hearing 
and a new minimum term decision that “fit the legal requirements 
as determined by the HPA Guidelines and the case law,” most 
likely referring to the reduction in Lewi’s minimum term of 
imprisonment for manslaughter from 20 years to 16 years.  The 
HPA did not, however, explain  how the new minimum term decision 
maintaining Lewi’s level of punishment for manslaughte r at Level 
III complied with St. Clair . 
HPA concluded its answering brief with a request that the 
ICA dismiss the HPA- related grounds in Lewi’s Rule 40 petition 
appeal as moot.   
4.  Reply Brief  
In Lewi’s pro se reply brief, he reiterated most of his 
earlier arguments, but added that he objected to the 
characterization of his HPA issues as moot, because “HPA 
neglected to address the illegal setting of [his] level III 
punishment.”   
5.  The ICA’s S ummary Disposition Order 
In a Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”), the ICA affirmed 
the circuit court’s FOFs, COLs, and Order.  Lewi v. State, No. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
23 
 CAAP-16- 0000090 (App. May 31, 2017) (SDO).  The ICA found 
without merit Lewi’s point of error that the circuit court held 
a hearing on his Rule 40 petition in his absence.  Lewi, SDO at 
2, noting there was no evidence that the circuit court held a 
hearing on October 15, 2015; rather, a status conference had 
been held on that day.  Id.  
The ICA also concluded that the circuit court did not err 
in imposing consecutive sentences.  Lewi, SDO at 4.  It reasoned 
that Brantley overruled the Jumila  line of cases Lewi relied on 
to support his argument that he cannot be convicted and 
sentenced for both manslaughter and weapons offenses.  Id.   The 
ICA further noted that HRS § 708- 668.5 permits the imposition of 
consecutive sentences.  Id.  
The ICA found without merit Lewi’s claims that the deputy 
public defender was ineffective.  Lewi, SDO at 3.  It concluded 
she was not ineffective for failing to appeal his consecutive 
sentences, because the consecutive sentences were not illegal, 
per Brantley.  Lewi, SDO at 2.  Further, the ICA declined to 
address Lewi’s argument that she deceived him into pleading 
guilty, noting that Lewi asserted in his briefing that he would 
not withdraw his manslaughter plea; the ICA noted that no other 
remedy is available for an involuntary plea.  Id.   Next, the ICA 
noted that the deputy public defender “made ‘various corrections 
to the presentence report’ and argued for probation and for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
24 
 concurrent sentencing,” rejecting Lewi’s claims that she was 
ineffective at sentencing.  Id.   Lastly, the ICA concluded that 
any claim that the deputy public defender was ineffective for 
failing to challenge HPA’s minimum term decision was moot, as 
during the pendency of the appeal, HPA held a new hearing and 
re-set Lewi’s minimum terms.  Lewi, SDO at 3.14 
Then Chief Judge Nakamura filed a concurrence and dissent 
to the SDO.  Lewi, SDO at 6-7 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and 
dissenting).  While he “generally agree[d] with the decisions 
reached by the majority” on Lewi’s points of error, he stated 
that he would remand the case for a hearing on Lewi’s claim that 
HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously in maintaining Lewi’s 
level of punishment at Level III on Count 1 (manslaughter) in 
its new minimum term decision.  Lewi , SDO at 6 (Nakamura, C.J., 
concurring and dissenting).  Chief Judge Nakamura footnoted his 
doubt that HPA’s remaining explanation for its Level III 
classification (“Nature of Offense”) could be justified, as that 
required a showing that Lewi “displayed a callous and/or cruel 
                     
14  The ICA also addressed the newly raised issue regarding Rule 40 
substitute counsel, concluding that he was not ineffective in representing 
Lewi in his Rule 40 proceedings.  Id.  The ICA noted that Rule 40 substitute 
counsel could not have been ineffective for failing to file Lewi’s Rule 40 
petition, as he was appointed Rule 40 counsel after Lewi had filed his own 
Rule 40 petition pro se.  Id.  The ICA also rejected Lewi’s arguments that 
Rule 40 substitute counsel failed to advocate for Lewi during the Rule 40 
proceedings, as he had filed a Supplemental Memorandum in support of Lewi’s 
Rule 40 petition.  Id.  The ICA concluded that “Lewi does not state what 
additional arguments Rule 40 substitute counsel should have made or how 
counsel’s communication, or lack thereof, affected the claims in his 
Petition.  Therefore, HRPP Rule 40 counsel was not ineffective.”   Id. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
25 
 disregard for the safety and welfare of others.”  Lewi, SDO at 6 
n.1 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting (quoting HPA 
Guidelines at 5)).  Chief Judge Nakamura further stated, “Under 
the circumstances of this case, rather than requiring Lewi to 
file another [Rule 40] petition to challenge the HPA’s new 
minimum term order, I would remand the case for a hearing on 
whether the HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously in continuing 
to classify Lewi as a Level III offender on his manslaughter 
conviction.”  Lewi, SDO at 6 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and 
dissenting). 
Chief Judge Nakamura also noted that Lewi did not expressly 
argue that the circuit court failed to adequately explain its 
reasons for imposing consecutive sentences in his Rule 40 
petition or in his Opening Brief; nevertheless, Chief Judge 
Nakamura stated “the record reveals some uncertainty” on that 
issue.  Lewi, SDO at 6-7 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and 
dissenting).  As such, Chief Judge Nakamura would have allowed 
Lewi, on remand, to raise a claim regarding the adequacy of the 
circuit court’s reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence.  
Lewi, SDO at 7 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting). 
III.  Standard  of Review 
 Review of orders denying HRPP Rule 40 petitions is de  novo: 
As a general rule, a hearing  should be held on a Rule 40 
petition for post -conviction relief where the petition 
states a colorable claim.  To establish a colorable claim, 
the allegations of the petition must show that if taken as ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
26 (continued. . .)  
 true the facts alleged would change the verdict, however, a 
petitioner’s conclusions need not be regarded as true.  
Where examination of the record of the trial court’s 
proceedings indicates that the petitioner’s allegations 
show no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the 
petition without a hearing.  The  question on appeal of a 
denial of a Rule 40 petition without a hearing is whether 
the trial record indicates that Petitioner’s application 
for relief made such a showing of a colorable claim as to 
require a hearing before the lower court.  
 
State v. Dan, 76 
Hawai‘i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) 
(citation omitted). 
IV.  Discussion 
 In his certiorari application, Lewi asserts that his Rule 
40 petition raised the following colorable claims:  first, that 
his plea was illegal; second, that he received ineffective 
assistance of counsel during pretrial, sentencing, and on 
appeal; third, that he was improperly convicted of both 
manslaughter and weapons offenses; fourth, that the HPA 
arbitrarily and capriciously set his minimum terms at their 
maximum lengths; fifth, that the HPA arbitrarily and 
capriciously maintained his level of punishment at Level III for 
the manslaughter conviction; and sixth, that the circuit court 
inadequately set forth reasons on the record for imposing 
consecutive sentences.     
 The record does not support Lewi’s first claim.15   
                     
15  Lewi’s plea was not illegal.  On certiorari, Lewi argues that the 
deputy public defender illegally induced his guilty plea by falsely promising 
that he would receive two years of imprisonment plus probation in exchange 
for it.  W hile there is evidence in the record that the deputy public 
defender requested a sentence of two years  of imprisonment plus probation , ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
27 (continued. . .)  
  As to the second claim (ineffective assistance of counsel), 
the record does not support an ineffective assistance of counsel 
claim.16   
 Lewi’s third claim (that he cannot be convicted of both 
manslaughter and weapons offenses) relies on a misapprehension 
of appellate case law.17   
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
there is no evidence in  the record or in Lewi’s submissions that she falsely
promised him two years of imprisonment and probation in exchange for his 
guilty plea.  The change of plea form also indicates Lewi was not given any 
promise in exchange for his plea. Rule 40 petitions are evaluated on the 
record and evidence submitted.  
See Rule 40(f) (“[T]he court may deny a 
hearing if the petitione r’s claim is patently frivolous and without a trace 
of support either in the record or from other evidence submitted  by the 
petitioner.”).  
 
16  Lewi asserts he received ineffective assistance of counsel because the 
deputy public defender  did not advise him that he could challenge information 
in his PSI.  The applicable standard for assessing claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel is whether the assistance provided was “within the 
range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.”  State v. 
Antone, 62 Hawaiʻi 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (internal citations 
omitted).  The burden rests on the Petitioner to prove: “1) that there were 
specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or 
diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.”  
Wilton v. State, 116 Hawai i 106, 110- 11, 170 P.3d 357, 361 -62 (2007) 
(internal citations omitted).    
 Lewi alleges the deputy public defender was ineffective for 
failing to advise him of the right to challenge information in a PSI. He does 
not specify what information should have been challenged.  In any event, at 
the May 24, 2010 sentencing hearing, the deputy public defender objected to 
the PSI’s inclusion of victim impact letters from individuals who were not 
relatives of the victim.  T hese letters were removed from the PSI.  The 
minutes of the sentencing hearing also stated  that Lewi’s counsel “not ed 
various corrections to the presentencing report.”   Therefore, this assertion 
does not raise a colorable claim.  
 
17  Lewi was properly convicted on both the manslaughter and weapons 
offenses.  On certiorari, Lewi’s question presented posits that the ICA 
incorrectly applied the Jumila line of cases to his case.
  In his argument 
section, however, Lewi relies exclusively on another case, State v. 
Fagaragan, 115 Hawaiʻ i 364, 167 P.3d 739 (App. 2007), and the authority 
therein, to support the argument that he cannot be convicted and sentenced ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
28 (continued. . .)  
                                                                   
(continued. . .) 
for weapons offenses in addition to manslaughter.  Fagaragan, however, is 
distinguishable. 
 In Fagaragan, the defendant (Fagaragan) was convicted of Promoting a 
Dangerous Drug in the First Degree, Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in 
the First Degree, and Prohibited Acts Relating to Drug Paraphernalia.  115 
Hawaiʻi at 365, 167 P.3d at 740.  Although Fagaragan argued that his 
convictions could not be sustained under HRS § 701 -109 or double jeopardy 
grounds, his appeal was not decided on those bases.  115 Hawai ʻi at 372, 167 
P.3d 747 (“[W]e need not reach Fagaragan’s other points of error on appeal.  
Fagaragan’s contentions that [Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree 
and Prohibited Acts Relating to Drug Paraphernali
a] merged into [Attempted 
Promoting a Drug in the Dangerous Degree] as a matter of law under HRS § 701 -
109 or the double jeopardy clauses of the United States and Hawai ʻi 
constitutions are moot  . . . .”)
.  Rather, in Fagaragan, the ICA looked to 
the legislative history of the drug possession statute and held that “the 
legislature did not intend for multiple punishments to be imposed in cases 
involving possession and  attempted distribution under HRS § 712 -1241, where 
the convictions rest on evidence of possession by a defendant 
of the same 
drugs at the same moment in time .”  115 Hawai ʻi at 370, 167 P.3d at 745 
(emphasis added).  Therefore, the ICA reversed Fagaragan’s Attempted 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree Conviction (but affirmed his 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree and Prohibited Acts Related to 
Drug Paraphernalia convictions).  
Id.    
Analogizing his case to Fagaragan, Lewi argues that his multiple 
convictions and sentences “are based on possessi on . . . of the same gun at 
the same moment in time .”  Therefore, he contends, the Ownership or 
Possession Prohibited and Carrying or  Possessing a Loaded Firearm on a Public 
Highway convictions should have been reversed, leaving only the Manslaughter 
conviction.  Lewi’s argument is not persuasive.  In Fagaragan, the ICA held 
that the attempt to distribute could not be punished in addition to the 
possession of drugs (the quantity of which supported the presumption that the 
possessor was preparing for distribution).  115 
Hawaiʻi at 370, 167 P.3d at 
745.   
Similar circumstances do not exist here.  In this case, Lewi was convicted of 
Ownership or Possession Prohibited because of his status:  he had previously 
been convicted of petty misdemeanor assault and was, therefore, not permitted 
to own a firearm.  See  HRS § 134- 7(b) (prohibiting any person convicted of a 
“crime of violence” from “own[ing], possess[ing], or controll[ing] any 
firearm or ammunition therefore”).  This offense is separate from the 
manslaughter offense, which requires (in Lewi’s case) “recklessly causing the 
death of another person,” see HRS § 707-7 02, without regard to whether the 
death resulted from the prohibited possession of a gun.  Lewi was also 
convicted of Carrying or Possessing a Loaded Firearm on a Public Highway, 
which forbids “a person on any public highway” from carrying on their person 
or in a vehicle “any firearm loaded with ammunition.”  HRS § 134 -26.  This 
offense differs from the Prohibited Possession offense, in that the gun 
possessed must be kept in a particular condition (loaded) and carried in a 
particular place (a public highway), whereas the Prohibited Possession 
offense contains no such requirements.  This offense also differs from 
Manslaughter, as the latter offense does not require that a death recklessly 
occur via a loaded gun on a public highway.  In short, the weapons 
convictions in this case are not subject to Fagaragan simply because the 
manslaughter and weapons offenses “are based on possession . . . of the same ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
29 (continued. . .)  
  Lewi’s fourth claim is now moot.18   
 Only Lewi’s fifth and sixth claims presented colorable 
claims.19  Therefore the circuit court erred in denying Lewi’s 
Rule 40 petition without a hearing, and the ICA erred in 
affirming the circuit court’s decision.  
A. Lewi raises a colorable claim that the HPA acted 
 arbitrarily and capriciously in maintaining his level of 
 punishment at Level III on the manslaughter conviction.   
 
 In his fifth claim, Lewi argues that the HPA acted 
arbitrarily and capriciously in setting his level of punishment 
at Level III.20  When the HPA revisited Lewi’s minimum terms, it 
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
gun at the same moment in time .”  Lewi’s argument based on Fagaragan  is
therefore misplaced.  
 
18  The claim that HPA arbitrarily and capriciously set Lewi’s minimum 
terms at the same length as his maximum sentences is now moot, as during the 
pendency of Lewi’s Rule 40 petition appeal, HPA held a new hearing and re -set 
all of Lewi’s minimum terms to less than his maximum sentences.   
 
19  On certiorari, Lewi also argues that he had a right to be present at an 
October 15, 2015 hearing, which he believed to be the hearing on his Rule 40 
petition.  Lewi appended  to his application, however, a notice of that the 
October 15, 2015 “hearing” was a status conference.
  To the extent Lewi 
believes that this status conference was the  actual hearing on his Rule 40 
petition, granted after  the circuit court finds colorable claims, he is 
mistaken.   See Dan, 76 
Hawaiʻi at 427, 879 P.2d at 532 (“As a general rule, a 
hearing should be held on a Rule 40 petition for post -conviction relief where 
the petition states a colorable claim.” ).  To the extent Lewi understands the 
October 15, 2015 proceeding was just a status conference, he is also mistaken 
as to his right to be present there, because he was represented by counsel at 
the time.  See, e.g., Thomas v. State, 771 S.E.2d 255 (Ga. Ct. App. 2015) 
(holding that the defendant had no constitutional right to be present at a 
status conference, as that is not a critical stage of the proceedings).  
 
20  Pursuant to HRS § 706 -669(8) (1985 & Supp. 1992),  the HPA is mandated 
to establish guidelines for determining minimum sentences of imprisonment for 
offenders sentenced by the courts to indeterminate and extended terms of 
imprisonment.  To that end, in 1989, the HPA published its “Guidelines for 
Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment” (“Guidelines”), with the stated 
goal of “provid[ing] a degree of uniformity and consistency in the setting of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
30 
 reset Lewi’s punishment level to Level II (down from Level III) 
on Counts 3 and 5.  Therefore, a s to Counts 3 and 5, Lewi’s 
argument is moot.  As to Count 1 (manslaughter), however, Lewi’s 
punishment level remained at Level III.   
The singular justification HPA now provides for the Level 
III classification is “nature of offense,” where, previously, 
the dual justification given was “nature of offense” and “degree 
of injury/loss to person.”  Under HPA’s Guidelines, for a Level 
III designation based on the “nature of offense,” the offense 
must be “against a person(s) and the offender displayed a 
callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of 
others.”  HPA Guidelines at 5 (emphasis added).  For a Level II 
designation based on the “nature of offense,” the offense must 
be “against the person and/or property, and the offender 
displayed a substantial (multiple counts, etc.) disregard for 
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
minimum terms while providing the community -at-large, public policy makers 
and planners, the criminal justice system, and victims and offenders with 
information as to the criteria used in establishing minimum terms of 
imprisonment.”  Guidelines at 1.  To set a minimum sentence within the 
maximum term of imprisonment range set by the sentencing court, the HPA 
determines an offender’s “level of punishment” at , from lowest to highest, 
Level I, II, or III.  Guidelines at 2.  To set an offender’s level of 
punishment, “the areas that will generally receive the greatest weight are . 
. . Nature of Offense, the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property, and 
the Offender’s Criminal History,” although there are other enumerated 
criteria within each level of punishment that the HPA may consider.  
Guidelines at 3.  In its Guidelines, the HPA acknowledges “certain amounts of 
subjectivity” in applying the criteria to each  offender, and it insists that 
its “INTERPRETATIONS AND PERCEPTIONS OF THE SUBJECTIVE CRITERIA REMAIN THE 
PREROGATIVE OF THE AUTHORITY.”  Guidelines at 3 (capitalization in 
original.).  We note that HPA has not revised its Guidelines in over 30 
years.         ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
31 
 the safety and welfare of others.”  HPA Guidelines at 4 
(emphasis added).  (For a Level I designation based on the 
“nature of offense,” the offense must be “against the person 
and/or property, and the offender displayed a disregard for the 
safety and welfare of others.”  HPA Guidelines at 3 (emphasis 
added).) 
Lewi argues that it was not enough for the HPA to note 
“nature of offense” as its “written justification.”  The State 
responds that given Lewi’s shooting of Mauga, “Lewi’s commission 
of the manslaughter [offense] was ‘against a person and the 
offender displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the 
safety and welfare of others,’ making the [HPA’s] reliance on 
‘nature’ of offense as set forth in the HPA Guide lines 
appropriate.”  We are persuaded that the HPA’s listing of a sole 
criterion, “nature of offense,”  for setting Lewi’s level of 
punishment at Level III was not sufficient.  
 Judicial intervention with regard to an HPA minimum term 
determination is warra nted “where the HPA has failed to exercise 
any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as 
to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise violated 
the prisoner’s constitutional rights.”  Coulter v. State, 116 
Hawaiʻi 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007) (citation omitted).  
In this case, the HPA did not provide any written explanation 
for its Level III designation beyond “nature of offense.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
32 
 [90:37]  The absence of a more detailed explanation hampers this 
court’s review of whether Lewi’s Level III designation is 
arbitrary and capricious, in violation of due process.  The ICA 
has had the opportunity to address the HPA’s manner of 
justifying its offender level designations in a recent decision 
authored by then Chief Judge Nakamura, Nichols v. State, 134 
Hawaiʻi 390, 341 P.3d 1190 (App. 2014).  In that case, the HPA 
set a prisoner’s offender level at Level III and set his minimum 
term of imprisonment at the maximum term, listing only the 
following “Significant Factors” as i ts written justification:  
“Nature of Offense” and “Degree of Injury to Person.”  134 
Hawaiʻi at 392, 341 P.3d at 1192.  The Nichols  court stated, 
“Where the HPA has taken the extraordinary action of setting the 
minimum term of imprisonment at the maximum term, thereby 
effectively eliminating the opportunity for parole, the HPA’s 
explanation of the reasons for its action, beyond simply listing 
the significant factors under the Guidelines, would assist the 
court in reviewing whether the HPA’s actions was arb itrary and 
capricious.”  Nichols, 134 Hawaiʻ i at 393, 341 P.3d at 1193.   
 In arriving at this statement, the Nichols  court favorably 
cited Hussein as an example of when this court has decided that 
the time had come to mandate, rather than merely recommend, a 
statement of reasons on the record for a sentencing decision.  
Nichols, 134 Hawai ʻi at 396- 97, 341 P.3d at 1196- 97.  The Nichols  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
33 
 court quoted this court’s discussion in Hussein that there was a 
dual purpose for requiring a statement of reasons:  first, to 
identify what facts and circumstances led to the sentencing 
decision in a way that would be meaningful to the defendant, the 
victim, and the public; and second, to confirm why  those facts 
and circumstances support the sentencing decision.  Id. (citing 
Hussein, 122 Hawai ʻi at 509- 10, 229 P.3d at 327- 28).  The Hussein 
court emphasized that reasons “confirm for the defendant, the 
victim, the public, and the appellate court” that the sentencing 
decision “was deliberate, rational, and fair.”  Nichols, 134 
Hawaiʻi at 397, 341 P.3d at 1197 (citing Hussein , 122 Hawaiʻi at 
509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-38).     
 Ultimately, however, the ICA stopped short of expressly 
requiring a statement of reasons from the HPA, because the 
record in Nichols’ case “provide[d] clear support for the HPA’s 
exercise of its discretion in fixing Nichols’ minimum terms 
under the Guidelines.”  Nichols, 134 Hawai ʻi at 393, 341 P.3d at 
1193.  The record reflected seventeen felony counts arising out 
of an assault, home invasion, and shooting, whe re Nichols’ 
victims were brutally attacked and permanently injured.  134 
Hawaiʻi at 393-94, 400, 341 P.3d at 1193- 94, 1200.     
 In Lewi’s case, it is questionable whether the record 
clearly supports the HPA’s finding that he acted with a “callous ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
34 
 and/or cruel disregard for the safety of others.”  Mauga 
confronted Lewi then reached into Lewi’s truck and punched Lewi 
in the head multiple times.  Lewi then brandished the shotgun 
(which he unlawfully stored in his truck) to scare Mauga off.  
There was a struggle, and the shotgun discharged, killing 
Mauga.  
It cannot be said that the record therefore clearly supports 
“cruel and/or callous disregard for the safety of others.”  We 
have previously noted that “Level III offenses are reserved for 
the most egregious co nduct.”  Fagaragan v. State, 132 Hawai ʻi 
224, 241, 320 P.3d 889, 906 (2014).  Here, Mauga was killed due 
to the reckless discharge of a weapon.  In the absence of a more 
detailed explanation from the HPA as to why a Level III 
designation is warranted in Le wi’s case, this court cannot fully 
perform its appellate review function and is left in doubt as to 
whether the HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously in setting 
Lewi’s offender level.  
 The HPA plays a critical role in our criminal justice 
system.  The Nichols court has previously recognized that, 
“[f]rom the standpoint of a criminal defendant, the HPA’s 
decision in setting the minimum term of imprisonment may be more 
important and significant than a trial court’s decision to 
impose the maximum indetermi
nate term or to impose a consecutive 
sentence.”  Nichols, 134 Hawai ʻi at 398, 341 P.3d at 1198.  
See 
also D’Ambrosio v. State , 112 Hawaiʻi 446, 464, 146 P.3d 606, 624 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
35 (continued. . .)  
 (App. 2006) (“In Hawai ʻi, the legi
slature has implemented a 
sentencing system that vests in the HPA significant 
discretionary power to determine felony imprisonment sentences . 
. . .  Under this arrangement, it is the HPA, not the courts, 
that exercises most of the State’s felony sentencing 
discretion.”).   We agree with these observations.  Th erefore, 
we now hold that the HPA is required to set forth a written 
justification or explanation (beyond simply an enumeration of 
any or all of the broad criteria considered) when it determines 
that the minimum term of imprisonment for the felony offender is 
to be set at a Level II or Level III punishment.21    
                     
21  We recognize that we announce a new rule in this case, and that we are 
“[f]ree to apply” this new rule “with or without retroactivity.”  State v. 
Jess, 117 Hawaiʻ i 381, 401, 184 P.3d 133, 153 (2008) (citation omitted).  This 
court has generally considered three primary alternatives in deciding to what 
degree a new rule is to have retroactive effect.  Id.  First, this court may 
give a new rule “purely prospective effect, which means that the rule is 
applied neither to the parties in the law -making decision nor to those others 
against or by whom it might be applied to conduct or events occurring before 
that decision.”  
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  
Second, this court may give a new rule “limited or ‘pipeline’ retroactive 
effect, under which the rule applies to the parties in the decision and all 
cases that are on direct review or not yet final as of the date of the 
decision.”  Id. (citations omitted).  Third, this court may give a new rule 
“full retroactive effect, under which the rule applies both to the parties 
before the court and to all others by and against whom claims may be 
pressed.”  Id.
 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  Lastly, 
this court has recognized a fourth alternative, in which a new rule is given 
“selective retroactive effect,” meaning the court applies the new rule “in 
the case in which it is pronounced, then return[s] to the old [rule] with 
respect
 to all [other cases] arising on facts predating the pronouncement.”  
117 Hawaiʻ i at 401 n.19, 184 P.3d at 153 n.19.  We have declined to apply this 
fourth alternative, as it “violates the principles of treating similarly 
situated defendants the same.”  Id
. (citations omitted).   
 In exercising our discretion in deciding the effect of a new rule, we 
“weigh the merits and demerits” of retroactive application of the particular 
rule in light of “(a) the purpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the extent 
of reliance by law enforcement authorities on the old standards, and (c) the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
36 
  We have previously noted the value of providing the 
Guidelines to offenders in preparation for minimum term hearings 
as follows:  “The importance of an offender being adequately 
informed of the appl
icable criteria cannot be overstated.  The 
determination of whether the offender is classified for Level II 
punishment as opposed to Level III punishment for a Class A 
felony is a potential difference of 10 years of incarceration 
based upon the range of pu nishment established by the HPA.”  
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
effect on the administration of justice of a retroactive application of the 
new standards.”  117 Hawai ʻi at 401- 02, 184 P.3d at 153 -54 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted).  Application of these factors counsels against 
selecting either a purely prospective or a full retroactive application of 
this new rule.  The first factor (the purpose of the newly announced rule) 
counsels against a purely prospective application of this new rule, as the 
purpose of the newly announced rule is to protect the defendant’s due process 
right to a fair minimum term decision.  We have previously recognized that 
retroactive application of a new rule would serve to “protect the very 
integrity of the fact- finding process.”  177 Hawai ʻi at 402, 184 P.3d at 154 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  On the other hand, the 
second factor (reliance by law enforcement on the old standards) counsels 
against a full retroactive application of this  new rule, as HPA has generally 
not provided justifications or explanations for its minimum term 
determinations, as there was no requirement to do so.  Compare, e.g.
, Jess, 
117 Hawaiʻ i at 402- 03, 184 P.3d at 154 -55 (concluding that the second factor 
counseled against full retroactive effect of a new rule requiring extended 
sentencing facts to be alleged in charging instruments, because prosecutors 
had long relied on prior case law prohibiting the allegation of such facts in 
charging instruments).  The third  factor (the effect on the administration of 
justice of the new standards) also counsels against a full retroactive 
application of this new rule, as a flood of HRPP Rule 40 petitions 
challenging HPA’s minimum term determinations is foreseeable, should this  
court impose full retroactive effect to its new rule.  Compare, e.g.
, Jess, 
117 Hawaiʻ i at 403, 184 P.3d at 155 (concluding that the third factor 
counseled against full retroactive effect of new rule, because “our courts 
would be inundated with HRPP Rule 40 (2006) petitions filed by defendants who 
were sentenced to extended terms from as long ago as 1978  . . . .”).   
   Therefore, on balance, in determining what degree of retroactivity to 
give the new rule, we choose the middle ground:  the second alternative, 
“limited” or “pipeline” retroactive effect.  Thus, the new rule is applied to 
the petitioner in this case, as well as to all cases that are on direct 
review or not yet final as of the date of this decision.           ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
37 
 Fagaragan, 132 Hawai ʻi at 242, 320 P.3d at 907 (footnote 
omitted).  We have also previously held that an offender has “a 
right to disclosure of adverse materials” in preparation for a 
minimum term hearing, so that “the in mate is given reasonable 
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on the issue of 
the minimum term.”  Id. (quoting De La Garza v. State, 129 
Hawaiʻi 429, 442, 302 P.3d 697, 710 (2013)).  Whether these due 
process measures meaningfully protect an off ender’s interest in 
a fair minimum term determination cannot be known when  the HPA 
provides no written justification or explanation of how it 
applied the criteria it used.  Transparency in HPA’s minimum 
term decision-making serves to confirm to the defendant, the 
victim, the public, and the appellate court that 
the 
determination was deliberate , rational, and fair. 
 In his concurrence and dissent in this case, Chief Judge 
Nakamura also indicated he would remand the case for a hearing 
on Lewi’s claim that HPA  acted arbitrarily and capriciously in 
maintaining Lewi’s level of punishment at Level III on Count 1 
(manslaughter) in its new minimum term decision.  Lewi , SDO at 6 
(Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting).  We agree with 
Chief Judge Nakamura that questions remain as to whether HPA 
adequately justified its Level III classification based on the 
“nature of offense,” as that required a showing that Lewi 
“displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
38 
 welfare of others.”  Lewi, SDO at 6 n.1 (Nakamura, C.J., 
concurring and dissenting) (quoting HPA Guidelines at 5).    
 The State suggests that Lewi file another Rule 40 petition 
challenging the new minimum term decision.  We agree with Chief 
Judge Nakamura, however, that under the circumstances of this 
case, rather than requiring Lewi to file another Rule 40 
petition to challenge the HPA’s new minimum term order, the case 
should be remanded for a hearing on whether the HPA acted 
arbitrarily and capriciously in continuing to classify Lewi as a 
Level III offender on his manslaughter conviction.   Lewi, SDO 
at 6 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting).22   
B. Lewi raises a colorable claim that the circuit court 
 provided inadequate reasons on the record for imposing 
 consecutive sentences. 
 
Finally, in his sixth claim, Lewi argues that the 
sentencing court did not provide sufficient justification on the 
record for imposing consecutive sentences.  He argues that the 
circuit court should have weighed his pro- social characteristics 
more heavily or should have expressly found him to be a danger 
to the community or a recidivism risk in order to justify the 
consecutive sentence. 
                     
22  We also note that Lewi argued for the first time on certiorari that 
“HPA denied [him] access to any adverse material PSI etc.,” contrary to his 
right to “all adverse material used to set his minimum and level of 
punishment.”  There is no evidence in the record to support Lewi’s claim.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
39 
 Chief Judge Nakamura, in his concurrence and dissent, also 
indicated that “the record reveals some uncertainty” as to 
whether the sentencing court adequately stated on the record its 
reasons for imposing consecutive sentences.  Lewi , SDO at 7 
(Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting).   We agree. 
 In Hussein, we held “that a court must state its reasons as 
to why a consecutive sentence rather than a concurrent one was 
required.”  Hussein, 122 Hawaiʻ i at 509,
 229 P.3d at 328.  Under 
HRS § 706-668.5(1), where a defendant is convicted of multiple 
offenses, there exists a presumption that “[m]ultiple terms of 
imprisonment run concurrently, unless the court orders or the 
[applicable] statute mandates that the term s run consecutively.”  
Again, the dual purposes behind the requirement that reasons be 
stated for a court’s imposition of a consecutive sentence are  to 
“(1) identify[] the facts or circumstances within the range of 
statutory factors that the court considered, and (2) confirm[] 
for the defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate 
court that the decision was deliberate, rational, and fair.”  
State v. Kong, 131 Hawaiʻi 94, 102-03, 315 P.3d 720, 728-29 
(2013).  In stating its reasoning, however, the sentencing court 
“is not required to articulate and explain its conclusions with ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
40 
 respect to every factor listed in HRS § 706- 606.[23]  Rather, ‘it 
is presumed that a sentencing court will have considered all 
factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of 
imprisonment under HRS § 706- 606.”  Kong, 131 Hawai ʻi at 102, 315 
P.3d at 720.  “Thus, a sentencing court is required to 
articulate its reasoning only with respect to those factors it 
relies on in imposing consecutive sentences.”  Id.       
 At the sentencing hearing, the circuit court stated the 
following: 
The question is whether the sentence – or the 
sentences are to run concurrently or consecutively.  It’s 
true there’s a presumption in favor of concurrent 
sentencing.  But what is of concern to the  Court is that 
you’re not supposed to have had the firearm in your truck 
to begin with.  Not supposed to have had a firearm in your 
possession, period.  Let alone a loaded shotgun on a public 
highway.  That possession in and of itself was an illegal 
act.  And after that you acted recklessly in allowing that 
firearm to go off and shoot Mr. Mauga.  
So based upon the seriousness of the offenses and the 
need for punishment and deterrence, consecutive sentence 
would be warranted.  
                     
23  HRS § 706- 606 (Supp. 1992) is  titled “Factor s to be considered in 
imposing a sentence.”  Those factors include the following:  
 (1)  The nature and circumstances of the offense and the 
history and characteristics of the defendant;  
      (2)  The need for  the sentence imposed:  
           (a)  To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote 
respect for law, and to provide just punishment for the 
offense; 
           (b)  To afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;  
           (c)  To protect the public from further crimes of the 
defendant; and  
           (d)  To provide the defendant with needed educational or 
vocational training, medical care, or other correctional 
treatment in the most effective manner;  
      (3)  The kinds of sentences available; and  
      (4)  The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities 
among defendants with similar records who have been found 
guilty of similar conduct.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
41 
 On the other hand, to your credit  you have a limited 
criminal history.  I have read the letters and seems that 
you have a strong prosocial character, yeah.  And you 
apparently are not – although there’s some arguments on the 
other side, didn’t seem as if you were a problem while out 
on bail.  And these factors favor concurrent sentencing.  
And regarding community protection, not sure how that 
cuts.  But balancing these considerations the Court 
believes that it’s appropriate to sentence you to a 25 -year 
indeterminate term, okay.  
 
We note that the record on appeal in this case contains only a 
partial transcript of Lewi’s sentencing hearing.   This portion 
of the transcript raises a question as to whether the circuit 
court adequately distinguished  between the need for a 25- year 
consecutive sentence versus the 20-year sentence Lewi would have 
received under the presumption of concurrent sentencing.     
 
As we are remanding this case to the circuit court for a 
Rule 40 hearing as to whether the HPA arbitrarily and 
capriciously maintained Lewi’s L evel of Punishment at Level III, 
Lewi may also amend his Rule 40 petition to include the claim 
that the circuit court did not adequately explain its decision 
to impose a consecutive sentence. 
V.  Conclusion 
 For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s Judgment on  Appeal is 
affirmed in part and vacated in part, and this case is remanded  
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
42 
 to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.   
Keith S. Shigetomi
 
for petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
   
     
Ricky R. Damerville and 
Suzanna L. Tiapula  
(with him on the briefs)
for respondent   
State of Hawaiʻ i  
 
 
 
     
Richard Stacey  
  
for respondent 
Hawaiʻi Paroling 
Authority  
