        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-29539 07-JUN-2013 10:42 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
SHILO WILLIS, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant, 
vs.
 
CRAIG SWAIN, FIRST INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAI' I, LTD.,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCWC-29539
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29539; CIV. NO. 01-1-0467)
 
June 7, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.,
WITH CIRCUIT JUDGE CHANG, ASSIGNED DUE TO VACANCY,
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold that (1) under the assigned claims procedure of 
the State of Hawai' i Insurance Joint Underwriting Program (JUP), 
see Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 431:10C-408 (Supp. 1998), 
the insurer assigned to a claim owes the same rights and 
obligations to the person whose claim is assigned to it as the insurer would owe to an insured to whom the insurer had issued a         
 
     
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
motor vehicle mandatory public liability and property insurance 
policy, HRS § 431:10C-403 (Supp. 1998); (2) the insurer’s good faith covenant implied in such motor vehicle policies applies to claimants under the assigned claim procedure irrespective of the absence of a written insurance policy; (3) accordingly, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant Shilo Willis (Petitioner), who was assigned by the JUP Bureau to Respondent/Defendant-Appellee First Insurance Company of Hawai' i, Ltd. (Respondent) under the 
assigned claim procedure, was owed a duty of good faith by Respondent; and (4) whether Respondent acted in bad faith in this case as alleged by Petitioner is a question of fact to be determined by the trier of fact. Therefore, we vacate the December 11, 2008 Final Judgment of the Circuit Court of the 
1
First Circuit (the court)  and the March 9, 2012 judgment of the
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) filed pursuant to its
 February 3, 2012 published opinion in Willis v. Swain, 126
 
2
Hawai'i 312, 270 P.3d 1042 (App. 2012) (Willis III),  affirming
the court, because both reflect holdings to the contrary. We remand this case to the court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
I.
 
On February 10, 1999, Petitioner was a passenger in an
 
uninsured vehicle that rear-ended another vehicle. The uninsured
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
2
 The opinion was filed by Chief Judge Craig H. Nakamura, and
 
Associate Judges Katherine G. Leonard and Lisa M. Ginoza.
 
2
         
          
             
       
         
      
        
        
        
        
   
       
        
       
       
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
vehicle was owned and operated by Craig Swain. At the time of 
the accident, Petitioner, a public assistance recipient, owned her own vehicle, and had a certificate policy issued by the State of Hawai' i Department of Human Services (DHS) through its JUP. 
Respondent was designated to adjust the certificate policy. 
The certificate policy was in effect from July 2, 1998 
through July 2, 1999, but did not include uninsured motorist coverage. Petitioner sought medical treatment for injuries resulting from the collision. Willis v. Swain, 112 Hawai' i 184, 
187 n.6, 145 P.3d 727, 730 n.6 (2006) (Willis I).
3 On July 21, 
1999, Petitioner applied for assigned claims coverage under the 
4
JUP. On August 11, 1999, the JUP Bureau  determined that
Petitioner was entitled to receive benefits available under JUP,
 and assigned Petitioner’s claim to Respondent. On December 28,
 1999, Respondent denied Petitioner’s request for coverage on the
 ground that, at the time of the accident, Petitioner had a 
3 It appears that, as a recipient of public assistance, at least 
some of Petitioner’s medical expenses were paid by DHS. Willis I , 112 Hawai 'i 
at 187 n.6, 145 P.3d at 730 n.6. 
4 The Joint Underwriting Plan Bureau is established pursuant to HRS
 
§ 431:10C-402 (1993), which provides:
 
§ 431:10C-402. Bureau. (a) The commissioner shall
establish and maintain a joint underwriting plan bureau in
the insurance division to receive, assign and supervise the
servicing of all assigned claims and all applications for
joint underwriting plan coverage.
(b) The commissioner shall adopt regulations for the
operation of the bureau, the assignment of applications for
joint underwriting plan coverage and assigned claims , and
the inspection, supervision and maintenance of this service
on a fair and equitable basis in accordance with this
article.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
3
         
 
            
           
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
certificate policy and that policy did not include uninsured
 
motorist coverage.
 
On February 9, 2001, Petitioner sued Respondent for 
breach of contract, bad faith refusal to pay liability coverage, misrepresentation, unfair claims practices, and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in violation of HRS § 480-2 (1993).
5 
On May 6, 2003, the court entered summary judgment in favor of Respondent with respect to all of Petitioner’s claims. This court reversed and remanded for Respondent to “tender the appropriate benefits under the assigned claims program.” Willis 
I, 112 Hawai' i at 191, 145 P.3d at 734. Respondent paid 
Petitioner the bodily injury liability policy limit of $20,000. 
Subsequently, Petitioner requested attorneys’ fees and 
costs as the prevailing party in Willis I. Willis v. Swain, 113 
Hawai'i 246, 151 P.3d 727 (2006) (Willis II). This court held 
that Petitioner was not entitled to attorneys’ fees, but that she should be awarded costs. Id. at 250, 151 P.3d at 731. 
On June 8, 2007, Petitioner filed a motion to compel
 
Respondent to answer Petitioner’s interrogatories, and to respond
 to Petitioner’s requests for production of documents. On June
 28, 2007, Respondent moved for summary judgment with respect to
 Petitioner’s remaining claims for breach of contract, bad faith,
 misrepresentation, unfair claims practices, and unfair or
 
5
 Petitioner did not raise the HRS § 480-2 claim in her appeal to
 
the ICA or in her Application for Writ of Certiorari (Application), and
therefore this statute is not relevant to this appeal and is not quoted.
 
4
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
deceptive acts or practices in violation of HRS § 480-2. 
Petitioner did not move for summary judgment, but filed an
 opposition to Respondent’s motion. 
As to Petitioner’s bad faith claim, Respondent argued, 
in relevant part, that under Hawai' i law there is no bad faith if 
an insurance company denies benefits based on a reasonable interpretation of the policy or based on an open question of law. Respondent contended that the fact that the court had previously granted summary judgment to it on the merits of Petitioner’s claim for benefits (a decision ultimately reversed in Willis I) demonstrated that there was reasonable disagreement over the interpretation of the law as applied to the facts of this case. Thus, Respondent urged, there was an open question of law and Petitioner had no basis to pursue its bad faith claim. 
Petitioner answered that whether Respondent had acted
 
unreasonably was a question of fact, and as such, was not the
 proper subject of a motion for summary judgment. Petitioner also
 argued that if an insurer honestly believes that its policy does
 not provide coverage, it must bear the risk of making the wrong
 judgment. Petitioner noted that this court in Willis I had
 criticized Respondent’s argument, calling it “absurd,” and thus,
 whether Respondent acted reasonably when it denied benefits on an
 irrational argument was a question of fact that precluded summary
 judgment.
 Additionally, Petitioner argued that because
 
Respondent had not answered some of Petitioner’s interrogatories,
 
5
         
         
      
       
 
           
     
       
       
         
       
      
       
      
         
      
        
        
         
         
       
       
        
         
          
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
produced requested documents, or allowed Petitioner to depose its
 
claims adjusters, Petitioner’s expert, a former adjuster for the
 JUP program for another insurance company, was unable to fully
 evaluate whether Respondent had denied coverage in bad faith. 
However, the expert averred in an affidavit submitted along with
 Petitioner’s opposition, that according to his reading of Willis
 I and the practice of the insurance industry, Respondent had
 unreasonably denied coverage to Petitioner.
 
On August 20, 2007, Respondent filed supplemental
 
memorandum in support of its motion for summary judgment, and
 Petitioner filed a supplemental memorandum in opposition to the
 motion for summary judgment. Attached to Petitioner’s Reply to
 Respondent’s Supplemental Legal Memorandum was another affidavit
 from Petitioner’s expert. In the affidavit, Petitioner’s expert
 averred: 
1. I reviewed the documents which were produced to
[Petitioner] in response to [Petitioner’s] request for
production of documents relating to [Respondent’s] denial of
benefits.
 
2. Based on the review of the above documents, it is
my professional opinion that [Respondent] unreasonably
denied the JUP assigned claim benefits to [Petitioner].
3. [Respondent] unreasonably denied the JUP assigned
claim benefits because it did not, among other things, have
any legal basis to deny said benefits.
4. The above-referenced records produced by
[Respondent] also do not show that a sufficient
investigation was undertaken by [Respondent] in connection
to its denial of the JUP assigned claim benefits.
5. [Respondent] unreasonably and wrongfully denied
the assigned claim when it unilaterally confused the purpose
and application of a certificate policy and an assigned
claim, which are separate and apart from one another.
6. Within the insurance industry and community, it is
common knowledge and understood that a certificate policy
does not negate a JUP assigned claim.
7. [Respondent] owed [Petitioner] a duty of good
faith and fair dealing, as the insurance company who wasassigned to adjust the JUP assigned claim by the State ofHawai'i under the [JUP]. 
6
         
         
        
       
      
        
        
          
        
  
         
        
       
         
      
      
      
       
        
        
        
         
         
       
        
       
     
      
        
         
           
           
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8. To the extent that the JUP assigned claims,
essentially, operates as an insurance relief measure and is
a substitute to the mandated automobile bodily injurycoverage requirements of the State of Hawai 'i,
[Respondent’s] duty of good faith and fair dealing arisesfrom [Respondent’s] assigned role as a servicing carrier andan insurer under the [JUP], and as such does not depend,
necessarily, on whether [Petitioner] was a party to anywritten contract. 
9. [Respondent breached its duty of good faith and
fair dealing when when [sic] it unreasonably and wrongfully
denied [Petitioner] the JUP assigned claim benefits.
10. The above opinions are preliminary and subject to
change whenever further documents are produced by
[Respondent] and/or other facts are developed through
further discovery in the underlying lawsuit against
[Respondent].
 
(Emphases added.) 
On October 3, 2007, the court granted Respondent’s
 
motion, concluding, in relevant part, that there was no contract
 
of insurance between Petitioner and Respondent, and thus, there
 could be no cognizable claim of bad faith in the absence of a
 contract. The court further concluded that the published opinion
 of this court in Willis I settled an open question of law and
 therefore pursuant to Enoka v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 109 Hawai' i 
537, 128 P.3d 850 (2006), there was no bad faith on Respondent’s
 part.
6 The court also granted Respondent’s motion for summary
 
6 The court’s order stated, in relevant part:
 
It is undisputed that [Respondent] has paid all benefits
that [Petitioner] is entitled to recover as an assigned
claims claimant under the [JUP] pursuant to and in
compliance with the Supreme Court’s opinion in this case.
By this Order this Court hereby grants summary judgment in
favor of [Respondent] and against [Petitioner] with respect
to all remaining claims alleged against [Respondent] in this
action, including, without limitation, any claim for breach
of contract, misrepresentation, negligent or intentional
infliction of emotional distress, unfair claims practices,
unfair or deceptive acts [or] practices in violation of
[HRS] §480-2 or bad faith. With respect to [Petitioner’s]
bad faith claim this Court concludes as a matter of law that
 there is no cognizable claim for bad faith in the absence of
a contract. This Court further finds that the published
(continued...)
 
7
         
          
         
      
          
           
  
 
          
             
       
             
                 
            
              
          
          
           
           
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
judgment with respect to the remainder of Petitioner’s claims. 
Upon granting Respondent’s motion for summary judgment, the court
 held that Petitioner’s motion to compel was moot and denied it.
 
II. 
7
On Petitioner’s appeal to the ICA,  the ICA held that
an underlying insurance contract was required in order to assert
 a claim of bad faith against an insurer, and because Petitioner’s
 claims did not arise from an insurance contract, the court did
 not err in granting summary judgment on Petitioner’s bad faith
 claim.
8 Willis III, 126 Hawai' i at 315-17, 270 P.3d at 1045-47. 
In light of that holding, the ICA declined to address whether the
 court erred in concluding that Respondent did not act in bad
 faith. Id. The ICA also concluded that in light of its holding
 
that no bad faith claim could lie against Respondent, the court 
6(...continued)
opinion of the Hawai 'i Supreme Court in this case settled an
open question of law and therefore pursuant to the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court’s opinion under analogous circumstances in
Enoka v. AIG Hawai 'i Ins. Co., Inc., 109 Hawai 'i 537, 128
P.3d 850 (2006), there was no bad faith on the part of[Respondent]. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7 Petitioner expressly stated in her opening brief to the ICA that 
she was not appealing the court’s decision to dismiss her claims for breach ofcontract, misrepresentation, and unfair claims practices. Petitioner mentioned her emotional distress claim to the ICA in her points of error, butdid not make any argument to the ICA as to that claim. As a result, the ICAheld that any argument regarding the court’s dismissal of such a claim hadbeen waived. Willis III , 126 Hawai 'i at 314, 270 P.3d at 1044. Petitioner 
does not take issue with that holding in her Application. 
8
 In addition, Petitioner argued that she could bring a bad faith
 
claim against Respondent because she was an intended beneficiary of the JUP
program. Petitioner does not assert this theory in her Application, and
therefore this theory is not addressed further.
 
8
         
        
            
      
        
          
         
       
     
      
         
        
        
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
properly denied Petitioner’s motion to compel. Willis III, 126 
Hawai'i at 317, 270 P.3d at 1047. 
III. 
Petitioner presents the following questions in her
 
Application: 
[1.] Whether the ICA correctly decided that [Respondent]
did not owe a duty of good faith in the absence of a
contractual relationship when HRS § 431:10C-403 specificallyand clearly states that an assignee insurance company hasthe same obligations as though it had sold the policy.[2.] Whether [Respondent] owed [Petitioner] a duty of goodfaith pursuant to its insurer and insured relationshipregardless whether [Petitioner] purchased a conventionalmotor vehicle insurance policy from [Respondent].[3.] Whether it is rational to exempt Hawai 'i insurance 
companies from acting in good faith when adjusting [JUP]assigned claims when they have an independent duty impliedin law to act in good faith as fiduciaries with theirinsureds. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
IV. 
In 1973, Hawai' i overhauled its insurance law and 
created a no-fault insurance scheme to govern motor vehicle 
accident reparations. Chapter 294 was enacted in order to “create a system of reparations for accidental harm and arising from motor vehicle accidents, to compensate these damages without regard to fault, and to limit tort liability for these accidents.” HRS § 294-1(a) (1974). According to the legislature, the “system of no-fault insurance can only be truly effective . . . if all drivers participate at least to the extent required by law” HRS § 294-1(b) (1974). For those persons “truly economically unable to afford insurance, the legislature 
9
         
        
      
        
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
. . . provided for them under the public assistance provisions of
 
[Chapter 294].” Id. 
In 1974, the public assistance provisions of the plan, 
located in HRS §§ 294-20 through -23, were repealed and replaced with the JUP, HRS §§ 294-20 to -24 (1974). The JUP plan required all insurers authorized to write insurance in Hawai' i to maintain 
membership in the plan. HRS § 294-20. The insurance commissioner was required to establish classifications of eligible persons for whom the JUP would provide no-fault policies and any additional coverage. HRS § 294-22. 
In 1987, Hawaii’s motor vehicle insurance law was again
 
overhauled with the repeal of Chapter 294 and enactment of
 Article 10C of Chapter 431. The purpose of Article 10C was to 
(1) Create a system of reparations for accidental harm and
loss arising from motor vehicle accidents;
(2) Compensate these damages without regard to fault; and
 
(3) Limit tort liability for these accidents.
 
HRS § 431:10C-102 (Supp. 1997). To encourage participation by
 
all drivers, uninsured drivers were dealt with more severely in
 criminal and civil areas, and those who were unable to afford
 insurance were provided for under the JUP. Id. 
The JUP was incorporated into Article 10C under HRS §§
 
431:10C-401 through -412. The JUP has two options for coverage. 
The first allows individuals to obtain certificate policies, HRS
 § 431:10C-407 (Supp. 1999), which are “intended to provide motor
 vehicle insurance and optional additional insurance in a 
10
         
      
           
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
convenient and expeditious manner for . . . persons who otherwise 
are in good faith entitled to, but unable to obtain, motor vehicle insurance through ordinary methods.” Hawai' i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 16-23-67(a) (1999). The second, the “assigned claims” program, allows individuals to obtain coverage even if they do not have a certificate policy. HRS § 431:10C­408. The assigned claims program “consists of the assignment . .
 
. of claims of victims for whom no policy is applicable, such as
 the hit-and-run victim who is not covered by a motor vehicle
 insurance policy.” HAR § 16-23-67(b). 
For certificate policies, the DHS must provide a
 
certificate of eligibility for JUP coverage to eligible licensed
 drivers and unlicensed permanently disabled individuals unable to
 operate their motor vehicle, who are receiving public assistance
 and who desire basic motor vehicle insurance coverage under the
 JUP.
9 HAR § 16-23-73(a) (1999). The applicant then submits the
 
certificate to the servicing carrier of the applicant’s choice
 for a motor vehicle insurance policy. Id. Certificates received
 
by the servicing carrier within thirty days from the date of
 certification eligibility by DHS “shall be accepted and treated
 as if it were payment in full” for a policy. Id. The servicing
 
carrier must then “certify this certificate which will function 
9
 These licensed drivers and unlicensed permanently disabled
 
individuals unable to operate their motor vehicle must be the sole registered
owners of the motor vehicles to be insured under the JUP. HAR § 16-23-73(a).
 
11
         
      
       
      
     
      
       
           
        
 
  
      
      
        
       
        
          
         
        
         
        
       
          
         
        
       
        
        
       
         
        
         
                ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as a motor vehicle insurance policy and issue the applicant a
 
motor vehicle insurance identification card.”10 Id. 
In contrast, under the assigned claims program “a
 
person sustaining accidental harm, or such a person’s legal
 representative,” (except as provided in another subsection) may
 obtain motor vehicle insurance benefits through the plan
 whenever: 
(1) No insurance benefits under motor vehicle insurance
 
policies are applicable to the accidental harm;
(2) No such insurance benefits applicable to the
accidental harm can be identified; or
(3) The only identifiable insurance benefits under motor
vehicle insurance policies applicable to the accidental harm
will not be paid in full because of financial inability of
one or more self-insurers or insurers to fulfill their
 obligations.
 
HRS § 431:10C-408(a).11
 
Insurers operating in Hawai' i are required to 
participate in the JUP (with some exceptions). HAR § 16-23-68(a)
 
10 The rest of HAR § 16-23-73 provides:
 
The servicing carrier shall develop the information
necessary to validate the eligibility of the applicant.
Only basic motor vehicle insurance policy coverages, as
defined in sections 16-23-4, 16-23-5, and 16-23-9, shall be
bound, and the effective date of coverage shall be the same
date as the signature date on the certificate by the
applicant; however, the effective date shall not precede the
time and date of the certification of eligibility by the
state department of human services, the date that the
servicing carrier receives the certificate, or the second
day after postmark, whichever is later. In the event that
 the applicant fails to date the certificate, the date that
the servicing carrier receives the certificate or the second
day after postmark, whichever is earlier, shall be
considered the date the applicant signed the certificate.
The servicing carrier shall promptly notify the director of
human services of public assistance recipients which it
insures.
 
11
 In 2001, HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1) was amended by adding the
 
following underscored language: “(1) No liability or uninsured motorist
insurance benefits under motor vehicle insurance policies are applicable to
the accidental harm . . . .” The amendment is not material to this dispute.
 
12
          
          
        
         
            
         
          
       
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(1999). Under the program, insurers “pool their losses and bona
 
fide expenses . . . to prevent the imposition of any inordinate
 burden on any particular insurer.” HAR § 16-23-68(a). “All
 costs incurred in the operation of the [JUP], such as
 administrative, staff, and claims (other than assigned claims)
 paid, shall be allocated fairly and equitably among the JUP
 members.” HAR § 16-23-70 (1999). Losses and expenses “under the
 assigned claims program are pro-rated among and shared by all
 motor vehicle insurers and self-insurers.” HAR § 16-23-67(b). 
Every year, the commissioner “prorate[s] among and assess[es] all
 insurers and self-insurers all costs and claims paid under the
 assigned claims program.” HAR § 16-23-85 (1999). 
The JUP also specifies the duties of insurers
 
participating in the program. Under HRS § 431:10C-403, the JUP
 Bureau “shall promptly assign each claim and application, and
 notify the claimant or applicant” of the identity of the assignee
 insurer. (Emphasis added.) Importantly, 
[t]he assignee, thereafter, has rights and obligations as if it had
issued motor vehicle mandatory public liability and property damage
policies complying with this article applicable to the accidental harm
or other damage , or, in the case of financial inability of a motor
vehicle insurer or self-insurer to perform its obligations, to perform
its obligations as if the assignee had written the applicable motor
vehicle insurance policy, undertaken the self-insurance, or lawfully
obligated itself to pay motor vehicle insurance benefits.
 
Id. (emphasis added). 
V. 
The law of insurance fits largely within two domains. 
1 New Appleman on Insurance Law Library Edition § 1.04 (Jeffrey
 
E. Thomas, ed., 2011) (hereinafter Appleman). The first involves
 
13
         
         
       
        
        
        
        
         
        
       
        
         
       
          
        
        
          
         
          
        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the regulation of insurers, and is generally accomplished through
 
statutes enacted by state legislatures and administrative
 regulations issued by state agencies. Id. The second involves
 
regulation of the insured-insurer relationship, and for the most
 part consists of judicially-articulated rules. Id. This latter
 
realm of insurance law largely overlaps with contract law because
 the insurance arrangement is usually articulated in a contract. 
Id. However, even if insurance law is generally understood as a
 
specialized application of contract law, other bodies of law are
 also pertinent to its application. Id. Doctrines developed in
 
contract law to facilitate the formation of agreements between
 parties negotiating at arms length have been adapted and expanded
 by incorporating principles from other areas of law in order to
 regulate the special relationship between policyholders and
 insurers.
12 See id. Thus, “tort law as expressed through the
 
12 For example, as explained in Appleman § 5.01:
 
Courts interpreting insurance policies often start from the
premise that an insurance policy is a contract, and
therefore the rules of contract interpretation apply. While
 at first blush this axiom seems true enough, insurance
policies do not fit the traditional contract model very
well. For example, the traditional contract model is not
very helpful when it comes to the question of
interpretation. Insureds do not generally have sufficient
control or information to develop a specific intention about
what is covered by their policy. Insurance policies are
almost always standardized forms offered on a take-it-or­leave-it basis. As a result the assumption that a court
engaged in the interpretation of an insurance policy will
determine the “intention” of the parties when they “made”
 the contract is a fiction. While courts say they are
looking for the intention of the parties, in reality they
are making a judgment about the scope of coverage based on
the text of the policy, the circumstances, and public
policy[.]
 
(continued...)
 
14
         
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
law of bad faith is highly relevant to the regulation of the
 
insurer-insured relationship.” Id. 
VI. 
Broadly speaking, in first-party insurance, “the
 
contract between the insurer and the insured indemnifies the
 insured for a loss suffered directly by the insured.” Appleman §
 
1.08[3]. Proceeds are paid to the insured to redress the
 insured’s loss. Id. Liability insurance, on the other hand, is
 
described as third-party insurance because the interests
 protected by the policy are ultimately those of third parties
 injured by the insured’s conduct. Id. For example, if the
 
insured negligently insures a third party, the third party will
 possess a claim against the insured. Id. If the claim is
 
reduced to a judgment, the insured will suffer a loss. Id. The
 
liability insurer will reimburse the insured for any liability
 the insured may have to the third party, but in the event of
 payment, the insured simply transfers the proceeds from the
 insurer to the third party. Id. 
One kind of insurance that appears to straddle the
 
first-party and third-party categories is uninsured motorist
 insurance. Id. As Appleman explains, after states began to
 
require that operators of automobiles carry liability insurance
 for the purpose of compensating the victims of automobile
 
12(...continued)
(Emphases added.)
 
15
         
   
        
           
           
           
           
            
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
accidents, “it became apparent that no mandatory system of
 
liability insurance could compensate all of the situations in
 which persons were injured in vehicular accidents.” This led
 insurers to market uninsured motorist coverage, “which is
 essentially a first-party coverage where the insurer’s obligation
 is defined by the scope of a third party’s obligation to its own
 insured.” Id. (emphasis added). In other words, under uninsured
 
motorist coverage, the insured pays a premium to his own insurer
 for coverage in the event a financially irresponsible or unknown
 person is legally responsible for the insured’s injury. Id. 
The assigned claims plan under JUP, which, as noted,
 
allows persons to procure coverage when (1) no benefits are
 applicable to the accidental harm; (2) no benefits applicable to
 the harm can be identified; and (3) the only identifiable
 benefits will not be paid in full because of the financial
 inability of the insurer to fulfill its obligations, HRS §
 431:10C-408(a), essentially fulfils the same goals as first-party
 uninsured motorist coverage.
13
 
VII. 
In Best Place, Inc. v. Penn America Insurance Co., 82 
Hawai'i 120, 920 P.2d 334 (1996), this court first recognized the 
tort of bad faith refusal to pay a valid insurance claim in the 
13
 This opinion concerns provisions relating to no fault insurance
 
provisions under Chapter 431:10C relating to Motor Vehicle Insurance. It does
 
not pertain to other statutory relationships, dissenting opinion at 3 n.3, or
the “family law area[,]” dissenting opinion at 22 n.16, as the dissent
suggests, and following the precepts of precedent would not afford a harbor
for “zealous advocate,” as the dissent suggests. Dissenting opinion at 3 n.3,
 12 n.11.
 
16
         
          
              
              
           
            
           
        
            
             
            
             
           
                
              
     
       
         
        
       
         
       
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
first-party insurance context. In that case, the insured, Best
 
Place, insured a nightclub under a policy issued by Penn America. 
Id. A fire broke out and destroyed the nightclub. Id. Penn
 
America suspected arson and refused to pay the proceeds that
 would have been due under the policy. Id. Best Place sued Penn
 
America, alleging breach of contract and tortious breach of the
 implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Id. 
Best Place considered whether Hawai' i would allow a 
tort claim for bad faith against an insurer.
14 Id. According to
 
this court, the Hawai' i legislature had recognized that the 
insurance industry affects the public interest, and, therefore,
 insurers are obligated to act in good faith. Id. at 125-26, 920
 
P.2d at 338-40 (citing HRS § 431:1-102 (1993)).
15 The duty to
 
act in good faith was consistent with other statutory provisions
 
14 In Best Place , this court looked to California decisions that “led 
the way in the modern development of the bad faith cause of action for insurer
misconduct.” Best Place , 82 Hawai 'i at 127, 920 P.2d at 341. This court 
noted that the Supreme Court of California’s decision in Gruenberg v. Aetna
Ins. Co. , 510 P.2d 1032 (Cal. 1973), “established that the defendant’s duty of
good faith and fair dealing, implied by law, is unconditional and independentof the performance of plaintiff’s contractual obligations,” and that 
“insurance companies owe an absolute duty of good faith and fair dealing to
their insureds.” Best Place , 82 Hawai 'i at 128; 920 P.2d at 342 (citing
Gruenberg , 510 P.2d at 1040) (emphasis in original). In Gruenberg it was
established that when an insurer fails to deal fairly and in good faith with
its insured “by refusing, without proper cause, to compensate its insured for
a loss covered by the policy , such conduct may give rise to a cause of action
in tort for breach of an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.”
510 P.2d at 1037. 
15
 HRS § 431:1-102 provides in relevant part:
 
The business of insurance is one affected by the public
interest, requiring that all persons be actuated by good
faith, abstain from deception and practice honesty and
equity in all insurance matters. Upon the insurer, the
insured and their representatives rests the duty of
preserving inviolate the integrity of insurance.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
17
         
      
        
        
       
   
          
          
         
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that contemplated a cause of action for insurer bad faith. Id.
 
at 126, 920 P.2d at 340. For example, in the no-fault insurance
 
16
 context, HRS § 431:10C-315 (1993)  sets forth the applicable
statute of limitations for a bad faith cause of action against an insurer. Best Place, 82 Hawai' i at 126, 920 P.2d at 340. 
This court held that there was a legal duty, implied in
 
first and third-party insurance contracts, requiring the insurer
 to act in good faith in dealing with insureds, and a breach of
 that duty of good faith gave rise to an independent cause of
 action in tort. Id. at 131-32, 920 P.2d at 345-46. Although
 
repeatedly alluding to the existence of a contractual
 relationship between the insurer and insured, this court grounded
 bad faith tort claims on the special relationship between
 insurers and their insureds. See id. It was reasoned that the
 
tort of bad faith is not merely a tortious breach of contract,
 “but rather a separate and distinct wrong ‘which results from the
 breach of a duty imposed as a consequence of the relationship
 established by contract.’” Id. at 131, 920 P.2d at 345 (citation
 
omitted) (emphasis added). Hence, there were sound reasons “for
 
16 HRS § 431:10C-315 provides in relevant part:
 
Statute of limitations. (a) No suit shall be brought
on any contract providing no-fault benefits or any contract
providing optional coverage more than, the later of
 . . . .
 
(4) Two years after the entry of a final judgment in,
or dismissal with prejudice of, a tort action arising out of
a motor vehicle accident, where a cause of action for
insurer bad faith arises out of the tort action.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
18
         
        
         
          
        
       
         
       
       
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
recognizing a cause of action in tort for breach of the implied
 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the insurance
 context.” Id. at 132, 920 P.2d at 346. Specifically, the
 
special relationship between insurer and insured was “atypical,
 and the adhesionary aspects of an insurance contract . . .
 justif[ied] the availability of tort recovery.” Id. Finally, a
 
bad faith cause of action would provide the necessary
 compensation to the insured for all damages suffered as a result
 of insurer misconduct. Id. Without the threat of a tort action,
 
insurance companies had “very little incentive to promptly pay
 proceeds rightfully due to their insureds, as they stand to lose
 very little by denying payment.” Id. 
VIII. 
The reasoning articulated in Best Place supports
 
Petitioner’s contention that she can pursue a bad faith tort
 claim in connection with her assigned claim. To begin, the
 legislature incorporated specific language in the JUP statutes
 concerning the rights and obligations of insurers under the JUP. 
As noted, in HRS § 431:10C-403, the legislature stated:
 
The bureau shall promptly assign each claim and application,
and notify the claimant or applicant of the identity and
address of the assignee of the claim or application. Claims
 and applications shall be assigned so as to minimize
inconvenience to claimants and applicants. The assignee,
thereafter, has rights and obligations as if it had issued
motor vehicle mandatory public liability and property damage
policies complying with this article applicable to the
accidental harm or other damage . . . 
.
 
The first two sentences prescribe the process that the
 
JUP Bureau must follow. But the language that follows sets
 
19
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
forth, not the JUP Bureau’s responsibilities, but those of the 
servicing carrier. Inasmuch as HRS § 431:10C-403 imposes obligations on the insurer as if it had issued a motor vehicle policy, the statute establishes a relationship between the insurer and the assigned claimant that is akin to a contract. As such, the underlying covenant of good faith and fair dealing applies, even in the absence of an actual contract. In other words, the legislature imposed a duty of good faith and fair dealing on insurers handling assigned claims by equating the relationship between an insurer and an assigned claimant to the contractual relationship between an insurer and an insured. This legislative goal is also manifest in HRS § 431:1-102. Best 
Place, 82 Hawai' i at 125-26, 920 P.2d at 339-40 (“The Hawai' i 
[l]egislature has recognized that the insurance industry affects the public interest, and, therefore, insurers are obligated to act in good faith.”) (citing HRS § 431:1-102). The legal basis for imposing a duty of good faith and fair dealing on insurers is thus set forth by statute. Consequently, by virtue of HRS § 431:10C-403, an insurer’s “obligations” would include dealing with the insured in good faith. 
When construing a statute, the foremost obligation of 
this court is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. State v. Reis, 
115 Hawai' i 79, 84, 165 P.3d 980, 985 (2007). This court reads 
the “statutory language in the context of the entire statute and 
20
         
  
       
           
           
            
            
            
        
             
          
           
             
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
construe[s] it in a manner consistent with its purpose.”17 Id. 
Since an insurer’s obligations toward an insured include a duty 
to act in good faith, see Best Place, 82 Hawai' i at 125-26, 920 
P.2d at 339-40 (citing HRS § 431:1-102), the insurer’s “rights and obligations” under the JUP must necessarily incorporate a duty of good faith toward the person whose claim has been assigned to the insurer. For all intents and purposes, that person becomes an “insured” once his or her claim has been assigned to the insurer.
18 
IX.
 
The differences in statutory language applicable to the
 
certificate policy program and the assigned claims program, i.e.,
 that a certificate policy is “deemed a policy” for purposes of
 the statute, while insurers who service assigned claims have
 “rights and obligations as if [they] had issued motor vehicle
 mandatory public liability and property damage policies[,]” do
 not reflect an intent by the legislature to impose a duty of good
 faith on the former category of insurers, but not the latter. To
 the contrary, the different language reflects the fact that the
 
17 Accordingly, “policy-making” is not involved, as the dissent 
contends, dissenting opinion at 8-9 n.8, inasmuch as this court applies the
plain language of the statute. Dejetley v. Kaho 'ohalahala , 122 Hawai 'i 251, 
262, 226 P.3d 421, 432 (2010). The dissent’s assertion that the legislaturedid not expressly deem an assigned claim to include a contract, see dissenting
opinion at 10-11 n.10, 21-24, is negated by the express provisions of thereferenced interrelated statutes, which plainly express a legislative policy
by which this court, in the exercise of its interpretive role, must be guided. 
18
 That “[t]he parties have not cited” to similar “cases from any
 
jurisdiction,” see dissenting opinion at 4 n.6, is not a valid objection
inasmuch as the dissent cites to no contrary case and, here, we interpret a
particular statute from our jurisdiction.
 
21
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
two programs deal with factually different circumstances. The
 
certificate program establishes a mechanism under which drivers
 who cannot afford insurance are provided coverage so that they
 can lawfully operate motor vehicles. See HRS §§ 431:10C-104(a)
 
and (b) (Supp. 1997); HAR § 16-23-73(a). HRS § 431:10C-104(a)
 provides in relevant part, that “no person shall operate or use a
 motor vehicle upon any public street, road, or highway of this
 State at any time unless such motor vehicle is insured at all
 times under a motor vehicle insurance policy.” (Emphasis added.) 
HRS § 431:10C-104(b) provides, “Every owner of a motor vehicle
 used or operated at any time upon any public street, road, or
 highway of the State shall obtain a motor vehicle insurance
 policy upon such vehicle which provides the coverage required by
 this article and shall maintain the motor vehicle insurance
 policy at all times for the entire motor vehicle registration
 period.” See also HRS § 431:10C-103 (Supp. 1998) (“‘Motor
 
vehicle insurance policy’ means an insurance policy that meets
 the requirements of [HRS §] 431:10C-301.”); HRS § 431:10C-301
 (Supp. 1998) (setting forth the required insurance policy
 coverage for a motor vehicle). Accordingly, it is reasonable to
 refer to those individuals under the certificate program as
 having a “policy,” which satisfies the requirements of the no
 fault law.
 
In contrast, the assigned claims program addresses a
 
different category of persons, i.e., individuals who have already
 been involved in an accident, and whose entitlement to lawfully
 
22
         
        
              
             
           
           
          
            
          
            
           
          
           
            
          
          
           
             
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
operate a motor vehicle in the future is not at issue. See HRS §
 
431:10C-408(a) (determining that benefits under the assigned
 
claims program are applicable to “[e]ach person sustaining an
 accidental harm, or such person’s legal representative”); see
 also HAR § 16-23-67(b) (“Another part of the JUP consists of the
 assignment thereto of claims of victims for whom no policy is
 applicable, such as the hit-and-run victim who is not covered by
 a motor vehicle insurance policy.”). Rather, the question is
 whether the claimant will be covered for an accident that has
 already occurred. HRS § 431:10C-408(a). The language employed
 by the legislature -- that the insurer assigned to handle such
 claims has the same rights and obligations as if it had issued a
 policy -- appropriately addresses that differing context and
 reflects a clear legislative intent that such claimants are
 entitled to the same protections as policyholders, including
 having their claim considered in good faith.
19
 
19 Consequently, HRS § 431:10C-403 deems that an assigned claim
 
claimant is to be treated as if the assignee had issued the claimant a “motor
 
vehicle . . . polic[y][.]” Further, as confirmed in HRS § 431:1-102, the
relationship is imbued with a good faith obligation, inasmuch as in the
business of insurance, all persons are “requir[ed]” to be “actuated by good
 faith[.]” Accordingly, the existence of an “actual contract of insurance,”
 dissenting opinion at 7, is not required. Also, contrary to the dissent’s
 position, see dissenting opinion at 8, the “express” reference to “policy,”
like that found in HRS § 431:10C-407(b)(2)(B), is not necessary in HRS §
431:10C-403 in light of equivalent statutory language in HRS §§ 431:1-102 and
431:10C. Thus, contrary to the dissent’s assertion that this conclusion
represents a leap, see dissenting opinion at 10-11 n.10, or “that the
 
legislature did not expressly deem an assigned claim to be based upon an
insurance policy,” see dissenting opinion at 20 n.14, this conclusion is
mandated by the express statutory language providing that insurers who service
assigned claims have “rights and obligations as if [they] had issued motor
vehicle mandatory public liability and property damage policies . . . .” HRS §
 
431:10C-403 (emphasis added).
 
23
         
  
        
           
          
          
           
            
          
         
                
    
         
            
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
X.
 
Moreover, to hold that an insurer does not owe a duty 
of good faith toward persons whose claims have been assigned to 
the insurer under the assigned claims portion of the JUP would also contravene public policy. As stated in Best Place, one of the reasons for allowing insureds to sue their insurers for bad faith is to ensure the insured receives the necessary compensation for all damages suffered as a result of insurer misconduct. 82 Hawai' i at 132, 920 P.2d at 346. The denial of 
claims in bad faith does not cease to be misconduct simply because the insured has not purchased a policy, but, rather is entitled to coverage pursuant to a state program that specifically requires insurers to provide such coverage. The legislature intended for persons who qualify to have coverage under the JUP assigned claims program, and an insurer’s bad faith denial of such claims undermines the statutory scheme, resulting in damages to the person whose claim has been improperly denied. A bad faith tort claim would allow recovery in cases of insurer misconduct.
20 
20 The dissent argues that assigned claimants are not necessarily
 
public assistance eligible, and therefore, may not be entitled to as much
protection against bad faith conduct as certificate policy holders. See
 
dissenting opinion at 9-10. However, assigned claimants are, by definition,
persons who have no other coverage available. Specifically, they are persons
 who have “no insurance benefits under [a] no-fault polic[y],” or for whom “no
 such insurance benefits applicable to the accidental harm can be identified,”
or for whom “[t]he only identifiable insurance benefits under no-fault
policies applicable to the accidental harm will not be paid in full . . . .”
HRS § 431:10C-408.
As noted before, an example of assigned claimants are those
“victims for whom no policy is applicable, such as the hit-and-run victim who
is not covered by a motor vehicle insurance policy.” HAR § 16-23-67(b). It
 
(continued...)
 
24
         
  
        
             
           
          
            
          
        
           
              
            
          
           
             
          
         
 
         
           
           
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Another reason cited in Best Place for allowing bad
 
faith tort claims is the possibility that without the threat of a
 
tort action, insurance companies have very little incentive to
 promptly pay proceeds, as they stand to lose very little by
 delaying payment. Id. That rationale may apply in this context. 
As noted, insurers are required to participate in the JUP as a
 condition of doing business in Hawai' i. It appears that losses 
and expenses are pro-rated among and shared by all participating
 insurers. See HAR § 16-23-68(b). It is unclear whether these
 
costs are passed on to the public in the form of higher insurance
 rates, or whether the state provides some other form of
 compensation to insurers.
21
 
If every claim that is paid out under the assigned
 
claims program results in an immediate loss that is shared among
 participating insurers, and these losses are not offset by the
 
20(...continued)
is unlikely that the legislature believed hit-and-run victims without
insurance had much in terms of resources at their disposal, and yet, created a
program to provide last resort coverage for those individuals. Indeed, the
idea that assigned claimants do not need protection is directly contradicted
by the fact that the legislature chose to create a program specifically to
protect them. Indeed, the legislature has afforded protection to such
claimants through the creation of the JUP.
The dissent states that our holding would create an anomaly in the
context of bad faith law in Hawai 'i. Dissenting opinion at 10 n.9. But,
based on the statutory language, the anomaly would be to extend bad faithprotection to certificate policy holders, but deny the protections offered bythe law of bad faith to insurance-needy assigned claimants, as the dissentwould apparently hold. See dissenting opinion at 10. Rather, our holding is
consistent with the requirement of fair and equal treatment for bothcertificate policy holders and assigned claimants, as demanded by thestatutory scheme. 
21
 It appears, for example, that certain insurers under the JUP
 
program are selected as “servicing carriers” to provide services on behalf of
 the JUP members and are reimbursed for their “servicing expenses” at certain
 rates. See HAR §§ 16-23-71 (1999); 16-23-78 (1999).
 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
claimant’s payment of premiums (since under the assigned claims 
program the claimant does not pay to have his or her claim assigned to an insurer), it would seem that insurance companies may have an economic incentive to deny or delay payment of assigned claims in order to avoid losses associated with such claims. The threat of a tort action serves to inhibit those incentives. As articulated in Best Place, allowing bad faith tort claims encourages companies to pay proceeds rightfully due to insureds. 82 Hawai' i at 132, 920 P.2d at 346. In any event, 
that the legislature intended to impose the same duties and obligations on insurers who are assigned claimants under the JUP, and that barring a bad faith tort action would undermine the statutory scheme, are enough to warrant allowing assigned claimants to pursue bad faith tort actions against insurers. 
XI. 
The ICA and Respondent, however, relied on Simmons v. 
Puu, 105 Hawai' i 112, 94 P.3d 667 (2004), reasoning that an 
insurance contract is a prerequisite to a claim of bad faith, and that because an assigned claim is not a “contract,” Petitioner cannot sue Respondent under a bad faith tort theory. In Simmons, the petitioner was the driver of a vehicle struck by a rental car self-insured by Hertz. Id. at 115, 94 P.3d at 670. The 
petitioner alleged that the driver of the vehicle was negligent and ultimately asserted a claim of bad faith settlement practices against Hertz as the self-insurer of the rental vehicle. Id. 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hertz contended that there existed no common law claim
 
for relief entitling third-party claimants such as the petitioner
 
to sue self-insurers for bad faith settlement practices, inasmuch
 as Hertz was not an insurer and had no claims practices. Id. at
 
118, 94 P.3d at 673. This court agreed. Id. It was explained
 
that a third party should not be permitted to enforce covenants
 not made for his or her benefit. Id. at 120-22, 94 P.3d at 675­
77 (citing Murphy v. Allstate Ins. Co., 553 P.2d 584 (Or. Ct.
 App. 1976)). Because the duty to settle claims in good faith was
 intended to benefit the insured (the rental car driver) and not
 the injured claimant (petitioner), the third party beneficiary
 doctrine did not furnish a basis for the injured claimant to
 recover. Id. 
This court further elaborated that the insurer was in a
 
fiduciary relationship with the insured but was in an adversarial
 relationship to the third-party claimant (petitioner). Id. In
 
meeting its duty to the insured, an insurer was required to give
 as much consideration to the insured’s interest as it did to its
 own interest. Id. But the insurer had no such relationship with
 
a third party. Id. This court adopted the assignment theory of
 
common law third-party claims of bad faith settlement practices,
 which required the existence of a contractual relationship
 between an insurer and an insured as a predicate to establishing
 an injured claimant’s right to sue a tortfeasor’s insurer. Id. 
In other words, a third-party claimant could sue an insurer for
 bad faith settlement practices only if the insured assigned his
 
27
         
          
              
          
              
       
             
             
           
             
          
            
              
          
         
            
             
          
              
        
          
            
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
or her rights to the third party.22 Id. The third party would
 
in effect step into the shoes of the first-party beneficiary, to
 
which the insurer owed a duty of good faith. See id. 
The reason for disallowing a bad faith tort claim in
 
Simmons does not apply in this context.23 As noted, an insurance
 
contract was held to be a prerequisite for a bad faith settlement
 claim in Simmons because, absent a contract between the third
 party and the insurer (or its equivalent -- an assignment of the
 first party’s claim to the third party), the insurer owed no duty
 of good faith toward the third party. Id. Here, in contrast, as
 
an assigned claimant, Petitioner stands in a first-party
 relationship to Respondent. 
The assigned claims plan under the JUP creates an
 
insurer-insured relationship, and under that plan, no underlying
 
22 In Jou v. National Interstate Insurance Co. of Hawai 'i, 114 Hawai 'i 
122, 157 P.3d 561 (App. 2007), the ICA held for similar reasons that a doctor
who provided services to an employee covered by workers’ compensation could not sue the workers’ compensation carrier for bad faith. The ICA noted that a workers’ compensation scheme essentially created a three-party agreementbetween the employer, the employee, and the compensation carrier. Id. at 133, 
157 P.3d at 572 (citation omitted). The ICA then explained that the purpose of workers’ compensation was to compensate employees, not physicians. Id. 
The ICA held that the doctor was an incidental beneficiary and not a third-party beneficiary of the workers’ compensation scheme, and therefore could notassert a bad faith tort claim against the workers’ compensation carrier. Id. 
at 134, 157 P.3d at 573. Further, the ICA noted, without deciding, that evenassuming, arguendo , that the doctor could qualify as an intended third-party
beneficiary, the special circumstances that warranted extending the tort ofbad faith to insureds and injured employees, did not exist between a physicianand a compensation carrier. Id. According to the ICA, unlike a typical
insured, a treating physician seeks commercial gain from the insurer ratherthan security, protection, and peace of mind. Id. In this case, the JUP
program creates an insured-insurer relationship between the assigned claimantand the insurer, and the assigned claimant seeks the same security,protection, and peace of mind from the insurer that a policy-holder would. 
23
 Contrary to the dissent’s argument, this opinion does not rely on
 
Simmons , see dissenting opinion at 11-12, but distinguishes it.
 
28
          
         
             
          
           
           
           
              
           
            
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
contract is necessary to give rise to that relationship and its
 
concomitant rights and obligations because that relationship is
 created by statute.
24 See HRS § 431:10C-403 (stating that after
 
an assigned claim is assigned to an insurer, the insurer is to
 have rights and obligations “as if it had issued motor vehicle
 mandatory public liability and property damage policies”). 
The statutory scheme requires insurers that are assigned claims
 to conduct their business as if there were in fact an underlying
 contract of insurance with a claimant. 
An underlying contract, therefore, is not the sine qua 
non of a bad faith tort claim. Cf. Best Place, 82 Hawai' i at 
132, 920 P.2d at 346 (“The breach of the express covenant to pay claims, however, is not the sine qua non for an action for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.”). This view is supported by Enoka, 109 Hawai' i 537, 128 P.3d 850, which 
was decided in 2006, two years after Simmons. In Enoka, the petitioner was in an accident while she was riding in another person’s truck. Id. at 541, 128 P.3d at 854. The petitioner’s 
parents owned three automobiles that were insured under a single 
24 The dissent incorrectly claims that good faith cannot be implied
 
without an underlying contract. Dissenting opinion at 12 n. 11. As noted
 
before, in this situation, HRS §431:10C-403 establishes the equivalent of a
policy contract by its terms, and HRS §431:1-102 reiterates a good faith
requirement. See discussion supra. The dissent maintains bad faith rights
are denied to the assigned claimant because “the singular requirement [of] an
actual contract . . . [must] exist before good faith duties can be implied.”
Dissenting opinion at 12, n.11. However, this view would contravene the
fundamental requirement of good faith that underlies HRS chapter 431. See HRS
 
§ 431:1-102 and HRS § 431:10C-403 (treating an assignee insurer “as if the
 assignee had written [a] motor vehicle insurance policy” to the individual
 claimant).
 
29
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
policy with AIG. Id. The petitioner was a named insured under a
 
different policy with GEICO. Id. Three years after the
 
accident, the petitioner filed a claim for no-fault benefits
 
under the AIG policy. Id. at 542, 128 P.3d at 855. AIG denied
 
the claim. Id. This court stated that an exclusion in AIG’s
 
policy for family members who are named insureds under another
 no-fault policy (here GEICO) clearly applied to the petitioner,
 and thus ostensibly the petitioner was not entitled to coverage
 under the AIG policy. Id. at 548, 128 P.3d at 861. 
However, this court also held that an insured could
 
bring a bad faith tort claim against an insurer even when the
 insurer had no contractual duty to pay benefits to the insured
 based on the clear and unambiguous language of an insurance
 policy. Id. at 552, 128 P.3d at 865. Thus, this court allowed
 
the petitioner to sue AIG for bad faith mishandling of the
 insurance claim. Id. It was reasoned that an insurer must act
 
in good faith in dealing with its insured and in handling the
 insured’s claim, even when the policy clearly and unambiguously
 excluded coverage. Id. Accordingly, the trial court had erred
 
in determining that because the insured’s breach of contract
 claim failed, her bad faith claim must also fail. Id. 
Enoka’s reasoning does not support the proposition that
 
the duty of good faith owed by the insurer to the insured is
 dependent on the existence of a contract. If the contract is the
 source of the duty to act in good faith, then mishandling or
 denying a claim when the insurer has no contractual duty to pay
 
30
         
         
             
         
             
             
             
          
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
benefits should not give rise to a bad faith claim. Indeed, in
 
Enoka, the insurer argued that in the absence of a contractual
 duty to pay benefits, there was no implied covenant of good faith
 and fair dealing to breach and, thus, no action for bad faith. 
Id. at 549, 128 P.3d at 862. Yet, this court held that the tort
 of bad faith did not turn on whether the claim for benefits was
 due or not; instead, it turned on “the conduct of the insurance
 company in handling the claim.” Id. at 551, 128 P.3d at 864. 
For, “[s]urely[,] an insurer must act in good faith in dealing
 with its insured and in handling the insured’s claim, even when
 the policy clearly and unambiguously excludes coverage.” Id. 
(emphases added). The special relationship between the insurer
 and the insured and the conduct of the insurer toward the insured
 is what gives rise to the tort of bad faith, not solely the
 existence of a contract.
25 See id. 
The ICA came to the same conclusion in Christiansen v. 
First Insurance Company of Hawai' i, Ltd., 88 Hawai' i 442, 449, 967 
P.2d 639, 646 (1998), stating that the tort of bad faith in the first-party insurance context “is unconditional and independent of [the insured’s] contractual obligations.” (Emphasis and brackets in original.) (Internal quotation marks and citation 
25
 Respectfully, the dissent does not distinguish Enoka as to its
 
holding, but states the obvious, that Enoka did not “address . . . a
 
statutorily created relationship without a contract.” Dissenting opinion at
 
17. However, Enoka is cited for recognizing that an insurer’s good faith duty
does not rest only in coverage under the insurance policy, but extends to therelationship between insured and insurer. See 109 Hawai 'i at 549, 128 P.3d at 
862. Although the dissent suggests otherwise, dissenting opinion at 14-16
n.13, as noted, Enoka recognized duties outside the contractual relationship.
 
31
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
omitted.) The issue in Christiansen was whether an action for
 
bad faith was “on the policy” such that a statute of limitations
 provision in the policy would apply to the bad faith action. Id.
 
at 450-51, 967 P.2d at 647-48. The ICA explained that
 jurisdictions were split on the question, and that some
 jurisdictions had ruled that because the alleged tortious conduct
 of the insurer arises out of its obligations under the provisions
 of the policy, an action for the bad faith handling of an
 insurance claim was governed by the limitation provision in the
 policy. Id. Those jurisdictions had concluded that since,
 
absent the insurance contract, “there would be no legal
 relationship between the parties[,] [the insurer] could not be
 guilty of acting in bad faith.” Id. 
The ICA rejected the rationale of those jurisdictions
 
as inconsistent with Best Place. Id. at 451-52, 967 P.2d at 648­
49. The ICA explained that in Best Place this court had
 
clarified that “an insurer’s duty of good faith and fair dealing
 [is] one implied by law that is independent of the performance of
 the insured’s contractual obligations.” Id. at 451, 967 P.2d at
 
648. The ICA stated that “a tort of bad faith is a tort
 
independent of the policy because its origins are not in the
 contract but in the common law imposition of good faith and fair
 dealing, the breach of which fiduciary duty may be considered an
 independent tort.” Id. at 452, 967 P.2d at 649 (emphasis added). 
Thus, the ICA held that the bad faith tort action is not “on the 
32
         
        
            
            
       
         
            
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
policy” and cannot be governed by the policy’s limitation
 
provision.26 Id. 
In light of Christiansen and Enoka,27 the ICA’s | 
reliance on Simmons for the proposition that a contract is a prerequisite to a bad faith claim is incorrect. As discussed above, the insurer had no duty toward the petitioner in Simmons because the petitioner was the victim of the accident, not the insured, and the insurer owed no duty of good faith to a third-party victim. 105 Hawai' i at 120-22, 94 P.3d 675-77. In this 
case, Petitioner is the insured. To hold that Respondent owes no duty of good faith to its own insured because the insurer-insured relationship is created by statute instead of by contract would be an unwarranted departure from this court’s post-Simmons holding in Enoka that the insurer must act in good faith in dealing with its insured and in handling the insured’s claim, even in the absence of a contractual obligation owed the insured. Enoka, 109 Hawai' i at 552, 128 P.3d at 865. Likewise, to hold 
that the insurer does have a duty of good faith toward its insured but that a tort of bad faith does not lie because the insured lacks a contract would be to recognize a duty that cannot be enforced. Such a result is not contemplated by cases such as 
26
 Again, the dissent’s assertion, that Christiansen , like Enoka, is
 
not relevant because no written contract exists here, is subject to the same
refutation -- that the statutes involved in the instant case indicate that an
 automobile insurance policy should be deemed to exist.
 
27
 These cases are pertinent as they exemplify situations in which
 
the contract was not central to the case but the court recognized duties
outside of the express language of the contract.
 
33
         
        
          
         
            
         
         
               
       
             
            
                 
              
            
              
                
               
           
         
               
          
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Best Place, Enoka, and Christiansen, and does not follow from
 
Simmons, which held only that a third party, to whom a
 tortfeasor’s insurer owes no duty, could not bring a claim of bad
 faith settlement practices.
28
 
XII.
 
There are contexts, however, in which the existence of
 
a contract does affect whether or not it is possible to bring a
 claim. For example, in Willis II, this court held that
 Petitioner could not seek attorneys fees under HRS § 431:10C­211(a) (Supp. 1997), which provides in relevant part that 
[a] person making a claim for personal injury protection
benefits may be allowed an award of a reasonable sum for
attorney's fees, and reasonable costs of suit in an action
brought by or against an insurer who denies all or part of a
claim for benefits under the policy . . . .
 
113 Hawai' i at 250, 151 P.3d at 731. 
This court stated that the denial of an assigned claim
 
did not qualify as the denial of a claim under a policy because
 
assigned claims are creatures of statute and do not arise out of
 a contractual relationship. Id. at 249, 151 P.3d at 730. To the
 
28 The parties also cite to Mendes v. Hawai 'i Insurance Guaranty 
Assn., 87 Hawai 'i 14, 950 P.2d 1214 (1998). In that case, an insured sued the 
Hawai'i Underwriters Insurance Company (HIGA), a non-profit, unincorporated
legal entity created by HRS Chapter 431, Article 16, in order to provide a
mechanism for the payment of covered claims when an insurer becomes insolvent.Id. at 17, 950 P.2d at 1217. This court held that HIGA could be sued for its 
failure to cover a claim, but that it was immune to a bad faith claim,pursuant to HRS § 431:16-116 (1993), which provided that there “shall be no liability on the part of and no cause of action of any nature shall ariseagainst . . . the association . . . for any action taken by them in theperformance of its duties.” Id. at 18, 950 P.2d at 1218. This court held 
that the legislature had made a policy determination to limit HIGA’s liabilitybecause HIGA was not a traditional, for-profit insurance company, andtherefore no bad faith claim could lie against HIGA. Id. There is no statute 
that limits Respondent’s liability pursuant to the JUP. Therefore, Mendes
does not resolve whether Petitioner can bring a bad faith claim againstRespondent. 
34
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
contrary, as noted above, HRS § 431:10C-403 explicitly provides 
that Respondent has the “same rights and obligations” with regard to Petitioner’s assigned claim as would an insurer that issued a policy providing such coverage. It was explained in Willis II that whereas the legislature announced that a certificate policy was to be deemed a policy for purposes of the Insurance Code, the legislature did not similarly categorize assigned claims, and therefore an assigned claim was not a “policy” for purposes of HRS § 431:10C-211(a). 113 Hawai' i at 249-50, 151 P.3d 730-31. 
In this case, the ICA decided that because this court 
determined in Willis II that Petitioner’s claim was not contractual in nature, Petitioner’s claim could not be treated as a policy for purposes of bringing a tort claim either. Willis 
III, 126 Hawai' i at 316, 270 P.3d at 1046. But Willis II is not 
dispositive of Petitioner’s tort claim. As noted, in Willis II, this court said that an assigned claim was not a policy for purposes of the attorneys’ fees statute because an assigned claim was not a contract and the legislature had chosen to treat certificate policies and assigned claims differently. 113 Hawai'i at 249-50, 151 P.3d 730-31. 
However, as noted herein, the statutory scheme treats
 
certificate policies and assigned claims equally for purposes of
 an insurer’s rights and duties to the insured. HRS § 431:10C­402(a) provides, “The commissioner shall establish and maintain a
 joint underwriting plan bureau in the insurance division to
 receive, assign and supervise the servicing of all assigned
 
35
         
            
            
           
             
         
              
         
            
          
            
        
           
            
           
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
claims and all applications for joint underwriting plan
 
coverage.” (Emphasis added.) “[A]pplications for joint
 underwriting plan coverage” refers to certificate applications,
 while “assigned claims” refers to the assigned claims program
 under the JUP. Compare HRS § 431:10C-407 (discussing applicants
 
for certificate policy), with HRS § 431:10C-408 (discussing
 assigned claims). As noted, in the very next sentence in HRS §
 431:10C-403, the legislature specified that the bureau “shall
 promptly assign each claim and application, and notify the
 claimant or applicant of the identity and address of the assignee
 of the claim or application.” To reiterate, “[t]he assignee,
 thereafter, has rights and obligations as if it had issued motor
 vehicle mandatory public liability and property damage policies .
 . . .” Id. The legislature thus intended for insurers to have
 
duties coincident with issuing a policy for both certificate
 applications and assigned claims.
29
 
XIII.
 
Respondent, however, argues that a claimant under the
 
29 In sum, the common law duty of good faith and fair dealing of
 
insurers is incorporated in the insurance code. See HRS § 431:1-102 (“The
business of insurance is one affected by the public interest, requiring that
all persons be actuated by good faith[.]”). Hence, the dissent is wrong in
 claiming that this decision “depart[s] from fundamental common law principles”
with respect to the bad faith doctrine. See dissenting opinion at 13. To
 
repeat, the legislature has further expressed its intent to specifically
impose the same duty of “good faith” upon insurers who adjust assigned claims
where no contractual relationship exists as that imposed on insurers who
adjust contract based policies. See HRS § 431:10C-403. This decision thus
 
effectuates legislative intent. Correlatively, this decision is consistent
 with established case law. Although not applying a statute, Best Place ,
Enoka, and Christiansen rest on the principle of a good faith obligation in
the insurer-insured relationship, as set forth in this opinion. This decision
 recognizes the statutory relationship of good faith, HRS § 431:1-102, between
an insurer and insured underlying HRS § 431:10C-403.
 
36
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
assigned claims program is “a person for whom ‘[n]o insurance
 
benefits under motor vehicle insurance policies are
 applicable[.]’” (Quoting HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1) (1998).) 
Stated differently, “[Respondent maintains] there is no basis for
 [Petitioner] to contend that she is a policyholder to whom
 benefits under an insurance policy have been denied and there is
 no basis for [Petitioner] to pursue her alleged ‘bad faith’ claim
 against [Respondent].” It appears that Respondent interprets a
 person for whom “no insurance benefits under motor vehicle
 insurance policies are applicable,” HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1), as
 requiring Petitioner to show that benefits have been “denied” to
 her under an existing policy. 
The evidence in this case is that no insurance benefits
 
were applicable to Petitioner at the time of the accident. As
 noted, although Petitioner had a certificate policy from July 2,
 1998 through July 2, 1999, the policy did not include uninsured
 motorist coverage. The fact that the JUP Bureau determined that
 Petitioner was entitled to receive benefits under the JUP
 confirms that the agency that administers the JUP also believed
 that Petitioner satisfied HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1). Respondent
 provides no authority for the proposition that Petitioner would
 not qualify under HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1) because she cannot show
 that she is a person to whom “benefits under an insurance policy
 have been denied.” On its face, HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1) is met
 if no benefits under a policy are applicable to the accidental 
37
         
 
          
        
      
         
     
        
          
      
        
        
       
     
        
            
         
            
        
            
         
           
             
           
           
          
            
           
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
harm. Thus, Respondent’s interpretation of HRS §
 
431:10C-408(a)(1) is not supported by the statutory language.30
 
XIV. 
Respondent also argues that this court has already
 
implicitly rejected Petitioner’s bad faith tort claim because
 this court only remanded in Willis I for a determination of
 benefits due pursuant to the assigned claim. Respondent’s
 argument is, in essence, that this court implicitly denied
 Petitioner’s bad faith claim by not saying anything about that
 claim when it remanded in Willis I. The exact language of this
 court’s remand in Willis I was: 
In light of the foregoing analysis, we hold that the circuit
court erred in awarding summary judgment in favor of
[Respondent] and against [Petitioner]. Accordingly, we
vacate the circuit court’s July 2003 judgment insofar as it
dismissed [Petitioner]’s action against [Respondent] remand
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. On
 remand, to the extent that the trier of fact finds that
[Petitioner]’s post-July 2, 1999 medical expenses remain
unpaid and her assigned claim complies with the Motor
Vehicle Insurance Law in other respects, the circuit court
shall order [Respondent] to tender the appropriate benefits
under the assigned claims program.
 
112 Hawai' i at 191, 145 P.3d at 734. This language cannot 
30 At oral argument, Respondent took a slightly different position,
 
arguing that HRS § 431:10C-408 is only satisfied if a person has no
“identifiable” benefits under any motor vehicle policy, and that because
Petitioner had a certificate policy at the time of the accident, she had
“identifiable” benefits. However, again, Respondent’s interpretation is not
supported by the language of the statute. HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(1) applies to
 persons when “[n]o insurance benefits under motor vehicle insurance policies
are applicable to the accidental harm[.]” (Emphasis added.) As noted, there
is no question in this case that no insurance benefits under a motor vehicle
insurance policy were applicable to Petitioner at the time of the accident
because her certificate policy provided no coverage for the accidental harm as
it lacked uninsured motorist coverage. HRS § 431:10C-408(a)(2), the section
 that contains the word “identified” (but which was not cited by Respondent in
its Response when making this argument) is satisfied if “no such insurance
 benefits applicable to the accidental harm can be identified.” (Emphasis
 
added.)
 
38
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonably be construed to resolve the rest of Petitioner’s
 
claims. As explained, in Willis I, the court had entered summary
 judgment in favor of Respondent because it had found that
 Petitioner was not due benefits under the assigned claim. This
 court noted that the court had also disposed of the rest of the
 claims in the lawsuit, “none of which is germane to this appeal.” 
Id. at 188 n.8, 145 P.3d at 731 n.8 (emphasis added). This court
 then vacated the court’s judgment “insofar as it dismissed
 [Petitioner’s] action against [Respondent.]” Id. at 191, 145
 
P.3d at 734. In other words, the court’s judgment was vacated
 insofar as it dismissed the entirety of Petitioner’s action
 against Respondent, which would include her bad faith claim. 
This court’s silence as to what should happen on remand to the
 rest of Petitioner’s claims that were not at issue in Willis I
 (and therefore not before this court) suggests only that the
 court would have to decide those claims on remand, not that this
 court silently and without explanation denied those claims. 
XV. 
Because we hold that Petitioner can bring a bad faith 
tort claim, the question of whether it was proper for the court to enter summary judgment on behalf of Respondent on the merits of Petitioner’s bad faith claim remains. As noted, the ICA did not decide the question because it held that Petitioner could not, as a matter of law, assert a bad faith tort claim. Willis 
III, 126 Hawai' i at 315-17, 270 P.3d at 1045-47. 
39
         
        
        
         
       
          
        
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed
 
under the same standard applied by the trial courts. Wong-Leong
 
v. Hawaiian Indep. Refinery, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 433, 438, 879 P.2d 
538, 543 (1994). Summary judgment is proper where the moving 
party demonstrates that there are no genuine issues of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Reed v. 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 76 Hawai' i 219, 225, 873 P.2d 98, 104 
(1994). “Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Pac. Int’l Servs. Corp. v. 
Hurip, 76 Hawai' i 209, 213, 873 P.2d 88, 92 (1994). 
In Best Place, this court articulated the applicable
 
standard for a first-party bad faith claim as follows:
 
[T]he insured need not show a conscious awareness of
wrongdoing or unjustifiable conduct, nor an evil motive or
intent to harm the insured. An unreasonable delay in
payment of benefits will warrant recovery for compensatory
damages . . . . However, conduct based on an interpretation
of the insurance contract that is reasonable does not
 constitute bad faith. . . .
 
82 Hawai' i at 113, 920 P.2d at 347. Further, “where an insurer 
denies the payment of no-fault benefits based on an ‘open 
question of law,’ there is ‘obviously no bad faith on the part of [the insurer] in litigating that issue.’” Enoka, 109 Hawai' i at 
552, 128 P.3d at 865. 
The court concluded that Willis I had settled an open
 
question of law, and therefore Respondent’s denial of
 
40
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner’s benefits was not in bad faith. Petitioner argues, 
however, that this court’s language in Willis I suggests that Respondent’s legal basis for denying Petitioner’s claim was not reasonable. As noted, in Willis I, Petitioner had argued that she qualified for an assigned claim because there was no other insurance that she could turn to and the legislature intended for her to be covered. 112 Hawai' i at 189, 145 P.3d at 732. 
Respondent countered that Petitioner did not qualify for assigned claims coverage because she was the named insured under her own certificate policy at the time of the accident, and therefore had “identifiable” motor vehicle insurance coverage on the date of the subject accident. Id. 
Respondent cited to HRS § 431:10C-408(a), which
 
provides that a person may seek coverage under the assigned
 claims program when no insurance benefits under motor vehicle
 insurance policies are applicable to the accidental harm or no
 such insurance benefits can be identified. Id. at 189, 145 P.3d
 
at 732. Respondent argued that certificate policies were not
 required to include uninsured motorist coverage in order to
 comply with the statutory scheme, and that Petitioner had
 disregarded a prior offer Respondent had made to Petitioner to
 add uninsured motorist coverage to her certificate policy, and
 that by disregarding Respondent’s offer, Respondent forewent her
 eligibility for assigned benefits. Id. 
This court explained that the “core issue as framed by
 
the parties [was] whether an offer and a tacit refusal of UM
 
41
         
          
            
          
           
           
           
          
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
coverage rendered the UM coverage ‘applicable’ and
 
‘identifi[able]’ so as to relieve the assignee insurer under HRS
 § 431:10C-408, [] of the duty to compensate the injured
 claimant.”
31 Id. However, this court held that it did not have
 
to decide that issue because Respondent had not “offered”
 uninsured motorist coverage to Petitioner but had, at most, made
 an invitation to initiate negotiations. Id. at 190, 145 P.3d at
 
733. It was explained that “[a]t most, [Respondent had] flagged
 
for [Petitioner] the fact that no statute or regulation bestowed
 an [uninsured motorist] component on her certificate policy . . .
 .” Id. This court stated, “[n]o reasonable reading of the
 
statement [made by Respondent to Petitioner] could elucidate (1)
 which insurer(s) might underwrite [Petitioner’s uninsured
 motorist] coverage or (2) the premiums or any other terms.” Id.
 
(footnote omitted) (emphasis added). 
This court also explained that Respondent had argued,
 
on public policy grounds, that if Petitioner’s argument were
 accepted, there would be universal uninsured motorist coverage
 for anyone insured in a motor vehicle accident, and that there
 would be no point in paying a premium for uninsured motorist
 coverage if all one had to do was to apply to the JUP at no cost. 
31
 In other words, if Petitioner had applicable coverage at the time
 
of the accident, she would not have qualified for an assigned claim because
not having applicable insurance coverage is a precondition for an assignment
claim. See HRS § 431:10C-408(a) (“Each person sustaining accidental harm, or
such person’s legal representative, may . . . obtain the motor vehicle
insurance benefits through the plan whenever: (1) No insurance benefits under
motor vehicle insurance policies are applicable to the accidental harm;
(2) No such insurance benefits applicable to the accidental harm can be
identified . . . .”).
 
42
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id. at 191, 145 P.3d at 734. Thus, Respondent’s argument
 
“distort[ed]” Petitioner’s characterization of the assigned
 claims program. Id. The assigned claims program applied only in
 
residual situations. Id. This court stated that the “absurd
 
consequence” of Respondent’s argument would be that insurers,
 merely by offering, could compel even those who do not own cars
 to purchase uninsured motorist coverage. Id. 
As noted, this court characterized Respondent’s
 
arguments on this particular issue as “unreasonable” and
 “absurd.” Indeed, it was held that there was no need to resolve
 the core issue -- the question of whether an offer and a tacit
 refusal of uninsured motorist coverage rendered certificate
 coverage applicable so as to relieve an assignee insurer of the
 duty to compensate the injured claimant, because the case could
 be resolved as a matter of law on the ground that Respondent had
 not made an offer to Petitioner. Therefore, Willis I did not
 resolve an “open question of law” posed by the parties and,
 consequently, the court’s grant of summary judgment to Respondent
 on the ground that this court resolved an open question of law
 was wrong.
 
XVI.
 
In general, whether an insurer has acted in bad faith 
is a question of fact. See Guajardo v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 118 
Hawai'i 196, 206, 187 P.3d 580, 590 (2008) (“allegations of bad 
faith between insurer and insured over fair dealing and meaning of policy were ‘exactly the type of issue[s], under Best Place, 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the jury should consider, and one[s] that should not be made 
by the court[.]’”) (citation omitted). This court has held that “reasonableness can only constitute a question of law suitable for summary judgment ‘when the facts are undisputed and not fairly susceptible of divergent inferences,’ because, ‘where, upon all the evidence, but one inference may reasonably be drawn, there is no issue for the jury.’” Id. (quoting Courbat v. Dahana 
Ranch, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 254, 263, 141 P.3d 427, 436 (2006)) 
(citations and brackets omitted). 
In Guajardo, this court held there was a disputed issue
 
of material fact concerning whether the insurer had refused to
 settle in good faith. Id. Further, this court explained that
 
although the ICA had reasoned that there was an open question of
 law that precluded finding the insurer had acted in bad faith,
 there was “no mention of an ‘open question of law’ as a basis for
 [the insurer’s] initial outright rejection of the possibility of
 a settlement, and, in any event, genuine issues of material fact
 regarding the reasonableness and good faith of [the insurer’s]
 interpretation of its policy remain, wholly separate and apart
 from the applicability of [case law.]” Id.; see also Smith v.
 
Safeco Ins. Co., 78 P.3d 1278 (Wash. 2003) (stating that “[t]he
 existence of some theoretical reasonable basis for the insurer’s
 conduct does not end the inquiry” into whether or not the insurer
 acted in bad faith, and that “[t]he insured may present evidence
 that the insurer’s alleged reasonable basis was not the actual 
44
         
         
        
         
        
           
        
  
  
         
              
            
         
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
basis for its action, or that other factors outweighed the
 
alleged reasonable basis”). 
Petitioner argues that a fair-minded jury may find that
 
it was unreasonable for Respondent to premise its denial of
 coverage on a legally invalid offer, to the extent that
 experienced claims adjusters should know better than to rely on
 faulty and insufficient offers as a basis to deny statutory
 benefits. Petitioner’s expert had also averred that, in his
 professional opinion, Respondent acted in bad faith in delaying
 payment of benefits to Petitioner and in failing to properly
 investigate Petitioner’s claim. According to the expert, it was
 common knowledge and understood within the insurance industry
 that a certificate policy does not negate an assigned claim. 
Petitioner’s expert also opined that Respondent owed Petitioner a
 duty of good faith as the insurance company that was assigned to
 adjust the JUP assigned claim, and that to the extent that the
 JUP 
operates as an insurance relief measure and is a substitute
to the mandated automobile bodily injury requirements of theState of Hawai 'i, [Respondent’s] duty of good faith and fair
dealing arises from [its] assigned role as a servicingcarrier and an insurer under the [JUP], and as such does notdepend, necessarily, on whether [Petitioner] was a party toany written contract. 
Respondent did not provide any affidavits to counter Petitioner’s
 
expert’s statement.32
 
32
 In support of its motion for summary judgment, Respondent attached
 
only a copy of Willis I and some documentation to establish that it had paid
Petitioner all of the benefits due to her under the assigned claim.
Respondent also attached a declaration to its Reply to Petitioner’s
Supplemental Legal Memorandum which stated that Petitioner had not provided
(continued...)
 
45
         
 
 
            
          
          
         
         
          
          
        
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner’s affidavits raise questions of fact for a
 
fact finder about whether Respondent’s reliance on a faulty offer
 
was in bad faith and whether Respondent’s conduct fell below that
 of a reasonable insurance adjuster. Thus, summary judgment for
 Respondent was wrongly granted.
33
 
XVII. 
We therefore vacate the judgments entered as aforesaid
 
and remand to the court for proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
34
 
Fernando L. Cosio,  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
for petitioner
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Bradford F.K. Bliss,
for respondent  /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
32(...continued)
proof of her medical expenses for treatment after January 26, 2006. However,
 
it appears that Respondent did not attach any affidavits to counter
Petitioner’s expert opinion that the facts suggested Respondent acted in bad
faith.
 
33
 On remand, the court should address Petitioner’s June 8, 2007
 
motion to compel Respondent to answer Petitioner’s interrogatories and to
respond to Petitioner’s requests for production of documents, which the court
denied as moot upon granting Respondent’s motion for summary judgment.
 
34
 We respectfully cannot agree with Judge Chang’s dissent, but
 
appreciate his eloquent and gracious opinion.
 
46
 