***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-15-0000439 09-OCT-2017 08:40 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
LAWRENCE L. BRUCE and JUSTIN MCKINLEY,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants.
 
SCWC-15-0000439
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-15-0000439; CAAP-15-0000477; CR. NO. 14-1-0987)
 
OCTOBER 9, 2017
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
I. INTRODUCTION
 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (the 
State) charged Respondent/Defendant-Appellant Lawrence L. Bruce 
(Bruce) and Respondent/Defendant-Appellant Justin McKinley (McKinley) with offenses arising from their alleged involvement           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in and benefit from the activities of a prostitute, the
 
complaining witness (CW). After being tried as co-defendants in
 the same jury trial, the jury found Bruce guilty of promoting
 prostitution in the second degree, and found McKinley guilty of
 promoting prostitution in the first degree. 
Bruce and McKinley appealed, arguing, inter alia, that
 
their trials were tainted by prosecutorial misconduct. The
 Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) held that one of the
 prosecutor’s comments during rebuttal closing argument
 constituted misconduct, and that such misconduct was not harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt. Thus, the ICA vacated Bruce’s and
 McKinley’s convictions and remanded their cases for new trials.
 
For the reasons stated below, we conclude that the
 
prosecutor’s comments during rebuttal closing argument did not
 constitute misconduct. Although the prosecutor’s comments could
 be interpreted as appealing to the jury’s passions and prejudices
 when viewed in isolation, we believe that the comments, properly
 analyzed in context, were relevant to the fundamental issues at
 trial. Consequently, the comments were not improper. 
Accordingly, as to Bruce, we reverse the ICA’s November
 
17, 2016 judgment on appeal filed pursuant to its October 20,
 2016 memorandum opinion, which vacated the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit’s (circuit court) May 5, 2015 judgment of
 
2
           
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conviction and sentence and remanded the case for a new trial. 
As to McKinley, we reverse the ICA’s September 29, 2016 judgment
 on appeal filed pursuant to its August 31, 2016 memorandum
 opinion, which vacated the circuit court’s May 5, 2015 judgment
 of conviction and sentence and May 5, 2015 mittimus and warrant
 of commitment to jail, and remanded the case for a new trial. 
II. BACKGROUND
 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings
1
 
On June 17, 2014, Bruce was charged with one count of 
promoting prostitution in the first degree in violation of Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1202(1)(a) and one count of 
sexual assault in the first degree in violation of HRS § 707­730(1)(a). McKinley was charged with one count of promoting prostitution in the first degree in violation of HRS § 712­1202(1)(a), two counts of sexual assault in the first degree in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(a), and one count of kidnapping in violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(d). Bruce and McKinley were tried as co-defendants at the same jury trial. 
CW was one of the witnesses who testified on behalf of 
the State. CW testified that she came to Honolulu, Hawai' i from 
San Diego, California on April 1, 2014. She attested that her initial purpose for coming to Hawai' i was to earn money through 
The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
3
 1           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prostitution so she could return home to Alaska. CW stated that 
her former pimp, Lando, had advised her to go to Hawai' i. 
CW testified that after arriving in Hawai' i, she went 
to a hostel in Waikî kî, where she met a man named “L-Way” for the 
first time. CW identified Bruce as L-Way at trial. CW testified that upon meeting Bruce, Bruce informed CW of the sexual services that she was to provide and the prices that she was to charge therefor. CW also attested that during their initial discussions, Bruce instructed CW on how she was to dress, act, and speak if she were to walk the streets as a prostitute. 
CW testified that rather than walking the streets, it 
was determined that she would solicit clients via her internet advertisement on a website called Backpage. CW attested that she had previously posted a Backpage advertisement for sexual services in San Diego, and that Bruce used his iPad to re-post and update her advertisement to reflect her relocation to Hawai'i. CW stated that Bruce paid $5 to promote her 
advertisement by “bring[ing] it to the top” of the list of advertisements on the website. 
CW attested that she and Bruce then had sexual
 
intercourse as a way of “initiating that [she was his] girl now.” 
She testified that after they had intercourse, Bruce said “[t]hat
 [she] was his girl now.” CW stated that after becoming Bruce’s
 
4
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“girl,” she “work[ed] for him now.” 
CW testified that she stayed at the hostel for about
 
ten or eleven days with Bruce, Jennie Ortegon (the mother of
 
Bruce’s son), and his son. She testified that while she stayed
 at the hostel, Bruce was “[r]ight there with [her]” and did not
 leave her alone. CW attested that in addition to the room in
 which CW, Bruce, and his family slept, Bruce rented a separate
 room at the hostel, which was solely used for dates with clients. 
CW testified that during her stay at the hostel, she
 
provided sexual services for one client. CW attested that she
 gave all of the money that she received from the client to Bruce,
 because she “became his girl” and “when you do prostitution, you
 give the guy the money. And if you don’t, then . . . [y]ou can
 serve consequences . . . [like] [g]et[ting] beat up.” 
CW testified that on or about April 11, 2014, she and
 
Bruce left the hostel and relocated to a Best Western hotel per
 McKinley’s recommendation. She stated that before leaving the
 hostel, Bruce had asked CW to give her I.D. and social security
 card to him so she “wouldn’t be able to go nowhere.” CW
 testified that she complied with Bruce’s request; upon arriving
 at the Best Western, Bruce did not return her I.D. or social
 security card to her.
 
CW testified that when she arrived at the Best Western,
 
5
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Bruce introduced her to McKinley, another pimp, and Keshawn
 
Stewart (Stewart), who was also a prostitute. CW, Bruce,
 McKinley, and Stewart stayed in the same hotel room together. 
CW testified that during her two-week stay at the Best Western,
 she earned about $1,000 by providing sexual services to clients,
 but she turned all proceeds over to Bruce. 
On April 13, 2014, CW and Stewart received a call from
 
a customer who requested two prostitutes to meet him at the
 Executive Centre Hotel (Executive Centre). CW testified that she
 told Stewart that she “didn’t think that [they] should go on that
 date because . . . the guy sounded funny, like he was a cop.” 
She stated that Bruce, who was sitting next to her when she
 expressed her concerns to Stewart, told her that “[h]e wanted
 [CW] to go on that date.” 
CW attested that after they met the customer at the
 
hotel room in the Executive Centre, the customer gave $700 to
 Stewart. CW testified that after he placed the cash in Stewart’s
 hand, the customer excused himself to go to the restroom. 
Subsequently, police entered the room and arrested Stewart and
 CW. The “customer” was actually a police officer from the
 Honolulu Police Department (HPD), who had contacted CW and
 Stewart as part of an undercover investigation and sting
 operation. 
6
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Following her arrest, CW spoke to HPD Officer Lovinna
 
Kaniho (Officer Kaniho) at the Executive Centre. Officer Kaniho
 
asked CW if she needed help getting out of prostitution. CW
 testified that she refused help at the time because when Officer
 Kaniho had spoken to her, Stewart was present. CW stated that
 she was concerned that if she accepted Office Kaniho’s help,
 Stewart would inform Bruce and McKinley that CW had agreed to
 help the police. Subsequently, CW and Stewart were taken to
 jail. CW was released on bail the next morning, and returned to
 the Best Western. 
CW testified that after she was arrested on April 13,
 
2014, she did not want to engage in prostitution anymore. CW
 explained that she was selling her body for money, and she felt
 like she “was somebody’s property.” She attributed her feelings
 to Bruce’s “pimp demeanor.” CW described Bruce’s “pimp demeanor”
 as follows: “[If] you do something wrong, you’re going to get
 beat, or you’re just out here making money for [him] and giving
 it to him. He just had that demeanor.” CW stated that despite
 her reservations, she felt like she “had to” keep prostituting
 because she “wanted to go home” and because she “didn’t want to
 get beat up.” 
CW attested that on April 18, 2014, she went to the Ala
 
Moana Shopping Center to buy new clothes. She testified that she
 
7
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
needed to ask Bruce for permission to go to the mall, and that
 
she remembered asking him, through text message: “Daddy, can I
 go with [Stewart] to the mall, please?” She stated that she
 called Bruce “Daddy” because “that’s what girls call their
 pimps.” 
CW testified that while she was at the mall, Bruce kept
 
in contact with her via text message, and told her to “make sure
 [she] tell him [sic] every place that [she] go [sic] or what
 [she’s] doing.” CW also stated that Bruce, by text, told her to
 take a picture of what she was wearing that day, because “there
 was money” around the mall. CW testified that she understood his
 comment to mean that she was to look for dates. 
CW attested that on or around April 18, 2014, Bruce
 
left the Best Western for a few days and did not return. CW
 testified that McKinley then called Bruce and told him that CW
 was “going to become his girl now since [Bruce’s] gone and left
 [her] behind.” CW stated that at that point, she “bec[a]me
 [McKinley’s] property.” Bruce returned to the Best Western on
 April 19, 2014 and turned over CW’s I.D. and social security card
 to McKinley. CW stated that after that date, she made over
 $1,000 by going on dates with clients. CW testified that she
 turned over all of her earnings to McKinley because she “was his
 property,” and that McKinley treated her “[l]ike property.” 
8
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After staying at the Best Western for two weeks, CW
 
relocated to the Pagoda Hotel (Pagoda) with McKinley and Stewart. 
At the Pagoda, there was an incident where McKinley beat CW by
 hitting her face and legs and choking her. Bruce was present
 during the incident and took a video recording of it on his cell
 phone. 
The video of the incident was entered into evidence
 
without objection, and was played for the jury. In the video, as
 he was hitting CW, McKinley said, inter alia, that CW was
 “costing everybody money,” that she was “costing [him] money with
 [her] games,” and that CW was to “[g]et money by all means
 necessary.” After remarking that calls to CW’s phone were being
 sent to voicemail, McKinley said: “I’m going [to] beat your
 brains.” 
CW testified that while she did not know why McKinley
 
had beaten her that day, she believed that when McKinley, in the
 video, referred to calls going to voicemail, he was likely
 referring to calls from clients that CW did not answer. CW
 attested that at the time, she was not answering calls to her
 cell phone in response to her Backpage advertisement because she
 “didn’t want to prostitute no more.” 
CW stated that on May 13, 2014, after attending a
 
hearing related to her arrest in April 2014, she went to Queen’s
 
9
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Medical Center because she was not feeling well. She was
 
admitted to the hospital after a urine test revealed that she was
 three months pregnant. After leaving the hospital, CW went to a
 safe house and filed a police report. CW subsequently met with
 Officer Kaniho and provided a statement. 
Following CW’s testimony, the State entered Exhibit 33,
 
a log of text messages that were sent to and from a T-Mobile cell
 phone in April 2014, into evidence. The T-Mobile cell phone was
 found on Bruce’s person when he was arrested. According to the
 State, Exhibit 33 detailed a series of text messages between CW
 and Bruce, which corroborated CW’s testimony regarding the text
 messages she sent and received when she went to the Ala Moana
 Shopping Center. 
After the State rested its case, Bruce orally moved for
 
a judgment of acquittal on his charges for promoting prostitution
 in the first degree and sexual assault in the first degree. The
 circuit court granted Bruce’s motion with regard to the sexual
 assault charge. The circuit court granted in part and denied in
 part Bruce’s motion with respect to his charge of promoting
 prostitution in the first degree, finding that “there’s
 sufficient evidence of promoting prostitution in the second
 degree, but not in the first degree.” 
Similarly, McKinley moved for a judgment of acquittal
 
10
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on all of his charges. The circuit court granted the motion with
 
respect to his kidnapping charge, but denied it as to all of the
 other charges. 
Stewart testified on behalf of McKinley. Much of her
 
testimony conflicted with CW’s testimony. She testified that she
 learned about the prostitution scene in Waikîkî through CW, and
 that she and CW occasionally prostituted together on a voluntary
 basis. Stewart stated that she and CW kept their earnings from
 going on dates, but that CW sometimes gave a small portion of her
 earnings to Stewart and McKinley to help cover the costs of the
 hotel room. Stewart attested that McKinley was her boyfriend,
 not her pimp, and that McKinley did not play a role in Stewart’s
 or CW’s involvement in prostitution. Stewart testified that
 while she was aware of the incident in which McKinley beat CW, it
 was her understanding that McKinley had beaten CW in response to
 Stewart’s complaints that CW had stolen her money, and that CW
 was not covering her share of the hotel room costs. 
Bruce testified on his own behalf. His testimony 
drastically diverged from CW’s testimony. Bruce attested that he was not the person whom CW had identified as “L-Way.” Rather, Bruce asserted, L-Way was CW’s boyfriend, who also went by the name “Lando.” Bruce testified that he met Lando in Hawai' i, and 
that they had been acquaintances since December 2013. Bruce 
11
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated that he met CW in April 2014 while he was walking back to
 
the hostel with his son. 
Bruce asserted that from December 2013 to June 2014,
 
Ortegon, the mother of his child, had his T-Mobile cell phone in
 her possession and was using it during that time. Accordingly,
 he testified that from December 2013 to June 2014, the text
 messages sent to and received by the T-Mobile cell phone were not
 between himself and CW. Bruce testified that the text messages
 from December 2013 to June 2014, including those sent and
 received during April 2014, were between Ortegon and Lando. To
 Bruce, these text messages supported that Bruce was not L-Way. 
Bruce denied managing CW as a prostitute and denied
 
being CW’s pimp. Bruce testified that he never had sexual
 intercourse with CW, and that he did not promote or pay to
 promote CW’s Backpage advertisement. Bruce further attested that
 CW did not live at the hostel with him or his family, that he did
 not rent any extra rooms to facilitate prostitution activities,
 and that he was unaware of whether any prostitution activities
 were taking place at the hostel. Bruce asserted that he did not
 set the prices for CW’s sexual services, that he did not have CW
 walk the streets as a prostitute, and that he never made money
 off of CW by way of prostitution.
 
Bruce testified that he took a video recording of the
 
12
           
        
        
         
          
    
 
           
        
        
          
         
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
incident where McKinley beat CW at the Pagoda. Bruce attested
 
that he took the video because he wanted to show it to Lando,
 CW’s boyfriend, and that he in fact did share the video with
 Lando.
 
Following jury instructions, the parties presented
 
their closing arguments. Bruce’s counsel argued that the
 evidence demonstrated that he was not L-Way, that he was not her
 pimp, and that he had never managed her as a prostitute. 
McKinley’s counsel argued that the jury could infer, based upon
 the evidence, that CW had engaged in prostitution voluntarily,
 and that McKinley did not force her to do prostitution. He
 argued that the video tape of McKinley beating CW did not
 demonstrate that he had compelled her to engage in prostitution
 against her will, as the evidence indicated that McKinley had
 beaten CW because he was fed up with living with a roommate who
 he believed was stealing money from his girlfriend, Stewart. 
In rebuttal closing argument, the prosecutor countered:
 
So this whole thing about [CW] lying and can’t
be believed, well, the only people who can’t be
believed was Keshawn Stewart and Mr. Bruce. The fact
 
of the matter is that they treated her like she was
property.
 
. . . .
 
. . . They didn’t see her as anything more than a
piece of property to pass around, to mistreat, to
humiliate, intimidate, beat, and force. That is how
 they viewed her, that is how they treated her. But
 
she’s not a piece of property. I mean, she’s
somebody’s daughter, she’s somebody’s friend, she’s a
 
13
           
         
     
          
        
           
           
          
           
         
           
            
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
mother, she’s a woman, she is a person, and she
deserves to be treated properly[.]
 
(Emphases added.) As to the prosecutor’s comment that CW was
 
“somebody’s daughter, she’s somebody’s friend, she’s a mother,
 she’s a woman, she is a person,” McKinley objected on grounds
 that “this is a little bit far beyond arguing the evidence.” 
Bruce did not join McKinley’s objection, nor did he raise one of
 his own. McKinley’s objection was overruled. 
On January 26, 2015, the jury found Bruce guilty of
 
promoting prostitution in the second degree. The jury found
 McKinley guilty of promoting prostitution in the first degree and
 not guilty of sexual assault in the first degree. The circuit
 court
2 entered its final judgment of conviction and sentence for
 
both Bruce and McKinley on May 5, 2015. On the same day, the
 circuit court entered its mittimus and warrant of commitment to
 jail with respect to McKinley. 
B. ICA Proceedings
 
On appeal, both Bruce and McKinley argued, inter alia,
3
 
2 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong signed both final judgments and the
 
mittimus and warrant of commitment to jail.
 
3 Bruce also raised several other points of error on appeal, including:
 
(1) whether the evidence at trial was sufficient to support his conviction;
(2) whether the circuit court abused its discretion in allowing Detective
Derek Stigerts (Detective Stigerts) to testify as an expert on the commercial
sexual exploitation of women; (3) whether the State committed prosecutorial
misconduct in characterizing the case as a “sex trafficking” case and alluding
to the practice of slavery; and (4) whether the circuit court abused its
discretion by allowing Ortegon to assert her Fifth Amendment privilege against
(continued...)
 
14
           
        
          
        
           
         
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the prosecutor engaged in prosecutorial misconduct when she
 
stated: “But she’s not a piece of property. I mean, she’s
 somebody’s daughter, she’s somebody’s friend, she’s a mother,
 she’s a woman, she is a person, and she deserves to be treated
 properly.” Bruce acknowledged that he did not object to the
 remarks at trial, and that therefore, “the appellate court must
 determine whether the misconduct constituted plain error that
 affected Bruce’s substantial rights.” 
Relying on 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 984 P.2d 
1231 (1999), Bruce argued that by referencing CW’s gender and
 familial status, the prosecutor improperly appealed to the jury’s
 passions and prejudices, invited the jurors to place themselves
 in CW’s position and render the verdict based on their emotions
 rather than the evidence, and injected irrelevant issues into
 
3(...continued)
s
elf-incrimination under the United States Constitution. McKinley similarly
challenged whether Detective Stigerts was qualified to testify as an expert
witness, and asserted that the prosecutor committed misconduct in
characterizing the case as a “sex trafficking” case and in referencing the
practice of slavery during the State’s closing argument.
In  brief,  the  ICA  held:   (1)  the  State  presented  sufficient  evidence  to
support  that  Bruce  was  guilty  of  promoting  prostitution  in  the  second  degree,
  
(2)  the  circuit  court  did  not  abuse  its  discretion  in  qualifying  Detective
Stigerts  as  an  expert  and  allowing  Detective  Stigerts  to  testify  as  an  expert
witness,  (3)  the  prosecutor  did  not  commit  prosecutorial  misconduct  during
closing  argument  either  when  she  described  the  case  as  a  “sex  trafficking 
case,”  or  when  she  alluded  to  the  practice  of  slavery,  and  (4)  the  circuit
court  did  not  abuse  its  discretion  when  it  did  not  compel  Ortegon  to  testify
on  Bruce’s  behalf.   On  certiorari,  the  State  has  not  raised  any  questions
pertaining  to  the  ICA’s  holdings  on  these  points.   Neither  Bruce  nor  McKinley
filed  a  response  to  the  State’s  application  for  writ  of  certiorari  to
challenge  any  of  these  rulings.   Accordingly,  we  do  not  address  any  of  these 
issues. See Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 40.1(d) (2014). 
15
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
their deliberations. Thus, Bruce contended that he was deprived
 
of a fair trial because the comments rose to the level of
 prosecutorial misconduct, the State did not have a strong case
 against Bruce, and no curative instruction was given. In his
 appeal, McKinley advanced arguments that aligned with the
 arguments that Bruce had made. 
On October 20, 2016, the ICA issued a memorandum 
opinion that vacated Bruce’s conviction and sentence and remanded the case for a new trial. The ICA held that “based on the Hawai'i Supreme Court’s analysis in Rogan, the State’s remarks, 
when viewed in context, were improper and, thus, constituted prosecutorial misconduct.” The ICA likened the comments in this case to those made by the prosecutor in Rogan, and concluded that “CW’s status as a daughter, friend, mother, and woman, while perhaps supported by the evidence, was not a disputed fact at trial and was not relevant to whether Bruce or McKinley did in fact view or treat CW as a ‘piece of property.’” Therefore, to the ICA, “the State’s comments about CW’s relationship to others did not bolster the validity of the State’s theory of the case.” 
The ICA also held that the prosecutor’s comments “were
 
meant to humanize CW in the eyes of the jury evoking sympathy for
 her,” and “represented an implied invitation for the jury to
 place themselves in CW’s position, or in the position of someone
 
16
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
near to her, enticing the jury to render a decision based on
 
emotional appeal rather than on the evidence that proved Bruce’s
 guilt.” Thus, the ICA held that the comments constituted
 prosecutorial misconduct.
 
The ICA then applied the three-prong harmless error
 
test for prosecutorial misconduct. The ICA ultimately concluded
 that the prosecutor’s comments were not harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt because: (1) the prosecutor’s comments were
 improper; (2) McKinley’s objection to the State’s comments was
 overruled; and (3) the State did not present overwhelming
 evidence against Bruce. 
In a footnote, the ICA noted that although McKinley
 
objected to the prosecutor’s comments, Bruce did not join in the
 objection. Observing that other jurisdictions have held that an
 objection by one defendant preserves the issue for a co­defendant’s appeal, even where the co-defendant does not join in
 the objection at trial, the ICA held that “under the facts of
 this case, McKinley’s objections to the State’s remarks
 sufficiently preserved the issue for Bruce’s appeal.” 
The ICA’s memorandum opinion resolving McKinley’s
 
appeal, filed on August 31, 2016, similarly concluded that the
 disputed comments by the prosecutor constituted misconduct. The
 ICA’s analysis in McKinley’s case was substantially identical to
 
17
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the analysis it employed in Bruce’s case. Accordingly, the ICA
 
vacated McKinley’s conviction and sentence and remanded his case
 for a new trial. 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Prosecutorial Misconduct 
“Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires an examination of the record and a determination of ‘whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction.’” Rogan, 
91 Hawai' i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 
Hawai'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
We are presented with the following three questions on
 
certiorari: (1) whether the ICA erred in holding that McKinley’s
 objection sufficiently preserved the issue on appeal for Bruce,
 who neither joined McKinley’s objection nor raised one of his
 own; (2) whether the ICA misapplied this court’s opinion in State
 v. Rogan to the present case; and (3) whether the ICA’s analyses resolving Bruce and McKinley’s appeals are obviously inconsistent with its own opinion in State v. Kiakona, 110 Hawai' i 450, 134 
18
           
            
        
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.3d 616 (App. 2006).4 Each is addressed in turn.
 
A.	 McKinley’s objection to the prosecutor’s remarks
sufficiently preserved the issue for Bruce’s appeal. 
The State contends that the ICA erred by holding that
 
McKinley’s objection to the State’s remarks adequately preserved
 
the issue for Bruce’s appeal. The State argues that assuming
 that one defendant’s objection applies to all defendants in cases
 where multiple defendants are being tried is impracticable, as
 each defendant may have different trial strategies, and one
 defendant’s objection may not necessarily benefit the other’s
 case. The State also emphasizes that a defendant only needs to
 utter two words, “I join,” to indicate whether he or she is
 joining in the co-defendant’s objection and to preserve the issue
 on appeal. 
The State’s argument presents the following issue of
 
first impression: whether an objection by one defendant
 preserves the issue on appeal for a co-defendant who does not
 raise his or her own objection or join the defendant’s objection. 
Courts in other jurisdictions have adopted one of two
 
approaches to resolve this issue. Several courts have held that
 when an objection by one co-defendant inures to the benefit of
 
The State filed an application for writ of certiorari in each of the
 
defendant’s appeals, separately challenging the ICA’s memorandum opinions in
each. We accepted both applications and consolidated McKinley’s and Bruce’s
cases for oral argument and disposition on certiorari.
 
19
 4           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
both defendants, the other co-defendant’s failure to object or
 
join in the objection does not waive the issue on appeal. In
 Williams v. United States, defendant Melonee Bryant (Bryant)
 allegedly helped an undercover police officer purchase crack
 cocaine from defendant Gualyn Williams (Williams) by using the
 officer’s pre-recorded cash to purchase three bags of crack
 cocaine; she gave one bag to the officer, and kept two for
 herself. 966 A.2d 844, 845-46 (D.C. 2009). After Bryant left,
 the officer performed a field-test on the substance in the bag,
 which indicated the presence of crack cocaine. Id. Both
 
defendants were later arrested and charged with distributing
 cocaine to an undercover police officer. Id. at 845-46. 
Bryant and Williams were tried together, and the
 
government sought to admit the report of a DEA-7 chemist, which
 confirmed that the recovered substance was cocaine. Id. at 847. 
Over Bryant’s objection that the report’s admission would violate
 her constitutional right to confrontation, the trial court
 admitted the report into evidence. Id. Williams did not join
 
Bryant’s objection, nor did he raise an objection of his own. 
See id. On appeal, the government argued that Williams’ failure
 
to raise a constitutional objection at trial waived the issue on
 appeal, thus requiring Williams to show plain error in order for
 the court to consider it. Id. 
20
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The D.C. Court of Appeals rejected the government’s
 
position. Id. The Williams court acknowledged that an objection
 
made by one co-defendant could preserve the issue on appeal for
 
another co-defendant when the objection applies to the latter’s
 situation and inures to his or her benefit. Id. Observing that
 
the government did not proffer any evidence to indicate that
 Williams “was thinking tactically, and was not just asleep at the
 switches, when Bryant forcefully challenged the admission of the
 chemist’s report without accompanying testimony,” the court held
 that Bryant’s objection sufficiently preserved the confrontation
 issue for Williams’ appeal. Id. at 847-48. On this point, the
 
court concluded that “[b]ecause the judge was given full
 opportunity to weigh the constitutional objection, and the
 prosecution a full chance to argue for admissibility, justice
 would not be served by holding Williams to near-forfeiture of the
 claim in circumstances where we see no plausible tactic behind
 his attorney’s silence.” Id. (citation omitted). See also
 
People v. Griffin, 597 N.W.2d 176, 185 n.4 (Mich. App. 1999)
 (observing that despite the defendant’s failure to object,
 “because defendant’s codefendant raised the objection and the
 ruling . . . affected both defendants, we here decline to regard
 the technicality of defendant’s lawyer’s failing to join in the
 objection as failing to preserve this issue”), abrogated on other
 
21
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
grounds by People v. Thompson, 730 N.W.2d 708 (Mich. 2007);
 
People v. Wilson, 187 P.3d 1041, 1062-63 (Cal. 2008)
 (acknowledging that an objection by a co-defendant may
 sufficiently preserve an issue on appeal for the defendant when
 the trial court’s treatment of the co-defendant’s objection would
 cause the defendant to reasonably believe that making his own
 objection would be futile); United States v. Garcia, 291 F.3d
 127, 140 (2nd Cir. 2002) (“We presume that the objection of a co-
defendant is an objection for all defendants, and it is
 sufficient to preserve the issue for appeal.”). 
By contrast, other courts require a defendant to
 
expressly join a co-defendant’s objection, or independently raise
 his or her own objection, to preserve an issue on appeal. In
 Jackson v. State, defendants Jackson and Antonio Harris (Harris)
 were charged with malice murder for shooting and killing a victim
 while trying to rob her at gunpoint. 532 S.E.2d 674, 676 (Ga.
 2000). At trial, the government sought to admit the victim’s
 hospital records, in which Dr. Aru Giorgio (Dr. Giorgio) opined
 about the trajectory of a bullet that had hit the victim. Id.
 
While Jackson raised a general objection to the
 
admission of the hospital records into evidence, which Harris
 joined, neither initially raised a specific ground to support the
 general objection. Id. After the trial court pointed out that
 
22
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
neither Harris nor Jackson had specified the ground upon which
 
they were objecting, Harris stated that he was objecting on the
 ground that Dr. Giorgio was not qualified as an expert on bullet
 trajectories. Id. Jackson did not join Harris’ objection, nor
 
did he offer his own specific ground for objecting. Id. The
 
trial court overruled Harris’ objection and admitted the medical
 records into evidence. Id. 
On appeal, Jackson argued that the trial court should
 
not have admitted the medical records because Dr. Giorgio was not
 qualified to testify as an expert on bullet trajectories. Id. at
 
676-77. The Supreme Court of Georgia held that “[t]his argument
 was not properly raised and preserved below” because “Jackson did
 not join his co-defendant when his co-defendant offered a reason
 for objecting to the admission of the medical record.” Id. at
 
677. See also Linnon v. Commonwealth, 752 S.E.2d 822, 828 (Va.
 
2014) (holding that “one party may not rely on the objection of
 another party to preserve an argument for appeal without
 expressly joining in the objection”); Gavlock v. Coleman, 493
 N.W.2d 94, 98 (Iowa Ct. App. 1992) (holding that an “issue was
 not preserved for appeal because defendant failed to make the
 proper objection or join in the objection raised at trial” by his
 co-defendant); United States v. Harris, 104 F.3d 1465, 1472 (5th
 Cir. 1997) (“Having chosen not to object or at least to join his
 
23
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
codefendant’s objection, the appellant did not preserve the issue
 
for appeal[.]”). 
Upon consideration of both possible approaches, we 
hereby adopt the former approach over the latter for two reasons. First, to require all defendants, especially in cases where numerous defendants are being tried together, to chime in and affirmatively join in a co-defendant’s objection, or object individually to the same issue, would impose upon courts a duplicative litany of redundant procedures that would disrupt the flow of the proceedings. Second, justice would not necessarily be served if a criminal defendant were denied the opportunity to raise an issue on appeal due to a mere technical error when the objection raised at trial also affected the defendant’s case. “[T]he purpose of requiring a specific objection is to inform the trial court of the error.” State v. Long, 98 Hawai' i 348, 353, 
48 P.3d 595, 600 (2002). When a co-defendant raises an objection, this purpose is served, regardless of whether the other defendant joins the co-defendant’s objection or objects independently. Therefore, we hold that an objection by a co-defendant at trial sufficiently preserves the issue on appeal for another defendant tried in the same proceeding when the objection also applies to the non-objecting defendant’s case, even if the non-objecting defendant does not join in the co-defendant’s 
24
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
objection or object independently. 
Applying this principle to the present case, McKinley
 
objected to the prosecutor’s remarks during the State’s rebuttal
 
closing argument. The prosecutor’s comments responded to remarks
 that were made during both defendants’ closing arguments. 
Therefore, McKinley’s objection also applied to Bruce’s case and
 inured to Bruce’s benefit. Accordingly, McKinley’s objection
 adequately preserved the issue for Bruce’s appeal, and plain
 error review was not required. 
B.	 This court’s opinion in State v. Rogan is distinguishable
and inapplicable to the present case.  
The State highlights that “[t]he analysis and holding
 
of Rogan, specifically, was based on the use of race in
 
argument.” Accordingly, the State contends that because the
 comments in the present case did not relate to CW’s race, and
 because the remarks did not similarly inflame the passion and
 prejudices of the jury as the comment made in Rogan, the ICA
 erred in relying on Rogan. 
In Rogan, the defendant was charged with three counts 
of sexual assault in the first degree and five counts of sexual assault in the third degree. 91 Hawai' i at 409, 984 P.2d at 
1235. The complaining witness, who was twelve years old at the time of the alleged offense, had invited the defendant to her 
25
           
       
         
         
         
        
          
         
        
          
        
       
      
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
home while her parents were out of the house. Id. After going
 
to the complaining witness’ sister’s bedroom to listen to music,
 
the defendant allegedly subjected the complaining witness to
 various forms of sexual contact and penetration until her mother
 entered the room after returning home. Id. 
During rebuttal closing argument, the prosecutor in
 
Rogan made the following comment: 
There was one thing [that defense counsel mentioned]
about, you know, it was the parents who wanted the
conviction and somehow she was coached. Yeah, you can
 bet the parents wanted a conviction. This is every
 
mother’s nightmare. Leave your daughter for an hour
and a half, and you walk back in, and here’s some
black, military guy on top of your daughter. That’s
 
what she’s saying. . . .
 
Id. at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (alterations in original). Defense
 
counsel objected to the comment as an improper appeal to racism,
 but the trial court overruled the objection. Id. 
This court held that the prosecutor’s comment was an
 
inflammatory reference to Rogan’s race and amounted to a
 particularly egregious form of misconduct. Id. at 414-15, 984
 
P.2d at 1240-41. The Rogan court observed that “courts
 throughout the country have consistently condemned appeals to
 racial prejudice during closing argument.” Id. at 413, 984 P.2d
 
at 1239. Accordingly, this court held that: 
Because there was no dispute as to the identity of the
perpetrator in this case, Rogan’s race was not a
legitimate area of inquiry inasmuch as race was
irrelevant to the determination of whether Rogan
committed the acts charged. . . . Indeed, the deputy
 
26
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prosecutor’s  comment  had  the  potential  of  distracting
the  jury  from  considering  only  the  evidence  presented
at  trial.   It  is  therefore  inescapable  that  the  deputy
prosecutor’s  reference  to  Rogan  as  a  “black,  military
 
guy”  was  an  improper  emotional  appeal  that  could
foreseeably  have  inflamed  the  jury.
     
Id. at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240. This court also held that “[t]he
 
deputy prosecutor’s inflammatory reference to Rogan’s race was
 further compounded by the statement that the incident was ‘every
 mother’s nightmare,’ which was a blatantly improper plea to evoke
 sympathy for the Complainant’s mother and represented an implied
 invitation to the jury to put themselves in her position.” Id.
 
We agree with the State insofar as we believe that
 
Rogan
 is distinguishable from this case in two key respects. 
First, compared to the prosecutor’s comments in Rogan, the
 comments here did not constitute an improper appeal to the jury’s
 emotions that bore no objectively legitimate purpose. Viewed in
 context, the prosecutor’s comments concluded the State’s
 overarching theme and theory of the case, that Bruce and McKinley
 had treated CW like a piece of property, by asserting that
 treating a person in the manner CW had been treated is improper. 
Second, unlike the prosecutor’s comments in Rogan, the
 
prosecutor’s remarks in the present case did not represent an
 implied invitation to the jury to put themselves in CW’s
 position. As discussed further in section IV.C, infra, when
 considered in context, the prosecutor’s remarks are more properly
 
27
           
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
viewed as a part of the State’s argument that despite defense
 
counsels’ assertions in closing argument to the contrary, the
 evidence sufficiently illustrated that Bruce had facilitated and
 benefited from CW’s prostitution activities, and that McKinley
 had compelled CW to engage in prostitution against her will. 
Because Rogan is significantly distinguishable from
 
the present case, Rogan is inapposite and does not apply. 
Accordingly, we hold that the ICA erred to the extent that it
 relied on Rogan in support of its holding. 
C.	 The prosecutor’s comments did not rise to the level of
misconduct. 
Having argued that Rogan is inapplicable to the present
 
case, the State contends that State v. Kiakona applies and
 
mandates a different outcome because the State’s comments had a
 legitimate bearing on the central issues in this case. The State
 also contends that the remarks, considered against the backdrop
 of the State’s closing argument as a whole and the State’s theory
 of the case, did not invite the jury to place themselves in CW’s
 position, or the position of someone near to her, and decide the
 
case based on emotion rather than evidence. 
In Kiakona, the defendant was charged with terroristic 
threatening in the first degree in connection with a road rage incident. 110 Hawai' i at 451-52, 134 P.3d at 617-18. The 
28
           
  
        
         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
complaining witnesses were two tourists who had, according to the
 
defendant, failed to observe a yield sign and in doing so, cut
 
off the defendant’s vehicle. Id. One of the complaining
 
witnesses testified that the defendant chased them, tried to run
 
them off the road several times, drove along the side of them,
 and ran up on their bumper. Id. at 453-54, 134 P.3d at 619-20. 
During closing argument, the prosecutor referred to the
 
complaining witnesses as “tourists” and “haoles” several times. 
See id. at 456-57, 134 P.3d at 622-23. For example, he said:
 
That’s why [the defendant’s] here in court, his own
arrogance, his own attitude he says the people in the
valley  have  because  it  is  his  turf  and  these  tourists
come  over  there  and  they  cause  trouble  and  they  need
to  be  taught  a  lesson.   That  is  what  this  case  is
 
about.   He’s  trying  to  teach  these  tourists  a  lesson.
 
Id.
 at 456, 134 P.3d at 622. On appeal, the defendant argued
 
that the prosecutor committed misconduct in describing the
 
complaining witnesses as “haoles” and “tourists” throughout the
 State’s closing argument. Id. at 457-59, 134 P.3d at 623-25.
 
The Kiakona court held that the prosecutor’s comments 
did not constitute an improper appeal to “racial, religious, ethnic, political, economic, or other prejudices of the jurors,” nor did they “lack ‘a legitimate bearing on some issue in the case, such as identification by race.’” Id. at 459, 134 P.3d at 
625 (quoting State v. Shabazz, 98 Hawai' i 358, 376, 48 P.3d 605, 
623 (App. 2002)). The ICA observed that “the central issue at 
29
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
trial was criminal intent--whether Defendant went after [the
 
complaining witnesses] in order to terrorize them or merely
 followed them in order to settle details the alleged accident
 entailed.” Id. The court also recognized that “references to
 
‘turf,’ ‘locals’ and ‘haole tourists’ crystallized the motive
 behind Defendant’s criminal intent--his resentment of Caucasian
 tourists and their supposedly highhanded ways in the place where
 he was born and raised.” Id. Accordingly, the Kiakona court
 
held: “Where, as here, references to status had a fundamental
 bearing on the central issue in the case, they were not
 improper.” Id. 
In the present case, the central issues at trial were
 
whether Bruce had facilitated and profited from CW’s involvement
 in prostitution, and whether McKinley had compelled CW to engage
 in prostitution against her will. Conflicting evidence was
 presented on both issues, as discussed in section II.A, supra. 
We acknowledge that when viewed in a vacuum, the
 
prosecutor’s comments could be interpreted as appealing to the
 jury’s passions and prejudices. However, as in Kiakona, the
 prosecutor’s comments, analyzed in context, had a fundamental
 bearing on the primary issues in this case: whether Bruce had
 facilitated and profited from CW’s prostitution activities, and
 whether McKinley had forced CW to involuntarily engage in
 
30
           
        
        
         
          
     
           
        
        
          
         
      
         
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prostitution. During Bruce’s closing argument, defense counsel
 
argued that the evidence demonstrated that he was not L-Way, that
 he never acted as CW’s pimp, and that he had never benefited from
 her activities as a prostitute. In McKinley’s closing argument,
 defense counsel argued that CW had voluntarily engaged in
 prostitution, and that McKinley had beaten her because he was
 exasperated with living with a free-loading roommate that he
 believed was stealing money from one of his other roommates. 
In rebuttal closing argument, the prosecutor responded:
 
So this whole thing about [CW] lying and can’t
be believed, well, the only people who can’t be
believed was Keshawn Stewart and Mr. Bruce. The fact
 
of the matter is that they treated her like property.
 
. . . .
 
. . . They didn’t see her as anything more than a
piece of property to pass around, to mistreat, to
humiliate, intimidate, beat, and force. That is how
 they viewed her, and that is how they treated her.
But she’s not a piece of property. I mean, she’s
somebody’s daughter, she’s somebody’s friend, she’s a
mother, she’s a woman, she is a person, and she
deserves to be treated properly [.]
 
(Emphases added.) 
Considered in context, it appears that the challenged
 
comments were made at the conclusion of the prosecutor’s broader
 
argument that the evidence presented at trial amply demonstrated
 that Bruce and McKinley treated CW like a piece of property--a
 mere object that they could pass around, control, and use to
 generate revenue. Accordingly, the prosecutor’s comments summed
 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
up the facts that, in the State’s view, supported Bruce’s and
 
McKinley’s charges, and argued that the jury should find both of
 them guilty despite defense counsels’ arguments to the contrary
 during their closing arguments. Properly viewed as such, the
 prosecutor’s remarks did not invite the jurors to place
 themselves in CW’s, or any other person’s, position, nor did the
 remarks constitute an improper plea to the jury’s passions and
 prejudices. Consequently, the prosecutor’s comments in this case
 did not rise to the level of misconduct. 
Moreover, while the prosecutor’s comments may have cast
 
CW in a sympathetic light, the comments were still not improper
 because they did not detract from the main point of the otherwise
 meritorious argument--that the evidence showed that Bruce and
 McKinley had treated CW like a piece of property. See State v.
 
Ceballos, 832 A.2d 14, 38 (Conn. 2003) (holding that the
 prosecutor’s comments about a child being the “perfect victim”
 for abuse due to her difficult childhood and poor living
 conditions were not improper appeals to the jury’s emotions
 because while the comments cast the complaining witness in “an
 undoubtedly sympathetic light,” they did not detract from the
 main point of the argument). At most, in making these comments,
 the prosecutor argued that as a human being, CW did not deserve
 to be treated like a piece of property, and that the way Bruce
 
32
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and McKinley treated CW was unacceptable. 
We hold that, when considered in context, the 
prosecutor’s comments were relevant to the central issues at 
trial. See Kiakona, 110 Hawai' i at 459, 134 P.3d at 625. The 
comments in the present case did not constitute prosecutorial misconduct. Accordingly, the ICA erred in holding that the comments were irrelevant to whether Bruce and McKinley were guilty of the offenses with which they were charged, amounted to an invitation for the jurors to decide the case based on their emotions rather than on the evidence presented at trial, and constituted an improper plea to the jurors’ passions and prejudices. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons stated above, as to Bruce, we reverse
 
the ICA’s November 17, 2016 judgment on appeal filed pursuant to
 its October 20, 2016 memorandum opinion, which vacated and
 remanded the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence
 entered on May 5, 2015. With respect to McKinley, we reverse the
 ICA’s September 29, 2016 judgment on appeal filed pursuant to its
 August 31, 2016 memorandum opinion, which vacated and remanded
 the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence and 
33
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
mittimus and warrant of commitment to jail, both of which were
 
filed on May 5, 2015. 
Sonja P. McCullen
for petitioner
 
Benjamin R.C. Ignacio
for respondent
Justin McKinley
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
for respondent
Lawrence L. Bruce
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
34
 