*** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCWC-18-0000922 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
 
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY AS TRUSTEE FOR 
MORGAN STANLEY ABS CAPITAL I  INC. TRUST 2006 -NC4, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
BLAINE T. YATA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant,  
 
and 
 
BROOKE J.C. RIOPTA; AMBER M. RIOPTA; CASIE A. RIOPTA,  
and COUNTY OF KAUAI WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT, Defendants. 
 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000922; CIV. NO. 5CC141000185) 
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, McKenna, Wilson, and Eddins, JJ.)  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
This case arises from a foreclosure proceeding.  On 
August 10, 2022 , Petitioner/Defendant -Appellant Blaine  T. Yata 
(Yata) filed an application for writ of certiorari challenging 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (ICA) July 11, 2022  Judgment  
on Appeal  entered pursuant to its June 9, 2022  Summary Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000922
22-FEB-2023
08:24 AM
Dkt. 5 MO*** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 Disposition Order.  The ICA affirmed the Circuit Court of the 
Fifth Circuit’s (circuit court)  July 19, 2018 Order Granting 
Motion for Summary Judgment and November 1, 2018 Order Denying 
Motion for Reconsideration.  
On or about March 24, 2006, Yata executed a note and 
mortgage to  New Century Mortgage Corporat ion, and the mortgage 
was later assigned to Respondent/Plaintiff -Appellee Deutsche 
Bank National Trust Company, as Trustee for Morgan Stanley ABS 
Capital I Inc. Trust 2006 -NC4 (Deutsche Bank).1  After Yata 
defaulted on the note, Deutsche Bank filed a complaint to 
foreclose the mortgage.  Deutsche Bank asserted that it was 
entitled to possession of the note, which was endorsed in blank.  
Deutsche Bank subsequently filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment, arguing it established all material allegations in the 
complaint and there were no genuine issues of any material fact.   
Attached to Deutsche Bank’s Motion for Summary Judgment was a 
declaration, along with exhibits, purporting to demonstrate 
Deutsche Bank’s possession of the note when the complaint was 
filed.  The circuit court grant ed Deutsche Bank’s Motion for 
Summary Judgment.   Yata filed a Motion for Reconsideration, 
arguing that Deutsche Bank failed to establish its standing to 
foreclose as required by this court’s decision in Bank of Am., 
                     
1  Deutsche Bank’s parent company is Deutsche Bank National Trust Company.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 N.A. v. Reyes -Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻi 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017).  
Deutsche Bank opposed Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration by 
filing another declaration purporting to establish Deutsche 
Bank’s possession of the note when the complaint was filed.   The 
circuit court denied Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration.  
Yata appealed and the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s 
Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment  and Order Denying 
Motion for Reconsideration .  The ICA determined  that, pursuant 
to this court’s decision in U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. as Tr. for LS F9 
Master Participation Tr. v. Verhagen , 149 Hawaiʻi 315, 489 P.3d 
at 419 (2021), as amended  (July 6, 2021), reconsideration 
denied, No. SCWC -17-000746, 2021 WL 2948836 (Haw. July 9, 2021), 
Deutsche Bank produced sufficient evidence to establish its 
standing to foreclose.  
On certiorari,  Yata asserts that the ICA  grievously 
erred by  misinterpreting Verhagen .  Yata argue s that there was 
no “admissible documentary evidence” demonstrating Deutsche Bank 
had possession of the note when it filed the complaint.   Yata’s 
argument appear s to have merit because  the ICA misapplied 
Verhagen  in determining that Deutsche Bank’s documents were 
admissible.   Moreover, even if the documents were admissible, 
those documents did not establish that Deutsche Bank had 
possession  of the note when it filed the complaint.  Thus, 
Deutsche Bank did not establish it had standing to foreclose.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 Accordingly, we vacate the ICA ’s July 11, 2022 
Judgment on Appeal , which affirmed  the circuit court’s Order 
Granting  Motion for Summary Judgment  and Order Denying Motion 
for Reconsideration . 
II. BACKGROUND  
A. Factual Background  
On or about March 24, 2006, Yata  executed an 
“Adjustable Rate Balloon Note” (the Note) to New Century 
Mortgage Corporation.   That same day , to secure the Note , Yata 
signed and del ivered a mortgage (the Mortgage) , which encumbered 
property located  on the Island of Kauaʻi (the mortgaged 
property),  to New Century Mortgage Corp oration.  On August 25, 
2008, the Mortgage was assigned to Deutsche Bank ( the 
Assignment ). 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings2 
1. Deutsche Bank’s Complaint  
On September 10, 2014, Deutsche Ba nk filed a 
“Complaint to Foreclose Mortgage”  (the Complaint).3  Deutsche 
Bank alleged that it had standing to bring the Complaint as the 
current holder of the Note , that it was entitled to  possession 
of the Note, and that the Note was endorsed in blank .  Deutsche 
                     
2  The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.  
 
3  Deutsche  Bank attached as exhibits to its Complaint, inter alia , a copy 
of the Note, a copy of the Mortgage, and a copy of the Assignment.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 Bank maintained that Yata defaulted on the payment of the 
principal and interest on the Note as of March 1, 2010.  
Deutsche Bank asserted that it was entitled to foreclosure o n 
the Mortgage and to a sale of the mortgaged property.  
On November 24, 2014, Yata filed a pro se answer to 
the Complaint and requested that the Complaint be dismissed with 
prejudice.  
2. Deutsche Bank’s Motion for Summary Judgment  
Nearly four years later, o n April 17, 2018, Deutsche 
Bank filed a Motion for Summary Judgment  and for Interlocutory 
Decree of Foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment) .  Deutsche 
Bank argued that  it was entitled to foreclose the Mortgage 
because it established all material allegations in the Complaint 
and there was no genuine issue of any material fact.   Deutsche 
Bank attached a declaration from Matthew Mountes (Mountes 
Declaration) to its Motion for Summary Judgment.4  As relevant 
here, the Mountes Declaration provided:  
 1. I am authorize d to sign this declaration on 
behalf of [Deutsche Bank], as an officer or employee of 
Specialized Loan Servicing LLC (“SLS”), which is [Deutsche 
Bank]’s loan servicing agent (“servicer”) for the subject 
loan (“the Loan”).  
 2. The information in this declar ation is taken 
from SLS’s business records.  I have personal knowledge of 
SLS’s procedures for creating these records.  They are: 
(a) made at or near the time of the occurrence of the 
                     
4  Attached to the Mountes Declaration were true and correct copies of: 
(1) the Note and the Allonges; (2)  the Mortgage; (3)  the Loan Modification 
Agreement; (4)  the Assignment; (5)  the notice sent to Yata regarding the 
default; (6)  the Payment History for the Loan; (7)  a printout that shows Yata 
defaulted on the Loan, the default has was not cured, and the amount owed; 
and (8) a Certification of Possession of Original Promissory Note.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 matters recorded by persons with personal knowledge of the 
information i n the business record, or from information 
transmitted by persons with personal knowledge; (b)  kept in 
the course of SLS’s regularly conducted business 
activities; and (c)  it is the regular practice of SLS to 
make such records.  
 3. The owner of the Note an d Mortgage for a 
particular a [sic] mortgage loan is commonly referred to in 
the loan servicing industry as the Investor.  The Investor 
for this mortgage loan is [Deutsche Bank].  
 4. SLS maintains all the day to day loan 
documents, records and accounting o f payments on the Loan 
being foreclosed in this action including all documents and 
business records acquired by [Deutsche Bank] when it 
purchased the subject mortgage loan.  
 5. Under the terms of SLS’s servicing arrangement, 
[Deutsche Bank] does not partic ipate in, keep and maintain 
any of the day to day loan documents, inputting of 
accounting data, saving of business records and all 
communications with borrowers.  
 6. [Deutsche Bank] as the Investor, has a passive 
role with the primary emphasis on tracking its return on 
investment.  In terms of routine business records on the 
Loan, SLS acts as the sole custodian of [Deutsche Bank]’s 
records.  
 7. Based upon my occupational experience, I know 
that loan servicers follow an industry wide standard on how 
to keep and maintain business records on the loan services 
performed in their portfolio which recordkeeping is part of 
the regularly conducted activity of loan servicers.  The 
type of and regular maintenance of loan information 
including the accounting under gener ally accepted 
principles for each mortgage loan is standard and 
computerized.  
 . . . . 
 11. Finally, the loan servicer records, maintains 
and takes custody of all such daily business records and 
all loan documents, including taking possession of the note 
and mortgage records on behalf of the Investor.  
 12. A portion of the business records for the loan 
in this matter were created by a prior servicer, the prior 
servicer’s records for the loan were integrated and boarded 
into SLS’s systems, such that the prior servicer’s records 
concerning the Loan are now part of SLS’s business records.  
SLS maintains quality control and verification procedures 
as part of the boarding process to ensure the accuracy of 
the boarded records.  It is the regular business pract ice 
of SLS to integrate prior servicers’ records into SLS’s 
business records, and to rely upon the accuracy of those 
boarded records in providing its loan servicing functions.  
These prior servicer records are integrated and relied upon 
by SLS as part of S LS’s business records.  True and correct 
copies of records I have reviewed and relied upon in 
executing this affidavit are attached to this affidavit and 
incorporated herein.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7  13. SLS became [Deutsche Bank]’s loan servicer for 
the Loan being foreclosed in this action on November 1, 
2016.  The prior loan servicers for this mortgage loan were 
America’s Servicing Company and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.  
 . . . . 
 15. [Deutsche Bank], directly or through an agent, 
has possession of the Note.  The Note has been duly 
endorsed in blank.  [Deutsche Bank] is the assignee of the 
security instrument for the subject loan.  [Deutsche Bank] 
has the right to foreclose the subject note and mortgage.  
 . . . . 
 28. At the time the foreclosure Complaint was filed 
in this case, [Deu tsche Bank], directly or through an 
agent, was in possession of the Note.  A true and correct 
copy of the “Certification of Possession of Original 
Promissory Note” is attached hereto as Exhibit “8”.  
  The circuit court orally granted  Deutsche Bank’s 
Motion for Summary Judgment , which was unopposed,  at a hearing 
on June 26, 2018.5 
3. The Circuit Court’s Findings of Fact and Conclusions 
of Law and Judgment  
On July 19, 2018, the circuit court issued “Findings 
of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff’ s Motion 
for Summary Judgment as Against All Defendants and for 
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure”  (Order Granting Motion for 
Summary Judgment ).6  The circuit court noted that Deutsche Bank 
appeared at the hearing on the Motion for Summary Judgment, and 
Yata did not appear.  
                     
5  Yata’s counsel appeared at a previous hearing on the Motion for Summary 
Judgment on May 24, 2018, noted “he was retained last Friday,” and requested 
“a continuance to file an opposition.”  The circuit court set a continued 
hearing for June 26, 2018.   Yata’s counsel did not file an opposition or 
appear at the June 26, 2018 continued hearing.  
 
6  That same day, the circuit court issued its corresponding Judgment.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8 The circuit court found, inter alia , that (1)  the 
Mortgage was assigned to Deutsche Bank on August 25, 2008, 
(2) Yata defaulted on the Note, and (3)  Deutsche Bank was the 
owner and holder of the Note and Mortgage.   The circuit court  
granted the Motion for Summary Judgment, concluding  that 
Deutsche Bank was entitled to a foreclosure on  the Mortgage  and 
to a judgment as a matter of law on the Complaint.  
4. Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration  
Yata had previously filed a “Motion for Rehearing 
and/or Reconsideratio n of this Court’s Decision Granting 
‘Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment as Against All 
Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure’”  (Motion 
for Reconsideration)  on July 3, 2018.  
Citing to Reyes-Toledo and Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes  
(HRS) §§ 490:3-201 and 490:3 -301, Yata maintained that Deutsche 
Bank did not offer admissible evidence that it possessed the 
Note when the Complaint was filed.7  Yata contended that the 
Mountes Declaration, which was attached to Deutsche Bank’s  
Motion for Summary Judgment, contained inadmissible hearsay and 
did not establish Deutsche Bank’s standing.   Citing to  Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Evidence  (HRE) Rule 602 and U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos , 
140 Hawaiʻi 26, 398 P.3d 615 (2017), Yata maintained that 
                     
7  Yata pointed out that Deutsche Bank presented the circuit court with a 
purported copy of the N ote and an allonge stamped with an endorsement.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 Mountes’ testimony was based on his review of SLS’s business 
records, which failed to demonstrate  “the requisite element of 
personal knowledge with respect to Wells Fargo’s business 
records, especially [Deutsche Bank]’s purported possession of 
the original note a t the time the Complaint was filed, or ever.”   
Yata asserted that Mountes never saw the original Note or 
witnessed the Note in Deutsche Bank’s possession.  Yata 
maintained that Mountes instead relied on “his review of a copy 
of an unverified ‘certificate’ (Exhibit 8 to [the Motion for 
Summary Judgment]), wherein an individual named Patrick A. 
Timmers alleges that Well s Fargo had possession of the original 
note on December 18, 2013.”  Yata argued that Deutsche Bank did 
not demonstra te who possessed the Note when the Complaint was 
filed on September 10, 2014.  
  In addition, Yata noted that Mountes state d he 
reviewed Deut sche Bank’s  “business records and files related to 
the mortgage loan herein, including the purported copy of the 
‘Certification of Possession of Original Promissory Note’ signed 
by Timmers on December 18, 2013”  (the Certification) .  According 
to Yata, Moun tes’ review of the Certification  from a prior loan 
servicer did not establish Mountes’ personal knowledge that 
Deutsche Bank possessed the original Note.   Yata thus argued 
that Mountes’ testimony was inadmissible double hearsay.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 Yata asserted that Mountes’  statement and the  
Certification  were “not admissible under the business records 
exception to the hearsay rule ,” which can only be satisfied if  
“the business record referred to by the testifying witness was 
produced, is offered as evidence, and meets the n ecessary 
criteria under HRE Rule 803(b)(6), [8] and is authenticated by a 
qualified witness in accordance with HRE Rule 901 or 902(11).”   
Yata also contended  that Mountes’ statement , based on his review 
of the Certification,  was not a business record.  Yata  
maintained  that even if Mountes could properly authenticate 
business records from the prior servicer, Wells Fargo, the 
business records did not demonstrate that Deutsche Bank 
possessed the Note when it filed the Complaint.  
                     
8  Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence  Rule 803(b)(6) (2002) provides:  
 
 The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, 
even though the declarant is available as a witness:  
  
. . . . 
  
(b) Other exceptions.  
  
. . . . 
  
(6) Records of regularly conduced activity.  A 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any 
form, acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, 
made in the course of a regularly conducted activity, at or 
near the time of the acts, even ts, conditions, opinions, or 
diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the custodian or 
other qualified witness, or by certification that complies 
with rule 902(11) or a statute permitting certification, 
unless the sources of information or other circumstanc es 
indicate lack of trustworthiness.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 According to Yata, Deutsche Bank  only produced a copy 
of the purported Note and the  Certification,  which was signed by 
Timmers before the Complaint was filed in 2013.   Yata maintained 
that HRE Rule 803(b)(6) only admits records of regularly 
conducted activity and the  Certification  was “not a verified and 
trustworthy record of regularly conducted activity.”  Yata 
argued that the  Certification was “ clearly a document that was 
prepared in anticipation of litigation, which is inadmissible.”   
Yata maintained  that Deutsche Bank  “failed to produ ce any 
admissible evidence demonstrating ” it possessed or was entitled 
to enforce the Note when the Complaint was filed , and thus  
Deutsche Bank  did not establish its standing to foreclose the 
Mortgage.  
a. Deutsche Bank’s Supplemental Opposition  
On September 21, 2018, Deutsche Bank filed a 
supplemental memorandum in opposition to Yata’s Motion for 
Reconsideration.9  Attached to Deutsche Bank’s supplemental 
memorandum was a “Declaration Regarding Location of the Note”  
                     
9  Deutsche Bank previously filed a memorandum in opposition to Yata’s 
Motion for Reconsideration on  July 27, 2018.  Deutsche Bank contended that 
the Motion for Reconsideration should be denied because Yata did not “pre sent 
new evidence or arguments that could not have been presented during the 
earlier adjudicated” Motion for Summary Judgment.  In support of this 
argument, Deutsche Bank noted that Yata’s counsel appeared at the May 24, 
2018 Motion for Summary Judgment he aring and requested a continuance to file 
an opposition, but at the June 26, 2018 continued hearing, Yata or his 
counsel did not appear and no opposition had been filed.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 from Mark McCloskey  (the McCloskey Declarati on).10  As relevant 
here, the McCloskey Declaration provided:  
 1. I am authorized to sign this declaration on 
behalf of [Deutsche Bank], as an officer or employee of 
Specialized Loan Servicing LLC (“SLS”), which is [Deutsche 
Bank]’s loan servicing agent (“servicer”) for the subject 
loan (“the Loan”).  
 2. The information in this declaration is taken 
from SLS’s business records.  I have personal knowledge of 
SLS’s procedures for creating these records.  They are: 
(a) made at or near the time of the occurren ce of the 
matters recorded by persons with personal knowledge of the 
information in the business record, or from information 
transmitted by persons with personal knowledge; (b)  kept in 
the course of SLS’s regularly conducted business 
activities; and (c)  it is the regular practice of SLS to 
make such records.  I am familiar with SLS’s record -keeping 
system. 
 3. The owner of the Note and Mortgage for a 
particular a [sic] mortgage loan is commonly referred to in 
the loan servicing industry as the Investor.  Th e Investor 
for this mortgage loan is [Deutsche Bank] . 
 4. SLS maintains all the day to day loan 
documents, records and accounting of payments on the Loan 
being foreclosed in this action including all documents and 
business records acquired by [Deutsche Bank] when it 
purchased the subject loan.  
 5. Under the terms of SLS’s servicing arrangement, 
[Deutsche Bank] does not participate in, keep and maintain 
any of the day to day loan documents, inputting of 
accounting data, saving of business records and all 
communications with borrowers.  
 6. [Deutsche Bank], as the Investor, has a passive 
role with the primary emphasis on tracking its return on 
investment.  In terms of routine business records on the 
Loan, SLS acts as the sole custodian of [Deutsche Bank]’s 
records.  [Deutsche Bank]’s records were received by SLS 
and incorporated into SLS’s records.  SLS relies upon the 
accuracy of these records in providing its loan servicing 
functions.  [Deutsche Bank]’s records are relied upon by 
SLS as part of SLS’s busine ss records.  I am familiar with 
the record -keeping system of [Deutsche Bank].  
 7. Based upon my occupational experience, I know 
that loan servicers follow an industry wide standard on how 
to keep and maintain business records on the loan services 
performed  in their portfolio which record -keeping is part 
of the regularly conducted activity of loan servicers.  The 
type of and regular maintenance of loan information 
                     
10  Deutsche Bank’s counsel also submitted a declaration which stated that 
counsel woul d bring the original endorsed Note to the October 2, 2018 Motion 
for Reconsideration hearing.   It appears Deutsche Bank’s counsel did not 
bring the original endorsed Note to the hearing.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 including the accounting under generally accepted 
principles for each mortgage loan is standard  and 
computerized.  
 . . . . 
 11. Finally, the loan servicer records, maintains 
and takes custody of all such daily business records and 
all loan documents, including taking possession of the note 
and mortgage records on behalf of the Investor . 
 12. A portion of the business records for the loan 
in this matter were created by a prior servicer, the prior 
servicer’s records for the loan were integrated and boarded 
into SLS’s systems, such that the prior servicer’s records 
concerning the Loan are now part of SL S’s business records.  
SLS maintains quality control and verification procedures 
as part of the boarding process to ensure the accuracy of 
the boarded records.  It is the regular business practice 
of SLS to integrate prior servicers’ records into SLS’s 
business records, and to rely upon the accuracy of those 
boarded records in providing its loan servicing functions.  
These prior servicer records are integrated and relied upon 
by SLS as part of SLS’s business records.  I am familiar 
with the record -keeping s ystems that prior servicers used 
to create and record information related to residential 
mortgage loans that it serviced, including the process by 
which information was entered into those systems and how 
those records were maintained.  True and correct cop ies of 
records I have reviewed and relied upon in executing this 
affidavit are attached to this affidavit and incorporated 
herein. 
 13. On or about March 24, 2006, Defendant BLAINE T. 
YATA executed a promissory note (“Note”) in the amount of 
$420,000.00.  A true and correct copy of the endorsed Note 
and the Allonges are attached hereto as Exhibit “1”.  
 14. At the time the foreclosure Complaint was filed 
on September 10, 2014, [Deutsche Bank], through its 
custodian Deutsche Bank National Trust Company, was i n 
possession of the Note.  The Note was kept by the custodian 
at 1761 E. St. Andrew Place, Santa Ana, CA 92705 on behalf 
of [Deutsche Bank].  The original date of possession of the 
Note by the custodian was April 4, 2006.  The Note had been 
returned to the  custodian on December 27, 2013.  The 
custodian maintained possession of the Note until May 8, 
2015.  A true and correct copy of the documentation 
supporting Note possession at the time of the filing of the 
Complaint is attached hereto as Exhibit “2”.  
 15. The Note, which is endorsed in blank, is 
currently being held by Law Offices of Mar vin S.C. Dang, 
LLLC for [Deutsche Bank].  
b. Yata’s Reply 
On September 27, 2018, Yata filed a reply to Deutsche 
Bank’s supplemental memorandum in opposition to the Motion for *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 Reconsideration.   Yata noted the McCloskey Declaration claimed 
that Deutsche Bank was in possession of the Note when the 
Complaint was filed on September 10, 2014.  Yata argued that 
such statement was inadmissible hearsay.  Yata contended  that 
even if Deuts che Bank possessed  the Note when the Complaint was 
filed, the McCloskey Declaration did not offer evidence 
demonstrating that the Note was endorsed  at that time.  
Yata argued that Deutsche Bank attempted  “to invoke 
the business records exception to the hear say rule ” by 
presenting “ a document marked as Exhibit 2,” which  were 
screenshots allegedly demonstrating Deutsche Bank’s possession 
of the Note when the Complaint was filed.  
Yata contended that  the McCloskey Declaration lacked 
the necessary foundation to a dmit Exhibit 2 into evidence.   Yata 
further contended that  
Although [McCloskey] claims that Exhibit “2” is the record 
he relied upon to determine that [Deutsche Bank]  was the 
holder of the note at the time the complaint was filed, it 
is impossible for any reasonable person viewing the 
document to reach the same conclusion.  McCloskey offers no 
explanation as to what any of the items of that document 
mean, or when, wher e, why, and how those alleged entries 
were made.  McClosk[e]y does not even point to a single 
entry on that document that purports to evidence [Deutsche 
Bank]’s possession of the indorsed promissory note.  
Without any such foundational testimony from McCls ok[e]y, 
Exhibit “2” offered as a business record for the purpose of 
demonstrating [Deutsche Bank] ’s possession of the note at 
the time the Complaint was filed, lacks trustworthiness.  
Nowhere does that document even reference the subject 
mortgage note.  No r is there any testimony as to when 
Exhibit “2” was generated.  The document itself is dated 
August 29, 2018, long after the Complaint was filed herein.  
As such, Exhibit “2”, lacking foundation and *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 trustworthiness, is not admissible under the business 
records exception to the hearsay rule.  
Thus, Yata maintained that his Motion for Reconsideration should 
be granted because Deutsche Bank did not establish its standing.  
c. The Circuit Court’s Order 
On November 1, 2018, the circuit court issued an  Order 
Denying M otion for Reconsideration , concluding that Deutsche 
Bank possessed the Note when the Complaint was filed . 
C. ICA Proceedings  
1. Opening Brief 
On November 30, 2018, Yata filed a notice of appeal.   
Yata filed an opening brief on April 10, 2019.   Yata raised one 
point of error on appeal, arguing that  Deutsche Bank did not 
establish its standing to foreclose and thus the circuit court 
erroneously granted Deutsche Bank’s Motion for Summary Judgment 
and erroneously denied Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration.   Yata 
repeated the arguments he made before the circuit court in his 
Motion for  Reconsideration and reply to Deutsche Bank’s 
supplemental memo randum in opposition to Yata’s Motion for 
Reconsideration.  
2. Answering Brief  
Deutsche Bank filed an answering brief on June 19, 
2019.  Deutsche Bank contended that  the circuit court properly 
granted “the Motion for Summary Judgment because the Note was *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 endorsed prior to the filing of the Complaint and Plaintiff was 
in possession.”11 
  Deutsche Bank pointed out that the Mountes D eclaration 
was signed by Mountes, a Second Assistant Vice President at SLS, 
Deutsche Bank’s loan servicer.   Deutsche Bank noted that the 
Mountes Declaration states that Deutsche Bank, directly or 
through an agent, possessed the Note when the Complaint was 
filed. 
  According to Deutsche Bank,  the instant case is 
distinguishable from Reyes-Toledo.  Deutsche Bank argued that in 
this case,  “the blank indorsement of the Note occurred prior to 
the initiation of the suit.”   Deutsche Bank  noted that “[t]he 
endorsed  Note was attached to the Complaint.”  Deutsche Bank 
asserted that  it possessed the Note, “through its custodian 
Deutsche Bank National Trust Company,” when it filed the 
Complaint.   Deutsche Bank thus contended that  it had standing to 
foreclose when the Co mplaint was filed.  
  Deutsche Bank further argued that the circuit court 
properly denied Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration.   Deutsche 
Bank repeated the arguments it made in the memorandum in 
opposition to Yata’s Motion for Reconsideration.   In addition, 
Deutsche Bank noted that  the McCloskey Declaration  stated: 
                     
11  Deutsche Bank also argued that Yata’s appeal should be dismissed 
pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure  Rules 28 and 30.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 14. At the time the foreclosure Complaint was filed on 
September 10, 2014, [Deutsche Bank] , through its custodian 
Deutsche Bank National Trust Company, was in possession of 
the Note.  The Note was ke pt by the custodian at 1761 E. 
St. Andrew Place, Santa Ana, CA 92705 on behalf of 
Plaintiff.  The original date of possession of the Note by 
the custodian was April 4, 2006.  The Note had been 
returned to the custodian on December 27, 2013.  The 
custodian maintained possession of the Note until May 8, 
2015.  A true and correct copy of the documentation 
supporting Note possession at the time of the filing of the 
Complaint is attached hereto as Exhibit “2.”  
According to Deutsche Bank,  Exhibit 2 supports the i nformation 
in paragraph 14 of the McCloskey Declaration.   Deutsche Bank 
asserted tha t its custodian, Deutsche Bank National Trust 
Company, possessed  “the Note from December 27, 2013 until May 8, 
2015” and thus Deutsche Bank possessed the Note when the 
Complaint was filed.  
  Citing to State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawaiʻi 354, 365 -68, 
227 P.3d 520, 531 -34 (2010) , as amended  (Apr. 5 2010) , Deutsche 
Bank maintained that the McCloskey Declaration laid a sufficie nt 
foundation  and the business records attached to the McCloskey 
Declaration were admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).   Deutsche 
Bank also contended that Yata  did not “provide any specific 
facts showing that the records in question are unreliable and 
untrustworthy .” 
3. ICA Summary Disposition Order  
The ICA issued a Summary Disposition Order on June 9, 
2022.  As an initial matter, the ICA pointed out that a hearing 
on the Motion for Summary Judgment was set for May 24, 2018 , *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 where Yata’s counsel requested a con tinuance to file an 
opposition .  The ICA noted that no opposition to the Motion for 
Summary Judgment was filed, and neither Yata nor his counsel 
appeared  at the June 26, 2018 continued hearing.   The ICA 
determined that  “to the extent that Yata contends – based on 
hearsay objections that were not raised in response to the 
Motion for Summary Judgment – that the Circuit Court erred in 
entering the  [Order Granting Motion for Summary 
Judgment]  . . . , Yata’s arguments are without merit”  because 
those objections  were waived.12 
The ICA went on to note that the circuit court 
considered the issue of standing at the Motion for 
Reconsideration stage.  Citing to this court’s decision in 
Verhagen , the ICA determined that  
 Here, with the Motion for Summary Judgment, Deuts che 
Bank submitted, inter alia , a declaration of Matthew 
Mountes (Mountes), Second Assistant Vice President of 
Specialized Loan Servicing LLC (SLS), loan servicer for 
Deutsche Bank; and in conjunction with its response to the 
Motion for Reconsideration, De utsche Bank submitted, inter 
alia, a declaration of Mark McCloskey (McCloskey), 
Assistant Vice President of SLS, both attesting to their 
personal review and knowledge of SLS’s records, including 
incorporated records.  With careful consideration of the 
supreme court’s directives in Verhagen , and upon review of 
the evidence presented by Deutsche Bank, we conclude that 
Mountes and McCloskey were qualified witnesses with 
personal knowledge of SLS’s procedures for creating its 
                     
12  Although the ICA did not err when it concluded that Yata’s argument  was 
meritless based on waiver , this court will address  Yata’s arguments on 
certiorari because Deutsche Bank did not raise a waiver argument, the circuit 
court addressed the Motion for Reconsideration’s substantive issues , and the 
ICA discussed U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. as Tr. for LSF9 Master Participation Tr. v. 
Verhagen, 149 Hawaiʻi 315, 489 P.3d 419 (2021), as amended  (July 6, 2021), 
reconsideration denied , No. SCWC -17-0000746, 2021 WL 2948836 (Haw. July 9, 
2021) when affirming the circuit court . *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 records, including its procedures f or incorporation of 
records of other businesses into SLS’s records, and SLS’s 
reliance on those records and maintenance of those records 
in the course of its regularly -conducted business 
activities, after a pre -incorporation process of quality 
control and verification procedures.  Although indicia of 
trustworthiness are not profuse, we conclude that the 
record provides sufficient indicia of trustworthiness, 
including with respect to the evidence that the Note was in 
the possession of Deutsche Bank, through its custodian 
Deutsche Bank National Trust Company, at the time the 
foreclosure  complaint  was filed.  Thus, we conclude that 
the Circuit Court did not err or abuse its discretion in 
denying the Motion for Reconsideration and rejecting Yata’s 
argument that Deutsche Bank did not have standing to 
foreclose on the subject property.  
Thus, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s  Order Granting Motion 
for Summary Judgment  and Order Denying Motion for 
Reconsideration .  The ICA issued its corresponding Judgment on 
Appeal on July 11, 2022.  
D. Application for Writ of Certiorari  
Yata filed a  timely application for writ of certiorari 
on August 10, 2022.   Yata asserts  that the ICA erroneously 
interpreted this court’s decision in Verhagen for two reason s. 
  First, Yata argues that the ICA erroneously held  that 
Deutsche Bank established it had possession of the Note when the 
Complaint was filed because (a)  there was no “admissible 
documentary evidence” of possession, and (b)  Deutsche Bank did 
not demonstrate how it was connected  to the custodian, Deutsche 
Bank National Trust Company.13 
                     
13  Yata maintains that “a parent corporation and its wholly -owned 
subsidiary are separate and distinct legal entities” and standing must be 
proven by Deutsche Bank  rather than Deutsche Bank’s parent company.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20   Yata argues that the instant case is distinguishable 
from Verhagen .  Yata contends that the Mountes and McCloskey 
Declarations contain conclusory statements regarding possession 
of the Note at the  time the Complaint was filed.  According to 
Yata, the only documentary evidence that Deutsche Bank possessed 
the Note was Exhibit 2 to the McCloskey Declaration.   Yata 
maintains  that Exhibit 2 is an inadmissible screenshot.   Citing 
to Wells Fargo Bank, N. A. v. Fong , 149 Hawaiʻi 249, 488 P.3d 1228 
(2021), Yata asserts that “ the screenshot is not self -
explanatory and McCloskey’s statements about what this shows are 
conclusory.”  Yata maintains that  the McCloskey Declaration does 
not state  “what entity the sc reenshot belongs to, and whether 
[McCloskey]  is familiar with the record -keeping of the entity.”  
Yata contends that  Exhibit 2 refers to a custodian “but does not 
state where the Note is.”   Yata asserts that  the screenshots 
were not admissible documentary evidence pursuant to Verhagen . 
  Second, Yata maintains that  the ICA erroneously held 
that the “qualified witness” doctrine applied to the screenshots 
because “(a) Deutsche Bank National Trust Company was not the 
lender or a prior loan servicer, and (b)  it was not shown what 
entity created or maintained the screenshot.”  
  Yata argues that the ICA did not analyze the three 
factors, which were set forth in Verhagen  and Wells Fargo Bank, 
N.A. v. Behrendt , 142 Hawaiʻi 37, 414 P.3d 89 (2018), to *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 determine “wheth er [Mountes and McCloskey] were qualified 
witnesses.”  Yata contends  that although McCloskey states that 
SLS received and incorporated business records into SLS’s 
records,  McCloskey “does not make this statement for the 
screenshot attached as Exhibit 2 to his declaration.”  Ya ta 
maintains  that “stating what a screenshot is without 
authenticating the screenshot does not meet the admissibility 
requirements for such evidence.”  
  Citing to Verhagen , Yata contends that  the McCloskey 
Declaration  does not explain McCloskey’s familiarity “with the 
record-keeping system that produced the screenshot ” or “state 
how an SLS employee would have knowledge of the records of 
Deutsche Bank National Trust Company.”   According to Yata,  
Deutsche Bank’s only evidence of possessio n of the Note was  “a 
screenshot that purports to show that Deutsche Bank National 
Trust Company had possession of the Note ” when the Complaint was 
filed.  Yata reiterates  that Deutsche Bank did not explain how 
it was related to Deutsche Bank National Trust Company and the 
only documentary evidence showing Deutsche Bank possessed the 
Note when the Complaint was filed was an inadmissible 
screenshot.14 
                     
14  Deutsche Bank did not file a response.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 III.   DISCUSSION  
A. Yata correctly ar gues that Deutsche Bank failed to 
establish standing.  
Yata largely cites to this court’s decision in 
Verhagen15 in support of his argument that Deutsche Bank  lacked 
standing because Deutsche Bank  did not prove it had possession 
of the Note at the time it fi led the Complaint.  Specifically, 
Yata maintains that Deutsche Bank did not produce “admissible 
documentary evidence” that it had possession of the Note when 
the Complaint was filed, and that screenshots submitted by 
Deutsche Bank were inadmissible under t he “qualified witness” 
doctrine . 
In Verhagen , Patrick Verhagen (Verhagen) owned real 
estate (the Property) and executed a note, secured by a mortgage 
on the Property, in favor of Washington Mutual.  Verhagen , 149 
Hawaiʻi at 317, 489 P.3d at 421.  The mortg age was assigned to 
U.S. Bank.  Id.  Caliber Home Loans, Inc. (Caliber) was U.S. 
Bank’s loan servicer, and JPMorgan Chase previously serviced the 
loan.  Id. at 317-18, 489 P.3d at 421 -22. 
                     
15  The briefing in th is appeal was completed in 2019 and t his court’s 
decision in Verhagen  was published in 2021.  Consequently , the parties did 
not cite to Verhagen  in the briefings before the ICA .  However, the ICA 
relied on Verhagen  in its Summary Disposition Order to affirm  the circuit 
court’s Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment and Order Denying Motion 
for Reconsideration.   Thus, Verhagen  is relevant to the instant application 
for writ of certiorari.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 After Verhagen defaulted on the note, U.S Bank filed a 
foreclosure c omplaint in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit, and attached a Verification by Caliber employee Julia 
Jackson.  Id. at 318, 489 P.3d at 422.  Jackson was familiar 
with Caliber’s records and how those records were maintained, 
and verified U.S. Bank pos sessed the original note.   Id. 
U.S. Bank subsequently filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure (MSJ).  Id.  
U.S. Bank supported its MSJ with a declaration from Alyssa 
Salyers, a foreclosure document specialist at Caliber (Salyers 
Declaration).  Id.  In the Salyers Declaration,  
 Salyers declared she was familiar with both Caliber’s 
business records concerning the Note and the manner in 
which Caliber maintains those records.  Salyers also 
declared she had inspected a copy of  the Note maintained by 
Caliber.  She attached a “true and correct” copy of the 
Note to her declaration.  She further declared that 
Caliber’s records concerning the Note include records 
incorporated from the prior loan servicer, JPMorgan Chase.  
The record s obtained from JPMorgan Chase, Salyers, 
declared, are “kept and maintained by Caliber in the 
ordinary course of its business for the purpose of 
maintaining an accounting of payments received, expenses 
incurred, and amounts advanced with regard to the Subj ect 
Loan, and such records are relied upon by Caliber in the 
regular course of its business.”  
Id.  Verhagen filed an opposition to U.S. Bank’s MSJ,  contending 
that “U.S. Bank could not establish standing under [Reyes-
Toledo].”  Id.  The circuit court disag reed and granted U.S. 
Bank’s MSJ.  Id. 
  After Verhagen appealed, the ICA remanded the case so 
U.S. Bank could “supplement the record in light of Reyes-Toledo *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 and [Mattos].”  Id. (footnote omitted).   Then, “[o]n remand, U.S 
Bank moved for ratification of the circuit court’s prior 
judgment.”  Id. at 319, 489 P.3d at 423.  Verhagen raised 
jurisdictional objections “but did not substantively oppose the 
motion to ratify.”  Id.  U.S. Bank’s motion to ratif y was 
accompanied by a supplemental declaration from Melinda 
Patterson, a Caliber employee (Patterson Declaration).  Id.  
Patterson stated she “was familiar with both Caliber’s books and 
records concerning the Note and the manner in which Caliber 
maintains  its books and records.”  Id.  The Patterson 
Declaration further provided:  
 Caliber’s records include and incorporate  records for 
the Loan obtained from [JPMorgan Chase] (“Prior Servicer”), 
the prior loan servicer for the Loan.  The records obtained 
by Caliber from the Prior Servicer are kept and maintained 
by Caliber in the ordinary course of its business for the 
purpose of maintaining an accounting of payment received, 
expenses incurred, and amounts advanced with regard to the 
Loan, and such records are r elied upon by Caliber in the 
regular course of its business.  The information regarding 
the Loan transferred to Caliber from the Prior Servicer has 
been validated in many ways , including but not limited to, 
going through a due diligence phase, review of ha rd copy 
documents, and review of the payment history and accounting 
of other fees, costs, and expenses charged to the Loan by 
Prior Servicer .  It is Caliber’s regular practice, after 
these phases are complete, to receive records from prior 
servicers and in tegrate these records into Caliber’s 
business records at the time of acquisition .  Once 
integrated, Caliber maintains and relies on these business 
records in the ordinary course of its mortgage loan 
servicing business.  
Id. (brackets in original).  
  Patterson also declared that U.S. Bank possessed the  
note when it filed its complaint against Verhagen:  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25  Plaintiff, or its agent on Plaintiff’s behalf, was in 
possession of the original wet-ink, indorsed in blank Note 
when the above -captioned foreclosure action w as commenced 
on March 23, 2016 and since [that time ] . . . . 
 My personal knowledge of these statements is derived 
from my having inspected Caliber’s business records.  
Specifically, I researched Calber’s business records, which 
includes “Certification” [s ic] executed by Caliber 
employee, Jennifer Martin.  The “Certification” contained 
in Caliber’s business records evidence [sic] that the 
original wet ink, indorsed in blank Note was in Caliber’s 
possession on Plaintiff’s behalf on February 9, 2016.  
Further, the “Certification” contained in Caliber’s 
business records indicates that the original wet -ink Note 
was indorsed in blank no later than February 9, 2016, as 
the original wet -ink Note was electronically scanned and 
uploaded to Caliber’s business records on or before 
February 9, 2016, and the scanned copy of the original wet -
ink Note that was uploaded to Caliber’s business records on 
or before February 9, 2016 contains a blank indorsement on 
page 6 of the Note . 
Id. (brackets in original).   Jennifer Martin’ s certification was 
attached to the Patterson Declaration.  Id.  In addition, 
Patterson declared that there was a December 9, 2016 attorney’s 
bailee letter agreement in Caliber’s business records, and “that 
Caliber sent the letter to U.S. Bank’s legal coun sel on or 
around that date along with the wet -ink indorsed -in-blank Note.”  
Id. at 319-20, 489 P.3d at 423 -24 (footnote omitted).  
  The circuit court issued amended findings of fact and 
conclusions of law, finding that  U.S. Bank possessed the note 
when it filed the complaint.   Id. at 320, 489 P.3d at 424.  
However, the ICA issued an amended summary disposition order  
vacating the circuit court’s amended findings of fact and 
conclusions of law.  Id. at 321, 489 P.3d at 425.  The ICA 
determined  U.S. Bank did not demonstrate it possessed the note 
when the complaint was filed and thus lacked standing.   Id. *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 (citation omitted).  U.S. Bank filed an application for writ of 
certiorari.  Id. at 323, 489 P.3d at 427.  This court concluded 
that U.S. Bank had standing as required by Reyes-Toledo, vacated 
the ICA’s amended summary disposition order , and affirmed the 
circuit court’s granting of U.S. Bank’s MSJ.  Id. at 328, 489 
P.3d at 432.  
As discussed below, the instant case is 
distinguishable from Verhagen , and Deutsche Bank did not 
demonstrate it had possession of the Note when it filed the 
Complaint.  
1. Deutsche Bank’s documentary evidence was inadmissible 
because there was insufficient testimony regarding 
circumstances of trustworthiness.  
Yata correctly argues that Deutsche Bank’s documentary 
evidence that it possessed the Note was inadmissible.  Unlike 
the records in Verhagen, Deutsche Bank’s records were 
inadmissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) because the Mountes  and 
McCloskey Declarations did not sufficiently demonstrate 
circumstances of trustworthiness.  
In Verhagen , this court pointed out that “HRE Rule 
803(b)(6) establishes a hearsay exception for ‘records of 
regularly conducted activity.’”  Id. at 325, 489 P.3d at 429 
(quoting HRE Rule 8 03(b)(6)).  This court stated that “when an 
entity incorporates records prepared by another entity into its 
own records, they are admissible as business records of the *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 incorporating entity  provided that it relies on the records, 
there are other indicia of reliability, and the requirements of 
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) are otherwise satisfied.”  Id. (quoting 
Fitzwater , 122 Hawaiʻi 354, 367 -68, 227 P.3d 520, 533 -34). 
This court noted when “it is appropriate to treat an 
incorporated record as ‘created’ by the receivin g business:”  
 Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies 
that [1]  the documents were incorporated and kept in the 
normal course of business, [2]  that the incorporating 
business typically rel ies upon the accuracy of the contents 
of the documents, and [3]  the circumstances otherwise 
indicate the trustworthiness of the document.  
Id. at 325-26, 489 P.3d at 429 -30 (quoting Behrendt , 142 Hawaiʻi 
at 45, 414 P.3d at 97)  (brackets in original ).  This court 
further noted that an incorporated record is admissible even 
without testimony concerning its actual creation if the three 
conditions are satisfied.  Id. at 326, 489 P.3d at 430.  
  As applied to the facts in Verhagen , this court  
determined that the first two requirements were satisfied:  
 Patterson and Salyers both testified that JPMorgan 
Chase’s records were incorporated into Caliber’s own and 
kept and maintained by Caliber in the ordinary course of 
its business.  They both further testified that Cal iber 
used and relied on the incorporated records in the regular 
course of its loan servicing business.  The first two 
requirements for the admission of incorporated records are 
thus satisfied.  
Id. (footnote omitted).  
With respect to the third requirement, this court 
noted that  Salyers did not testify about circumstances *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 indicating  “the trustworthiness of the documents Caliber 
incorporated from JPMorgan Chase ” but Patterson did  because 
“Patterson declared that:”  
 The information regarding the Loan transferre d to 
Caliber from the Prior Servicer has been validated in many 
ways, including, but not limited to, going through a due 
diligence phase, review of hard copy documents, and review 
of the payment history and accounting of other fees, costs, 
and expenses cha rged to the Loan by Prior Servicer.  
Id.  This court determined  that: 
 Though scant, this testimony establishes 
circumstances indicating the trustworthiness of Caliber’s 
incorporated records.  It is evidence that before 
incorporating JPMorgan Chase’s docume nts, Caliber reviewed 
hard copies of the documents, engaged in a “due diligence” 
process, and reviewed the payment history and accounting 
associated with the loan.  JPMorgan Chase’s documents were 
not, in other words, uncritically incorporated into 
Caliber’s own.  They were vetted by Caliber.  Th is pre-
incorporation vetting, however nebulously described by 
Patterson’s testimony, is a circumstance that indicates the 
trustworthiness of the documents.  
Id.  This court concluded that  Patterson’s testimony satisf ied 
the three Behrendt  requirements  and “[t]he ICA should have held 
that Caliber’s incorporated records, as authenticated by Salyers 
and Patterson’s testimony, were admissible under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6).”  Id. at 327, 489 P.3d at 431 (footnote omitted).  
Here, like the declarations in Verhagen , the Mountes 
and McCloskey Declarations satisfy the first two Behrendt  
requirements.16  Both declarations stated that some of the 
                     
16  In addition, Mountes and McCloskey were qualified witnesses because 
they had knowledge of SLS’s record -keeping system and described SLS’s 
incorporation of prior loan servicer’s documents.  See Verhagen , 149 Hawaiʻi 
at 327 n.8, 489 P.3d at 430 n.8 (citing State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawaiʻi 354, 
366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 (2010), as amended  (Apr. 5, 2010)  (“The phrase ‘other 
qualified witness’ is given a very broad interpretation.  The witness need *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 business records regarding Yata’s loan were “created by a prior 
servicer” and “were integra ted and boarded into SLS’s systems, 
such that the prior servicer’s records concerning the Loan are 
now part of SLS’s records.”  Both declarations further stated 
that 
It is the regular business practice of SLS to integrate 
prior servicers’ records into SLS’ s business records, and 
to rely upon the accuracy of those boarded records in 
providing its loan servicing functions.  These prior 
servicer records are integrated and relied upon by SLS as 
part of SLS’s business records.  
In addition, McCloskey stated he wa s “familiar with the record -
keeping systems that prior servicers used to create and record 
information related to residential mortgage loans that it 
serviced, including the process by which information was entered 
into those systems and how those records w ere maintained.”  The 
Mountes and McCloskey Declarations demonstrate that SLS 
“incorporated and kept the documents in the normal course of 
business” and “typically relies upon the accuracy of the 
contents of the documents,” and “[t]he first two requirement s 
for admission of incorporated records are thus satisfied.”  Id. 
at 326, 489 P.3d at 430 (citing Behrendt , 142 Hawaiʻi at 45, 414 
P.3d at 97).  
                     
only have enough familiarity with the record -keeping system of the b usiness 
in question to explain how the record came into existence in the ordinary 
course of business.”) (cleaned up)).  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 However, the Mountes and McCloskey Declarations do not 
provide sufficient “circumstances [that] indicate the 
trustworthiness of the documents.”  Id.  With regard to 
circumstances indicating trustworthiness, the Mountes and 
McCloskey Declarations state that “SLS maintains quality control 
and verification procedures as part of the boarding process to 
ensure the accura cy of the boarded records.”  The declarations  
in Verhagen  provided specific methods of validation of documents 
from the prior loan servicer, “including, but not limited to, 
going through a due diligence phase, review of hard copy 
documents, and review of t he payment history and account of 
other fees, costs, and expenses charged to the Loan by Prior 
Servicer.”  Id.  The Mountes and McCloskey Declarations merely 
assert that SLS has “quality control and verification 
procedures” to ensure the accuracy of incorp orated records 
without stating what those procedures are.  This court noted 
that the testimony indicating circumstances of trustworthiness 
in Verhagen  was “scant” and “nebulously described” circumstances 
of trustworthiness.  Id.  Here, there is even less t estimony 
describing circumstances of trustworthiness.  Thus, it appears 
that the third Behrendt  requirement was not satisfied, and the 
documents attached to the Mountes and McCloskey Declarations 
were not admissible.  See id. at 327, 489 P.3d at 431.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 2. Even if Deutsche Bank’s documentary evidence was 
admissible, that documentary evidence was insufficient 
to establish Deutsche Bank’s possession of the Note 
when it filed the Complaint.  
In Verhagen , this court determined that “[t]he 
evidence, taken together, sho ws U.S. Bank had standing at the 
time it filed suit.”  Id.  This court noted that  “a foreclosing 
plaintiff must establish its standing to b ring a lawsuit at the 
commencement of the proceeding, not merely at the summary 
judgment stage.”17  Id. (citing Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻi at 369, 
390 P.3d at 1256) .  This court pointed out that : 
 U.S. Bank maintains that, at the time it initiated 
suit, it was entitled to enforce the Note because it held 
the indorsed -in-blank Note.  U.S. Bank supports this claim 
with the f ollowing evidence: (1) Jennifer Martin’s February 
9, 2016, certification certifying, under penalty of 
perjury, that at 12:51 p.m. on February 9, 2016, she 
personally verified Caliber’s possession of the original 
Note and attaching  an indorsed -in-blank copy  of the Note; 
(2) a bailee letter dated December 9, 2016, establishing 
that Caliber sent the Note to U.S. Bank’s counsel at that 
time; and (3)  Patterson’s sworn testimony that, based on 
her review of Caliber’s records, and her knowledge of how 
those record s are made and maintained in the ordinary 
                     
17  This court pointed out that “the requirement of standing overlaps with 
a plaintiff’s burden of proving its entitlement to enforce the subject 
promissory note.  Verhagen , 149 Hawaiʻi at 327, 489 P.3d at 431 (citing Bank 
of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻi 361, 367, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254 
(2017)).  This court  noted that “[w]hether a party is entitled to enforce a 
promissory note is determined by application of  [Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes ]  
§ 490:3-301, which provides:  
 
 “Person entitled to enforce” an instrument means 
(i) the holder of the instrument, (ii)  a nonholder in 
possession of the instrument who has the rights of a 
holder, or (iii)  a person not in possession of the 
instrument who is entitled to enforce the instrument 
pursuant to section 490:3 -309 or 490:3 -418(d).  A person 
may be a person entitled to enforce the instrument even 
though the person is not the owner of the instrument or is 
in wrongful possession of the instrument.  
Id. at 327, 489 P.3d at 431.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 course of business, “Plaintiff, or its agent on Plaintiff’s 
behalf, was in possession of the original wet -ink, indorsed 
in blank Note when the [Verhagen] foreclosure action was 
commenced on March 23, 2016, and sinc e.” 
Id. (bracketing in original) (emphasis added).   This court then 
determined : 
 . . . Patterson testified that based on her knowledge 
of Caliber’s records and record -keeping practices, U.S. 
Bank had actual or constructive possession of the Note at 
the time it filed the complaint.  Such testimony, standing 
alone and uncorroborated by documentary evidence, would be 
insufficient to establish U.S. Bank possessed the Note when 
it filed the complaint.  Here, however, there is admissible 
documentary evidence show ing that U.S. Bank possessed the 
Note both a mere six weeks before the filing of the 
complaint and at the time of summary judgment.   
Collectively, the evidence presented by U.S. Bank thus 
establishes the bank’s possession of the Note on the day 
the complai nt was filed.[18] 
Id. at 327-28, 489 P.3d at 431 -32 (footnote omitted) (emphasis 
added). 
  Here, in contrast to Verhagen , the Certification 
attached as Exhibit 8 to the Mountes Declaration was dated 
December 18, 2013, nearly nine months before the Complaint was 
filed on September 10, 2014.  The Verhagen  court concluded that 
U.S. Bank established possession of the note on the day the 
complaint was filed partly because the certification in that 
case “predates the filing of the complaint by less than two 
                     
18  This court went on to note that “a def endant may counter this inference 
of possession at the time of filing with evidence setting for th ‘specific 
facts showing that there is a genuine issue’ as to whether the plaintiff 
actually possessed the subject note at the time it filed suit.”  Verhagen , 
149 Hawaiʻi at 328, 489 P.3d at 432  (citation omitted) .  However, Yata did not 
need to counter an inference of possession because Deutsche Bank failed to 
produce sufficient evidence of possession of the Note when it filed the 
Complaint.  *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
33 months.”  Id. at 328 n.10, 489 P.3d at 432 n.10.  Thi s court 
further noted that “[a]n older certification, and a 
correspondingly larger gap between the certification’s date and 
that of the complaint, would leave more room for a ‘genuine 
issue’ as to whether U.S. Bank actually possessed the Note when 
it sued Verhagen.”  Id.  As discussed above, the Certification 
in this case predates the filing of the complaint by nearly nine 
months, which is significantly more than two months.  Thus, 
there is more potential for a “genuine issue” as to whether 
Deutsche Bank po ssessed the Note when it filed the Complaint 
against Yata.  See id. 
  In addition, Yata correctly contends that the 
screenshots attached as Exhibit 2 to the McCloskey Declaration 
are unclear and do not establish Deutsche Bank’s possession of 
the Note when it filed the Complaint.  The McCloskey Declaration 
does not explain where the screenshots came from or how to 
interpret the screenshots.  Without such an explanation, it is 
unclear how the screenshots demonstrate that Deutsche Bank had 
possession of the No te when it filed the Complaint.  
  Furthermore, in Verhagen , this court took into 
consideration U.S. Bank’s possession of the note at the time of 
summary judgment when determining if U.S. Bank had standing.  
Id. at 328, 489 P.3d at 432.  Here, the only evid ence Deutsche 
Bank possessed the Note at the time of or after summary judgment *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
34 was a declaration from Deutsche Bank’s counsel, which stated 
that “[t]he Note, which is endorsed in blank, is currently being 
held by Law Offices of Marvin S.C. Dang, LLLC for P laintiff.”  
This declaration further stated that Deutsche Bank’s counsel 
would “bring the original endorsed Note to the hearing on 
October 2, 2018.”  Deutsche Bank’s counsel did not bring the 
original endorsed Note to the hearing.  In contrast to Verhagen , 
there was no bailee letter demonstrating SLS sent the Note to 
Deutsche Bank’s counsel after Deutsche Bank filed its Complaint, 
see id. at 327, 489 P.3d at 431, and there was no documentary 
evidence demonstrating Deutsche Bank had possession of the Note 
after it filed the Complaint.  
In sum, there was more potential for a genuine issue 
regarding whether Deutsche Bank had possession of the Note when 
it filed the Complaint because the Certification predates the 
filing of the Complaint by more than two months, the screenshot 
was unclear and did not establish Deutsche Bank’s possession of 
the Note before or after it  filed the Complaint , and the only 
evidence Deutsche Bank possessed the Note after the Complaint 
was filed was Deutsche Bank’s counsel’s conclusory de claration.  
Even if Deutsche Bank’s documents were admissible, there is less 
evidence in this case demonstrating Deutsche Bank’s possession 
of the Note when it filed the Complaint than in Verhagen .  Thus, 
it appears that Deutsche Bank lacked standing to fo reclose *** NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
35 against Yata because Deutsche Bank did not establish it 
possessed the Note when it filed the Complaint.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
For the foregoing reasons, Deutsche Bank failed to 
establish standing when it filed the Complaint.  Thus, we vacate 
the ICA’s  July 11, 2022 Judgment on Appeal , which affirmed the 
circuit court’s  Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment and 
Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration.   The case is remanded 
to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.  
DATED:  Honolulu , Hawaiʻi, February 22, 2023. 
 
Keith M. Kiuchi
for petitioner  
 
Marvin S.C. Dang
and Amy Jackson 
for respondent   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
