     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
                                                                 
                                                                 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000342 08-JAN-2014 
10:49 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
THEODORE K. BLAKE, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I PLANNING COMMISSION; COUNTY OF KAUA' I 
PLANNING DEPARTMENT; IAN COSTA, in his official capacity as
Planning Director; DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES;
WILLIAM J. AILA, JR., in his official capacity as chair of the
Department of Land and Natural Resources; and STACEY T.J.
WONG, as Successor Trustee of the Eric A. Knudsen Trust,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees. 
SCWC-11-0000342
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000342; CIV. NO. 09-1-0069)
 
JANUARY 8, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK JJ.;
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case involves a challenge to the County of Kaua
'i 
Planning Commission’s approval of a subdivision application for 
the Eric A. Knudsen Trust’s development of land in Kôloa, Kaua 'i.         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
One of the challenged aspects of the proposed subdivision was the 
need for the Knudsen Trust to breach a historic road (Hapa Road) and its adjacent rock wall to provide access into the subdivision. During the Planning Commission’s consideration of the Knudsen Trust’s subdivision application, all the parties assumed that Hapa Road belonged to the County of Kaua' i. The 
Planning Commission eventually approved the Knudsen Trust’s subdivision application. 
Theodore K. Blake filed a civil complaint asserting six
 
1
 claims against the Defendants, including, inter alia, alleged
failure of the Defendants to follow the proper environmental and historic review processes, violations of Native Hawaiian rights, and breaches of the public trust. 
Blake subsequently amended his 
complaint in part because he discovered that Hapa Road belonged to the State of Hawai' i and not the County. In his amended 
complaint, Blake also asserted two additional claims of negligence and public nuisance against the Knudsen Trust for allegedly breaching Hapa Road and its adjacent rock wall. 
On a motion for summary judgment brought by the State
 
Defendants, the circuit court determined that, because the State
 had not given its approval to breach Hapa Road, the issues raised
 
1
 State of Hawai 'i Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) 
chair William J. Aila, Jr., was automatically substituted as a respondent/
defendant-appellee in place of former DLNR chair Laura Thielen, who was suedin her official capacity.  Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
43(c)(1) (2012).  Thus, the respondents/defendants-appellees are the PlanningCommission, County of Kaua 'i Planning Department, Ian Costa in his official
capacity as planning director, DLNR, Aila in his official capacity as chair ofthe DLNR, and the Knudsen Trust (collectively, Defendants). 
-2­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in Blake’s complaint were not ripe, and therefore dismissed the
 
claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.2 The circuit
 
court also indicated that even though Blake may have had claims
 that were ripe and severable, in the interest of judicial
 economy, it had the discretion to dismiss those claims as well. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed the circuit court’s
 order.
 
In his application, Blake argues that all eight of his
 
claims were ripe for adjudication. We agree. First, we hold
 that the Planning Commission’s final approval of Knudsen’s
 subdivision application constituted “final agency action” for
 purposes of ripeness. Based on this conclusion, we hold that the
 allegations in Counts 1-5 were ripe because they will not be
 affected by the BLNR’s decision regarding Hapa Road, and that
 Count 6 is ripe because it requires no further factual
 development for purposes of ripeness. We also hold that the
 conduct alleged in Counts 7 and 8 has already occurred and
 therefore those claims are ripe. Lastly, we conclude that the
 circuit court erred in dismissing claims on the basis of judicial
 economy. Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court’s final
 judgment and the ICA’s judgment on appeal, and remand the case to
 the circuit court for further proceedings.
 
2
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
-3­        
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal. 
A. Village at Po' ipû Development 
On April 9, 2003, the Knudsen Trust filed an 
application with the Planning Commission to subdivide 
approximately 208 acres of land it owned in Kôloa, Kaua' i, to 
implement Phase I of its planned residential community development, the Village at Po' ipû (hereinafter referred to as 
“the development”). The development consisted of approximately twenty acres of land bordered on the west by Hapa Road.
3 
A copy of the Knudsen Trust’s application was sent to 
the DLNR’s State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD). SHPD issued a letter to Planning Director Costa recommending that conditions be attached to the Village at Po' ipû project, 
including, inter alia: conducting an archaeological inventory survey of the parcels of land in the application, submitting a report to SHPD for review and approval, and developing detailed mitigation plans if significant historic sites are recommended for mitigation. 
The Planning Commission subsequently granted tentative
 
subdivision approval for the development project. To obtain
 
3
 As discussed further infra, Hapa Road is a “significant historic
 
site” that is afforded protections under the State’s historic preservation
laws.
 
-4­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
final approval, the Knudsen Trust was required to comply with the
 
requirements set forth by SHPD. 
SHPD later received the “Interim Protection Plan” for 
the development, which identified numerous significant historic sites located in the vicinity of the development. One of the sites identified in the Interim Protection Plan was Hapa Road: “Hapa road is a single lane unpaved road connecting Kô loa Town to 
the beach road (Po' ipû). The road is marked by a stacked boulder 
wall on both sides.”
4
 
The Interim Protection Plan called for “an orange
 
colored plastic barricade fencing” along the east side of Hapa
 Road and the rock wall “during all construction and landscaping
 activities in the vicinity.” The Interim Protection Plan also
 provided, “At no time shall any construction work take place
 within the buffer zone.” 
In a March 30, 2005 letter, SHPD Administrator Melanie
 
Chinen “concur[red]” with the Interim Protection Plan. 
4 The Interim Protection Plan further stated:
 
A brief inspection of historic maps gives some
insight into the history and age of Hapa Road and its
associated walls.  Hapa Road is at least 100 years
 old.  It appears on the Monsarrat Map of 1891.  The
 road probably dates back to the 1850s when the
Catholic Church was built makai of K ôloa Town on the
 
west side of the road and probably predated this
period as a mauka/makai trail.  The road shows on all
 maps postdating 1891, including sugar field maps at
the Kôloa Sugar Company.  Because the rocky lands on
either side of the road were used for cattle grazing,
the walls were necessitated as pasture boundaries and
to allow driving of cattle along the road during the
early part of this century.
 
-5­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In November 2006, the Knudsen Trust completed a final
 
environmental impact statement (Final EIS) for its Village at
 
Po'ipû development. The Final EIS discussed Hapa Road: 
A portion of Hapa Road will be improved as a
pedestrian and bicycle path as mandated by the Countyof Kaua 'i. The historic rock walls will be preserved
in place where they are in good condition and restoredwhere they have collapsed or have been damaged bystone robbing. 
The State Land Use Commission approved the Final EIS
 
that same month. 
In a January 8, 2009 letter, SHPD’s administrator
 
noted:
 
We have reviewed the Draft Archaeological Data
Recovery Plan for an Approximately 60 ft Wide Portion
of Hapa Road, SIHP # 50-30-10-0992, Koloa Ahupuaa,
Koloa District, Kauai. [ 5
]  The breach of Hapa road
 
will 
have an effect, with agreed upon mitigation, on a
significant historic site.  In order to mitigate the
effect we have requested, and the Trust has agreed to
restore 2,000 Linear Feet of the west side of the Hapa
Road Rock wall beginning at the railroad berm and
heading north to roughly match the eastern rock wall
at each corresponding point.  This work is to be
 completed by January 8, 2029.
 
At a January 13, 2009 meeting, the Planning Commission
 
granted final subdivision approval of the development. 
5 A subsequent, Final Archaeological Data Recovery Plan called for
 
creating an approximately 60 foot wide breach of Hapa Road by manually
deconstructing the rock walls adjacent to Hapa Road, to allow for access to
the proposed subdivision.  The purpose of the Data Recovery Plan was to
adequately mitigate the proposed impact to Hapa Road and to satisfy the
regulations of SHPD.  The Data Recovery Plan noted,
 
[t]he SHPD concurrence on the breaching and
reconstruction of the wall segments detailed above is
contingent upon a commitment by Knudsen Trust to
reconstruct 2,000 linear feet of the western wall of
Hapa Road to roughly match the dimensions of the wall
on the adjacent east side of the road beginning at the
railroad berm and going north.
 
-6­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Blake timely filed a complaint against the Defendants. 
In his complaint, Blake asserted six counts: (1) that the 
Defendants failed to fulfill the obligations imposed upon them by the public trust doctrine (Count 1); (2) that the County Defendants failed to “thoroughly investigate and protect Native Hawaiian rights” when they considered the Knudsen Trust’s application (Count 2); (3) that the Defendants failed to comply with the requirements of Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
chapter 13-284, the rules governing procedures for historic preservation review to comment on projects subject to Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 6E (Count 3); (4) that the subdivision approval and construction, based upon an improper and incomplete historic preservation review process, threatened to cause irreparable injury to burial sites and other historic sites (Count 4); (5) that because the Knudsen Trust’s land is located within the State’s coastal zone management area, the Planning Commission was obligated to give “full consideration of historic and cultural values prior to decisionmaking[,]” including consideration of the objectives of HRS chapter 205A, the Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA), such as the protection, preservation, and restoration of historic and prehistoric resources in the coastal zone management area that are significant to Hawaiian history and culture (Count 5); (6) that the Knudsen Trust would breach a part of Hapa Road to allow vehicular traffic into its 
-7­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
development; the impact of this breach, Blake argued, was not
 
addressed in the Final EIS, even though the breach of Hapa Road
 was a “significant change in scope and use and is, as such, a
 different action for which a supplemental [EIS] is required”
 (Count 6). 
Blake subsequently filed a motion to amend his 
complaint. In his memorandum in support of his motion to amend his complaint, Blake stated that, contrary to all the parties’ assumption, Hapa Road was owned by the State and not the County of Kaua'i. On August 20, 2009, Blake filed a first amended 
complaint. In his first amended complaint, Blake reasserted his previous six counts, alleged that “Hapa Trail is owned by the State of Hawai' i,” and added two additional counts: Count 7 
alleged that the Knudsen Trust caused a public nuisance in altering Hapa Road without appropriate government authorization; and Count 8 alleged that the Knudsen Trust was negligent when it altered Hapa Road without appropriate government authorization. 
The parties filed numerous motions for summary judgment
 
and joinders. Relevant to this appeal, Blake filed a motion for
 partial summary judgment on Counts 1-6 of his first amended
 complaint. 
The State Defendants filed a motion for summary
 
judgment as to all counts of Blake’s first amended complaint. In
 its memorandum in support of its motion, the State Defendants
 argued, inter alia, that Blake’s claims were not ripe because the
 
-8­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Knudsen Trust was “prohibited from going forward on [the
 
development] until such time as [it] receives approval from the
 [BLNR] for an easement across Hapa Road.” The State Defendants
 asserted that Blake failed to satisfy the two-pronged test for
 ripeness because final agency action was needed for the
 development to go forward.
6
  
The circuit court held a hearing on the various
 
motions, but continued the hearing and requested supplemental
 briefing on the issue of the court’s subject matter jurisdiction. 
The parties filed supplemental memoranda on the issue of ripeness
 and subject matter jurisdiction.
 
Following a continued hearing, the circuit court filed
 
its order granting the State Defendants’ motion for summary
 judgment. The circuit court determined:
 
Ripeness is an issue of subject matter
jurisdiction.  In determining whether a particular
case is ripe the court must look at the facts as they
exist today.  The courts have developed a two part
test to determine if a matter is ripe.  The two prongs
of the test are the fitness of the issues for judicial
decision and the hardship to the parties of
withholding court consideration.  Both prongs must be
 present.  The fitness element requires that the issue
 
6 This court has set forth the following test for ripeness:
 
The ripeness inquiry has two prongs: the fitness of
the issues for judicial decision and the hardship to
the parties of withholding court consideration.  The
 fitness element requires that the issue be primarily
legal, need no further factual development, and
involve a final agency action.  To meet the hardship
requirement, a party must show that withholding
judicial review would result in direct and immediate
hardship and would entail more than possible financial
loss.
 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Hous. and Cmty. Dev. Corp. of Hawai 'i, 121 
Hawai'i 324, 336, 219 P.3d 1111, 1123 (2009) (citation omitted). 
-9­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be primarily legal, need no further factual
development, and involve a final agency action.
 
This [c]ourt finds that Hapa Road, also known as
Hapa Trail, is owned by the State of Hawaii. The
 subdivision plan submitted by [the Knudsen Trust] to
[the Planning Commission], which is the subject of
this lawsuit, required access across Hapa Road.  This
 [c]ourt further finds that there has been no final
agency action as state agency action giving permission
for the use and breach of Hapa Road has not been
taken.  This matter is not ripe and this [c]ourt lacks
subject matter jurisdiction.  To the degree that there
may be issues that are severable and ripe, this
[c]ourt will decline to exercise jurisdiction based on
considerations of judicial economy.  This matter is
 hereby dismissed as to all counts and all parties.
 
(Citations omitted). 
The circuit court entered its final judgment in favor
 
of the Defendants and against Blake, and Blake timely filed a
 
notice of appeal. 
B. ICA Appeal
 
In his opening brief, Blake raised two points of error:
 
(1) that the circuit court erred in granting the State
 Defendant’s motion for summary judgment and concluding that the
 case was not ripe; and (2) that the circuit court erred in
 failing to grant summary judgment in his favor on all counts. 
Blake argued the merits of all his claims, and explained how each
 claim was ripe for adjudication. Blake also contended that “even
 if one of the counts was not ripe, judicial economy is not served
 by dismissing all the other counts. This is especially true
 given the thousands of dollars expended in this case and the
 volume of the record. All the counts that are ripe can be
 resolved independent of whatever count may be unripe.” 
-10­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In its answering brief, the County Defendants conceded
 
that Counts 1-5 were ripe for adjudication, but argued that each
 
of Blake’s allegations against them (Counts 1-6) were without
 merit. 
The State Defendants filed an answering brief and
 
argued that the case was not ripe inasmuch as there needed to be
 further factual development as to what actions would be taken by
 the parties, and the State, as owner of Hapa Road, had not taken
 final action as to whether to grant or deny an easement across
 Hapa Road. The State Defendants also asserted that the circuit
 court correctly dismissed all the other claims in the interest of
 judicial economy. The State Defendants contended that
 “[d]eciding less than all of the issues would inevitably lead to
 piecemeal litigation. The circuit court’s decision to dismiss
 all claims should be affirmed.” 
The Knudsen Trust filed an answering brief and argued
 
that Blake’s claims were not ripe because further factual
 development is needed and there was no final agency action, and
 that Blake’s claims were without merit. 
Blake filed a reply to each of the Defendants’
 
answering briefs, and reasserted his argument that the issues
 were ripe for adjudication and that the ICA should grant summary
 judgment in his favor. 
In a memorandum opinion, the ICA determined that the
 
circuit court did not err in its determination that certain
 
-11­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
counts were not ripe for adjudication inasmuch as there was no
 
final agency action. Blake, 2012 WL 3600347, at **2-4. In
 
addition, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did not err in
 dismissing all the other claims in the interest of judicial
 economy. Id. at *3. Although the ICA mentioned Count 6 in its
 
discussion, it did not expressly state which counts were not ripe
 and which counts were dismissed in the interest of judicial
 economy. Id. The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s final
 
judgment. 
Blake timely filed his application for writ of
 
certiorari, and raises the following questions:
 
1.	 Is this case ripe for adjudication?  Related to
 
this question:
a.	 Is a complaint that seeks to protect
historic properties ripe when (a) some
damage to historic property has already
occurred, (b) provisions of HRS Chapter 6E
have already been violated, (c)
construction of the project that threatens
historic properties has commenced, and (d)
more damage is likely to occur?
 
b.	 Is final subdivision approval “final
agency action”?
 
c.	 If a landowner receives final subdivision
 approval that allows construction that
threatens historic property to proceed, is
that final subdivision approval
sufficiently final for the purposes of
ripeness?
 
d.	 Does “final agency approval” refer to the
agency that gave the approval that is
being challenged?
 
e.	 Is “final agency approval” different than
“final project approval” when a developer
must receive approval from multiple
agencies?
 
2.	 Did the Circuit Court have subject matter
jurisdiction to consider this case?
 
-12­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3.	 Should [Blake’s] motions for partial summary
judgment have been granted?[7]
 
The Defendants filed separate responses to Blake’s
 
application, and Blake filed replies to each. 
II. Standard of Review
 
“It is axiomatic that ripeness is an issue of subject
 
matter jurisdiction. Whether a court possesses subject matter
 
jurisdiction is a question of law reviewable de novo.” Kapuwai
 
v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, Dep’t of Parks & Recreation, 121
 Hawai'i 33, 39, 211 P.3d 750, 756 (2009) (citation and quotation 
marks omitted).
 
III. Discussion
 
The primary issue is whether Blake’s claims against the
 
Defendants are ripe for adjudication. In determining whether a
 claim is ripe, this court has stated:
 
Because ripeness is peculiarly a question of timing,
the court must look at the facts as they exist today
in evaluating whether the controversy before us is
sufficiently concrete to warrant our intervention.
  
The ripeness inquiry has two prongs: the fitness of
the issues for judicial decision and the hardship to
the parties of withholding court consideration.  The
 fitness element requires that the issue be primarily
legal, need no further factual development, and
 
7 As discussed below, we conclude that Blake’s claims are ripe, but 
remand rather than addressing whether Blake is entitled to summary judgment. 
We agree with the concurring and dissenting opinion that this court may, inappropriate circumstances, decide a motion for summary judgment withoutremand.  However, the claims at issue in the instant case arise out of acomplex set of facts that have not yet been considered by the circuit court. In these circumstances, we decline to decide whether partial summary judgmentshould be entered in favor of either party.  See Kaleikini v. Yoshioka , 128
Hawai'i 53, 81, 283 P.3d 60, 88 (2012) (declining to enter judgment in
plaintiff’s favor where plaintiff “sought a wide range of relief in thecircuit court, and the rationale for granting or denying that relief has notbeen fully developed[,]” and where “additional information may have becomeavailable since the [defendant’s] motion was decided, and it is not clear whatimpact these additional facts may have on the relief [plaintiff] seeks”). 
-13­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
involve a final agency action.  To meet the hardship
requirement, a party must show that withholding
judicial review would result in direct and immediate
hardship and would entail more than possible financial
loss.
 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 121 Hawai' i at 336, 219 P.3d at 1123 
(citation and emphasis omitted).
 
Blake asserted eight counts in his Amended Complaint:
 
(1) the State and County Defendants failed to fulfill their
 
public trust obligations in considering the Knudsen Trust’s
 development proposal; (2) the Defendants failed to investigate
 and protect Native Hawaiian rights; (3) the Defendants failed to
 comply with HAR chapter 13-284; (4) the Defendants irreparably
 injured historic sites, including burial sites; (5) the
 Defendants failed to comply with the objectives, policies, and
 guidelines of the Coastal Zone Management Act; (6) the Defendants
 failed to submit or require a supplemental EIS for the proposed
 breach of Hapa Trail; (7) the Knudsen Trust caused a public
 nuisance by failing to preserve and by altering Hapa Road without
 appropriate government authorization; and (8) the Knudsen Trust
 was negligent in failing to preserve the Hapa Road and its
 adjacent walls. 
In its order granting the State Defendants’ motion for
 
summary judgment, the circuit court determined, in relevant part:
 
This [c]ourt further finds that there has been no
final agency action as state agency action giving
permission for the use and breach of Hapa Road has not
been taken.  This matter is not ripe and this [c]ourt
lacks subject matter jurisdiction.  To the degree that
there may be issues that are severable and ripe, this
[c]ourt will decline to exercise jurisdiction based on
 
-14­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
considerations of judicial economy.  This matter is
 
hereby dismissed as to all counts and all parties.
 
(Emphasis added). 
On appeal, the ICA determined that the circuit court
 
“correctly concluded that it did not have subject matter
 
jurisdiction over this case” and that the circuit court did not
 err in dismissing “all other claims” in the interest of judicial
 economy. Blake, 2012 WL 3600347, at *3 (emphasis added).
 It is unclear from both the circuit court’s order and
 
the ICA’s memorandum opinion which claims were dismissed based on
 judicial economy, and which claims were dismissed as unripe. As
 discussed below, however, the ICA erred in affirming the circuit
 court’s final judgment because all of the claims are ripe for
 adjudication. In any event, the circuit court lacked the
 authority to dismiss claims based on judicial economy.
 
A.	 All Counts are ripe for adjudication
 
Because the parties’ arguments concerning ripeness
 
focus on whether final agency action has occurred in this case,
 
we first address the meaning of “final agency action.” We then
 address Blake’s claims in sequence.
 
1.	 The Planning Commission’s final approval constituted
“final agency action” for the purposes of ripeness
 
The question of whether a claim involving an agency’s
 
decision is ripe for adjudication involves a two-pronged
 
analysis: (1) “that the issue be primarily legal, need no further
 factual development, and involve a final agency action”; and (2)
 
-15­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that “withholding judicial review would result in direct and 
immediate hardship and would entail more than possible financial loss.”
8 Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 121 Hawai' i at 336, 219 P.3d 
at 1123. 
Blake argues that the circuit court’s conclusion that
 
“final agency action” has not occurred was “based on the false
 premise that ‘final agency action’ is the same thing as ‘final
 project approval from all agencies.’” Blake further contends
 that this court has previously determined that there was final
 agency action even when there were pending conditions on a final
 approval of a permit, and that “[f]inal agency action refers to
 the agency’s [sic] whose decision is being challenged - not some
 other agency whose approval for a project may also be necessary.” 
As explained below, we agree with Blake and hold that the
 Planning Commission’s approval constituted “final agency action”
 for purposes of ripeness. Thus, the BLNR’s determination as to
 whether it will allow an easement over Hapa Road is not relevant
 to our ripeness analysis.
 
This court has yet to set forth principles to determine
 
when an action is a “final agency action” under the
 aforementioned two-pronged analysis. Nevertheless, ICA cases
 implicitly addressing the issue are instructive. See, e.g., Pele
 
8
 In their filings with this court, the Defendants only argue that
 
Blake’s claims were not ripe because there was no final agency action and
there was a need for further factual development.  The Defendants do not argue
that Blake failed to satisfy the hardship requirement of the ripeness
analysis, and therefore, any arguments to that effect are waived and not
addressed here.
 
-16­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defense Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 8 Haw. App. 203, 204, 
797 P.2d 69, 71-72 (1990); Leone v. County of Maui, 128 Hawai' i 
183, 284 P.3d 956 (App. 2012). 
In Leone, the appellants, owners of property located
 
with a Special Management Area (SMA), filed an assessment
 application seeking a determination that their proposed use of
 their property as a single-family residence was exempt from SMA
 permit requirements. Id. at 188, 284 P.3d at 961. The Director
 
of the Department of Planning of the County of Maui rejected the
 application. Id. Appellants then filed inverse condemnation
 
claims alleging that Maui County engaged in regulatory takings by
 depriving their properties of any economically viable use. Id. 
The circuit court dismissed appellants’ claims as unripe because
 the appellants failed to exhaust administrative remedies by not
 appealing the Director’s decision to the Planning Commission. 
Id. at 189, 284 P.3d at 962. On appeal, the only issue the ICA
 considered was whether the claims were ripe for adjudication. 
Id. Within the context of a regulatory taking and distinguishing
 
between issues of ripeness and exhaustion of administrative
 remedies, the ICA held, inter alia, that “the finality
 requirement is concerned with whether the initial decisionmaker
 has arrived at a definitive position on the issue that inflicts
 an actual, concrete injury.” Id. at 193, 284 P.3d at 966 (citing
 
Williamson Cnty. Reg’l Planning Comm’n v. Hamilton Bank of
 Johnson City, 473 U.S. 172, 193 (1985)). The ICA concluded that
 
-17­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Director’s decision to reject the appellants’ application
 
“satisfied the finality requirement for ripeness by setting forth
 a definitive position regarding how [the] County will apply the
 regulations at issue to the particular land in question.” Id.
 
(emphasis added).
 
In Pele Defense Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 8 Haw. 
App. 203, 203, 797 P.2d 69, 70 (1990), the ICA addressed whether the attachment of a condition to a permit would affect the finality of the decision for purposes of appeal. The appellants, Pele Defense Fund and numerous individuals, appealed the Hawai' i 
County Planning Commission’s award of a geothermal resource permit to Puna Geothermal Venture. Id. at 204-05, 797 P.2d at 
70. The permit contained fifty-one attached conditions, 
including Condition 51, which established a Geothermal Asset fund for the purpose of geothermal impact mitigation efforts, into which the State of Hawai' i and Puna Geothermal Venture would 
contribute funds. Id. at 206-08, 797 P.2d at 71-72. The 
appellants argued, inter alia, that the “matter [was] not ripe for appeal, since it [had] not been shown that Condition 51 attached to the permit [could] be fulfilled.” Id. at 206, 797 
P.2d at 71. The ICA determined that “[a]ppellants’ argument [was] without merit,” and that “[s]uch conditions do not per se affect the finality of the approval of the permit for purposes of appeal.” Id. at 208-09, 797 P.2d at 72 (emphasis added). The 
ICA reasoned: 
-18­        
See, e.g.,
Although not in the context of ripeness, this court has
 
addressed an agency’s action, such as granting a permit, even
 
though there were additional conditions that were necessary
 before the applicant could commence the project.  
Mahuiki v. Planning Comm’n, 65 Haw. 506, 511-14, 654 P.2d 874,
 877-79 (1982) (holding that this court had “no difficulty in
 concluding the appeal was from a final decision,” even though
 there were subsequent decisions yet to be made on the challenged
 permit).
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Condition 51 is similar to many of the other 50
conditions of the permit in that it is prospective in
nature.  For example, Respondent is required to submit
status reports pursuant to conditions 4 and 5, submit
environmental monitoring data under condition 6,
maintain records in accordance with condition 7, and
submit copies of approved permits from all applicable
federal, state, and county agencies before initiating
construction of the project under condition 25.  Such
 conditions do not per se affect the finality of the
approval of the permit for purposes of appeal.
 
Whether or not condition 51’s terms have been complied
with becomes pertinent when Respondent applies for its
first building or construction permit.  Presumably, it
will not be able to obtain any permit unless condition
51 has been met.  In that event, condition 25 prevents
Respondent from commencing any work.  Also, if
condition 51 has not been met, Respondent will be
required to correct the non-compliance.  In the event
 they do not, the Commission is authorized to revoke or
modify the permit.
 
Id. at 208-09, 797 P.2d at 72 (citations and footnote omitted).
 
Thus, the ICA determined that the challenge to the
 
Hawai'i County Planning Commission’s approval of a permit could 
proceed regardless of Puna Geothermal Venture’s need to obtain
 
additional approvals from other agencies.
 
From these cases, it appears that finality for purposes
 
of ripeness involves a decision of the agency whose “definitive
 
-19­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
position” on a matter is being challenged, and a decision of that 
agency is final for purposes of ripeness even if there are other approvals or conditions that still need to occur.
9 Leone, 128 
Hawai'i at 193, 284 P.3d at 966; Pele Defense Fund, 8 Haw. App. 
at 209, 797 P.2d at 72; see also Mahuiki, 65 Haw. at 511-14, 654 P.2d at 877-79. 
Applying the foregoing principles to this case, it is
 
clear that the Planning Commission’s final approval of the
 Knudsen Trust’s subdivision application was “final agency action”
 for purposes of ripeness. Here, the Planning Commission granted
 “final approval” to the Knudsen Trust on January 13, 2009, which
 was months before Blake discovered that Hapa Road was owned by
 the State. Although BLNR would need to grant an easement over
 Hapa Road, the pendency of that approval does not “per se affect
 the finality of the [Planning Commission’s] approval of the
 [subdivision application] for purposes of appeal” because Blake
 is challenging the Planning Commission’s action, and not the
 action of BLNR. See Pele Defense Fund, 8 Haw. App. at 209, 797
 
P.2d at 72. The Planning Commission’s final approval also
 
9 This rule appears to be consistent with other jurisdictions.
 
Generally, other jurisdictions have determined that “[i]n order for agency
action to be final, the action must mark the consummation of the agency’s
decision-making process, rather than merely be tentative or interlocutory in
nature, and the action must be one by which rights or obligations have been
determined or from which legal consequences will flow.”  Laura Hunter Dietz,
et al., Administrative Law, 2 Am. Jur. 2d § 459; see, e.g., Bennett v. Spear,
520 U.S. 154, 177-78 (1997) (“As a general matter, two conditions must be
satisfied for agency action to be “final”: First, the action must mark the
“consummation” of the agency’s decisionmaking process —it must not be of a
merely tentative or interlocutory nature.  And second, the action must be one
by which “rights or obligations have been determined,” or from which “legal
consequences will flow[.]” (citations omitted)).
 
-20­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
appears to have been the County’s “definitive position” on the 
Knudsen Trust’s subdivision application. See Leone, 128 Hawai' i 
at 193, 284 P.3d at 966. Indeed, Planning Director Ian Costa sent the Knudsen Trust a letter indicating that the subdivision was “granted final approval by the Planning Commission at their meeting held on January 13, 2009,” which comports with the Planning Commission’s rules for service of decisions. See Rules 
of Practice and Procedure of the Kauai County Planning Commission (Rules of the Planning Commission) Rule 1-6-18(g) (1987) (“Decisions [of the Planning Commission] shall be served in writing by the Director by mailing copies thereof . . . to the Parties of record.”). Additionally, aside from challenging violations of specific terms or conditions of an otherwise valid permit, see Rules of the Planning Commission Rule 1-12 (1987) (authorizing the revocation and modification of permits), there appear to be no further administrative remedies by which to challenge the Planning Commission’s determination to grant final subdivision approval.
10 Consistent with that view, the Rules of 
the Planning Commission provided that the Commission’s approval took effect on the date of the meeting, January 13, 2009. See 
Rules of the Planning Commission Rule 1-2-6 (1987) (“Unless a specific effective date is set forth, the effective date of a decision rendered by the Commission shall be the date of the 
10
 Moreover, the record does not establish nor do the parties argue
 
that the Planning Commission has withdrawn its final approval of the Knudsen
Trust’s application in light of the new information regarding the ownership of
Hapa Road.
 
-21­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Meeting at which such valid decision was made.”). Thus, in the
 
circumstances of this case, the Planning Commission’s approval,
 while given without the BLNR’s consent to an easement, was
 nevertheless final agency action for purposes of ripeness.
 
Furthermore, the record reflects, and the Defendants do
 
not dispute, that construction commenced on the property
 following the Planning Commission’s final approval of the
 subdivision. In Kapuwai, this court held:
 
The rationale underlying the ripeness doctrine and the
traditional reluctance of courts to apply injunctive
and declaratory remedies to administrative
determinations is to prevent courts, through avoidance
of premature adjudication, from entangling themselves
in abstract disagreements over administrative
policies, and also to protect the agencies from
judicial interference until an administrative decision
has been formalized and its effect felt in a concrete
 way by the challenging parties .
 
121 Hawai' i at 41, 211 P.3d at 758 (emphasis in original). 
The commencement of construction after the Planning
 
Commission voted on January 13, 2009 to grant final subdivision
 
approval is clearly an “effect” of that decision. Id. This
 
further supports the inference that the Planning Commission’s
 approval of the Knudsen Trust’s subdivision application was final
 agency action for purposes of ripeness.
 
2. Counts 1-5 are ripe for adjudication
 
Counts 1-5 are ripe for adjudication because, as
 
stated, the Planning Commission’s approval of the subdivision
 
constituted a “final agency action” regardless of where the
 access point was located. Moreover, the determination of the
 
-22­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
access point to the development will not materially affect these
 
claims.
 
In Count 1, Blake alleged that the Defendants failed to
 
fulfill their public trust obligations with respect to (1)
 “destroyed historic sites”; (2) alterations to Hapa Road; and (3)
 the Knudsen Trust’s lack of compliance with the Interim
 Protection Plan. In his motion for summary judgment, Blake
 alleged that the County Defendants failed to fulfill their public
 trust obligations by (1) approving the development without
 reviewing relevant documents or completing the historic
 preservation review process and (2) failing to enforce relevant
 provisions of the County Code and a zoning ordinance. Blake also
 alleged that the State Defendants failed to fulfill their public
 trust duties because SHPD’s review of the development was flawed,
 and also alleged that the State Defendants failed to take
 enforcement action pursuant to HRS chapter 6E for the Knudsen
 Trust’s alleged violations of the Interim Protection Plan. The
 selection of an access point to the development is not
 determinative of the government Defendants’ obligation to enforce
 the laws and to make decisions in a manner consistent with
 constitutional, statutory, and administrative authority. Thus,
 Count 1 is ripe.
 
In regard to Count 2, Blake asserted that the County
 
Defendants had an obligation to investigate and protect Native
 Hawaiian rights pursuant to article XII, section 7 of the Hawaii
 
-23­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Constitution, before granting the Knudsen Trust’s subdivision 
application. Blake, citing this court’s decision in Ka Pa' akai o 
Ka 'Aina v. Land Use Commission, 94 Hawai' i 31, 45, 7 P.3d 1068, 
1082 (2000), contended that the County Defendants had an independent obligation to consider the effects of their actions on Native Hawaiian traditions and practices. Blake argued that “at a minimum[,]” the County Defendants were required to make specific findings and conclusions on the extent to which traditional and customary Native Hawaiian rights are exercised in the area, the extent to which those rights would be affected or impaired by the action, and the feasible action, if any, to be taken to protect any Native Hawaiian rights. Blake asserted that the Planning Commission made no such findings. The allegation that the Planning Commission failed to consider traditional Native Hawaiian rights is ripe for adjudication because the determination of the access point to the development had little if any bearing on any alleged traditional or cultural rights that may be practiced within the development, and on the adequacy of the Planning Commission’s consideration of those rights. 
Count 3 alleged that the Defendants failed to comply
 
with the requirements of HAR chapter 13-284, the historic
 preservation review process established to protect historic
 sites. In his motion for summary judgment, Blake argued that the
 State and County defendants violated HAR chapter 13-284 by
 allowing the project to advance before the historic preservation
 
-24­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
review process was completed, and by relying on “outdated and
 
flawed reports.” Specifically, Blake contended that HAR chapter
 13-284 was violated when (1) the Planning Commission granted the
 Knudsen Trust tentative subdivision approval without completing
 the historic preservation review process or taking into account
 the impact on historic properties; (2) SHPD “did not make clear”
 that the review process must be completed prior to project
 approval; (3) various steps in the review process were not
 completed or were completed improperly; and (4) the Planning
 Commission granted final subdivision approval despite a flawed
 review process. Blake also argued that the Knudsen Trust failed
 to comply with the approved Interim Protection Plan. Although
 Count 3 appears to include arguments regarding Hapa Road,
11
 
Blake’s contentions focus on the failure of the Defendants to
 follow the historic review process, a determination that can be
 made regardless of whether Hapa Road is used as the access point
 to the development. Thus, Count 3 is ripe.
 
In Count 4, Blake alleged that injunctive relief was
 
warranted because “[s]ubdivision approval and construction, based
 upon an improper and incomplete historic review process, threaten
 to cause irreparable injury to burial sites and other historic
 sites.” Blake asserted in his motion for summary judgment that:
 
Knudsen damaged the walls associated with Hapa Trail
without authorization; placed a waterline on historic
 
11
 Blake argues in his motion for summary judgment that the Planning
 
Commission granted final subdivision approval before SHPD approved all the
mitigation plans for the area including Hapa Road.
 
-25­        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hapa Trail without authorization; and engaged in
construction activities within fifty feet of Hapa
Trail in violation of the interim protection plan.
Knudsen also allowed historic sites on his own
 property to be destroyed despite a clear
prohibition[.]
 
Blake also asserted that the Planning Commission
 
approved the subdivision prior to completing the historic
 
preservation review process, and without the written concurrence
 from SHPD required under HRS chapter 6E. Because this claim is
 premised on actions that allegedly have already occurred, Count 4
 is also ripe.
 
In Count 5, Blake alleged that the Defendants failed to 
comply with HRS chapter 205A, the CZMA, in failing to consider historic and cultural values. HRS § 205A-4(a) provides that, “In implementing the objective of the coastal zone management program, the agencies shall give full consideration to ecological, cultural, historic, esthetic, recreational, scenic, and open space values, and coastal hazards, as well as to needs for economic development.” (Emphasis added). Blake argued that “[t]he undisputed evidence in this case, however, is that the County Defendants failed to give full consideration of historic sites in the area.” Blake asserted that the Planning Commission admitted that it failed to review various archaeological reports, and still “does not have ‘sufficient knowledge or information to form a belief as to’ whether” dozens of archaeological sites, including the “remnants of an extensive and complex ' auwai 
system,” have been found on the Knudsen Trust land. Blake’s 
-26­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
claim in Count 5 that the County Defendants failed to consider
 
cultural and historic values in violation of the CZMA is not
 dependent on the determination of the access point to the
 development. Thus, Count 5 is ripe.
 
In sum, each of the claims are ripe for adjudication
 
because the Planning Commission’s approval was “final agency
 action” for purposes of ripeness. Furthermore, the determination
 of the access point to the development does not materially affect
 Counts 1-5.
 
3.	 Count 6 is ripe for adjudication because there is no
need for further factual development
 
As stated, the first prong of the ripeness analysis 
requires “that the issue be primarily legal, need no further 
factual development, and involve a final agency action.” Office 
of Hawaiian Affairs, 121 Hawai' i at 336, 219 P.3d at 1123 
(emphasis added). The Defendants argue that further factual development is necessary as to Count 6, regarding the necessity of a Supplemental EIS to address a breach of Hapa Road, because it is unclear whether the BLNR will grant an easement over Hapa Road to allow access to the development. We disagree, and conclude that Count 6 is ripe without further factual development. 
In determining whether a claim is ripe, the circuit
 
court must “look at the facts as they exist” at the time it makes
 its decision. Id. In Count 6 of his Amended Complaint, Blake
 
alleged that the Defendants failed to provide a supplemental EIS
 
-27­        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that specifically covered the breach of Hapa Road. Blake further
 
alleged that the Knudsen Trust “will breach a portion of Hapa
 Trail to allow vehicular traffic” and that the Final EIS did not
 “address the impact of this breach.” 
In its Answer to Blake’s Amended Complaint, the Knudsen
 
Trust admitted that “vehicular access to Phase I has always been
 across Hapa Road/Trail as shown, disclosed and discussed in the
 Environmental Impact Statement and other filings with the County
 of Kauai.” (Emphasis added). The County admitted that the
 “Knudsen Trust will breach a portion of Hapa Trail to allow
 vehicular traffic.” The State admitted that the “Knudsen Trust
 has requested to breach a portion of Hapa [Road] and the
 adjoining historic wall to allow vehicular traffic.” Thus, at
 the time the Planning Commission granted final subdivision
 approval of the development, all of the parties appeared to
 recognize that access to Phase I was intended to be by breaching
 Hapa Road and its adjacent wall.
12 The circuit court, however,
 
failed to consider the necessity of a Supplemental EIS even
 though all the parties apparently agreed that Hapa Road would
 need to be breached.
 
Moreover, the record in this case contained the Final
 
EIS, which would need to be analyzed to determine whether a
 Supplemental EIS was necessary.
 
12
 The Defendants argue, and Blake recognizes, that Count 6 could
 
become moot if another access point to Phase I is considered. However, there
is no indication in the record before this court of any other alternative
access point to Phase I. 
-28­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Inasmuch as the parties intended for Hapa Road to be
 
breached and the Final EIS is contained in the record, the
 
question of the necessity of a Supplemental EIS was ripe for
 review, regardless of BLNR’s approval. Accordingly, the circuit
 court had subject matter jurisdiction to address Count 6 because
 that claim was ripe.
 
4.	 Blake’s claims that the Knudsen Trust caused a public
nuisance and was negligent when it altered historic
sites (Counts 7 and 8) are ripe for adjudication
 
In Counts 7 and 8, Blake contended that the Knudsen
 
Trust caused a public nuisance and was negligent when it altered
 
Hapa Road without appropriate government authorization. In its
 response, the Knudsen Trust does not argue that Counts 7 and 8
 were not ripe for adjudication; instead, it contends that Counts
 7 and 8 fail as a matter of law. 
Because Counts 7 and 8 involve allegations that the
 
Knudsen Trust altered Hapa Road, Blake’s claims involve alleged
 conduct that has already occurred. Counts 7 and 8 pertain to two
 incidents in which the Knudsen Trust, or its agents, allegedly
 altered the walls associated with Hapa Road. The decision as to
 whether Hapa Road is used as an access to the development is
 irrelevant to the resolution of these claims. Therefore, Counts
 7 and 8 are ripe and should have been adjudicated.
 
Accordingly, all Counts are ripe for adjudication.
 
B.	 The circuit court erred in dismissing Blake’s claims on the
basis of judicial economy
 
-29­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court dismissed Blake’s case even though it
 
acknowledged that some unspecified claims may have been severable
 
and ripe. The Defendants fail to cite any authority that
 expressly allows a court to decline to exercise jurisdiction
 based on judicial economy. We conclude that the dismissal of
 ripe claims in the instant case was improper.
 
Our case law indicates that the proper course for a 
court faced with a complaint asserting both ripe and unripe claims is to either proceed on the ripe claims, or to stay some or all of the ripe claims in the interest of judicial economy. For example, in Save Sunset Beach Coalition v. City & County of Honolulu, 102 Hawai' i 465, 78 P.3d 1 (2003), this court reached 
the merits of several claims even though one particular count was not ripe for adjudication. There, the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint asserting ten counts. Id. at 470-72, 78 P.3d 
at 6-8. The circuit court dismissed four counts on the ground that the issues raised were “premature.” Id. at 471, 78 P.3d at 
7. At a bench trial, the circuit court decided in favor of the
 
defendants on the remaining six counts. Id. at 472, 480, 78 P.3d
 
at 8, 16. On appeal, this court determined that one of the
 adjudicated counts was not ripe, yet still addressed the merits
 of several other claims raised by the plaintiffs. Therefore, it
 is clear that the circuit court and this court can address the
 merits of some claims even when other claims are unripe.
 
Alternatively, the court may consider whether a stay
 
-30­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
with respect to some or all of the ripe claims is appropriate. 
See City of Honolulu v. Ing , 100 Hawai' i 182, 193 n.16, 58 P.3d 
1229, 1240 n.16 (“[T]he power to stay proceedings is incidental 
to the power inherent in every court to control the disposition of the causes on its docket with economy of time and effort for itself, for counsel, and for litigants. How this can best be done calls for the exercise of judgment, which must weigh competing interests and maintain an even balance.”
13
  (quoting Air
Line Pilots Ass’n v. Miller, 523 U.S. 866, 880 (1998))). A stay
 may be appropriate where proceeding with the litigation will
 result in unnecessary duplication of effort, such as where the
 issues to be decided are inextricably intertwined with or
 affected by the resolution of other pending matters. See
 
Chronicle Pub. Co. v. Nat’l Broad. Co., 294 F.2d 744, 748-49 (9th
 Cir. 1961) (concluding it was not an abuse of discretion to grant
 a stay where, “[t]o a large extent the problems are intertwined
 with or may likely be affected by the matters which are now
 pending” in other proceedings, and noting that “the avoidance of
 unnecessary duplication of effort in such matters as these is a
 valid consideration”); Eggleston v. Pierce County, 99 F. Supp. 2d
 1280, 1282 (W.D. Wash. 2000) (staying proceedings in the interest
 
13
 A court’s discretion to stay proceedings for purposes of judicial
 
economy is not without limitations.  Cf. Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 41, 609
P.2d 13, 142 (1980) (noting that a “wide variety of circumstances may arise
which call for the exercise of judicial discretion in determining whether to
grant or refuse a continuance[,]” including whether a continuance would be
prejudicial to the opposing party, or whether the denial of a continuance
would prevent the moving party from having a reasonable opportunity to present
its case on the merits). 
-31­        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of comity and judicial efficiency, where the plaintiff’s federal
 
claims were “inextricably intertwined” with state court appellate
 proceedings); cf. D.L. v. Unified School Dist. No. 497, 392 F.3d
 1223 (10th Cir. 2004) (holding that the district court should
 have stayed proceedings on one claim even though it lacked
 jurisdiction to resolve the remaining claims because of a pending
 state court proceeding); Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, London
 v. Boeing Co., 895 N.E.2d 940 (Ill. App. Ct. 2008) (affirming the
 trial court’s order staying a complaint until the completion of
 an underlying international arbitration); Pardee v. Consumer
 Portfolio Servs., Inc., 344 F. Supp. 2d 823 (D.R.I. 2004) (noting
 that the action was not ripe for adjudication, but was stayed
 until the out-of-state cases were resolved). 
We note that the ICA in the instant case cited to two 
cases to support its conclusion that the circuit court could dismiss ripe claims based on judicial economy. Blake, 2012 WL 
3600347, at *3 (citing Hawai' i Hous. Auth. v. Lyman, 68 Haw. 55, 
78, 704 P.2d 888, 902 (1985); Kauhane v. Acutron Co., 71 Haw. 458, 463, 795 P.2d 276, 278 (1990)). However, neither Lyman nor Kauhane supports the proposition that a court can dismiss a ripe 
claim in these circumstances. In Lyman, this court determined 
that a trial court is vested with discretion to certify a claim 
under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) “after 
weighing the advantage of expedited appeal against the potential for waste of judicial resources and equitable arguments for 
-32­        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
delay.” 68 Haw. at 78, 704 P.2d at 902 (citation omitted). In
 
Kauhane, this court noted that the doctrine of res judicata
 serves to conserve judicial resources. 71 Haw. at 463, 795 P.2d
 at 278. Although both cases articulated general principles
 regarding the importance of judicial economy, neither case held
 that a circuit court could dismiss a ripe claim on that ground.
 
Thus, the circuit court erred in dismissing Blake’s
 
case on the basis of judicial economy. 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court’s final
 
judgment and the ICA’s judgment on appeal are vacated, and the
 case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.
 
David Kimo Frankel and /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna/s/ Richard W. PollackAshley K. Obrey for
petitioner 
Ian K. Jung forrespondents County ofKaua
'i Planning Commission,
County of Kaua' i Planning
Department, and Costa 
Linda L.W. Chow for
 respondents DLNR and Aila
 
Michael D. Tom and 
Joseph F. Kotowski, III,
for respondent Wong
 
-33­