***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I
  
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
PEAK CAPITAL GROUP, LLC, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
  
vs. 
 
CHRISTOPHER HULL PEREZ, JENNIFER HULL PEREZ, 
Respondents/Defendants- Appellees,  
 
and 
 
LINDA WILCOX ROBINSON, 
Petitioner/Real-Party-In -Interest- Appellant, 
 
and   
 
CINDY A. PEDRO, 
Respondent/Real-Party-In-Interest. 
________________________________________________________________
 
 
SCWC-14-0001125  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0001125 ; CIVIL NO. 09- 1-2899) 
 
DECEMBER 7, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
 
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0001125
06-DEC-2017
02:28 PM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 I.  Introduction 
Self-represented litigant Linda Wilcox Robinson 
(“Robinson”) seeks review of th e Intermediate Court of Appeals’ 
(“ICA”) judgment on appeal  entered pursuant to its summary 
disposition order.  The ICA affirmed the Circuit Court of the 
1First Circuit’s  (“circuit court”) order denying Robinson’s 
motion for return of her personal possessions allegedly taken 
during the execution of a writ of ejectment after the 
foreclosure sale of a house in which she resided.  Peak Capital 
Grp., LLC v. Perez , CAAP-14-0001125 (App. Mar. 23, 2016) (SDO).  
We construe Robinson’s certiorari application to assert 
that the ICA erred by affirming the circuit court’s denial of 
2her motion for the following reasons:  (1) the purchaser of the 
property at foreclosure, mortgagee Peak Capital Group, LLC 
(“Peak Capital”), did not give her the minimum 90 -day notice to 
vacate required by the federal Protecting Tenants at Foreclosure 
Act of 2009 (“PTFA”) ; (2) Peak Capital violated her rights under 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”) Chapter 521, t he Residential 
Landlord-Tenant Code (“landlord -tenant code”), including the 45 -
day notice to vacate required to be given to month- to-month 
tenants by HRS § 521- 71 (2006 & Supp. 2008);  (3) the circuit 
court’s refusal to order return of her possessions viola ted her 
                     
1  The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.   
 
2  Courts are to construe pro se filings liberally.  See Waltrip v. TS 
Enters., 140 Hawai i 226, 239, 398 P.3d 815, 828 (2016).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 3constitutional due process rights ; and (4) the circuit court’s 
refusal to return her possessions was otherwise in error.    
 We hold as follows: (1) although the PTFA does not require 
a residential lease to be in writing, Robinson was not entitled 
to PTFA protections because she did not qualify as a “bona fide 
tenant” as required by the PTFA; (2) in general, the landlord -
tenant code applies to residential leases entered into before a 
lis pendens, but Robinson was not a residential tenant, and the 
lis pendens made the subsequent written lease to Robinson’s non -
profit for a room/office in the property subject to the court’s 
decision as to its appropriate disposition; and (3) under the 
circumstances of this case, Robinson was afforded her due 
process rights to notice and an opportunity to be heard at a 
meaningful time and in a meaningful manner; but (4) the circuit 
court should have granted Robinson’s motion for return of 
possessions, when the possessions included items of no financial 
value to Peak Capital but with great sentimental value to 
Robinson, such as her grandparent’s ashes.  
 
 
                     
3  Robinson also argued before the circuit court and ICA that Peak Capital 
improperly foreclosed upon the property.  We do not further address this 
argument because she does not reassert this argument on certiorari, and the 
grounds upon which she based her argument, that the mortgage could not secure 
the personal debt of Christopher Perez because the property was held by the 
Perezes as tenants by  the entirety, is meritless.  At the time the note and 
mortgage were signed by Christopher Perez, he owned the property as a tenant 
in severalty.   
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
 II. Background 
A.  Loan and foreclosure 
On May 15, 1994, Christopher Hull Perez (“Perez”) and 
Jennifer Hull Perez (collectively, “the Perezes”) purchased a 
fee simple residence in Waialua, Hawai i (“the property”), as 
4tenants by the entirety.   On October 24, 2007,  Perez, 
individually, refinanced the original loan through a mortgage 
loan from Bridgelock Capital (“Bridgelock”), which was  secured 
by a mortgage.  The deed and mortgage were recorded in the 
Office of the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court of the State 
of Hawai i (“Land Court”).    
On November 18, 2009, the note and mortgage were assigned 
to Peak Capital Group.  These documents were also recorded in 
Land Court.  On December 16, 2009, Peak Capital filed a 
foreclosure complaint against the Perezes.  Peak Capital also 
filed a notice of pendency of action (“lis pendens”) pursuant to 
HRS § 634-51, which was recorded with the Land Court on December 
17, 2009 pursuant to HRS § 501
-151.    
Perez was served with the complaint at the property on 
December 17, 2009.  A few weeks later, on January 4, 2010, 
Robinson prepared a two-page letter to counsel for Peak Capital 
                     
4  The focus will be on facts relevant to Robinson’s certiorari 
application; Robinson’s assertions on behalf of other occupants of the 
property are generally not included because these other occupants are not 
parties to the certiorari proceeding.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
 on letterhead stating “CHRISTOPHER H. PEREZ & REV. DR. LINDA 
WILCOX ROBINSON” at the top, with the property address, a fax 
number, a cell phone number, and an email address listed below.    
Robinson, the only signator, indicated she was writing in 
response to the foreclosure complaint and requested an extension 
of time to answer, stating, “ we will need to file a motion to 
extend the time to answer this complaint as we are currently 
obtaining legal counsel.”  (Emphasis added.)  She also indicated 
she and Perez had thought legal counsel they had retained to 
negotiate a loan modification with Peak Capital would also 
represent them in the foreclosure lawsuit, but learned he would 
not.  Robi nson’s letter ended as follows:  
Also, I believe you have the “Power of Attorney” in your 
file for Christopher’s consent in my communication with 
this subject matter.  If you need an additional copy, I can 
provide it to you again.  Again, Mahalo.  Should there be 
any other information you need please feel to contact me.  
 
 The foreclosure complaint included an allegation against 
5Doe Defendants,  but Robinson was never named as a defendant.   
                     
5  Hawaii  Rules of Civil Procedure (“HRCP”) Rule 17(d) (2000) provides:  
(d) Unidentified defendant . (1) When it shall be necessary 
or proper to make a person a party defendant and the party 
desiring the inclusion of the person as a party defendant 
has been unable to ascertain the identity of a defendant, 
the party desiring the inclusion of the person as a party 
defendant shall in accordance with the criteria of R ule 11 
of these rules set forth in a pleading the person’ s 
interest in the action, so much of the identity as is known 
(and if unknown, a fictitious name shall be used), and 
shall set forth with specificity all actions already 
undertaken in a diligent and good -faith effort to ascertain 
the person’ s full name and identity.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 On January 6, 2010, Perez filed a pro se motion requesting 
until January 27, 2010 to respond to the complaint.  Perez did 
not file an answer or make any other appearance in the 
foreclosure lawsuit for over three years, when he filed the May 
8, 2013 motion discussed below.   
Jennifer Perez was served with the complaint in Texas on 
February 24, 2010.  On October 12, 2010, default was entered 
against both Perezes.  The next day, October 13, 2010, the 
circuit court entered a minute order denying Perez’s January 6, 
2010 motion for additional time to respond to the complaint, on 
the grounds that default had already been entered.  Perez had 
already had more than eight months to respond to the complaint. 
On January 3, 2011, Peak Capital filed a motion for summary 
judgment and for an interlocutory decree of foreclosure.  On 
February 15, 2011, the circuit court entered its findings of 
fact, conclusions of law, and order granting the motion.  The 
circuit court appointed a commissioner and ordered that the 
property be sold at public auction.  The circuit court also 
entered a judgment on the same day (“foreclosure judgment”).  
The Perezes did not appeal the foreclosure judgment.   
                                                                  
(2) Subject to HRS section 657-22, the person intended 
shall thereupon be considered a party defendant to the 
action, as having notice of the institution of the action 
against that person , and as sufficiently described for all 
purposes, including services of process, and the action 
shall proceed against that person.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 B. Sale of property and writ of ejectment   
Perez apparently refused to cooperate with the commissioner 
to arrange open houses before the foreclosure sale.  Without any 
open houses, a public auction to sell the property took place on 
February 14, 2012.  Peak Capital submitted the highest bid, a 
credit bid of $359,000.    
On March 12, 2012, Peak Capital filed a motion to confirm 
the sale, to distribute its proceeds, and for a writ of 
ejectment (“motion to confirm”), which was scheduled for hearing 
on April 12, 2012.  Perez filed a bankruptcy petition on April 
11, 2012, the day before the scheduled hearing, so the motion 
was not heard on that date.  Perez’s bankruptc y petition was 
dismissed on May 14, 2012 for failure to file required 
documents.  The hearing on the motion to confirm was therefore 
rescheduled for June 28, 2012.  Just before that hearing, 
however, counsel for Peak Capital was notified that Perez’s 
bankruptcy petition had been reactivated.    
Perez received a bankruptcy discharge on August 29, 2012.  
On August 31, 2012, he filed a motion in bankruptcy court to 
avoid Peak Capital’s lien, which Peak Capital opposed; the 
record does not reflect the basis of the motion.   It appears 
this motion was denied, as Peak Capital renoticed the hearing on 
its motion to confirm before the circuit court for April 11, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
 2013, and the court orally granted the motion at that hearing. 
Perez did not appear.    
On May 8, 2013, the circuit court entered the order 
granting Peak Capital’s motion to confirm.   A final judgment and 
a writ of ejectment were also entered on the same date.  The 
writ of ejectment ordered that law enforcement personnel remove 
the Perezes and anyone “holding under or through them,” as well 
as their personal belongings, and put Peak Capital in possession 
of the property.    
C. Perez’s preliminary post -judgment motions 
On May 8, 2013, the same date as the final judgment and 
writ of ejectment, Perez filed a pro se motion to set aside 
entry of default and default judgment (“motion to set aside 
default judgment”).   Perez asserted the mortgage securing the 
personal loan he obtained in 2007 did not create a lien on the 
property because the Perezes, a married couple, owned the 
property as tenants by the entirety.    
Two days later, on May 10, 2013, Perez submitted an ex 
parte motion for a temporary restraining order to stay execution 
of the writ of ejectment, asserting the same grounds.  In the ex 
parte motion, Perez represented that his 94- year-old physically 
infirm grandfather, “ his immediate family longtime best friend & 
roommate, LINDA WILCOX ROBINSON, who facilitates & runs a Hawaii 
registered non-profit foundation, T.I.T.A., Inc. (Together in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 Total Aloha, Inc.) ,” (“T.I.T.A.”) and two formerly homeless 
women, Cynthia Pedro (“Pedro”) and Jane Silos (“Silos”) resided 
with him on the property.  He did not characterize any occupants 
as tenants.  The circuit court denied the ex parte motion on May 
14, 2013.    
On June 7,  2013, Peak Capital filed its memorandum in 
response to Perez’s motion to set aside default judgment.  Peak 
Capital argued Perez’s motion was untimely because the 
foreclosure judgment had entered over two years earlier, on 
February 15, 2011.  Peak Capital also argued it would be 
prejudiced if the motion was granted, as Perez had continued to 
live in the property for over five years without any payment.  
It also pointed out Perez had no meritorious defense, attaching 
documents showing that although Perez had previously held the 
property with his wife as tenants by the entirety, at the time 
the subject note and mortgage were signed, Perez held the 
property individually as a tenant in severalty, and that after 
the mortgage, he reconveyed the property to himself and his wife 
as tenants by the entirety.  Peak Capital also argued Perez 
inexcusably neglected to respond to the foreclosure lawsuit.  
After the June 18, 2013 hearing on Perez’s motion to set aside 
default judgment, the circuit court entered an order denying the 
motion on July 15, 2013.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
 Title to the property was then transferred from Perez to 
Peak Capital via a commissioner’s quitclaim deed dated September 
30, 2013, which was filed in the Land Court on November 4, 2013.    
D. Execution of the writ of ejectment and additional post-
judgment motions 
 
On December 7, 2013, deputy sheriff Thomas Cayetano, 
accompanied by two police officers and two other men, including 
investigator Terry Pennington, went to the property.  Perez was 
not present, but Robinson and other occupants were.  According 
to Pennington, Robinson told him she was Perez’s girlfriend and 
had lived there for many years without a rental or lease 
agreement.  The writ of ejectment was not executed; rather, the 
occupants were notified of Peak Capit al’s intent to evict them 
if they did not voluntarily leave within one week.   
On or about December 11, 2013, Robinson and the other 
occupants sent a letter to the circuit court regarding the writ 
of ejectment.  In relevant part, the top left of the first page 
of this letter reflected T.I.T.A. as a tenant in unit A- 2.  
Robinson signed the letter on behalf of T.I.T.A.; the letter 
discussed and asserted tenant rights under the PTFA.    
On December 13, 2013, Perez, now represented by counsel, 
filed another motion to lift the October 12, 2010 entry of 
default and for relief from the February 25, 2011 default 
judgment (“motion to lift default judgment”); this motion was ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
 scheduled for hearing on January 21, 2014.  Counsel stated Perez 
had been served with the writ of ejectment and had been given 
one week to vacate the property.  Counsel further represented he 
had requested an additional thirty days to vacate the property 
from Peak Capital’s attorney, but that the request had been 
denied.  Attached to the motion was a letter dated December 12, 
2013 from Robinson to Peak Capital as agent for T.I.T.A. 
asserting the December 7, 2013 seven- day notice to vacate 
violated the PTFA.  Also attached were the first and last pages 
of a purportedly eleven- page Rental Agreement between Perez and 
T.I.T.A., dated May 1, 2012, stating its “initial term” began 
May 1, 2012 and ended April 30, 2013, for rental of a 
“[r]oom/office in main house” in the property.  This document 
did not reflect any lease rent amount; the last page was signed 
by Perez and Robinson as agent for T.I.T.A.    
 On December 16, 2013, Robinson filed an ex parte motion to 
stay execution of writ of possession and judgment for possession 
(“motion to stay”).   This motion asserted: 
A Judgment for Possession and Writ of Execution for 
Possession was entered against me on the above date. I have 
filed a Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment[6] for reasons 
set forth in the attached declaration. I am requesting a 
Stay of the Judgment for Possession And Writ of Possession 
until the Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment is heard by 
this Court.  
                     
6  This referred to Perez’s December 13, 2013 motion to lift default 
judgment. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 Robinson attached a letter to the circuit court alleging PTFA 
violations along with a copy of the PTFA.  The circuit court 
temporarily granted this motion and stayed enforcement of the 
writ of ejectment until a hearing set for December 27, 2013 on 
Robinson’s motion to stay.    
Peak Capital filed its memorandum in opposition to the 
motion to stay on December 20, 2013.  Peak Capital argued that 
(1) because its lis pendens had been filed on December 17, 2009, 
anyone that acquired an interest in the property after that date 
was subject to the May 8, 2013 final judgment and writ of 
ejectment; (2) as a foreclosing mortgagee, it was not acting as 
a landlord; (3) because the alleged tenants did not record or 
register their tenancy interests in the Land Court, their claims 
were unenforceable, citing City & County of Honolulu v. A.S. 
7Clarke, Inc., 60 Haw. 40, 44-45, 587 P.2d 294, 297 (1978).     
Only counsel for Peak Capital and Pedro appeared at the 
December 27, 2013 hearing on the motion to stay.  Peak Capital 
orally argued that because there was no lease filed, there was 
no documentation indicating that any of the occupants, including 
Robinson, qualified as bona fide tenants entitled to protection 
                     
7  The referenced pages state that Clarke’s  failure to record with the 
Land Court a letter allegedly giving him a twenty -five-year ground lease to 
the subject property precluded him from asserting any interest in the 
property against the City.  The referenced pages also cite to HRS § 501 -121 
(1976) which then and still provides that a “(l)ease of registered land for a 
term of one year or more shall be registered.”  Because this statute was not 
raised, and it is not necessary to do so, we do not address its applicability 
in this case. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 under the PTFA.  The circuit court denied the motion without 
prejudice, finding that the occupants, including Robinson, had 
failed to properly file documents establishing they were bona 
fide tenants under the PTFA.        
Soon after the hearing ended, Robinson filed a reply 
memorandum.  Robinson asserted Federal Emergency Management 
Agency records would show that after severe storms and flooding 
in December 2008, she became a tenant at the property through 
lease agreements beginning in April 14, 2009.  She further 
alleged that she and Perez entered into an agreement for 
Robinson to act as his “Landlord Agent in exchange for her rent 
of T.I.T.A., Inc. office space/room” as it “wa s conducive for 
all parties as T.I.T.A.” to act as “a liaison for those who need 
assistance in homelessness. . . .”   She again alleged PTFA 
violations.    
On January 3, 2014, Robinson filed an emergency motion for 
reconsideration of the court’s December 27 , 2013 ruling denying 
the motion to stay, again requesting an immediate temporary stay 
(“motion to reconsider”).   Robinson stated that because Perez 
had a longtime friendship with her, there was a verbal agreement 
allowing her a tenancy for a live- in office.  She also stated 
that after incorporating T.I.T.A., on April 30, 2012, a written 
lease began on May 1, 2012, and attached a complete copy of a 
May 1, 2012 rental agreement between Perez and “Linda Wilcox ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
 Robinson for T.I.T.A., Inc.” for a “Room/office in main house” 
of the property; the stated rent was $200 a month.  Robinson 
again alleged violations of PTFA.  This renewed motion was 
scheduled for hearing on February 4, 2014.    
On January 13, 2014, Peak Capital filed a memorandum in 
opposition to Perez’ s December 13, 2013 motion to lift default 
judgment, repeating arguments contained in its December 20, 2013 
memorandum in opposition to motion to stay.  Counsel for Peak 
Capital and Perez appeared at the January 21, 2014 hearing on 
this motion.  The circui t court denied Perez’s motion via a 
minute order the next day.    
Ten days before the scheduled February 4, 2014 hearing on 
Robinson’s renewed motion, on Saturday, January 25, 2014, Peak 
Capital executed the writ of ejectment.  Robinson and Peak 
Capital presented differing accounts of the events of that day.   
Robinson indicated that although she got a U-Haul later in the 
day to take away some of the occupants’ possessions, the movers 
quickly began packing and moving possessions soon after arrival, 
she was treated rudely, and at the end of seven and a half 
hours, the house was locked up and the occupants were unable to 
return.  Pennington says the movers loaded Robinson’s U -Haul 
with the things she instructed them to, that Robinson was 
allowed to pack up the entire office herself, and that he went 
back to the property for total of three days to allow Perez to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
 remove his remaining possessions, and once finished, Perez 
authorized him to throw out the remaining items.  Cayetano and 
an investigator hired by Peak Capital say they saw Robinson pack 
her belongings and direct movers on what to pack and move.  
Overall, there is no dispute that the occupants had no idea that 
law enforcement officials would be arriving early that morning 
to eject them and that some of the occupants’ possessions, 
including Robinson’s, were re moved and taken to storage.   
On January 27, 2014, Peak Capital filed its memorandum in 
opposition to Robinson’s January  3, 2014 motion to reconsider.  
Peak Capital argued the PTFA was inapplicable because Robinson 
did not have a “bona fide lease” resulting from “an arms -length 
transaction.”    
On February 4, 2004, Robinson filed a reply memorandum 
regarding the motion to reconsider scheduled for hearing that 
day.  Robinson asserted Perez had informed Peak Capital 
regarding her tenancy and lease agreements on multiple occasions 
along with loan modification application forms and tax returns, 
to provide requested proof of income to Peak Capital’s loan 
servicers.  Robinson argued that her friendship with Perez was 
not relevant because the “bona fide” lease was between Perez and 
T.I.T.A.  Robinson alleged that in addition to requiring them to 
incur expenses for a U-Haul and storage rentals, the ejectment 
had resulted in damage to her personal and business property and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 there had been an unlawful taking of her possessions without 
disclosure of the location of the possessions or possible 
redemption methods.  Robinson also argued violations of PTFA and 
due process, and requested a cancellation of the writ of 
ejectment.    
At the February 4, 2014 hearing on the motion to 
reconsider, counsel for Peak Capital and Perez appeared along 
with Robinson.  Robinson asserted her due process rights had 
been violated through the sudden early morning ejectment and the 
taking of her property, and requested a return of her 
possessions.  Peak Capital responded that a request for return 
of possessions was not the subject of the motion being heard and 
that the parties should make this request to the sheriff.  It 
also argued there was no stay of the writ and that Robinson did 
not have a bona fide tenancy.  Peak Capital further argued that 
because Robinson’s lease was entered into a significant time 
after the foreclosure action had commenced, the motion should be 
denied.  Perez pointed out that although the circuit court had 
denied the previous motion, it had encouraged the occupants to 
refile their motion with copies of the leases, which they had 
done immediately.  Perez requested a return of all the personal 
possessions.  Peak Capital responded that it had no problem with 
the request to return personal property, and asked Perez to put 
the request in writing.  Robinson then argued that contrary to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
 Peak Capital’s arguments regarding the leases post -dating the 
lis pendens, the leases had begun in 2007.  The court took the 
matter under advisement.    
On February 5, 2014, Peak Capital filed a supplemental 
memorandum in response to a question the circuit court had asked 
during the hearing regarding what the date the “notice of 
foreclosure” would be under 2010 amendments to the PTFA.   
According to Peak Capital, the PTFA defined “notice of 
foreclosure” as the “date on which complete title of a property 
is transferred to a successor entity or person as a result of an 
order of a court or pursuant to provisions in a mortgage, deed 
of trust, or security d eed.”  Peak Capital represented that 
transfer of title occurred upon the February 14, 2012 auction of 
the property.  Peak Capital argued that because documents filed 
January 3, 2014 showed Robinson’s lease was dated May 1, 2012, 
which post-dated the February 14, 2012 auction, she had no 
rights as a bona fide tenant under 2010 amendments to the PTFA.    
On February 13, 2014, Pennington e-mailed Robinson 
informing her that Peak Capital requested reimbursement of the 
eviction costs of $10,713.47 to release her property, but that 
Peak Capital would also consider a counter-offer.  The email 
also stated that if Robinson did not respond, Peak Capital would 
not continue to pay for the storage of her property.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
 On February 14, 2014, the circuit court entered its minute 
order denying the motion to reconsider.  In relevant part, the 
circuit court ruled as follows:   
  THE COURT FINDS THAT THE TENANTS  ARE NOT BONA FIDE AS THE  
LEASE AGREEMENTS WERE  EXECUTED, OR EXTENDED, AFTER THE NOTICE  
OF FORECLOSURE.  FURTHER, THE COURT FINDS THAT MS.  WILCOX 
ROBINSON’ S LEASE AGREEMENT IS NOT THE  RESULT OF AN ARMS  
LENGTH TRANSACTION[.] . . . . 
 
Robinson responded to Pennington’s February 14, 2014 e -mail 
on February 18, 2014, stating that she had been rear- ended by a 
drunk driver, and saying she would get back to him in a few 
days.    
On March 13, 2014, the circuit court entered its order 
denying the January 3, 2014 motion to reconsider.    
E. Robinson’s motion for return of possessions  
On May 7, 2014 Robinson filed a motion for return of 
possessions on behalf of herself and Pedro.  Among other things, 
Robinson alleged violations of the PTFA and landlord- tenant 
code.  Robinson identified the property taken as yearbooks, baby 
pictures, memorabilia of her deceased father, ashes of her 
deceased grandparent, sentimental childhood books, toys, 
prescription medication, legal files and evidence for this case, 
bedding, food, dog food, shoes, a cable box, a DVD player and 
rentals, mail, and work tools; she also indicated third- party 
files related to her work as an Internal Revenue Service 
enrolled agent had been taken.  Robinson also attached a ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
 “complaint” for damages to her motion, alleging that as a result 
of the unlawful eviction she had incurred charges for loss of 
the items above as well as to rent a U- Haul and storage unit, a 
hotel room, meals and outside facilities, pet boarding 
accommodations, other daily items, work loss, lost appliances 
left in the property (refrigerator, microwave, range and oven, 
and gas dryer), and prescription contacts and supplies.    
On June 9, 2014, Peak Capital filed its memorandum in 
opposition to the motion for return of possessions.  Peak 
Capital did not contest the list of items Robinson alleged had 
been taken during execution of the writ of ejectment. It also 
did not indicate whether Robinson’s possessions were still in 
storage or whether they had been sold or discarded.  Instead, 
Peak Capital argued the circuit court had already ruled that 
Robinson was not entitled to relief under the PTFA because she 
was not a bona fide tenant.  It also argued that Perez had no 
interest in the property to lease after being divested of any 
interest in the property as of the date of the commissioner’s 
auction.  Peak Capital also argued that Robinson had been 
advised of the status of her possessions through Pennington’s 
February 13, 2014 e- mail, and that she was not entitled to the 
possessions until she paid the eviction costs.      
In her June 23, 2014 reply memo, Robinson represented she 
had personally entered into a lease agreement with Perez in 2005 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 and that on April 30, 2010, the tenant had changed to T.I.T.A. 
with herself as agent.  She argued that she had become a 
holdover tenant pursuant to HRS § 521- 71(c) at the time of the 
foreclosure auction and that, pursuant to that statute, Peak 
Capital, as purchaser, had sixty days to either file a new 
eviction action or renew the lease, and because it had done 
neither, pursuant to law, she became a holdover tenant subject 
to the landlord-tenant code.  She also cited to a 1982 
California Supreme Court case arising out of a writ of eviction 
for unlawful detainer (similar to summary possession in 
Hawaii), 
Arrieta v. Mahon , 31 Cal. 3d. 381, 644 P.2d 1249 (1982), which 
held that eviction of occupants claiming a right to possession 
unnamed in a writ of eviction violated those occupants’ 
procedural due process rights.  Her reply memorandum also 
attached declarations from others stating they had known Perez 
and his tenant, Robinson, for over seven years.  She also 
attached a February 17, 2014 special warranty deed transferring 
title to the property from Peak Capital to Kukui Farms Limited 
Liability Company.    
At the June 24, 2014 hearing on the motion for return of 
possessions, Robinson asked the circuit court to order release 
of her possessions, arguing she had not been afforded due 
process before the ejectment occurred.  She repeated her 
previous HRS § 521-71(c) arguments.   She asserted she was ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 entitled to damages for wrongful eviction and denial of due 
process and constitutional rights.  Peak Capital reiterated its 
argument that Robinson was not a bona fide tenant, that 
Robinson’s alleged rental agreement was dated May 1, 2012, and 
that because its lis pendens had recorded on December 17, 2009, 
Robinson took subject to the outcome of the foreclosure.  Peak 
Capital also argued that because the property was a land court 
property and Robinson did not record any interest against the 
certificate of title, her claims were unenforceable under 
Clarke.  Peak Capital argued that Robinson was required to pay 
the eviction costs of more than $10,000 if she wanted a return 
of her property.    
Robinson argued in rebuttal that she was a tenant before 
the lis pendens was filed.  She also argued that Peak Capital 
should not be able to claim the move out costs because it chose 
to execute the writ of ejectment while a hearing was pending, 
and that if Peak Capital had waited, none of the expenses it was 
now claiming would have been incurred.    
The circuit court took the motion for return of possessions 
under advisement, then summarily denied it via a minute order on 
June 26, 2014.  A written order denying the motion was filed on 
August 27, 2014.  Robinson appealed the circuit court’s denia l 
of this motion to the ICA on September 10, 2014.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
 F. ICA Proceedings 
1.  Opening Brief 
Robinson filed a notice of appeal on behalf of herself and 
Pedro.  Because an individual not licensed to practice law 
cannot represent another person in court, the ICA dismissed the 
appeal as to Pedro.  In her opening brief, in relevant part, 
Robinson contended the circuit court erred in denying her motion 
for return of possessions because Peak Capital failed to give 
Robinson proper notice to vacate under the PTFA and the 
landlord-tenant code.  She also claimed she was denied due 
process and equal protection of the law when the circuit court 
denied her motion for return of possessions.    
 2. Answering Brief 
Peak Capital argued Robinson did not appeal the circuit 
court’s foreclosure judgment or the final judgment and writ of 
ejectment.  Peak Capital further argued that because the Perez’s 
property was foreclosed upon in 2011, Perez did not have a valid 
interest in the property to lease to Robinson when he signed a 
lease with T.I.T.A. in 2012.    
3. Reply Brief 
Robinson argued Peak Capital became the new landlord as 
Perez’s successor in interest.   According to Robinson, Peak 
Capital was therefore required under HRS § 521-71(e) to either 
renew her lease or file an eviction process within 60 days of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
 taking ownership of the property.  Because Peak Capital 
undertook neither of these actions, Robinson argued that she 
became a month-to-month tenant entitled to 45 days of notice to 
vacate the property.      
4. ICA Summary Disposition Order 
In relevant part, the ICA ruled that Robinson should have 
raised her arguments through an appeal from the circuit court’s 
final judgment and writ of ejectment.  See Peak Capital Group,  
LLC, SDO at 3.  The ICA also concluded that the circuit court did 
not err in denying her motion for return of possessions as her 
rights under the PTFA, the landlord-tenant code, and 
constitutional due process were not violated.  See id. at 2-5.  
The ICA therefore affirmed the circuit court’s August 27, 2014 
order denying the motion for return of possessions.  See id. at 
6. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Interpretation of a statute 
Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de 
novo.  See Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 114 Hawai ʻi 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)  
(citations omitted).  When construing statutes, the court is 
governed by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental  starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
 
 When there is ambiguity in a statute, the meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, 
with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may 
be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning. 
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in 
determining legislative intent, such as legislative 
history, or the reason and spirit of the law.  
 
114 Hawaiʻ i at 193, 159 P.3d at 152-53  (citations and quotation 
marks omitted). 
B. Findings of fact and conclusions of law  
A trial court’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
“clearly erroneous” standard of review.  Beneficial Haw., Inc v. 
Kida, 96 Hawai i 289, 305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001).  A finding of 
fact is clearly erroneous when “the record lacks substantial 
evidence to support the finding,” or “despite evidence to 
support the finding, the appellate court is left with a definite 
and firm conviction . . . that a mistake has been committed.”  
Id. (citations omitted).  The circuit court’s conclusions of law 
are reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard.  Hawaii 
Nat’l Bank v. Cook , 100 Hawai i 2, 7, 58 P.3d 60, 65 (2002).   
C. Courts sitting in equi ty  
Foreclosure is an equitable action.  Hawaii Nat’l Bank , 100 
Hawaii at 7, 58 P.3d at 65.  “ Courts of equity have the power to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 mold their decrees to conserve the equities of the parties under 
the circumstances of the case."  Honolulu, Ltd. v. Blackwell , 7 
Haw. App. 210, 219, 750 P.2d 942, 948 (1988).  A court sitting 
in equity in a foreclosure case has the plenary power to fashion 
a decree to conform to the equitable requirements of the 
situation.  Jenkins v. Wise , 58 Haw. 592, 598, 574 P.2d 1337, 
1342 (1978).  Whether and to what extent relief should be 
granted rests within the sound discretion of the court and will 
not be disturbed absent an abuse of such discretion.  58 Haw. at 
597, 574 P.2d at 1341.  
IV. Discussion 
In summary, Robinson asserts that ICA erred in affirming 
the circuit court’s denial of her motion for return of 
possessions because: (1) Peak Capital did not give her the 
minimum 90-day notice to vacate required by the PTFA; (2) Peak 
Capital violated her rights under the landlord- tenant code, 
including the 45-day notice to vacate required to be given to 
month-to-month tenants by HRS § 521-71 ; (3) the circuit court’s 
refusal to order return of her possessions violated her 
constitutional due process rights, including assertions that an 
unserved lis pendens does not apprise tenants of a foreclosure 
prior to seizure of their property, and the post- judgment 
hearings in this case were constitutionally inadequate to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 8satisfy minimum due process standards;  and (4) the circuit 
court’s refusal to return  her possessions was otherwise in 
error.       
 We address each of these issues in turn.  
A. Although the PTFA does not require a written lease, 
Robinson was not entitled to PTFA protections because she 
did not qualify as a “bona fide tenant.”  
 
 1. Background of the PTFA 
 
The federal Protecting Tenants Against Foreclosures Act, or 
PTFA, was signed into law on May 20, 2009 and was effective 
9until December 31, 2014.   Congress enacted the law as a 
temporary measure to provide more protections to tenants during 
the mortgage foreclosure crisis.  The PTFA protected residential 
tenants residing in dwelling units subject to foreclosure by 
requiring that successors in interest to foreclosed properties 
provide “bona fide tenants,” as defined by the law, with a t 
least 90 days’ notice to vacate the property.   
Relevant portions of the PTFA provided as follows : 
  
                     
8  Robinson also asserts the ICA erred by ruling she should have raised 
her arguments in an appeal from the circuit court’s final judgment and writ 
of ejectment because she was never made a party to the foreclosure 
proceeding.  Robinson’s assertion has merit; this basis of the ICA’s ruling 
is incorrect, as Robinson was not a party.  We vacate the ICA’s decision, 
however, on other grounds.  
 
9  The PTFA is located in Title VII of the Helping Families Save Their 
Homes Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111-22, §§ 701-04, 123 Stat. 1632, 1660- 61. 
The PTFA originally had a sunset date of December 31, 2012, but Congress 
later changed the date to December 31, 2014. Mortgage Reform and Anti –
Predatory Lending Act , Pub. L. No. 111 –203, § 1484, 124 Stat. 1376, 2204 
(2010). 
  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 Sec. 702. Effect of Foreclosure on Preexisting Tenancy.  
 
(a) IN GENERAL .- In the case of any foreclosure on a 
federally -related mortgage loan or on any dwelling or 
residential real property after the date of enactment of 
this title, any immediate successor in interest in such 
property pursuant to the foreclosure shall assume such 
interest subject to:  
 
(1) the provision, by such successor in interest of a 
notice to vacate to any bona fide tenant at least 90 days 
before the effective date of such notice; and  
 
(2) the rights of any bona fide tenant, as of the date of 
such notice of foreclosure — 
 
(A) under any bona fide lease entered into before the 
notice of  foreclosure to occupy the premises until the end 
of the remaining term of the lease, except that a successor 
in interest may terminate a lease effective on the date of 
sale of the unit to a purchaser who will occupy the unit as 
a primary residence, subject to the receipt by the tenant 
of the 90 day notice under paragraph (1); or  
 
(B) without a lease or with a lease terminable at will 
under state law, subject to the receipt by the tenant of 
the 90 day notice under subsection (1),  
 
except that nothing under this section shall affect the 
requirements for termination of any Federal - or State -
subsidized tenancy or of any State or local law that 
provides longer time periods or other additional 
protections for tenants.  
 
(b) BONA FIDE LEASE OR TENANCY. - For purposes of this 
section, a lease or tenancy shall be considered bona fide 
only if 
 
(1) the mortgagor or the child, spouse, or parent of the 
mortgagor under the contract is not the tenant;  
 
2) the lease or tenancy was the result of an arms -length 
transaction; and   
 
3) the lease or tenancy requires the receipt of rent that 
is not substantially less than fair market rent for the 
property or the unit’s rent is reduced or subsidized due to 
a Federal, State, or local subsidy.  
 
Pub. L. No. 111-22, § 702, 123 Stat. at  1660-61, as amended by  
Pub. L. No. 111- 203, § 1484, 124 Stat. at  2204. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
 Federal courts have generally agreed that the language of 
the PTFA does not create a federal private cause of action and 
that tenants cannot use the PTFA to assert affirmative claims.  
See Mik v. Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp. , 743 F.3d 149, 160 (6th 
Cir. 2014).  Rather, because the PTFA is framed in terms of 
“protections” for tenants, courts have interpreted the statute 
as providing a defense in state eviction proceedings.  Logan v. 
U.S. Bank Nat’l Ass’n , 722 F.3d 1163, 1173 (9th Cir. 2013).  In  
many jurisdictions, tenants have used the PTFA as a defense to 
10unlawful detainer  actions initiated in state court by banks or 
landlords.  See, e.g. , Blue Mountain Homes, LCC v. Short , No. 
2:13–cv–0913, 2013 WL 1966224, at *2 (E.D. Cal. May 10, 2013); 
Wells Fargo Bank v. Lapeen , No. C 11 –01932, 2011 WL 2194117, at 
*4 (N.D. Cal. June 6, 2011).   
 2. Application of the PTFA to Robinson 
Robinson has argued throughout the course of this 
litigation that Peak Capital violated her rights under the PTFA.   
We preliminarily note that the circuit court’s orders up to 
the final judgment, which were entered while the PTFA was in 
effect from May 20, 2009 until December 31, 2014, did not 
reference its possible application.  The circuit court’s 
                     
10  Black’s Law Dictionary  543 (10th ed. 2014) defines “unlawful detainer” 
as “[t]he unjustifiable retention of the possession of real property by one 
whose original entry was lawful, as when a tenant holds over after lease 
termination despite the landlord’s demand for possession.” 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
 February 15, 2011 interlocutory decree of foreclosure included 
the following language:  
L. In the event the Commissioner deems it advisable  
to remove the occupants and their personal belongings from 
the Property, the Commissioner may obtain a writ of 
possession and  in his/her  sole discretion arrange for the 
removal of the  personal effects to a suitable storage area, 
to be stored for a  period of thirty (30) days. If such 
personal effects are not  claimed within the thirty (30) day 
period, the Commissioner may,  in his/her sole discretion, 
dispose of such personal belongings  in a commercially 
reasonable manner. Any funds generated by such  sale shall 
be distributed according to the Order of this Court.  
The costs of removal of occupants and their personal 
belongings  shall be considered a foreclosure expense.  
 
M. All Defendants, including Defendant PEREZ, and  
all other parties hereto, and all persons claiming by, 
through or under them, except any governmental authority 
enforcing a  lien for unpaid real property taxes as to the 
Property,  will be perpetually barred of and from any and 
all right, title and  interest in the Property or any part 
thereof, upon closing of  the sale herein authorized.  
 
N. Pursuant to H.R.S. §634 -51 and §501 -151, as amended, any 
and all other or further encumbrancers or  purchasers in 
respect of the Property or any part thereof, whose  interest 
arises from and after December 17, 2009, will be forever 
barred of and from any and all right, title and interest  
to the Property and every part thereof upon closing of the 
sale herein authorized.  
 
Paragraph L would seemingly have allowed the commissioner to 
obtain a writ of possession to remove occupants from the 
property without complying with the PTFA.  In addition, the 
terms of the May 8, 2013 writ of ejectment could have also 
violated rights of bona fide tenants under the PTFA, as nothing 
was stated requiring compliance with that law: 
THE STATE OF HAWAII:  
 
TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF HAWAII, OR 
HIS DEPUTY, THE CHIEF OF POLICE OF THE HONOLULU POLICE 
DEPARTMENT, OR HIS DEPUTY,OR TO ANY POLICE OFFICER OF THE 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU:  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
 Pursuant to the Order Granting Plaintiff’s Motion for  
Confirmation of Sale, Distribution of Proceeds, and For 
Writ of Ejectment filed herein, Plaintiff PEAK CAPITAL 
GROUP, LLC obtained an Order for Writ of Ejectment against  
Defendants CHRISTOPHER HULL PEREZ and JENNIFER HULL PEREZ, 
and all persons holding under or through them, for 
possession of the [property].  
 
NOW, THEREFORE, YOU ARE HEREBY COMMANDED TO REMOVE  
FORTHWITH THE SAID Defendants CHRISTOPHER HULL PEREZ and  
JENNIFER HULL PEREZ, and all persons holding under or 
through him [sic] from the premises above- mentioned, 
including their personal belongings and properties, and put 
Plaintiff PEAK CAPITAL GROUP, LLC, or its nominee, in full 
possession thereof, and make due return of this Writ with 
what you have endorsed thereon.  
 
With respect to whether 
Robinson was entitled to protections 
provided by the PTFA, the circuit court initially ruled on 
11December 27, 2013  that Robinson did not qualify as a “bona fide 
tenant” because the record did not contain a written
 lease.  
Section 702(a)(2)(B) of the PTFA e xplicitly provides that “any 
immediate successor in interest . . . shall assume such interest 
subject to . . . the rights of any bona fide tenant . . . 
without a lease or with a lease terminable at will under state 
law, subject to the receipt by the tenant of the 90 day notice 
under paragraph (1). . . .”   Pub. L. No. 111- 22, § 702(a)(2)(B), 
123 Stat. at 1661.  Thus, the plain language of the PTFA clearly 
extends its protections to tenants without written leases whose 
tenancies otherwise meet “bona fide tenancy” requirements.  To 
the extent the circuit court’s initial ruling was based on the 
lack of a written lease in the record, it was in error. 
                     
11  See Section II(d), supra (discussing the circuit court’s December 27, 
2013 ruling on Robinson’s motion to stay) . ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
31 
 An appellate court may, however, affirm a decision of a 
lower court on any ground in the record which supports 
affirmance.  See Canalez v. Bob’s Appliance  Serv. Ctr., Inc.,  
89 Hawai i 292, 301, 972 P.2d 295, 304 (1999).  With respect to 
Robinson’s PTFA allegations, although a written lease was not 
required, Robinson was entitled to PTFA protection only if she 
also otherwise qualified as a “bona fide tenant.”  Section 
702(b)(2) of the PTFA also requires that a “bona fide tenancy” 
be one that is “the result of an arms -length transaction.”  The 
circuit court specifically found in its February 14, 2014 minute 
order denying Robinson’s motion to reconsider, however, that 
Robinson’s lease agreement was not the result of an arms -length 
transaction.  Substantial evidence supports this finding.  
For example, after Perez was served with the foreclosure 
complaint December 17, 2009, it was Robinson who responded to 
Peak Capital’s counsel on letterhead listing her name along with 
Perez’s, stating that she was writing in response to the 
foreclosure complaint, requesting more time to answer, as “we 
will need to file a motion to extend time to answ er. . . .”  She 
also stated she and Perez had earlier retained an attorney to 
negotiate a loan modification with Peak Capital, and that Peak 
Capital should have a copy of Perez’s power of attorney naming 
her in their files.  In addition, in his first filing after the 
January 6, 2010 motion to extend time to answer, the May 8, 2013 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
32 
 motion to set aside default judgment, Perez identified his 94-
year old-grandfather, Robinson, “his immediate family longtime 
best friend & roommate,” and two formerly homeless women as 
residing with him on the property, but never characterized any 
of them as tenants or mentioned any leases.  In addition, when 
Robinson appeared in the lawsuit from December 11, 2013 and 
thereafter, she repeatedly asserted that it was T.I.T.A. that 
had a lease for a room/office, eventually stating in her 
February 4, 2014 reply memorandum to the motion to reconsider 
that any lease was between Perez and T.I.T.A, with her as agent 
for T.I.T.A.  Also, the lease only stated a rental of $200 a 
month for an entire room in the property.    
The PTFA only protects “bona fide tenants” with residential 
lease agreements, whether oral or written, resulting from arms-
length transactions.  There was substantial evidence for the 
circuit court’s ruling that Robinson was not a “bona fide 
tenant,” whether based on its ruling that there was no arms - 
length transaction, or based on evidence indicating there was no 
residential lease.  Therefore, the circuit court did not err in 
ruling Robinson was not entitled to PTFA protections.  
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
33 
 B. The Residential Landlord-Tenant Code applies to residential 
leases entered into before a lis pendens, but Robinson was 
not a residential tenant, and the lis pendens made the 
subsequent written lease to T.I.T.A. subject to the 
decision of the court as to its disposition.   
 
 Robinson also asserts the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of her motion for return of possessions 
because Peak Capital violated her rights under the landlord-
tenant code, including the 45-day notice to vacate required to 
be given to month-to- month tenants by HRS § 521- 71.  
1. Applicability of Chapter 521 
 
With respect to Robinson’s argument that the landlord -
tenant code applies to purchasers at a foreclosure sale, HRS § 
521-2 (2006) provides: 
Purposes; rules of construction.   (a)  This chapter shall 
be liberally construed and applied to promote its 
underlying purposes and policies.  
(b)  The underlying purposes and policies of this chapter 
are:  
      (1)  To simplify, clarify, modernize, and revise the law 
governing the rental of dwelling units and the rights and 
obligations of landlords and tenants of dwelling units;  
      (2)  To encourage landlords and tenants to maintain and 
improve the quality of housing in this State; and  
      (3)  To revise the law of residential landlord and tenant 
by changing the relationship from one based on the law of 
conveyance to a relationship that is primarily contractual 
in nature.  
 
Pursuant to HRS § 521- 2, the landlord- tenant code applies 
“landlords” and “tenants” of “dwelling units.”  These terms are 
defined by HRS § 521- 8 (2006):  
“Dwelling unit” means a structure, or part of a structure, 
which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by 
one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common 
household, to the exclusion of all others.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
34 
 “Landlord”  means the owner, lessor, sublessor, assigns or 
successors in interest of the dwelling unit  or the building 
of which it is a part and in addition means any agent of 
the landlord.  
. . . . 
“Tenant” mean s any person who occupies a dwelling unit for 
dwelling purposes under a rental agreement.  
 
(Emphasis added.) 
 As argued by Robinson, th e definition of “landlord” 
includes “successors in interest” of the owner of a dwelling 
unit.  Black’s Law Dictionary  1660 (10th  ed. 2014) defines 
“successor in interest” as “(s)omeone who follows another in 
ownership or control of property”; “A successor in interest 
retains the same rights as the original owner, with no change in 
substance.”  This plain language interpretation is supported by 
§ 702(a) of the PTFA, which also uses the term “successor in 
interest” to refer to purchasers of foreclose d dwellings.   
 Thus, in general, the landlord-tenant code applies to 
purchasers at a foreclosure sale, but only when the lease was 
12 13entered into before a lis pendens,  as further discussed below.  
                     
12  If a valid month -to-month tenancy existed before a lis pendens, it 
would be subject to Chapter 521, including the forty- five day notice to 
vacate required by HRS § 521 -71(a) (2006).  We  do not address whether there 
are circumstances under which a lease entered into before a lis pendens could 
be invalidated, including possible application of HRS Chapter 651C, the 
Uniform Fraudule nt Transfer Act, under which a fraudulent “transfer” through 
a lease can be invalidated.  See HRS § 651C -1 (2016) (defining of 
“transfer”); HRS § 651C -4 (2016).   
 
13  The National Low Income Housing Coalition lists Hawai i as one of 
nineteen states providing no specific legal protections for renters in 
foreclosed properties as of 2015.  National Low Income Housing Coalition, 
Protecting Tenants At Foreclosure Act , 
http://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/FactSheet_PTFA_2015.pdf  (last visited 
Nov. 30, 2017).  See also Section III of Aleatra P. Williams’s article, Real 
Estate Market Meltdown, Foreclosures and Tenants’ Rights , 43 Ind. L. Rev. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
35 
  2. Effect of lis pendens  
 Although the landlord- tenant code includes a purchaser at a 
foreclosure sale in the definition of a landlord, as reflected 
in the circuit court’s February 14, 2014 minute order denying 
Robinson’s motion to reconsider, a lis pendens impacts the 
effect of leases entered into after its filing.  In this case, 
Peak Capital filed its lis pendens on December 17, 2009, citing 
to HRS §§ 634-51 and 501-151.  We note at the outset that HRS § 
14634-51
 explicitly provides that in the case of registered land, 
                                                                  
1185 (2010), for a discussion of different states’ treatment of tenants’ 
rights in foreclosure as of the time of that article.  According to the 
article, as of 2010, the general approaches were that (1) tenancy terminates 
upon foreclosure; (2) tenancy survives foreclosure; (3) seventeen states 
required that a tenant be provided with notice before foreclosure (Alaska, 
California, Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, 
Missouri, Montana, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, 
and Washington); and (4) twelve states, including some in category (3) 
required that a tenant be  made a party to the foreclosure (Connecticut, 
Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Missouri, New York, Ohio, 
Vermont, and Wisconsin).  See id. at 1196- 1207.  The category (3) and (4) 
states cite due process concerns, which we discuss in the next section.  See 
id. at 1206.   
 
14  On December 17, 2009, HRS § 634 -51 provided as follows:  
 
Recording of notice of pendency of action.   In any action 
concerning real property or affecting the title or the 
right of possession of real property, the plaintiff, at the 
time of filing the complaint, and any other party at the 
time of filing a pleading in which affirmative relief is 
claimed, or at any time afterwards, may record in the 
bureau of conveyances a notice of the pendency of the 
action, containing the names or designations of  the 
parties, as set out in the summons or pleading, the object 
of the action or claim for affirmative relief, and a 
description of the property affected thereby.   From and 
after the time of recording the notice, a person who 
becomes a purchaser or incumbrancer of the property 
affected shall be deemed to have constructive notice of the 
pendency of the action and be bound by any judgment entered 
therein if the person claims through a party to the action; 
provided that in the case of registered land, section 501-***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
36 
 HRS § 501-151 governs; therefore, we address the effect of HRS § 
501-151.  On December 17, 2009, the latter statute provided in 
relevant part as follows:  
Pending actions, judgments; recording of, notice.   No writ 
of entry, action for partition, or any action affectin
g the 
title to real property or the use and occupation thereof or 
the buildings thereon, and no judgment, nor any appeal or 
other proceeding to vacate or reverse any judgment, shall 
have any effect upon registered land as against persons 
other than the parties thereto, unless a full memorandum 
thereof, containing also a reference to the number of 
certificate of title of the land affected is filed or 
recorded and registered.   . . . .  This section does not 
apply to attachments, levies of execution, or to 
proceedings for the probate of wills, or for administration 
in a probate court; provided that in case notice of the 
pendency of the action has been duly registered it is 
sufficient to register the judgment in the action within 
sixty days after the rendition thereof. 
As used in this chapter “judgment” includes an order 
or decree having the effect of a judgment.  
     Notice of the pendency of an action in a United States 
District Court, as well as a court of the State of Hawaii, 
may be recorded.  
 
HRS § 501-151 (2006).  As we noted in Knauer v. Foote, 101 
Hawaii 81, 87, 63 P.3d 389, 395 (2003), the sole function of a 
lis pendens is to notify prospective purchasers and 
encumbrancers that any interest acquired by them regarding 
property in litigation is subject to decision of a court.  A  
lis pendens actually “does not prevent title from passing to the 
grantee, but operates to cause the grantee to take the property 
subject to any judgment rendered in the action supporting the 
                                                                  
102, sections 501 -241 to 501- 248, and sections [501 -261 to 
501-269] shall govern . 
This section authorizes the recording of a notice of 
the pendency of an action in a United States District 
Court, as well as a state court.  
 
HRS § 634- 51 (1993 & Supp. 2009) (emphasis added.)  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
37 
 lis pendens.”  S. Utsunomiya Enters., Inc. v. Moomuku Country  
Club, 75 Hawaiʻ i 480, 502, 866 P.2d 951, 963 (1994).  Thus, “the 
practical effect of a recorded lis pendens is to render a . . . 
property unmarketable 
and unusable as security for a loan,” 
Utsunomiya , 75 Haw. at 502-03, 866 P.2d 963- 64. 
With respect to tenants, as discussed earlier, a lis 
pendens generally does not affect leases entered into before its 
filing.  A lis pendens does not, however, prohibit a mortgagor 
who still owns the property from leasing the property after its 
filing; lessees are, however, subject to the decision of the 
court as to their tenancies.  Because a foreclosure suit is an 
action in equity, however, a circuit court has discretion to 
fashion an equitable remedy as to tenants of foreclosed 
15properties.   
3. Application to Robinson  
In this case, Robinson repeatedly asserted that the non-
profit T.I.T.A. had a lease for a room/office, and conceded in 
her February 4, 2014 reply memorandum to the motion to 
reconsider that any lease was between Perez and T.I.T.A, with 
her signing as agent for T.I.T.A.  Therefore, Robinson was not a 
“tenant” occupying a “dwelling unit” under a “rental agreement,” 
and the landlord-tenant code did not apply to T.I.T.A.’s 
                     
15  See Section IV(D), infra. 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
38 
 tenancy.  In addition, the May 1, 2012 written lease from Perez 
to T.I.T.A. with Robinson as agent was after the December 17, 
2009 lis pendens; therefore, that lease was subject to the 
circuit court’s decision  as to its disposition.  
Therefore, there was substantial evidence supporting the 
circuit court’s denial of Robinson’s claims under the landlord -
tenant code; the circuit court did not err in denying Robinson 
16protections under the code.  
C. Robinson was afforded her procedural due process rights 
 
Robinson also asserts the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of her motion for return of possessions 
because the circuit court’s refusal to order return of her 
possessions violated her due process
 rights.  She includes 
arguments that an unserved lis pendens does not apprise tenants 
of a foreclosure prior to seizure of their property and that the 
post-judgment hearings in this case were constitutionally 
inadequate to satisfy minimum due process standards.  
 Robinson asserts property interests as a residential tenant 
and as an owner of tangible personal property.  With respect to 
the former, the United States Supreme Court has recognized a 
                     
16  We note Peak Capital ended up executing the writ of ejectment on 
January 25, 2014, forty -nine days after the December 7, 2013 personal notice 
to vacate.  Robinson was told, however, that she had seven days to vacate, 
raising questions as to whether Peak Capital would have been in violation of 
HRS § 521- 71 if she had qualified as a month -to-month tenant entitled to 
protection of the landlord -tenant code, an issue we need not decide at this 
time. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
39 
 residential tenant’s property interest in continued residence in 
his or her home.  See Greene v. Lindsey , 456 U.S. 444, 450-51 
(1982).  In this case, for the reasons given above, Robinson 
does not qualify as a residential tenant.  The United States 
Supreme Court, however, also recognizes property interests in 
non-residential leases.  U.S. v. Petty Motor Co. , 327 U.S. 372, 
379 (1946).  In addition, it is axiomatic that Robinson has a 
property interest in her tangible personal belongings.   
With respect to due process protections, as we stated in 
Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land and Natural Res. , 136 Hawai i 
376, 388-89, 363 P.3d 224, 236 -37 (2015):  
 The Hawai ʻi Constitution provides, “No person shall be 
deprived of life, liberty or property without due process 
of law....” Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. Due process calls for 
such procedural protections as the particular situation 
demands. The requirements of due  process are flexible and 
depend on many factors, but there are certain fundamentals 
of just procedure which are the same for every type of 
tribunal and every type of proceeding.  
 The basic elements of procedural due process are 
notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time 
and in a meaningful manner. However, while a fair trial in 
a fair tribunal is a basic requirement of due process, 
giving a person “a day in court” does not alone mean that a 
process is fair.  
 
(Some internal citations, punctuation, quotation marks omitted.)   
Robinson asserts her due process rights were violated 
because an unserved lis pendens does not apprise tenants of a 
foreclosure prior to seizure of their property.  This assertion 
may have had merit if Robinson had been a tenant without actual 
notice of the foreclosure proceeding.  Robinson was, however, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
40 
 aware of the foreclosure proceeding at least by the time Perez 
was served with the foreclosure complaint in December 2009.  
This is clear because she personally responded to Peak Capital, 
seemingly in the capacity of an owner or owner representative.   
Her January 4, 2010 letter to Peak Capital’s counsel stated she 
and Perez had together previously retained legal counsel to 
negotiate a loan modification.  This indicates she was aware of 
the default well before the filing of the foreclosure action.  
Whatever Robinson’s relationship may have been with Perez, from 
that point until she finally appeared personally in the lawsuit 
in December 2013, she undoubtedly knew the progress of the 
foreclosure.  Thus, this basis for alleging a due process 
violation lacks merit. 
Robinson also asserts her due process rights were violated 
because the post- judgment hearings in this case were 
constitutionally inadequate to satisfy minimum due process 
standards.  In this regard, as noted above, Robinson was well 
aware of the progress of the foreclosure proceeding.  Also, 
before seizure of her property, Robinson was officially notified 
of the writ of ejectment when a sheriff and others appeared at 
the property on December 7, 2013.  Robinson filed for and 
obtained a temporary stay of writ of ejectment until the 
December 27, 2013 hearing on her December 16, 2013 motion to 
stay.  The circuit court considered Robinson’s arguments at the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
41 
 December 27, 2013 hearing, bef ore ultimately rejecting them.  
When Robinson filed her January 3, 2014 motion to reconsider, 
the circuit court scheduled the matter for hearing on February 
4, 2014, but no ex parte motion for emergency stay was attached 
to this motion and no further stay was granted.  Robinson had 
previously shown awareness of the need for a court ordered stay 
to halt execution of a writ of ejectment.  After the January 25, 
2014 execution of the writ of ejectment, the circuit court 
considered Robinson’s additional arguments at the February 4, 
2014 hearing on her motion to reconsider.  It also considered 
her filings with respect to her May 7, 2014 motion for return of 
possessions, then considered her arguments at the June 24, 2014 
hearing before taking the motion under advisement and later 
summarily denying the motion.  Robinson was therefore given 
various opportunities to be heard before and after the seizure 
of her possessions.  She was provided with the opportunity to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner as 
required by due process, and the process provided was fair.  
Thus, Robinson’s due process rights were not violated .  
D. The circuit court should have granted Robinson’s motion for 
return of possessions. 
 
Robinson also generally alleges that the circuit court 
erred in denying her motion for return of possessions.  Although 
Hawaii law does not provide specific statutory protection for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
42 
 17tenants of foreclosed properties,  un der our common law, 
foreclosure is an equitable action.  Hawaii Nat’l Ban k, 100 
Hawaii at 7, 58 P.3d at 65.  “Courts of equity have the power to 
mold their decrees to conserve the equities of the parties under 
the circumstances of the case.”  Honolulu, Ltd. , 7 Haw. App. at 
219, 750 P.2d at 948.  A court sitting in equity in a 
foreclosure case has the plenary power to fashion a decree to 
conform to the equitable requirements of the situation.  See 
Jenkins, 58 Haw. at 598, 574 P.2d at 1342.  Thus, whether and to 
what extent relief should be granted rests within the sound 
discretion of the court and will not be disturbed absent an 
abuse of such discretion.  See 58 Haw. at 597, 574 P.2d at 1341. 
 Therefore, our precedent allows courts to consid er the 
equitable circumstances of all those involved in the foreclosure 
of a residential property, including tenants unnamed in the 
18foreclosure.   In this case, we have already held that the 
circuit court did not violate Robinson’s procedural due process 
rights.  We must still address, however, whether the circuit 
court abused its equitable discretion by refusing to grant 
                     
17  See n.13, supra. 
 
18  A court’s equitable powers include the discretion to inquire with 
foreclosing parties regarding whether there are residential tenants, to 
require that residential tenants be provided notice of the foreclosure  
action, to provide adequate time under the circumstances for residential 
tenants to move out of the foreclosed premises, and to address other issues, 
including the disposition of tenants’ personal possessions and security 
deposits.  In other words, courts have discretion to fashion d
ecrees 
conforming to the equitable requirements of each foreclosure.    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
43 
 Robinson’s motion for return of possessions.  In evaluating the 
equities, we note there is no indication that any payment was 
made to Peak Capital after its June 7, 2013 representation to 
the circuit court that the property had continued to be occupied 
19for over five years without any payment toward the mortgage.   
Also, there is no dispute that Peak Capital incurred substantial 
delay and expense in effectuating the foreclosure and ejectment.   
On the other hand, although Robinson was not a residential 
tenant, she was not obligated on the note to Peak Capital and 
was not a mortgagor.  Peak Capital chose to execute the writ of 
ejectment on Saturday, January 25, 2014, while knowing the 
circuit court had scheduled a further he aring on Robinson’s 
20motion to reconsider on February 4, 2014.   Robinson and other 
occupants of the property were surprised by the sudden 
appearance of the sheriff and movers.  Robinson argues that if 
Peak Capital had waited until the February 4, 2014 hearing on 
the motion to reconsider and the motion had been denied, Peak 
Capital would not have had to incur the over $10,000 to remove 
not only Robinson’s possessions, but the possessions of Perez 
and the other occupants.   
                     
19  In addition, despite this being a judicial foreclosure, Peak Capital 
was precluded from obtaining a deficiency judgment as to Perez’s pre -petition 
debts due to his bankruptcy discharge.    
 
20  It is unclear whether the pending closing of the sale of the property 
to Kukui Farms Limited Liability Company prompted Peak Capital to execute the 
writ of ejectment before the February 4, 2014 hearing.  As noted, Robinson 
attached a February 17, 2014 special warranty deed to her June 13, 2014 reply 
memorandum to her motion for retu
rn of possessions.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
44 
 When Peak Capital refused to return Robinson’s possessions 
without payment of all of the ejectment costs, Robinson filed 
the May 7, 2014 motion for return of possessions.  Robinson 
represented that her taken possessions included yearbooks, baby 
pictures, memorabilia of her deceased father, ashes of her 
deceased grandparent, sentimental childhood books, toys, 
prescription medication, legal files and evidence for this case, 
bedding, food, shoes, a cable box, a DVD player and rentals, 
mail, work tools, and third party IRS files.  Although those 
executing the ejectment submitted declarations suggesting that 
Robinson was able to take the personal possessions she wished to 
take in the U-Haul she rented, at no time did Peak Capital 
dispute Robinson’s descriptions of her possessions that had been 
taken.  In addition, the circuit court judge summarily denied 
the motion with no indication he did not believe Peak Capital 
had taken the items Robinson asserted.  Thus, there is no basis 
in the record to question Robinson’s assertion that her personal 
possessions were taken. 
Of the possessions listed by Robinson, it appears other 
than the toys, bedding, food, shoes, cable box, DVD player and 
rentals, and work tools, the other items had no monetary value 
to Peak Capital, and it appears that even those items had very 
little monetary value.  Yet Peak Capital refused to return any 
of Robinson’s possessions, including the ashes of her deceased ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
45 
 grandparent, without payment of the entirety of the ejection 
costs, exceeding $10,000. 
In a foreclosure proceeding, w hether and to what extent 
relief should be granted rests within the sound discretion of 
the court and will not be disturbed absent an abuse of such 
discretion.  See Jenkins , 58 Haw. at 598, 574 P.2d at 1342.   
Under the circumstances, however, we conclude the circuit court 
abused its discretion by refusing to order Peak Capital to 
return Robinson’s personal possessions, especially because the 
possessions consisted of items that had little or no value to 
21Peak Capital but were priceless to Robinson.   It was especially 
inequitable to allow Peak Capital to hold Robinson’s 
grandparent’s ashes hostage for payment of eviction costs.  
Thus, we hold the circuit court abused its equitable 
discretion by denying Robinson’s motion for return of 
possessions.  We therefore remand this case to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
V.  Conclusion 
Based on the reasoning above, we vacate the ICA’s April 20,   
 
 
                     
21  Refusal to return the third -party files may have also implicated the 
due process rights of third parties who had no notice and no opportunity to 
be heard. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
46 
 2016 Judgment on Appeal, and remand this case to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Linda Wilcox Robinson 
petitioner pro se  
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  
    /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
Everett Walton 
for respondent/ 
plaintiff-appellee 
     
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
 
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
 
      /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 
 
 
