*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
---o0o--- 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
vs. 
VICTORIA I. SATOAFAIGA,  
Petitioner/ Defendant- Appellant.  
SCWC-20-0000067 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-20-0000067 ; 2CPC-17-0000969 ) 
FEBRUARY 7, 2022 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS,  JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION
Victoria I. Satoafaiga, a former employee of the 
Central Maui Boys & Girls Club (the Club), was indicted for the
sexual assault of a twelve-year-old member of the organization 
(complaining witness or CW).  Initially charged with four 
counts, including Sexual Assault in the First Degree for the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-20-0000067
07-FEB-2022
09:50 AM
Dkt. 21 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
2 “sexual penetration” of the CW, she  accepted a plea agreement 
allowing her to plead no contest to an amended charge of Sexual
Assault in the Fourth Degree and one count of Custodial 
Interference in the Second Degree.  Satoafaiga moved for a 
deferred acceptance of no contest (DANC) plea.  The circuit 
court denied the DANC motion and sentenced her to a one-year 
prison sentence.  She appealed the denial of her DANC motion,  
and the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed.  
Satoafaiga now asks us to reverse the ICA and the circuit 
court’s decision s and remand to the circuit court with 
instructions to enter an order granting the DANC motion nunc 
pro tunc to the date of her sentencing.  
 Satoafaiga’s appeal requires us to decide whether  it 
was proper for the circuit court to take into account an 
alleged act of “sexual penetration” when the only sexual-
assault charge she pleaded  to by definition excluded acts of 
sexual penetration.  We hold that the circuit court’s 
consideration of sexual penetration under these circumstances 
constituted an abuse of discretion.  Satoafaiga pleaded no 
contest to Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, which 
criminalizes “sexual contact.”   Hawai‘i Revised Sta
tutes (HRS)  
§ 707-733(1)(a)  (Supp. 2016).  “Sexual contact” is defined as 
“any touching, other than acts of ‘sexual penetration’ , of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
3  sexual or other intimate parts of another.”  HRS § 707-700 
(Supp. 2016) (emphasis added).  Thus, Satoafaiga’s no contest 
plea to Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree excluded any 
allegation of sexual penetration.  Under the
se circumstances, 
the circuit court abused its discretion when it improperly 
considered an allegation of sexual penetration in denying her 
DANC motion.  We therefore vacate the ICA’s judgment on appeal 
to the extent it affirmed the denial of the DANC motion and 
vacate the circuit court’s judgment of conviction inasmuch as 
it denied the motion for a DANC.   We remand for reconsideration
of Satoafaiga’s DANC motion  consistent with this opinion.  1  
 As to Satoafaiga’s remaining arguments , we affirm the
judgments of the ICA and the circuit court.  The circuit court 
did not otherwise exceed the bounds of reason
 or abuse its 
discretion in ruling on her motion.   
                         
 1  Satoafaiga has never challenged the trial court’s sentencing 
decision.  Therefore, even though we remand to reconsider the DANC  decision,
we leave the sentence undisturbed.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
4  II.  BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background  2
 Satoafaiga was employed as a director of the Boys and
Girls Club of Central Maui between August 2016 and April 2017. 
The CW was a twelve-year-old living with her Aunt and Uncle, 
who had raised her since she was three years old.  She was a 
member of the Club, part of a network of clubhouses that 
provides recreational opportunities and a safe haven for 
children of different ages.    
 
 Aunt and Uncle were first alerted to an inappropriate
relationship between Satoafaiga and the CW when they discovered
explicit text messages on the CW’s phone.  Near midnight on 
April 16, 2017, Uncle noticed that the CW was not asleep and 
appeared to be hiding under her covers.
  He asked her to hand 
over her phone.  Uncle saw a text message exchange with an 
unknown person saved as “V.$(Mom) ,” who sent the CW explicit 
sexual messages and stated in one message , “I love you baby .”  
The person had also sent the CW explicit images.  Uncle asked   
 
                         
2  The facts  recounted here are drawn from the presentence 
investigation (PSI) report prepared for the circuit court and the findings
of fact issued by the circuit court following a motion to suppress cell-
phone evidence.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
5  who the person was and
 the CW told him it was Satoafaiga.  
Uncle was familiar with Satoafaiga as 
he had met her at the
Club.   3 
 
 Three  days later, the CW was interviewed at the 
Children’s Justice Center  in Wailuku.  The CW related that she
had gotten to know Satoafaiga after Satoafaiga expressed 
concern about the CW and told her to reach out if she needed.  
Their relationship progressed from there.      4 
 
 The CW described two incidents of sexual assault.  
First, some months before the CW was interviewed, Satoafaiga 
asked the CW to help her retrieve some snacks upstairs at the
Club; while there, she grabbed the CW by the hips and then 
kissed her on the lips, over her protest.  Some time later, 
over spring break in 2017, the CW claimed that, while the two
of them were alone together in an upstairs area at the Club,  
 
                         
3  Warrants were later executed for records from the CW’s phone as
well as Satoafaiga’s personal cell phone and a cell phone issued to her by 
the Club, which confirmed that the exchange was in fact with Satoafaiga.   
 
4  Satoafaiga described her relationship with the CW  in a letter to
the court.   She recalled expressing concerns to the CW  about her wellbeing 
and encouraging her to reach out if she needed.  She claimed that the CW 
“would, from that day forward, hang out in my office and often asked 
questions about my personal life.”  According to Satoafaiga, “over several 
weeks . . . [the CW] was becoming somewhat obsessive with hanging out around
me.”  
 
 She also acknowledged the text messages she exchanged with the 
CW: “I did develop what  later came to be a[n] inappropriate friendship with 
[the CW] and I understand that it was wrong.  Inappropriate text messages 
were sent and and [sic]  received and I am truly ashamed and embarrassed of 
my inappropriate conduct.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
6 Satoafaiga digitally penetrated her under her clothing.  The CW
pushed her off and left the Club.   Police later learned from  
Uncle that Satoafaiga gave the CW a sweater and two pairs of 
loop earrings as gifts.  Satoafaiga resigned from the Club on 
April 27, 2017.  5 
 Pursuant to several search warrants, the Maui Police 
Department (MPD) obtained phone records from the CW and 
Satoafaiga’s phones.   The warrants revealed that Satoafaiga 
exchanged approximately 15,978 text messages with the CW over a
roughly four-month period
 culminating in April 2017.  Some of 
these text messages were sexually explicit.   6
 
  Months later, on October 27, 2017, Aunt  and Uncle 
contacted the MPD to report that the CW had run away.  Uncle 
had gone to the Club to pick up the CW but was not able to 
locate her.  The CW later told Aunt and Uncle that she had been
with Satoafaiga and not at the Club during the daytime on 
October 27.  Satoafaiga took her to the Kahului Break Water  
                         
5  Satoafaiga maintained throughout these proceedings that she did 
not sexually assault the CW .  In a letter to the circuit court she expressed 
remorse for developing an inappropriate relationship with the CW but 
asserted that she was “not a rapist or a pedophile” and that she acce pted 
the plea offer to avoid the risk of conviction for the first -degree offense. 
And in her ICA reply brief, she asserted that through this statement, she 
had “categorically denied ‘digital penetration.’”    
 
6  Satoafaiga moved to suppress the results of  the search warrants
on her work and personal phone s, including the text messages.  The circuit 
court denied this motion.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
7  where she made several hickeys on the CW’s chest.  When the CW 
returned to the Club, she noticed 
Uncle waiting for her and ran
away so she would not get in trouble.  Finally, at about 4 a.m.
the following morning , Satoafaiga’s partner called Aunt to tell
her the CW was at their residence.  Aunt contacted the MPD, and
the MPD escorted her to the residence.    
 
 
 
 Satoafaiga’s account of that evening differed from 
Aunt and Uncle’s .  Satoafaiga and her partner claimed they had
gone out for a “Ladies Night” around 9 p.m. on October 27.  
When they came home at about 2 a.m., they discovered the CW 
there; after questioning her about how she knew their address
,
they got Aunt’s number from the CW and  called her.       
 
B. Procedural History  
1. Circuit court proceedings7 
 
 A grand jury indicted Satoafaiga on four counts.  
Count One alleged that Satoafaiga committed Sexual Assault in 
the Third Degree by kissing the CW on the lips,  in violation of 
HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (2014).   Count Two alleged that she 
committed Sexual Assault in the First Degree by inserting her 8
                         
7  The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.  
 
8  HRS § 707 -732(1)(b) states, “A person commits the offense of 
sexual assault in the third degree if: . . . The person knowingly subjects
to sexual contact another person who is less than fourteen years old or 
causes such a person to have sexual contact with the person [.]”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
8  finger into the CW’s vagina , in violation of HRS 
§ 707-730(1)(b) (2014).   Count Three alleged that she committed
Attempted Sexual Assault in the Third Degree on October 27, 
2017, presumably a reference to the Kahului Break Water 
incident, in violation of HRS §§ 705- 500 (2014) and 707-
732(1)(b).   And Count Four alleged that she committed 
Custodial Interference in the Second Degree on the same date, 
in violation of HRS § 707- 727(1)(a) (2014).  The circuit court
later dismissed Count Three for failing to provide Satoafaiga 
with adequate notice.   11109  
 
  T he prosecutor offered Satoafaiga a plea agreement.  
The prosecution offered to dismiss Count One with prejudice and 
to amend Count Two to a charge of Sexual Assault in the Fourth  
                         
9  HRS § 707 -730(1)(b) states, “A person commits the offense of 
sexual assault in the first degree if: . . .  The person knowingly engages in
sexual penetration with another person who is less than fourteen years 
old[.]”  
 
10  HRS § 705 -500(1)(b) states, in relevant part: “A person is 
guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if the person: . . . I ntentionally 
engages in conduct which, under the circumstances as the person believes 
them to be, constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct intended 
to culminate in the person’s commission of the crime.”  
 
11  HRS § 707 -727(1)(a) states, “A person commits the offense of 
custodial interference in the second degree if: (a) The person intentionally
or knowingly takes, entices, conceals, or detains a minor knowing that the 
person has no right to do so [.]”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
9  Degree under HRS 
707-733(1)(a)  (Supp. 2016).   Count Four 
remained unchanged.  Satoafaiga accepted the plea deal,  
agreeing to enter a plea of either guilty or no contest to 
Count Four and the amended Count Two and stipulating to a 
factual basis to support those charges.  In conjunction with 
her plea agreement, Satoafaiga moved to defer the acceptance of
her no contest plea.   12
 
  The circuit court allowed her to withdraw her plea of 
not guilty and enter a plea of no contest.  The court ordered a 
presentence investigation (PSI) report to be prepared. 
  
 The court convened on January 22, 2020 to consider 
the DANC motion and sentencing.  Satoafaiga urged the court to 
find that the three 
prongs of the HRS § 853-1 (2014) analysis,  
governing DANC and deferred acceptance of guilty (DAG) plea 
motions, were met: (1) she voluntarily pleaded guilty or no 
contest before trial, (2) she was not likely to engage again in
a criminal course of conduct, and (3) the ends of justice and 
the welfare of society did not require that she presently   
                         
12  HRS § 707 -733(1)(a) states, “A person commits the offense of 
sexual assault in the fourth degree if: (a)  The person knowingly subjects 
another person, not married to the actor, to sexual contact by compulsion or
causes another person, not married to the actor, to have sexual contact with
the actor by compulsion [.]”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
10  suffer the penalty imposed by law.   First, she pointed to “the
excellent presentence report and the character references” from 
friends, family, and coworkers that it included .  She argued 
that her relative youth – she was in her late twenties at the 
time – and the fact that she had no arrest record weighed 
toward deferral. 
 Satoafaiga referenced the “Assessment Factors 
for Sentencing” in the PSI report , which found that she had 
previously led a “law -abiding life” and that her “character and 
attitude and history ” indicated that she was “unlikely to 
commit another crime. ”  She next pointed to the legislative 
policy behind HRS § 853- 1, which aimed to provide “first -time, 
accidental, or situational offenders” with an opportunity to 
maintain a clean record.  In light of these factors, defense  13  
                         
13  HRS § 853-1(a) provides:  
 
Upon proper motion as provided by this chapter:  
 
(1) When a defendant voluntarily pleads guilty or 
nolo contendere, prior to commencement of trial, 
to a felony, misdemeanor, or petty misdemeano r; 
(2) It appears to the court that the defendant is 
not likely again to engage in a criminal course 
of conduct; and 
(3) The ends of justice and the welfare of society
do not require that the defendant shall 
presently suffer the penalty imposed by law,   
 
the court,  without accepting the plea of nolo contendere or
entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the 
defendant and after considering the recommendations, if 
any, of the prosecutor, may defer further proceedings.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
11 counsel asked the court to let her “prove to you that she’s
entitled to have her record free.”    
  The  State argued that deferral would not be 
appropriate for the sexual assault of a minor by a person in a 
position of authority.  It characterized Satoafaiga’s crime as   
not an “accidental” or “situational” one but rather a crime 
committed over a long period that bore “grooming aspects.”   14
  
The court found that the first prong of the HRS 
§ 853-1 analysis was met because Satoafaiga voluntarily pleaded
no contest before trial.  Turning to the latter  two prongs , the
court first noted that Satoafaiga, at twenty-seven, had been 
more than twice the age of the CW and “should have known twice 
as much.  Twice as mature, allegedly.”  The court acknowledged 
the “glowing” letters from friends, family, and colleagues in 
the PSI report but pointed out that Satoafaiga’s relationship 
with the CW was “ a different kind of relationship.  It was a   
 
                         
14  Satoafaiga argued in the circuit court that by asserting  
“[t]here are certain crimes that do not deserve a deferral ,” the State 
improperly implied that Satoafaiga was ineligible for deferred acceptance of
her plea based on the offense she committed .  However, when defense counsel 
brought up Satoafaiga’s eligibility for deferred acceptance, the court 
agreed she was eligible, and the prosecutor clarified she was not arguing 
against eligibility.    
 Satoafaiga presse d this argument on appeal, but it was rejected
by the ICA.  State v. Satoafaiga, 149 Hawai ‘i 103, 482 P.3d 566, 2021 WL 
928443 at *5 (App. Mar. 11, 2021)  (SDO).  Because we see no indication in 
the record that the trial court believed Satoafaiga to be ineligible for 
deferred acceptance of her plea, we do not address this argument further.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
12 child with an adult.  It was with someone who’s supposed to be 
her mentor[.]”   
  The court next turned to whether Satoafaiga had taken
responsibility for her actions: “Have you truly taken 
responsibility and a
pologized?   I guess does it appear that 
you’re unlikely to engage in such a criminal course of conduct 
again?”  It referred to a letter to the court included in the 
PSI report where Satoafaiga stated “[i]nappropriate text 
messages were sent and and [sic] r
eceived and I am truly 
ashamed and embarrassed of my inappropriate conduct” and “I am 
completely remorseful that I had engaged in inappropriate tex t 
messaging with [the CW].”  The court pointed out , ”Well, you do
admit in your letter that you engaged in inappropriate text 
messages.”  However, the court went on:  
 
But this was more than text messaging.   It was 
penetration with a finger to a vagina.   And the problem 
is, is that inappropriate text messaging might be a few 
messages here and there or maybe even a couple of 
messages here and there, but 15,978 messages were 
exchanged.  . . . It means there was an exchange going on 
between the two of you.   So talk about some inappropriate 
behavior.  
  Noting the number of messages – almost 16,000 over 
approximately four months – and their explicit content,  the15 
                         
 15  The text messages discovered as a result of the execution of the
cell-phone warrants documented at least three different sexually explicit 
conversations on three different days, including the April 16, 2017 exchange
that ultimately alerted Aunt and Uncle to the relationship.  The earliest of
these documented exchanges took place on March 18, 2017.   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
13 court concluded that this was not a “one -time incident” and 
“definitely more than inappropriate text messaging.”   The court
next contrasted Satoafaiga’s behavior with the mission of the 
Club.  Finally, it concluded:   
[E]verything  you did to her, besides the digital 
penetration and the custodial interference, dealing with 
taking her out to the breakwater when she was supposed to 
be going home, and her guardians come to pick her up from 
the Boys & Girls Club and she’s not there, and they’re 
going crazy, where’s my kid, where’ s my daughter, looking 
all over for her.  And at two o’clock or four o’ clock the 
next morning, finally a phone call comes in from your 
partner . . .  letting [Aunt] know that the child is at 
your house.  So she’s gone for, I don’ t know, 4:30 in the 
afternoon the day before to like 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. the 
next morning.  She’s in your -- she’s in your trust, 
she’s in your care this whole time.  You were responsible 
for her, and she ends up with hickeys on her chest during 
this time.  I mean, talk about a negative influence on a 
child. 
 The court found Satoafaiga was likely to reoffend and
that the ends of justice and the welfare of society required 
that she should presently suffer the penalty imposed by law.  
Consequently, it denied the DANC motion.    
  The court next turned to sentencing.  The State  
characterized Satoafaiga’s letter in the PSI report as 
demonstrating “complete denial over the facts of the 
relationship” and claimed that she still “is not taking full 
responsibility.”   It argued that she used the CW’s 
vulnerabilities to “target[] a struggling person, a struggling 
child.”  Satoafaiga responded by repeating the positive 
assessment in the PSI report , pointing to her stable employment  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
14 and support from family and friends.  She also pointed out in 
response to the court’s mention of “digital penetration”  during
the DANC discussion that:   
[T]he defendant was able to get a plea agreement, and the
government had dismissed the felony.  So with all due 
respect, there is no allegation of digital penetration, 
and to the extent that the Court may have been misled 
about that, you know, I am --  want to bring it to the 
Court’s attention that that is inaccurate, your Honor.  
She pleaded no contest.   
  She argued that her purported lack of remorse should 
not be used against her.  Although she maintained she had  taken 
responsibility, she argued that “[a] person can choose to 
accept the government’s plea even if they’re innocent” and 
that, in light of her no- contest plea,  the court should not use 
her “lack of accepting full responsibility as a criteria.”   
Defense counsel concluded that “[s]he has a history of no 
criminal involvement whatsoever.  She’s a good person who made 
a bad mistake[.] ”  Finally, Satoafaiga personally addressed the 
court, acknowledging that she “let a lot of people down” but 
maintaining “a lot of what has been said is also not true.”    
  In imposing sentence, the court again mentioned the
volume and inappropriate content of the text messages between
Satoafaiga and the CW.  It acknowledged defense counsel’s 
argument with respect to the felony count having been 
dismissed:    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
15 So the act that took place  -- and I understand, Mr. 
Aluli, it’s not sexual assault in the first degree.   
Thank you for correcting me.  It’s sexual assault in the 
fourth degree.   But it still occurred at the Boys & Girls
Club, I think in the upper room.  This inappropriate 
activity between you and the juvenile, you and the minor 
did happen.  It happened.  
  Pointing to the text messages and inappropriate 
pictures as well as the gifts Satoafaiga allegedly provided the
CW, the court observed that “grooming is what comes to mind 
here.”  The court sentenced Satoafaiga to a one-year prison 
term for each count, to run concurrently,  with credit for time 
served.    
2. ICA proceedings   
 Satoafaiga appealed the denial of her DANC motion.  
Her appeal raised a number of arguments, all aimed at 
demonstrating that the trial court abused its discretion when 
it denied the motion.  She argued, first, that the trial 
court’s finding that she was likely to reoffend exceeded the 
bounds of reason.  Further, it erred by considering the 
“uncharged conduct” of sexual penetration and compounded the 
error by considering her lack of remorse for that conduct.  The
illicit text messages exchanged with the CW, she argued, were 
irrelevant.  Finally, the court erred by disregarding the 
public policy behind HRS c hapter 853, which demands leniency 
for offenders like Satoafaiga.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
16    In a summary disposition order, the ICA first 
found that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion by 
denying Satoafaiga ’s  DANC motion.  State v. Satoafaiga, 149 
Hawai
‘i 103, 482 P.3d 566, 2021 WL 928443 at *4 (App. Mar. 11, 
2021) (SDO).  It rejected  the argument that the trial court was
barred from considering digital penetration as uncharged 
conduct, because despite the amendment of Count II, the 
indictment still alleged an act of penetration.   Id.  With 
respect to Satoafaiga’s argument that the court improperly used
her failure to admit responsibility against her, the ICA held, 
“I
t was within the ambit of the court’ s authority to consider 
Satoafaiga’s lack of remorse, or lack of taking 
responsibility[.]”  Id. at *5.  
 
 Satoafaiga sought review in this court; her arguments
in her application for certiorari largely repeat  her 
multifaceted attack on the circuit court’s denial of  her DANC 
motion.      
III.  STANDARD OF REVIEW  
The grant or denial of a motion for a DANC plea is within 
the discretion of the [trial] court and will not be 
disturbed unless there has been manifest abuse of 
discretion.  State v. Tom, 69 Haw. 602, 603, 752 P.2d 597,
597 (1988).  “An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial 
court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice  to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.”  State v. 
Davia, 87 Hawai ‘i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
17 State v. Klie, 116 Hawai ‘i 519, 521-22, 174 P.3d 358, 360- 61
(2007).  
IV.  DISCUSSION  
A. The Circuit Court Did Not Exceed the Bounds of Reason by
Finding Satoafaiga Likely to R eoffend  
 
Satoafaiga argues that because HRS chapter 853 seeks 
to benefit defendants with clean records like her, the court 
erred when it nevertheless denied her DANC motion.  The court’s 
decision exceeded the bounds of reason, she argues, because as 
a first-time offender and in light of the favorable factors in 
the PSI report, she was not likely to reoffend. 
 Citing State 
v. Medeiros , she asserts  that the court abused its discretion  
by denying her motion for a DANC solely based on the elements 
of the offense she committed.  
146 Hawai ‘i 1, 14, 454 P.3d 1069,
1082 (2019) .  If uncorrected, the ICA decision would 
“completely nullify[] Hawai ‘i’s [DANC] criminal procedure, ” as 
every defendant would be ineligible based solely on the 
commission of their offense.  
The legislature authorized the 
deferred acceptance of plea s in HRS chapter 853 in order to 
provide certain defendants, “particularly . . . first time, 
accidental, or situation al offenders,” with “the opportunity to 
keep [their] record free of a criminal conviction.”  1976 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 154, § 1 at 279; see also State v. Putnam, 93  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
18 Hawai‘i 362, 368, 3 P.3d 1239, 1245 (2000) (discussing the 
legislative history).  Especially where youth are involved, 
eventual dismissal may prove “more conducive to offender 
rehabilitation and crime prevention than the deterrent effects
of a conviction and sentence” with their accompanying stigma 
and career roadblocks.  1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act  154, § 1 at 
279.    
The decision to grant a motion for a deferred 
acceptance “is properly within the discretionary province of a 
trial judge.”  State v. Martin, 56 Haw. 292, 294, 535 P.2d 127,
128 (1975).  However, there are certain guidelines in making 
the decision.  Courts “should always consider all of the 
possible alternatives,” whereas “blind adherence” to 
predetermined rules fails to provide “enlightened and just 
resolve” of the motion for a DANC.  Id .  Thus, while courts 
have “wide latitude in the selection of penalties,” State v. 
Murray, 63 Haw. 12, 25, 621 P.2d 334, 342 (1980), that 
discretion is not limitless and may not be exercised in a 
manner that is arbitrary and capricious, Martin, 56 Haw. at 
294, 535 P.2d at 128- 29 (finding sentencing court “ arbitrarily 
and capriciously” denied a motion for a DAG and reversing) ; see
also Medeiros, 146 Hawai ‘i at 11, 454 P.3d at 1079  (overturning  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
19 denial of a motion for a DANC as an abuse of discretion).16 
According to Satoafaiga, the finding that she was 
likely to reoffend clearly exceeded the bounds of reason: “The 
trial court’s finding of future criminality, and the ICA’s 
affirmation of that finding, completely disregarded 
Petitioner’s lack of criminal history as being the best 
predictor of future behavior.”   Satoafaiga’s lack of a criminal
record, together with all the other factors weighing in her 
favor, made the finding that she was likely to reoffend an 
abuse of discretion.  Moreover, denying the motion for a DANC 
belied HRS chapter 853’s  legislative policy of benefiting 
youthful, first-time offenders.    
 To the extent that Satoafaiga’s argument is that all 
first-time offenders who commit DANC-eligible crimes are 
entitled to deferred acceptance, this argument has no merit.  
HRS § 853-1 provides that where the 
statute’s requirements are 
met, a trial court “ may defer further proceedings.”  (Emphasis 
added.)  The import of the word “may” in granting discretion to
the trial court is clear.  Further, the same legislative  
                         
16  Satoafaiga argues that the ICA applied the incorrect standard of
review when it stated, “[W]e cannot conclude that the Circuit Court’s 
determination that Satoafaiga did not satisfy the second and third criteria 
was arbitrary or capricious .”  Satoafaiga, 2021 WL 928443 at *4 (emphasis 
added).  But this language appears to come from Martin, wherein this court 
explained the circumstances under which  a court abuses its discretion in 
granting or denying a motion for a DANC.  56 Haw. at 294, 535 P.2d at 128.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
20 history that Satoafaiga cites in support of her position shows
that HRS § 853-1 sought “to establish a means whereby a court 
in its discretion  may defer acceptance” of a plea.  Putnam, 
93 Hawai‘ i at 367-68, 3 P.3d at 1244-45 (emphasis added) 
(quoting 1976 Haw. Sess. Laws  Act 154,  § 1 at 279).  The 
legislature easily could have made all or some first-time 
offenders automatically entitled to a DANC; instead, it chose 
to grant courts discretion to decide when a DANC is merited.  
Because Satoafaiga’s interpretation of HRS chapter 853 runs 
counter to the statute’s clear language and the legislative 
policy behind it, we decline to adopt it.    
 Moreover, the court did not abuse its discretion by 
finding Satoafaiga likely to reoffend notwithstanding her lack 
of criminal history and other factors weighing in her favor.  
The court explicitly considered Satoafaiga’s age but balanced 
it against the age of the CW.  It pointed to the nearly 16,000 
text messages between Satoafaiga and the CW over an 
approximately four-month period to conclude that the offense 
was not a one-time, accidental, or situational incident.  
In 
other words, the circuit court did not disregard public policy;
rather, in weighing the HRS § 853-1 factors and considering the
record, it determined that public policy supported the denial 
of the motion.  That there were factors on both sides of the  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
21 scale does not mean the circuit court “clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason” and abused its discretion.  Klie, 116 Hawai ‘i
at 522, 174 P.3d at 361.  The DANC determination requires 
balancing countervailing 
factors, which is what the  circuit 
court did here.  See  State v. Buchanan, 59 Haw. 562, 563, 584 
P.2d 126, 127 (1978) (“However persuasive we might regard 
appellant’s presentation in support of the motion, the reasons
expressed by the court in denying the 
motion are relevant and 
significant.  No abuse of discretion appears.”).  There was 
sufficient basis in the record for the circuit  court to find 
that Satoafaiga was likely to reoffend and that the ends of 
justice and the welfare of society required her immediate 
punishment.   
 
 For the same reasons, Satoafaiga’s argument that the 
circuit court’s decision violated Medeiros  fails.  In Medeiros ,
the defendant pleaded no contest  to two offenses related to 
night hunting and then moved for a DANC.  146 Hawai ‘i at 4
-5, 
454 P.3d at 1072- 73.  In denying the DANC motion, the circuit 
court noted the manner in which the defendant committed the 
crime (for example, wearing a camouflage T- shirt) and the 
apparently inconsistent statements he made to officers when 
apprehended.  Id. at 10-11, 454 P.3d at 1078 -79.  We noted that
Medeiros was a youthful,  first-time offender and that he  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
22 apologized to the court and took  responsibility for his 
offenses.  Id.  On this record, the circuit court abused its 
discretion by denying the moti on for a DANC.  Id.  In her 
concurrence, Justice Nakayama explained that the circuit 
court’s reasons for denying Medeiros’s motion for a DANC were 
“merely elements of the offenses . . . to which Medeiros pled.”
Id. at 14, 454 P.3d at 1082 (Nakayama, J., concurring).   
  As an initial matter, Medeiros does not foreclose 
consideration of the circumstances of an offense to assess a 
motion for a DANC.  In fact, we have upheld denials of motions 
for DANCs and DAGs based, at least in part, on this factor.  
See Buchanan
, 59 Haw. at 563, 584 P.2d at 127 (“The record in 
the present case shows consideration of the [DAG] motion on its
merits, and denial of the motion only after review by the court
of the circumstances of the offense as well as testimony 
offered by appel lant.” 
 (emphasis added)).  Our holding in 
Medeiros instead prohibits courts from denying a motion for a 
DANC based on facts that would apply to “any other DANC plea -
eligible defendant charged with the same underlying offenses. ” 
146 Hawai
‘i at 11, 454 P.3d at 1079.  
 
 
 Here, as discussed, the circuit court went beyond the
fact that Satoafaiga allegedly subjected the CW to “sexual 
contact” in denying the  DANC motion.  Instead, it considered  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
23 among other factors Satoafaiga’s age relative to the CW, her 
position of authority and trust, the thousands of text messages 
between the two over approximately four months, the later 
runaway incident, and Satoafaiga’s long -term negative influence 
on the CW.  Contrary to Satoafaiga’s assertions, these are not 
elements of the offense or factors shared by all defendants who 
plead guilty or no contest to Sexual Assault in the Fourth 
Degree.  Rather, they are circumstances particular to 
Satoafaiga’s situation, which the trial court properly weighed  
against the mitigating factors she cited.  Thus, there was no 
violation of the rule we laid out in Medeiros. 
B. The Court Abused Its Discretion by Considering Conduct –
Sexual P enetration – that Was Excluded by the O ffense 
Satoafaiga Pleaded to  
 
 Although the court did not abuse its discretion in 
weighing the HRS § 853-1 factors, it abused its discretion when
it considered conduct excluded by one of the offenses 
Satoafaiga pleaded to.   
 Satoafaiga argues that the circuit court should not 
have held her responsible for the “uncharged conduct” of sexual
penetration.  Although penetration was charged in the 
indictment and supported by evidence in the record, we agree 
that it should not have been considered by the circuit court in
weighing the DANC motion.  The charge to which Satoafaiga  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
24 (continued . . .)  ultimately pleaded no contest – Sexual Assault in the Fourth 
Degree - contained as a necessary element “sexual contact.”  
HRS § 707-733(1)(a) .  In turn, “sexual contact” is defined by 
statute to mean “any touching, 
other than acts of ‘sexual 
penetration’, of the sexual or other intimate parts of 
another.”  See HRS § 707- 700 (emphasis added).   Consequently, 
Satoafaiga’s plea of no contest to Sexual Assault in the Fourth
Degree necessarily excluded the allegation that she committed 
sexual penetration.  Thus, the  circuit court abused its 
discretion by considering conduct that, per her plea, 
Satoafaiga logically could not have committed.   
 In examining when a court abuses its discretion in 
denying a DANC motion, we look to our sentencing cases for 
guidance.  While not controlling  in the DAG/DANC context, these
cases provide a useful starting point – especially, as here, 
where there are no DAG/DANC cases directly on point.  17 
                         
 17  Both the sentence and the decision to defer it are decisions 
within a judge’s discretion; both determine whether and how a defendant will
be punished.  See State v. Hussein , 122 Hawai ‘i 495, 509-10, 229 P.3d 313, 
327-28 (2010), as corrected  (Apr. 28, 2010) (reviewing the factors judges 
must consider in imposing a sentence); Martin, 56 Haw. at 294, 535 P.2d at 
128 (describing deferred acceptance as part  of the “sentencing process” and 
stressing the importance of considering all available alternatives).  
Moreover, both sentencing and the DANC decision turn on the defendant’s 
culpability; the likelihood of reoffending; and the public interest in 
safety, rehabilitation, and retributive justice.   Compare HRS § 853 -1 with 
HRS § 706- 606 (2014).  
  Accordingly, the ICA was incorrect to distinguish a case – State 
v. Kamana‘ o, 103 Hawai ‘i 315, 82 P.3d 401 (2003)  - based on the fact that it 
arose in the sentencing context.  T he ICA relied on State v. Oshiro, 69 Haw. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
25  While courts have broad discretion in the sentencing
context, they abuse that discretion when they base their 
decisions on “unsubstantiated allegation [s]
” of uncharged 
crimes.  State v. Vellina, 106 Hawai ‘i 441, 450, 106 P.3d 364,
373 (2005).  In 
State v. Nunes, we held that punishing a    
defendant for uncharged crimes “raises serious constitutional 
questions”:
  
 
While a court has broad discretion in imposing a sentence, 
and can consider the candor, conduct, remorse and 
background of the defendant as well as the circumstances of
the crime and many other factors, a judge cannot punish a 
defendant for an uncharged crime in the belief that it too 
deserves punishment.   
 
72 Haw. 521, 525, 824 P.2d 837, 840 (1992) .  
  In Nunes, the circuit court sentenced the defendant 
in part based on its inference that he asked the complaining 
witness to lie for him.  We noted that “there is nothing in the
record before us that would support a conclusion that 
defendant’s conduct toward other witnesses supports increasing 
his sentence.”  Thus, it was improper and in violation of the 
defendant’s constitutional rights to sentence hi m on that  
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
438, 442, 746 P.2d 568, 570 (1987), for the proposition that “the denial of 
a motion for DANC is neither a conviction nor a sentence nor a punishment.” 
Satoafaiga, 2021 WL 928443 at *5.  Of course, the ICA was correct in noting 
that a DANC is not a sentence.  In Oshiro, this distinction was outcome  
determinative because the State only had statutory authority to appeal 
sentences, and not grants of DANCs or DAGs.  69 Haw. at 442- 43, 746 P.2d at 
570-71 (citing HRS § 641 –13 (1985)).  In general, however, we find that 
sentencing cases are persuasive, though not controlling authority, in the 
DAG/DANC context.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
26 basis.  Id.  Similarly, in Vellina, we held that the circuit 
court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason when it imposed 
consecutive terms based on the prosecutor’s allegation – with
no basis in the record – that the defendant transferred 
firearms he stole to a drug dealer.  106 Hawai ‘i at
 450, 106 
P.3d at 373.  
  Likewise, a court may not base its sentencing 
decision on conduct for which the defendant was acquitted.  
State v. Koch, 107 Hawai ‘i 215, 22
5, 112 P.3d 69, 79 (2005) 
(holding sentencing court could not consider allegations of 
drug dealing when jury acquitted the defendant of ”dealing 
charges”).  Other jurisdictions have joined Hawai ‘i in holding 
that once a jury has rendered a verdict of acquittal, the 
sentencing court cannot consider the 
allegations underlying the
acquitted counts.  See, e.g. , State v. Melvin, 258 A.3d 1075, 
1087-1090, 1093 -94 (N.J. 2021) (reviewing state and federal 
authority and holding that the  sentencing court may not 
consider conduct excluded by a jury verdict).  
 Here, given the specific elements of the offense to 
which Satoafaiga pleaded  no contest, the court was precluded 
from considering allegations of sexual penetration.  Normally,
a lesser-included offense does not exclude the greater  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
27  offense.   Where two offenses  differ only in severity, or 
because one contains an additional element, one can logically 
commit both in the same act; committing the lesser offense does
not exclude the possibility that one has also committed the 
greater one.  This is the normal understanding of included 
offenses.   18
 
 Not so with Sexual Assault in the First Degree and 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree.  To be guilty of fourth-
degree sexual assault under HRS § 707- 733(1)(a) , one must 
commit an act of sexual contact , defined as “any touchi ng, 
other than acts of ‘sexual penetration.’”   HRS § 707-700.  But 
in order to be convicted of first-degree sexual assault, one 
must commit an act of sexual penetration.  HRS § 707- 730.  One 
cannot logically commit, at the same time, an act of sexual 
                         
18  HRS § 701 -109(4) ( 2014) defines lesser- included offenses as 
follows: 
 
A defendant may be convicted of  an offense included in 
an offense charged in the felony complaint, indictment,
or information.  An offense is so included when:   
  
(a) It is established by proof of the same or less
than all the facts required to establish the 
commission of the offense charged ;  
(b) It consists of an attempt to commit the 
offense charged or to commit an offense 
otherwise included therein; or  
(c) It differs from the offense charged only in 
the respect that a less serious injury or risk
of injury to the same person, property, or 
public interest or a different state of mind 
indicating lesser degree of culpability 
suffices to establish its commission.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
28 penetration and an act “other than [an] act[] of ‘sexual 
penetration.'”   The fourth-degree offense may , depending on 
the circumstances, be a  lesser-included offense of the first-
degree offense because it entails a less serious injury or risk
to the complainant.  See State v. Malave, 146 Hawai ‘i 341, 351, 
463 P.3d 998, 1008 (2020), as amended (Apr. 22, 2020) (holding 
sexual contact “carries a less serious injury or risk” than 
sexual penetration).  But  nonetheless, in this instance, the 
lesser-included offense necessarily excludes the greater 
offense.  2019
 
 Thus, as in Nunes  and Vellina, here , the circuit 
court erred by punishing Satoafaiga for conduct she could not 
properly be held accountable for
.  Unlike in those cases, there  
                         
19  The exemptive language in the definition of sexual contact was 
added as part of a redrafting that aimed to supersede this court’s opinion 
in State v. Mueller, 102 Hawai‘ i 391, 395, 76 P.3d 943, 947 (2003), which 
required prosecutors to prove some penetration, however slight, to convict a 
defendant of
 first-degree sexual assault involving an act of cunnilingus.  
2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 61 , §2 at 302- 03; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3121, in 
2004 Senate Journal, at 1558.  However, the Mueller court suggested that a 
Modica problem would result if cunnilingus could be penalized, on its own, 
as both sexual contact and sexual penetration.  See Mueller, 102 Hawai ‘i at 
398
-97, 76 P.3 d at 948 -49; State v. Modica, 58 Haw. 249, 250– 51, 567 P.2d 
420, 421– 22 (1977).  Thus, the exemptive language in the definition of 
sexual contact may have seemed necessary to avoid this result.  In any case, 
because the language of HRS § 707 -700 admits no interpretation other than 
the one Satoafaiga gives it, we read it to exclude acts of sexual 
penetration from any sexual -contact offense.   
 
 20  For this reason, although the ICA was correct to note that 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree may be  a lesser- included offense  of 
Sexual Assault in the First Degree, it erred when it noted that “necessarily 
any allegation sufficient to establish the latter will also establish the 
former.”  Satoafaiga, 2021 WL 928443 at *4 n.5.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
29 was support in the record for the condu ct Satoafaiga was 
penalized for – the alleged act of sexual penetration.  But 
that evidence was essentially negated to the extent it 
could 
not comport with her plea.  We find this case to be analogous 
to Koch, where we held that the circuit court abused its 
discretion when it “assumed that Koch had engaged in unlawful 
conduct of which he had been expressly acquitted .”  107 Hawai ‘i 
at 225, 112 P.3d at 79.  Once the jury acquits a defendant, the 
conduct underlying the acquitted counts cannot be considered.  
Likewise, once a defendant enters a valid plea
 that becomes the 
basis for their conviction, the court may not consider conduct 
logically excluded by that plea.  Thus, b y denying Satoafaiga’s 
DANC motion in part based on an act of penetration, the circuit 
court disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to her 
substantial detriment.  21
                         
 21 The State cited State v. Lucas , 141 Hawai‘ i 146, 406 P.3d 369,
2017 WL 5899894 (App. Nov. 30, 2017), for the proposition that :   
 
[T]here is a distinction between improperly considering 
uncharged conduct for purposes of sentencing, and properly 
considering the same for purposes of ruling on a DANC 
motion.  Thus, even if the Circuit Court had considered 
uncharged conduct in ruling on [Satoafaiga]’s DANC motion, 
doing so would not have been an abuse of discretion.  
 
(Citation omitted.)   
 
  However, as discussed, sentencing cases have persuasive value in
the DANC context.  Here, the circuit court improperly considered conduct 
excluded by Satoafaiga’s offense of conviction, requiring vacatur of the 
denial of her DANC motion .  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
30  This argument holds notwithstanding that Satoafaiga
stipulated to a factual basis to support the charges she 
pleaded to.  The State argues, and the ICA held, that because
the only allegation underlying Count II was an act of sexual 
penetration, Satoafaiga stipulat
ed to that act  and the trial 
court properly considered it.  See Satoafaiga, 2021 WL 928443
at *4 (“The plea agreement further provided, inter alia, that
Satoafaiga . . . agreed to a factual basis to support the 
charges in Count II . . . . There was no other factual 
allegation or conduct charged in Count II. ”  (footnote 
omitted)).    
 
 
 
 We disagree.  A plea of no contest does not require 
the defendant to admit guil t.  State v. Merino, 81 Haw
ai‘i 198, 
217, 915 P.2d 672, 691 (1996)
 (citing State v. Gomes, 79 Hawai‘i
32, 33 n.3, 897 P.2d 959, 960 n.3 (1995)) ; see also  Gomes, 
79 Hawai‘ i at 38 & n.12, 897 P.2d at 965 & n.12 ( noting that 
although the defendant stipulated to a factual basis, he did 
not explicitly admit that he committed the charged offenses and
noting the “subtle distinction between a plea of guilty and a 
plea of no contest ”).  Unlike with a guilty plea, there is no 
requirement that the court establish a factual basis for a no  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
31 contest plea.   State v. De Guair , 108 22 Hawai‘i 179, 191, 118 
P.3d 662, 674 (2005)
.  Satoafaiga’s stipulation only admits 
that there is “a factual basis to support these charges”; it 
does not admit to the particular facts alleged by the 
indictment.  Thus, Satoa
faiga’s stipulation does not negate the 
effect of HRS §§ 707-700 and 707-733 to preclude consideration 
of sexual penetration.
 
 While it is not entirely clear from the record what 
weight the trial court gave to  the alleged act of penetration , 
it is clear that it factored into the court’s decision.  In 
considering the DANC motion, following a discussion of the 
explicit text messages between Satoafaiga and the CW, the court
observed, “But this was more than text messaging. It was 
penetration with a finger to a vagina .”  (Emphasis added.)  T he
court also mentioned the “digital penetration” a second time :  
 
                         
 22  Nevertheless, judges must be mindful of  their obligation to 
accept no contest pleas “only after due consideration of the views of the 
parties and the interest of the public in the effective administration of 
justice.”  Hawai‘ i Rules of Penal Procedure ( HRPP) Rule 11(b) (2014).  In 
some cases, due consideration may entail establishing the factual basis for 
a no contest plea, even though no such inquiry is explicitly mandated  and 
the defendant need not elaborate on their conduct.  Requiring the prosecutor
to explain the factual basis for a no cont est plea is “the better practice” 
as it prevents misunderstanding and clarifies the record for appeal.  
5 Wayne R. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure  § 21.4(a) n.23 (4th ed. 202 1) 
(“Even where no factual basis is required, determining the factual basis by 
inquiry of the prosecutor is said to be ‘the better practice’ because it 
aids inquiry on appeal into the sufficiency of the charge.” (quoting Ranke 
v. United States, 873 F.2d 1033, 1037 (7th Cir. 1989))).  Indeed, we have 
held that although a court is not obligated to establish a factual basis in 
the record for a no contest plea, it has the discretion to do so.  Merino, 
81 Hawai‘ i at  219, 915 P.2d at 693.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
32 “I think everything you did to her, besides the digital 
penetration and the custodial interference . . . . I mean,  talk 
about a negative i nfluence on a child.”  (Emphasis added.)   And 
later, after defense counsel pointed out that “there is no 
allegation of digital penetration” because the first-degree 
charge had been dismissed, the court acknowledged the 
correction but observed that “it stil l occurred at the Boys & 
Girls Club, I think in the upper room.  This inappropriate 
activity between you and the juvenile, you and the minor did 
happen.  It happened.”  While this last exchange took place 
after the DANC decision and during the court’s sent encing 
discussion, it further suggests that the penetrative act of 
which Satoafaiga had been accused weighed on the court’s DANC 
decision.  Together, these references show that Satoafaiga’s 
alleged act of digital penetration factored into the court’s 
decision when it denied the DANC motion.  
 Likewise, the circuit court erred by factoring into 
its decision Satoafaiga ’s failure to accept  responsibility for
the alleged sexual penetration.  In considering the DANC 
motion, the court addressed Satoafaiga’s lack of remorse for 
the penetration:  
Have you truly taken responsibility and apologized? I 
guess does it appear that you ’re unlikely to engage in 
such a criminal course of conduct again?  Well, you do 
admit in your letter that you engaged in inappropriate *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
33 text messages. But this was more than text messaging.   It
was penetration with a finger to a vagina.   
(Emphasis added.)    
  While a court generally can consider a defendant’s 
lack of remorse in the sentencing context, State v. Kamana ‘o, 
103 Hawai‘ i 315, 321, 82 P.3d 401, 407 (2003), in this case the 
court was explicitly excluded from considering penetration.  It 
could not obviate this limitation by penalizing Satoafaiga’s 
failure to express remorse for the same conduct.  Thus, it was 
improper for the court to take into account whether Satoafaiga 
had “taken responsibility and apologized” for an act of sexual 
penetration.   Accordingly , the circuit court’s judgment must 
be vacated to the extent that it denied the  motion for a DANC.  23
 We do not mean to imply that any time a defendant 
pleads to a lesser-included offense in exchange for the 
dismissal of a greater one, the court may not 
consider the 
circumstances leading to the greater charge .  For example, if
the heinous or aggravated nature of the acts committed points
to a sentence on the upper end of the permitted sentencing 
range, the judge may consider it.  See State v. Karwacki,  
 
                         
 23  Satoafaiga appears to argue for a rule displacing the analysis
in Kamana‘ o and categorically barring  judges from considering a defendant’s
remorse in cases involving a no contest plea.  Because we hold that the 
underlying conduct for which Satoafaiga was asked to apologize was 
improperly considered, we do not address whether Kamana‘ o properly applies 
in the context of a no contest plea.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
34 1 Haw. App. 157, 159, 616 P.2d 226, 228  (1980); accord HRS 
§ 706-606 (2014) (directing sentencing courts  to consider 
“nature and circumstanc es of the offense ”).  Defendants who 
plead to a lesser offense after being charged with a greater 
one do not thereby insulate themselves from the gravity of 
their conduct.  See  State v. Modica, 58 Haw. 249, 251, 567 P.2d
420, 422 (1977) (“[I]t is generally  no defense to an indictment
under one statute that the accused might have been charged 
under another.”).    
 
 However, just as a court may not penalize a defendant
for conduct with no support in the record, it cannot hold a 
defendant responsible for conduct that they could not logically
have committed, given their offense of conviction.  
Consequently, we hold that the trial court abused its 
discretion by considering sexual penetration, and remand for 
reconsideration of the DANC motion.
  
 
C. On Remand, the Trial Court Has Broad D iscretion to C onsider
the Circumstances of the O ffense and D efendant  
 
  Because we remand for reconsideration of the DANC 
motion, we provide guidance as to what the circuit court may 
and may not consider.
  In general, judges have broad discretion
to consider the facts and circumstances of the defendant and 
the offense in making a DANC determination.  Thus, Satoafaiga’s 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
35 arguments that the trial court should not have considered, 
inter alia, her inappropriate text messages with the CW or the
sentencing factors
 in the PSI report are misplaced.    
  Satoafaiga’s arguments cut against the principle that
judges have broad discretion in deciding whether to grant 
DAG/DANC motions.  As noted, HRS § 853-1(a) sets forth the 
criteria a trial court should examine in its determination, 
which are: (1) whether the defendant is not likely again to 
engage in a criminal course of conduct; and (2) whether the 
ends of justice and the welfare of society require that the 
defendant presently suffer the penalty imposed by law.  In 
making these determinations, the court may consider sentencing 
factors discussed in the PSI report, including the “nature and 
circumstances of the offense and the history and 
characteristics of the defendant.”  HRS § 706 -606.    
  The role of the PSI report illuminates the importanc e
of judges taking the facts and circumstances into account.  
These reports focus the judge’s attention on matters including  
“the circumstances attending the commission of the crime” and 
“[t]he defendant’s history of d elinquency or criminality, ” see 
HRS § 706-602 (2014), which are also relevant to the HRS  
§ 853-1(a) factors.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
36    In the DAG/DANC context, a court cannot intelligently
decide whether a defendant is likely to reoffend nor whether 
their crimes merit immediate punishment without understanding 
the nature of the offense and the defendant’s character and 
circumstances.  Thus, judges not only may but 
must consider the
defendant’s particular situation  in DANC proceedings as well as
in sentencing.  Cf. Martin , 56 Haw. at 294, 535 P.2d at 128  
(holding, in the DAG context, that “[d] iscretionary action must
be exercised on a case-by -case basis ”).  
 
 
 
  Nevertheless, Satoafaiga argues that the circuit 
court should not have relied on “uncharged, irrelevant evidence
of text messaging ” 
in denying the DANC motion.  And she 
asserts that, other than some of the factors supporting her 
DANC motion, the Assessment Factors listed in the PSI report 
were “irrelevant imposition -of-jail factors ” that both the ICA 
and the circuit court erroneously considered.     24 
 Far from being irrelevant, the sexually explicit text
messages bore on the relationship between Satoafaiga and the CW
and thus on the nature of the offense.  The three or four  
 
                         
 24  In her application for certiorari, Satoafaiga describes the 
text-messaging evidence as “uncharged .”  However, she does not elaborate on
what uncharged offenses  the circuit court may have considered when it took 
the text messages into account.  Therefore, although Nunes and Vellina 
prohibit consideration of uncharged conduct, we do not address how these 
cases apply to the sexually explicit text -message exchanges in this case.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
37 months of prolonged communication between her and the CW made 
the two incidents for which Satoafaiga was ultimately convicted
appear more like a long-term pattern of conduct than a 
momentary lapse of judgment.   Cf. State v. B arrios, 139 
Hawai‘i 321, 3 32-33, 389 P.3d 916, 927 -28 (2016)  (holding the 
circuit court properly considered the long-term nature of the 
abuse and the fact that defendant “groomed” his victim).  And 
indeed, the trial court so found here
.  The text  messages were 
relevant to the court’s determination regarding the HRS  
§ 853-1(a) factors.  Therefore, the court was within its 
discretion to consider the text messages. 25 
 Satoafaiga also argues that the Assessment Factors in
the PSI report, “other than those factors that comment on the 
likelihood of future criminality, are simply not relevant to”  
the DANC analysis.  Thus, Satoafaiga contends, while she 
properly quoted the Report’s findings to the trial court with 
respect to her lack of a criminal record and low recidivism  
                         
 25  In this regard,  this case resembles State v. Zimmerman, 131 
Hawai‘i 60, 314 P.3d 850, 2013 WL 6507550 (App. Dec. 11, 2013) (SDO).  In 
Zimmerman, the defendant pleaded guilty to second -degree murder and 
kidnapping; during sentencing, the court considered an email the defendant 
sent to his victim demeaning and threatening her.  Id. at *1.  Zimmerman 
argued that the court improperly punished him for writing the email, which 
was copied to nineteen other email addresses and included explicit 
photographs of the victim.  Id. at *1-*2.  The ICA rejected this argument, 
holding that the email “illuminated the abusive nature of the relationship 
between Zimmerman and his victim.”  Id. at *2.  Likewise, here, the text 
messages reflected the relationship between Satoafaiga and the CW; it was in
the context of this relationship that the offense occurred.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
38 risk, the ICA erred when it considered the findings that 
Satoafaiga “ acted without provocation or without reasons ” and
her actions “suggest a significant lack of control and good 
judgment.”  Satoafaiga, 2021 WL 928443 at *4.  
  Satoafaiga cannot so easily dissect the record to say
what is relevant and what is not.  As discussed, a broad range 
of considerations will be relevant to whether Satoafaiga is 
likely to reoffend and whether justice and social welfare 
require her present punishment.  Thus, the PSI report ’s 
findings that Satoafaiga acted without provocation and 
demonstrated poor judgment are germane to the DANC decision – 
no less so than its findings, on the other hand , that she had a
stable history of employment and a strong  support system.  All 
of these factors go to the nature and context of the offense 
and the circumstances of the defendant, and were within the 
trial court’s discretion to consider.   
 
  Thus, while the circuit court on remand may not 
consider any allegations from the PSI report  or elsewhere that 
Satoafaiga committed an act of sexual penetration, we do not 
otherwise limit its discretion.  Normally, the manner in which 
a defendant commits a crime is relevant to the DANC decision.  
See Buchanan, 59 Haw. at 563, 584 P.2d at 127 (approving the 
trial court’s consideration of the offense conduct in denying a  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
39 DAG motion) .  But here, because of the unusual circumstances of
this case, the court is barred from considering the particular 
manner in which Satoafaiga committed the crime.  
  Nevertheless, the offense to which Satoafaiga plead ed 
remains relevant to whether a DANC is merited.  T he court below 
may consider that Satoafaiga pleaded no contest to an offense 
involving sexual contact with a minor.  As discussed, her 
stipulation concedes that the State can prove the elements of 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, including  sexual contact - 
in this case, with a twelve-year-old under her charge.  Thus, 
the court may take into account that 
some acts  of sexual 
contact occurred between Satoafaiga and the CW.  The court may 
also consider the circumstances surrounding the offense
 she 
pleaded to, for example that it is alleged to have taken place 
at the Club and in the context of an ongoing “grooming” 
relationship with the CW.   
V.  CONCLUSION  
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate  the ICA’s 
April 13, 2021 judgment on appeal to the extent that it 
affirmed the denial of Satoafaiga’s DANC motion and  
vacate the
circuit court’s January 2 2, 2020 judgment of conviction with 
respect to its denial of the DANC motion.  Inasmuch as 
Satoafaiga has not challenged her sentence on appeal, the  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
40 judgments are affirmed as to the sentence.  We remand this 
matter to the circuit court with instructions to reconsider 
Satoafaiga’s DANC motion in a manner consistent with this 
opinion.    
Hayden Aluli 
for petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 
        /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
Richard B. Rost
for respondent  
    /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 
        /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
        /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
