*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-28473 15-DEC-2011 12:40 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
MICHELE R. STEIGMAN, Petitioner-Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
v.
 
OUTRIGGER ENTERPRISES, INC., dba OHANA SURF HOTEL,
Respondent-Defendant-Appellee.
 
NO. SCWC-28473
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(ICA NO. 28473; CIV. NO. 05-1-0274) 
DECEMBER 15, 2011
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA AND DUFFY, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WILSON, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY;
AND ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
Petitioner-Plaintiff-Appellant Michele R. Steigman
 
brought this tort action to recover damages after suffering a
 slip-and-fall accident while she was a guest of Respondent­Defendant-Appellee Outrigger Enterprises’ Ohana Surf Hotel. The
 case went to trial, and a jury found that Outrigger was not
 negligent.
1 Steigman’s appeal to the Intermediate Court of
 
1  The  Honorable  Victoria  S.  Marks  presided.
         
        
        
         
           
        
        
         
       
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Appeals (“ICA”) resulted in a Summary Disposition Order affirming
 
the trial court’s final judgment.
 
Steigman’s application for writ of certiorari presents 
a question of first impression, namely, whether Hawaii’s comparative negligence statute nullifies the common law tort defense barring recovery for plaintiffs injured by known or obvious dangers. Prior to the legislative enactment of comparative negligence, the courts of this state applied the rule of contributory negligence, and an injured plaintiff was denied recovery upon a showing that her negligence contributed to her own injury. Torres v. Northwest Engineering Co., 86 Hawai' i 383, 
399 n.8, 949 P.2d 1004, 1020 n.8 (Haw. App. 1997). Then, “[a] legislative perception of unfairness in the common law doctrine of contributory negligence led to the passage of our modified comparative negligence statute in 1969.” Wong v. Hawaiian Scenic 
Tours, Ltd., 64 Haw. 401, 403-04, 642 P.2d 930, 932 (1982). The statute, Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-31, states, in 
relevant part: 
Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in any action
by any person or the person’s legal representative to
recover damages for negligence resulting in death or in
injury to person or property, if such negligence was not
greater than the negligence of the person or in the case of
more than one person, the aggregate negligence of such
persons against whom recovery is sought, but any damages
allowed shall be diminished in proportion to the amount of
negligence attributable to the person for whose injury,
damage or death recovery is made.
 
HRS § 663-31(a) (1993). This statute eliminates contributory
 
2
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
negligence, and instead provides that an injured plaintiff may
 
recover against a defendant even if her negligence contributed to
 her own injury, as long as her negligence is not greater than
 that of the defendant.
 
Steigman contends that the traditional known or obvious 
danger defense conflicts with the Legislature’s intent behind the comparative negligence statute. We agree. We therefore hold that in Hawai' i, the known or obvious danger defense is no longer 
viable as a complete bar to an injured plaintiff’s claim in the context of premises liability. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Steigman’s application poses two questions. She asks
 
whether, as a matter of law, the known or obvious danger defense
 is inconsistent with comparative negligence, and whether, as
 applied in her case, the jury instruction on the defense was
 properly given. We answer her first question in the affirmative,
 eliminating the need to consider her second question; thus a
 thorough review of the details of her case and the evidence
 presented over eight full days of trial is unnecessary. 
Nonetheless, this case is illustrative of the difficulty in
 applying the known or obvious danger defense. As such, a brief
 review of the facts of this case follows. 
A. Trial Proceedings
 
In 2003, Steigman and her family were guests of the
 
3
           
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Ohana Surf Hotel in Honolulu. On the afternoon of March 6,
 
Steigman and her family got caught in a rainstorm and returned to
 their hotel room to dry off. When Steigman went on the lanai
2 to
 
get a chair, she slipped, slid across the balcony, and sustained
 injury to her foot when it got trapped under the lanai railing. 
Steigman filed this lawsuit against Outrigger alleging
 
negligence. At trial, Steigman presented evidence to prove that
 the hotel lanai was unsafe. An expert witness testified that the
 lanai’s surface did not have the friction coefficient required by
 industry standards for exterior surfaces. Steigman’s daughter
 testified that the lanai had a glossy surface, so it was
 difficult to determine by sight alone whether it was wet or dry. 
Steigman also presented evidence that an Outrigger employee had
 suffered a similar slip-and-fall accident on a lanai at the
 hotel, and therefore Outrigger knew of the dangerous condition.
 Throughout the trial, Outrigger argued that Steigman’s injury was
 caused solely by Steigman’s own negligence because the wet lanai
 presented a known or obvious danger of being slippery, and she
 chose to confront that danger.
 
At the conclusion of the trial, Outrigger proposed the
 
following jury instruction: “A danger is open and obvious when a
 party either knew or should have known of it. Whether the
 
“Lanai” is a Hawaiian word meaning “porch, veranda, [or] balcony.”
 
Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 193 (rev. ed. 1986).
 
4
 2 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Plaintiff actually discovered the danger is irrelevant.” The
 
court refused Outrigger’s instruction and proposed the following
 instruction, fashioned after the Restatement (Second) of Torts:
 
A  hotel  operator  is  not  liable  to  its  guests  for
physical  harm  caused  to  them  by  any  activity  or  condition  in
the  hotel  whose  danger  is  known  or  obvious  to  them,  unless
the  hotel  operator  should  anticipate  the  harm  despite  such
knowledge  or  obviousness.
The  word  “known”  denotes  not  only  knowledge  of
the  existence  of  the  condition  or  activity  itself,  but  also
appreciation  of  the  danger  it  involves.   Thus  the  condition
 
or  activity  must  not  only  be  known  to  exist,  but  it  must
also  be  recognized  that  it  is  dangerous,  and  the  probability
and  gravity  of  the  threatened  harm  must  be  appreciated.
  
“Obvious”  means  that  both  the  condition  and  the  risk  are
 
apparent  to  and  would  be  recognized  by  a  reasonable  man,  in
the  position  of  the  guest,  exercising  ordinary  perception,
intelligence,  and  judgment.
 
Steigmen’s counsel objected to this instruction on the grounds
 that it was not supported by the evidence and that it conflicted
 with this state’s comparative negligence statute. The court
 replied “Okay. And the Court’s giving it because [of] the fact
 that it was raining, and the plaintiff knew it was raining.” 
The court provided the jury with a special verdict
 
form. The first question asked “Was defendant Outrigger
 Enterprises, Inc., doing business as Ohana Surf Hotel,
 negligent?” The jury answered “no”. As instructed by the form,
 the jury did not answer any further questions. The trial court
 entered a final judgment in favor of Outrigger, and ordered
 Steigman to pay Outrigger $29,722.30 for costs. 
B. The ICA’s June 8, 2010 Summary Disposition Order
 
On appeal before the ICA, Steigman asserted five points
 
5
          
        
       
         
            
         
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
of error. Three points of error are no longer relevant to this
 
appeal. The remaining two of the points of error concerned the
 known or obvious danger instruction: Steigman argued that the
 facts of her case did not support the instruction, and that the
 instruction fundamentally conflicts with Hawaii’s comparative
 negligence statute. 
On November 16, 2010, the ICA filed a Summary
 
Disposition Order affirming the trial court’s judgment. Steigman
 
v. Outrigger Enterprises, Inc., No. 28473, 2010 WL 4621838 (App.
 Nov. 16, 2010) (SDO). Therein the ICA affirmed the trial court’s
 judgment on all five points of error. With regard to the known
 or obvious danger arguments, the ICA held that the instruction
 was proper because there was substantial evidence to support the
 jury’s finding. Steigman, 2010 WL 4621838 at *7 n.5. The court
 
also held that “there is no inherent conflict between the known
 or obvious doctrine and the comparative negligence statute,”
 because the finding of a known or obvious danger completely
 absolves a landowner of his duty to people on his premises. 
Steigman, 2010 WL 4621838 at *6. The ICA’s reasoning was as
 follows:
 
[I]f the finder of fact determines that the hazard falls
within the known or obvious doctrine, the question of
comparative negligence is never reached as the defendant
owes no duty to the plaintiff, and accordingly, cannot be
negligent as a matter of law. In the absence of a legal duty
owed to the plaintiff, there is no negligence to compare
under HRS § 663-31.
 
6
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Steigman, 2010 WL 4621838 at *6. 
On December 16, 2010, the ICA filed its Judgment on
 
Appeal. On February 10, 2011, Steigman filed a timely
 
application for writ of certiorari. This court accepted
 Steigman’s application on March 23, 2011 and heard oral argument
 on May 5, 2011.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of 
law reviewable de novo.” Hawaii Government Employees Ass’n, 
AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai' i 197, 201-02, 239 
P.3d 1, 5-6 (2010) (quoting Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai'i 417, 420, 5 P.3d 407, 410 (2000)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The case at bar presents a question of first
 
impression. However, the central core of the question is
 familiar, in that it requires this court to reexamine a
 traditional, judge-made rule of tort law in modern context, an
 analysis this court has previously undertaken. For example,
 until 1969, the state followed the common law rule that a
 landowner’s duty to a visitor was determined by the visitor’s
 purpose for being on the land; a landowner owed a high duty of
 care to visitors on the land for business purposes, called
 “invitees,” but a smaller scope of duty to visitors there for
 
7
          
      
      
     
     
       
          
       
       
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
non-business purposes, called “licensees.” W. Page Keeton, et
 
al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts §§ 60 and 61, at 412
 and 419 (5th ed. 1984). Then in 1969, this court abandoned the
 common law invitee/licensee distinctions and defined premises
 duty as follows: “an occupier of land has a duty to use
 reasonable care for the safety of all persons reasonably
 anticipated to be upon the premises, regardless of the legal
 status of the individual.” Pickard v. City and County of
 
Honolulu, 51 Haw. 134, 135, 452 P.2d 445, 446 (1969). The court
 advanced two justifications for the change. First, courts had
 difficulty applying the common law classifications consistently. 
The court quoted language from the United States Supreme Court,
 noting that 
[i]n an effort to do justice in an industrialized urban
society, with its complex economic and individual
relationships, modern common-law courts have found it
necessary to formulate increasingly subtle verbal
refinements, to create subclassifications among traditional
common-law categories, and to delineate fine gradations in
the standards of care which the landowner owes to each. Yet
 even within a single jurisdiction, the classifications and
subclassifications bred by the common law have produced
confusion and conflict.
 
Id. at 135-36, 452 P.2d at 446 (quoting Kermarec v. Compagnie
 
Generale Transatlantique, 358 U.S. 625, 630-31 (1959)). 
The second justification for the change was that the
 
distinctions had ceased to comport with modern values. The court
 quoted Rowland v. Christian, a California Supreme Court decision,
 which states that 
8
           
          
           
        
       
         
         
        
          
        
      
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
[a] man’s life or limb does not become less worthy of
protection by the law nor a loss less worthy of compensation
under the law because he has come upon the land of another
without permission or with permission but without a business
purpose. Reasonable people do not ordinarily vary their
conduct depending upon such matters, and to focus upon the
status of the injured party as a trespasser, licensee, or
invitee in order to determine the question whether the
landowner has a duty of care, is contrary to our modern
social mores and humanitarian values. The common law rules
 obscure rather than illuminate the proper considerations
which should govern determination of the question of duty.
 
Id. at 136, 452 P.2d at 446 (quoting Rowland v. Christian, 443
 
P.2d 561, 568 (Cal. 1968)).
 
We believe that these justifications from the Pickard
 
case apply in this case: we observe that courts have difficulty
 applying the known or obvious danger defense consistently, and
 that the defense is incompatible with the modern policy values
 that tort law seeks to effect. Furthermore, we believe that the
 known or obvious danger defense is inconsistent with the
 legislative intent behind our state’s comparative negligence
 statute. And finally, we note that the majority of states to
 consider the question have abolished the use of the known or
 obvious danger defense as a complete bar to an injured
 plaintiff’s recovery. 
A.	 The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense Frustrates The
Legislative Intent Behind Comparative Negligence
 
To resolve Steigman’s question, this court must
 
interpret our state’s comparative negligence statute. The
 
statute, HRS § 663-31, provides:
 
9
         
         
        
         
           
        
        
         
       
     
          
         
            
   
         
      
  
        
   
            
        
          
        
         
         
           
       
          
 
          
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
(a) Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in any
action by any person or the person’s legal representative to
recover damages for negligence resulting in death or in
injury to person or property, if such negligence was not
greater than the negligence of the person or in the case of
more than one person, the aggregate negligence of such
persons against whom recovery is sought, but any damages
allowed shall be diminished in proportion to the amount of
negligence attributable to the person for whose injury,
damage or death recovery is made.
 
(b) In any action to which subsection (a) of this section
applies, the court, in a nonjury trial, shall make findings
of fact or, in a jury trial, the jury shall return a special
verdict which shall state:
 
(1) The amount of the damages which would have been
recoverable if there had been no contributory
negligence; and
 
(2) The degree of negligence of each party, expressed
as a percentage.
 
(c) Upon the making of the findings of fact or the return of
a special verdict, as is contemplated by subsection (b)
above, the court shall reduce the amount of the award in
proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the
person for whose injury, damage or death recovery is made;
provided that if the said proportion is greater than the
negligence of the person or in the case of more than one
person, the aggregate negligence of such persons against
whom recovery is sought, the court will enter a judgment for
the defendant.
 
(d) The court shall instruct the jury regarding the law of
comparative negligence where appropriate.
 
HRS § 663-31 (1993). The statute is structured as follows:
 
subsection (a) of the statute mandates that a plaintiff’s
 negligence will not completely bar recovery for that plaintiff,
 as long as her negligence was not greater than the defendant’s. 
Subsection (b) requires a special verdict form from the jury with
 findings of the total amount of damages and the percent of
 negligence of each party. Subsection (c) guides the court in
 administering the recovery, and subsection (d) permits the court
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
to instruct the jury about comparative negligence where 
appropriate. The plain language of the statute does not expressly include or exclude actions involving known or obvious dangers. Our task then, in order to answer Steigman’s question, is to effect the legislative intent behind the statute. Hawaii 
Government Employees Ass’n, AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai' i at 202, 239 P.3d at 6 (2010). 
This court examined the legislative purpose behind the
 
comparative negligence statute in a past case. In Wong v.
 Hawaiian Scenic Tours, Ltd., the estate and parents of Wesley Wai
 Leong Wong brought suit against the City and County of Honolulu
 (“the City”) and Hawaiian Scenic Tours after Wesley was fatally
 struck by a school bus. 64 Haw. 401, 402, 642 P.2d 930, 931
 (1982). At trial, the jury determined that Hawaiian Scenic Tours
 was eighty percent at fault, the City was six percent at fault,
 and Wesley was fourteen percent at fault. Id. at 403, 642 P.2d
 
at 931. The City appealed, arguing that Wesley could not recover
 any damages from the City because the jury found it to be less at
 fault than Wesley. Id. The supreme court noted that in the time
 
between the accident and the appeal, the Legislature had modified
 the statute to explicitly permit a plaintiff to recover against
 joint tortfeasors if their combined negligence was greater than
 the plaintiff’s. Id. at 402 n.1, 642 P.2d at 931 n.1. However,
 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the version of the statute that was in place at the time of the
 
accident contained no such provision; therefore the court
 investigated the legislative intent behind the statute in order
 to resolve the City’s appeal. Id. As this court wrote:
 
[t]he  legislative  modification  of  the  doctrine  of
contributory  negligence  in  1969  sought  to  temper  a  phase  of
the  common  law  deemed  inconsistent  with  contemporary  notions
of  fairness.   Its  purpose  was  to  allow  one  partly  at  fault
in  an  accident  resulting  in  injury  to  be  recompensed  for  the
damages  attributable  to  the  fault  of  another  if  the  former’s
negligence  was  not  the  primary  cause  of  the  accident.
   
Id. at 405, 642 P.2d at 933. Informing this interpretation is a
 committee report which stated that allowing a plaintiff’s
 contributory negligence to completely bar her recovery “seems to
 be unfair and in opposition to the average person’s concept of
 justice.” Id. at 404 n.2, 642 P.2d at 932 n.2. 
The supreme
 
court held that the City remained liable even though the jury
 found that the plaintiff was more at fault than the City, because
 the point of the statute was to allow a plaintiff’s recovery as
 long as the plaintiff was not the primary cause of the accident. 
Id. at 406, 642 P.2d at 933.
 
Applying this legislative intent to the known or
 
obvious danger defense is straightforward. Under the known or
 obvious danger defense, a plaintiff cannot recover if the
 plaintiff is injured due to a known or obvious danger. Friedrich
 
v. Department of Transp., 60 Haw. 32, 36, 586 P.2d 1037, 1040
 (1978) (superseded, in non-relevant part, by statute). This
 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
defense operates as a complete bar; a plaintiff may not recover
 
even if she was extremely cautious in confronting the danger, and
 a defendant may not be held liable even if he knew the danger had
 a high likelihood to lead to injury but did nothing to correct
 it. Id. at 36 n.1, 586 P.2d at 1040 n.1 (citing 2 Harper and
 
James, Torts, s 27.13 (1956)). 
The known or obvious danger defense is “in opposition to
 
the average person’s concept of justice” because it mandates that
 a plaintiff must go uncompensated for her injuries, even if she
 acted with precaution and the defendant did not. The defense is
 incompatible with the state’s comparative negligence statute
 because it denies a plaintiff the opportunity to have her fault
 compared with the fault of the defendant. As such, the known or
 obvious danger defense conflicts with the intent of the
 Legislature that the courts apply comparative negligence in the
 place of “unfair” common law doctrines. 
B.	 The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense Yields Inconsistent
Results
 
There are few reported cases applying the known or
 
obvious danger defense in this jurisdiction, however, among those
 
cases, the difficulty in applying the defense is apparent. For
 example, in Friedrich this court affirmed the award of summary
 judgment to the state under the known or obvious danger defense. 
Friedrich, 60 Haw. at 32, 586 P.2d at 1038. The plaintiff in
 
13
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
that case was walking down a state-owned pier in Hanalei Bay on 
Kaua'i when he slipped and fell over the edge, severely injuring 
himself. Id. at 34, 586 P.2d at 1039. As described in this 
court’s opinion, the pier was at least 26 feet wide. Id. at 32, 
586 P.2d at 1038. This court held that the danger of falling over the edge was known to the plaintiff, and therefore summary judgment in favor of the state was proper. Id. at 37, 586 P.2d 
at 1041. 
In Friedrich, the court distinguished that factual
 
scenario from a previous case, Levy v. Kimball. Levy involved a
 
state-controlled seawall that was partially degraded and was
 anywhere from thirteen inches to two feet wide. 50 Haw. 497,
 498, 443 P.2d at 142, 144 (1968). A tourist walked along the
 seawall and the heel of her shoe got stuck in a “bad spot.” Id.
 
at 498, 443 P.2d at 143. She fell off the side of the seawall
 onto rocks eight feet below, sustaining injury. Id. In that
 
case, this court reversed the trial court’s judgment for the
 state, holding that the state was liable for the plaintiff’s
 injury. Id. at 500, 443 P.2d at 145. There was no argument
 
based on the known or obvious characteristics of the seawall,
 even though there is reference to a “bad spot” that may have been
 conspicuous, and even though the very act of walking along a
 degraded, two-foot wide seawall could be described as obviously
 
14
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
dangerous. 
Friedrich distinguished Levy, and instead of solely
 
focusing on whether the danger was known or obvious, the court
 
included in the analysis the question of whether the plaintiff
 could have avoided injury. Friedrich, 60 Haw. at 37, 586 P.2d at
 
1041. The court found no liability for the state in Friedrich
 because the plaintiff chose a route that placed him close to the
 pier’s edge. Id. This result is the opposite of the holding in
 
Levy but, according to the court, that was warranted because
 there was no proof that the plaintiff in Levy had a choice of a
 different route. Id. at 37, 586 P.2d at 1041. The end result is
 
incongruous: the danger of walking on a 26-foot wide pier falls
 under the known or obvious defense, even though the danger of
 crossing a degraded two-foot seawall did not. 
Another case involving a known or obvious danger, Bidar
 
v. Amfac, 66 Haw. 547, 669 P.2d 154 (1983), is quite similar to
 the case at bar and illustrates the difficulty in knowing whether
 the known or obvious danger test applies. In Bidar, the
 plaintiff, an elderly tourist, was a guest of a hotel on Maui. 
Id. at 549, 669 P.2d at 157. She used the toilet in the hotel
 bathroom, and then tried to use the towel bar mounted on an
 adjacent wall to help pull herself up. Id. The towel bar tore
 
loose from the wall, and plaintiff fell down to the ground,
 
15
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
fracturing her hip and wrist. Id. Plaintiff filed suit and the
 
hotel moved for summary judgment, arguing that it had no duty to
 
provide a towel rack capable of supporting the guest’s weight. 
Id. at 549-50, 669 P.2d at 157. The trial court agreed and
 granted summary judgment. Id. at 551, 669 P.2d at 158. On
 
appeal this court reversed, holding that liability turned on the
 foreseeability of injury, an issue unsuitable for summary
 adjudication. Id. at 554, 669 P.2d at 160. In his dissent,
 
Judge Spencer, assigned by reason of vacancy, wrote that he would
 affirm the grant of summary judgment because the towel bar is a
 known or obvious danger when used to support the weight of a
 person. Id. at 560, 669 P.2d at 163. 
Bidar, Friedrich, and Levy show that the application of 
the known or obvious danger defense has been inconsistent here in Hawai'i. They also illustrate a large obstacle in applying the 
defense: it can be difficult to even define the danger that led to the injury and to determine whether the known or obvious danger defense should even apply. In Friedrich, the pier was deemed a known or obvious danger not because of any characteristic of the pier itself, but rather because of the way the plaintiff chose to walk on it. Friedrich, 60 Haw. at 35-36, 
586 P.2d at 1040. The court distinguished the disintegrating, narrow ledge of the Levy case because there the plaintiff did not 
16
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
have another available route. Id. at 37, 586 P.2d at 1041. In
 
Bidar, one Judge dissented because he believed the known or
 
obvious danger defense should have controlled the outcome of the
 case. Bidar, 66 Haw. at 560, 669 P.2d at 163. 
Defining the danger in the case at bar presents a
 
similar challenge. Outrigger seemed to define the danger as a
 wet lanai, which most people would recognize as being potentially
 dangerous, and argued that it is not liable for any injury
 suffered by Steigman when she chose to encounter that known or
 obvious danger. Plaintiff defined the dangerous condition as the
 surface of the lanai. She offered evidence that the lanai’s
 surface did not have the level of slip resistance established by
 hotel industry standards, and that it was finished with a glossy
 coating that made it difficult to tell if the surface was wet. 
Plaintiff argued that a slippery lanai surface was not a known or
 obvious condition, because an average person could not determine
 how dangerous it would be to walk on the lanai. The trial court
 disagreed with Steigman’s argument. The court stated that
 Outrigger was entitled to the known or obvious danger defense
 because of “the fact that it was raining, and the plaintiff knew
 it was raining.”
 
Defining the known or obvious danger as a wet balcony
 
leads to an antithetical result. When it rains, exterior
 
17
 As past cases and the case at bar illustrate, the known
 
or obvious danger defense presents many difficulties to the
 
courts. We note also that courts of our sister states have
 similarly struggled, and therefore the defense has come under
 significant criticism. See Woodard v. ERP Operating Ltd. P’ship,
 351 F.Supp.2d 708, 713 (E.D. Mich. 2005) (“The ‘open and obvious’
 doctrine is one of the most litigated areas of Michigan premises
 liability law. 
Despite the fact that Michigan courts have
 
decided hundreds of cases involving the doctrine, inconsistent
 applications of the doctrine have resulted in a confusing
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
surfaces may become wet, and industry standards requiring non­slip surfaces are established to provide a safe environment even
 when wet. Allowing landowners to escape liability for injuries
 caused when guests slip on an untreated surface because the
 surface was wet—despite the fact that the standards exist to
 protect people, should the surfaces become wet—is
 counterproductive. This would provide no incentive for
 landowners to maintain premises in compliance with safety
 standards even when the dangers of non-compliance are readily
 foreseeable. Also, plaintiffs would be unable to recover when
 injured while premises were in their most dangerous state, even
 when they could not possibly have known that the surfaces do not
 comply with ordinary safety standards.
 
18
      
       
           
         
          
         
        
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
jurisprudence.”) (footnote omitted); Rogers v. Spirit Cruises, 
Inc., 760 N.Y.S.2d 280, 282 (App. Term 2003) (characterizing the rule as “ancient” and “oft-criticized”);
 Groleau v. Bjornson Oil 
Co., Inc., 676 N.W.2d 763, 773 (N.D. 2004) (Maring, J., dissenting in part and concurring in part) (“Therefore, the common law ‘no duty’ rule or ‘open and obvious’ doctrine has endured much criticism from both courts and commentators.”); O’Donnell v. City of Casper, 696 P.2d 1278, 1282 (Wyo. 1985) (“This court has not been consistent in its application of the obvious danger rule since comparative negligence.”). We acknowledge the difficulties our courts and the courts of other jurisdictions have experienced in applying the known or obvious defense, and we believe it would be prudent to prevent Hawai' i 
courts from further embedding this problematic doctrine into our case law. 
C.	 The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense Is Incompatible with
Public Policy
 
The Mississippi Supreme Court’s analysis of the known
 
or obvious danger and tort policy is instructive. As that court
 
explained:
 
This Court should discourage unreasonably dangerous
conditions rather than fostering them in their obvious
forms. It is anomalous to find that a defendant has a duty
to provide reasonably safe premises and at the same time
deny a plaintiff recovery from a breach of that same duty.
The party in the best position to eliminate a dangerous
condition should be burdened with that responsibility. If a
dangerous condition is obvious to the plaintiff, then surely
 
19
          
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
it is obvious to the defendant as well. The defendant,
accordingly, should alleviate the danger.
 
Tharp v. Bunge Corp., 641 So. 2d 20, 25 (Miss. 1994). The
 
Kentucky Supreme Court recently agreed with Mississippi’s
 analysis. They cited Mississippi’s reasoning for support that
 abolishing the known or obvious danger defense in favor of
 comparative negligence “makes good policy sense.” Kentucky River
 
Medical Center v. McIntosh, 319 S.W.3d 385, 391-92 (Ky. 2010). 
This is because a landowner’s duty “is predicated upon [his]
 superior knowledge concerning the dangers of his property,” which
 places the landowner in a better position to anticipate and take
 action to prevent injury. Id. at 392 (quoting Janis v. Nash
 
Finch Co., 780 N.W.2d 497, 502 (S.D. 2010)).
 
Approaching torts from a policy perspective is germane 
to Hawai' i jurisprudence; as this court has written, “tort law is 
primarily designed to vindicate social policy.” Francis v. Lee 
Enterprises, Inc., 89 Hawai' i 234, 239, 971 P.2d 707, 712 (1999) 
(citing W. Page Keeton, et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 1, at 5-6 (5th ed. 1984)) (emphasis omitted). One social policy enacted through the tort system is compensating injured plaintiffs. Fonseca v. Pacific Const. Co., 54 Haw. 578, 584, 513 
P.2d 156, 160 (1973) (“a basic premise of tort law is to give adequate protection to persons injured through the unreasonable conduct of others. . . .”). When enacted as a complete bar, the 
20
            
             
          
             
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
known or obvious defense precludes an injured plaintiff from 
recovering from even an unreasonable landowner, and opposes this important social policy. Second, tort law seeks to prevent injury where possible by providing incentive to deter negligent acts. See Smith v. Cutter Biological, Inc., 72 Hawai' i 416, 435, 
823 P.2d 717, 727 (1991). Allowing a landowner to escape liability as a matter of law, even when he has not reasonably maintained his premises, provides no such incentive. We therefore conclude that considerations of public policy counsel against permitting the continuation of the known or obvious defense. 
D.	 In Abolishing The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense, Hawai' i 
Joins The Majority Of States That Have Considered The
Question
 Hawai'i is not the first jurisdiction to abolish the 
known or obvious danger defense. Of the states that have 
directly considered the question of how the advent of comparative negligence modified the known or obvious defense, the majority held that the known or obvious character of a danger does not automatically absolve a landowner of liability.
3 The analysis 
typically follows one of two tacks. 
3
 A minority of states to consider the issue have retained the known
 
or obvious danger defense as a complete bar to recovery. See O’Sullivan v.
 
Shaw, 726 N.E.2d 951, 956-57 (Mass. 2000); Harrington v. Syufy Enterprises ,
931 P.2d 1378, 1380 (Nev. 1997); Armstrong v. Best Buy Co., Inc. , 788 N.E.2d
1088, 1089 (Ohio 2003).
 
21
           
         
 
          
        
         
        
          
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
The courts that have found the defense incompatible
 
with comparative negligence have analyzed the known or obvious
 
characteristic of the danger either as a component of the
 landowner’s duty, or as a factor to consider when weighing each
 party’s negligence. The former states, following either their
 own statutes or the Restatement (Second) of Torts, held that the
 known or obvious defense is not a complete bar to recovery
 because the known or obvious characteristic of the danger may not
 always defeat a landowner’s duty. These states include
 
6 7 8 9
 Illinois4 , Kentucky5 , Michigan , Missouri , New Mexico , Utah , and
10
 Tennessee  .  The latter states held that factfinders should
 
consider the known or obvious quality of a danger as a component
 of comparative fault, and entirely abolished the defense. 
These
 
4 Ward v. K Mart Corp. , 554 N.E.2d 223, 228 (Ill. 1990).
 
5 Kentucky River Medical Center v. McIntosh , 319 S.W.3d 385, 390
 
(Ky. 2010).
 
6
 Lugo v. Ameritech Corp., Inc. , 629 N.W.2d 384, 389 (Mich. 2001).
 
7
 Harris v. Niehaus , 856 S.W.2d 222, 226 (Mo. 1993).
 
8
 Klopp v. Wackenhut Corp. , 824 P.2d 293, 295 (N.M. 1992).
 
9
 Hale v. Beckstead , 116 P.3d 263, 267 (Utah 2005).
 
10
 Coln v. City of Savannah , 966 S.W.2d 34, 43 (Tenn. 1998)
 
(overruled on other grounds).
 
22
            
          
          
       
  
       
          
           
         
      
        
          
        
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
, 1 3 , states include  Idaho1 1	 Mississippi 12 , Oregon  Texas1 4
,  and
Wyoming1 5
 .
1.	 States Analyzing The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense As
An Aspect Of Duty
 
Some states that have struck the known or obvious
 
danger defense as a complete bar to liability have held that such
 a bar is incompatible with landowner duty. 
These states
 
typically adopt the analysis of the Restatement (Second) of
 Torts, which provides:
 
(1) A possessor of land is not liable to his invitees for
physical harm caused to them by any activity or condition on
the land whose danger is known or obvious to them, unless
the possessor should anticipate the harm despite such
knowledge or obviousness.
 
(2) In determining whether the possessor should anticipate
harm from a known or obvious danger, the fact that the
invitee is entitled to make use of public land, or of the
facilities of a public utility, is a factor of importance
indicating that the harm should be anticipated.
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 343A (1965). Under this
 
framework, the fact that a danger is known or obvious does not
 eliminate liability as a matter of law. Instead, a landowner has
 a duty, and comparative negligence principles apply, when the
 landowner should anticipate harm from a known or obvious danger
 
11
 Harrison v. Taylor , 768 P.2d 1321, 1326 (Idaho 1989).
 
12
 Tharp v. Bunge Corp. , 641 So. 2d 20, 25 (Miss. 1994).
 
13
 Woolston v. Wells , 687 P.2d 144, 149-50 (Or. 1984).
 
14
 Parker v. Highland Park, Inc. , 565 S.W.2d 512, 517 (Tex. 1978).
 
15
 O’Donnell v. City of Casper , 696 P.2d 1278, 1284 (Wyo. 1985).
 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
on his land. 
The case of Ward v. K Mart Corp., 554 N.E.2d 223 (Ill.
 
1990), provides illustration. In Ward, the plaintiff was exiting
 
a K Mart department store carrying a large item he had just
 purchased when he walked into a concrete post located directly
 outside the store’s exit. Id. at 224. The case went to trial,
 
and a jury delivered a verdict in favor of the plaintiff, but
 reduced the damages 20% to account for the plaintiff’s
 comparative negligence. Id. at 226. However, the circuit court
 
judge entered a judgment for the defendant notwithstanding the
 jury’s verdict, finding that the store owed the plaintiff no duty
 because the post was open and obvious. Id. at 224. A fractured
 
appellate court affirmed, and the plaintiff appealed to the
 Supreme Court of Illinois. Id. The supreme court reinstated the
 
jury’s verdict, and held that the open and obvious character of
 the danger did not automatically negate the store’s duty to the
 plaintiff. Id. Instead of an inflexible rule that denied
 
recovery to all injured plaintiffs, the court held that a more
 nuanced analysis of the circumstances of injury is necessary, in
 order to determine whether K Mart could have anticipated that the
 pole would cause plaintiff’s injury. Id. In this case, the
 
court believed it was foreseeable that a customer may be injured
 by the concrete post, so the store had a duty to prevent such
 
24
           
       
         
       
         
         
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
injury. Id. 
The court’s analysis turned on the notion that the
 
ability of a plaintiff to recognize a danger depends heavily on
 
the circumstances in which the plaintiff confronts that danger. 
As the court noted: 
there is perhaps no condition the danger of which is so
obvious that all customers under all circumstances would
 necessarily see and realize the danger in the absence of
contributory negligence, and this is particularly true if
the further principle so often repeated is accepted that the
customer or business invitee is entitled to assume that the
 premises are reasonably safe for his use.
 
Id. at 230 (quoting W. Page Keeton, Personal Injuries Resulting
 
from Open and Obvious Conditions, 100 U.Pa.L.Rev. 629, 642
 (1952)). Thus, the fact that a condition is known or obvious is
 not an absolute bar to recovery, and instead courts of that
 jurisdiction must engage a more thorough analysis. Id. at 299. 
(“Whether in fact the condition itself served as adequate notice
 of its presence or whether additional precautions were required
 to satisfy the defendant’s duty are questions properly left to
 the trier of fact. The trier of fact may also consider whether
 the plaintiff was in fact guilty of negligence contributing in
 whole or in part to his injury, and adjust the verdict
 accordingly.”)
 
Other jurisdictions share the Illinois Supreme Court’s
 
view that the known or obvious defense may not be a complete bar
 to a plaintiff’s claim, but rather that a landowner has a duty to
 
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
protect against, and may be held liable for, foreseeable injuries
 
due to a known or obvious danger. Kentucky River Medical Center
 
v. McIntosh, 319 S.W.3d 385, 390 (Ky. 2010) (“By concluding that
 a danger was open and obvious, we can conclude that the invitee
 was negligent for falling victim to it, unless for some reason
 ‘to a reasonable man in his position the advantages of
 [encountering the danger] would outweigh the apparent risk.’ But
 this does not necessarily mean that the land possessor was not
 also negligent for failing to fix an unreasonable danger in the
 first place. Under our rule of comparative fault, the defendant
 should be held responsible for his own negligence, if any.”)
 (citation omitted); Coln v. City of Savannah, 966 S.W.2d 34, 36
 (Tenn. 1998) (overruled on other grounds) (“As in any negligence
 action, we think a risk is unreasonable and gives rise to a duty
 to act with due care if the foreseeable probability and gravity
 of harm posed by a defendant’s conduct outweigh the burden upon
 the defendant to engage in alternative conduct that would prevent
 the harm. Applying this analysis, if the foreseeability and
 gravity of harm posed by the defendant’s conduct, even if ‘open
 and obvious,’ outweigh the burden upon the defendant to engage in
 alternative conduct, the defendant has a duty to act with
 reasonable care and the comparative fault principles apply. . .
 .”) (citations omitted); Hale v. Beckstead, 116 P.3d 263, 269
 
26
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
(Utah 2005) (“The open and obvious danger rule in particular
 
simply defines the reasonable care that possessors of land must
 show toward invitees. Under that definition, a possessor of land
 must protect invitees against dangers of which they are unaware,
 may forget, or may reasonably encounter despite the obviousness
 of the danger.”) 
To summarize, in states following the Restatement, the
 
fact that a plaintiff was injured due to a known or obvious
 danger does not automatically bar the plaintiff’s claim; in those
 states, a landowner retains a duty to the plaintiff if the
 plaintiff’s injury was foreseeable.
 
2.	 States Analyzing The Known Or Obvious Danger Defense As
An Element Of Comparative Fault
 
Other jurisdictions have abolished the known or obvious
 
danger defense entirely due to its incompatibility with
 comparative negligence. The case considered by the Supreme Court
 of Wyoming, one of the first to abolish the doctrine, provides an
 apt illustration. In O’Donnell v. City of Casper, 696 P.2d 1278
 (Wyo. 1985), that court considered the case of a motorcyclist who
 sustained injuries when his motorcycle slipped on loose gravel on
 one of the City’s streets. Id. at 1280. The trial court found
 
that the gravel was open and obvious, and granted the City’s
 motion for summary judgment on the ground that the City owed no
 duty to warn of an obvious danger. Id. at 1281. On appeal, the
 
27
         
         
        
       
           
          
       
         
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Supreme Court of Wyoming held that this was error, and reasoned
 
that:
 
[t]he City may have been negligent by not properly
maintaining the streets, and the negligence of the City, if
any, should be compared with the negligence of appellant.
Because appellant knew of the obviously dangerous condition
of the road he may very well have been negligent, but that
is for the trier of fact to determine, and the relative
degree of negligence is all important under comparative
negligence. Gone are the days when a scintilla of negligence
by the plaintiff will bar recovery.
 
Id. at 1283-84. Courts of other jurisdictions have agreed that
 
the defense is irreconcilable with comparative negligence. 
Woolston v. Wells, 687 P.2d 144, 149 (Or. 1984) (“Instructing the
 jury that defendant has no liability because of actions of the
 plaintiff, or that defendant is liable only if a reasonable
 person entering the land would not realize a danger or would not
 protect himself against it, frustrates the purpose of instituting
 a system of comparative fault.”); Parker v. Highland Park, Inc.,
 565 S.W.2d 512, 518 (Tex. 1978) (“[Comparative Negligence]
 replaced the harsh system of absolute victory or total defeat of
 an action by such doctrines as contributory negligence, voluntary
 assumption of risk, and also the included doctrine known as
 no-duty. [. . .] The survival of no-duty (plaintiff’s knowledge
 and appreciation) as a total bar is incompatible with the
 legislative purpose of the comparative negligence statute.”). 
In states where the known or obvious danger defense has
 
been abolished, the jury considers the known or obvious character
 
28
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
of the danger as one of the many factors relevant to determining
 
each party’s comparative negligence. Joseph v. City of New
 
Orleans, 842 So. 2d 420, 423 (La. Ct. App. 2003) (“Simply stated,
 the open and obvious nature of the defect is merely another
 factor to be weighed in the risk-utility balance.”); Parker v.
 Highland Park, Inc., 565 S.W.2d 512, 517 (Tex. 1978) (“The
 reasonableness of an actor’s conduct under the circumstances will
 be determined under principles of contributory negligence.”);
 Tharp v. Bunge Corp., 641 So. 2d 20, 25 (Miss. 1994) (“We now
 abolish the so-called ‘open and obvious’ defense and apply our
 true comparative negligence doctrine. The jury found that there
 was negligence in the case at hand; the trial judge erred in
 construing the open and obvious defense as a complete bar when it
 really is only a mitigation of damages on a comparative
 negligence basis under [the state’s comparative negligence
 statute].”).
 
In summary, in states where the known or obvious
 
defense has been completely abolished, the jury need not make a
 finding regarding whether the danger was known or obvious because
 such a determination does not operate as an absolute bar to a
 plaintiff’s recovery. Instead, a jury may consider all the facts
 and circumstances of the injury, and apportion liability by
 comparing the fault of the landowner and the injured plaintiff.
 
29
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
E.	 The Known Or Obvious Defense Is No Longer Viable In Premises
Liability Actions
 
We now hold that the known or obvious defense is not 
viable in Hawai' i, thus joining the states described in Section 
III.D.2, supra. In so holding, we reject the Restatement view 
followed by the states as described in Section III.D.1, supra. As explained above, the Restatement view permits a plaintiff to recover for an injury caused by a known or obvious danger only when her injury was foreseeable. We believe that such a position does not execute the legislative intent behind our state’s comparative negligence statute. We further believe that the rule is inconsistent with the case law of this state because it requires the trial judge to usurp duties which should be reserved for the factfinder. 
First, as discussed above, Hawaii’s Comparative
 
Negligence statute “sought to temper a phase of the common law
 deemed inconsistent with contemporary notions of fairness.” 
Wong v. Hawaiian Scenic Tours, Ltd., 64 Haw. at 405, 642 P.2d at
 933. The legislative purpose of the statute was “to allow one
 
partly at fault in an accident resulting in injury to be
 recompensed for the damages attributable to the fault of another
 if the former’s negligence was not the primary cause of the
 accident.” Id. Applying the absolute logic of the Restatement
 
precludes an injured plaintiff from recovery based on the Judge’s
 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
conclusions that a danger was known or obvious and that injury
 
was not foreseeable. This would not afford an opportunity for
 the plaintiff’s fault to be compared to the fault of the
 landowner. In precluding such comparison, the Restatement would
 not permit the plaintiff “to be recompensed for the damages
 attributable to the fault of another if the former’s negligence
 was not the primary cause of the accident.” 
Second, in rejecting the Restatement view, we join the
 
states that have abolished the known or obvious danger defense in
 part to affirm the proper role of the jury as factfinder. Those
 states noted that the determination of whether the known or
 obvious danger defense applied had been an element of duty
 analysis, and therefore had fallen to the judge. Many states
 expressed concern that a judge would decide such a fact-intensive
 issue. For example, in Harrison v. Taylor, 768 P.2d 1321 (Idaho
 1989), the Idaho Supreme Court considered a slip-and-fall case in
 which plaintiff was injured due to a fault in a sidewalk in front
 of a store. Id. at 1322. The trial court judge found the
 
sidewalk’s condition to be open and obvious, and granted the
 store’s motion for summary judgment. Id. at 1323. The supreme
 
court felt it was inappropriate for such a critical question of
 fact to be decided by a judge without involvement of a jury. Id.
 
at 1328. The court explained:
 
31
         
        
        
         
          
        
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
[t]his discussion points up the major flaw with granting
defendants’ summary judgment motion based on the open and
obvious danger doctrine-a judge not a jury, is thereby
ruling on quintessential issues of fact such as whether the
injured party knew, or should have known of the danger, the
obviousness of the danger, whether there was a justifiable
reason for confronting the danger, and so on. However,
today’s opinion will correct this problem area in our law.
 
Id. Other jurisdictions have expressed similar concerns. Cox v.
 
J.C. Penney Co., Inc., 741 S.W.2d 28, 30 (Mo. 1987) (“Under
 
comparative fault, we leave to juries the responsibility to
 assess the relative fault of the parties in tort actions.
 Respondent’s duty argument fails in this context because it
 pretermits jury assessment of respondent’s fault for failure to
 maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition.”) 
We share these concerns. In Hawai' i, the existence of 
a duty is a question of law. Bidar v. Amfac, Inc., 66 Haw. 547, 
552, 669 P.2d 154, 158 (1983). Accordingly, if this court were to retain the known or obvious danger defense as defeating a landowner’s duty, it would fall to the judge to decide whether the defense applies. That result is undesirable. As our review of the known or obvious cases shows, the characterization of the danger as known or obvious is fact-intensive and depends on the circumstances involved in each case. We believe such an assessment should be reserved for the jury, unless reasonable minds could not differ. See id. at 554, 669 P.2d at 160 (noting 
that the question of breach must be resolved by a jury if the 
32
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
court is left with “a definite impression that reasonable minds
 
could draw different inferences from the facts and arrive at
 
conflicting conclusions on relevant factual issues.”) 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We hold that the known or obvious danger defense is 
inconsistent with the legislative intent behind Hawaii’s 
comparative negligence statute. The known or obvious danger defense yields inconsistent results and is incompatible with the policy values underlying Hawaii’s tort law. Accordingly, we hold that the known or obvious danger defense is no longer viable in Hawai'i. We reject the Restatement’s retention of the doctrine 
as a factor in determining the landowner’s duty, and instead hold that courts of this state may consider any known or obvious characteristics of the danger as factors in the larger comparative negligence analysis. The Intermediate Court of Appeals’ December 16, 2010 judgment on appeal and the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s March 6, 2007 judgment are vacated. 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
This case is remanded to the trial court for proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
Janice P. Kim 
for Petitioner-
Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Dennis E. W. O’Connor and
 
Michael J. McGuigan of
O’Connor Playdon & Guben,
LLP for Respondent­Defendant-Appellee
 
Arthur Y. Park and 
John C. McLaren for Amicus Curiae Hawai' i 
Association for Justice /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
34
 