***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF 
 
THE ELAINE EMMA SHORT REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST AGREEMENT 
DATED JULY 17, 1984, as amended.  
 
 
SCWC-15-0000960 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000960; T. No. 15- 1-0165) 
 
JUNE 18, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, WILSON, JJ. , WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART,  
WITH WHOM  NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
 
  In this case , we consider whether the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA) properly upheld an order and judgment of 
the probate court that modified a trust provision regarding the 
distribution of trust principal without issuing findings of fact 
to explain or support its ruling.  We also address whether the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000960
18-JUN-2020
10:45 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 2 terms of a  trust may override a trustee’s statutory requirement 
to provide accounts information to contingent beneficiaries.   
  U pon review, we conclude that the absence of factual 
findings by the probate court did not enable the ICA to 
meaningfully review the basis of the probate court order to 
modify the trust and 
that the ICA’s reliance on selective 
extrinsic evidence was improper
.  We further hold that the ICA  
erred when it concluded that the terms of a trust could 
supersede 
the trustee’s statutory duty to provide accounts 
information to contingent beneficiaries of the trust.  
Accordingly, we vacate the I CA’s judgment on appeal and the 
probate court’s order and judgment , except as specified below , 
and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.   
I. BACKGROUND 
A. General Overview
 
Elaine Emma Short (Elaine), who passed away on January 
3, 2012, was married to Clarence Short (Clarence), and they had 
two sons, David Short (David) and William Short (William).  
Elaine’s brother, Leroy Cook, is the father of five children 
(collectively, “the Cooks”).1  In a will dated September 4, 1979 
                     
 1 LeRoy Cook predeceased Elaine and thus is represented in this 
suit by his daughter, Kristin Linae Cook Kline.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 3  
(continued . . .)  (“1979 Will”), Elaine named Clarence as trustee of her estate, 
with their two sons and First Hawaiian Bank (FHB) as successor 
trustees in the event Clarence was unavailable or predeceased 
her.  Elaine subsequently established a revocable living trust 
in 1984 (“initial trust ”), as did her husband ( “Clarence’s 
Trust”).  Both trusts were created to provide for the settlor’s 
respective spouse, as well as their two sons David and William.  
Article V.B.(a) of the initial trust provided that if Elaine was 
not survived by Clarence at the time of her death, subtrusts 
would be created for David and William, from which the Successor 
Trustee could distribute principal and income to her sons as 
needed for health, education, 
and support and maintenance for  
each son’s accustomed standard of living.2  Article V.B.(a) also 
                     
 2 Article V.B. of the initial trust provided as follows:  
B. Upon the Settlor’s death, if the Settlor is survived by 
any of the Settlor’s descendants, but not by the Settlor’s 
spouse CLARENCE RAYMOND SHORT, then at such time the 
Successor Trustee shall hold, administer, and distribute 
all of the then remaining residuary trust estate, including 
accumulated and accrued but undistributed income and any 
property received from the Settlor’s probate estate, as 
follows: 
(a) The Successor Trustee shall divide the aforesaid 
trust property into two equal shares.  The Successor 
Trustee shall hold one of such shares as a separate 
trust for the benefit of the Settlor’s son, WILLIAM 
SHORT, and the Successor Trustee shall hold the other 
of such shares a s a separate trust for the Settlor’s 
son, DAVID SHORT.  The Successor Trustee shall pay 
the income and principal of each separate trust to 
the Settlor’s son for whom such share was set aside, 
in accordance with his needs for health, education, 
support and maintenance in his accustomed standard of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 4  
(continued . . .)  provided that once each son reached the age of 45, the Successor 
Trustee would distribute to that son the remaining trust balance 
and terminate his subtrust.  Under Article  V.B.(b) of the 
initial trust, if either son died before Elaine, the property 
that would have otherwise funded the subtrust for the deceased 
son’s benefit was to be distributed to his issue, per stirpes ; 
if the son died without issue, the Successor Trustee was to hold 
the property for the surviving son.  Articles V.C and VIII 
provided that if neither Clarence nor any of Elaine’s 
descendants survived her , then the trust estate was to be 
distributed to Elaine’s  heirs-at-law at the time of her death.3 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
living.  As each of the Settlor’s said sons reaches 
the age of thirty -five (35) years, the Successor 
Trustee shall distribute to him one -half (1/2) of the 
property remaining in the separate trust set aside 
for his benefit.  When each of the Settlor’s sons 
reaches the age of forty -five (45), the Successor 
Trustee shall distribute the balance of the trust 
balance remaining in the separate trust set aside for 
his benefit, and that trust shall thereupon 
terminate.   
(b) If either of the Settlor’s said sons shall not be living at the 
time when a separate trust otherwise would be established hereunder for 
his benefit, the property which otherwise would have funded the 
separate trust for his benefit shall be distributed to his issue, per 
stirpes; and if he leaves no issue who are then living, such property 
shall be held by the Successor Trustee of the separate trust 
established for the other of the Settlor’s said sons; and if neither of 
the Settlor’s said sons is living a t the time when separate trusts 
otherwise would be established for them hereunder, all of the aforesaid 
trust property shall be distributed to the Settlor’s issue, per 
stirpes.   
 3 Article V.C provided as follows:  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 5  
(continued . . .)    On March 10, 1993, Elaine amended several articles of 
the initial trust ( “Elaine’s Trust ”).4  Relevant to this 
litigation, Article V.B.(a) was amended to provide the Successor 
Trustee with full discretion to withhold distribution of income 
to David and William if warranted by the circumstances (Amended 
Article V.B.(a)).5  Upon Elaine’s death, the  Successor Trustee 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Upon the settlor’s death, if neither the Settlor’s 
spouse CLARENCE RAYMOND SHORT nor any of the 
Settlor’s descendants survive the Settlor, then at 
such time the Successor Trustee shall dispose of all 
of the then remaining residuary trust estate under 
Article VIII herein below.   
  Article VIII provided as follows:  
If, at any time, the foregoing provisions do not 
provide persons qualified to take the trust estate, 
then the trust estate shall be distributed to those 
persons who would constitute the heirs -at-law of the 
Settlor as then determined under, and in the 
proportions then provided by, the laws of the state 
of the Settlor’s domicile at the date of the 
Settlor’s death relating to descent and distribution 
of property, the same in all respects as though the 
Settlor’s death had occurred at the time  that such 
assets became subject to distribution under this 
Article.  
 4 Articles V.C. and VIII were not modified by the 1993 amendments.   
 5 Amended Article V.B.(a) provides as follows:  
(a) The Successor Trustee shall divide the aforesaid trust 
property into two equal shares.  The Successor Trustee 
shall hold one of such shares as a separate trust for the 
benefit of the Settlor’s son, WILLIAM SHORT, and the 
Successor Trustee shall hold the other of such shares as a 
separate trust for the Settlor’s son, DAV ID SHORT.  The 
Successor Trustee shall pay all or portions of the income 
of each separate trust to the Settlor’s son for whom such 
share was set aside, in accordance with his needs for 
health, education, support and maintenance as determined by 
the Successor Trustee in its sole discretion, with full ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 6  
(continued . . .)  could only distribute income, and not principal, from David and 
William’s respective subtrusts  as necessary to meet their needs  
for “health, education, support, and maintenance ,” as determined 
by the Successor Trustee in its sole discretion .  Also, because 
William at the time had a drug- related disability, income 
distributions to him were to be restricted to vital necessities 
unless he had been drug- free for at least a year.  The amended 
trust no longer provided for the distribution of principal to 
either of Elaine’s sons after her death nor did it provide for 
termination of their subtrusts.   
  
On June 8, 1993, William passed away unmarried and 
without children.  Under the terms of Elaine’s Trust, William’s 
interest in the property was to be held by the trustee for David 
at Elaine’s death.6  Clarence passed away on April 10, 2010.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
discretion to withhold any income from time to time if 
circumstances so warrant.  In the case of William Short who 
has a drug -related disability at the present time, the 
Successor Trustee shall withhold income for everything but 
the vital necessities unless said son is drug -free and has 
continued to be for at least one year, the Successor 
Trustee to have absolute discretion in making such 
determinations from time to time.   
 6 Should one or both sons not survive Elaine, Amended Article 
V.B.(b) of Elaine’s Trust provides the following instructions:  
If either of the Settlor’s said sons shall not be living at 
the time when a separate trust otherwise would be 
established hereunder for his benefit, the property which 
otherwise would have funded the separate trust for his 
benefit shall be distributed to his issue, per stirpes; and 
if he leaves no issue who are then living, such property ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 7  
(continued . . .)  Elaine was declared incapacitated in 2005, and she passed away 
on January 3, 2012.  David has not married and has no children. 
B. Probate Court Petition  
  On August 16, 2015, FHB, as the trustee of Elaine’s 
Trust, filed a Petition for Instructions Regarding Distribution 
and Termination, and for Modification of Trust (petitio
n) in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (probate court) th at 
requested in relevant part that the probate court (1) instruct 
the trustee that 
David’s subtrust created under Amended Article 
V.B.(a) of Elaine’s Trust terminate upon the death of David; (2) 
instruct the trustee that discretionary distributions of 
principal may be made from David’s subtrust ; and (3) modify 
Elaine’s Trust to provide for a termination date and the 
discretionary distribution of principal, by amending Article 
V.B(a);7 and (4) allow payment of FHB’s attorneys’ fees and 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
shall be held by the Successor Trustee of the separate 
trust established for the othe r of the Settlor’s said sons; 
and if neither of the Settlor’s said sons is living at the 
time when separate trusts otherwise would be established 
for them hereunder, all of the aforesaid trust property 
shall be distributed to the Settlor’s heirs at law, 
determined by the laws of the State of Hawaii in force at 
such time.  
 7 The proposed modifications to Article V.B.(a) of Elaine’s Trust 
read as follows: 
a) The Successor Trustee shall divide the aforesaid trust 
property into two equal shares.  The Successor Trustee 
shall hold one of such shares as a separate trust for the 
benefit of the Settlor’s son, WILLIAM SHORT, and the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 8 costs.  In the petition, FHB listed the Cooks as heirs at law 
and contingent beneficiaries under Elaine’s Trust.  
 
 David filed an affidavit in support of FHB’s petition, 
asserting that because he and his mother Elaine had little to no 
contact with her brother Leroy, or with any of Leroy’s issue for 
many decades prior to Elaine’s death, it was his belief that 
Elaine’s intent was to make her husband and sons the “primary 
beneficiaries” of her trust.   
  The Cooks contested the petition by fil ing a response 
and objection to FHB’s petition .  The Cooks agreed that David’s 
subtrust should termi nate at David’s death but opposed FHB’s 
proposed modification that would allow the distribution of 
principal to David.  Elaine’s Trust was not ambiguous as to the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Successor Trustee shall hold the other of such shares as a 
separate trust for the Settlor’s son, DAVID SHORT.  The 
Successor Trustee shall pay all or portions of the income 
and portions of the principal  of each separate trust to the 
Settlor’s son for whom such share was set aside, in 
accordance with his needs for health, education, support 
and maintenance, as determined by the Successor Trustee in 
its sole discretion, with full discretion to withhold any 
income or principal from time to time if circumstances so 
warrant, and each separate trust shall terminate upon the 
death of the Settlor’s son for whom such share was set 
aside.  In the case  of William Short who has a drug -related 
disability at the present time, the Successor Trustee shall 
withhold income for everything but the vital necessities 
unless said son is drug -free and has continued to be for at 
least one year, the Successor Trustee to have absolute 
discretion in making such determinations from time to time.  
(Emphasized portions indicate proposed modifications.)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 9 permitted distribution of the principal, the Cooks contended, 
and thus FHB’s attempt to change the language of Elaine’s Trust 
should be rejected as improper.   
  The Cooks also disputed the contents of David’s 
affidavit.  The Cooks, through the declaration  of Susan Kay Cook 
Galvin (Susan), stated that Leroy’s relationship with Elaine was 
close and that, through Elaine’s numerous visits to Minnesota to 
see Leroy and the Cooks over many years, they learned Elaine’s 
relationship with David was “strained” in li ght of concerns 
during her lifetime regarding the level of financial support 
David expected from her.  Susan declared that in 1998 she stayed 
with Elaine in a Minneapolis hotel for three days during the 
Opera America Convention, and that in 1999 she stayed with 
Elaine and Clarence in Hawai ʻi.  Susan further stated that after 
Leroy died, the Cooks maintained regular phone contact with 
Elaine until 2009 or 2010. 
 The Cooks also included several 
photographs of themselves with Elaine in activities, two of 
which appear to show Elaine present at one of the Cooks’ 
weddings, while others appear to be group family photos.  The 
Cooks also submitted a p etition for  the appointment of a 
guardian that showed David’s whereabouts were unknown when 
Elaine needed a guardian due to her advanced dementia.  Further, 
the Cooks argued that the  amendment to  Article V.B.(a) was not 
made in response to Williams’ drug -related disability because ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 10 Elaine did not amend this  provision  after William’s death  that 
year.  Lastly, the Cooks requ ested attorneys’ fees from the 
principal of Elaine’s Trust, arguing that their involvement in 
the matter was necessary to clarify the provisions of Elaine’s 
Trust.   
  In response to the Cooks’ objections, FHB argued that 
its petition proper
ly sought  clarification of its duties under 
Elaine’s Trust.  FHB stated that permitting discretionary 
distributions of principal to David would be in furtherance of 
Elaine’s intent to provide for her sons and any issue they might 
have.  It was premature for the Cooks to assert their rights as 
contingent remainder beneficiaries, FHB contended, because the 
Cooks would be “completely divested” if David were to have issue 
before his death.  While Elaine’s Trust did not expressly 
provide for distributions of principal to David, FHB maintained, 
it did not expressly prohibit such action and thus Elaine’s 
Trust was ambiguous.  FHB contended that Hawai ʻi trust law 
permits the court to 
modify a trust document, and that the  
proposed amendment was supported by the text of Elaine’s Trust 
and extrinsic evidence.  FHB also argued against payment of 
attorneys’ fees to the Cooks from the principal as a potentially 
improper use of trust assets for non- beneficiaries because the 
Cooks were contingent beneficiaries .  Finally, FHB requested 
that its attorneys’ fees be paid from the principal because it ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 11 had raised questions that affected  the principal of the trust 
estate.   
  
In a supplement to its initial petition, FHB also 
responded to a September 16, 2015 letter from the Cooks’ coun sel 
requesting information under Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 560:7-303(2)&(3).8  In the letter, the Cooks requested that FHB 
provide them with the following information: (a) a list of 
assets of Elaine’s Trust at the time of Elaine’s death, (b) a 
statement of accounts for Elaine’s Trust during 2012 -2014, (c) a 
statement of income distributed to David during 2012- 2015, (d) 
the amount of income that David received from Clarence’s Trust 
                     
 8 HRS § 560:7 -303 (2006) provides in relevant part  as follows : 
The trustee shall keep the beneficiaries of the trust 
reasonably informed of the trust and its administration; 
provided, however, during the life of the settlor, the 
trustee of a revocable inter vivos trust shall not be 
required to register the trust, reveal the terms to 
beneficiaries, or account to beneficiaries, unless 
otherwise directed by the settlor.  In addition:  
 . . . . 
(2) Upon reasonable request, the trustee shall 
provide the beneficiary with a copy of the terms of 
the trust which describe or aff ect the beneficiary’s 
interest and with information about the assets of the 
trust and the particulars relating to the 
administration.   
(3) Upon reasonable request, a beneficiary is 
entitled to a statement of the accounts of the trust 
annually and on termination of the trust or change of 
the trustee.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 12 during 2012-2015, and (e) the amount of David’s total income for 
2012-2015.   
  FHB objected to the Cooks’ request for information 
regarding David’s income and information as to Clarence’s Trust 
because the requested information did not relate to Elaine’s 
Trust and was not necessary for the Cooks to protect their 
interest.  Citing Article  XIV of Elaine’s Trust, FHB contended 
that only adult beneficiaries then entitled to receive income or 
principal of the trust estate were allowed to receive regular 
accounts of Elaine’s Trust.9  Since the Cooks were not yet in the 
position to receive income from Elaine’s Trust and because 
Clarence’s Trust was a separate matter altogether, FHB argued 
that requests (d) and (e) set forth in the Cooks’ letter were 
unwarranted.  FHB requested the probate court give instructions 
as to whether the Cooks, as contingent remainder beneficiaries 
who could be completely divested of their interest in Elaine’s  
Trust if David dies with issue, were entitled to the information 
sought in requests (a), (b), and (c).   
                     
 9 Article XIV of Elaine’s Trust provides in pertinent part as 
follows: 
The Trustee and all Successor Trustees shall not be 
required to give any bond or surety or file any account in 
any court, but shall deliver regular accounts to the 
Settlor during the Settlor’s lifetime and subsequently to 
all adult beneficiaries then entitled to receive income or 
principal of the trust estate.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 13   David filed a response to FHB’s petition an d to the 
Cooks’ objection to modify Elaine’s Trust.  In his response, 
David agreed with both FHB and the Cooks as to setting a 
proposed termination date for Elaine’s Trust.  David further 
agreed with FHB that he should receive discretionary 
distributions of principal from Elaine’s Trust, stating that 
Elaine’s Trust contained ambiguous language that should be read 
in his favor as the sole income beneficiary.  David argued that 
Elaine’s unquestionable intent was to provide for him, William, 
and their respective descendants, and he was the only one 
living.  David disputed the Cooks’ objections, contending that 
if the Cooks were truly as close to Elaine as they claimed, 
there would be more express language in Elaine’s Trust to 
provide for them if he and William left no issue.  Instead, 
David maintained,  Elaine’s Trust merely contains an “Armageddon 
clause” referencing “heirs at law,” which does not provide a 
sufficient basis for the Cooks to frustrate Elaine’s primary 
intent to benefit her sons.  Finally, David included a 
declaration from Carol Short, Elaine’s sister -in-law through 
Clarence, stating  that she was in frequent contact with Elaine 
and Clarence, she had never heard of the Cooks, Elaine had never 
mentioned the Cooks, and she believed Elaine’s intent was  to 
provide financial support to David after her death.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 14   The probate court held a hearing on FHB’s petition, 
with counsel for FHB, David, and the Cooks present.10  The 
minutes of the hearing indicate that the court found “there is 
an ambiguity” and would “focus on the settlor’s intent.”11  In 
its Order Granting Petition for Instructions Regarding 
Distributions and Termination, and for Modification of Trust 
(Order), the court granted FHB’s petition, modifying Elaine’s 
Trust to provide for discretionary payments of principal to 
David and terminating his  subtrust under A mended Article V.B.(a) 
and (b) at his death.  The probate court’s order contained no 
findings of fact as to whether Elaine’s Trust contained an 
ambiguity regarding the distribution of principal, whether 
extrinsic evidence was considered in the court’s determinations, 
and if so, the evidence that was considered and the evidentiary 
standard used to review the evidence.    
  
The court also concluded FHB was not required to 
provide financial information to the Cooks.  The court 
instructed the parties to provide a termination date for 
Elaine’s Trust and ordered that the attorneys’ fees for all 
parties involved in the proceedings be paid from the principal 
                     
 10 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.  
 11 Although the Cooks requested a transcript of the hearing, it was 
not included in the record on appeal.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 15 of Elaine’s Trust.  The probate court ent ered its judgment on 
December 16, 2015 (judgment), from which both the Cooks and 
David appealed to the ICA.   
C. ICA Proceedings 
  The Cooks asserted that the probate court erred in 
modifying Amended Article  V.B.(a) of Elaine’s Trust and in 
refusing their request for information related to Elaine’s Trust 
and David’s finances.   David and FHB both filed answering briefs 
opposing the Cooks’ contentions.  David also filed a cross -
appeal, arguing that the probate court abused its discretion in 
allowing the Cooks ’ attorneys’ fees and costs to be paid from 
the principal of Elaine’s Trust.   
  
In its memorandum opinion, the ICA first addressed 
whether the plain language of A mended A rticle V.B.(a) 
unambiguously demonstrated Elain e’s intent to allow 
discretionary payments of principal to David.12  The ICA noted 
that this provision does not instruct the trustee on principal 
distributions and that Elaine’s Trust  did not demonstrate 
Elaine’s intent to preserve the principal for the Cooks or to 
limit David to income solely.   
                     
 12 The ICA’s memorandum opinion can be found at In re Elaine Emma 
Short Revocable Living Tr. Agreement, No. CAAP -15-0000960, 2019 WL 2417367 
(Haw. App. June 10, 2019)  (mem.).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 16   The ICA determined that “Elaine’s primary intent 
appears to be to provide for her children.”  By contrast, stated 
the ICA, the Cooks’ claim  to their interest arises only “through 
a default provision.”  The ICA surmised that the language 
permitting the trustee to withhold income was likely added in 
response to William’s drug -related disability.  The ICA also 
determined that, regardless of Elai ne’s primary intent, there 
were no provisions in Elaine’s Trust limiting or prohibiting the 
trustee’s ability to distribute principal.   
  Thus, the ICA concluded that an ambiguity arose as to 
the distribution of principal under A mended Article V.B.(a),  and 
it accordingly reviewed extrinsic evidence to aid in its 
construction of this provision.  The ICA noted that Carol 
Short’s declaration stated that she was frequently in contact 
with Elaine, Elaine never mentioned the Cooks, and she had “no 
doubt” Elaine would want to provide complete financial support 
to David.  Referencing D avid’s affidavit, the ICA stated that 
David also did not believe that Elaine had contact with the 
Cooks, and that Elaine “intended for her children and their 
issue to be the primary b eneficiaries of [Elaine’s] Trust.”  
Further, the ICA concluded that the 1979 Will likely reflected 
Elaine’s intent to provide the principal to David, to the 
exclusion of the Cooks, because the 1979 Will made no mention of 
“heirs at law.”  The ICA then considered the Cooks’ statements , ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 17 the numerous photographs, as well as Susan’s declaration, but 
the ICA found this evidence insufficient to show that Elaine 
intended the Cooks to receive the principal, stating,  “we are 
unpersuaded.”  Finally, the ICA dismissed  the Cooks’ assertion 
that Elaine did not have a close relationship with David, 
opining that the fact that David could not be found when Elaine 
needed a guardian appointed merely shows that “the identity and 
whereabouts of Elaine’s adult children [was] unknown.”  This  
circumstance, the ICA stated , “does not, in our view, establish 
that Elaine intended now to provide for her heirs- at-law.”  
  The ICA thus held that the extrinsic evidence 
supported the conclusion that Elaine intended first and foremost 
to provide for her sons and their respective issue.  
Accordingly, the ICA concluded that the probate court had not 
erred in modifying A mended Article V.B.(a) to allow 
discretionary distribution of the principal to David.   
  The ICA also rejected the Cooks’ argu ment that HRS 
§ 560:7-303 superseded A rticle XIV of Elaine’s Trust, which 
provides that FHB need only give accounts information to 
beneficiaries then entitled to principal and income.  The ICA 
held that a trust can alter how much information is given to a 
beneficiary and may limit accounts information, even if that 
information is required by statute, so long as the statute does ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 18 not prohibit such alteration.13  HRS § 560:7- 303 does not 
prohibit FHB from providing accounts information to current 
beneficiaries only, the ICA concluded, allowing Elaine’s T rust 
to exclude contingent beneficiaries like the Cooks.  Therefore, 
the ICA determined that the probate court did not err when it 
rejected the Cooks’ contention that they were statutorily 
entitled to (1) a listing of Elaine’s Trust assets at the time 
of Elaine’s death in 2012; (2) a statement of accounts for 
Elaine’s Trust in the years 2012, 2013, and 2014; (3) a 
statement of the income distributions made to David from 
Elaine’s Trust for 2012, 2013, and 2014; and (4) financial 
information relating to Clarence ’s Trust. 
  
Lastly, the ICA found that the probate court abused 
its discretion when it awarded the Cooks attorneys’ fees from 
Elaine’s Trust’s principal.  The ICA thus affirmed the probate 
court’s Order and judgment in all respects except as to the 
grant of the Cooks’ attorneys’ fees  and costs, which was 
reversed.   
 
 In their application for writ of certiorari, the Cooks 
contend that the ICA gravely erred in the following: (1) after 
finding an ambiguity in the trust, weighing conflicting evidence 
                     
 13 The ICA cited Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 82 cmt. a(2) and 
§ 83 cmt. d (Am. Law Inst. 2007) for this proposition.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 19 to determine Elaine’s intent  and ignoring other evidence to 
resolve the ambiguity without holding a hearing as required for 
contested matters under Hawaiʻi Probate Rules (HPR)  Rules 19 and 
20;14 (2) affirming the probate court’s decision to deny the 
Cooks any financial information regarding Elaine’s Trust despite 
the trustee’s statutory duty to produce this information;15 and 
(3) determining that the probate court abused its discretion in 
awarding attorneys’ fees and costs to the Cooks.   
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Construction of a Trust 
  “The construction of a trust is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo.”  In re Medeiros Testamentary 
Tr. and Life Ins. Tr., 105 Hawai ʻi 284, 288, 96 P.3d 1098, 1102 
(2004).   
B. Statutory Interpretation 
  Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.  Stout v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps. Ret. 
Sys., 140 Hawai ʻi 177, 185, 398 P.3d 766, 774 (2017).   
                     
 14 The Cooks do not c hallenge the ICA’s determination that an 
ambiguity exists as to the distribution of principal under Amended Article 
V.B.(a). 
 15 The Cooks in their certiorari application do not challenge the 
ICA’s holding that they were not entitled to information regardin g Clarence’s 
Trust, and this issue is thus not addressed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 20 III. DISCUSSION 
A. The ICA Erred by Weighing the Credibility of the Extrinsic 
Evidence on Appeal Instead of Remanding the Case to the Probate 
Court. 
1. The Lack of Findings Requires Remanding the Case to the 
Probate Court. 
  The probate 
court’s written Order in this case allowed  
FHB to modify Elaine’s Trust to provide for the distribution of 
principal to David.  The  Order, however, contain ed no findings 
of fact as to whether Amended Article V.B.(a) was ambiguous.  
According to the minutes of the hearing on FHB’s petition, the 
probate court orally stated that it found an ambiguity and 
“focus[ed] on Settlor’s intent.”  But it is unclear on what 
basis the probate court found an ambiguity,  or if such ambiguity 
formed the basis for the court’s determination .16  Even assuming 
the probate court found an ambiguity, it  is also unclear whether 
the probate court considered Ela ine’s intent to be clear from 
                     
 16 The probate court’s Order contains no findings of fact or 
conclusions of law regarding ambiguity.  While the ICA’s memorandum opinion 
addressed the specific issue raised by the Cooks of whether Amended Article 
V.B.(a) was ambiguous, a probate court may modify  a trust in other 
situations, for example, when unforeseen or emergency circumstances require 
modification of a clause.  See Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 66 (Am. Law 
Inst. 2003) (permitting  modification of an administrative or distributive 
provision of a trust because of unanticipated circumstances or in order to 
further the purposes of the trust); see also  Hawaiian Tr. Co. v. Breault, 42 
Haw. 268, 271 (Haw. Terr. 1958) (permitting deviation  from the terms of the 
trust when emergencies occur or unusual circumstances arise).  In fact, FHB 
argued in its petition and its answering brief to the ICA that Amended 
Article V.B.(a) was ambiguous and  that there were unforeseen circumstances 
necessitating a change.  Thus, it is unclear what considerations formed the 
basis of the probate court’s decision to grant FHB’s petition to modify 
Elaine’s Trust.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 21 other provisions in Elaine’s Trust or whether the court relied 
on extrinsic evidence in determining Elaine’s intent.  If the 
probate court did rely on extrinsic evidence, it is unclear what 
evidence it found persuasive, and there is also no indication as 
to what evidentiary standard it used in weighing the evidence.  
In short, the probate court did not articulate the factual basis 
of its ruling.   
 
 The  ICA, after concluding that Amended Article V.B.(a) 
was ambiguous, proceeded to evaluate extrinsic evidence offered 
by the parties to the probate court.  It determined that Carol 
Short’s Declaration, David’s Affidavit, and the 1979 Will were 
credible and persuasive evidence of Elaine’s intent, stating 
that it was “unpersuaded” by the Declaration of Susan, the 
numerous photographs, and the petition for appointment of a 
guardian.  Thus, based on the evidence it considered to be 
credible or deserving of weight, the ICA held that the probate 
court did not err in granting FHB’s petition .   
 
 However, when the lower court has failed to issue the 
requisite findings of fact to enable meaningful appellate 
review, it is not the function of the appellate court to conduct 
its own evidentiary analysis.  See  Goo v. Arakawa , 132 Hawai ʻi 
304, 317, 321 P.3d 655, 668 (2014) (holding that a fact-
intensive inquiry is best handled by a trial court, not an 
appellate court, especially when the record is incomplete or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 22 non-existent); Sprint/United Mgmt. Co. v. Mendelsohn, 552 U.S. 
379, 383-84 (2008) (holding that the Court of Appeals should 
remand to the District Court instead of engaging i n its own 
evidentiary analysis).  After concluding that Amended Article 
V.B.(a) was ambiguous, the ICA should not have conducted its own 
analysis of the evidence by weighing its credibility.  Instead, 
the ICA should have remanded the case to the probate court so 
that it could identify the facts it found to be in support of 
the modification.  See  Graham v. Wash. Univ., 58 Haw. 370, 375, 
569 P.2d 896, 900 (1977) (remanding a trust dispute to the trial 
court for consideration of extrinsic evidence to determine the 
settlor’s intent after concluding that the extrinsic evidence 
was improperly excluded by the trial court).17  The ICA’s failure 
to remand the case to the probate court contravened the basic 
and well-settled principle that fact-finding should be left to a 
fact-finder.  Pullman- Standard v.  Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 291- 92 
(1982) (“[F]actfinding is the basic responsibility of district 
courts, rather than appellate courts, and . . . the Court of 
Appeals should not have resolved in the first instance this 
                     
 17 FHB argues that Graham is inapposite because it was not 
adjudicated under the court rules that govern probate court proceedings, 
i.e., HPR Rules 19 and 20.  However, the principle that the trial court 
should consider, in the first instance , extrinsic evidence when resolving an 
ambiguity applies without regard to the procedural rules governing the 
proceeding.  Indeed, the Graham court’s holding was based on the trial 
court’s erroneous application of the parole evidence rule and did not 
reference any rules of procedure.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 23 factual dispute which had not been considered by the District 
Court.” (alterations in original )); see also  Gussin v. Gussin, 
73 Haw. 470, 489, 836 P.2d 484, 494 (1992) (holding that remand 
was required because the family court did not make any findings 
as to donative intent or any other element bearing on whether a 
legal gift had been made); 
Herrmann v. Herrmann, 138 Hawai ʻi 144, 
155-56, 378 P.3d 860, 871-72  (2016) (holding that ICA erred in 
not remanding for further fact- finding where the family court 
did not make a finding as to prejudice regarding an estoppel 
argument).  
  Furthermore, “[t]his court has repeatedly stated that 
cases will be remanded when the factual basis of the lower 
court’s ruling cannot be determined from the record.”  State v. 
Visintin, 143 Hawai ‘i 143, 157, 426 P.3d 367, 381 (2018) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) .  This rule has been applied 
whenever the trial court fails to make findings of fact that are 
necessary for the court’s ruling.  State v. Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 
331, 861 P.2d 11, 23 (1993) (“Because findings of fact are 
imperative for an adequate judicial review of a lower court ’s 
conclusions of law, we have held that cases will be remanded 
when the factual basis of the lower court ’s ruling cannot be 
determined from the record.” ( alterations and internal quotation  
marks omitted) (quoting State v. Anderson, 67 Haw. 513, 514, 693 
P.2d 1029, 1030 (1985))) ; Anderson , 67 Haw. at  514, 693 P.2d at  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 24 1030 (remanding after determining that the lower court granted 
the motion to suppress without having made any findings of 
fact).  Accordingly, when a trial court has failed to issue 
findings of fact and the appellate court is unable to discern 
the factual basis of the lower court’s ruling, we have held that 
the case should be remanded to permit the lower court or agency 
to make the requisite findings.  Visintin, 143 Hawai ‘i at 157, 
426 P.3d at 381; see also Gordon v.  Gordon, 135 Hawaiʻi 340, 351, 
350 P.3d 1008, 1019 (2015) (remanding to the trial court when 
the record was so deficient as to prohibit “meaningful appellate 
review”).   
  The Chief Justice’s Concurring and Dissenting Opinion 
(minority) contends that our opinion “ ignores” the well-settled 
rule that, “Where the [lower] court’s decision is correct, its 
conclusion will not be disturbed on the ground that it gave the 
wrong reason for its ruling. ”
  Minority at 9  (alteration in 
original) (quoting Poe v. Hawai ʻi 
Labor Rels.  Bd., 87 Hawai ‘i 
191, 197, 953 P.2d 569, 575 (1998)).  However, in this case the 
probate court gave no reason for its ruling, and it is not clear
that this rule is intended to apply when the lower court decides
a case without providing any reasoning at all.  The Poe opinion 
cited directly to two cases in support of this rule.  The first 
case was Reyes v. Kuboyama, in which this court vacated the 
lower court’s ruling granting summary judgment and recognized  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 25  
(continued . . .)  that the defendant owed a duty to plaintiff not to sell liquor 
to a minor in violation of the law.  76 Hawai ‘i 137, 139, 870 
P.2d 1281, 1283 (1994).  Poe also cited to Enos v. Pacific 
Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., in which this court stated that  
in order to facilitate a meaningful and more efficient 
appellate review, an order imposing sanctions should set 
forth findings  that describe, with reasonable specificity, 
the perceived misconduct (such as harassment or bad faith 
conduct), as well as the ap propriate sanctioning 
authority [.] 
79  452, 459, 903 P.2d 1273, 1280Hawai‘i  (1995) (emphasis added) .  
We do not interpret Poe  as permitting an appellate court to 
scour the evidentiary record of a case for any factual basis in 
the record to support a trial court’s decision.  Such a rule 
would require the appellate court to affirm a lower court’s 
decision despite overwhelming evidence in the record to the 
contrary or affirm a ruling that resulted from the trial court’s 
misapprehension of the determinative facts or the applicable 
law.  Moreover, it would also allow the exact situation that 
occurred in this case: permitting an appellate court to affirm a 
trial court’s decision based on credibility determ inations that 
were never made by a trial court .18 
                     
 18 The minority contends that we should affirm the probate court 
based upon any ground in the record because the court found that Elaine 
intended for David to receive distributions of principal.  Minority at 8.  
The probate court made no such finding.  We disagree  that the record 
impliedly establishes the court made this finding as there are no findings 
whatsoever as to Elaine’s intent or with regard to the extrinsic evidence.  
Additionally, it is unclear whether the probate court’s ruling was based on a 
finding that Elaine intended for David to receive distributions of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 26   W ithout findings of fact to review, the ICA was unable 
to determine if the probate court’s modification was based on 
clearly erroneous findings.  Th e absence of findings therefore 
precluded the ICA from being able to conduct appropriate 
appellate review.  And this  court is similarly not able to 
meaningfully review the probate court’s Order in this case.  The 
ICA thus erred in affirming the probate court’s Order and 
judgment instead of remand ing the case to the probate court with 
instructions to render findings of fact.19   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
principal or whether it found there were unforeseen or emergency 
circumstances that required a modification of Elaine’s Trust so that its 
purposes would not be frustrated.  See supra note 16.  The minutes of the 
court hearing could have referred to a focus on Elaine’s intent as to the 
purpose or purposes of the trust or her intent for David to receive 
distributions of the principal.  Since the record is susceptible to multiple 
possible bases for the probate court’s ruling, and since the court did not 
identify the facts upon which it relied, we are unable to affirm the probate 
court’s ruling, let alone on a separate basis.  Cf. Reyes, 76 Hawai ‘i at 140, 
870 P.2d at 1284.  The minority contends that the purpose of Elaine’s Trust  
and an intention for David to receive principal distributions are “one and 
the same.”  Minority at 8-9 n.5.  However, this assumes that the purpose of 
the trust had to coincide with Elaine’s intent as to whether David would 
receive a distribution of principal, which may or may not have been the case.   
 19 The minority argues that the lack of a transcript of the hearing 
on the petition, as required by Hawai ʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 10(b)(3), is more significant to this appeal than the lack of findings.  
Minority at 2- 3.  HRAP Rule 10(b)(3) (2012) provides that “[i]f the appellant 
intends to urge on appeal that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by the 
evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the appellant shall include in the 
record a transcript of all evidence  relevant to such finding o r conclusion.”  
(Emphase s added.)  The minutes indicate that only the arguments of counsel 
were presented at the hearing on the petition and do not show that any 
evidence in the form of testimony, documents, or tangible objects was 
adduced; under the circumstances of this case, the inclusion of the hearing 
transcript would not aid us in our resolution of this case.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 27 2. The Probate Rules Do Not Supersede the Settled Principle 
That An Appellate Court Will Remand a Case to the Lower 
Court When It Has Not Entered Findings  Sufficient to Permit 
Meaningful Review of the Decision . 
  The minority contends that our well -established case 
law requiring that a case be remanded when the lower court has 
failed to issue requisite findings of fact does not apply to the 
probate court.  Minority at 7.  Specifically, the minority 
argues that the probate rules permit the probate court to 
dispose of contested cases  without entering written findings.  
Minority at 7- 8.  Accordingly, the minority contends that if the 
probate court declines to make findings, as it is permitted to 
do under the probate rules, the appellate court is empowered to 
examine and weigh the extrinsic evidence in the record as the 
ICA did in this case.  Minority at 8.   
 
 First, as discussed,  it is not the function of the 
appellate court to conduct its own evidentiary analysis in a 
case on appeal.  See Goo v. Arakawa , 132 Hawai ʻi 30
4, 317, 321 
P.3d 655, 668 (2014).  Determining contested facts is for the 
trial courts,  not courts  of appeal.  Sprint/United Mgmt. Co. v. 
Mendelsohn, 552 U.S. 379, 383- 84 (2008).  Whether the probate 
court rules expressly require findings or whether the probate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 28 court declines to make findings does not redefine an appellate 
court’s 
reviewing authority.20 
  The minority’s analysis is also negated by the 
structure of the Hawai i Probate rules.  HPR Rule 20 (2010) 
provides that when a case is contested
 the probate court must, 
through a written order, either assign the case to the circuit 
court or retain it.21  HPR Rule 20(a).22  If the probate court 
assigns the case to the circuit court, “[t]he Hawaiʻi Rules of 
                     
 20 The minority appears to contend that the Cooks have waived any 
challenge to the ICA conducting its own analysis of the extrinsic evidence 
and weighing its credibility.  Minority at 3-5.  However, the Cooks 
challenged the ICA’s improper weighing of the extrinsic evidence at the 
earliest possible time that such a challenge could  have been raised--in their 
application for a writ of certiorari--b ecause the probate court had not 
referenced any extrinsic evidence in its O rder. Thus, the nature of such 
reliance, if any, could not have previously been  discerned.  Accordingly, the 
issue is not waived. 
  The minority also suggests that the ICA’s consideration and 
weighing of extrinsic evidence was appropriate because “ [p]etitioner s invited 
it to do so.”  Minority at 1
0.  It is incorrect to assert that the Cooks 
“invited” the ICA to weigh the extrinsic evidence.  The Cooks specifically 
argued that consideration of the extrinsic evidence would be improper under 
Hawai‘i law, but, in the event that the ICA was inclined to consider it, the 
Cooks argued that the extrinsic evidence supported their contention that 
Elaine did not intend for David to receive  distributions of principal.  
Moreover, a party’s argument as to the credibility or weight of extrinsic 
evidence simply does not negate the well -settled rule that an appellate court 
should remand a case to the lower court when the absence of findings prevents 
meaningful appellate review.  Gussin, 73 Haw. at 489, 836 P.2d at 494.  
 
 21 The Cooks filed an objection to FHB’s petition challenging FHB’s 
contention that Elaine’s Trust was ambiguous as to the distribution of the 
principal or, in the alternative, arguing that the ambiguity should be 
resolved in their favor.  The opposed petition therefore became a contested 
matter.  HPR Rule 19 (“A contested matter is any one in which an objection 
has been filed.”).   
 22 HPR Rule 20(a) provides as follows:  
The court by written order may retain a contested matter on 
the regular probate calendar or may assign the contested 
matter to the civil trials calendar of the circuit court.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 29 Civil Procedure [(HRCP)] and the Rules of the Circuit Courts 
will apply to all contested matters assigned to the civil trials 
calendar.”  HPR Rule 20(c).23  Crucially, HRCP Rule 52 (2000) 
provides that “[i]n all actions tried upon the facts without a 
jury . . . the court 
shall find the facts specially .”  HRCP Rule 
52(a) (emphasis added).24  Thus, under HPR Rule 20(c), the 
circuit court would make findings of fact on the contested 
                     
 23 HPR Rule 20(c) provides as follows:  
The Hawai ʻi Rules of Civil Procedure and the Rules of the 
Circuit Courts will apply to all contested matters assigned 
to the civil trials calendar.  However, no right to jury 
trial shall be created by assignment to the civil trials 
calendar where such a right does not exist in the 
underlying proceeding.  Unless otherwise ordered by the 
court, when a matter is assigned to the civil trials 
calendar, then for all procedural purposes, the party 
objecting to the petition shall be considered the 
plaintiff, the objection is to be treated as a complaint, 
and the complaint shall be deemed to have been filed on the 
date of the assignment to the civil trials calendar.  
 24 HRCP Rule 52 provides in pertinent part as follows:  
(a)  Effect.  In all actions tried upon the facts without a 
jury or with an advisory jury, the court shall find the 
facts specially and state separately its conclusions of law 
thereon, and judgment shall be entered pursuant to Rule 58; 
and in granting or refusing interlocutory injunctions the 
court shall similarly set forth the findings of fact and 
conclusions of law which constitute the grounds of its 
action.  Requests for findings are not necessary for 
purposes of review.  Findings of fact shall not be set 
aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be 
given to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the 
credibility of the witnesses.  The findings of a master, to 
the extent that the court adopts them, shall be considered 
as the findings of the  court.  If an opinion or memorandum 
of decision is filed, it will be sufficient if the findings 
of fact and conclusions of law appear therein.  Findings of 
fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on decisions of 
motions under Rules 12 or 56 or any other motion except as 
provided in subdivisions (b) and (c) of this rule.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 30 matter under HRCP Rule 52.  Alternatively, if the probate court 
retains the case, the probate court “in the order of assignment 
may, at the request of the parties, designate and order that any 
one or more of the Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure and/or the 
Rules of the Circuit
 Courts shall be applicable in such matter.”  
HPR Rule 20(d).25  Although the probate court is not obligated to 
adopt any and all rules that the parties request, it must 
exercise its discretion to do so “with regard to what is right 
and equitable under the circumstances and the law.”  Booker v. 
Midpac Lumber Co., 65 Haw. 166, 172, 649 P.2d 376, 380 (1982) 
(quoting Langnes v. Green, 282 U.S. 531, 541 (1931)). 
  Thus, i n order for a contested case to be resolved 
without findings of fact, the parties would have to agree to 
allow the probate court to resolve their contested matter 
without explaining its reasons for its decision , or 
alternatively, the probate court would have to refuse a party’s 
request to adopt a rule requiring the court to make findings in 
its ruling.  In a contested case, particularly where the outcome 
may depend on factual determinations about the credibility of 
                     
 25 HPR Rule 20(d) provides as follows:  
Whenever the court retains jurisdiction of a contested 
matter as a probate proceeding, the court in the order of 
assignment may, at the request of the parties, designate 
and order that any one or more of the Hawai ‘i Rules of Civil 
Procedure and/or the Rules of the Circuit Courts shall be 
applicable in such matter.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 31  
(continued . . .)  extrinsic evidence, such a refusal would likely be inequitable 
and an abuse of discretion.  Additionally, a contested case that 
is adjudicated without findings of fact may occur when the 
probate rules are not followed.  
  
Here the case was clearly contested, yet the probate 
court did not issue an order retaining the case in contravention 
of HPR Rule 20(a).  Thus, the parties 
were not provided an 
opportunity under HPR Rule 20(d) to request that the probate 
court adopt HRCP Rule 52 and render  findings of fact  at the time 
an order of retention should have been issued.  Additionally, 
the record does not contain any other order indicating that the 
probate court intended to decide the case without findings,  nor 
does the record contain a waiver from any of the parties of 
their right to request findings as a result 
of the probate 
court’s ret ention of the case.26   
                     
 26 The minority contends that the “parties must request that 
specific rules apply before the probate court issues a retention order.”  
Minority at 7 n.4.  The minority inverts the process.  As the commentary to 
HPR Rule 20(a) explains, “By requiring a written order of assignment . . . a 
clear record is created, and the court then  has the opportunity to decide 
what procedures will be used if the contested matter is retained. (See [HPR] 
Rule [20](d). . . .”  HPR Rule 20(a) cmt. (emphasis added).  
  Similarly, this court has observed in a probate proceeding where 
no retention order was entered that “ [t]he prerequisites of HPR Rule 20(d)  
apparently were not satisfied in this case in that there is no order of 
assignment in which the court ‘may, at the request of the parties designate 
and order that any one or more of the Hawai ‘i Rules of Civil Procedure and/or 
the Rules of the Circuit Courts shall be applicable in such matter.’”  In re 
Estate of Campbell, 106 Hawaii 453, 460 n.16, 106 P.3d 1096, 1103 n.16 (2005)  
(emphasis added) (citing HPR Rule 20(d)).  As in Campbell, because an order 
of retention was never issued by the probate court in this case, the parties 
were not properly afforded the opportunity to request the procedures that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 32   T his court has repeatedly emphasized the critical 
importance of factual findings and the many reasons they should 
be made when possible
.  First, findings of fact “facilitate a 
meaningful and more efficient a ppellate review.”  Bank of Hawaii  
v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai ‘i 372, 390, 984 P.2d 1198, 1216 (1999).  
Adequate findings are crucial to meaningful appellate review 
because it allows the appellate court to ascertain the trial 
court’s reasoning and determine whether it was consistent with 
applicable law.  Enos, 79 Hawai‘ i at 459, 903 P.2d at  1280 
(stating that an order imposing sanctions should describe with 
reasonable specificity the perceived misconduct and the 
appropriate sanctioning authority to facilitate meaningful and 
efficient appellate review).   
  Second , findings “assure both the litigants and the 
court that the decision . . . was the result of reasoned 
consideration.”  Trs. of Estate of Bishop v. Au, No. SCWC-16 -
0000235, at 28, 2020 WL 1150157, at * 9–10 (Haw. Mar. 10, 2020) 
(citing Enos, 79 Hawai ‘i at 459, 903 P.2d at 1280)
.  By 
specifically articulating its findings, the trial court is 
encouraged to take care in determining the facts in dispute.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
would be employed by the court, as specifically provided by HPR Rule 20(d), 
and no such procedures were ever established in a written order.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 33 Richards v. Kailua Auto Mach. Serv., 10 Haw. App. 613, 620- 21, 
880 P.2d 1233, 1237 (1994) (“[T]he requirement that findings of 
fact be made is intended to evoke care on the part of the trial 
judge in ascertaining the facts.” (citing 9 C. Wright & A. 
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 2571, at 679-80 
(1971))) . 
  Third, without findings of fact, the appellate court 
is compelled to review the entire record to identify clear 
error, expending valuable time and effort that could easily be 
avoided through the making of findings, which is a 
proportionally less burden some task on the lower court.  
Similarly, the lack of findings  of fact impairs a litigant’s 
ability to meaningfully advocate  on appeal because the litigant 
must speculate as to the basis for the trial court’s rulings.  
See Mackler v. Bd. of Educ., 108 A.2d 854, 858 (N.J. 1954) 
(stating that there are practical reasons for making findings of 
fact, including, to help parties plan their cases for rehearing 
and for judicial review).   Findings of fact relieve both the 
parties and the appellate courts from the unnecessary burden of 
exhaustively combing the record in an attempt to find any fact 
that could hypothetically justify the lower  court’s decision.    
  Based on these reasons, we have held  that findings are 
necessary or strongly encouraged in a variety of proceedings, 
even when they are not required by rule or statute.  Enos, 79 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 34 Hawai‘i at 459, 903 P.2d at  1280 (stating that a court should 
make findings when ordering sanctions); Au, No. SCWC -16-0000235, 
at 29 (“[W]e hold that a court imposing a vexatious litigant 
order under HRS chapter 634J is required to make findings[.]”).   
This court has also required findings for orders granting 
sanctions for discovery violations or
 failing to review a court 
rule, and we have made findings a near requirement when a trial 
court grants an involuntary dismissal of a complaint with 
prejudice.  Fujimoto v. Au, 95 Hawai ‘i 116, 153, 19 P.3d 699, 736 
(2001) (holding that the circuit court’s sanction ing of the 
plaintiffs for failure to review a court rule before filing the 
complaint was an abuse of discretion “[a]bsent  a particularized 
finding of bad faith” ); Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri 
Prods., 86 Hawai ‘i 214, 258 , 948 P.2d 1055, 1099  (1997) 
(affirming the circuit court’s award of sanctions for abusive 
litigation practices because the sanction was adequately 
supported by an express finding of bad faith); In re Blaisdell, 
125 Hawai‘ i 44, 49, 252 P.3d 63, 68 (2011) (stating that before 
dismissing a case with prejudice, “the careful exercise of 
judicial discretion requires that a [trial] court consider less 
severe sanctions and explain, where not obvious, their 
inadequacy for promoting the interests of justice. ” (alteration 
in original) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Schilling v. Walworth 
Cty. Park & Planning Comm ’n, 805 F.2d 272, 275 (7th Cir. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 35 1986))).  Nonetheless, the minority asserts that probate courts 
are uniquely empowered to dispose of contested matters without 
articulating the factual basis of their disposition s.  Minority 
at 7-8. 
  The minority relies on a combination of the canons of 
interpretation known as in pari materia and expressio unius est 
exclusio alterius to conclude that the absence of an express 
requirement that findings be made in the probate rules and its 
presence in the HRCP and the Hawai ‘i F
amily Court Rules evidences 
a specific intent to except probate courts from any requirement 
that findings of fact be made in contested matters.  Minority at 
7-8.  First, the structure of the probate court rules, in 
automatically implementing the HRCP when a contested case is 
assigned to the circuit court and allowing the parties to 
request that findings be made when a probate court retains the 
contested case, essentially renders it unnecessary for the 
probate rules to have an express mandate that the probate court 
render findings of fact in contested cases.   As stated, a 
probate court would likely abuse its discretion in not rendering  
findings when requested by a party in a contested case, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 36 particularly when the disposition turns on the credibility of 
extrinsic evidence, which is an inherently factual inquiry.27   
  Additionally, t he canon of in pari materia  is only 
applicable if the statutes or rules being compared relate to the 
same subject matter, which is not the case here.  Int ’l Sav. & 
Loan Ass’n, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 Hawai‘ i 197, 200, 921 P.2d 117, 120 
(1996) (stating that statutes concerning the same subject matter 
should be construed with reference to each other); State v. 
Mata, 71 Haw. 319, 330, 789 P.2d 1122, 1128 (1990) (“HRS Chapter 
281 regulates the sale of liquor and liquor establishments.  HRS 
Chapter 291 regulates traffic violations.  The chapters serve 
different purposes and are not in pari materia.”).  Here, the 
probate rules, family court rules, and the rules of civil 
procedure do not relate to the same subject matter. 
  Further , this court has stated that these canons serve 
“only as an aid” to interpretation and “[t]he inclusion of a 
specific matter in a statute implies the exclusion of another 
‘only where in the natural association of ideas the contrast 
between a specific subject matter which is expressed and one 
which is not mentioned leads to an inference that the latter was 
                     
 27 The minority incorrectly asserts that we conclude that the 
structure of the probate rules “always” requires findings of facts, making a 
specific rule unnecessary in this case.  Minority at 7 n.4.  We do not  make 
this conclusion.  Instead, we conclude that the failure of the probate court 
to make findings in a dispositive ruling may require an appellate court to 
remand the case for the rendering of findings to permit a meaningful review 
of the probate court’s decision.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 37 not intended to be included within the statute .’”  Wiig, 82 
Hawai‘i at 201, 921 P.2d at 121 (emphases added) (quoting 82 
C.J.S. Statutes  § 333, at 670 (1953)).  Here, the differences 
between the probate rules, the rules of civil procedure, and the 
family court rules do not naturally lead to the inference that 
probate courts are specially excepted from having to make 
findings of fact in contested matters.  This is particularly 
true because when the probate court assigns the case to the 
civil trial calendar, the HRCP apply, and when the probate court 
retains the case, the parties are given the right to request 
findings, thus essentially providing the parties with the means 
to obtain the underlying basis for the court’s ruling  
pursuant 
to HPR Rule 20(a), (c), and (d) and HRCP Rule 52.  This further 
militates against any  inference of a specific intent to 
specially except the probate courts from making findings in 
contested cases that depend on factual determinations, as any 
such intent is negated by the structure of the rules themselves.  
Hence, when acting in accordance with the Hawai ʻi Probate Rules, 
a probate court should make findings of fact in a contested case 
such as this, even though there is not an explicit requirement 
to do so, except when the court’s refusal may be justified as a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 38 sound exercise of its discretion or when the parties agree to a 
resolution without an articulation of its basis.28 
  Thus, w hile the probate rules do not specifically 
require findings in all contested cases retained by the probate 
court, their omission in a dispositional ruling may require an 
appellate court to remand the case for the 
making of findings to 
enable the appellate court to meaningfully review the probate 
court’s decision.  In this case , the complete absence of 
findings by the probate court precludes us from being able to 
determine which facts the court relied upon and  which underlay 
the court’s modification of Elaine’s Trust.  Without this 
information, we are unable to determine if the probate court’s 
modification was based on clearly erroneous findings or whether 
alternative grounds would support affirmance.29  See Visintin, 
143 Hawai‘ i at 157, 426 P.3d at 381; Wong v. Cayetano, 111 
                     
 28 The minority contends that the instant case is an example of when 
a probate court is permitted to dispose of a contested matter without making 
findings.   Minority at 7 n.4.  However, the probate court in this case did 
not comply with the probate rules when it failed to issue an order retaining 
the case and, because there was no order of assignment, failed to 
specifically afford the parties the ability to request that the Hawai ‘i Rules 
of Civil Procedure and/or the Rules of the Circuit Courts be applicable in 
the contested matter.  This failure does not provide a legal basis to excuse 
the probate court from having to make findings of fact that are sufficient to 
enable the appellate court to meaningfully review the probate court’s 
decision.   
 
 29 The minority also contends that the issue of the probate court’s 
failure to make findings was “not preserved for review.”   Minority at 5.  W e 
do not consider whether the probate court’s de cision not to enter findings 
was erroneous.  Contra  Minority at 5.  We hold only that under the 
circumstances of this case, the lack of findings precludes us from conducting  
meaningful appellate review.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 39 Hawai‘i 462, 479, 143 P.3d 1,  18 (2006).  Accordingly , we are 
unable to conduct an appropriate appellate review and must 
remand the case to the probate  court.30 
B. The Cooks A re Entitled to Accounts Information from the 
Trustee of Elaine’s Trust . 
  When construing a testamentary trust, this court is 
guided by principles relating to the interpretation of trusts as 
well as those relating to the interpretation of wills.  Tr. 
Created Under the Will of Damon (Trust of Damon I), 76 Hawai ʻi 
120, 124, 869 P.2d 1339, 1343 (1994).  “A fundamental rule when 
construing trusts is that the intention of the settlor as 
expressed in a trust instrument shall prevail unless 
inconsistent with some positive rule of law.”  In re Lock 
Revocable Living Tr. (In re Lock),  109 Hawai ʻi 146, 151- 52, 123 
P.3d 1241, 1246-47 (2005)  (quoting Trust of Damon I, 76 Hawaiʻi 
at 124, 869 P.2d at 1343); In re Robinson Tr. , 110 Hawaiʻi 181, 
184, 130 P.3d 1046, 1049 (2006).  Positive law “typically 
consists of enacted law-- the codes, statutes, and regulations 
                     
 30 Because the probate court judge who initially presided over this 
case is unavailable to enter findings of fact, we vacate that portion of the 
ICA’s judgment affirming the probate court’s Order modif ying Elaine’s Trust 
to distribute principal to David and remand the case to the probate court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  Cf. Hana Ranch, Inc. v. 
Kanakaole, 66 Haw. 643, 649 -650, 672 P.2d 550, 554 (1983) (noting that under 
HRCP Rule 63, “a successor trial judge cannot enter findings of fact and 
conclusions of law in a case which was tried before his predecessor .”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 40 that are applied and enforced in courts.”  Positive Law, Black’s 
Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019).31   
  Here, Article XIV of Elaine’s Trust provides that the 
trustee “shall deliver regular accounts to . . . all adult 
beneficiaries then entitled to receive income or principal of 
the trust estate.” (emphasis added).  Elaine’s intention as 
expressed in Article XIV wa s to limit who received  “regular 
accounts” to “then entitled” beneficiaries .  See In re Lock , 109 
Hawaiʻi at 151-52, 123 P.3d at  1246-47.  Under Elaine’s Trust, 
David is the only beneficiary “then entitled” to receive regular 
accounts.  T he Cooks, by their own admission, are contingent 
beneficiary remainders.  See  In re Estate of Campbell, 46 Haw. 
475, 483 n.6, 382 P.2d 920, 943 n.6 (1963) (“In this opinion the 
term ‘
contingent beneficiaries ’ is used to describe those who 
are not presently income takers but who may become income takers 
and may also share in the distribution of the corpus upon the 
termination of the trust[.] ”).  Thus, under the terms of 
Elaine’s Trust, the Cooks are not now entitled to accounts 
information.  This provision prevails unless there is positive 
law that overrides Elaine’s intent.  In re Lock , 109 Hawaiʻi at 
151-52, 123 P.3d at 1246-47.   
                     
 31 For the purposes of this opinion, “positive rule of law” is 
considered to be synonymous with “positive law,” as defined by Black’s Law 
Dictionary.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 41   When construing statutes, “the fundamental starting 
point for statutory interpretation is the language of the 
statute itself.”  Stout v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps. Ret. Sys., 
140 Hawaiʻ i 177, 185, 398 P.3d 766, 774  (2017) (quoting Citizens 
Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals, 114 Hawaiʻi 184, 
193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)) .  HRS § 560:7- 303 requires a 
trustee to “keep the beneficiaries of the trust reasonably 
informed of the trust and its administration.”  Hawaiʻi law is 
clear that a trust benefici ary is any person with a “future 
interest, vested or contingent .”  HRS § 560:1 -201 (2006) 
(emphasis added).32  This court  has previously held that HRS 
§ 560:7-303 imposes three separate duties on the trustee.  Trust  
Created Under the Will of  Damon (Trust of Damon II) , 140 Hawaiʻi 
56, 65, 398 P.3d 645, 654 (2017).  “The first is an affirmative 
duty to ‘keep the beneficiaries  . . . reasonably informed of the 
trust and its administration.’  The second and third duties set 
forth in parts (2) and (3), respectivel y, spring to life ‘upon 
reasonable request’ of a beneficiary.”33  Id. at 65-66, 398 P.3d 
at 654-5 5 (footnote omitted).  Once information is requested, 
                     
 32 HRS § 560:1 -201 provides in pertinent part as follows:  
“Beneficiary”, as it relates to a trust beneficiary, 
includes a person who has any present or future interest, 
vested or contingent, and also includes the owner of an 
interest by assignment or other transfer[.]  
 33 See note 8, supra , for HRS § 560:7 -303 subsections (2) and (3).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 42 the trustee, in lieu of providing copies of documents, has 
discretion to provide a “sufficient or adequate  opportunity to 
review and inspect these requested documents.”  Id. at 66 n.19, 
398 P.3d at 655 n.19.  We have noted that “the probate court 
retains broad discretion to consider all the circumstances of a 
case,” and, unless ordered by a court, a trustee ne ed not 
include “sensitive personal information about other 
beneficiaries.”  Id. at 68 n n.21, 22, 398 P.3d at 657 nn .21, 22.  
Thus, this court has recognized that HRS § 560:7-303 imposes a 
duty upon a trustee to provide trust account information to 
beneficiaries within reasonable limitations.  Following the 
failure of FHB to provide trust account information regarding 
Elaine’s Trust, the Cooks, as contingent remainder beneficiaries 
under HRS § 560:7-303, were entitled upon request to receive 
such information within reasonable limits determined by the 
probate court.   
  Instead of evaluating the reasonableness of the 
request, the probate court in its Order determined that the 
statute imposed no duty on FHB to provide trust and accounts 
information: 
The Trustee  is instructed that the Trustee is not required 
to provide financial information relating to the Trust, the 
Subtrust, and the Clarence Raymond Short Revocable Living 
Trust Agreement dated July 17, 1984, as amended, to the 
contingent remainder beneficiaries  of the Trust and the 
Subtrust.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 43 Without referencing this court’s opinion in Trust of Damon II, 
the ICA affirmed the probate court, citing Restatement (Third) 
of Trusts § 82 cmts . a(2) and (d)  (Am. Law Inst. 2007),34 and it 
held that a trust may alter the amount of information a trustee 
must give to the beneficiary, even if a statute requires the 
providing of that information, so long as the statute does not 
prohibit such an alteration.  In effect, under the ICA’s 
reading, HRS § 560:7-303 can be overridden by the language of 
the trust document, notwithstanding the mandatory language of 
subsections (2) and (3) because the statute does not prohibit 
modification of the amount of information a trustee must give to 
the beneficiaries.  While it is true that nothing in the 
language of HRS § 560:7- 303 prohibits modifying the terms of a 
trust regarding whether a trustee must provide account 
                     
 34 Commentary to Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 82 provides in 
relevant part: 
(a)(2) . . . . The terms of a trust may alter the amount of 
information a trustee must give to the beneficiaries under 
this Section and also the circumstances and frequency with 
which, and persons to whom, it must be given.  
. . . .  
(d) . . . .  Disclosure is fundamental to sound 
administration of the trust, and to both the trustee’s 
performance and the beneficiarie s’ monitoring of associated 
fiduciary obligations.  Therefore, the trustee's duty to 
provide the type of information described in this Comment 
is subject to modification only by clear language in the 
terms of the trust and within limits described in 
Commen
t a(2). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 44 information to the beneficiaries, there is similarly nothing in 
the statute’s language that sugge sts providing such information 
is optional or non- mandatory.  See Territory v. Fasi, 40 Haw. 
478, 480 (Haw. Terr. 1954) (finding that the use of the verb 
“shall” generally indicates a mandatory provision); Kinkaid v. 
Bd. of Review, 106 Hawai ʻi 318, 323, 104 P.3d 905, 910 (2004) 
(reading “entitled” to be similar to “entitlement” which is a 
“[r]ight to benefits . .  . which may not be abridged”  
(alterations in original)) ; see also HRS § 560:7-303.  “In any 
event, a trust provision relieving the trustee of the duty to 
keep formal accounts does not abrogate the statutory duty to 
account to the beneficiaries in the probate court.”35  In re 
Childress Tr., 486 N.W.2d 141, 145 (Mich. Ct. App. 1992) (citing 
Raak v. Raak, 428 N.W.2d 778 (Mich. Ct. App. 198 8)); see also 
Hollenbeck v. Hanna, 802 S.W.2d 412 , 414-15 (Tex. App. 1991) 
(rejecting an attempt by the settlor to eliminate accounts to 
any trust beneficiaries in the trust document and remanding to 
                     
 35 The ICA cited In re McGuire Marital Trust, 660 N.W.2d 308 (Wis. 
Ct. App. 2003), for the proposition that contingent remainder beneficiaries 
were not entitled to trust and accounts information when the trust only 
required accounts information be given to then -entitled beneficiaries.  
However, McGuire is inapposite.  The McGuire  court specifically noted that 
“Wisconsin law is silent as to whether a settlor of an inter vivos  trust can 
give one class of beneficiaries sole authority to receive and approve the 
trust accounting.”  660 N.W.2d at 314.  Hawai ʻi law is not silent regarding 
such matters.  HRS § 560:7 -703 clearly establishes that a beneficiary, 
including a contingent beneficiary, is entitled to request trust and accounts 
information.  HRS § 560:7- 303(2), (3).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 45  
(continued . . .)  lower court to determine the extent of accounts owed under the 
statute). 
  FHB and David also assert, and the ICA agreed, that 
HRS § 560:7-201(b) permits a settlor to amend a trust document 
to limit who can receive accounts information.  See  generally 
HRS § 560:7-201 (2006).36  FHB argues that this statute grants a 
                     
 36 HRS § 560:7 -201 provides as follows:  
(a) The court has jurisdiction of proceedings initiated by 
trustees and interested persons concerning the internal 
affairs of trusts.   Proceedings which may be maintained 
under this section are those concerning the administration 
and distribution of trusts, the declaration of rights and 
the determination of other matters involving trustees and 
beneficiaries of trusts.   These include, but are not 
limited to, proceedings to:  
(1) Appoint or remove a  trustee;  
(2) Review trustees’ fees and to review and settle 
interim or final accounts;  
(3) Ascertain beneficiaries, to determine any 
question arising in the administration or 
distribution of any trust including questions of 
construction of trust instruments, to instruct 
trustees, and to determine the existence or 
nonexistence of any immunity, power, privilege, duty 
or right; and  
(4) Release registration of a trust.  
(b) Neither registration of a trust nor a proceeding under 
this section result in continuing supervisory proceedings.  
The management and distribution of a trust estate, 
submission of accounts and reports to beneficiaries, 
payment of trustees’ fees and other obligations of a trust, 
acceptance and change of trusteeship, and other aspects of 
the administration of a trust shall proceed expeditiously 
consistent with the terms of the trust, free of judicial 
intervention and without order, approval or other action of 
any court, subject to the jurisdiction of the court as 
invoked by interested persons or as otherwise exercised 
pursuant to law.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 46 settlor broad discretion to control the administration of the 
trust and in effect codifies Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 82 
cmt. a(2).  This assertion is unmoored from the actual text of 
the statute.  HRS § 560:7-201(b) is a jurisdictional statute 
that allows a trust to be administered without court 
supervision, while subsection (a)  establishes  the type of 
proceedings that an interested person can initiate before the 
court.  HRS § 560:7- 201(a).  This statute cannot be read as a 
broad grant for a settlor to ignore positive law.  In re Lock, 
109 Hawaiʻ i at 151- 52, 123 P.3d at 1246- 47.37  And even assuming 
that HRS § 560:7-201(b) and HRS § 560:7-303 could be read as 
conflicting, a specific statute (HRS § 560:7-303) trumps a 
general statute (HRS § 560:7
-201(b)).  Richardson v. City & Cty. 
of Honolulu, 76 Hawai ʻi 46, 55, 868 P.2d 1193, 1202 (1994).   
  Thus, HRS § 560:7- 303 is positive law that cannot be 
modified by the language of a trust.  See In re Lock, 109 Hawai ʻi  
at 151-52, 123 P.3d at 1246-47.  Accordingly, the limitation on 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
(Emphases added.)  
 37 FHB cites Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 215 -16, 685 P.2d 794, 
797 (1984), and Barnett v. State, 91 Hawaiʻ i 20, 31, 979 P.2d 1046, 1057 
(1999), for the proposition that courts must give effect to all parts of a 
statute and that laws on the same subject matter should be read with 
reference to one another.  However, HRS § 560:7 -201(b) merely allows a trust 
to be administered without court interference consistent with the settlor’s 
intent.  It does not permit the settlor to contravene Hawai ʻi law that is part 
of the same HRS chapter.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 47 the dissemination of trust and accounts information to “then 
entitled beneficiaries” in Article XIV of Elaine’s Trust is an 
impermissible infringement on  HRS § 560:7-303.   
  The Cooks are currently  contingent beneficiaries 
because their interest is contingent on David passing without 
issue.  While their interest may be divested if a greater claim 
arises, this does not mean that the Cooks are not currently 
reasonably entitled to accounts information regarding Elaine’s 
Trust as provided by HRS § 560:1 -201.  The exact scope of what 
trust and accounts information regarding Elaine’s Trust they are 
entitled to is a determination to be made by the probate court 
based on a reasonable request standard.  See  HRS § 560:7- 201 
(“[S]ubmission of accounts and reports to beneficiaries . . . 
[is] subject to the jurisdiction of the court as invoked by 
interested persons or as otherwise exercised pursuant to law.”); 
see also T rust of Damon II, 140 Hawai ʻi at 68, 398 
P.3d at 657 
(citing HRS § 560:7- 303 to find a reasonable request standard).   
  Thus, the ICA erred in holding that the terms of 
Elaine’s Trust can supersede HRS § 560:7 -303 to limit which 
beneficiaries are entitled to trust and accounts information 
from the trustee.  Further,  the probate court also erred in 
concluding that FHB is not required to provide financial 
information regarding Elaine’s Trust to the contingent 
beneficiaries.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 48 IV. CONCLUSION  
  Accordingly, the ICA’s August 1, 2019 Judgment on 
Appeal is vacated, except as to its affirmance of the denial of 
account information to the Cooks from Clarence’ s Trust.  The 
probate court’s judgment and Order are also vacated except as to 
its ruling regarding providing account information from 
Clarence’s trust.  The case is remanded to the probate court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
 Thomas E. Bush 
for petitioners 
 
Rosemarie S.J. Sam, Edmund K. 
Saffery, Deirdre Marie-Iha  
(Lynda L. Arakawa with them on
the brief)  
for respondent  
First Hawaiian Bank  
 
Rhonda L. Griswold, Calvert G. 
Chipchase, Summer G. Shelverton
(Stacy K. Takekawa with them on
the brief) 
for respondent David Short  
 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
  
