                                                                 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0001074 07-AUG-2014 
01:55 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
SANDRA C.J. BALOGH, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
DONALD RAYMOND BALOGH, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee.
 
                                                                
SCWC-11-0001074
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-11-0001074; FC-D NO. 10-1-0149)
 
AUGUST 7, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, MCKENNA, JJ., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE CHAN, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED,
WITH POLLACK, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
We consider whether various documents signed by a
 
husband and wife should control the division and distribution of
 
their marital partnership property upon divorce. 
Donald Raymond
 
1
Balogh (Ray) and Sandra C.J. Balogh (Sandra)  married in New
1
 Because both parties in this case share the same surname, we refer
 
to them by their first names, i.e., Ray and Sandra.  
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Jersey in 1981. After moving to Oahu in 2003, the couple began
 
constructing a home on a vacant lot they had purchased (Kahalakua
 property or the property). The parties held title to the
 property as tenants by the entirety. 
On October 6, 2008, following a period of tension
 
between Ray and Sandra, they each signed a handwritten document
 stating that if they separated, Sandra would receive seventy-five
 percent of the profit from the sale of the property, the contents
 of their home (excluding Ray’s tools and clothes), and all of
 their vehicles. A few weeks later, on October 24, 2008, the
 parties signed a typewritten Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
 stating that upon separation or divorce, Sandra would receive
 seventy-five percent of the proceeds from the sale of the
 property, the contents of their home (excluding Ray’s tools and
 building equipment), all of their vehicles, and $100,000 from Ray
 in lieu of alimony and court proceedings. 
After a period of continued tension between Ray and
 
Sandra, Ray agreed to move out of the couple’s home on August 15,
 2009. On September 1, 2009, Ray signed a quitclaim deed
 transferring his entire interest in the property to Sandra for
 ten dollars and “other valuable consideration.” 
In January 2010, Sandra filed a complaint for divorce
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit. Notwithstanding the
 quitclaim deed and two agreements, the family court awarded Ray
 and Sandra each a one-half interest in the property, which it
 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
valued at $1.6 million at the time of divorce.2 The family court
 
concluded that it would be unconscionable to enforce the
 
quitclaim deed and that all three agreements were unenforceable
 because Ray acted under duress and coercion when he signed them. 
Sandra appealed, and the Intermediate Court of Appeals
 
vacated in part the family court’s divorce decree and its
 findings of fact and conclusions of law, and remanded for further
 proceedings. The ICA concluded that both the quitclaim deed and
 MOU were enforceable. The ICA explained that the quitclaim deed
 was not unconscionable and that Ray executed both the deed and
 the MOU voluntarily. The ICA also concluded that the deed
 superseded the MOU only to the extent it modified the disposition
 of the Kahalakua property, and therefore remanded to the family
 court to determine whether Ray owed Sandra an additional $100,000
 pursuant to the MOU.
 
In his application, Ray presents two questions: 
(1) whether the ICA erred in vacating the family court’s decision
 that the postmarital agreements and the quitclaim deed were
 unenforceable because they were unconscionable; and (2) whether
 the ICA erred in vacating the family court’s decision that the
 postmarital agreements and quitclaim deed were unenforceable
 because they were entered into involuntarily. 
As a threshold matter, we hold that the quitclaim deed
 
2
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
 
-3­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
does not constitute a separation agreement that alters the
 
parties’ rights to an equitable division of their marital
 partnership property, such that Sandra should receive the entire
 value of the Kahalakua property. The ICA therefore erred in
 concluding that the quitclaim deed was an enforceable separation
 agreement.
 
Because the quitclaim deed did not affect the
 
disposition of the couple’s marital partnership property upon
 divorce, we must also consider whether the MOU is enforceable. 
We hold that the MOU is enforceable because it is not
 unconscionable and was entered into voluntarily. Because we
 conclude that the MOU is enforceable, we do not consider the
 October 6, 2008 handwritten agreement. The ICA’s judgment is
 therefore vacated, the family court’s divorce decree and findings
 of fact and conclusions of law are vacated in part, and we remand
 this case to the family court for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion. 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal and the family court’s findings of fact and
 conclusions of law.
3
 
3
 On appeal, Sandra challenged only two of the family court’s
 
factual findings.  Specifically, Sandra challenged finding of fact 48 to the
extent it stated that “Sandra told Ray he should leave,” and finding of fact
53, which stated the following: “After discussions with Sandra, Ray thought
the Quitclaim deed would protect the home from potential lawsuits, but title
would be transferred back to joint ownership when thing[s] returned to
(continued...)
 
-4­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A. Factual background
 
Ray and Sandra married in 1981 in New Jersey. At the
 
time of the marriage, Sandra owned two properties in Monmouth
 
County, New Jersey. Sandra sold the first property in 1982 for
 $89,000. The second property was a vacant lot which Sandra had
 purchased for $28,750 (Wall Township property). At the time of
 the marriage, Ray owned one property which he sold shortly
 thereafter for $40,000. According to Ray, after he and Sandra
 married, they built a home on the Wall Township property. 
Ray and Sandra are both well educated. Ray has a
 
bachelor of science and a master’s degree in electrical
 engineering. Sandra has a bachelor of science in biological
 science and a master’s degree in education and student personal
 services. While living in New Jersey, Ray worked as a contractor
 for various companies. Before retiring in 2002, Sandra worked as
 a high school guidance counselor for more than twenty-five years. 
While Ray and Sandra were living in New Jersey, they 
regularly vacationed in Hawai' i. In 2002, Ray and Sandra 
purchased the Kahalakua property, which was a vacant lot on O' ahu 
on Kahalakua Street, for $280,000. Ray and Sandra took out a home-equity loan on the Wall Township property to pay for the 
3(...continued)
norma
l.”  All of the family court’s remaining findings of fact are binding on
this court.  See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai 'i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004)
(“[F]indings of fact that are not challenged on appeal are binding on the
appellate court.” (quotation marks, ellipsis, and citation omitted)).
 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kahalakua property. Ray and Sandra held title to the Kahalakua
 
property as tenants by the entirety. 
In 2003, Ray and Sandra decided to move to Hawai' i so 
that Sandra could care for her elderly parents. The couple sold the Wall Township property for $545,000. 
Soon after arriving in Hawai' i, Ray and Sandra hired a 
contractor to build a home on the Kahalakua property for $595,000. The couple used the proceeds from the sale of the Wall Township property, as well as approximately $350,000 Ray had inherited and money from their joint savings, to help pay for the Kahalakua property and the construction of the home on the property. 
Construction on the property began in 2004 and the home
 
was supposed to be completed within two years. There were
 problems with the construction process from the start. The
 builder showed up only sporadically and eventually walked off the
 project without completing the work. In 2006, the builder placed
 a mechanic’s lien on the property, even though there was a list
 of approximately 150 incomplete items. 
The homeowner’s association then sought to assess Ray
 
and Sandra a penalty totaling $350,000 because the house had not
 been completed within the prescribed two-year period. The couple
 sued the homeowner’s association, and the parties agreed on a
 reduced penalty of $5,000 with an additional two-year period to
 complete construction of the home. 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In order to complete the home, Ray and Sandra paid a
 
total of $60,000 to six additional subcontractors, but the home
 
was still not completed. About six months after the original
 builder had walked off the job, Ray and Sandra were able to move
 into the house. 
During this time, Sandra was working as a part-time 
secretary, and Ray was working for Northrop Grumman. Sandra
 coordinated the work of most of the subcontractors, and Ray
 worked on the house when he was home from work. For example, Ray
 finished the kitchen. 
Tension arose between Ray and Sandra after Ray began
 
going outside their home without clothes on. Ray’s behavior
 resulted in complaints from neighbors and a visit to the couple’s
 home by the police. Sandra also suspected that Ray was having an
 affair because he had lost weight, was working out, and was well
 tanned. Sandra also observed Ray giving other women what she
 described as “lecherous looks.” 
Ray stopped working in July 2008, after his contract
 
with Northrop Grumman had expired and he was unable to find
 additional work. At the time of his retirement, Ray was earning
 between $115,000 and $120,000 per year. Following his
 retirement, Ray continued to work on the house. 
After months of arguing and still questioning Ray’s
 
fidelity, Sandra told Ray that if he was serious about being
 committed to the marriage, that they should “write something up.” 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On October 6, 2008, Ray wrote an agreement, as dictated by
 
Sandra, that provided the following:
 
If Sandy and Ray Balogh are to separate from each
other their assets are to be divided as such:
 
I Donald Raymond Balogh agree that my wife Sandra C.
Balogh will receive:
 
1. ¾ or 75% of the profits of the sale of [] Kahalakua
St.
 
2. The entire contents of the house excluding Ray’s
tools and clothes 
3. All vehicles at time of separation [.]
 
Both Ray and Sandra signed the agreement. Sandra was
 
not thinking about divorce when she asked Ray to sign this
 
agreement; instead, Sandra thought that Ray was committing to
 saving their marriage. Ray acknowledged that he had agreed to
 the terms of the agreement, and Sandra testified that she did not
 threaten Ray to get him to sign the agreement. According to Ray,
 he was not in his right mind when he signed the agreement, but
 nevertheless signed the agreement to show his good faith and
 commitment to save the marriage. Ray thought that if he did not
 sign the agreement, his and Sandra’s relationship would further
 degrade and he would be thrown out of the house. 
Sandra, however, remained suspicious of Ray’s fidelity. 
Just over two weeks after they had signed the first agreement,
 Ray and Sandra executed the MOU in front of a notary. The MOU
 provided the following:
 
This Agreement between Donald Balogh and Sandra Balogh
will be implemented if they are to separate and/or
divorce from each other.
 
-8­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Their assets will be divided as follows:
 
1. In regards to the contents of the house at []
Kahalakua St., Honolulu, HI []: Donald Balogh (Ray)
will receive his tools and building equipment. Sandra
Balogh (Sandy) will receive the entire contents of the
house, furniture, appliances, electronics
(televisions, etc.)
 
2. In regards to vehicles: Sandy will receive the
vehicles. 
3. In regards to the proceeds of the house, due to a
sale:  Sandy will receive 75% of the sale proceeds and
Ray will receive 25% of the proceeds.
 
4. In regards to compensation:  Ray agrees to pay
$100,000.00 to Sandy in lieu of Alimony and court
proceedings.
 
Again, both Ray and Sandra signed the agreement. 
Sandra testified that the MOU was intended as an inducement for
 
Ray to work on the marriage because if Ray was “going to sign
 something like that, which gives [Sandra] quite a bit, then [Ray]
 must [have been] serious about working on the marriage.” Sandra
 testified that she added the additional term requiring Ray to pay
 her $100,000 to obtain further commitment from Ray to their
 marriage and to “see how serious he was.” Ray acknowledged that
 he agreed to the terms of the MOU, and Sandra testified that she
 did not threaten Ray before he signed the MOU. Because Ray
 signed the MOU, Sandra thought that Ray would tell her the truth
 and stop his inappropriate behavior. Ray signed the MOU in a
 “desperate attempt to hold the marriage together.” 
In November 2008, an attorney representing the
 
homeowner’s association mailed a letter to Ray and Sandra. The
 letter stated that a number of individuals had complained about
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ray’s behavior. In January 2009, a second letter was mailed to
 
Ray and Sandra. This letter detailed another incident involving
 Ray and demanded that Ray cease and desist. Ray hid both of
 these letters from Sandra. Ray’s behavior, however, did not
 stop.
 
In June 2009, Ray and Sandra were walking on the 
Makapu'u Trail when police stopped Ray to question him about 
exposing his buttocks. The following month, Ray and Sandra were at Ala Moana shopping center when security officers again stopped the couple to question Ray about exposing his buttocks. Ray was issued a trespass warning, banning him from the shopping center for one year. Following both incidents, Ray told Sandra that he had not exposed himself. 
Ray sent a written request to Ala Moana, asking that
 
the one-year ban be lifted, but on August 10, 2009, that request
 was denied. Upon receiving the letter denying Ray’s request,
 Sandra wanted to contact a lawyer because she believed Ray that
 he had done nothing wrong. Ray then admitted to exposing his
 buttocks at Ala Moana. Sandra was shocked. Ray agreed to move
 out of the couple’s home the following day. 
Ray testified that by that point, the marriage had
 
“melted down,” the anxiety and friction were constant, and there
 was “just so much tension in the house,” that he “decided that
 it’d be best that [he] leave.” Before Ray left, Sandra asked him
 to call their relatives to tell them what was happening. While
 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ray was speaking to his sister on the telephone, Sandra heard Ray
 
mention the possibility of divorce and she got upset. Sandra
 then told Ray, “I need security, Ray, I need security, I need you
 to sign the house over to me.” Ray agreed to do so, and Sandra
 said that she would make the necessary arrangements. Ray moved
 out of the couple’s home on August 15, 2009. 
On September 1, 2009, Ray and Sandra met to execute a
 
quitclaim deed, in which Ray granted his interest in the
 Kahalakua property to Sandra in exchange for ten dollars and
 “other valuable consideration.” According to Ray, he thought the
 deed was only a “temporary agreement,” that would protect the
 home from potential lawsuits, and that title would eventually be
 transferred back to joint ownership. Ray testified that he
 signed the deed in an effort to save the marriage and that he
 signed the document “in a panic.” 
On September 24, 2009, Ray and Sandra met with Dr.
 
Renee Robinson for marriage counseling. Dr. Robinson referred
 Ray to a specialist on obsessive-compulsive behavior. Ray saw
 the specialist three times, who recommended ways for Ray to deal
 with his behavior. 
B. Family court proceedings
 
Ray and Sandra attempted to execute an uncontested
 
divorce, which failed because Ray refused to sign the divorce
 
documents. On January 14, 2010, Sandra filed a Complaint for
 Divorce. Following a trial, the family court rendered an oral
 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision. As relevant here, the family court stated the
 
following:
 
The Court considered what it thought to be the
appropriate motivations and reasonings of the parties. 
What was clear to the Court is that at the time the
 documents were done, both were focused –- both husband
and wife were focused on I think, in their own words,
saving the marriage.  That was the primary motivation
 for the documents.  At some point those actions -­what may have been intent became actions.  A quitclaim
 was signed.  But it is unclear as to what the
 motivations of both parties were, and that’s why,
again, you folks went to trial.  Based on the relevant
 case law, the Court finds that this would be an
inequitable provision to hold both parties to.
 
Court’s going to rule as follows:
 
With regard to the marital property, which is
the Kahala home, the Court is going to basically award
Mr. Balogh a one half interest.  That one half
 interest may be satisfied either by way of a sale of
the property, in which case the net proceeds are cut
in half, or Mrs. Balogh may buy out Mr. Balogh. 
The Court’s going to set the buy-out price -­
I’m sorry, the value of the property at 1.6 based on
the relevant testimony.  Again, the Court comes to
that number based on what was presented in court. I
 know there’s conflicting testimony, but that’s the
price the Court’s going to -- or the –- the value the
Court will set.  Again, if it comes to an actual sale,
it may be more, it may be less.  For purposes of a
buy-out, the Court will set it at 1.6.  So basically
 it’s 800,000, if it’s a buy-out.
 
On December 2, 2011, the family court issued the
 
divorce decree. The decree provided the following:
 
a. The Court finds that it is inequitable to enforce
the agreements entered into by the parties on October
6, 2008, October 24, 2008, and September 1, 2009, as
to the real property located at [] Kahalakua Street,
Honolulu, Hawaii (marital residence).
 
b. The gross value of said property is $1,600,000.00.
 c. Said property shall be sold in a commercially
reasonable manner.  From the proceeds of the sale, the
realtor commissions, escrow fees, and costs of sale
shall be paid.  Thereafter, the net proceeds shall be
divided equally between the parties.
 
d. Either party may buy-out the other party.
 
-12­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
e. The foregoing provisions shall be enforced upon the
expiration of 90 days from the effective date of this
Decree.
 
f. The parties [are] to cooperate on resolving the
mechanics lien.
 
On February 15, 2012, the family court issued its
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law. As relevant here, the
 
family court made the following conclusions of law:
 
K. To enforce the parties’ agreement or the Quitclaim
Deed is to award Sandra with a marital asset worth
 $1,600,000.  In doing so, Sandra would be receiving
more than 85% of the marital estate.
 
L. In addition, Ray contributed $350,000 of his
inheritance and $40,000 of his premarital asset[s] to
the marital partnership, for which he is not receiving
a credit.  Sandra contributed $89,000 of her
premarital asset[s] to the marital partnership for
which she is not receiving a credit.
 
M. If Ray received credit for his $390,000 capital
contribution, Ray’s share of the retirement/securities
accounts would just be sufficient to repay him his
capital contribution.  He would in essence receive 0%
 of the marital estate if Sandra is awarded the Kahala
 Kua property.
 
N. After thirty years of marriage, the Court concludes
it would be unconscionable to award Sandra the Kahala
 Kua property by enforcing the Quitclaim Deed.   Kuroda
 
v. Kuroda, 87 Haw. 419, 958 P.2d 541 (Haw. App. 1998);
and Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 748 P.2d 1362 (1988).
 
O. Further, after considering their testimony, the
Court finds that the parties were motivated to save
the marriage when they signed the various agreements. 
When Ray signed the Quitclaim Deed, Ray was protecting
their marital home from potential lawsuits and had no
intent of permanently transferring his interest to
Sandra.  Neither party intended their marriage to
result in a divorce and to divide their marital estate
 accordingly.
 
P. The Court finds Ray was suffering from extreme
distress as a result of the ongoing construction of
their Kahala Kua residence, the contractor’s walk-off
and lawsuit in 2006, the penalties assessed by the
[homeowner’s association] and parties’ lawsuit against
[the homeowner’s association], his high security
clearance job which also required twenty-four
hour/seven days on call one week a month, the
continuing issues with the subcontractors, and his
uncontrollable obsessive behavior that escalated from
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
his backyard nudity to public display, his shame and
embarrassment, his fear of being discovered, and the
constant argument with Sandra about his inappropriate
behavior.  At the same time, Sandra suspected him of
infidelity which further exacerbated the marital
relationship and escalated the tension and the
friction in their home.  Ray was thus under duress
and coercion when he signed the agreements.  Prell v.
 
Silverstein, 114 Haw. 286, 162 P.3d 2 (Haw. App.
2007).
 
Q. Therefore, the Court concludes that the parties’
agreements on October 6, 2008, October 24,2008, and
September 1, 2009, are not enforceable.
 
R. Accordingly, each party shall be awarded
fifty-percent (50%) interest in their Kahala Kua
property.  The parties may sell said property and
divide the net sales proceeds equally or Sandra may
buyout Ray’s interest for the amount of Eight Hundred
Thousand and No/l00 Dollars ($800,000.00).  Said
 provision shall take place within 90 days of the
effective date of the Divorce Decree. 
C. ICA proceedings and proceedings in this court 
On December 20, 2011, Sandra timely filed a notice of
 
appeal. In her amended opening brief — and as relevant here —
 
Sandra argued that the agreements and the quitclaim deed were not
 unconscionable, Ray was not under duress when he signed each
 agreement and the deed, and in signing the three documents, Ray
 did not intend to protect the Kahalakua property from the claims
 of third parties. Sandra argued, therefore, that the agreements
 and the deed were enforceable. 
The ICA agreed with Sandra that the family court erred
 
with regard to the agreements’ enforceability. The ICA first
 concluded that the quitclaim deed was not unconscionable. The
 ICA noted that “nothing in the record indicates unfair surprise,”
 and that “this is not an exceptional case where the agreement was
 so one-sided that it is unconscionable even without a showing of
 
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unfair surprise.” The ICA explained that “[t]he fact that
 
[Ray’s] (perhaps shortsighted) decision to quitclaim his interest
 to [Sandra] ultimately turned out to be a bad one from his
 perspective is irrelevant and does not warrant invalidating the
 quitclaim deed.” 
The ICA further concluded that Ray “freely and
 
voluntarily entered into the agreements.” Specifically, the ICA
 noted that both Ray and Sandra were well educated, and that
 “there is nothing in the record showing that [Sandra] used
 threats or any other improper methods of persuasion.” The ICA
 also rejected Ray’s argument that he never intended to convey his
 interest in the Kahalakua property. The ICA explained that Ray’s
 statements regarding intent “were inadmissible for purposes of
 contradicting the deed’s clear language, under which he granted
 his interest in the [Kahalakua property] to [Sandra] as tenant in
 severalty.” The ICA further explained that because the deed was
 unambiguous, extrinsic evidence of the facts and circumstances
 surrounding the execution of the deed was not “competent to
 contradict, defeat, modify or otherwise vary the meaning or legal
 effect of the deed.” (Internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted). The ICA concluded, therefore, that the “Family Court
 erred in failing to classify the [Kahalakua property] as
 [Sandra’s] separate property pursuant to the plain language of
 the deed.” 
In a concurring opinion, Judge Foley stated that
 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unconscionability encompasses two basic principles: one-
sidedness and unfair surprise, and indicated that both must be
 present in order for the doctrine to apply. Specifically, Judge
 Foley noted that, even assuming the quitclaim deed was one-sided,
 “nothing in the record indicates unfair surprise.” 
The ICA entered its judgment on appeal on October 3,
 
2013, and, on December 2, 2013, Ray timely filed an application
 for writ of certiorari. In his application for writ of
 certiorari, Ray presents two questions:
 
1.	 Whether the ICA erred in vacating the Family
Court’s decision that postmarital agreements
were unenforceable because they were
unconscionable.
 
2.	 Whether the ICA erred in vacating the Family
Court’s decision that postmarital agreements
were unenforceable because they were
involuntary.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Construction of contract
 
“[T]he construction and legal effect to be given a 
contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate 
court.” Brown v. KFC Nat’l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 239, 921 
P.2d 146, 159 (1996). Unconscionability is a question of law this court reviews de novo. See, e.g., HRS § 490:2-302(1) 
(2008). “Whether particular circumstances are sufficient to constitute . . . duress is a question of law, although the existence of those circumstances is a question of fact.” Gruver 
v. Midas Int’l Corp., 925 F.2d 280, 282 (9th Cir. 1991) (citing
 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Oregon law on economic duress).
 
B. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
The family court’s findings of fact are reviewed under 
the clearly erroneous standard. Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 
Hawai'i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 706 (2012) (citation omitted). A 
finding of fact is clearly erroneous when “(1) the record lacks 
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.” Id. “‘Substantial evidence’ is 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” Id. 
The family court’s conclusions of law are reviewed de
 
novo. Id. 
III. Discussion
 
At the outset, we must decide whether the quitclaim
 
deed in fact constituted a separation agreement that altered the
 parties’ rights to an equitable division of the couple’s marital
 partnership property, such that Sandra must receive the entire
 value of the Kahalakua property pursuant to the deed. For the
 reasons set forth below, the answer to this threshold question is
 no. Accordingly, the ICA erred in concluding that the quitclaim
 deed was an enforceable separation agreement.
 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Because the quitclaim deed did not affect the
 
disposition of the parties’ property upon divorce, we must also
 
decide whether the MOU is enforceable. For the reasons set forth
 below, the MOU is enforceable because it is not unconscionable 
and Ray entered into the agreement voluntarily. Because we
 conclude that the MOU is enforceable, we do not consider the
 enforceability of the October 6, 2008 handwritten agreement. 
A.	 The quitclaim deed was not an agreement to alter the
division of Ray and Sandra’s marital partnership property 
“In Hawai
'i, there is no fixed rule for determining the 
amount of property to be awarded each spouse in a divorce action 
other than as set forth HRS § 580–47.” Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i at 
136-37, 276 P.3d at 706-06 (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai' i 19, 26, 868 P.2d 
437, 444 (1994)). Pursuant to HRS § 580-47(a), the family court has broad discretion to divide the estate of divorcing parties in a “just and equitable” manner. HRS § 580-47(a) (Supp. 2011); see also Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i at 137, 276 P.3d at 706. This court 
has adopted the “partnership model of marriage” to guide the family court in its exercise of this discretion. Kakinami, 127 
Hawai'i at 137, 276 P.3d at 706 (citing Gussin v. Gussin, 73 Haw. 
470, 486, 836 P.2d 484, 492 (1992)). Pursuant to the partnership model, “the family court can utilize the following five categories of net market values (NMVs) as guidance in divorce cases”: 
-18­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Category 1. The [NMV], plus or minus, of all property
separately owned by one spouse on the date of marriage
(DOM) but excluding the NMV attributable to property
that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to
the other spouse, to both spouses, or to a third
party.
 
Category 2. The increase in the NMV of all property
whose NMV on the DOM is included in category 1 and
that the owner separately owns continuously from the
DOM to the DOCOEPOT [date of the conclusion of the
evidentiary part of the trial.]
 
Category 3. The date-of-acquisition NMV, plus or
minus, of property separately acquired by gift or
inheritance during the marriage but excluding the NMV
attributable to property that is subsequently legally
gifted by the owner to the other spouse, to both
spouses, or to a third party.
 
Category 4. The increase in the NMV of all property
whose NMV on the date of acquisition during the
marriage is included in category 3 and that the owner
separately owns continuously from the date of
acquisition to the DOCOEPOT.
 
Category 5. The difference between the NMVs, plus or
minus, of all property owned by one or both of the
spouses on the DOCOEPOT minus the NMVs, plus or minus,
includable in categories 1, 2, 3, and 4.
 
Id. at 137-38, 276 P.3d at 706-07 (brackets in original).
 
These NMVs generally determine the division of marital
 
partnership property upon divorce. However, spouses may
 
expressly contract for a different division of marital
 partnership property, and the family court must enforce all valid
 and enforceable agreements with regard to marital property
 division.
4 See HRS § 572-22 (2006) (“All contracts made between
 
4
 Spouses may contract regarding marital property rights in
 
premarital, postmarital, or settlement agreements.  Premarital or prenuptial
 
agreements are entered into before marriage.  See, e.g., Prell v. Silverstein,
 
114 Hawai 'i 286, 287-88, 162 P.3d 2, 3-4 (App. 2007).  Postmarital or 
postnuptial agreements are entered into after marriage.  See, e.g., Chen v.
 
Hoefl
inger, 127 Hawa
i'i 346, 352, 279 P.3d 11, 17 (App. 2012).  Settlement 
agreements are entered into after separation or in anticipation of immediate
separation.  See, e.g., Bienvenue v. Bienvenue, 102 Hawai 'i 59, 61, 72 P.3d 
531, 533 (App. 2003). 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
spouses . . . not otherwise invalid because of any other law, 
shall be valid.”); Epp v. Epp, 80 Hawai' i 79, 87, 905 P.2d 54, 62 
(App. 1995). In addition, spouses may exclude certain assets from the marital partnership entirely, thereby segregating those assets as marital separate property. Marital separate property includes: 
a. All property that was excluded from the marital
partnership by an agreement in conformity with the
Hawai'i Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (HUPAA), HRS
chapter 572D (Supp. 1992); 
b. All property that was excluded from the marital
partnership by a valid contract; and
 
c. All property that (1) was acquired by the
spouse-owner during the marriage by gift or
inheritance, (2) was expressly classified by the
donee/heir-spouse-owner as his or her separate
property, and (3) after acquisition, was maintained by
itself and/or sources other than one or both of the
spouses and funded by sources other than marital
partnership income or property.
 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i at 138-39, 276 P.3d at 707-08 (brackets and 
ellipsis omitted) (emphasis added). 
In the instant case, the quitclaim deed does not
 
constitute either an express agreement to deviate from the
 
partnership model of marital property division, or a valid
 contract converting the Kahalakua property into marital separate
 property.
5 Although the deed stated that Ray “remise[d],
 
release[d] and forever quitclaim[ed]” his interest in the
 property to Sandra, nothing on the face of the deed indicates
 
5
 The other two means of converting marital partnership property
 
into marital separate property — an agreement pursuant to the HUPAA or the
special treatment of a gift or inheritance — are not implicated in the instant
case.
 
-20­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that it was intended to alter Ray’s right to an equitable 
division of the property upon divorce, or to convert the property to marital separate property. Thus, although the language of the deed effectuated a change in who held title to the property, it was not, standing alone, sufficient to remove the property from the marital partnership. See Reithbrock v. Lange, 128 Hawai' i 1, 
16 n.9, 282 P.3d 543, 558 n.9 (2012) (noting that awarding property solely on the basis of which spouse holds title would conflict with the partnership model of property division). 
Accordingly, this court must look to the circumstances
 
surrounding the quitclaim deed to determine whether it was
 intended to alter the disposition of the Kahalakua property.
6
 
According to Ray, he signed the deed to protect the property from
 lawsuits, and he and Sandra intended to eventually “restore the
 title to joint ownership.” However, according to Sandra, Ray
 signed the quitclaim deed because she told him, “I need
 security.” Sandra further testified that, pursuant to the deed,
 she “gave up” the $100,000 due to her under the MOU in exchange
 for receiving the entire Kahalakua property. 
The family court credited Ray’s explanation for the
 
6
 Thus, the ICA erred in concluding that “[Ray’s] statements
 
regarding intent were inadmissible for purposes of contradicting the deed’s
clear language.”  Although the deed was unambiguous with respect to the
transfer of title, it was ambiguous with respect to whether it was intended to
alter the division of the property upon the parties’ divorce.  Accordingly,
the ICA was incorrect in stating that “[t]he Family Court erred in failing to
classify the Property as [Sandra’s] separate property pursuant to the plain
language of the deed.” 
-21­   
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
quitclaim deed, finding that, “[a]fter discussions with Sandra, 
Ray thought the Quitclaim deed would protect the home from potential lawsuits, but title would be transferred back to joint ownership when things returned to normal.” Although Sandra challenged this finding on appeal, it is supported by substantial evidence in the form of Ray’s testimony. In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 
183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (“[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.” (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). Accordingly, the family court’s finding is not clearly erroneous, and it is therefore binding on this court. 
Based on the family court’s finding, the parties did
 
not intend the quitclaim deed to alter the disposition of their
 marital partnership property upon their divorce. Accordingly,
 the quitclaim deed did not bar the family court from equitably
 dividing the Kahalakua property. Thus, this court need not
 determine whether the quitclaim deed was unconscionable or agreed
 to under duress.
7
 
7 In general, a deed is not a contract.  See, e.g., Brown v. Brown, 
501 So. 2d 24, 26 n.1 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1986) (“As distinguished from
covenants of warranty, et cetera, which are often in a deed but which are notessential to its character, a deed is not a contract.  A deed does something(conveys land) as distinguished from promising to do something.”). Nevertheless, to the extent the parties here treat the quitclaim deed as acontract, it is well settled that “there must be a meeting of the minds on allessential elements or terms in order to create a binding contract.”  Moss v. Am. Int’l Adjustment Co., 86 Hawai 'i 59, 63, 947 P.2d 371, 375 (1997)
(internal quotations marks and citation omitted).  Because Ray thought thatthe deed would protect the property from lawsuits and that title would
(continued...)
 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We next must determine whether either of the parties’
 
other two agreements are enforceable. In her appeal to the ICA,
 
Sandra described the October 6, 2008 agreement, the MOU, and the
 quitclaim deed as a “series of agreements for their divorce,” and
 maintained that each of the agreements was enforceable. However,
 Sandra also argued that, even if the family court’s findings and
 conclusions regarding the quitclaim deed are affirmed, the
 October 6, 2008 agreement and subsequent MOU should nonetheless
 be enforced. Consistent with this view, Sandra continues to
 argue in this court that all three agreements are enforceable. 
Accordingly, we next consider whether the MOU is enforceable. 
B.	 In general, a postmarital agreement is unconscionable if it
is impermissibly one-sided and is the result of unfair
surprise
 
As stated, the family court must enforce all valid and 
enforceable postmarital and separation agreements. See Epp, 80 
Hawai'i at 87, 905 P.2d at 62. A postmarital or separation 
agreement is enforceable if the agreement is “not unconscionable 
and has been voluntarily entered into by the parties with the knowledge of the financial situation of the [other] spouse.” See 
Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 501, 748 P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988); see also Chen v. Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai' i 346, 356-57, 279 P.3d 11, 
7(...continued)
eventually be restored to joint ownership, and Sandra thought that Ray signed
the deed in order to provide her with “security,” there plainly was no meeting
of the minds with respect to the effect of the deed.
 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
21-22 (App. 2012).8 Ray argues that the ICA applied the wrong
 
legal standard for determining unconscionability. For the
 
reasons set forth below, Ray’s argument is without merit.
 
Unconscionability encompasses two principles: one-
sidedness and unfair surprise. Lewis, 69 Haw. at 502, 748 P.2d
 
1366. One-sidedness (i.e., substantive unconscionability) means
 that the agreement “leaves a post-divorce economic situation that
 is unjustly disproportionate.” Id. Unfair surprise (i.e.,
 
procedural unconscionability) means that “one party did not have
 full and adequate knowledge of the other party’s financial
 condition when the [marital] agreement was executed.” Id. A
 
contract that is merely “inequitable” is not unenforceable.
9 Id.
 
at 500, 748 P.2d at 1366. The unconscionability of an agreement
 regarding the division of property is evaluated at the time the
 
8 Some jurisdictions have concluded that postmarital agreements are
 
subject to greater scrutiny than premarital agreements because of the nature
of the marital relationship.  See, e.g., Bedrick v. Bedrick, 17 A.3d 17, 27
(Conn. 2011) (“This leads us to conclude that postnuptial agreements require
stricter scrutiny than prenuptial agreements.”).  The dissent adopts such a
view, arguing that “transactions between spouses should be subject to the
general rules governing fiduciary relationships,” and that “an agreement that
[is] not in accordance with fiduciary standards should be presumptively
involuntary and unenforceable.”  Dissent at 28-29.  Neither the family court
nor the ICA concluded that a heightened standard should be applied in
evaluating postmarital agreements, and neither party has argued that this
court should apply such a standard.  We therefore do not consider whether
 postmarital agreements should be subject to greater scrutiny than premarital
agreements. 
9
 Although the family court stated in the divorce decree that it
 
would be “inequitable to enforce the agreements entered into by the parties,”
the family court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law indicate that the
family court concluded that “it would be unconscionable to award Sandra the
Kahala Kua property by enforcing the Quitclaim Deed,” not merely
“inequitable.”  The family court therefore applied the correct legal standard
in determining whether the deed was unconscionable.
 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
agreement was executed. See id. at 507, 748 P.2d at 1369. 
Generally, “[a] determination of unconscionability
 
. . . requires a showing that the contract was both procedurally
 
and substantively unconscionable when made,” but there may be
 “exceptional cases where a provision of the contract is so
 outrageous as to warrant holding it unenforceable on the ground
 of substantive unconscionability alone.” Gillman v. Chase
 
Manhattan Bank, N.A., 534 N.E.2d 824, 828-29 (N.Y. 1988); see
 also Adler v. Fred Lind Manor, 103 P.3d 773, 782 (Wash. 2004) (en
 banc) (“individual contractual provisions may be so one-sided and
 harsh as to render them substantively unconscionable despite the
 fact that the circumstances surrounding the parties’ agreement to
 the contract do not support a finding of procedural
 unconscionability”); Maxwell v. Fidelity Fin. Servs., Inc., 907
 P.2d 51, 59 (Ariz. 1995) (concluding under state statute that “a
 claim of unconscionability can be established with a showing of
 substantive unconscionability alone”). Although some courts have
 concluded that “[t]o be unenforceable, a contract must be both
 procedurally and substantively unconscionable,” see, e.g., Marin
 Storage & Trucking, Inc. v. Benco Contracting and Eng’g, Inc.,
 107 Cal. App. 4th 1042, 1052 (Cal. Ct. App. 2001), most
 authorities have recognized that, in at least some cases,
 substantive unconscionability, without more, can render an
 agreement unenforceable, see Restatement (Second) of Contracts
 § 208 cmt. c (1981) (“Theoretically it is possible for a contract
 
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to be oppressive taken as a whole, even though there is no
 
weakness in the bargaining process and no single term which is in
 itself unconscionable.”); 7 Joseph M. Perillo, Corbin on
 Contracts § 29.1 at 377 (revised ed. 2002) (“Some cases hold that
 the defense of unconscionability cannot be invoked unless the
 contract or clause is both procedurally and substantively
 unconscionable, but there is no basis in the text of [Uniform
 Commercial Code §2-302] for such a conclusion.” (footnotes
 omitted)). Indeed, the courts of this state have recognized
 that, under certain circumstances, an impermissibly one-sided
 agreement may be unconscionable even if there is no unfair
 surprise. 
For example, in Kuroda v. Kuroda , 87 Hawai' i 419, 428 
(App. 1998), the court held that a postnuptial agreement was unconscionable where it awarded the wife all personal and real property held in common, implicitly allowed the wife to keep her personal property including her accounts, required the husband to pay the wife one half of his net income from every source until either spouse passed away, and required the husband to pay all attorney’s fees and costs associated with the separation and divorce. The Kuroda court reached this conclusion without considering whether there was unfair surprise. Thus, although under Hawai' i law “two basic principles are encompassed within 
the concept of unconscionability, one-sidedness and unfair surprise,” Lewis, 69 Hawai' i at 502, 748 P.2d at 1366, in certain 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circumstances, one-sidedness alone can render an agreement 
unconscionable, see Kuroda, 87 Hawai' i at 428, 958 P.2d at 550. 
Here, the ICA applied the correct legal standard in its
 
memorandum opinion. Specifically, the majority stated that
 “there need not be both one-sidedness and unfair surprise in
 reaching a determination that a marital agreement is
 unconscionable.” The ICA concluded, however, that the quitclaim
 deed was not “so outrageously oppressive as to be unconscionable
 in the absence of unfair surprise.” 
Ray nevertheless argues that instead of applying the
 
well settled law, “the ICA held that a marital agreement is only
 enforceable if there is both one-sidedness and unfair surprise.” 
Ray’s description of the ICA’s analysis does not accurately
 characterize the approach taken by that court. The ICA did not
 hold that one-sidedness, without more, would never be enough to
 find an agreement unconscionable. Instead, the ICA concluded
 that the deed was not so “one-sided that it is unconscionable
 even without a showing of unfair surprise.” Thus, the ICA
 plainly applied the correct legal standard in considering the
 validity of the deed.
 
Ray also appears to argue that this legal standard is
 
overly narrow. According to Ray, “a marital agreement is
 unenforceable if it is one-sided,” and unconscionability in the
 context of marital agreements does not require a showing of
 unfair surprise. Put another way, Ray appears to argue that a
 
-27­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
marital agreement need not be exceptionally one-sided in order to
 
be unconscionable. Ray further argues that requiring a showing
 of unfair surprise is absurd in the context of postmarital
 agreements because spouses “are in an obvious[ly] better position
 to be knowledgeable about their spouse’s financial condition.” 
Ray’s arguments are without merit. First, Ray does not
 
cite to any cases invalidating a postmarital agreement solely on
 the basis of that agreement being somewhat one-sided.
10
 
Furthermore, parties may have legitimate reasons for entering
 into a somewhat one-sided postmarital agreement, and may do so
 knowingly and voluntarily. Permitting the family court to
 invalidate such agreements without requiring a showing of
 extraordinary one-sidedness would frustrate the purpose of HRS
 § 572-22, which permits spouses to enter into enforceable
 contracts with each other. 
Accordingly, the ICA applied the correct legal standard
 
in evaluating unconscionability. 
10 Ray cited two cases involving unconscionability in divorce
 
actions.  The first, In re Marriage of Thomas , 199 S.W.3d 847, 860 (Mo. App.
2006), does not support Ray’s argument because the court there noted that
parties are bound to the provisions of a pre-nuptial agreement “only if the
agreement was conscionable and  fairly made,” i.e., both substantively and
procedurally conscionable.  Id. at 852 (emphasis added).  Additionally, the
court emphasized a similar standard of one-sidedness as that articulated by
the ICA:  “An agreement is unconscionable when the inequality is so strong,
gross, and manifest that it must be impossible to state it to one with common
sense without producing an exclamation at the inequality of it.” Id.
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  Similarly, in the second
case, In re Marriage of Manzo, 659 P.2d 669, 671 (Colo. 1983), the court
considered both whether the agreement was procured through “overreaching,
fraud, concealment of assets, or sharp dealing,” and whether it was
substantively “fair, just and reasonable.”  Id. at 675.
 
-28­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. The MOU is not unconscionable
 
Ray argues that the marital agreements were one-sided 
and therefore unconscionable.11 In her response to this court, 
Sandra agrees that it would be one-sided to award the Kahalakua 
property to her in its entirety pursuant to the deed. Sandra argues, however, that the MOU is not “unjustly disproportionate” because Ray would receive 25% of the proceeds of the sale of the property, in addition to any cash accounts and retirement benefits awarded by the family court. (Citing Chen, 127 Hawai' i 
at 357, 279 P.3d at 22). 
Although the family court did not address whether the
 
MOU is unconscionable, this court may nonetheless reach the issue
 because unconscionability is a question of law, reviewable de
 novo. See, e.g., HRS § 490:2-302(1). For the reasons set forth
 
below, the MOU is not unconscionable with respect to the division
 of the Kahalakua property, nor is it unconscionable to the extent
 it required Ray to pay Sandra $100,000 in lieu of alimony.
12 The
 
MOU is therefore an enforceable marital agreement with regard to
 these clauses.
 
Again, the terms of the MOU were as follows:
 
11
 Nothing in the record suggests that Ray was surprised by the terms
 
of the MOU, and Ray did not argue otherwise in his answering brief or
application.  The only issue, therefore, is whether the MOU was so
impermissibly one-sided that it is unconscionable.
 
12
 Although the MOU also addressed Ray’s tools and building
 
equipment, the contents of the house, and the couple’s vehicles, the
disposition of those items is not being disputed by the parties.
 
-29­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This Agreement between Donald Balogh and Sandra Balogh
will be implemented if they are to separate and/or
divorce from each other.
 
Their assets will be divided as follows:
 . . . . 
3. In regards to the proceeds of the house, due to a
sale: Sandy will receive 75% of the sale proceeds and
Ray will receive 25% of the proceeds.
 
4. In regards to compensation: Ray agrees to pay
$100,000.00 to Sandy in lieu of Alimony and court
proceedings.
 
Even if the allocation of the entire Kahalakua property
 
to Sandra pursuant to the quitclaim deed could be characterized
 
as so one-sided as to have been unconscionable, the 75%/25% split
 set forth in the MOU and the requirement that Ray pay $100,000 in
 lieu of alimony are not. First, in addition to his share of the
 Kahalakua property, Ray was entitled to an equitable share of the
 couple’s other major assets, which totaled $760,000.
13 Second,
 
although Ray will receive a lesser share of the proceeds under
 the MOU than he would under the family court’s 50%/50% division
 of the property, such imbalance was the express purpose of the
 MOU. As the family court found, “Sandra believed Ray would tell
 her the truth and stop his inappropriate behavior by signing the
 MOU. Ray signed it in his desperate attempt to hold the marriage
 together.” It is unlikely that the MOU would have been construed
 as demonstrative of Ray’s commitment to the marriage had it
 
13
 The record does not indicate the exact values of Ray’s and
 
Sandra’s respective shares of their other assets.  Based on the family court’s
calculations, however, it appears that Ray and Sandra each received about half
of the other assets.
 
-30­   
 
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
provided for the same division of property Ray was likely to
 
receive in the family court under an equitable division upon
 divorce. Moreover, as noted above, “unless the agreement rises
 to the level of unconscionability, a merely ‘inequitable’
 contract is not unenforceable under contract law.” Lewis, 69
 
Haw. at 500, 748 P.2d at 1365-66. Accordingly, the 75%/25%
 division of the Kahalakua property and the $100,000 payment set
 forth in the MOU are not unconscionable.
 
D. The MOU was entered into voluntarily
 
Ray also argues that the ICA erred in vacating the
 
family court’s decision because he did not enter into each of the
 
marital agreements voluntarily. For the reasons set forth below,
 Ray executed the MOU voluntarily.
14
 
“Involuntariness is shown by evidence of ‘duress, 
coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstance indicating lack of free will or voluntariness.’” Chen, 127 Hawai' i at 357, 
279 P.3d at 22 (quoting Prell, 114 Hawai' i at 298, 162 P.3d at 
14). Here, the family court concluded that Ray was “under duress and coercion when he signed the agreements” because of the ongoing construction of the Kahalakua home, the contractor walking off and the resulting mechanic’s lien, the penalties assessed by the homeowner’s association and the resulting 
14
 For the reasons stated above, this court need not address whether
 
the quitclaim deed was voluntarily executed.  Moreover, because we conclude
that the MOU is enforceable, we do not consider the voluntariness of the
October 6, 2008 agreement.
 
-31­   
  
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
litigation, the demands of Ray’s job, the continuing issues with
 
subcontractors, and Ray’s uncontrollable obsessive behavior. The
 family court’s factual findings, however, are not sufficient to
 support a conclusion that Ray signed the agreements under either
 duress or coercion.
15
 
Duress is defined as “a threat of harm made to compel a
 
person to do something against his or her will or judgment;
 [especially], a wrongful threat made by one person to compel a
 manifestation of seeming assent by another person to a
 transaction without real volition.” Black’s Law Dictionary 614
 
(10th ed. 2014). It is well established that an agreement is
 voidable due to duress when “a party’s manifestation of assent is
 induced by an improper threat by the other party that leaves the
 victim no reasonable alternative.” Standard Fin. Co., Ltd. v.
 
Ellis, 3 Haw. App. 614, 621, 657 P.2d 1056, 1061 (1983)
 (quotation marks and citation omitted); see also Restatement
 (Second) of Contracts § 175(1) (“If a party’s manifestation of
 assent is induced by an improper threat by the other party that
 leaves the victim no reasonable alternative, the contract is
 voidable by the victim.”).
16
 
15
 It appears that the family court used the terms duress and
 
coercion interchangeably, i.e., there is nothing in the Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law to indicate that the court viewed them as legally distinct
terms.  We address each doctrine separately. 
16
 Section 175(2) of the Restatement concerns improper threats made
 
by a third party to induce the recipient to enter into a contract.  However,
Ray does not contend, and the record does not suggest, that any third party
threatened Ray to enter into the agreements. 
-32­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A threat of divorce does not constitute an improper
 
threat since the party making it has the legal right to seek a
 
divorce. See Kam Chin Chun Ming v. Kam Hee Ho, 45 Haw. 521, 558,
 
371 P.2d 379, 402 (1962) (it is not duress for a party to
 “threaten to do what they had a legal right to do”); see also
 Rubenstein v. Sela, 672 P.2d 492, 494 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1983)
 (concluding that husband’s threat to leave the marriage did not
 constitute duress because he had a right to leave the marriage);
 Autin v. Autin, 617 So.2d 229, 233 (La. Ct. App. 1993) (holding
 that “a threat of doing a lawful act or a threat of exercising a
 right does not constitute duress”).
 
However, a threat of exposure of publicly embarrassing
 
information can be the basis of a claim of duress. See
 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 176(2) (“A threat is improper
 if the resulting exchange is not on fair terms, and . . . the
 threatened act would harm the recipient and would not
 significantly benefit the party making the threat”); id. cmt. f
 (“A typical example is a threat to make public embarrassing
 information concerning the recipient unless he makes a proposed
 contract.”).
 
The record here does not support a finding that Ray’s
 
assent to the MOU was induced by an improper threat by Sandra and
 that he had no reasonable alternative to signing that agreement. 
There was conflicting testimony regarding whether Sandra had
 threatened Ray in order to get him to sign any of the documents. 
-33­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sandra repeatedly testified that she did not threaten Ray in
 
connection with the two agreements and the deed. Ray testified
 at one point that Sandra had told him that if he did not sign,
 she would tell family members about his behavior and that she
 would “go public” with that information.
17
 
In its findings of fact and conclusions of law,
 
however, the trial court did not find that Sandra had threatened
 Ray. Rather, it simply identified a number of factors that
 contributed to Ray’s “extreme distress,” ranging from problems
 with the construction to “his uncontrollable obsessive behavior
 that escalated from his backyard nudity to public display, his
 shame and embarrassment, his fear of being discovered, and the
 constant argument with Sandra about his inappropriate behavior.” 
Moreover, Ray failed to establish that he had no reasonable
 alternative to signing the MOU. Ray could have declined to sign
 the MOU but still attempted to resolve his issues with Sandra in
 
17 At another point Ray appeared to deny that Sandra had threatened
 
him.  However, this testimony was subject to an objection that was sustained
by the court:
 
Q. So was it –- was there a -– threat of divorce
or exposure to others-­
A. No.
 Q.
 –or -­
MR. HIOKI: Objection, leading, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Getting there.  Sustained.
 
Rephrase the question. 
(Emph
asis added). 
Sandra argues that because the answer was not stricken from the
record, it is in evidence.  Even assuming arguendo that Ray’s response can be
considered, the fact remains that there was conflicting testimony on this
issue, and the family court implicitly resolved those conflicts in Sandra’s
favor when it declined to find that she had threatened Ray. 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
an effort to save the marriage. In sum, because the family court
 
did not make a finding that Sandra had improperly threatened Ray,
 and since Ray had a reasonable alternative to signing the MOU,
 the record does not support the family court’s conclusion that
 Ray signed that agreement under duress. 
The record also does not support a conclusion that the
 
MOU was the result of coercion. Coercion is defined as
 “[c]ompulsion of a free agent by physical, moral, or economic
 force or threat of physical force.” Black’s Law Dictionary 315
 
(10th ed. 2014). “Coercion sufficient to avoid a contract need
 not . . . consist of physical force or threats of it. Social or
 economic pressure illegally or immorally applied may be
 sufficient.” Billouris v. Billouris, 852 N.E.2d 687, 693 (Mass.
 
App. Ct. 2006). For all the reasons set forth above, the record
 does not support a conclusion that Sandra employed physical,
 moral, or economic force to obtain Ray’s assent. 
Although the family court found Ray was under stress
 
due to a variety of factors, those factors do not establish
 either duress or coercion. Moreover, Ray cannot rely on those
 factors to establish that he lacked mental capacity when he
 signed the agreements, since he had specifically agreed prior to
 trial that he was “not claiming lack of mental capacity as to any
 issue herein.” Ray therefore executed the MOU voluntarily.
 
In sum, the record does not support the family court’s
 
conclusion that Ray’s assent to the MOU was the product of duress
 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and coercion. The dissent does not dispute that analysis, but
 
rather suggests that the family court did not intend to rely
 specifically on those doctrines, as opposed to other potential
 grounds for finding that Ray’s assent was involuntary. See
 
Dissent at 10-24. Respectfully, the family court’s Conclusion of
 Law P quite specifically refers to “duress and coercion” as the
 basis for invalidating the agreement, and the court’s
 accompanying citation to the Prell case implies that its reliance
 on those two doctrines was intentional.
 
In any event, we respectfully disagree with the
 
dissent’s contention that Ray did not enter into the MOU
 voluntarily because his “mental state was extremely vulnerable”,
 he was unduly influenced, and “other circumstances” demonstrate
 involuntariness. Dissent at 15, 22-24, 17-22. First, to the
 extent the dissent suggests that Ray’s “mental state” deprived
 him of the capacity to contract, Ray explicitly agreed prior to
 trial that he was not claiming a lack of mental capacity. 
Second, the record does not establish that Ray was 
unduly influenced. Undue influence is “[t]he improper use of power or trust in a way that deprives a person of free will and substitute’s another’s objective.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1760 
(10th ed. 2014); Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai' i 128, 
160, 254 P.3d 439, 471 (2011). As a threshold matter, the family court did not find that Sandra exerted undue influence over Ray, and Ray does not argue otherwise in this court. Moreover, the 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
record does not support a conclusion that Sandra either attempted
 
to impose or actually imposed improper influence on Ray.
 
Finally, there are no “other circumstances” indicating
 
a lack of free will on Ray’s part. The dissent asserts that Ray
 was motivated by saving the marriage and that Ray believed he had
 no other choice but to sign the agreements. Dissent at 21. The
 facts of this case, however, do not support a conclusion that Ray
 executed the MOU involuntarily. As noted above, Ray was well
 educated, with a bachelor’s and master’s degree in electrical
 engineering, and he held a high-level security clearance. There
 is no suggestion in the record that Ray was unaware of what he
 was doing, nor do the facts otherwise support a conclusion that
 the MOU was the result of a lack of free will. In fact, Ray
 expressly testified that he agreed to all of the terms of the
 MOU. While Ray was under stress from a number of sources, that
 stress is not sufficient to establish that the MOU was not
 entered into voluntarily. 
The dissent also asserts that the MOU is voidable for a
 
lack of consideration. Dissent at 29. The family court,
 however, made no findings or conclusions relating to the adequacy
 of consideration, and Ray has made no argument in this regard to
 this court. Thus we do not consider the issue. 
We therefore vacate the family court’s conclusions of
 
law N, P (in part), Q, and R. We vacate conclusion of law N
 because the family court treated the quitclaim deed as a
 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
separation agreement. We vacate conclusion of law P to the
 
extent the family court concluded that Ray signed the agreements
 under duress and coercion. We vacate conclusion of law Q because
 the family court concluded that the parties’ agreements were
 unenforceable. Finally, we vacate conclusion of law R because it
 awarded Ray and Sandra each a fifty-percent interest in the
 Kahalakua property.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s judgment is
 
vacated, the family court’s divorce decree is vacated, and the
 family court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law are
 affirmed in part and vacated in part. 
The case is remanded to
 
the family court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion. 
Rebecca A. Copeland
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Stephen T. Hioki
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
 
-38­