                                                                                                                                  ---o0o--
 
      
      
       
       
           ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S   HAWAI I  REP ORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000668 12-NOV-2019 08:25 AM 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
-
STATE
  OF  HAWAI I  
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
KEITH  KAUHANE,
 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-16-0000668 
CERTIORARI  TO  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000668;  CR.  NO.  15-1-0808(4)) 
NOVEMBER  12,  2019 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA,
 POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
In 2016, Keith Kauhane was convicted of Obstructing 
after participating in a demonstration against the construction 
of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) on the summit of 
Haleakalā.           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
  
       
         
      The  Intermediate  Court  of  Appeals  (ICA)  vacated  the 
conviction  based  on  an  error  in  the  jury  instructions,  and 
remanded  for  a  new  trial.   See  State  v.  Kauhane,  144  Hawai i  109, 
112,  436  P.3d
  1192,  1195  (App.  2018).   Nevertheless,  on 
certiorari,  Kauhane  asks  this  court  to  further  determine:  (1) 
whether  the  ICA  erred  in  determining  that  the  State’s  complaint 
was  sufficient,  despite  its  failure  to  define  the  statutory  term 
“obstructs”;  and  (2)  whether  the  ICA  erred  in  its  analysis  of  a 
“golden  rule”  objection  made  by  the  State  during  Kauhane’s 
closing  argument.  
We  hold  that  the   complaint  was  defective.   By  failing 
to  include  the  statutory  definition  of  “obstructs,”  the  complaint 
omitted  an  essential  element  of  the  offense  of  Obstructing  and 
did  not  apprise  Kauhane  of  what  he  was  required  to  defend 
against.   Even  under  the  “liberal  construction”  standard 
applicable  to  charges  challenged  for  the  first  time  on  appeal, 
the  complaint  cannot  within  reason  be  construed  to  charge  a 
crime.   State  v.  Motta,  66  Haw.  89,  657  P.2d  1019  (1983);  State 
v.  Wells,  78  Hawai i  373,  894  P.2d   70  (1995).   
Additionally, although the ICA correctly
 concluded that 
defense counsel did not make an improper “golden rule” argument, 
we disagree with the ICA’s conclusion that the argument was 
otherwise improper because it misstated the law. 
2           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
          
       
  
       
       
       
       
          
   
       
       
        
         
        
  
  
 Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment, and remand 
to the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court) with 
instructions to dismiss the Obstructing charge without prejudice. 
I. BACKGROUND 
On August 20, 2015, the Maui Police Department’s 
Specialized Emergency Enforcement Detail (SPEED) team, led by 
Captain Clyde Holokai (Captain Holokai), was assigned to 
accompany construction vehicles and equipment from the Central 
Maui Baseyard in Kahului to the DKIST construction site at the 
summit of Haleakalā. 
On Crater Road, the convoy encountered fifteen to 
twenty protestors blocking the roadway, standing shoulder to 
shoulder. When those protestors eventually cleared, seven more 
protestors were revealed, sitting in the middle of the roadway, 
chanting and praying. These seven protestors, including Kauhane, 
were arrested. 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. The Complaint 
After  his  arrest,  the   State  charged  Kauhane  with:  (1) 
Failure  to  Disperse,  in  violation  of  Hawai i  Revised   Statutes 
(HRS)  §  711-1102   (2014);   (2)  Obstructing,   in  violation   of  HRS 
3           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
        
          
         
           
         
         
        
       
            
             
        
      §  711-1105(1)(a)  (2014);  and  (3)  Disorderly  Conduct,  in 
violation  of  HRS  §  711-1101(1)(d)  (2014).   The  complaint  set 
forth  the  Obstructing  charge  as  follows: 1 
Count  II:  [Obstructing]   
That  on  or  about  the  20th  day  of  August,  2015,  in  the 
County  of  Maui,  State  of  Hawai i,  KEITH  KAUH ANE, 
whether  alone  or  with  others  and  having  no  legal 
privilege  to  do  so,  did  knowingly  or  recklessly 
persist  to  obstruct  any  highway  or  public  passage, 
after  a  warning  by  a  law  enforcement  officer  to  move 
to  prevent  or  to  cease  such  obstruction,  thereby 
committing  the  offense  of  Obstructing  in  violation  of 
Section  711-1105(1)(a)  of  the  [HRS]. 
(Emphasis added). 
Notably,  the  charge  did  not  define  “obstructs,”  which 
is  defined  in  HRS  §  711-1100  (Supp.  2015)  as  “renders  impassable 
without  unreasonable  inconvenience  or  hazard.” 
2. Evidence 
At
 trial,2 the State called four witnesses to describe 
the protest scene. Captain Holokai explained that it was “very 
dim” when the convoy encountered the line of standing protestors, 
and that the road was “very steep and narrow.” Captain Holokai 
further testified that as he approached the line of protestors 
with the SPEED team, he and the other officers “repeatedly 
ordered [the protestors] to get off the roadway.” 
1 HRS § 711-1101(1)(a) (Obstructing) provides: “[a] person commits 
the offense of obstructing if, whether alone or with others and having no 
legal privilege to do so, the person knowingly or recklessly . . . [o]bstructs 
any highway or public passage[.]” (Emphasis added). 
2 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. 
4           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
          
          
        
          
          
        
          
          
      
          
        
             
          
         
  
    
         
        
       
         
         
         Captain Holokai testified that he first encountered 
Kauhane as the line of standing protestors dispersed. Because of 
Kauhane’s position in the middle of the road, and the positions 
of the other sitting protestors, Captain Holokai explained that 
the convoy could not have continued past them. Captain Holokai 
testified that the SPEED team had to “physically pry” the sitting 
protestors apart, and that even after being handcuffed, “they 
wouldn’t walk.” As such, he explained, each of the seven 
protestors had to be removed from the roadway by stretcher. 
On cross-examination, Captain Holokai explained that it 
took about five minutes to remove Kauhane from the roadway. 
Although Captain Holokai admitted that he did not specifically 
warn Kauhane that he would be arrested if he did not move to the 
side of the road, Captain Holokai explained that he had given 
this warning multiple times to the protestors standing in front 
of Kauhane. 
Sergeant Russell Kapahulehua (Sergeant Kapahulehua) 
confirmed the events described by Captain Holokai and stated that 
the protestors had created a “dangerous situation.” Sergeant 
Kapahulehua testified that although Captain Holokai might not 
have specifically warned Kauhane that he could be arrested, he 
recalled that Captain Holokai’s general warnings to the group of 
protestors were announced “very loudly” and that the standing and 
5           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
       
         
       
         
       
           
         
            
           
        
          
      
         
        
        
        
         
         
       
    
      
          sitting protestors “were all pretty close together.” 
Rex Hunter (Hunter), the DKIST’s project manager, as 
well as Ervin Pigao (Pigao), an employee with the State’s 
Department of Transportation (Department), also testified for the 
State. Hunter, who had accompanied the convoy, testified that 
the materials being transported were “extraordinarily wide,” and 
that were the materials to fall, they “could kill someone.” He 
further testified that the convoy had to stop multiple times 
because of protestors as it made its way to the summit. Pigao, 
who did not accompany the convoy, added that he had checked the 
Department’s records, and could confirm that the Department had 
not issued any licenses or permits to block the roadway. 
The defense first called Professor Hokulani Holt-
Padilla (Professor Holt-Padilla) to testify as an expert in the 
field of Hawaiian custom, culture, history, and religion. 
Professor Holt-Padilla explained that Haleakalā was one  of the 
“most significant cultural and religious sites on Maui” for 
Native Hawaiians. Construction of the DKIST, she explained, was 
not just a “desecration” and an “affront” to the Hawaiian 
culture, but would also affect many Native Hawaiians 
“emotionally, spiritually, and physically.” 
Kauhane then testified
 that DKIST’s construction had 
caused him “serious emotional harm,” and that as long as the 
6           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 3. Jury Instructions 
     
    
      
     
       
      
      
      
      
      
  
      
     telescope  continued  to  be  built,  he  and  other  Hawaiians  would  be 
harmed.   Kauhane  thus  testified  that  he  went  to  Crater  Road  to 
pray  and  to  protest  the  mountain’s  desecration.   He  acknowledged 
that  by  going  to  Crater  Road,  he  had  also  meant  to  stop  the 
transport  of  the  DKIST’s  materials,  and  that  while  praying,  he 
was  “obstructing”  the  middle  of  the  road.   Despite  this,  Kauhane 
denied  hearing  the  SPEED  team’s  warnings  that  he  would  be 
arrested  if  he  failed  to  move.  
At  the  close  of  evidence,  the   following  instructions, 
which  were  agreed  upon  by  both  parties,  were  read  to  the  jury 
with  regard  to  the  offense  of  Obstructing: 
Instruction  17   
In  Count  T wo  of  the  Complaint,  the  Defendant,  KEITH 
KAUHANE,  is  charged  with  the  offense  of  Obstructing.  
A  person  commits  the  offense  of  Obstructing  if, 
whether  alone  or  with  others  and  having  no  legal 
privilege  to  do  so,  the  person  knowingly  or  recklessly 
persists  to  obstruct  any  highway  or  public  passage, 
after  a  warning  by  a  law  enforcement  officer  to  move 
to  prevent  or  to  cease  such  obstruction.   There  are 
three  material  elements  of  the  offense  of  Obstructing, 
each  of  which  the  prosecution  must  prove  beyond  a 
reasonable  doubt.   These  three  elements  are:  
[(1)] [T]hat on o
r about August 20, 2015, in the 
County of Maui, State of Hawai i, the 
De
fendant, whether alone or with others 
and having no legal privilege to do so, 
obstructed any highway or public passage; 
[(2)] [T]hat the Defenda
nt persisted to obstruct 
any highway or public passage, after a 
warning by a law enforcement officer to 
move to prevent or to cease such 
obstruction; and 
[(3)]  [T]hat the Defendant did so knowingly or 
recklessly as to the above elements. 
7           
         
 
      
 
    
       
         
         
         
         
        
       
        
         
         
         
 
        
       
         
      
           
           
 
            
          
  
          
       
 
        
        . . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In
struction  26  
“Obstructs
”  means  “re nders  impassable  without 
unreasonable  inconvenience  or  hazard.” 
The jury was also given an instruction on the choice-
of-evils defense:3 
Instruction  30 
It  is  a  defense  to  the  offense  charged  that  the 
defendant’s  conduct  was  legally  justified.   The  law 
recognizes  the  “choice  of  evils”  defense,  also 
referred  to  as  the  “necessity”  defense. 
The “choice of evils” defense justifies the 
defendant’s conduct if the defendant reasonably 
believes such conduct is necessary to avoid an 
imminent harm or evil to himself or another person. 
The conduct is justifiable if the harm or evil sought 
to be avoided by such conduct is greater than that 
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense 
charged. 
If the prosecution has not proved beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the defendant’s conduct was not legally 
justified by the “choice of evils” defense, then you 
must find the defendant not guilty of each of the 
offenses. If the prosecution has done so, then you 
must find that the “choice of evils” defense does not 
apply. If you find that the defendant was reckless or 
negligent in bringing about the situation requiring a 
3 The choice-of-evils defense is codified in HRS § 703-302 (2014), 
and in relevant part, provides the following: 
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid an 
imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another is justifiable 
provided that: 
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such conduct is 
greater than that sought to be prevented by the law defining 
the offense charged; 
(b) Neither the Code nor other law defining the offense provides 
exceptions or defenses dealing with the specific situation 
involved; and 
(c) A legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed 
does not otherwise plainly appear. 
8           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 4. Closing Arguments 
     
       
            
        
            
           
  
          
        
           
          
         
          
         
        
          
          
         
        ch
oice  of  harms  or  evils  or  in  appraising  the 
necessity  of  his  conduct,  the  justification  afforded 
by  this  defense  is  unavailable  as  a  defense  to  the 
offense  of  Obstructing. 
The  State  emphasized  that  the  “laws  of  Hawai i 
[existed]  for
  a  reason”   and  that  they  needed  to  be  followed  in 
order  to  protect  the  community.   Acknowledging  that  Haleakalā  was 
undoubtedly  a  sacred  place  to  many,  and  that  all  individuals  had 
the  rights  to  protest,  pray,  and  exercise  their  religions,  the 
State  urged  the  jury  to  find  Kauhane  guilty  as  charged  because 
Kauhane,  unlike  many  of  the  other  protestors  on  Crater  Road,  had 
chosen  to  break  the  law.  
In response, drawing upon Professor
 Holt-Padilla’s 
testimony about Native Hawaiian beliefs and Kauhane’s testimony 
about his belief of harm, the defense urged the jury to find that 
the choice-of-evils defense applied, and that Kauhane stayed in 
the middle of the road, despite it being unlawful to do so, to 
avert an even greater harm to himself and other Native Hawaiians. 
The defense argued: 
[W]eigh it out. What’s the harm versus what is he 
being imminently harmed with? What’s the difference? 
You’ve got to weigh it out, and you as jurors, I hope, 
will weigh in favor of my client and find that he 
believed that there was going to be imminent harm. 
You know, we all experience . . . pain in various 
ways. We all experience mental pain and grief and 
anxiety in various ways. Pain, grief, and anxiety, 
that equals harm. It’s the same thing. And again, 
the only way that you can really judge as jurors the 
vastness of the harm, the grief, the pain, the anxiety 
is to walk in Kalei’s [Kauhane’s] shoes. 
9           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
        
      
          
          
       
     
  
 
        
           
             
           
            
             
             
          (Emphasis added). 
The  State  objected  on  the  basis  of   the  “golden  rule,” 
which  the  circuit  court  sustained.   The  defense  then  rephrased 
its  argument,  omitting  any  reference  to  “walking  in  [Kauhane’s] 
shoes,”  as  follows:   
In light of Jury Instruction Number 30 [explaining the 
choice-of-evils defense], I’m asking that you find 
that my client was justified to be on the mountain at 
that point in time because he believed he was going to 
be suffering imminent harm from the desecration and 
the continuing desecration of Haleakalā. 
5. Conviction and Sentence 
The  jury  acquitted  Kauhane  of  the  Failure  to   Disperse 
and  Disorderly  Conduct  charges,  but  found  him  guilty  of 
Obstructing.   The  circuit  court  then  sentenced  Kauhane  to  one  day 
in  jail  with  credit  for  time  served,  six  months  of  probation,  and 
various  fines  and  fees.  
B. ICA Proceedings 
On  appeal,  Kauhane  argued:
  (1)  that   the  circuit  court 
erred  by  failing  to  instruct  the  jury  on  the  mitigating  defense 
to  the  Obstructing  charge,  which  would  have  reduced  his 
conviction  from  a  petty  misdemeanor  to  a  violation;  (2)  that  the 4 
4 HRS § 711-1105(5) provides that “Obstructing is a petty 
misdemeanor if the person persists in the conduct specified in subsection (1) 
after a warning by a law enforcement officer; otherwise it is a violation.” 
Kauhane argued that the jury should have been instructed on this mitigating 
defense, because there was evidence adduced at trial that Kauhane did not hear 
a warning by a law enforcement officer to remove himself from the road. 
Because the ICA agreed with Kauhane and granted a new trial on that basis, 
this opinion does not discuss the parties’ arguments on that issue. 
10           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
        
       
       
       
       
        
          
       
           
            
   State’s complaint was defective because it failed to include the 
statutory definition of “obstructs”; and (3) that the circuit  
court erroneously sustained the State’s “golden rule” objection, 
which precluded him from accurately presenting the requirements 
of the choice-of-evils defense to the jury.5 
Kauhane  first  explained  that  under  HRS  §  711-1100, 
“obstructs”  meant  to  “render[]  impassable  without  unreasonable 
inconvenience  or  hazard.”   By  omitting  that  definition  from  the 
complaint,  Kauhane  alleged  that  the  State  had  not  afforded  him 
sufficient  notice  of  what  he  was  required  to  defend  against  and 
had  violated  his  right  to  due  process.   Had  he  known  the 
definition  of  “obstructs,”  he  argued,  he  could  have  “adduced 
evidence  .  .  .  that  his  conduct  did  not  present  a  hazardous 
situation[,]”  or  “could  have  developed  a  defense  that  his 
conduct[,]  at  worst[,]  created  a  reasonable  inconvenience,  given 
.  .  .  his  rights  to  peaceably  assemble  and  protest  []  official 
government  action.”   In  light  of  these  arguments,  Kauhane  asked 
for  the  ICA  to  dismiss  the  State’s  complaint  without  prejudice.   
Kauhane also alleged that by sustaining the State’s 
“golden rule” objection, the circuit court prevented him from 
properly explaining to the jury in his closing argument that it 
5 On appeal, Kauhane also argued that insufficient evidence 
supported his conviction. The ICA rejected this argument. Because Kauhane 
does not challenge the sufficiency of the evidence on certiorari, we do not 
address the issue further. 
11           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
           
    
        
          
         
        
 
       
         
         
      
          
         
          
         
        
       
        
           could contemplate Kauhane’s choice-of-evils defense by “walking 
in [his] shoes.” Thus, in the alternative, he requested a new 
trial on that basis. 
The State agreed with Kauhane that: (1) the circuit 
court had erred by
 failing to instruct the jury on Obstructing’s 
mitigating defense; (2) the complaint was defective; and (3) the 
circuit court had erred by sustaining the “golden rule” 
objection. 
Despite its concession with respect to the
 complaint’s 
deficiency, however, the State noted that because Kauhane did not 
object to the charge until his appeal, the Motta/Wells rule 
applied.6 Under this post-conviction “liberal construction 
rule,” the State contended that Kauhane could not show (1) that 
the charge was “so
 obviously defective that by no reasonable 
construction [could] it be said to charge the offense for which 
the conviction was had”; or (2) that he was substantially 
prejudiced. The State thus contended that Kauhane’s conviction 
could not be vacated on this ground. 
In its published opinion, the ICA
 vacated the circuit 
court’s judgment and remanded the case for a new trial, based on 
12 6 The  Motta/Wells  rule  derives  from  State  v.  Motta,  66  Haw.  89,  657 
P.2d  1019  (1983),  and  State  v.  Wells,  78  Hawai i  373,  894  P. 2d  70  (1995).   In 
Motta,  this  court  adopted  a  “liberal  construction  standard  for  post-conviction 
challenges  to  indictments,”  while  in  Wells,  we  limited  this  standard  to 
judicial  review  of  charges  challenged  for  the  first  time  on  appeal.             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
     
    
            
               
            
        
             
      
         
            
            
       its  conclusion  that  the  court  had  erred  by  failing  to  instruct 
the  jury  on  the  mitigating  defense  to  Obstructing.   Kauhane,  144 7
Hawai i  at  112,  114-16,  436  P.3d  at   1195,  1197-99.   The  ICA 
rejected  Kauhane’s  argument  that  the  State’s  complaint  was 
defective,  however,  and  found  that  although  the  circuit  court  had 
erred  in  sustaining  the  State’s  “golden  rule”  objection,  such 
error  was  harmless.   Id.  at  113-14,  120-22,  436  P.3d  at  1196-98, 
1203-05. 
To  determine  the  sufficiency  of  the  complaint,  which, 
as  the  State  pointed  out,  was  challenged  for  the  first  time  on 
appeal,  the  ICA  indicated  that  it  was  applying  the  Motta/Wells 
rule.   Id.  at  113,  436  P.3d  at  1196.   Accordingly,  it  explained 
that  it  would  only  vacate  Kauhane’s  conviction  based  on  the 
sufficiency  of  the  charge  if  he  could  show:  (1)  that  the 
complaint  could  not
  within  reason  be  construed  to  charge  a  crime; 
7 The  ICA  held  that  the  circuit  court’s  failure  to  instruct  the  jury 
on  the  mitigating  defense  to  Obstructing  was  plain  error.   Kauhane,  144 
Hawai i  at  114,  436  P.3d  at  1197.   The  ICA  explained  that  under  HRS  §  711-
1105(5),  Obstructing  could  be  either  a  petty  misdemeanor  or  a  violation, 
dependent  on  whether  the  individual  persisted  in  blocking  a  highway  or  public 
passage  after  a  warning  by  a  law  enforcement  officer.   Id.  
Here, the ICA con
cluded, there was some evidence that Kauhane may 
not have received a warning to clear the roadway, and that therefore, his 
offense could have qualified as a violation. Id. at 116, 436 P.3d at 1199. 
The ICA noted that Captain Holokai did not recall giving Kauhane an individual 
warning, that Sergeant Kapahulehua only recalled Captain Holokai speaking 
“very loudly” to the general group, and that Kauhane had testified that he did 
not hear any warning. Id. 
The ICA thus concluded that, because evidence existed in the 
record to support Kauhane’s contention that he may not have been warned to 
move, the circuit court had erred by failing to provide instructions to the 
jury on this mitigating defense. Id. 
13           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
        
        
          
          
           
         
       or (2) that he was prejudiced. Id.  
The  ICA  found  that  the  complaint   adequately  charged  the 
offense  of  Obstructing  and  that  the  complaint  was  sufficient  as  a 
matter  of  law.   Id.  at  113-14,  436  P.3d  at  1196-97.  
Specifically,  the  ICA  determined  that  the  statutory  definition  of 
“obstructs”  within  the  Obstructing  statute  comported  with  its 
common  definition,  and  that  the  use  of  the  term  without  its 
statutory  definition  would  still  be  “readily  comprehensible  to 
persons  of  common  understanding.”   Id.   
Further,  the  ICA  explained  that   Kauhane  failed  to  show 
that  he  was  prejudiced  by  the  complaint.   Id.  at  114,  436  P.3d  at 
1197.   Noting  that  the  parties  had  agreed  upon  jury  instructions 
that  included  the  statutory  definition  of  “obstructs,”  the  ICA 
rejected  Kauhane’s  contentions  that  he  neither  had  adequate 
notice  of  the  State’s  burden  of  proof  nor  the  elements  of  the 
crime.   Id.   
And, although the ICA agreed
 with Kauhane that the 
circuit court erred by sustaining the State’s “golden rule” 
objection, it concluded that this error was harmless. Id. at 
122, 436 P.3d at 1203. Specifically, the ICA explained, Kauhane 
was not prejudiced by this error, as the argument he attempted to 
make – that the choice-of-evils defense entitled a jury to 
consider a defendant’s subjective belief by placing themselves 
14           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
    II. STANDARD OF REVIEW “in  the  [defendant’s]  shoes”  –  was  not  proper.   Id.  at  120-22, 
436  P.3d  at  1203-05  (citing  State  v.  Maumalanga,  90  Hawai i  58, 
63,  976  P.2d  372,  377  (1988)
  (explaining  that  the  choice-of-evils 
defense  assesses  a  defendant’s  belief  under  a  “reasonable”  person 
standard).   Moreover,  “[i]n  light  of  Jury  Instruction  Number  30,” 
which  detailed  the  defense  and  included  language  that  the 
“defendant  reasonably  believe[d]  such  conduct  [was]  necessary,” 
the  ICA  explained  that  Kauhane  was  able  to  properly  assert  the 
choice-of-evils  defense,  despite  his  claim  otherwise.   Id.  at 
122,  436  P.3d  at  1205. 
C. Supreme Court Proceedings 
On  certiorari,
  Kauhane  again  argues:  (1)  that   the 
State’s  complaint  was  deficient
  for  failing  to  include  the 
statutory  definition  of  “obstructs”;  and  (2)  that  Kauhane  was 
prejudiced  by  the  circuit  court’s  erroneous  sustaining  of  the 
State’s  “golden  rule”  objection,  in  light  of  the  arguments  he 
sought  to  present  to  the  jury  with  respect  to  his  choice-of-evils 
defense.  
“Whether  [a  charge]  sets  forth  all   the  essential 
elements  of  [a  charged]  offense  .  .  .  is  a  question  of  law[,] 
which  [this  court  reviews]  under  the  de  novo,  or  right/wrong, 
standard.”   State  v.  Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  383,  390,  219  P.3d 
15           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
           
 
    
         1170, 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
State v. Wells, 78 Hawai i 373, 379, 894 P.2d 70, 76  (1995) 
(citations
 omitted)). 
III.   DISCUSSION 
As  set  forth  below,  we
  conclude  that  the  ICA  erred  by 
failing  to  properly  apply  the  Motta/Wells  rule  and  by  holding 
that  the  State’s  complaint  was  sufficient.   We  also  conclude  that 
defense  counsel’s  argument  on  the  choice-of-evils  defense  was  not 
improper,  and  that  defense  counsel  should  have  been  able  to  ask 
the  jury  to  consider  Kauhane’s  subjective  belief  of  harm. 
A. The State’s Complaint Was
 Insufficient. 
1. The ICA Erred by Failing to Apply the Motta/Wells Rule. 
As  an  initial  matter,  we   note  that  the  ICA  erred  by 
misapplying  the  Motta/Wells  rule.   When  a  criminal  defendant 
challenges  the  sufficiency  of  a  charge  in  a  timely  manner,  an 
appellate  court  will  uphold  that  charge  if:  (1)  it  contains  the 
elements
  of  the  offense;  and  (2)  it  sufficiently  apprises  the 
defendant  of  what  the  defendant  must  be  prepared  to  meet.   State 
v.  Mita,  124  Hawai i  385,  390,  245  P.3d  458,  463  (2010);  State  v. 
Jendrusch,  58  Haw.  279,  283,  567  P.2d  1242,  1245  (1977).   In 
other  words,  “[t]he  relevant  inquiry  .  .  .  is  whether  or  not  the 
charge  [has]  provided  the  accused  with  fair  notice  of  the 
16           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
   
       
         [offense’s]  essential  elements.”   Mita,  124  Hawai i  at  390,  245 
P.3d  at  463  (citation  omitted). 8
However,  when  a  defendant  challenges  the  sufficiency  of 
a  charge  for  the  first  time  on  appeal,  an  appellate  court  will 
apply  a  more  liberal  standard  of  review,  called  the  Motta/Wells 
rule.   See,  e.g.,  State  v.  Merino,  81  Hawai i  198,  213,  915  P.2d 
672,  687
  (1996)  (explaining  that  the  Motta/Wells  rule  applies  to 
challenges  to  oral  charges,  informations,  and  complaints  raised 
for  the  first  time  on  appeal).   Under  the  Motta/Wells  rule, 
charges  challenged  for  the  first  time  on  appeal  are  presumed 
valid.   Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  at  399-400,  219  P.3d  at  1186-87.  
Accordingly,  we  will  only  vacate  a  defendant’s  conviction  under 
this  standard  if  the  defendant  can  show:  (1)  that  the  charge 
cannot  reasonably  be  construed  to  allege  a  crime;  or  (2)  that  the 
defendant  was  prejudiced.   Motta,  66  Haw.  at  91,  657  P.2d  at 
1020.  
Here, because Kauhane challenged the sufficiency of
 the 
complaint for the first time on appeal, the Motta/Wells rule is 
applicable. Although the ICA purported to apply that rule, 
17 8 Although  not  implicated  in  this  case,  we  note  that  in  addition  to 
including  all  of  an  offense’s  essential  elements,  a  charge  must  also  include 
that  offense’s  requisite  state  of  mind.   See  State  v.  Gonzalez,  128  Hawai i 
314,  288  P.3d  788  (2012)  (citing  State  v.  Nesmith,  127  Hawai i  48,  276  P.3d 
617
  (2012)).   If  a  charge  fails  to  do  so,  it  will  not  pass  muster  under  the 
Motta/Wells  rule.   See  State  v.  Apollonio,  130  Hawai i  353,  311  P.3d  676 
(2013).           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
   2. The Complaint was Defective Under 
Review for Timely Challenges. the Standard of however,  it  appears  that  the  ICA  instead  analyzed  the  language  of 
the  charge  using  the  principles  applicable  to  timely  challenges.   
See  Kauhane,  144  Hawai i  at  113-14,  436  P.3d  at   1196-97  (“We 
conclude  that  the  term  ‘obstructs’  as  defined  in  HRS  §  711-1100 
comports  with  its  commonly  understood  definition,  and  use  of  that 
term  in  the  .  .  .  [c]omplaint  is  readily  comprehensible  to 
persons  of  common  understanding.”).   
As  set  forth  below,  we   respectfully  disagree  with  that 
analysis,  and  further  hold  that  the  charge  was  deficient  even 
under  the  Motta/Wells  rule. 
As  described  above,  a  charge  will  only  be  sufficient 
when  it  “provide[s]  the  accused  with  fair  notice  of  the 
[offense’s]  essential  elements.”   Mita,  124  Hawai i  at  390,  245 
P.3d
  at  463  (citation  omitted).   A  charge’s  essential  elements 
include  conduct,  attendant  circumstances,  and  results  of  conduct.  
State  v.  Sprattling,  99  Hawai i  312,  329  n.6,  55  P.3d  276,  293 
n.6  (2002)  (quoting  Merino,  81  Hawai i  at  214,  915  P.2d  at  688); 
HRS  §  702-205.  
“[W]here  [a]  statute  sets  forth   with  reasonable  clarity 
all  essential  elements  of  the  crime  intended  to  be  punished,  and 
fully  defines  the  offense  in  unmistakable  terms  readily 
comprehensible  to  persons  of  common  understanding,  a  charge  drawn 
18           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
       
  
       
       
        
        
    
      
  
        
          
          
       
         
          
          
         
     
      in  the  language  of  the  statute  [will  be]  sufficient.”   State  v. 
Nesmith,  127  Hawai i  48,  53,  276   P.3d  617,  622   (2012)  (citing 
Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  at  393,  219  P.3d  at  1180).   However,  “[i]n 
some  cases,  []  a  charge  tracking  the  language  of  the  statute 
defining  the  offense  [will]  violate[]  an  accused’s  due  process 
rights.   Id.   
This is so because although “some statutes in our 
criminal laws so clearly and specifically define the 
offense that nothing more is required in a charge than 
the adoption of language of the statute, other 
statutes fail to sufficiently describe the crime and a 
charge couched merely in the language of such a 
statute would violate due process .” 
Id.  (citing  State  v.  Israel,   78  Hawai i  66,  73,  890  P.2d   303,  310 
(1995)  (emphasis  added)  (internal  quotations  and  brackets 
omitted)). 
The charge at issue here falls
 into this latter 
category because it failed to allege all of Obstructing’s 
essential elements. By doing so, it also failed to apprise 
Kauhane of what he was required to defend against. 
Under HRS § 711-1105(1)(a), “[a] person commits the 
offense of Obstructing if, whether alone or with others and 
having no legal privilege to do so, the person knowingly or 
recklessly . . . [o]bstructs any highway or public passage[.]” 
(Emphasis added). HRS Chapter 711 defines “obstructs” to mean 
“renders impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or 
hazard.” HRS § 711-1100. 
19           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
        
            
       
       
        
          
       
          
           
         
       
          
         
    
           
         
  2.   
            
        Here, the State’s charge tracked the language of the 
Obstructing statute, but did not include the statutory definition 
of “obstructs” as provided for in HRS § 711-1100. The State was 
required to include this definition, however, because “render[ing 
a highway or public passage] impassable without unreasonable 
inconvenience or hazard” comprised an essential element of the 
offense as a result of conduct. See HRS § 711-1100. 
Without this element, Kauhane could not have been 
sufficiently apprised of what he was required to defend against. 
Contrary to the ICA, we do not believe that the statutory meaning 
of “obstructs” comports with its common meaning. For example, 
Merriam-Webster’s dictionary defines “obstructs” as “to block or 
close up by an obstacle[;] to hinder from passage, action, or 
operation[;] IMPEDE[ or] to cut off from sight,” while Black’s 
Law Dictionary defines “obstructs” as: 
1. To block or stop up (a road, passageway, etc.); to 
close up or close off, esp. by obstacle <obstruct the 
runway>. To make difficu lt or impossible;  to keep        
from  happening;  hinder  <to  obstruct  the  peace 
process>. 3. To cut
 off a  line of vision; to shut 
out <the new construction obstructs our view of the 
road>. 
See  Obstruct,   Merriam-Webster  Collegiate  Dictionary  (11th  ed. 
2003);  see  also  Obstruct,  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  1246  (10th  ed. 
2014).   
Under  these  common  definitions,  any  blockage  of  passage 
is  sufficient  to  constitute  obstruction.   This  is  not  the  case 
20           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
        
      
     
       under HRS § 711-1100, however, which is more protective of 
freedom of speech and assembly and provides that conduct 
constitutes obstruction only if it poses “unreasonable 
inconvenience or hazard.” (Emphasis added). 
This  more  protective  approach   is  confirmed  by  HRS 
§  711-1105's  commentary,  as  well  as  by  the  commentary  on  Model 
Penal  Code  (MPC)  §  250.7,  the  model  statute  from  which  HRS  §  711-
1105  was  substantially  derived.   See  State  v.  Aiwohi,  109  Hawai i 
115,  126  n.13,
  123  P.3d  1210,  1221  n.13  (2005)  (explaining  that 
the  MPC  as  adopted  in  1962  was  used  by  the  Judicial  Council  of 
Hawai i  as  the  guide  for  the  Hawai i  Penal  Code)  (citing  State  v. 
Gaylord,  78  Hawai i  127,  140  n.22,  890  P.2d  1167,  1180  n.22 
(1995)  (citation  omitted)). 
Specifically, the commentary to
 HRS § 711-1105 states 
that: 
Normally,  the  act  of  obstructing  a  public  highway 
presents  a  great  public  inconvenience  and  serves  no 
useful  purpose.   However,  where  the  obstruction  is 
caused  by  a  crowd  listening  to  a  speaker,  or  even  by  a 
crowd  protesting  some  official  action,  important  goals 
are  served  by  leaving  the  group  as  free  from 
restriction  as  possible. 
HRS  §  711-1105  cmt. 
The  commentary  on  MPC  §  250.7  also  explains  that  the 
MPC’s  definition  of  “obstructs”  –  “to  render  impassable  without 
unreasonable  hazard  or  delay”  –  played  a  “crucial  role”  in 
confining  the  reach  of  the  Obstructing  statute  “within  acceptable 
21           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
limits.”   ALI  Model  Penal  Code  and  Commentaries  Part  II,  §  250.7, 
at  403  (1980)  (emphases  added).   And,  it  further  explains  that 
the  MPC  adopted  such  a  “precise”  definition  of  “obstructs” 
because  “[n]ot  every  incidental  impact  on  access  to  streets  and 
highways”  warranted  a  “restriction  on  speech  and  assembly.”   Id. 
(explaining  that  an  individual’s  “presence  in  an  obstructive 
gathering”  was  not  criminal  “so  long  as  .  .  .  the  public  [could] 
go  on  their  way  with  reasonable  safety  and  convenience”).   This 
definition  of  “obstructs,”  the  commentary  notes,  would  therefore 
“preclude[]  the  suppression  of  otherwise  lawful  activity  on  the 
ground  of  some  trivial  inconvenience  to  [a]  passerby,”  and 
furthermore,  “give  the  widest  possible  scope  to  picketing, 
protest,  and  other  lawful  assembly,  consistent  with  the  need  to 
protect  reasonable  public  access  to  highways  and  other  public 
passages.”   Id.  at  403-04.  
It  is  thus  clear,   from  examining  Hawai i’s  Obstructing 
statute  and
  its  commentary,  as  well  as  the  commentary  of  MPC 
§  250.7,  that  the  statutory  definition  of  “obstructs”  does  not 
reflect  the  term  as  commonly  understood.   Rather,  the  statutory 
definition  of  “obstructs”  includes  a  limitation  of 
“unreasonableness”  for  the  specific  purpose  of  protecting  freedom 
of  speech  and  freedom  of  association.   We  do  not  believe  that  a 
person  of  common  understanding  would  be  aware  of  this  additional 
22           
       
  
    
       
        
        
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meaning. 
This  analysis  is  confirmed   by  an  examination  of  State 
v.  Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  383,  219  P.3d   1170  (2009),  and  State  v. 
Pacquing,  139  Hawai i  302,  389  P.3d  897  (2016).   In  Wheeler,  this 
court  held  that  a  charge  for  Operating  a  Vehicle  Under  the 
Influence  of  an  Intoxicant  (OVUII)  was  fatally  defective  because 
it  failed  to  include  the  statutory  definition  of  “operates.”   121 
Hawai i  at  393,  219  P.3d  at  1180.   Under  the  statutory 
definition,  the  term  “operates”  meant  to  “drive  or  assume  actual 
physical  control  of  a  vehicle  upon  a  public  way,  street,  road,  or 
highway[.]”   Id.  at  391,  219  P.3d  at  1178  (emphasis  added).   In 
contrast,  the  commonly  understood  definition  of  the  term  meant 
“to  perform  a  function  or  operation,  or  [to]  produce  an 
effect[,]”  regardless  of  where  that  took  place.   Id.  at  394,  219 
P.3d  at  1181  (citing  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  1091  (6th  ed.  1990)).  
This court concluded that the
 statutory definition of 
“operates,” which included the attendant circumstance of 
location, did “not comport with its commonly understood 
definition,” was “not readily comprehensible to persons of common 
understanding,” and did not provide the defendant with adequate 
notice of what he was required to defend against. Id. 
Accordingly,  we  held   that  an  OVUII  charge  would  not  be  sufficient 
unless  it  alleged  that  the  offense  had  occurred  on  a  public 
23           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
        
          
         
         roadway. Id. at 396, 219 P.3d at 1183. 
This  court  came  to   a  similar  conclusion  in  Pacquing, 
holding  that  any  charge  for  the  unauthorized  possession  of 
confidential  personal  information  (UPCPI)  would  have  to  include 
the  statutory  definition  of  “confidential  personal  information” 
in  order  to  be  sufficient.   139  Hawai i  302,  308,  389   P.3d  897, 
903  (2016).   As  provided  by  statute,  the  term  “confidential 
personal  information”  meant  “information  in  which  an  individual 
[had]  a  significant  privacy  interest,  including  but  not  limited 
to  a  driver’s  license  number,  a  social  security  number,  an 
identifying  number  of  a  depository  account,  a  bank  account 
number,  [or]  a  password[.]”   Id.   This  definition,  we  concluded, 
did  not  comport  with  its  common  meaning  of  “secret  or  private 
knowledge  belonging  or  relating  to  a  particular  person  or 
designed  for  use  by  that  person.”   Id.   Because  the  phrase 
“‘confidential  personal  information’  [did]  not  convey  the  extent 
or  limits  of  the  statutory  definition[,]”  we  held  that  the  UPCPI 
charge  did  not  “sufficiently  apprise”  the  defendant  of  what  he 
was  required  to  defend  against.   Id.   
Here, as in Wheeler
 and Pacquing , the State’s charge 
against Kauhane failed to “convey the extent or limits of the 
statutory definition” and failed to apprise Kauhane of what he 
was required to defend against. Kauhane would not have 
24           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
          
          
           
        
         
         
        
      
          
      3. The Complaint 
Rule. was Insufficient Under the Motta/Wells “obstructed” Crater Road in violation of HRS § 711-1105 had he 
merely blocked it; he only would have “obstructed” the road for 
the purposes of the statute had he blocked it by causing an 
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard. Because the State was 
required to include the definition of “obstructs” in its charge 
as an essential element of the offense, and ultimately, prove 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Kauhane’s conduct would have 
prevented the convoy’s passage without unreasonable inconvenience 
or hazard, the charge was fatally defective and did not provide 
Kauhane  with  adequate  notice.   
As  set
  forth  above,  although   the  ICA  purported  to  apply 
the  Motta/Wells  rule,  it  actually  applied  the  standard  of  review 
for  an  issue  raised  at  the  trial  level.   We  hold,  however,  that 
even  under  the  Motta/Wells  rule,  the  complaint  was  insufficient 
and  must  be  dismissed. 
In  State  v.  Sprattling ,  99  Hawai i  312,  317,  55   P.3d 
276,  281  (2002),  the  defendant  argued  that  an  Assault  in  the 
Third  Degree  charge  was  fatally  defective  because,  by  alleging 
“injury”  instead  of  “bodily  injury,”  the  State  failed  to  include 
one  of  the  charge’s  essential  elements.   This  court  rejected  that 
argument,  and  instead  held  that  it  was  sufficient  under  the 
Motta/Wells  rule.   Id.  at  321,  55  P.3d  at  285.   
25           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
  
         
       
           As  an  initial  matter,  this  court  explained  that  the 
charge  could  still  “be  reasonably  construed  to  charge  assault  in 
the  third  degree.”   Id.  at  320,  55  P.3d  at  284.   Although  the 
charge  failed  to  include  the  word  “bodily,”  we  concluded  that 
this  omission  was  not  a  fatal  defect  because  the  term  “bodily” 
merely  served  as  a  modifier  to  the  word  “injury,”  and  did  not,  on 
its  own,  constitute  an  essential  element  of  the  offense.   Id.  at 
319,  55  P.3d  at  283.   This  court  also  concluded  that  this 
omission  did  not  “alter  the  nature  and  cause  of  the  accusation 
such  that  a  person  of  common  understanding  would  fail  to 
comprehend  it.”   Id.   Even  without  the  term  “bodily,”  a  defendant 
could  still  comprehend  the  charge  to  include  “bodily  injury” 
because  “bodily  injury”  was  inherent  in  the  common  definition  of 
“assault.”   Id.   For  this  reason,   and  because  the  defendant  did 
not  allege  that  he  was  prejudiced,  this  court  held  that  the 
State’s  charge  passed  muster  under  the  Motta/Wells  rule. 9 
In contrast to the State’s charge
 in Sprattling , which 
imperfectly stated an element of the offense, here, the State’s 
failure to include the statutory definition of “obstructs” 
amounted to an omission of an entire element of the offense. 
9 Specifically,  we  held  that  “[t]he  word  ‘assault’  by  definition 
implie[d]  bodily  injury[,  as]  it  [was]  defined  as  ‘any  intentional  display  of 
force  such  as  would  give  the  victim  reason  to  fear  or  expect  bodily  harm[.]”  
Sprattling,  99  Hawai i  at   319,  55  P.3d  at  283  (emphasis  and  omission  in 
original)  (citing  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  114-15  (6th  ed.  1990)). 
26           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      B. The State’s “Golden Rule” Objection Was Incorrect. 
           
 Thus,  unlike  the  charge  in  Sprattling,  the  charge  here  cannot 
reasonably  be  construed  to  charge  an  offense  because  the  common 
definition  of  “obstructs”  did  not  comport  with  its  statutory 
definition.   As  a  result,  even  under  the  more  liberal  Motta/Wells 
rule,  the  charge  was  insufficient,  and  accordingly,  must  be 
dismissed.   See  Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  at  386,  400,  219  P.3d  at 
1173,  1187  (affirming  the  ICA’s  judgment,  which  vacated  and 
remanded  the  case  with  instructions  to  dismiss  without  prejudice, 
because  the  charge  was  deficient).10 
In  addition  to  challenging  the  sufficiency  of  the 
complaint,  Kauhane  also  argued  to  the  ICA  that  the  circuit  court 
erred  by  sustaining  the  State’s  “golden  rule”  objection  during 
his  closing  argument,  which  precluded  him  from  informing  the 
jurors  that  they  could  consider  Kauhane’s  belief,  for  the 
purposes  of  the  choice-of-evils  defense,  by  “walking  in  his 
shoes.”   Although  the  ICA  agreed  with  Kauhane  that  the  argument 
was  not  improper  under  the  “golden  rule,”  it  further  held  that  it 
was  improper  because  it  misstated  the  law  on  the  choice-of-evils 
defense. 
10 In light of our determination, we do not address whether Kauhane 
was prejudiced. 
27           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      1. The “Golden Rule” Argument Did Not Apply. 
As  the  ICA  concluded,  the  circuit  court  incorrectly 
sustained  the  State’s  objection.   Under  a  typical  “golden  rule” 
argument,  “a  lawyer  asks  the  jurors  to  reach  a  verdict  by 
imagining  themselves  or  someone  they  care  about  in  the  place  of 
the  injured  plaintiff  or  crime  victim.”   Golden-rule  argument, 
Black’s  Law  Dictionary  807  (10th  ed.  2014).   These  arguments  are 
widely  condemned  in  both  civil  and  criminal  cases  because  they 
“ask  the  jurors  to  become  advocates  for  the  plaintiff  or  victim 
and  to  ignore  their  obligation  to  exercise  calm  and  reasonable 
judgment[.]”   Kauhane,  144  Hawai i  at  121,   436  P.3d  at  1204 
(citing  Ditto  v.  McCurdy,  86  Hawai i  93,  127,  947  P.2d  961,  995 
(App.  1997)  (citation  omitted),  aff’d  in  part,  rev’d  on  other 
grounds,  86  Hawai i  84,  947  P.2d  952  (1997)).   As  the  ICA  noted, 
unlike  a  typical  “golden  rule”  argument,  the  defense’s  argument 
in  the  instant  case  did  not  attempt  to  inflame  the  passions  of 
the  jury.   Id.   Furthermore,  the  “golden  rule”  argument  did  not 
apply  because  Kauhane,  who  asked  the  jury  to  “walk  in  [his] 
shoes”  for  the  purposes  of  the  choice-of-evils  defense,  was  a 
defendant,  rather  than  a  civil  plaintiff  or  victim.   Id.  at  122, 
436  P.3d  at  1205.   Accordingly,  we  agree  with  the  ICA  that  it  was 
error  for  the  circuit  court  to  sustain  the  State’s  objection  when 
it  was  based  on  that  ground. 
28           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
     2. A Defendant’s Subjective Belief of Harm is Relevant For 
the Purposes of the Choice-of-Evils Defense. 
Although  the  ICA  correctly  concluded   that  the  circuit 
court  erred  in  sustaining  the  State’s  objection,  we  disagree  with 
its  analysis  of  whether  that  error  was  harmless.   Specifically, 
the  ICA  concluded  that  defense  counsel’s  statement  to  the  jury  – 
that  “the  only  way  to  judge  the  vastness  of  the  harm  to  Kauhane 
was  to  walk  in  [his]  shoes”  –  was  improper  for  the  purposes  of 
the  choice-of-evils  defense  because  it  failed  to  incorporate  a 
reasonable  person  standard.   Kauhane,  144   Hawai i  at  122,  436 
P.3d  at  1205  (citing  Maumalanga,  90  Hawai i  at  58,  976  P.2d  at 
372). 11 
Thus,  it  appears  the  ICA  was  suggesting  that  defense 
counsel  was  misstating  the  law  by  not  referring  to  the 
reasonableness  of  Kauhane’s  belief.   However,  although  Kauhane’s 
belief  had  to  be  objectively  reasonable,  it  was  also  necessary 
that  Kauhane,  in  fact,  subjectively  held  such  a  belief.   Thus,  it 
11 In  Maumalanga,  90  Hawai i   at  58,  976  P.2d  at  372,  this  court  held 
that  “all  of  the  elements  of  the  choice  of  evils  defense  [were]  contained 
within  the  express  language  of  HRS  §  703-302[,]”  and  further,  that  any  “common 
law  formulations  .  .  .  [were]  superseded  by  the  adoption  of  the  Hawai i  Penal 
Code.”   See  id.;  see  also  State  v.  Friedman,  93  Hawai i  63,  71,  996  P.2d  268, 
276  (2000).   This  court  based  its  ruling  on  the  concurring  and  dissenting 
opinion  of  then-Judge  Acoba,  who  acknowledged  in  the  ICA  that  “[t]he  term 
‘believes’  in  HRS  §  703-302  meant  ‘reasonably  believes[,]’”  and  further,  that 
“this  definition  [of  belief]  .  .  .  was  intended  by  the  legislature  to 
incorporate  a  ‘reasonable  [person]  standard.’”   See  State  v.  Maumalanga,  90 
Hawai i  96,  112  n.3,  976  P.2d  410,  426  n.3  (App.  1998);  HRS  §  703-300  (“In 
this  chapter,  unless  a  different  meaning  is  plainly  required:  ‘Believes’  means 
reasonably  believes”);  HRS  §  703-302  supp.  cmt.  (explaining  that  the 
legislature  adopted  a  reasonable  person  standard  for  the  choice-of-evils 
defense). 
29           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
          
       
         
        
 
  
    
            /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald was proper for Kauhane’s counsel to address Kauhane’s subjective 
belief in his closing argument. Moreover, we do not interpret 
Kauhane’s argument as suggesting that the jury improperly 
disregard the requirement that the belief be reasonable. Thus, 
the ICA incorrectly concluded that defense counsel’s argument was 
improper. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
For  the  reasons   set  forth  above,  we  vacate  the  ICA’s 
January  2,  2019  Judgment  on  Appeal  and  the  circuit  court’s 
September  9,  2016  Judgment  of  Conviction  and  Probation,  and 
remand  the  case  to  the  circuit  court  with  instructions  to  dismiss 
without  prejudice. 
Hayden  Aluli 
for  petitioner 
/s/
 Paula A. Nakayama 
Gerald  K.  Enriques   
(Richard  K.  Minatoya 
on  the  brief) 
for  respondent /s/ Sabrina S.  McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
30 