***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
TRACY SOUZA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-13-0002043 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13-0002043; CRIMINAL  NO. 12-1-1028) 
 
MAY 30, 2018  
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  In State v. Murray , 116 Hawai i 3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007), 
this court held that if a defendant offers to stipulate to the 
prior conviction element of a charged offense, the trial court 
must accept the stipulation.  This appeal arises from a 
challenge by Tracy Souza asserting that the circuit court 
refused to accept his offer to stipulate to his prior felony Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0002043
30-MAY-2018
09:22 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 conviction, which constituted an element of an offense with 
which he was charged.  We hold that the manner in which the 
circuit court addressed  Souza’s offer to stipulate to the prior 
conviction element was inconsistent with our decision in Murray.  
Because this error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, 
we vacate the judgment and remand the case for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
I. BACKGROUND  
  
On July 16, 2012,  Souza was charged by felony 
information in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court) with place to keep unloaded firearms other than pistols 
and revolvers, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 
134-24 (hereinafter “place to keep firearm”) ,1 and ownership or 
                                                           
 1 HRS § 134 -24 (2011) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 (a) Except as provided in section 134 -5, all firearms 
shall be confined to the possessor’s place of business, 
residence, or sojourn; provided that it shall be lawful to 
carry unloaded firearms in an enclosed container from the 
place of purchase to the purchaser’s place of business, 
residence, or sojourn, or between these places upon change 
of place of business, residence, or sojourn, or between 
these places and the following:  
 (1) A place of repair;  
 (2) A target range;  
 (3) A licensed dealer’s place of business;  
 (4) An organized, scheduled firearms show or exhibit;  
 (5) A place of formal hunter or firearm use training 
or instruction; or  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 possession prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person 
convicted of certain crimes, in violation of HRS § 134- 7(b) 
(hereinafter “ prohibited possession of firearm ”).2  Souza pleaded 
not guilty to the charges, and a jury trial was held .3   
A. Proposed Stipulation 
  Prior to jury selection, the circuit court discussed 
with both parties the subject of a possible stipulation as to 
Souza’s previous conviction of a felony offense.  The court 
noted that both the State and Souza drafted proposed 
stipulations but that an agreement had not been reached as to 
which version would be used at trial.
  The court stated the 
following:  
 After reviewing both of the stipulations, it’s my 
view, that, absent a specific agreement by both of you, 
then the State would be perfectly within its right to call 
whatever witnesses they felt are necessary and relevant -- 
obviously it would be 
-- have to be approved and permitted 
by the Court -- to establish that element of a prior 
conviction.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
 (6) A police station.  
 2 HRS § 134 -7 provides in relevant part as follows:  
 (b) No person who  is under indictment for, or has 
waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the 
circuit court for, or has been convicted in this State or 
elsewhere of having committed a felony, or any crime of 
violence, or an illegal sale of any drug shall own, 
possess, or control any firearm or ammunition therefor.  
HRS § 134- 7(b) (2011).  
 3 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4  And, so, with that, [defense  counsel], has Mr. Souza 
arrived at any decisions as to whether or not he’ll accept 
the State’s version of the stipulation?  
  Defense counsel responded , “Yes,”  and indicated that 
he wished to make a record.  Counsel stated that while the 
defense was seeking to exclude the naming  of Souza’s prior 
convictions, the State’s stipulation included facts that were 
not elements of the offense of prohibited possession of firearm
 
and therefore they were not relevant.4  As an example, defense 
counsel cited paragraph 3 of the State ’s proposed stipulation--
regarding Souza not having been pardoned of the prior 
conviction--as already covered by Souza’s stipulation that he 
has a prior conviction.  Counsel also pointed to paragraph 4 of 
the State’s proposed stipulation--that Souza was prohibited from 
                                                           
 4 The record on appeal does not include Souza’s proposed 
stipulation.  The State’s proposed stipulation provided, inter alia, as 
follows: 
1. As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, had 
been convicted of a felony offense in the State of 
Hawaii. 
2. As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, knew 
that he had been convicted of a felony offense in the 
State of Hawaii.  
3. The Defendant, Tracy  Souza, has not been pardoned for 
such felony offense.  
4. As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy 
Souza, is prohibited from owning or possessing any 
firearms or ammunition.  
5. As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy 
Souza, knew that he was prohibited from owning or 
possessing any firearms or ammunition.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 owning or possessing firearms as a result of his prior 
conviction--as being a statement of law and not an element of 
the offense.  
Additionally, defense counsel referenced paragraph 
5 of the State ’s proposed stipulation-- that Souza knew he was 
prohibited from owning or possessing any firearms-- as also not 
being an element of the prohibited possession of firearm 
offense.  Souza requested that, even if the defense did not 
agree to the State ’s proposed sti pulation , the State be 
precluded from presenting evidence as to these matters.  Defense 
counsel continued as follows: 
My understanding is the State is proffering or would put up 
. . . Mr. Souza’s former probation officer, to testify to 
the effect that Mr. Souza was instructed or informed or 
advised that he was prohibited from possessing.  And, so, 
that not being relevant under 403 -- well, 401, 403, we’d 
ask that we not have to agree to that as well as the State 
not -- as well as the State be precluded from presenting 
that evidence.  
  Although the State acknowledged that 
pursuant to State 
v. Murray  the defense had the right to stipulate to the name and 
nature of the offense, the State a sserted that it still needed  
to prove that it was a Hawai i court that had issued the prior 
judgment.  T he State indicated that it intended to provide such 
proof by entering a certified, sealed judgm ent of the conviction 
subject to redaction.  Defense counsel disagreed with the State ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 that it was required to prove the jurisdiction of the court that 
rendered the prior judgment.5   
  The State also contended that it needed to prove 
that 
Souza knew he was prohibited from owning or possessing firearms.  
Thus, the State would not agree to Souza’s proposed  stipulation 
because it did not want to be precluded from offering evidence 
as to what the State believed were elements of the offense that 
the State was required to prove to obtain a conviction.  The 
court then inquired
 of the State whether it believe d that, 
absent the stipulation, it would be en titled under caselaw to 
introduce the matters contained in its stipulation, or 
alternately, whether it intended to present evidence of such 
matters even with the stipulation.  The State responded that it 
did not want the situation to be cast in a light where Souza was 
forced to accept its  proposed stipulation and if that was the 
case it would withdraw its proposed stipulation.  The State 
again acknowledged that Souza had the right under Murray to 
stipulate to preclude the name and nature of the prior 
conviction.  At the same time, the State contended that, absent 
a broader stipulation,
 it would need to introduce evidence of 
                                                           
 5 The court indicated that it tended to agree with the defense as 
to its position on this issue.  However, the jurisdictional fact was included 
in the stipulation that was read to the jury.  See infra § I-C.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 Souza’s state of mind  with respect to the firearm prohibition.  
The State continued, 
So . . .  I would intend to call the probation officer, not 
to discuss the name and nature of the prior offenses but 
just to establish that he did go over the terms and 
conditions of that probation and they did include the fact 
that he was prohibited from owning or possessing the 
firearm.  
  Defense counsel disagreed that the State was required 
to prove that “Souza knew he was prohibited or even reckless 
about being prohibited from possessing”  a firearm.  Souza 
maintained that this state of mind is not an element of  the 
offense of prohibited possession of firearm.  And because 
knowledge or recklessness as to the statute’s prohib ition was 
not relevant to proof of the offense, defense counsel contended 
that the State should be precluded from calling the probation 
officer for such testimony.  
 
  The court stat ed that it seemed the language in the 
felony information did involv e Souza’s state of mind.  Defense 
counsel responded that Souza’s stipulat ion included his  state of 
mind as to having been convicted but not that Souza knew he was 
prohibited from owning or possessing a firearm.  The court 
responded as follows: 
THE COURT: B
asically this is the situation, and if Mr. 
Souza, after discussing with you the pros and cons of the 
stipulation and the pros and cons of deciding not to agree 
to enter into the stipulation as proposed by the State -- 
and it’s his choice -- if he decides that he -- the 
stipulation as proposed is unacceptable to him, the Court 
is certainly not going to do anything to try to persuade 
him or convince him that, you know, he should do that.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 That’s entirely up to him.  And so -- but if, however, he 
chooses, after thinking about it and talking to you about 
it, making a decision, and upon voir dire by the Court that 
that’s what he wants to do, then the stipulation will stand 
as it is.  So I’ll give you some time to talk to him.  But 
certainly prior to opening state ment we’ll reach a 
resolution on the stipulation.  
Defense counsel asked the court whether it was ruling that 
“Souza’s state of mind with regard to . . . [paragraphs] 4 and 5 
. . . that he knew he was prohibited from owning or possessing 
firearms or ammunition, that the Court is of the belief . . . 
that that is relevant.”  T he court responded,  “Yes.”   
  Following jury selection, the court asked the parties 
whether an agreement had been reached  regarding the proposed 
stipulations.   Defense c ounsel stated that “because of the 
court’s ruling s,” Souza was going to stipulate to the five 
enumerated paragraphs t hat the State proposed although he 
originally had no desire to do so.   
 
 The court then conducted a colloquy, and  Souza 
acknowledged that he agreed to the State’s proposed stipulation .  
The court found that Souza voluntarily entered into the 
stipulation with the requisite knowledge and understanding.   
B. Trial Testimony  
  On July 11,  2012, Dennis Crail, a security agent for 
the Board of Water Supply, responded to a report of homeless 
people or trespassers on state property located at 2530 Likelike ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 Highway.6  While searching the property, Crail discovered a  blue 
tent that was situated on Board of Water Supply land.  Crail 
testified that he 
was approximately thirty feet from the tent 
when he saw a male  exit that tent.  T he male had his back turned 
toward him, Crail stated, but the male later turned sideways, 
allowing Crail to see the side of his face.  Crail later 
identified the male as Souza.  Crail acknowledged that he had 
not seen Souza prior to the incident.   
  
According to Crail, Souza was carrying in his ha nd 
what appeared to be a rifle case.  Crail observed Souza take 
something out of the case and hold it in his right hand; when 
Souza raised his hand, Crail could see the stock of a rifle.  
Crail testified that he saw Souza hold the rifle for about three 
minutes.  Crail then re
treated a safe distance and called 911.  
Crail later learned that there were two other persons with 
Souza--a male and a female
--but testified that he was sure he 
saw Souza with the rifle.   
  Brianna Lincoln- Chong, who was with Souza on the day 
he was arrested, testified that she and Souza had arrived at the 
wooded area on Likelike Highway
 earlier that day.  Souza went to 
                                                           
 6 Crail testified that the state property at 2530 Likelike Highway 
had none of the following: a target range for firearms, a place of repair for 
firearms, a licensed firearm dealer’s place of business, an organized 
scheduled firearm show or exhibit, a place of formal hunter or firearm use 
training, and a police station.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 check hunting traps, and then she and Souza  hiked to a campsite.  
When the police arrived, Souza was asleep.  Chong stated that 
Souza never had the rifle in his possession during the entire 
time from when she arrived at the campsite until John Wilcox 
arrived.  Chong explained that
 Wilcox asked her if she had seen 
a case for the rifle and
 that Wilcox had the rifle in his hand 
at that time.7   
 
 Chong acknowledged that in her statement to police she 
wrote that only Souza had possession of the rifle and that the 
rifle was brought out when she and Souza left for the hike and 
put back into the case when they reached the campsite.  However, 
she explained that  when she made the statement,  she was scared 
and felt threatened by the possibility of going to jail.  Chong 
testified that she had been handcuffed and held for questioning 
and that she was not allowed to leave until she made a 
statement.  She stated that she told the police that she did not 
know whose rifle it was and did not initially include in the 
statement anything 
about Souza holding it.  Chong testified that 
the police made her add at the end of her statement that Souza 
                                                           
 7 The State also presented the testimony of Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD) officers who responded to the reported incident (but did not 
view the alleged carrying), an HPD detective who interviewed Crail, HPD 
personnel who examined the rifle and who kept records of permits or licenses 
to carry firearms, and an employee of the Board of Water Supply who testified 
that the property at 2530 Likelike Highway is state property.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 had possessed the rifle.8  Because she had never been in trouble 
or been arrested before, Chong said,  she “just cooperated and 
did whatever [the police] wanted [her] to do” in order to leave 
the police station.  Chong  acknowledged that Souza is a family 
friend and that she did not want to testify because she felt she 
could be the reason for Souza going to jail.   
  
John Wilcox testified that he and Souza had found the 
rifle in the bushes the day earlier when they were pig hunting.  
Wilcox stated he had picked up the rifle and put it  in the 
bushes where he and Souza were camping.   
  The next day 
when Wilcox arrived at the campsite, 
Souza was asleep in the tent.  Wilcox testified that he 
retrieved the rifle from the bushes.  A little while later,  he 
heard tires screeching, saw the police officers, ran back to the 
tent, and woke Souza up.  Wilcox asked Souza what he  should do 
with the rifle,  and Souza said to get rid of it.  Wilcox put the 
rifle back in the bushes where he had placed it earlier.  He 
testified that Souza never handled the rifle and that he had 
never seen Souza pick it up.  He further testified that he 
understood it was possible that he could get in trouble by 
                                                           
 8 The final two sentences in Chong’s written statement read, “John 
[Wilcox] never had the gun in his possession.  Only Tracy [Souza] did.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 testifying.  And although Souza was his friend, Wilcox explained 
he was not making up a story to help Souza .   
  On cross- examination, Wilcox indicated that the rifle 
did not have a magazine, nor was it loaded when it was found.  
Wilcox stated that at no point was the rifle fired either on the 
day it was found or on the following day.  Wilcox acknowledged 
that he did not have a license or permit to carry or acquire the 
rifle.  Wilcox also related that he had known Souza for a little 
over a year and they were friends and d id side jobs together.   
C. Stipulation and Jury Instructions  
  At the end of the State’s case -in-chief, the circuit 
court informed the jury that the State and Souza had reached a 
stipulation and that the stipulated facts were true and accurate 
and would be admitted into evidence in lieu of other evidenc
e or 
testimony.  The court then read the stipulation as follows:  
 It is hereby stipulated to by and between Defendant 
Tracy Souza  . . . and the State of Hawai i . . . that the 
following facts are true and accurate and will be admitted 
into evidence during trial of the above -entitled matter in 
lieu of other evidence or testimony.  
 1) As of July 11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy Souza, 
had been convicted of a felony offense in the state of 
Hawaii. 
 2) As of July 11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy Souza, 
knew that he  had been convicted of a felony offense in the 
state of Hawaii.  
 3) The defendant, Tracy Souza, has not been pardoned 
for such felony offense.  
 4) As a result of this conviction, the defendant, 
Tracy Souza, is prohibited from owning or possessing any 
firearms or ammunition.  
 5) As a result of this conviction, the defendant, 
Tracy Souza, knew that he was prohibited from owning or 
possessing any firearms or ammunition.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 The court then advised the jury that one of the elements of 
prohibited possession of firearm is referred to as the “prior 
conviction element” and requires the State to prove that Souza 
was previously convicted of a felony.  The court explained that 
the State and Souza had stipulated to this element, meaning that 
both sides agreed that Souza has a prior felony conviction.  The 
court stated that based on this stipulation the jury must accept 
as proven beyond a reasonable doubt the prior conviction 
element.9   
  
At the conclusion of the evidence, the court 
instructed the jury on the elements of the offense of prohibited 
                                                           
 9 The court’s instruction as to the stipulation  stated as follows:  
One of the elements of the alleged offense in Count II of 
Ownership or Possession of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a 
Person Convicted of Certain Crimes requires the Prosecution 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Defendant Tracy 
Souza had been previously convicted of a felony.  This 
element is referred to as the “prior conviction element ” of 
the offense.  The Defense and the Prosecution have 
stipulated to this element, which means that both sides 
agree that Defendant has a prior felony conviction.  Based 
on this stipulation, you must accept as proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt the “prior conviction element. ”  You must 
not consider the stipulation for any other purpose.  You 
must not speculate as to the nature of the prior 
conviction.  Do not consider this evidence for any other 
purpose.  You must not use this evidence to conclude that 
because the defendant at another time has committed a crime 
that he is a person of bad character and, therefore, must 
have committed the offenses charged  in this case.  In 
considering the evidence for the limited purpose of which 
it has been received, you must weigh it in the same manner 
as you would all other evidence in this case and consider 
it along with all other evidence in this case.  
The instruction was given again, substantially verbatim, at the close of  
evidence.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 possession of firearm.  The court reiterated that the State and 
Souza had stipulated to the prior conviction element, meaning 
that both sides agreed that Souza has a prior felony conviction, 
and that this element must be accepted as proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt.   
  The  jury found Souza guilty of both charged offenses.  
Souza was sentenced to five years of probation in each count, 
with the terms to run concurrently.  As part of Souza’s 
probation sentence, the court imposed concurrent jail terms of 
thirty days with credit for time served.  Souza filed a notice 
of appeal to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA ) from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation S entence (judgment) .   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS  
  
In his opening brief, Souza contended that he offered 
to stipulate to the prior conviction element of the prohibited 
possession of firearm charge but that the circuit court refused 
to accept his stipulation unless he agreed to the State’s 
proposed stipulation.10   
  
Souza explained that he and the State discussed his 
intent to admit to his prior  felony conviction and to his 
knowledge of that conviction , but that they differed as to 
                                                           
 10 Souza raised three other points of errors, none of which were 
raised in his application for a writ of certiorari, and thus they are not 
addressed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 agreeing to other matters in the stipulations.  Souza noted that 
the State made it clear that if he did not accept its 
stipulation it would call a witness to establish that Souza knew 
his prior conviction prohibited him from owning or possessing 
firearms.  Souza added that the State informed the court that it 
would also seek to admit a redacted version of the certified 
judgment of the prior felony conviction to prove that the 
conviction occurred in the State of Hawai i.  Souza argued that 
these facts were not elements of the offense and were unduly 
prejudicial.   
  Souza maintained that the court admonished him that if 
he did not accept the State’s proposed stipulation, the State 
would be free to call any witnesses it felt were necessary to 
establish the prior felony conviction.  The circuit court, Souza 
continued, conditioned the acceptance of his offer to stipulate 
to other evidence requested by the State.  Souza argued that the 
court’s error was not harmless and that such error  infected the 
jury’s verdict as to both of the charged offenses.  Accordi ngly, 
Souza requested that the judgment be vacated and the case 
remanded for a new trial.   
  In its answering brief, the State responded that 
neither it nor the circuit court forced Souza to accept the 
State’s proposed stipulation.  The State maintained t hat both ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 parties had their own versions of the stipulation but that they 
did not reach an agreement as to either version.  The State 
argued that the point of contention was whether the stipulation 
should include that Souza was prohibited from owning or 
possessing firearms as a result of his prior conviction and that 
he knew he was prohibited from such ownership or possession.  
The State contended that it was required to show that Souza 
acted with the requisite state of mind to prove the prohibited 
possession of firearm charge.  The State concluded that it was 
Souza’s choice to agree to the State’s stipulation and that 
there was nothing in the record indicating that Souza would have 
been prevented from stipulating to his prior conviction had he 
not accepted t he State’s proposed stipulation.   
  In a summary disposition order
 (SDO), the ICA affirmed 
the circuit court’s judgment.11  The ICA determined that the 
transcript of proceedings contradicted Souza’s contention that 
he was forced to decide between accepting the State’s proposed 
stipulation and not being allowed to stipulate.  The ICA 
indicated that the parties and the circuit court did not discuss 
whether the court would accept Souza’s stipulation.  However, 
the ICA stated that “they did discuss that in the event that 
                                                           
 11 The ICA’s SDO can be found at State v. Souza , NO. CAAP-13-
0002043, 2017 WL 2797598 (Haw.  App. June 28, 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 Souza’s stipulation was entered, whether the State would be 
allowed to call Souza’s probation officer to establish that 
Souza knew that he was not allowed to possess firearms. ”  
Accordingly, the ICA concluded that the circuit court complied 
with the Murray  decision.   
III. DISCUSSION  
A. Failure to Comply With the Murray  Requirements 
  A defendant has a due process right to have each 
element of an offense proven  beyond a reasonable doubt; this 
right is protected by the federal and state constitutions and 
HRS § 701-114.  State v. Murray , 116 Hawaii 3, 10, 10 n.8, 169 
P.3d 955, 962, 962 n.8 (2007) (citing U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 
1; Haw. Const. art. I, §  5).  Thus, where a prior conviction is 
an essential element of the offense charged, the State must 
prove the prior conviction beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id. at 
10, 169 P.3d at 962.   
  In this case, Souza was charged with violating HRS § 
134-7(b), which prov ides, “No person who . . . has been 
convicted in this State or elsewhere of having committed a 
felony, or any crime of violence, or an illegal sale of any drug 
shall own, possess, or control any firearm or ammunition 
therefor.”  Hence, to establish that So uza violated HRS § 134-
7(b), the State was required to prove, inter alia, that Souza ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 was previously convicted of a felony, any crime of violence, or 
an illegal sale of any drug.   
  A defendant may offer to stipulate to the prior 
conviction element of a charged offense.  If the defendant does 
so, “the court must accept [the] stipulation.”  Murray, 116 
Hawaii at 21, 169 P.3d at 973.  The stipulation may be accepted 
only after the court has engaged the defendant in an on- the-
record colloquy regarding the def endant’s constitutional rights 
and has ensured that the defendant “is making a knowing and 
voluntary waiver of his right to have the prior convictions 
proven beyond a reasonable doubt and decided by a jury. ”  Id.  
Following acceptance of the stipulation, the court must instruct 
the jury, inter alia, that the defendant has stipulated to the 
prior conviction element of the charged offense to make it clear 
that this element is conclusively proven  beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  Id.  “The instruction must be carefully crafted to omit 
any reference to the ‘name or nature’” of the prior conviction, 
and “[t]he court must also preclude any mention of the nature of 
[the defendant’s] prior convictions at any point during the 
trial.”  Id.   
  In this case, Souza had a prior conviction that 
constituted an element of the prohibited possession of firearm 
charge.  Thus, under Murray, Souza was allowed to stipulate to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 the prior conviction element, which stipulation “the court must 
accept.”  116 Hawaii at 21, 169 P.3d at 973.  Souza contends 
that the circuit court violated this  requirement by refusing to 
accept his offer to admit to the prior conviction element.  The 
ICA disagreed, stating that “t he Circuit Court did not 
explicitly discuss whethe r the court would accept Souza’s 
stipulation.”  The transcript of proceedings contradicts  this 
holding, however.   
  The State and Souza each drafted proposed stipulations 
regarding the prior conviction element.  The circuit court 
informed the parties that it had received and reviewed both the 
State’s and Souza’s stipulations and would allow the State to 
call witnesses to prove the conviction element if the parties 
did not reach an agreement:
 
After reviewing both of the stipulations, it’s my view, 
that, absent a specific agreement by both of you , then the 
State would be perfectly within its right to call whatever 
witnesses they felt are necessary and relevant  -- obviously 
it would be -- have to be approved and permitted by the 
Court -- to establish that  element of a prior conviction . 
(Emphases added.)  The circuit court thus stated that only an 
agreement by both counsel as to the stipulation to be given 
would preclude the State from calling witnesses to establish the 
element of the prior conviction.  By expressing that the State 
would be permitted to call witnesses if an agreement was not 
reached, the court was stating that it would not accept Souza’s 
stipulation to the conviction element “absent an agreement by ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 both” parties.  In other words, the circuit  court declined  to 
accept Souza’s stipulation on its own, without the State’s 
consent--a ruling that Murray squarely forecloses.  See 116 
Hawaii at 21, 169 P.3d at 973 (“[T]he court must accept [the] 
stipulation.”).   
  Souza further argues that the circuit court 
conditioned his right to admit the prior conviction element on 
his agreement to enter into the form of stipulation proposed by 
the State, which contained additional information to which he 
did not wish to stipulate.  As discussed, the court stated at 
the outset that, absent an agreement between the State and 
Souza, the State would be entitled to call witnesses to 
establish the prior conviction element of the prohibited 
possession of firearm charge.  Under Murray, Souza was entitled 
to admit to the prior conviction element and preclude the 
introduction of evidence to prove this element of the charged 
offense.  This entitlement exists whether or not the State 
agrees to the form of the stipulation in which the defendant 
admits to the prior conviction.  Instead of informing Souza of 
this right, the court told Souza he could either reach an 
agreement with the State  as to the form of the stipulation  or 
the State could call necessary and relevant witnesses to prove 
the element of the prior conviction.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21   The court then compounded its error by asking defense 
counsel the following question: “And, so, with that . . . has 
Mr. Souza arrived at any decisions as to whether or not he’ll 
accept the State’s version of the stipulat ion?”  Souza, however, 
was under no obligation to elect whether to accept the State’s 
version of the stipulation.  The circuit court should only have 
confirmed Souza’s intention to admit to the prior conviction , 
and once Souza so indicated, that should have been the end of 
the discussion.   
  The court did not correct its misstatements; as a 
result, its subsequent statements to defense counsel aggravated 
the approach that the court had followed.   
THE COURT: Basically this is the situation, and if Mr. 
Souza, after discussing with you the pros and cons of the 
stipulation  and the pros and cons of deciding not to agree 
to enter into the stipulation as proposed by the State  -- 
and it’s his choice -- if he decides that he -- the 
stipulation as proposed is unacceptable to him, the Court 
is certainly not going to do anything to try to persuade 
him or convince him that, you know, he should do that.  
That’s entirely up to him.  And so -- but if, however, he 
chooses, after thinking about it and talking to you about 
it, making a decision, and upon voir dire by the Court that 
that’s what he wants to do, then the stipulation will stand 
as it is .  So I’ll give you some time to talk to him.  But 
certainly prior to opening statement we’ll reach a 
resolution on the stipulation.  
(Emphases added.)  Thus, the court gave Souza two choices: “not 
to agree to enter into the stipulation as proposed by the 
State,” which had pro and cons, or accept the State’s 
stipulation, which also had pros and cons.  But, as discussed, 
under Murray, the choice should not have been whether to accept ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 or not accept the State’s proposed stipulation in light of the 
“pros and cons .”  Instead, under the circumstances, Souza had an 
absolute right to have his offer to admit to the  prior 
conviction accepted by the court.12   
  The circuit court’s misapprehension of the procedures 
adopted in Murray  was underscored when it informed Souza that he 
could reject the State’s stipulation (which as the court had 
previously explained essentially meant that the State could call 
whatever witnesses it wished to prove the prior conviction), or 
accept the State’s stipulation without any modification (“then 
the stipulation will stand as it is ”).  (Emphasis added.)  But 
the court should have either modified the State’s proposed 
stipulation in a manner that was consistent with this court’s 
decision in Murray or, alternatively, accepted Souza’s proposed 
stipulation.  The circuit court therefore erred when, instead of 
accepting Souza’s proffered stipulation to the prior conviction 
element as required by Murray, it presented Souza with the 
choice of accepting or not accepting the State’s stipulation . 
                                                           
 12 The State asserted that it was Souza’s choice whether or not to 
enter into the stipulation in the State’s proffered form.  The mere assertion 
that Souza was not required to agree to the form of stipulation that the 
State submitted did not alter the court’s non -acceptance of Souza’s proposed 
stipulation. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 B. The Procedure Utilized  by the Circuit Court Compromised the 
Protections Adopt ed in Murray 
  In Murray , we recognized the inherent difficulties 
that arise in providing a fair trial to a defendant who is 
charged with an offense of which a previous criminal conviction 
forms a requisite element.  On the one hand, a defendant 
possesses a constitutional due process right to be convicted 
only when the State proves every element of an offense beyond a 
reasonable doubt, including that of a prior conviction.  State 
v. Murray , 116 Hawai i 3, 10, 169 P.3d 955, 962 (2007).  On the 
other hand, the introduction of eviden ce regarding a defendant’s 
previous crimes injects undue prejudice into the proceedings 
because it may lead the jury to make its decision on an improper 
basis, such as the belief that the defendant is a bad person 
with criminal inclinations.  Id. at 19, 16 9 P.3d at 971.   
  To resolve this tension, we held that a defendant has 
an unconditional right to make a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the requirement that a previous conviction be proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  Id. at 21, 169 P.3d at 973.  By exercising 
this unconditional right, a defendant may admit to the element 
and remove the previous conviction from contention, ensuring 
that the jury is not exposed to potentially prejudicial evidence 
about the nature of the previous offense.  Id.  If the waiver is 
knowing and voluntary, the court must accept the stipulation ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 unconditionally.  Id.  This approach protects the defendant’s 
constitutional due process right to a fair trial to the greatest 
extent possible while minimizing the likelihood that the jury 
will improperly consider the details of a previous crime as it 
relates to the defendant’s character.  
  Here, the Murray stipulation was used by the circuit 
court as a basis to make evidentiary rulings not applicable to 
such a stipulation in a manner that exposed the jury to 
information unrelated to the defendant’s prior conviction.  In 
addition, because this extraneous information was contained in a 
stipulation, the jury was required to treat it as conclusive.  
Thus, rather than striking a balance between competing 
interests, the approach taken in this case contravened the 
protections adopted in Murray. 
1. The stipulation procedure was improperly combined with 
evidentiary rulings to determine the scope of the stipulation.  
  The circuit court departed from the procedures 
required by Murray  by combining preliminary evidentiary rulings 
with its consideration of Souza’s stipulation.  Souza argued 
that several paragraph s contained within the State’s proposed 
stipulation were not e lements of the prohibited possession of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 firearm charge, were irrelevant,  and were prejudicial.13  The 
circuit court disagreed, stating that the paragraphs were 
relevant and even went so far as to specify which witnesses it 
might permit to testify on the matter if Souza did not accept 
the stipulation.14   
  The court’s evaluation of admissibility should have 
been separate and distinct from the only determination at issue 
in Souza’s Murray  stipulation--namely, whether Souza knowingly 
and voluntarily admitted the prior  conviction element of the 
prohibited possession of firearm charge.  Murray  required that 
the court unconditionally accept Souza’s admission of the prior 
conviction element if Souza so agreed to it.  116 Hawai i at 21, 
169 P.3d at 973.  All other  issues were immaterial to the 
                                                           
 13 Specifically, Souza argued against paragraphs three, four, and 
five.  Paragraph three stated the following: “The Defendant, Tracy Souza, has 
not been pardoned for [the previous] f elony offense.”  Paragraph four read as 
follows: “As a result of [his prior] conviction, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, 
is prohibited from owning or possessing any firearms or ammunition.”  
Paragraph five stated as follows: “As a result of [the prior] convict ion, the 
Defendant, Tracy Souza, knew that he was prohibited from owning or possessing 
any firearms or ammunition.”  It is noted that the court correctly did not 
instruct the jury that the lack of a pardon, the fact of the prohibition, and 
Souza’s knowledg e of the prohibition were elements of the prohibited 
possession of firearm offense, despite the inclusion of these paragraphs in 
the State’s stipulation.   
 14 The State explained that, if Souza did not agree to the State’s 
proposed stipulation, it intended to call Souza’s probation officer to prove 
that Souza was aware that he was prohibited from owning or possessing 
firearms.  The circuit court ruled that Souza ’s state of mind with respect to 
the prohibition was relevant to the prohibited possession of firearm offense 
and that it would permit the State to call the witnesses the State deemed 
necessary to prove the matter if Souza did not agree to the State’s 
stipulation.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 analysis.  By combining the Murray ruling with unrelated 
evidentiary matters, the circuit court intermingled the 
determinations, compromising Souza’s fundamental right to remove 
his prior conviction from consideration. 
2. The contents of the State ’s stipulation far exceeded the 
parameters of a  Murray stipulation. 
  In Murray , the defendant was charged with a recidivist 
abuse offense for which the prosecution was required to prove, 
inter alia, “that the violation was Petitioner’s ‘ third or any 
subsequent offense that occur[ed] within two years of a second 
or subsequent conviction. ’”  116 Hawai i at 7, 169 P.3d at  959 
(alteration in original) (quoting HRS § 709 –906(7) (Supp. 
2004)).  We held that this requirement of a previous conviction 
within the specified time frame was an attendant circumstance 
that was an element of the offense and that the defendant had an 
unconditional right to stipulate to that previous conviction 
element.  Id. at 8, 21, 169 P.3d at 960, 973.   
  Here, the court instructed the jury that Souza was 
charged with a crime for which the prosecution needed to prove 
the following elements:  
[1) T]he defendant intentionally or knowingly possessed or 
controlled the object in question; and 2) that the object  
in question was a firearm; and 3) that at the time he 
possessed or controlled the object in question Defendant 
believed, knew, or recklessly disregarded a substantial and 
unjustifiable risk that the object was a firearm; and 4) 
that prior to July 11, 2012, the defendant was convicted of 
committing a felony offense; and 5) that at the time he 
possessed or controlled the object in question the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 defendant believed, knew, or recklessly disregarded the 
substantial and unjustifiable risk that he had previously 
been convicted of a felony offense.  
 
Under Murray, Souza had a right to stipulate to the final two 
elements in order to prevent the jury from hearing about the 
name and nature of his previous conviction .  That right could 
not be conditioned on Souza stipulating to any other 
information.  The State’s proposed stipulation was far more 
extensive.  The stipulation read as follows:  
1. As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, had 
been convicted of a felony offense in the State of Hawaii.  
2. As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, knew 
that he had been convicted of a felony offense in the State 
of Hawaii.  
3. The Defendant, Tracy Souza, has not been pardoned for 
such felony offense.  
4. As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy 
Souza, is prohibited from owning or possessing any firearms 
or ammunition.  
5. As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy 
Souza, knew that he was prohibited from owning or 
possessing any firearms or ammunition.  
Only the first two paragraphs were covered by our Murray 
holding.15  The State argued that the remaining paragraph s 
constituted elements of the offense, which was incorrect.  But 
this is ultimately beside the point-- even other elements of the 
offense are beyond the scope of a Murray stipulation.  
                                                           
 15 It is noted that paragraphs 1 and 2 are not entirely encompassed 
by the decision in Murray.  Both paragraphs indicate that Souza was 
previously convicted in the State of Hawai i.  Souza correctly argued to the 
circuit court that the jurisdiction of the court that rendered the judgment 
of the prior conviction is not an element of the prohibited possession of 
firearm offense.  In relevant part, HRS § 134 -7(b) provides that “[n]o person 
who . . . has been convicted in this State or elsewhere  of having committed a 
felony . . . shall own, possess, or control any firearm.”  (Emphasis added.)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28   The harm caused by the error was realized when the 
court read the stipulation to the jury in its entirety.  In 
other words, the result of the Murray stipulation here was to 
expose the jury to more prejudicial information rather than 
less.   
  Instead of ta king Souza’s prior conviction out of 
contention, the stipulation made it a central focus and further 
communicated to the jury that Souza had not been pardoned and 
was aware that his possession of a firearm was prohibited.  And, 
as Souza pointed out to the circuit court, the stipulation 
confused the issues by including a statement of law-- that 
Souza’s conviction prevented him from owning or possessing 
firearms.  In sum, the stipulation increased  the likelihood that 
the jury would make its decision on an improper basis-- the 
precise opposite of what a Murray stipulation is intended to 
accomplish. 
C. The Circuit Court’s Error Was Not Harmless  Beyond a 
Reasonable Doubt 
  Given the circumstances of this case, it cannot be 
said that the circuit court’s error in not accepting Souza’s 
stipulation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  “In 
applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard[,] the 
court is required to examine the record and determine whether 
there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 might have contributed to the conviction.”  State v. Mundon, 121 
Hawaii 339, 368, 219 P.3d 1126, 1155 (2009) (alteration in 
original) (quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai i 109, 114, 924 
P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996)).    
  This is not a case “ [w]here there is a wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show the 
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt .”  State v. Rivera , 
62 Haw. 120, 127, 612 P.2d 526, 532 (1980).  The evidence 
adduced at trial established that Crail was the only witness who 
identified Souza as the person in possession of the rifle.  
Crail admitted that he had not had any contact with Souza prior 
to the underlying incident in this case.  Crail further 
testified that he was approximately thirty feet away from the 
tent when he saw Souza carrying the rifle, that Souza had his 
back turned toward him, and that he later saw only the side of 
Souza’s face.   
  The evidence also included testimony that there were 
two other persons with Souza on the day in question, Chong and 
Wilcox.  Chong testified that Souza never had the rifle with him 
or in his possession during the entire time from when she 
arrived at the campsite until Wilcox arrived.16  At a later 
                                                           
 16 Although this testimony was inconsistent with the written 
statement Chong initially made to police, which was admitted into evidence, 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 point, Chong testified, Wilcox asked her-- while holding the 
rifle in his hand-- whether she had seen the case for that rifle.  
Wilcox testified that the rifle was found the day before Souza’s 
arrest near where he and Souza were camping.  He stated that 
Souza never handled the rifle and that he had never seen Souza 
pick it up and look at it.  Wilcox testified that he was the 
person who had held the rifle--even though he understood it was 
possible that his  testimony could get him in trouble.   
  Clearly, on this record, there is a reasonable 
possibility that the court’s error in not accepting Souza’s 
offer to stipulate might have contributed to Souza’s conviction 
for prohibited possession of firearm .  The State’s stipulation 
conclusively informed the jury that Souza had not been pardoned 
for his prior offense and that he was aware that his prior 
conviction prohibited him from owning or possessing any 
firearms.  The jury may have thus draw n negative inferences 
about Souza’s character from this information, including that he 
was a person who was not worthy of a pardon and that he 
willfully violated the law as he knew his conduct was a criminal 
                                                                                                                                                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
 
Chong testified that she  was frightened when she made the earlier statement 
because she had never before been in any kind of legal trouble and that the 
police pressured her into blaming Souza by threatening her with a firearm 
possession charge.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 offense.17  Such negative inferences would clearly have been 
prejudicial to Souza in the jury’s evaluation of the evidence in 
this case. 
  
There is also a reasonable possibility that 
impermissible speculation may have contributed to Souza’s 
conviction for the place to keep firearm offense.  With respect 
to both charged offenses in this case, the only contested issue 
was whether it was Souza who was in possession of the firearm.  
Thus, the same negative inferences about Souza’s character that 
applied to the offense of prohibited possession of firearm, 
including that Souza was a person who did not deserve to be 
pardoned and that he deliberately failed to respect the law as 
he knew his conduct was unlawful, may have equally impacted the 
jury’s evaluation of Souza with regard to the place to keep 
firearm charge.  As Souza  maintains on certiorari,  “it cannot be 
                                                           
 17 Souza correctly argued to the circuit court that paragraph 4 of 
the State’s stipulation --“As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, 
Tracy Souza, is prohibited from owning or possessing firearms or ammunition” -
-is a statement of law.  This statement of law was improperly included in a 
factual stipulation, outside the allowable scope of Murray, and its 
presentment as a statement of fact potentially confused the jury as to the 
nature of its fact -finding role.  Additionally, by specifying that 
“Defendant, Tracy Souza” was prohibited fr om engaging in the conduct with 
which he was charged , the stipulation likely increase d the perceived gravity 
of the charged conduct, which was also prejudicial to Souza.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 said that the trial court’s error did not infect the jury’s 
verdict as to both of the charged offenses in this case.”18   
  The circuit court ’s instruct ion that accompanied the 
stipulation was not sufficient to cure th is potential prejudice.  
The instruction stated only that the jury was prohibited from 
considering the stipulation and “this evidence” for any purpose 
besides establishing the prior conviction element.  It made no 
reference to the underlying facts proven by the factual 
stipulation, and it did not specifically address the ways in 
which the stipulation was flawed, which included that Souza had 
not been pardoned and that he was aware that his prior 
conviction prohibited him from owning or possessing a firearm.  
A jury instruction must be specific to the harm resulting from 
the error to function as a curative, and a general, boilerplate 
instruction will not serve to eliminate the prejudice.  See 
State v. Basham , 132 Hawai i 97, 111, 319 P.3d 1105, 1119 (2014) 
(“Additionally, while the court properly instructed the jury on 
accomplice liability, that instruction did not cure the 
prosecutor’s misstatements of the law, where no specific 
curative instruction relating to the misstatements was given. ”); 
                                                           
 18 The State did not file a response to Souza’s application for a 
writ of certiorari, nor did it make an argument in its answering brief to the 
ICA that distinguished between the two charged offenses as to prejudice.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 State v. Espiritu , 117 Hawaii 127, 143, 176 P.3d 885, 901 (2008) 
(“While the court here did properly instruct the jury . . . , 
that instruction could not cure Respondent’ s misstatements of 
the law, where no specific curative instruction relating to the 
misstatements was given.”).    
  In addition,  when the misstatement of the law comes 
from the court as here, “ the court, at least tacitly, place[s] 
its imprimatur upon the ” improper statement.  State v. Schnabel , 
127 Hawai i 432, 453, 279 P.3d 1237, 1258 (2012) (brackets 
omitted) (quoting State v. Pacheco , 96 Hawai i 83, 96, 26 P.3d 
572, 585 (2001) ).  A jury is presumed to follow a court’s 
instructions precisely because a jury is likely to perceive a 
court’s statements of the law as the accurate law to apply.  
When the court does not unequivocally correct its own 
misstatement, a contrary instruction simply introduces confusion 
as to the law governing the jury’s determination without 
rectifying the error.  
  Lastly, although there is normally a presumption that 
the jury follows all of the trial court’ s instructions, see 
State v. Klinge , 92 Hawai i 577, 592, 994 P.2d 509, 524 (2000),  
that presumption is refuted here.  Prior to instructing the jury 
regarding the stipulation, the court stated, “ There are five 
material elements of the offense of Ownership or Possession ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 Prohibited of any Firearm by a Person Convicted of Certain 
Crimes.”  The court instructed the jury that two of those 
elements were that 1) prior to possessing a firearm, Souza was 
convicted of a felony offense,  and 2) when he possessed the 
firearm, Souza “believed, knew, or recklessly disregarded the 
substantial and unjustifiable risk that he had been convicted of 
a felony offense.”   The stipulation in this case included facts 
satisfying both  of these requirements.19  However, the court’s 
instruction regarding the stipulation, which was given both at 
the close of the State’s case -in-chief and immediately prior to 
closing arguments, stated as follows: 
One of the elements of the alleged offense in Count II of 
Ownership or Possession of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a 
Person Convicted of Certain Crimes requires the Prosecution 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Defendant Tracy 
Souza had been previously convicted of a felony.  This 
element is referred to as the “prior conviction element ” of 
the offense.   The Defense and the Prosecution have 
stipulated to this element, which means that both sides 
agree that Defendant has a prior felony conviction.  Based 
on this stipulation, you must accept as proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt the “prior conviction element. ”  You must 
not consider the stipulation for any other purpose.   You 
must not speculate as to the nature of the prior 
conviction.  Do not consider this evidence for any other 
purpose.  
(Emphases added.)  The instruction did not reference Souza’s 
state of mind with respect to his prior conviction, which the 
                                                           
 19 As stated, the stipulation provided inter alia that, “As of July 
11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy Souza, had been convicted of a felony offense 
in the state of Hawaii” and, “As of July 11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy 
Souza, knew that he had been convicted of a felony offense in the state of 
Hawaii.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 jury had been instructed was a separate element the State was 
required to prove in order to obtain a conviction.  And, because 
Souza’s state of mind as to his conviction was included in the 
factual stipulation, the State did not present any other 
evidence from which the jury could have inferred that Souza’s 
state of mind was proven beyond a reasonable doubt.   
 
 In other words, there was no evidence adduced at trial 
regarding Souza’s state of mind as to his prior conviction  other 
than the stipulation.  But to find Souza guilty of prohibited 
possession of firearm,  the jury was required to find that Souza 
believed, knew, or recklessly disregarded the substantial and 
unjustifiable risk that he had a prior felony conviction, and 
the court had instructed the jury that this was a different 
element than the prior conviction element.  The factual 
stipulation contained this requisite fact, and it was the only 
evidence from which a jury could have possibly found that the 
state of mind for the prior conviction element was satisfied.  
The court’s instruction, however, informed the jury that the 
stipulation could not be used for this purpose because it could 
be used only for the prior conviction element, which the court 
had instructed the jury was separate from the state of mind 
element as to his prior conviction.  Thus, the jury necessarily  
disregarded the court’s instruction and considered the 
underlying facts in the stipulation substantively because the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 jurors would not have been able to convict Souza had they 
followed the court’s instruction as delivered.20  Accordingly, 
the verdict as to the prohibited possession of firearm charge 
rebuts the presumption that the jury followed the circuit  
court’s limiting instructions regarding the stipulation in this 
case. 
  The dissent 
agrees that the circuit court erred by 
refusing to accept Souza’s stipulation and requiring Souza to 
accept or reject the State’s proposed stipulation without 
modification.  Dissent at 4.  However, the dissent argues that 
there is no reasonable possibility that the court’s errors  
contributed to Souza’s conviction s.  Dissent at 4.  
  T he dissent contends that the case turned on the 
jury’s evaluation of the credibility of  Crail, Chong, and 
Wilcox’s respective testimonies.  Dissent at 15.  Although 
acknowledging that the jury could have drawn impermissible 
inferences regarding
 Souza’s character from the facts in the 
State’s unmodified stipulation, the dissent concludes that 
Souza’s character was irrelevant
 to Crail, Chong, and Wilcox’s  
credibility and thus unlikely to have affected the jury’s 
determination.  Dissent at 15.   
                                                           
 20 Given our disposition of this case, we do not address whether 
this logical inconsistency would amount to reversible error in its own right.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37   However, our holding in Murray sought to preclude the 
unnecessary introduction of evidence from which a jury might 
make negative inferences about a defendant’s character precisely 
because such evidence is not relevant to any matter of 
consequence and invariably prejudicial to a defendant.  See 
State v. Murray , 116 Hawai i 3, 21, 169 P.3d 955,  973 (2007) 
(“Eliminating the name and nature of the previous convictions 
from the jury’ s realm will prevent unfair prejudice to 
defendants . . . .”); Kaeo v. Davis , 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d 
387, 392 (1986) (“Unfair prejudice ‘ means an undue tendency to 
suggest decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not 
necessarily, an emotional one. ’” (quoting Advisory Committee ’s 
Note to Federal Rules of Evidence Rule  403)).  Similarly, 
evidence concerning other  crimes, wrongs, or acts is generally 
inadmissible under Hawaii Rules of E vidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) 
because it is largely irrelevant, and “every variety of ‘unfair 
prejudice’” implicated under HRE Rule 403 “is present when an 
accused’s prior crimes are sought to be used against her.”  
Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 404- 3 
(2016) (citing State v. Kassebeer , 118 Hawaii 493, 507, 193 P.3d 
409, 423 (2008); State v. Arceo , 84 Hawaii 1, 23-24, 928 P.2d 
843, 865-66 (1996)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38   As the dissent acknowledges,  the jury could  have drawn 
negative inferences about Souza’s character from the facts 
included in the State’s stipulation.  Dissent at 4 , 15.  The 
risk that the jury would decide the case on the basis of these 
unfavorable inferences about Souza’s character rather than  upon 
the witnesses’ credibility, or that the jury would make 
unreasonable inferences as to the credibility of the witnesses 
based on Souza’s perceived bad character, is exactly why the 
evidence was unfairly prejudicial and should not have been 
admitted at trial. 
  The dissent responds that, unlike the name and nature 
of a prior conviction, the wrongfully admitted evidence in this 
case was not “of such an overwhelmingly prejudicial nature that” 
it could “affect a jury’s determination of a case, irrespective 
of the nature of the issues and arguments upon which the parties 
relied at trial.”  Dissent at 12 -16.  
  As an initial matter, the dissent understates the 
gravity of the prejudicial information included in the 
stipulation, which informed the jury, inter alia, that  
 1) As of July 11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy Souza, 
had been convicted of a felony offense in the state of 
Hawaii. 
 2) As of July 11, 2012, the defendant, Tracy Souza, 
knew that he had been convicted of a felony offense in the 
state of Hawaii.  
 3) The defendant, Tracy Souza, has not been pardoned 
for such felony offense . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 (Emphasis added.)  Members of a jury unfamiliar with the 
executive pardon power may have inferred that a pardon is 
generally given in due course following a convicted defendant ’s 
successful rehabilitation, and there was a reason that Souza had 
not received one.  Certainly, jurors instructed by the court 
that it was “true and accurate” that Souza had not been  pardoned 
for his felony offense would consider this fact important for 
their consideration.  J urors thus may have concluded that Souza 
had not been pardoned for his felony conviction because he did 
not merit receiving a pardon based on his character or his 
subsequent conduct.   In this respect, the stipulation suggested 
an ongoing, present failure by Souza to redeem himself,  not 
merely past misconduct for which Souza had already paid his debt 
to society.  And,  unlike a prior conviction introduced through 
the normal evidentiary process, Souza was unable to offer any 
evidence demonstrating context or mitigating circumstances 
explaining the prejudicial facts (including the rarity with 
which pardons are granted) because the facts
 were established by 
stipulation.  See 83 C.J.S. Stipulations  § 5 (2017) (“A 
stipulation bars a party who enters into it from adducing 
evidence to dispute the stipulated facts or the circumstances 
surrounding them.”) .   
  Further, the negative effect of each portion  of the 
stipulation must be considered cumulatively.  As stated, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 stipulation also informed the jury that Souza was prohibited 
from possessing a firearm and knew he was prohibited from 
possessing a firearm, increasing the perceived wrongfulness of 
the conduct underlying the firearm- related charges against 
Souza.  The harm in this case of the improperly admitted 
information is particularly manifest when the various aspects 
are compounded.  See State v. Pemberton , 71 Haw. 466, 473, 796 
P.2d 80, 83–84 (1990) ( “We find that a number of these acts, 
while not individually sufficient to warrant reversal, 
cumulatively prejudiced Defendant to the extent of denying him a 
fair trial.”). 
  Specific negative inferences aside, t he dissent’s 
reasoning misapprehends the basis for our decision in Murray.  
To be sure, this court determined that evidence of the name and 
nature of a defendant’s previous conviction is overwhelmingly 
prejudicial, and we accordingly prescribed the stipulation 
procedure that a defendant must be allowe d to utilize to 
preclude its introduction.  Murray, 116 Hawaii at 20-21, 169 
P.3d at 972-73.  We did not suggest, however, that other 
negative character evidence must rise to this level for its 
admittance to constitute harmful error .  Indeed, the dissent 
appears to formulate a new alternative standard for evaluating 
the harmfulness of negative character evidence when the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 defendant’s character is not closely related to arguments or 
issues in the case, requiring a showing of overwhelming 
prejudice in such circumstances.21  
  But i
rrelevant negative character evidence undermines 
the presumption of innocence and  places a thumb on the scales of 
justice regardless of what issues the case properly turns upon.  
Admitting such evidence implies that the defendant “ is not 
entitled to the presumption of innocence throughout trial and 
deliberations. ”  State v. Mara , 98 Hawai i 1, 16, 41 P.3d 157, 
172 (2002) (quoting United States v. Doyle , 130 F.3d 523, 538 
(2d Cir. 1997)); accord United States v. Myers , 550 F.2d 1036, 
1044 (5th Cir. 1977) (holding bad character evidence is not 
admissible because “[a]  concomitant of the presumption of 
innocence is that a defendant must be tried for what he did, not 
for who he is”).  Further, the admission of prejudicial 
character evidence that is irrelevant may color a juror’s view 
of other evidence that is  relevant, bolstering the government’s 
case and diminishing the defendant’s such that the government’s 
burden of proof is effectively reduced .  A juror “ may take it 
upon herself to make a premature evaluation of the case ” and 
                                                           
 21 Because the use of character evidence is restricted under our 
evidentiary rules, a defendant’s character is actually related to the jury’s 
determination in only limited circumstances.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 conclude that she “ need not hold the Government to its strict 
burden [because] she is otherwise convinced of the accused ’s 
guilt.”  Mara, 98 Hawai i at 16, 41 P.3d at 172. 
  In sum, the admission of irrelevant character evidence 
invites jurors to make a premature evaluation of the case,  
erodes the presumption of innocence, and raises the potential 
that such evidence will be used in decid ing the case based on 
irrelevant considerations of who the defendant is and not what 
the defendant has done .  See id.  In light of the evidentiary 
record, it cannot be concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that 
such impermissible speculation by the jury did not contribute to 
Souza’s conviction .22  Thus, we vacate the circuit court’s 
judgment as to both convictions and remand the case for further 
proceedings. 
IV. CONCLUSION  
  The circuit court in this case did not accept Souza’s 
offer to admit to his prior conviction.  The court instead 
required Souza to either accept or reject the State’s proposed 
stipulation without modification, which included facts that were 
                                                           
 22 We stated in Murray that the “failure to allow the defendant to 
use the stipulation procedure would not be considered harmless error.”  116 
Hawaii at 20 n.14, 169 P.3d at 972 n.14 .  Because the harm from the court’s 
error was manifest in this case, we do not address whether a court’s failure 
to accept a defendant’s Murray stipulation to a prior conviction is 
structural error that is per se harmful.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 not elements of prohibited possession of firearm and that were 
prejudicial to Souza.  If Souza accepted the proffered 
stipulation, it would have the opposite effect that a Murray 
stipulation is intended to accomplish, making it more rather 
than less likely that the jury would decide the case on an 
improper basis.  But if Souza rejected the S tate’s proposed 
stipulation, the court indicated that the State would then be 
allowed to call witnesses to prove Souza’s prior conviction 
which would have the effect of introducing irrelevant facts 
through potentially prejudicial testimony.  Neither option 
conformed to Murray .  The circuit court’s error was not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  
  Accordingly , we vacate the ICA’s August 4 , 2017 
Judgment on Appeal and the circuit court’s June 18, 2013 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence and remand the 
case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
William H. Jameson, Jr.  
for petitioner  
 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
