   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER      
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
_____________________________________________________________  *** *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-30700 21-OCT-2015 
08:45 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
---
oOo---
GERARDO DENNIS PATRICKSON; RODOLFO BERMUDEZ ARIAS;
  
BENIGNO TORRES HERNANDEZ; FERNANDO JIMENEZ ARIAS; MELGAR
  
OLIMPIO MORENO; LEANDRO SANTOS; HERMAN ROMERO AGUILAR; ELIAS
  
ESPINOZA MERELO; CELESTINO HOOKER ERA; ALIRIO MANUEL MENDEZ
  
and CARLOS HUMBER RIVERA, individually and on behalf of
  
others similarly situated, Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants,
  
 
vs.  
 
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC.; DOLE FRESH FRUIT COMPANY; DOLE FRESH 
FRUIT INTERNATIONAL, INC.; PINEAPPLE GROWERS ASSOCIATION OF 
HAWAII; AMVAC CHEMICAL CORPORATION; SHELL OIL COMPANY; DOW 
CHEMICAL COMPANY; and OCCIDENTAL CHEMICAL CORPORATION, 
(individually and as successor to Occidental Chemical Company 
and Occidental Chemical Agricultural Products, Inc., Hooker 
Chemical and Plastics, Occidental Chemical Company of Texas and 
Best Fertilizer Company); STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY; STANDARD FRUIT 
AND STEAMSHIP COMPANY; STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY DE COSTA RICA, 
S.A.; STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY DE HONDURAS, S.A.; CHIQUITA BRANDS 
INC.; CHIQUITA BRANDS INTERNATIONAL, INC., (individually and as successor in interest to United Brands Company, Inc.); MARITROP 
TRADING CORPORATION; DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE N.A., INC.  
(incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A.); DEL MONTE 
FRESH PRODUCE COMPANY; DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE (HAWAII) INC., 
(incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce Hawaii, Inc.); DEL 
MONTE FRESH PRODUCE COMPANY and FRESH DEL MONTE N.V.,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.   
 
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC., Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-
Appellees, vs. DEAD SEA BROMINE CO., LTD and BROMINE COMPOUNDS 
LIMITED, Third-Party Defendants-Appellees.
       
 
 
 
  
SCWC-30700
  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(ICA NO. 30700; CIV. NO. 07
-1-0047)
 
OCTOBER 21, 2015  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
  
I. Introduction 
This appeal challenges the circuit court’s grant of partial 
summary judgme
nt against Plaintiffs on statute of limitations 
grounds. At issue on certiorari is whether the filing of a 
putative class action in another jurisdiction operated to toll this state’s statute of limitations, and, if so, at what point, 
under the particular circumstances of this case, did such 
tolling end. We hold that the filing of a putative class action 
in another jurisdiction does toll the statute of limitations in 
this state, as such “cross -jurisdictional tolling” supports a 
primary purpose of class action litigation, which is to avoid a 
multiplicity of suits. See Levi v. University of Hawai ʻi, 67 
Haw. 90, 93, 679 P.2d 129, 132 (1984) (“One of the purposes of a 
class action suit is to prevent multiplicity of actions, thereby 
preserving the economies of time, effort and expense.  This 
objective can be effectively achieved only by allowing the proposed members of a class to rely on the existence of a suit 
which protects their rights.”). 
2
      
 
 
 Further, under the unique circumstances of this case, 
cross-jurisdictional tolling ended when the foreign jurisdiction 
issued a final judgment that unequivocally dismissed the 
putative class action. 
In this case, Plaintiffs’ Complaint was 
filed within two years (the applicable limitations period) of the filing of the final judgment and, therefore, was not time-
barred. Accordingly, we hereby vacate the ICA’s judgment on 
1 appeal, which affirmed the circuit court’s  final judgment, 
entered pursuant to its order granting partial summary judgment 
against the Plaintiffs and in 
favor of the Defendants, and we 
remand this case to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.  
  
  
 This case involves dibromochloropropane (“DBCP”), a 
powerful nematocide
, or nematode worm killer.  The Ninth Circuit 
described DBCP as follows:  
 
                     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
A. The History of DBCP Litigation 
Tough on pests, it’s no friend to humans either. Absorbed 
by the skin or inhaled, it’s alleged to cause sterility, 
testicular atrophy, miscarriages, liver damage, cancer and 
other ailments that you wouldn’t wish on anyone. 
Originally manufactured by Dow Chemical and Shell Oil, the 
pesticide was banned from general use in the United States by the Environmental Protection Agency in 1979. But the 
chemical companies continued to distribute  it to fruit 
companies in developing nations.  
Patrickson v. Dole Fruit Co., Inc.,  251 F.3d 795, 798 (9th Cir. 
2001). Although much of the following history of the multi-
The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
3
  1     
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jurisdictional DBCP litigation is not contained in the record, 
it has been extensively chronicled in published (and unpublished) opinions from other jurisdictions. The instant 
case “represents one front in a broad litigation war between these plaintiffs’ lawyers and these defendants.” 
Id.  
1. Carcamo 
and Delgado : The DBCP War Begins in Texas 
The war began in August 1993, when “a putative class 
action, Jorge Carcamo v. Shell Oil Co.,  was filed in the 
District Court of Brazoria County, a state court in Texas. The 
action . . . defined the putative class as ‘[a]ll  persons 
exposed to DBCP, or DBCP-containing products . . . between 1965 
and 1990.’” Chaverri v. Dole Food Co., Inc., 896 F.Supp.2d 556, 
560 (E.D.La. 2012)(footnote omitted; first ellipsis added; 
second ellipsis in original.  
On March 29, 1994, the Carcamo plaintiffs moved for class 
certification. Id. Before the Texas state court could hear the 
motion, however, the Carcamo defendants removed the case to the 
United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas 
(“Texas district court”). Id.  The statutory basis for removal 
was the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (“FSIA”), as there were defendants impleaded into the case who were purportedly owned by 
the State of Israel. 
Id.
; see also 
Marquiniz v. Dole Food Co., 
Inc., 2014 WL 2197621, *1 (D. Del. May 27, 2014).  
4

      
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After removal, the Texas district court consolidated 
Carcamo
 with another DBCP case,  Delgado v. Shell Oil Co., 
originally filed in Galveston County (collectively, the 
“Carcamo/Delgado  case”). Chaverri,  896 
F.Supp.2d at 560; 
Delgado v. Shell Oil Co. , 231 F.3d 165, 170 (5th Cir. 2000).  
The Carcamo/Delgado defendants moved to enjoin any further DBCP 
litigation anywhere in the United States. Canales Blanco v. 
Amvac Chemical Corp., 2012 WL 3194412, *2 (Del.Super. Aug. 8, 
2012). 
2. Abarca:  Posturing 
in Florida 
Fearing that the Texas district court would grant the 
Carcamo/Delgado  defendants’ motion for an injunction against any 
further DBCP litigation anywhere else in the United States, the 
Carcamo/Delgado plaintiffs filed, on June 9, 1995, a class 
action lawsuit entitled Abarca v. CNK Disposition Corporation, 
on behalf of 3000 individuals, in 
Florida state court.  
Chaverri, 896 F.Supp.2d
 at 562 & 562 n.14.  The Abarca  
plaintiffs never  served their Complaint.  896 F.Supp.2d at 562 
n.14. In its order dated July 11, 1995 (discussed in greater 
detail in the next section), the Texas district court entered a 
narrower injunction than the defendants originally sought, 
enjoining only the Delgado  named plaintiffs from filing any 
further DBCP complaints in the United States.  Canales Blanco, 2012 WL 3194412 at *2; Chaverri , 896 F.Supp.2d at 562 n.14.  
5

      
 
 
Therefore, the Carcamo/Delgado   plaintiffs, “no longer fearing 
the broad injunction defendants had requested and prior to them 
being served, voluntarily  dismissed Abarca  on July 12, 1995.” 
Canales Blanco, 2012 WL 3194412 at *2.  
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. The War Continues in Texas 
This brief 
interlude in Florida thus concluded, the war 
continued in Texas. In addition to moving for an injunction 
against United States DBCP filings, the Carcamo/Delgado  
defendants had also moved to dismiss the complaints for forum 
non conveniens (“f.n.c.”). Chaverri , 896 F.Supp.2d at 560.  
The 
Texas district court granted the motion in its “Memorandum and 
Order” dated July 11, 1995 (“July 11, 1995 order”), and this 
order is the focus of the instant Application. Delgado v. Shell  
Oil Co.
, 890 F.Supp. 1324 (S.D.Tex. 1995). 
The July 11, 1995 order is 41 pages long. The first six 
pages lay out the procedural history in the cases consolidated before the Texas district court. 890 F.Supp. at 1335-41.  The 
next 10 pages explain the Texas district court’s reasoning for asserting federal jurisdiction over the case due to the presence 
of the impleaded Israeli companies, pursuant to the FSIA. 890 
F.Supp. at 1341-51.  Then, the Texas district court delved into 
its lengthier (23-page) f.n.c. analysis, including a survey of 
the availability of legal remedies in each of the plaintiffs’ 
home countries, culminating in a dismissal of the consolidated 
6
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 The July 11, 1995 order also contained, pursuant to Fifth 
Circuit precedent,  a return jurisdiction provision, which read  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
cases for f.n.c. 890 F.Supp. at 1351-75.  Recognizing the 
difficulty litigating these cases in the plaintiffs’ home countries, the Texas district court allowed the parties another 
90 days within which to expedite discovery in the U.S., as 
follows: 
The court concludes that the overwhelming majority of the 
relevant sources of proof are more readily available to the 
parties in the home countries of the plaintiffs and that 
this factor weighs heavily in favor of dismissal. 
Nevertheless, because foreign fora might not afford 
plaintiffs as many opportunities for discovery as they 
desire, to ensure that plaintiffs have access to evidence 
located in the United States no case will be dismissed until 90 days have elapsed after the entry of this 
Memorandum and Order. During that time plaintiffs may 
pursue expedited discovery against defendants under the 
supervision of this court. 
890 F.Supp. at 1367. The last paragraph in the Texas district 
court’s July 11, 1995 order read as follows:  
Other motions 
In addition to defendant’s motion to dismiss for 
f.n.c., a number of other motions are pending. Because 
Delgado, Jorge Carcamo, Valdez,
 and Isae Carcamo  may be 
dismissed in 90 days, all pending motions in those cases 
not otherwise expressly addressed in this memorandum and 
Order are DENIED as MOOT . 
Id. (emphasis in original). 
Notwithstanding the dismissals that may result from this 
Memorandum and Order, in the event that the highest court 
of any foreign country finally affirms the dismissal for 
lack of jurisdiction of any action commenced by a plaintiff 
in these actions in his home country or the country in which he was injured, that plaintiff may return to this 
court and, upon proper motion, the court will resume 
jurisdiction over the action as if the case had never been 
dismissed for f.n.c. 
890 F.Supp. at 1375. 
7
      
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On October 27, 1995, the Texas district court entered a final 
judgment dismissing the Carcamo/Delgado  consolidated action 
based on the f.n.c. dismissal. Chaverri
, 896 F.Supp.2d at 562. 
The Carcamo/Delgado  plaintiffs appealed the judgment, but 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit 
affirmed the dismissal on October 19, 2000. See Delgado 
, 231 
F.3d at 182.  The United States Supreme Court denied certiorari 
on April 16, 2001. See Delgado v. Shell Oil Co. , 532 U.S. 972 
(2001). 
Meanwhile, while the appeal of the Texas distr ict court’s 
judgment was pending, the war moved to 
our shores. 
4. The War Moves to Hawai ʻi 
The instant case was filed on October 3, 1997. 
As had 
happened in Carcamo/Delgado , Dole impleaded the defendant 
Israeli companies, and the case was removed to the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawai ʻi pursuant to the FSIA.  
Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson , 538 U.S. 468, 472 (2003).  As the 
Texas district court had done, the Hawaiʻ i district court 
dismissed the case for f.n.c. Patrickson, 251 F.3d at 798.  On 
appeal, however, unlike the Fifth Circuit, the Ninth Circuit 
reversed, holding that the Israeli companies were not organs of 
the Israeli government, and therefore, did not qualify as 
instrumentalities of a foreign state under the FSIA. 251 F.3d 
at 808. Therefore, the Ninth Circuit held that the federal 
8

      
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
courts did not have jurisdiction over the case, and ordered the 
Hawaiʻi district court to remand the case to Hawai ʻi state court. 
251 F.3d at 808-09.  The United States Supreme Court accepted 
certiorari to resolve the split between the Fifth and Ninth 
Circuits, and affirmed the Ninth Circuit. Dole Food Co., 538 
U.S. 468. The instant case was remanded to Hawai ʻi state court, 
specifically the Second Circuit Court, and venue was later 
changed to the First Circuit Court. 
5. Texas Epilogue 
The Delgado/Carcamo  class action eventually returned to 
Texas, pursuant to 
the return jurisdiction clause in the Texas 
district court’s July 11, 1995 order, after the Costa Rican courts dismissed the Costa Rican plaintiffs’ claims for lack of 
jurisdiction. Chaverri, 896 
F.Supp.2d at 561; Marquiniz, 2014 
WL 2197621 at *2. 
The cases were reinstated in Texas state 
court. Chaverri, 896 F.Supp.2d
 at 562. In September 2007, a 
Texas state court dismissed the Delgado action after defendants 
settled with the named plaintiffs. Id. In June 2010, a Texas 
state court denied a motion to certify the 
class in the Carcamo  
action. Id. Thus, by 2010, the DBCP litigation war had ended; 
the remaining DBCP battles occurring on other fronts ( e.g.
, in 
Hawaii, the Eastern District of Louisiana, and Delaware, 
according to our record on appeal) continued only to the extent 
9
      
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
                     
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the Texas action tolled the statute of limitations in those 
jurisdictions. 
B. 	An In-Depth Look at the Instant Hawai i DBCP Class 
Action 
1.  Complaint and First Amended Complaint 
In this case, Gerardo Dennis Patrickson, Rodolfo Bermudez 
Arias, Benigno Torres Hernandez, Fernando Jimenez Arias, Melgar 
Olimpio Moreno, Leandro Santos, Herman Romero Aguilar, Elias 
Espinoza Merelo, Celestino Hooker Era, Alirio Manuel Mendez, and 
Carlos Humberto Rivera,2 individually and on behalf of others 
similarly situated (“Plaintiffs”), filed their Complaint (and 
First Amended Complaint) against Dole Food Company, Inc.; Dole 
Fresh Fruit Company; Dole Fresh Fruit International, Limited; 
Dole Fresh Fruit International, Inc.; Pineapple Growers 
Association of Hawaii; Amvac Chemical Corporation; Shell Oil 
Company; Dow Chemical Company; Occidental Chemical Corporation; 
Standard Fruit Company; Standard Fruit and Steamship Company; Standard Fruit Company de Costa Rica, S.A.; Standard Fruit 
Company de Honduras, S.A.; Chiquita Brands, Inc.; Chiquita 
Brands International, Inc.; Maritrop Trading Corporation; Del 
On certiorari, only six named Plaintiffs remain in this action (Gerardo 
Dennis Patrickson, Benigno Torres Hernandez, Fernando Jimenez Arias, Elias 
Espinoza Merelo, Alirio Manual Mendez, and Carlos Humberto Rivera). Alirio 
Manual Mendez and Carlos Humberto Rivera stipulated to partially dismiss, 
without prejudice, all claims against Defendants Dole Food Company, Inc.; Dole Fresh Fruit Company; Standard Fruit Company; and Standard Fruit and 
Steamship Company. Roldolfo Bermudez Arias, Celestino Hooker Era, Herman 
Romero Aguilar, Leandro Santos, and Melgar Olimpio Moreno all stipulated to 
partially dismiss, without prejudice, all claims against all defendants. 
10
 2      
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
                     
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Monte Fresh Produce, N.A.; Del Monte Fresh Produce Company; and 
3Doe Defendants.
The Complaint alleged that the Plaintiffs were banana 
plantation workers from Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, and 
Panama, who were exposed to DBCP, made by or used by the 
Defendants, and such exposure caused severe injuries to the 
Plaintiffs’ reproductive systems. The Plaintiffs alleged as 
causes of action the following: negligence, conspiracy, strict liability, intentional tort, and breach of implied warranty.  
They prayed for compensatory and punitive damages. 
The circuit court denied the Plaintiffs’ motion for class 
certification and appointment of class representative on June 13, 2008. Plaintiffs did not appeal the denial of class 
certification. Therefore, this case concerns only the named 
Plaintiffs. 
2. Dow’s Mot ion for Partial Summary Judgment 
On April 13, 2009, Dow filed a motion for partial summary 
judgment against Gerardo Dennis Patrickson, Benigno Torres 
Hernandez, Fernando Jimenez Arias, Elias Espinoza Merelo, Alirio 
The parties later stipulated to dismiss, without prejudice, Chiquita 
Brands, Inc.; Chiquita Brands International, Inc.; Maritrop Trading 
Corporation; Dole Fresh Fruit International, Inc.; Dole Fresh Fruit 
International, Ltd.; Standard Fruit Company de Costa Rica, S.A.; Standard Fruit de Honduras, S.A.; Del Monte Fresh Produce Company, and Fresh Del Monte 
Produce N.V. (incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce and Fresh Del 
Monte N.V.). 
11
 3      
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
                     
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Manuel Mendez, and Carlos Humberto Rivera. Dow argued that on 
June 9, 1995 (over two years before the filing of the instant complaint on October 3, 1997), these six named plaintiffs filed 
the Abarca action, which made the same allegations as those in 
the instant case. To Dow, the Abarca action proved that these 
plaintiffs knew of their claims by June 9, 1995, and their causes of action accrued by that date. Therefore, because the 
Plaintiffs did not file the instant complaint within two years 
of having filed the Abarca complaint, their claims were barred 
by the two-year statute of limitations found under HRS § 657-7 (1993)
4 for tort actions. 
3. 	Plaintiffs’ Opposition to Dow’s Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment 
The Plaintiffs filed a memorandum in opposition to Dow’s 
motion for partial summary judgment. They counter-argued that 
the Abarca 
action was a “purely defensive response to 
defendants’ efforts to enjoin the litigation of any additional DBCP cases by the Texas [district] court hearing the 
[Carcamo/]Delgado  litigation. ” With regard to the statute of 
limitations, the Plaintiffs asserted that the “continued 
pendency of the 1993 Carcamo putative class action (consolidated 
HRS § 657- 7 (1993) is entitled “Damage to persons or property” and 
provides, “Actions for the recovery of compensation for damage or injury to 
persons or property shall be instituted within two years after the cause of 
action accrued, and not after, except as provided in section 657 -13.” HRS § 
657-13 (1993), in turn, contains exceptions for infancy, insanity, and 
imprisonment, which are not at issue in this case. 
12
 4      
 
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
into ‘Delgado’ ) suspended the running of the statute of 
limitations,” under American Pipe & Constr. Co. v. Utah , 414, 
U.S. 538, 554 (1974), which held that “the commencement of a 
class action suspends the applicable statute of limitations as 
to all asserted members of the class who would have been parties 
had the suit been permitted t o continue as a class action.” The 
Plaintiffs also noted that the United States Supreme Court 
extended American Pipe ’s holding in Crown, Cork & Seal Co. v. 
Parker, 462 U.S. 345, 350 (1983), to allow tolling not only in 
cases where plaintiffs sought to intervene in a continuing 
action, but also where they sought to file an entirely new action. The Plaintiffs noted that this court adopted American 
Pipe and Crown, Cork in
  Levi
, 67 Haw. 90, 679 P.2d 129. The 
Plaintiffs asserted that the Levi court made clear that “tolling 
provisions [extend] to all asserted members of the class, until class certification is denied.” 67 Haw. at 94, 679 P.2d at 132. 
Applying American Pipe, Crown, Cork,
  and Levi to the 
instant facts, the Plaintiffs argued that their Complaint was 
timely because 
the Hawai i statute of limitations was tolled by 
the 1993 filing of the Texas class actions. The Plaintiffs 
acknowledged that the Texas district court entered a f.n.c. 
dismissal order on July 11, 1995, but they argued that the Carcamo/Delgado putative class action was ultimately reinstated 
in Texas state court “as though it had never been dismissed” and 
13
      
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“remained pending until it was finally dismissed in September 
2007.” Therefore, Plaintiffs argued, their 1997 Complaint was timely. 
4. Dow’s Reply 
Dow
’s reply preliminarily pointed out that its motion for 
partial summary judgment had become, in effect, a motion for summary judgment, because the four other plaintiffs who were not 
the subject of the partial motion for summary judgment were in 
the process of dismissing their claims against the defendants.  
As to whether the 
Carcamo/Delgado  class action tolled the 
statute of limitations on the Plaintiffs’ complaint, Dow argued 
that American Pipe, Crown, Cork, and 
Levi do not support the 
Plaintiffs’ argument that a class action pending in one 
jurisdiction tolled the statute of limitations in another 
jurisdiction. Dow argued that those cases involved subsequent 
claims brought by members of a putative class in the same 
jurisdiction. Dow argued that a majority of jurisdictions do 
not allow cross-jurisdictional tolling. 
Moreover, even assuming cross
-jurisdictional tolling 
applied, Dow pointed out that any such tolling ended when class certification in 
Carcamo/Delgado  was denied by the Texas 
district court’s July 11, 1995 order. That order denied “all pending motions in [the consolidated cases] not otherwise 
expressly addressed in this Memorandum and Order” as moot. 
14

      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Delgado, 890 F.Supp. at 1375. Dow attached the state court 
docket sheet for Carcamo as an exhibit to its reply to show that 
plaintiffs’ motion for class certification was pending when the 
Texas district court issued its July 11, 1995 order.   The 
parties stipulated that the six named Plaintiffs in the instant case were putative class members in the 
Carcamo  case.    
Lastly, Dow 
argued that Plaintiffs cannot rely on class 
action tolling after having filed the Abarca  action while a 
motion for class certification in Carcamo/Delgado  was still 
pending. The parties stipulated that the six named Plaintiffs 
were named parties in Abarca
. 
5. Hearing on the Motion for Partial Summary Judgment   
At the hearing on Dow’s Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment, the parties focused on whether the July 11, 1995 order 
denied class certification in the Carcamo/Delgado case clearly 
enough to restart the Hawai i statute of limitations. 
Plaintiffs’ counsel argued that the July 11, 1995 order did not 
dispose of the Carcamo motion to certify a class action, because  
“that housekeeping order didn’t reference class certification 
specifically,” and “it wasn’t clear that [there] was a pending 
motion [for class certification] . It hadn’t been set for 
hearing. It hadn’t been briefed. It wasn’t argued.” Dow’s counsel, on the other hand, argued that the July 11, 1995 order 
was “the original denial of the motion [to certify the class] 
15
      
 
 
and the original dismissal of the 
[Carcamo/Delgado ] action”; 
therefore, the July 11, 1995 date set the limitations clock 
ticking once again.  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It became clear, however, that the circuit court intended 
to grant the partial motion for summary judgment in Defendants’ 
favor because it considered the filing of the Abarca
  case to be 
an effective “opt -out” of the Carcamo/Delgado  class action.    
6. 
	Order Granting Dow’s Motion for Partial Su mmary 
Judgment; Final Judgment; Notice of Appeal 
The circuit court granted Dow’s motion for partial summary 
judgment in an order dated July 30, 2009, as well as co
-
defendants’ joinders in that motion . The circuit court filed 
its judgment on July 26, 2010, and the Plaintiffs timely 
appealed. 
7. The ICA Appeal 
a. Opening Brief 
On appeal, Plaintiffs focused on the significance of the 
Abarca filing, as that formed the basis of the circuit court’s 
order granting Dow’s motion for partial summary judgme nt on 
limitations grounds.  The Plaintiffs argued that the filing of the Abarca complaint, which was never served and later 
voluntarily dismissed, did not commence an action for statute of 
limitations purposes, and did not manifest an intent to opt-out 
of the Carcamo/Delgado  class action. Plaintiffs argued that, 
16

      
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
because the putative class action in Delgado was not finally 
dismissed until September 2007, and because class certification 
was not denied in Carcamo 
until June 2010, Plaintiffs had two 
years from those dates from which to file a timely action; therefore, the Plaintiffs’ October 1997 Complaint was timely 
filed. The Plaintiffs argued that the defendants’ approach 
would frustrate the purposes of the class action tolling 
doctrine by forcing plaintiffs to prematurely commence 
individual actions out of an abundance of caution rather than 
relying on class actions to protect their interests.   The 
Plaintiffs requested that the ICA reverse the circuit court’s 
judgment and order granting summary judgment in favor of the 
Defendants. 
b. Answering Brief 
Only Dow filed a substantive Answering Brief
, while other 
defendants filed joinders to it. Dow first argued that the Texas district court ’s July 11, 1995 order in 
Carcamo/Delgado  
denied a pending class certification motion as moot; therefore, 
the Hawai
i two-year statute of limitations began running on that 
date, and Plaintiffs’ October 3, 1997 Complaint was time -barred.  
Second, Dow argued that the ICA should not recognize cross-
jurisdictional tolling. Third, Dow argued that the Plaintiffs opted out of the 
Carcamo/Delgado  class action by filing 
individual claims in the Abarca  complaint. Moreover, the filing 
17

      
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the Abarca  action in June 1995 demonstrated that the 
Plaintiffs were aware of their claims at that time, over two 
years before they filed the instant complaint, and thus, beyond  
the Hawai i two-year statute of limitations governing their 
claims. Dow requested that the ICA affir m the circuit court’s 
judgment.  
c. Reply Brief 
In their Repl
y, the Plaintiffs argued that the July 11, 
1995 order was a “routine housekeeping order” incidental to the 
district court’s f.n.c. dismissal , which “did not specifically 
refer to the [Carcamo/]Delgado  plaintiffs’ motion for class 
certification” when it ruled that “all pending motions” were 
moot. The Plaintiffs also argued that the ICA could recognize 
cross-jurisdictional tolling, as this court’s Levi 
opinion left 
open that possibility. 
d. The ICA’s Memorandum Opinion 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s  Judgment.   Patrickson 
v. Dole Food Co., No. 30700 (App. Mar. 7, 2014) (mem.) at 21.   
The ICA concluded  
[A]ll claims asserted by the Six Plaintiffs that have a 
two-year statute of limitations are time barred.  The 
Abarca  action establishes that the Six Plaintiffs were 
aware of their claims at least by June 9, 1995, when the 
Abarca  complaint was filed. 
Moreover, even if we assume 
that class action tolling applied, such tolling ended on July 11, 1995, when [the Texas distr ict court’s order] was 
issued, and the complaint in this case was filed more than 
two years later, on October 3, 1997. 
18
      
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. at 15. 
III. Standard of Review 
This court reviews a circuit court’ s grant of summary 
judgment de novo . See Hawai i Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka , 
94 Hawai i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000). “[S]ummary judgment is 
appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law .” Id. (citations omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Plaintiffs’ Application 
On certiorari, the Plaintiffs present the following 
questions: 
A. Whether an order entered on July 11, 1995 – purportedly 
dismissing the prior class action – that explicitly did not 
take effect until October 11, 1995 operates to bar 
Petitioners’ October 3, 1997 lawsuit on limitations 
grounds. 
B. Whether an administrative “housekeeping” order included 
in a forum non conveniens order denying “all pending 
motions” as “moot” – without specifying those pending 
motions – put putative class members on notice that class 
action tolling had ended. 
The Plaintiffs first argue that the July 11, 1995 order 
“expressly stated that the Order would not take affect [sic] 
until 90 days after the date of the Order because it was 
conditional upon the defendants submitting to certain 
stipulations to make the Order effective.  890 F.Supp. 1373, 
19
      
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1375. As a result, the Order did not become effective until 
October 11, 1995.”   The Plaintiffs argue that the Texas district 
court’s paragraph denying all other pending motions as moot also 
took effect on October 11, 1995.   Therefore, the Plaintiffs 
argue, they timely filed their Complaint on October 3, 1997, which was within two years of October 11, 1995.  
Next, the Plaintiffs argue that 
the July 11, 1995 order’s 
paragraph denying all other pending motions as moot was a 
“generic housekeeping order,” that “did not even refer to a 
class certification motion,” and “did not contain any discussion 
of the requirements of class certification under federal Rule 23.” The Plaintiffs argue that the provision therefore “did not 
[sic], and could not have put, putative class members reasonably 
on notice of the need to act.” They argue that this court 
should “clarify the law to require that the termination of class 
action tolling must be sufficiently clear and unambiguous to put 
putative members of the class on notice that limitations has 
begun to run against their claims and they have an obligation to act.” 
20
      
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
   
  
                     
   
  
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Dow’s and Dole’s Responses 
Dow and Dole filed Responses.5 As to Plaintiffs’ argument 
that the July 11, 1995 order did not take effect until October 
11, 1995, Dow counter-argues that the conditional f.n.c. 
dismissal “is in no way relevant to the denial of the class 
action certification motion”; the 90 -day expedited discovery 
deadline ending on October 11, 1995 had nothing to do with the 
dismissal of the Carcamo motion for class certification, which 
was pending at the time the Texas district court denied “all 
other pending motions” as moot. More emphatically, Dole argues, 
“A motion denied is a motion denied. Contrary to Petitioner’s 
assertions, there was nothing ‘vague’ or ‘ambiguous’ about the 
July 1995 Order.” Thus, the Defendants argue that any class 
action tolling stopped on July 11, 1995, when class certification was denied, and the Plaintiffs had two years from 
that date to file their Complaint. 
Dow and Dole 
also point out that the ICA ’s holding is 
consistent with those of two recent cases examining the effect of the July 11, 1995 order on putative DBCP class actions filed 
within their respective jurisdictions, 
Marquiniz  and 
Chaverri , 
which both concluded that the July 11, 1995 denial of the 
Respondent s Pineapple Growers Association of Hawaii; Occidental 
Chemical Corporation, and Shell Oil Company joined in Dow’s Respon se. 
Respondent Pineapple Growers Association of Hawaii joined in Dole’s Response. 
21
 5      
 
 
 
    
  
  
    
     
    
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pending motion for class certification restarted limitations 
periods. See  Marquiniz, 2014 WL 2197621 at *2, and Chaverri , 
896 F.Supp.2d at 569 . Dow notes both cases hold that the denial 
of class certification, while not on the merits, was sufficient to end any class action tolling. 
See  Marquiniz , 2014 WL 2197621 
at *2 (“While the denial of the motion was not on the merits, any reliance would have been objectively unreasonable, as the 
case was dismissed .”
); Chaverri , 896 F.Supp.2d at 569 (noting 
that courts “did not make any distinction based upon the type or 
manner of denial, nor did they require that the denial be on the 
merits.”). Dow states that these holdings are in line with the majority rule that “the tolling rule announced in [ American 
Pipe] extends only through the denial of class status in the 
first instance by the district court.” Giovanniello v. ALM 
Media, 726 F.3d 106, 116 (2d Cir. 2013). Dole agrees, arguing that “federal courts are in broad agreement ‘that [class action] 
tolling ceases upon entry of an order denying class 
certification in the trial court.’” See Arivella v. Lucent  
Techs., Inc., 623 F.Supp.2d 164, 174-75 (D.Mass. 2009) . 
C. Analysis 
1. Cross-Jurisdictional Tolling 
A threshold issue in this appeal is whether the pendency of 
the Texas Carcamo /Delgado action tolled this state’s statute of 
limitations. In other words, this court must decide whether to 
22
      
 
 
 
  
 
  Crown, Cork,*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recognize “cross -jurisdictional tolling.” “Cross -jurisdictional 
tolling” has been defined as “a rule whereby a court in one 
jurisdiction tolls the applicable statute of limitations based 
on the filing of a class action in another jurisdiction.” Quinn 
v. Louisiana Citizens Prop. Ins. Co., 118 So.3d 1011, 1018 n.7 (La. 2012) (citations omitted).  
We start with the general premise that the pendency of a 
class action will toll the statute of limitations for 
intervenors and those pursuing individual suits within the 
federal court system, and within the Hawai i state court system. 
American Pipe, 414 U.S. at 554; Crown, Cork, 462 U.S. at 354; 
Levi 
, 67 Haw. at 93, 679 P.2d at 132. This “class action 
tolling” rule originated in American Pipe
, which held that the 
“the commencement of a class action suspends the applicable 
statute of limitations as to all asserted members of the class 
who would have been parties had the suit been permitted to 
continue as a class action.” American Pipe, 414 U.S. at 554.  
In other words, the pendency of a class action will toll the applicable statute of limitations for would-
be intervenors.  
Further, “[o]nce the statute of limitations has been tolled, it remains tolled for all members of the putative class until class 
certification is denied.  At that point, class members may choose to file their own suits or to intervene as plaintiffs in 
the pending action.”  462 U.S. at 354.  In other  
23

      
 
 
 
   
  
       
 
 
 
                     
 
 
  
  
 6*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
words, the American Pipe  rule applies not only to intervenors to 
a class action, but 
also to putative class action plaintiffs 
seeking to file individual suits upon the denial of class 
certification. This court in Levi adopted the American Pipe and 
Crown, Cork “class action tolling” rule to Hawai i state court 
actions. 
67 Haw. at 93, 679 P.2d at 132. Whether class action 
tolling applies cross-jurisdictionally so that a putative class action filed in one jurisdiction operates to suspend this state 
statute of limitations is a matter of first impression for this 
court.
6 
We note that other states are split on the issue of whether 
a putative class action filed in one jurisdiction will operate 
to toll the statute of limitations in another. Cases in which 
courts have recognized such cross-jurisdictional tolling include 
Stevens v. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., 247 P.3d 244 (Mont. 
2010); Vaccariello v. Smith & Nephew Richards,  763 N.E.2d 160 
(Ohio, 2002); Staub v. Eastman Kodak Co.,  726 A.2d 955 
We note that, almost 30 years ago, the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Second Circuit had the opportunity to examine whether cross -
jurisdictional tolling existed in Hawai i. See In re Agent Orange Product 
Liability Litigation , 818 F.2d 210 (2d Cir. 1987). The Hawai i plaintiffs -
appellants in that case argued that the pendency of a multi -district federal 
class action in the Eastern District of New York tolled the two -year Hawai i 
statute of limitations such that their claims were timely filed. 818 F.2d at 
213. The Second Circuit disagreed, holding that “none of [Hawaii’s 
limitations statutes] provides for tolling in a situation such as exists here . . . [so that] it is doubtful that either 
American Pipe  or Crown, Cork can 
be treated as applicable precedent.” Id. 
(citations omitted).  In other 
words, the Second Circuit declined to interpret Hawai i law to cross-
jurisdictionally toll the state statute of limitations during the pendency of a federal class action. 
24
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(N.J.Sup.Ct.App.Div. 1999); Hyatt Corp. v. Occidental Fire & 
Cas. Co. of N.C.,  801 S.W.2d 382 (Mo. Ct. App. 1990); and Lee v. 
Grand Rapids Bd. of Educ. , 384 N.W.2d 165 (Mich. Ct. App. 1986).  
Cases in which courts have declined to adopt cross-
jurisdictional tolling include Casey v. Merck & Co., 722 S.E.2d 
842 (Va. 2012); Ravitch v. Pricewaterhouse, 793 A.2d 939 (Pa. 
Super. Ct. 2002); Maestas v. Sofamor Danek Group, Inc., 33  
S.W.3d 805 (Tenn. 2000); Portwood v. Ford  Motor Co., 701 N.E.2d 
1102 (Ill. 1998); and Bell v. Showa Denko K.K. , 899 S.W.2d 749 
(Tex. Ct. App. 1995). 
Those states declining to adopt cross-jurisdictional 
tolling do so out of concern for forum shopping and delay. See  
Portwood, 701 N.E.2d at 1104; Maestas, 33 S.W.3d at 808. On 
forum-shopping, the Portwood court reasoned that cross-
jurisdictional tolling “may actually incr ease the burden on [a] 
state’s court system, because plaintiffs from across the country 
may elect to file a subsequent suit in that state solely to take 
advantage of the generous tolling rule.” 701 N.E.2d at 1104; see also Ravitch , 793 A.2d at 944 (citing Portwood , 701 N.E.2d 
at 1104). On delay, the Portwood court noted that a forum 
state’s court has no control over the work of another 
jurisdiction’s courts, and that lengthening a forum state’s 
statute of limitations during the pendency of an out
-of-
jurisdiction class action could require forum states to 
25
      
 
 
 
    
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ultimately entertain stale claims. 701 N.E.2d at 1104. The 
Maestas court also viewed cross-jurisdictional tolling as a threat to the forum state’s “power to adopt statutes of 
limitations and exceptions to those statutes. . . .” 33 S.W.3d 
at 809. Where a forum state’s statute is cross -jurisdictionally 
tolled by a pending federal class action in particular, the 
Maestas 
court additionally held that such tolling “would 
arguably offend the doctrines of federalism and dual sovereignty.” 
Id.  
Those states adopting cross
-jurisdictional tolling do so to 
promote the “efficient utilization of judicial resources and 
the reduction of costs to individual litigants,” which “are 
among the principal purposes of both state and federal class 
action rules.” Staub, 726 A.2d at 966; Stevens, 247 P.3d at 
256.  The Supreme Court of Ohio adopted cross-jurisdictional 
tolling because it was “more important to ensure efficiency and 
economy of litigation than to rigidly adhere” to its state 
statutes of limitations. Vaccariello,  763 N.E.2d at 163.  That 
court acknowledged that the purposes of statutes of limitations 
are to “put defendants on notice of adverse claims and to 
prevent plaintiffs from sleeping on their rights.” 
763 N.E.2d 
at 162. 
The court stated, however, that even the United States 
Supreme Court in  Crown, Cork  observed that “blind application of 
statutes of limitations would frustrate ‘[t]he principal 
26

      
 
 
 
  
 
                     
  
 
    
 
 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
purposes of the class-action procedure –- promotion of 
efficiency and economy of litigation.’” Id.  (citing 462 U.S. at 
349). Therefore, the Vaccariello  court stated that “allowing 
the filing of a class action in the [other jurisdiction] to toll 
the statute of limitations in [a subsequent state action]  does 
not defeat the purpose” of the state statute of limitations, because the first class action put th e defendant “on notice of 
the substance and nature of the claims against it” within the 
7 limitations period.   Id.   Further, noting that the bulk of its 
state class action rules is identical to the bulk of the [out-of-jurisdiction] class action rules, the Vaccariello  court held 
that “a class action filed in [the other jurisdiction] serves 
the same purpose as a class action filed in Ohio.” Id.     
The 
Vaccariello  court also did not consider the flood of 
lawsuits feared by the Portwood court to be “a realisti c 
Of course cross -jurisdictionally tolling a state statute of limitations 
as to a defendant named in the state action but not named in the first class 
action would be unfair. Therefore, we agree with the ICA’s footnote 9, which 
states: 
Because notice to the defendant of the claim is one  of the 
underlying rationales supporting class action tolling, such 
tolling does not apply to claims against a Defendant who 
was not previously named as a defendant in Carcamo.  From 
the record, it appears that Defendants Pineapple Growers 
Association of Hawaii, AMVAC Chemical Corporation, Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., Inc., and Del Monte Fresh Produce 
(Hawaii) Inc. were not named as defendants in Carcamo, and 
thus for this additional reason any tolling does not apply to claims against these Defendants.  
Patrickson,  mem. op. at 13 n.9. See 
also Bell, 899 S.W.2d at 758 (declining 
to adopt cross- jurisdictional tolling in any event, but observing that such 
tolling would not apply to defendants who were not named as defendants in the 
first class action). 
27
      
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
potential problem.” Vaccariello,  763 N.E.2d at 163.  Rather, 
the Vaccariello court held that cross-jurisdictional tolling 
“merely allows a plaintiff who could have filed suit in [the 
forum state] irrespective of the class action filed in [another 
jurisdiction] to rely on that class action to protect her rights 
in [the forum state].” Id.  To do otherwise, that court held, 
“would encourage all potential plaintiffs in [the forum state] 
who might be a part of a class that is seeking certification in 
[an out-of-jurisdiction] class action to file suit individually 
in [the forum state’s] courts to preserve their [forum state] claims should the class certification be denied.” 
Id. The 
resulting “multiplicity of filings would defeat the purpose of 
class actions. . . .” Id. The Superior Court of New Jersey’s 
Appellate Division also considered the unfairness of disallowing cross-jurisdictional tolling when it held that “a contrary rule 
would reward defendants who caused a court to delay decision of 
class action certification until the statute of limitations had 
run. . . .” 
Staub, 726 A.2d at 966. 
We find the reasoning of those states adopting cross
-
jurisdictional tolling to be more persuasive, as well as consistent with our existing precedent, namely Levi. In Levi
, 
we adopted the American Pipe  and Crown, Cork  class action 
tolling rule and noted the following: 
28

      
 
 
 
  One of the purposes of a class action suit is to prevent 
multiplicity of actions, thereby preserving the economies 
of time, effort and expense. This objective can be 
effectively achieved only by allowing the proposed members of a class to rely on the existence of a suit which protects their rights. 
 
67 Haw. at 93, 679 P.2d at 132.  We therefore hold that a class 
action filed in another jurisdiction will toll the applicable 
Hawaii statute (s) of limitations.    
  2.	  
 The End of the Cross-Jurisdictional Tolling   
 Period   
  
 The next question we confront is , when did the cross-
jurisdictional tolling of our state statute of limitations end?  
We are cognizant of the authority marshalled by the Defendants 
that a majority of the federal courts hold that “the tolling 
rule announced in [ American Pipe ] extends only through the 
denial of class status in the first instance by the district court.” 
Giovanniello , 726 F.3d at 107-08; see  also  Arivella, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
623 F.Supp.2d at 174-75 (“Most  courts . . . also agree that 
[class action] tolling ceases upon entry of an order denying 
class certification in the trial court. ”   Citing this authority, 
the Defendants argue that any tolling ended upon the Texas 
district court’s July 11, 1995 order dismissing the 
Carcamo/Delgado  case for f.n.c. and all other pending motions as 
moot.   Therefore, argue t he Defendants, Plaintiffs’ October 3, 
1997 Complaint was untimely, having been filed beyond the two-year statute of limitations in HRS § 657-7.    
29

      
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
                     
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Plaintiffs, on the other hand, focus on the language of the 
July 11, 1995 order. They argue that the order’s paragraph 
denying all other pending motions as moot was a “generic 
housekeeping order,” that “did not even refer to a class 
certification motion,” and “did not contain any discussion of 
the requirements of class certifi cation under federal Rule 23.” 
The Plaintiffs also argue that any tolling ended at the earliest 
on October 10, 19958, 90 days after the entry of the July 11, 
1995 order, because the order did not take effect immediately; 
instead, the order stated, “[N]o case will be dismissed until 90 
days have elapsed after the entry of this Memorandum and Order.” 
890 F.Supp. at 1367. Therefore, argue the Plaintiffs, their 
October 3, 1995 Complaint was timely, having been filed days 
before the two year statute of limitations in HRS § 657-7 ended.  
They urge this court to “clarify the law to require that the 
termination of class action tolling must be sufficiently clear and unambiguous to put putative members of the class on notice 
that limitations has begun to run against their claims and they have an obligation to act.” 
The Plaint iffs’ arguments are persuasive. While it is not 
true that the July 11, 1995 order “did not even refer to a class 
The Plaintiffs calculate the 90th day to be October 11, 1995, but it 
appears that the 90th day was October 10, 1995. 
30
 8      
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
The court concludes that the overwhelming majority of the 
relevant sources of proof are more readily available to the 
parties in the home countries of the plaintiffs and that this factor weighs heavily in favor of dismissal. 
Nevertheless, because foreign fora might not afford 
plaintiffs as many opportunities for discovery as they 
desire, to ensure that plaintiffs have access to evidence 
located in the United States
 no case will be dismissed 
until 90 days have elapsed after the entry of this 
Memorandum and Order.  During that time plaintiffs may pursue expedited discovery against defendants under the 
supervision of this court.  
 
890 F.Supp. at 1367  (emphasis added).  Further, the district 
court’s affirmative statement that “no case will be dismissed 
                     
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
certification motion,”9 it is true that it “did not contain any 
discussion of the requirements of class certification under 
federal Rule 23.” The denial of class certification in the July 
11, 1995 order was, as Plaintiffs argue, not express. Therefore, we agree with the Plaintiffs that the July 11, 1995 
order did not terminate class action tolling in a “sufficiently 
clear and unambiguous” way in order to “put putative members of 
the class on notice that” the Hawai i state statute of 
limitations had begun to run against them. 
Moreover, it would appear from the plain language of the 
order that July 11, 1995 was not the date that the order itself 
would take effect in any event. In the order, the Texas 
district court stated that its dismissal of the cases would not 
take effect for another 90 days: 
The record reflects that there was a pending class certification motion 
in Carcamo
, and the Texas district court was aware of it when it stated in 
the July 11, 1995 order , “Defendants respond that while plaintiffs have 
sought class certification in several of the pending actions, no classes have 
been certified.” Delgado,  890 F.Supp. at 1368. 
31
 9      
 
 
until 90 days have elapsed after the entry of this Memorandum 
and Order” is in tension with the more tentative “may be dismissed” language of the provision dismissing all pending 
motions as moot:  
 
  In addition to defendant’s motion to dismiss for 
f.n.c., a number of other motions are pending. Because 
Delgado, Jorge Carcamo, Valdez, and Isae Carcamo  may be 
dismissed in 90 days, all pending motions in those cases 
 not otherwise expressly addressed in this Memorandum and 
 Order are DENIED as MOOT .  
 
 
  
 
 
 Carcamo/Delgado 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Other motions  
890 F.Supp. at 1375. (capitalization in original; emphasis 
added). It would appear from the plain language of the July 11, 
1995 order that, as of that date, there still remained a possibility that the Carcamo/ Delgado litigation might not be 
dismissed; therefore, a related motion for class certification 
might not become moot. Thus, as Plaintiffs argue, the July 11, 
1995 order did not unambiguously signal to putative class 
members of the need to act to protect their interests. It was 
not until October 27, 1995 that the Texas district court filed 
its judgment dismissing the cases that it could 
be said with certainty that class certification was denied. 
In order to prevent such confusion from arising in the 
future, we hold that the pendency of a class action in another 
jurisdiction operates to toll our state’s a pplicable statute(s) 
of limitations until the court in our sister jurisdiction issues an order expressly denying a motion for class certification (or 
32
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expressly denying the last such motion, if there is more than 
one motion). The July 11, 1995 order in this case was not an express denial of class certification; therefore, July 11, 1995 
is not the date our state statute of limitations began to run 
again. Barring such an express order in this case, we hold that 
the Texas district court’s October 27, 1995 fin al judgment 
dismissing Carcamo /Delgado for f.n.c. clearly denied class 
certification and triggered the resumption of our state statute 
of limitations. The Plaintiffs’ Complaint, which was filed on 
October 3, 1997, was therefore timely. 
Finally, although the parties no longer pursue the issue of 
whether the Abarca filing constituted an “opt -out” of the 
Carcamo/Delgado class action, we note that cross-jurisdictional 
tolling would also end upon a class member’s decision to opt -out 
of a class action suit. In the present case, however, the 
Abarca filing was not an opt-out of the Carcamo /Delgado class 
action under the Hawai i Rules of Civil Procedure (“HRCP”) or the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (“FRCP”). Under both HRCP Rule 
23(c)(2) (2011) and FRCP Rule 23(c)(2) (2009), once a court 
determines that a class action can be maintained under 
subsection (b)(3), then the court notifies class members that 
they can opt out of the class by sending a request to the court. See HRCP Rule 23(c)(2) (“In any class action maintained under 
subdivision (b)(3), the court shall direct to the members of the 
33
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
class the best notice practicable under the circumstances . . . 
advis[ing] each member that . . . the court will exclude the member from the class if the member so requests by a specified 
date. . . .”); FRCP Rule 23(c)(2) (“For any class certified 
under Rule 23(b)(3), the court must direct to class members the 
best notice that is practicable under the circumstances . . . 
clearly and concisely stat[ing] in plain, easily understood 
language . . . that the court will exclude from the class any 
member who requests exclusion. . . .”) 
In this case, the Texas district court had not certified 
the Carcamo/Delgado class action; therefore, the opt-out 
provisions of HRCP Rule 23(c)(2) and FRCP Rule 23(c)(2) were not 
triggered. The Abarca filing was not an opt-out as envisioned 
under those rules. 
V. Conclusion 
We hold that Hawai ʻi recognizes cross-jurisdictional 
tolling. Cross-jurisdictional tolling ends when a court in our 
sister jurisdiction issues an order expressly denying a motion 
for class certification (or expressly denying the last such 
motion, if there is more than one motion).  Where there is no 
such express order, cross-jurisdictional tolling ends when a 
court in our sister jurisdiction enters final judgment 
dismissing the class action. We note that cross-jurisdictional 
tolling also ends when a class member opts out of the class 
34
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pursuant to the class action rules of this state or a sister jurisdiction. 
In this case, the Plaintiffs’ June 1995 Abarca filing was 
not an opt-out of the Carcamo/Delgado class action under FRCP 
Rule 23(c)(2); therefore, it did not trigger the resumption of 
our state’s statute of limitations. The Texas district court’s 
July 11, 1995 order did not expressly deny the Carcamo motion 
for class certification; therefore, the July 11, 1995 date did not mark the resumpt ion of our state’s statute of limitations. 
The Texas district court did clearly dismiss the Carcamo/Delgado 
class action by final judgment entered on October 27, 1995, thus restarting our state’s two -year limitations period.  
Consequently, Plaintiffs were required to file their Complaint 
by October 27, 1997. The Plaintiffs filed their Complaint on 
October 3, 1997; therefore, the Complaint was timely. As the 
ICA held otherwise, its judgment is hereby vacated, as is the 
final judgment of the circuit court, and this case is remanded 
35
      
 
 
 
    
       
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
Sean M. Lyons  
for petitioners  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Sidney K. Ayabe,  
Calvin E. Young,    
Steven L. Goto, and  
Michael L. Brem    
(admitted pro hac vice)
   
for respondent     
The Dow Chemical Company
  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson

 
Melvyn M. Miyagi,
 
Ross T. Shinyama, 
Angela T. Thompson, and
 Andrea E. Neuman
 
(admitted pro hac vice)
 
for respondent
 Dole Food Company, Inc.
 
Melvyn M. Miyagi,
 
Ross T. Shinyama, and
 
Angela T. Thompson
 
for respondent
 
Pineapple Growers
 Association of Hawaii
 
Judy A. Tanaka and
 
Maile Osika 
for respondent
 
Occidental Chemical Corporation
 
Wendell H. Fuji and
 
Anthony F. Suetsugu
 
for respondent
 
Shell Oil Company 
36
 