*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---O0O--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
ESTATE OF ROBERT FREY
, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellant ,
 
vs. 
 
ROBERT P. MASTROIANNI, M.D., 
Respondent/ Defendant- Appellee. 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-14-0001030 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0001030; CIVIL NO. 07-1-0206(1)) 
 
May 5, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK,  AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J. 
 
  Following the death of Robert Frey (“Frey”) in 2004, 
his estate and several family members initiated proceedings 
against Dr. Robert Mastroianni (“Dr. Mastroianni”) before a 
medical claim conciliation panel (“MCCP”) , claiming that Dr. 
Mastroianni’s negligence was the cause of Frey’s death .  The 
case eventually led to a 2014 trial in the Circuit Court of the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0001030
05-MAY-2020
09:03 AM*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 Second Circuit (“circuit court”).  After the sole remaining 
plaintiff, the Estate of Robert Frey (“the Estate”), rested its 
case, the circuit court granted judgment as a matter of law to 
Dr. Mastroianni.   
  The circuit court held that it had no jurisdiction 
over the Estate’s “loss of chance” claim— that is, its claim that 
Dr. Mastroianni’s negligence caused Frey to lose a chance of 
recovery or survival —because such a claim was not raised before 
the MCCP.  And it held that the Estate had failed, as a matter 
of law, to present sufficient evidence of causation to make out 
a claim.  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirm ed.  
Estate of Frey v. Mastroianni, No. CAAP- 14-0001030, 2018 WL 
3199216, at *12 (App. June 29, 2018) (mem.).  The ICA concluded 
that “loss of chance” claims seek recovery for  a “separate 
compensable injury[,]” and that the Estate’s failure to raise 
loss of chance before the MCCP deprived the circuit court of 
jurisdiction.  Id.
 at *7.  It also concluded that, during trial, 
the Estate had “failed to provide any expert medical testimony 
establishing that Dr. Mastroianni caused Frey’s death ‘to a 
reasonable degree of medical probability.’”  Id. at *11.   
  We accepted  certiorari to resolve the question of 
whether the “loss of chance” doctrine is consistent with Hawaiʻi 
law and to provide additional guidance regarding the MCCP 
pleading process.  In brief, we hol
d that while a “loss of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 chance” is not a separate compensable injury under Hawaiʻi law, a 
factfinder in a medical malpractice case involving the death of 
a patient may consider a loss of chance theory
 in determining 
legal causation under our traditional fr
amework for negligence, 
which considers whether an actor’s conduct was a substantial 
factor in bringing about the harm.  
See Mitchell v. Branch, 45 
Haw. 128, 132, 363 P.2d 969, 973 (1961).  We  also clarify that 
the pleading requirements before MCCPs , now renamed MICPs , are 
intended to be relatively simple , requiring only a brief 
description of the facts underlying the claim, not a detailed 
legal theory of the case.  Thus, we hold  that the circuit court 
had jurisdiction over the Estate’s negligence claim , including 
its loss of chance arguments, in the present case.  We hold  
further that the circuit court erred in holding that the Estate 
failed as a matter of law to 
present sufficient evidence of 
causation to make out a claim.  We remand the case for a new 
trial in light of this opinion . 
I.  BACKGROUND 
A.  Medical Claims Conciliation Panel Proceedings 
  On June 13, 2006, the Estate and several of Robert 
Frey’s family members (collectively, “the Claimants”) submitted 
a letter (“the Claim Letter”)  to a medical claim conciliation *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 panel.1  In the Claim Letter, the Claimants alleged that Frey  
died as a result of the negligence of his treating physician, 
Dr. Mastroianni.  The Claim Letter made the following factual 
and legal allegations and demand : 
 Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes, 671 -1, et seq.,  
Claimants . . .
 hereby present a claim for damage resulting 
from Robert  Frey’s death, which occurred as a result of the 
negligence of the following respondent:  
 
Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D.  
 
. . . 
 
 The Claimants are the estate of Robert Frey, and his 
parents, brother, and sisters as individuals.  Robert Frey 
was born on March 2, 1946.  He died on June 15, 2004.  He 
was fifty -eight years old at the time of his death.  
Respondent Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D., is a medical doctor 
who provided care to Robert Frey.  
 
 The background and circumstances of this claim are as 
follows:  On June 11, 2004, Robert Frey was visiting Maui 
and staying with a friend.  Sometime during that day Mr. 
Frey inadvertently ingested an immense dose of gamma 
hydroxy butyrate (GHB).  The GHB was contained in a juice 
bottle in the refrigerator of his friend’s home and Mr. 
Frey used it, thinking that it was just juice, to make a 
smoothie in the blender.  Thereafter, as a result of the 
effects of the GHB, Mr. Frey fell while within the 
residence, apparently hitting his head on a table.  He was 
found unconscious by his friend and another person.  An 
ambulance was eventually called and Robert Frey was taken 
                     
1 At the time, Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 671 -12(a) (1993) 
provided:
 
 
[A]ny person or the person’s representative claiming that a 
medical tort has been committed shall submit a statement of the 
claim to the medical claim conciliation panel before a suit based 
on the claim may be commenced in any court of this State.  Claims 
shall be submitted to the medical claim conciliation panel in 
writing.  The claimant shall set forth facts upon which the claim 
is based and 
shall include the names of all parties against whom 
the claim is or may be made who are then known to the claimant. 
 
In 2012, the legislature amended HRS Chapter 671 to re -designate MCCPs 
as “medical inquiry and conciliation panels” (“MICP”) and “claims” as 
“inquiries.”  2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 296, §  4 at 1006- 15.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 to the emergency room at the Maui Memorial Medica
l Center.  
From the emergency room, Mr. Frey was transferred to the 
intensive care unit.  Respondent Robert P. Mastroianni, 
M.D. was his treating physician.  Over the next two days, 
Mr. Frey emerged from his coma and began to recover.  On 
June 13, 2004, Dr. Mastroianni discharged Mr. Frey in 
“stable condition,” on oral antibiotics with a diagnosis of 
“bronchitis,” despite the facts that (1) it was documented 
that Mr. Frey had vomited several times while unconscious, 
(2) his most recent chest x -ray (of the day before) showed 
evidence of developing pneumonia, (3) he had a fever of 102 
degrees, and (4) he was coughing.  Dr. Mastroianni did not 
order new x -rays on the day of Mr. Frey’s discharge.  
During the evening of June 13th Robert developed difficulty 
breathing, and the next morning he was rushed back to the 
hospital.  Following treatment in the emergency room, he 
was admitted with a diagnosis of pneumonia, hypoxia, 
sepsis, and severe metabolic acidosis.  His condition 
quickly deteriorated, and at 11:05 a.m. on Tuesday June 15, 
2006 [sic], Mr. Frey died.  The pathologist who conducted 
the autopsy listed the immediate cause of death as severe 
necrotizing pneumonia, with contributing conditions of 
sepsis and gamma hydroxy butyrate intoxication.   
 
 Claimants allege that Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D., 
fell below the applicable standard of care in multiple 
respects, including but not limited to the following:  (1) 
failing to start Mr. Frey on broad spectrum intravenous 
antibiotics soon after the first admission, when it became 
clear that he had pneumonia; (2) discharging the patient on 
June 13th without determining the reason for his fever; (3) 
not repeating the chest X -ray on June 13th, which would 
clearly have shown pneumonia; and (4) misdiagnosing Mr. 
Frey’s condi tion as bronchitis, despite the evidence of his 
chest x- rays, his fever of 102, and his probable aspiration 
of vomit while he had been unconscious.  
 
 If Dr. Mastroianni had administered antibiotics in 
the hospital on June 11th or 12th, repeated the chest x-ray 
on June 13th, and kept Mr. Frey in the hospital for further 
observation and treatment, then with the benefit of closer 
observation and care it is likely that he would have 
survived.  
 
 Wherefore, Claimants demand judgment against the 
above-stated respondent for such general and special 
damages to which Claimants shall be entitled pursuant to 
the proof adduced at the hearing which is sufficient to 
invoke the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court of the State 
of Hawaii, together with costs of suit, pre -judgment and 
post-judgment interest, and such further relief, both legal 
and equitable, as this panel deems appropriate.    
 
On February 28, 2007, the Claimants submitted a pre- hearing 
statement to the MCCP which repeated these allegations.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6  
 In April 2007, the
 MCCP decided in favor of the 
Claimants.  After the MCCP’s decision, Dr. Mastroianni took the 
position that he would not pay the award.2 
B.  Circuit Court Proceedings
 
1.  Pleadings 
 
 On June 12, 2007, the Claimants filed a complaint in 
the circuit court against Dr. Mastroianni.  The complaint 
alleged one count of “Negligen[c]e (Medical Malpractice)”  and 
one count of “Wrongful Death[.]”   As to the negligence count, 
the complaint alleged facts mirroring those in the Claim Letter 
and claimed that “[t] he medical care rendered by [ Dr. 
Mastroianni] to Robert Frey fell below the applicable standard 
of care, and constituted a lack of due care and a negligent act 
on the part of [Dr. Mastroianni.]
”  The complaint  alleged that, 
“[h]ad [Dr. Mastroianni] not violated the applicable standard of 
medical care . . . , Mr. Frey’s life could have been saved [,]” 
and that, “[a]s a direct result of [Dr. Mastroianni’s ] 
negligence, Robert Frey experienced severe pain and suffering 
and then died.”  As to the wrongful death count, t he complaint 
claimed that Dr. Mastroianni’s “negligent actions were a 
substantial factor in causing Robert Frey’s death [,]” or, in the 
                     
2 If a party to an MCCP hearing rejects the decision  of the MCCP, 
the claimant is then permitted to institute litigation based on the claim in 
an appropriate court.  HRS § 671 -16(a) (Supp. 2003).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 alternative, that
 “[Dr. Mastroianni’s] negligent treatment 
deprived Robert Frey of a significant improvement in his chances 
for recovery, and/or resulted in a loss of an increased chance 
of recovery, which loss of chance is compensable in and of 
itself.”  The complaint alleged that Dr. Mastroianni was liable 
to the Estate for Frey’s “pain and suffering, loss of enjoyment 
of life, economic loss, and other damages” and to the other 
Claimants for “their loss of consortium, emotional distress, 
economic loss, and other damages.”  
  Dr. Mastroianni filed an answer on July 27 , 2007 in 
which he denied all allegations of negligence.  The trial date 
was continued multiple times over the following years, during 
which time all of Frey’s family members ’ claims against Dr. 
Mastroianni were dismissed with prejudice, leaving the Estate as 
the sole plaintiff. 
2.  Trial Testimony 
  
Jury trial commenced on July 7, 2014.3  Along with two 
lay witnesses, the Estate called three expert witnesses:  Dr. 
Peter Schultz, Dr. Bradley Jacobs, and Dr. Darvin Scott Smith.4 
                     
3 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.  
 
4 By permission of the court, the testimony of Dr. Jacobs and Dr. 
Smith was presented in the form of depositions read out in court by the 
attorneys. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8   The Estate’s first expert witness was Dr. Peter 
Schultz, an internal medicine doctor from California.  Dr. 
Schultz testified that he had reviewed the medical records for 
Robert Frey, as well as police reports, witness statements, and 
an ambulance report.  He testified that, in his opinion, it was 
not appropriate for Dr. Mastroianni to discharge Frey on June 
13, 2004, and that the decision to do so fell below the standard 
of care expected of a physician.  Dr. Schultz testified that 
this opinion was “based on looking at the totality of the 
clinical picture, all of the factors that led up to his being 
hospitalized and his condition at the time --  at the day and 
time of the discharge.”  He stated that, if he had been the 
treating physician in that situation, he would have diagnosed 
aspiration pneumonia, and that, in his opinion, “it fell below 
the standard of care to not suspect pneumonia in this case.”  
Dr. Schultz was asked what would have been different if Frey had 
stayed in the hospital, rather than being discharged, and he 
responded that Frey “ would have received treatment that might 
have included things to help him survive until the antibiotics 
could take effect.”  When asked to elaborate on the specific 
measures he would have taken, Dr. Schultz responded: 
Well, the body’s own defenses and the antibiotics 
that are used are -- do take time to work.  They need to be 
given the time.  And when you have an overwhelming 
infection, sometimes it overwhelms both of those measures -
- the body’s own immune system and the antibiotics -- 
before they have a chance to be effective.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9  
 Sepsis, in particular,  can progress very quickly.  
And time is very important in effectively treating it.  If 
it progresses to the way we know it eventually did with Mr. 
Frey, and had he stayed in the hospital, he could have been 
treated much more quickly than he eventually was  after he 
was discharged from the hospital.  The measures that could 
have --
 the measures could have included aggressive 
intravenous fluid, which would help maintain his blood 
pressure.  When he came back very sick and eventually died, 
he had a very low blood pressure.  There are medications 
that help tighten up the arteries and raised the blood 
pressure that are sometimes used in severe cases of sepsis.  
Those could have been started much sooner.  
 
 They were eventually used.  But by that time, it was 
too late.  They could have been used earlier in the course.  
And had that happened, I think he -- there is a significant 
chance that he could have done better than he eventually 
did.   
 
Dr. Schultz was also asked if Frey’s chances of survival would 
have improve
d “significantly” if Frey had remained in the 
hospital; he affirmed that such was his opinion.  He testified 
further that the steps that were taken to combat sepsis when 
Frey was readmitted to the hospital were taken  too late, and 
that “they could have done them in an earlier time, and his 
chances would have been significantly improved.”  Finally, Dr. 
Schultz was asked, “[a]re all the opinions that you’ve given in 
court today to a reasonable degree of medical probabil ity?”; he 
responded, “[y]es, they are.”  
  The Estate’s second expert witness was Dr. Bradley 
Jacobs, a primary care doctor from California.  Dr. Jacobs 
testified that he had reviewed the full medical reports for 
Frey’s treatment.  He testified that he beli eved that Dr. 
Mastroianni “did not abide by the standard of care in the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 treatment of Mr. Frey.”  Specifically, he testified that Dr. 
Mastroianni “discharged the patient too early and gave him an 
inappropriate diagnosis of bronchitis” and that Frey “should 
have been kept in the hospital and monitored until it was clear 
that his infection had resolved, that he was stable to be 
discharged home.”  He stated that his conclusion  that Frey 
should not have been discharged was based on reviewing Frey’s 
vital signs.  He also testified that Frey should have been 
diagnosed with multi- lobar pneumonia.  Dr. Jacobs was asked, 
“[a]re the opinions that you have expressed here today to a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty?”; he responded, “[y]es.”  
  The Estate’s third exp ert witness was Dr. Darvin Scott 
Smith, an internal medicine doctor from California with a 
specialty in infectious diseases and geographic medicine.  Dr. 
Smith testified that, with regard to Frey’s case, he had 
reviewed medical records and other relevant documents.  He 
testified that Frey had contracted Klebsiella pneumonia by the 
time he was discharged from the hospital on June 13, 2004, and 
that the pneumonia had caused his sepsis and eventual death.  He 
was asked what Dr. Mastroianni should have done on June 13, 2004 
according to the standard of care, to which he responded:  
 So based on the observed signs, the vital signs in 
particular, and his recent history of intubation, 
aspiration, and persistent fevers throughout his 
hospitalization, it would have been best practice and 
standard of care to continue to observe him closely and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 address all of those observations in a timely way such that 
he would have responded appropriately.   
 
Smith testified that it was his understanding that Dr. 
Mastroianni did not d
o those things, and that, therefore, Dr. 
Mastroianni did not comply with the standard of care when he 
discharged Frey from the hospital.  Dr. Smith was also asked 
about the care Frey received on June 12, 2004, and testified as 
follows:  
And if care had been rendered in an ongoing fashion on that 
day, when it was apparent that it should have been, 
including perhaps, but not necessarily a follow -up x ray, 
but certainly administration of fluids to resuscitate him 
for low blood pressure and his high pulse, possibly empiric 
antibiotics for what I believe was an incipient but 
developing pneumonia observed originally, and oxygen 
supplementation either by nasal cannula, maybe a mask, or 
possibly even if he needed a later intubation.   
 
 But being in the hospital, under close observation, 
such that those steps could be taken, if indicated, would 
all ensure his safety.   
 
He also testified that there would have been “an advantage” to 
Frey being administered antibiotics in the hospital, rather than 
at home following his discharge, and that Frey could have been 
given fluids and other antibiotics at the hospital with the 
correct diagnosis.  He testified that the main thing that would 
have been different would have been the timing, and that 
“[s]ooner is better when you’re dealing with a critical illness 
like this.  And so he would have responded much better had that 
been addressed right away.”  He was asked if  “it was just too 
late” when Frey was readmitted; he responded that he “believe[d] *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 it was at tha
t point.”  He testified that Dr. Mastroianni’s 
diagnosis of bronchitis was incorrect.  Dr. Smith was asked, 
“[a]re all of the opinions you’ve expressed today to a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty?”; he responded, “[y]es.”  
3.  Judgment as a Matter of Law 
  
After presenting the testimony of its three expert 
witnesses, the Estate rested its case.  Dr. Mastroianni moved 
for judgment as a matter of law pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Civil Procedure (“HRCP”) Rule 50(a)5 “on the grounds that [the 
Estate could not] establish with reasonable medical probability 
that Dr. Mastroianni’s care and treatment of Robert Frey was the 
cause of Mr. Frey’s death.”  In a memorandum in support of the 
motion, Dr. Mastroianni argued that the Estate provided “no 
expert testimony from any witness to establish the required 
causal connection between any negligent act or omission by Dr. 
Mastroianni and the death of Robert Frey” and that Dr. 
Mastroianni was therefore entitled to a judgment in his favor on 
                     
5 HRPC Rule 50(a) (2000) provides:  
 
(1)  If during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard on an 
issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary basis for a 
reasonable jury to find for that party on that issue, the court 
may determine the issue against that party and may grant a motion 
for judgment as a matter of law against that party with respect 
to a claim or defense that cannot under the controlling law be  
maintained or defeated without a favorable finding on that issue.  
 
(2)  Motions for judgment as a matter of law may be made at any 
time before submission of the case to the jury.  Such a motion 
shall specify the judgment sought and the law and the facts on 
which the moving party is entitled to the judgment.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 the wrongful death clai
m.  Dr. Mastroianni also argued that the 
Estate was not permitted to pursue “a claim for lost chance of 
survival under the loss of chance doctrine” because such a claim 
“(1) was never presented at the MCCP proceeding that preceded 
the filing of the complaint, thereby depriving [the]  court of 
jurisdiction to hear any such claim; (2) was not plead[ed]  in 
the complaint itself; and (3) is not a recognized cause of 
action in this jurisdiction. ” 
 
 The Estate argued that there was sufficient evidence 
of negligence to overcome a motion for judgment as a matter of 
law.  It argued that Hawai ʻi had effectively adopted the loss of 
chance doctrine, not as a  separate cause of action, but as a 
theory of causation that may result in an apportionment of 
damages.  In the alte rnative, it argued that Dr. Mastroianni’s 
negligence was a substantial factor leading to Frey’s death.  It 
also argued that a plaintiff’s
 failure to plead a damages theory 
at the MCCP is not a jurisdictional bar. 
  The circuit court granted Dr. Mastroianni ’s motion  for 
judgment as a matter of law.  The court stated that it 
considered the Estate’s claim for loss of chance as separate 
from the wrongful death claim, and found that, irrespective of 
whether the claim is recognized as a valid claim under Hawaiʻi 
law, it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the claim 
because the Estate failed to raise the claim before the MCCP.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 Turning to the wrongful death claim, the court found that none 
of the Estate’s experts 
“opined to a reasonable degree of 
medical probability as to whether Mr. Frey would have survived 
had he not been discharged by Dr. Mastroianni. ”  “Therefore , 
even after considering the evidence in the light most favorable 
to [the Estate], ” the court found that “[the Estate  could not] 
establish with reasonable medical probability that Dr. 
Mastroianni’s care and treatment of  Robert Frey was the 
proximate or contributory cause of Mr. Frey’s  death.”  On July 
25, 2014, the court entered judgment in favor of Dr. Mastroianni 
on all claims. 
C.  ICA Proceedings 
  The Estate appealed the judgment to the ICA.  Estate 
of Frey, 2018 WL 3199216, at *1.  The Estate argued that the 
circuit court erred in finding it had no jurisdiction over a 
loss of chance claim, in rejecting loss of chance as a theory of 
causation, and in granting Dr. Mastroianni’s motion for judgment 
as a matter of law.6  The ICA affirmed the trial court’s 
judgment.  Id. at *12. 
                     
6 In its appeal to the ICA, the Estate also challenged several of 
the circuit court’s evidentiary rulings.  However, as none of its claims of 
error with regard to the evidentiary rulings were raised in the Estate’s 
application for writ of certiorari to this court, we do not address them.  
See Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 40.1(d)(1) (“Questions not 
presented according to this paragraph will be disregarded.”).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15   The ICA concluded that, in medical malpractice actions 
in which the patient dies , “the loss of chance doctrine is 
consistent with Hawai ʻi law and should be recognized as a 
separate compensable injury[.] ”  Id. at *7 (citing McBride v. 
United States, 462 F.2d 72 (9th Cir. 1972); Craft v. Peebles, 78 
Hawaiʻi 287, 305, 893 P.2d 138 , 156 (1995); Barbee v. Queen’s 
Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai ʻi 136, 164, 194 P.3d 1098, 1126 (App. 
2008)).  However, it held  that the Estate did not assert a loss 
of chance claim in its Complaint Letter to the MCCP .  Id.  
Because it also concluded that “[d]ismissal of a civil suit 
based on a medical tort claim is 
proper where a claimant files a 
suit before first having submitted a statement of the claim to 
the MCCP[,]” id. at *3 (citing Dubin v. Wakuz awa, 89 Hawaiʻi 188, 
198, 970 P.2d 496, 506 (1998); Buenafe v. Kiehm, No. 29237, 2011 
WL 1713493 (App. May 4, 2011) (SDO)), the ICA held that “the 
circuit court did not err when it dismissed the Estate of Frey’s 
loss of chance claim because it lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over the claim. ” Id. at *7.   
  With regard to Dr. Mastroianni’s motion for judgment 
as a matter of law, the ICA held that “the expert medical 
testimony” of the Estate’s witnesses “fell short of providing a 
causal nexus between Dr. Mastroianni’s alleged negligence and 
Frey’s death.”  Id. at *9.  The ICA stated: *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16  The expert medical testimony provided at trial, at 
most, established that had Frey remained in the hospital, 
his chance of a better outcome would have improved.  This 
evidence only indicates that it was merely a possibility 
that Dr. Mastroianni caused Frey’s death, “a showing which 
the Hawai ʻi supreme court explicitly found to be 
insufficient in Craft, 78 Hawai ʻi at 305, 893 P.2d at 156. ”  
Barbee, 119 Hawaiʻi at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125.  
 
Id. at *11.  The Estate, the ICA said, “failed to provide any 
expert medical testimony establishing that Dr. Mastroianni 
caused Frey’s death ‘to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability.’”  Id.  Thus, it held that the circuit court did 
not err in granting Dr. Mastroianni’s motion for judgment as a 
matter of law.  Id. 
D.  Supreme Court Proceedings 
  The Estate filed an application for writ of certiorari 
with the supreme court.  In its application, the Estate 
presented the following questions:  
 A.  Whether it was error for the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (“ICA”) in its Memorandum Opinion dated June 29, 
2018, to affirm the trial court’s written order granting 
Defendant’s Rule 50 motion for judgment as a matter of law 
on the grounds that the trial court lacked jurisdiction 
over a “loss of chance” claim, because the loss of chance 
claim had not been properl y asserted in Plaintiff’s MCCP 
Claim Letter.  This question is comprised of the following 
subsidiary questions:  
 
 1.  Whether the legislature’s intent, in 
establishing the MCCP (now the MICP) was to establish 
an informal, advisory forum, or to establish a  formal 
setting with strict pleading standards.  
 
 2.  Whether the legislature’s requirement, in 
the MCCP/MICP statute (Haw. Rev. Stat. §671 -12) that 
“the Claimant . . . set forth facts upon which the 
claim is based” was intended to require of Plaintiffs 
a full, formal statement of all legal theories upon 
which a claim may be based.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17  3.  Whether the “loss of chance” doctrine based 
on medical negligence must be asserted as a separate 
legal theory in an initial MCCP statement, or whether 
it may be considered subsumed in a more general 
medical negligence claim.  
 
 4.  Whether the bar from  subsequent litigation, 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 671 -16, is to be construed to 
preclude litigation on any theories of liability that 
are not explicitly and meticulously pled by a 
Plaintiff in its MCCP statement.  
 
 B.  Whether it was error for the ICA to affirm the 
trial court’s written order finding that Plaintiff had not 
established causation under traditional doctrines of 
“substantial cause” and “but -for causation.”  
 
The application was granted. 
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A.  Jurisdiction 
 
 “The existence of jur isdiction is a question of law 
that this court reviews de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  
Uyeda v. Schermer, 144 Hawai ʻi 163
, 170, 439 P.3d 115, 122 (2019) 
(quoting Bailey v. Duvauchelle, 135 Hawaiʻi 482, 488, 353 P.3d 
1024, 1030 (2015)). 
B.  Judgment as a Matter of Law  
 It is well settled that a trial court’s rulings on 
motions for judgment as a matter of law are reviewed de 
novo.  When we review the granting of a motion for judgment 
as a matter of law, we apply the same standard as the trial 
court.  A motion for judgment as a matter of law may be 
granted only when after disregarding conflicting evidence 
and indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn 
from the evidence in the non -moving party’s favor, it can 
be said that there is no evid
ence to support a jury verdict 
in his or her favor.  
 
Kawakami v. Kahala Hotel Inv’ rs, LLC
, 142 Hawai ʻi 507, 513, 421 
P.3d 1277, 1283 (2018) (ellipses omitted) (quoting Miyamoto v. 
Lum, 104 Hawaiʻ i 1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514-15 (2004)). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 III.  DISCUSSION 
A.  Under Hawaiʻ i law, loss of chance is not an independent cause 
of action, but may be considered in determining
 legal causation.  
1.  The Mitchell Test 
  “This court has long required a plaintiff to prove 
that the defendant’s conduct was the legal cause of h is or her 
injuries as one of the prima facie elements of negligence.”  
O’Grady v. State, 140 Hawaiʻi 36, 43, 398 P.3d 625, 632 (2017) 
(citing Mitchell, 45 Haw. at 132, 363 P.2d at 973 ).  “We apply a 
two-step analysis[,]” often referred to as “the Mitchell 
test[,]” to determine “whether the defendant’s conduct was the 
legal cause of the plaintiff’s injuries[.]”  Id. at 44, 398 P.3d 
at 633.  The Mitchell test provides that  
the defendant’s conduct is the legal cause of the harm to 
the plaintiff if  
 
(a) the ac tor’s conduct is a substantial factor in 
bringing about the harm, and  
 
(
b) there is no rule of law relieving the actor from 
liability because of the manner in which [the 
actor’s]  negligence has resulted in the harm.  
 
Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Taylor-Rice v. State, 91 Hawaiʻi 
60, 74, 979 P.2d 1086, 1100 (1999)).   
  Under the first  prong of the Mitchell  test—the 
“substantial factor” prong— the defendant’s conduct “need not 
have been the whole cause or the only factor bringing about the 
plaintiff’s injuries”  in order to be their legal cause.  State 
v. Phillips, 138 Hawaiʻi 321, 352, 382 P.3d 133, 164 (2016) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 (ellipses omitted) (quoting Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, 
Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 390, 742 P.2d 377, 386 (1987)).  However, the 
conduct must have been more than “a negligible or trivial[] 
factor in causing the harm.  In other words, a substantial 
factor is one that a reasonable person would consider to have 
contributed to the harm. ”  O’Grady, 140 Hawaiʻi at 
47, 398 P.3d 
at 636. 
  In adopting a substantial factor test for legal 
causation in negligence cases, the Mitchell  court called it 
“[t]he best definition and the  most workable test of legal cause 
so far suggested[. ]”  45 Haw. at 132, 363 P.2d at 973.  We have 
clearly and consistently reaffirmed its use since.   See, e.g., 
McKenna v. Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschraft, 57 Haw. 460, 465, 
558 P.2d 1018, 1022 (1977) (“This test represents a realistic 
approach to problems of causation, an area which has long been 
complicated by a failure to distinguish between questions of 
fact and policy concerns. ”); Knodle, 69 Haw. at 390, 742 P.2d at 
386 (“[W]e are convinced that ‘substantial factor’ is a phrase 
sufficiently intelligible to furnish an adequate guide in 
instructions to the jury, and that it is neither possible nor 
desirable to reduce it to any lower terms
.” (quoting W.P. 
Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 41, at 267 (5th 
ed. 1984))); Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawaiʻi 282, 289
, 884 P.2d 
345, 352 (1994) (quoting Knodle); O’Grady, 140 Hawaiʻi at 44-47, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 398 P.3d at 633- 636 (discussing the history and policy 
considerations underlying the test).   
  As we have consistently applied the substantial factor 
test, we have rejected other tests for legal causation, 
particularly the widely-used “‘but for’ rule[,]” under which 
“the defendant’s conduct is a cause of the event if the event 
would not have occurred but  for that conduct[. ]”  Knodle, 69 
Haw. at 389, 742 P.2d at 386 (brackets omitted) (quoting Keeton, 
supra, at 266).  We have also never required plaintiffs to prove 
that “the defendant’s negligence more likely than not cause d the 
ultimate outcome[. ]”  Matsuyama  v. Birnbaum, 890 N.E.2d 819, 829 
(Mass. 2008) (explaining the “all or nothing”  rule).  Rather, 
the Mitchell test “contemplates a factual determination that the 
negligence of the defendant was more likely than not a 
substantial factor in bringing about the result complained of.”  
McKenna, 57 Haw. at 465, 558 P.2d at 1022 (emphasis added).  
  The Mitchell test extends to negligence claims against 
medical professionals.  Claims of medical negligence or medical 
malpractice require a determination of legal causation.  See  HRS 
§ 671-1(2) (1993) ( “‘Medical tort’  means professional 
negligence, the rendering of professional service without 
informed consent, or an error or omission in professional *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 practice, by a health care provider, which proximately causes 
death, injury, or other damage to a patient.”  (emphasis added)).7  
Therefore, in order to prevail on a medical negligence claim, a 
plaintiff8 must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a 
health care provider defendant, acting in the defendant’s  
professional capacity, committed a negligent act or omission 
which was a substantial factor in bringing about the death of, 
or injury or other damage to, a patient.9   
2.  The Loss of Chance Doctrine Under Hawaiʻi Law 
  In the context of medical negligence, “[a] number of 
courts have recognized a lost opportunity (or lost chance) for 
cure of a medical condition as a legally cognizable harm. ”  
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical and 
Emotional Harm § 26 cmt. n. (Am. Law Inst. 2010).  The Supreme 
Court of Minnesota explained the loss of chance doctrine as 
follows: 
 Under the loss of chance doctrine, a patient may 
recover damages when a physician’ s negligence causes the 
patient to lose a chance of recovery or survival.  The 
fundamental principle underlying the l
oss of chance 
                     
7 The term “proximate cause” is  synonymous with the term “legal 
cause,” although this court has generally used the latter term.  O’Grady, 140 
Hawaiʻi at 43 n.3, 398 P.3d at 632 n.3.  
8 Pursuant to HRS § 663 -3(a) (2016 ), “[w]hen the death of a person 
is caused by the wrongful act, neglect, or default of any person, the 
deceased’s legal representative . . . may maintain an action against the 
person causing the death or against the person responsible for the death.”   
 
9 Additional elements are required to establish a claim of 
negligent failure to obtain informed consent.  See Barcai v. Betwee, 98 
Hawaiʻi 470, 483- 84, 50 P.3d 946, 959 -60 (2002).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 doctrine is that the plaintiff’ s chance of survival itself 
has value.
  In a loss of chance case, the plaintiff must 
sustain the burden of proving that the defendant 
negligently deprived her of a chance of a better outcome.  
Assuming that the plaintiff satisfies that burden, then the 
defendant should be liable for the value of the chance he 
has negligently destroyed.  
 
Dickhoff ex rel. Dickhoff v. Green, 836 N.W.2d 321, 329- 30 
(Minn. 2013) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) .   
  The loss of chance doctrine “originated in 
dissatisfaction with the prevailing ‘all or nothing’ rule of 
tort recovery.”  Matsuyama , 890 N.E.2d at 829 (citing Joseph H. 
King, Jr., Causation, Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury 
Torts Involving Preexisting Conditions and Future Consequences, 
90 Yale L.J. 1353, 1365-66 (1981)).  As explained above, under 
the “all or nothing” rule, which is not the law in Hawaiʻi, “a 
plaintiff may recover damages only by showing that the 
defendant’s negligence more likely than not caused the ultimate 
outcome . . . ; if the plaintiff meets this burden, the 
plaintiff then recovers 100% of her damages.”  Id.  The problem 
with the “all or nothing” rule in the context of medical 
negligence cases is that, “[s]o long as the patient’s chance of 
survival before the physician’s negl igence was less than even, 
it is logically impossible for her to show that the physician’s 
negligence was the but- for cause of her death, so she can 
recover nothing.”  Id.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23   The origins of the loss of chance doctrine have been 
variously attributed to “a handful of early tort cases, the 
‘rescue’ doctrine, certain contract cases, the Restatement 
(Second) of Torts [§ 323(a) ( Am. Law Inst. 1965) ], Hicks v. 
United States[, 368 F.2d 626 (4th Cir. 1966)], and a 1981 Yale 
Law Review article[, King, Causation, supra].”  Tony A. Weigand, 
Loss of Chance in Medical Malpractice: The Need for Caution, 87 
Mass. L. Rev. 3, 4- 5 (2002) (footnotes omitted).  Hicks involved 
facts comparable to those alleged in the present case.  In 
Hicks, a patient was treated by a Navy physician, who diagnosed 
her with gastroenteritis and released her with drugs to relieve 
the pain and instructions to return in eight hours.  368 F.2d at 
628.  The patient died later that day of an undiagnosed 
intestinal obstruction.  Id.  at 629.  The government argued 
that, even if there was negligent misdiagnosis and mistreatment 
on the part of the doctor, it was merely speculative that the 
patient would have survived.  Id.  at 632.  The U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, applying Virginia law, responded 
to that argument in an oft -quoted passage:  
 When a defendant’ s negligent action or inaction has 
effectively terminated a person’ s chance of survival, it 
does not lie in the defendant’ s mouth to raise conjectures  
as to the measure of the chances that he has put beyond the 
possibility of realization.  If there was any substantial 
possibility of survival and the defendant has destroyed it, 
he is answerable.  Rarely is it possible to demonstrate to 
an absolute certainty what would have happened in 
circumstances that the wrongdoer did not allow to come to 
pass.  The law does not in the existing circumstances 
require the plaintiff to show to a certainty that the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 patient would have lived had she been hospitalized and 
operated on promptly.  
 
Id.   
  The vast majority of jurisdictions have considered 
whether or not to adopt the loss of chance doctrine.  Lauren 
Guest, David Schap & Thi Tran, The “Loss of Chance” Rule as a 
Special Category of Damages in Medical Malpractice: A State -by-
State Analysis, 21 J. Legal Econ. 53, 59 (2015); Matsuyama, 890 
N.E.2d at 828 n. 23 (compiling cases).  According to one recent 
survey, as of July 2014, twenty- four states had adopted the 
doctrine, seventeen had rejected it, four had deferred an 
opinion on it, and five had yet to consider it at the level of 
their highest state court.  Guest, supra , at 59.  Hawai ʻi is one 
of the few states to not have definitively addressed loss of 
chance.  Id.; Futi v. United States, No. 08 -00403JMS/LEK, 2010 
WL 2900328, at *26 (D. Haw. July 22, 2010) .  Today, with the 
benefit of the analysis of the many jurisdictions  that have 
considered this issue, w e address the loss of chance doctrine 
and its relationship to Hawaiʻ i law for the first time.  However, 
our opinion is limited to the present facts:  a medical 
malpractice case in which the patient has died  as a result of 
the alleged negligence.  We do not address situations in which a 
patient survives despite the alleged negligence of a medical 
professional, but the plaintiff nonetheless claims that medical *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 negligence deprived the patient of a better recovery .  See 
Delaney v. Cade, 873 P.2d 175, 178 (Kan. 1994) (distinguishing 
between “loss of survival” and “loss of better recovery” cases).  
  Although nearly all the states have now considered the 
loss of chance doctrine, there is not a clear consensus on its 
merit; nor, among those states that have adopted it , is there 
agreement on what form it should take.  See  Dickhoff , 836 N.W.2d 
at 334 (“[A] growing number of jurisdictions have adopted some 
form of the doctrine, albeit with divergent rationales.”) ; 
Matsuyama, 890 N.E.2d at 831 (“[C]ourts adopting [the doctrine] 
have not approached loss of chance in a uniform way. ”).  While 
each state has approached the issue differently, “[g]enerally, 
courts have taken three approaches to loss of opportunity 
claims.”  Lord v. Lovett, 770 A.2d 1103, 1105 (N.H. 2001); see  
Joseph H. King, Jr., “Reduction of Likelihood” Reformulation and 
Other Retrofitting of the Loss-of-a-Chance Doctrine , 28 U. Mem. 
L. Rev. 491, 505-09 (1998).    
  The first is the “traditional ” approach —that is, the 
“all or nothing” rule under which the plaintiff must prove that, 
as a result of the defendant’s negligence, the patient was 
deprived of a greater than even chance of survival.  See Lord, 
770 A.2d at 1105.  Courts adopting this approach have 
essentially rejected the loss of chance doctrine in favor of 
traditional rules of causation .  See, e.g., McAfee ex rel. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 McAfee v. Baptist Med. Ctr., 641 So.2d 265, 267 (Ala. 1994) 
(declining to “recognize the ‘loss of chance doctrine’” or 
“abandon Alabama’s traditional rules of proximate cause[,]” 
which require the plaintiff in a medical malpractice case to 
“prove that the alleged negligence ‘probabl y caused the injury ’” 
(quoting Parrish v. Russell, 569 So.2d 328, 330 (Ala. 1990))); 
Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 600.2912a(2) (2010 ) (“In an action 
alleging medical malpractice, the plaintiff cannot recover for 
loss of an opportunity to survive or an opportunity to achieve a 
better result unless the opportunity was greater than 50%.”); 
Jones v. Owings, 456 S.E.2d 371, 374 (S.C. 199 5) (“[W]e decline 
to adopt the doctrine and maintain our traditional approach.”); 
Kramer v. Lewisville Memorial Hosp., 858 S.W.2d 39 7, 407 (Tex. 
1993) (“[W]e do not adopt the loss of chance doctrine as part of 
the common law of Texas.”); Smith v. Parrott, 833 A.2d 843, 848 
(Vt. 2003) (“The loss of chance theory of recovery is thus 
fundamentally at odds with the settled common law standard . . . 
for establishing a causal link between the plaintiff’s injury 
and the defendant’s tortious conduct.”)  
  States that have adopted this approach —in other words, 
those that have outright rejected the loss of chance doctrine —
have expressed a reluctance to allow recovery based on a “mere 
possibility” of harm when their traditional negligence rules 
allow for recovery only when the negligence was more likely than *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 not to have caused the injury.  McAfee, 641 So.2d at 267; see  
Jones, 456 S.E.2d at 374.  Some have found that the loss of 
chance doctrine is “fundamentally at odds with the requisite 
degree of medical certitude necessary to establish a causal link 
between the injury of a patient and the tortious conduct of a 
physician.”  Jones, 456 S.E.2d at 374 (quoting Kilpatrick v. 
Bryant, 868 S.W.2d 594, 602 (Tenn. 1993)); see  Gooding v. Univ. 
Hosp. Bldg., Inc., 445 So.2d 1015, 1019- 20 (Fla. 1984).  Others, 
while recognizing the value  of the loss of chance doctrine, have 
found it to be inconsistent with their medical malpractice 
statutes and have held that any changes to medical malpractice 
law are more appropriately left to legislative determination.  
See Smith, 833 A.2d at 848.   
  T he shortcoming of the traditional approach, as 
discussed above, is that it prevents a plaintiff with a fifty 
percent or lower chance of survival from recovering anything as 
a result of a medical professional’s negligence.  See Lord, 770 
A.2d at 1105.  It h as been criticized as arbitrary, unfair, and 
contrary to the deterrence objectives of tort law.  Margaret T. 
Mangan, The Loss of Chance Doctrine:  A Small Price to Pay for 
Human Life, 42 S.D. L. Rev. 279, 302 (1997).  The so -called 
“traditional” approach h as no place in Hawai ʻi law, because, as 
discussed above, we do not have a tradition of requiring 
plaintiffs to prove that their harm was more likely than not the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 result of negligence by the defendant.  Rather, since the 
earliest days of statehood, we have required plaintiffs to prove 
that the defendant’s negligence was a substantial factor in 
bringing about their harm.  Mitchell, 45 Haw. at 132, 363 P.2d 
at 973. 
  A second approach to the loss of chance doctrine is to 
recognize “the lost opportunity for a better outcome” as itself 
an injury for which a negligently injured patient may recover.   
Lord, 770 A.2d at 1105- 06.  States adopting this approach have 
essentially created a new tort which recognizes the loss of 
chance as a compensable injury distinct from other medical 
malpractice claims.  See , e.g., United States v. Anderson, 669 
A.2d 73, 77  (Del. 1995) (“[T]he loss of a chance of avoiding an 
adverse consequence, increased risk, should be viewed as an 
injury and be compensable [.]”); Mead v. Adrian, 670 N.W.2d 174, 
178 (Iowa 2003)  (“[T]he last-chance-of-survival doctrine is not 
an alteration of the traditional rules for determining proximate 
cause, but, rather, the creation of a newly recognized 
compensable event to which those traditional rules apply. ”); 
Dickhoff, 836 N.W.2d at 334; Lord , 770 A.2d at 1106; Alberts v. 
Schultz, 975 P.2d 1279, 1283 (N.M. 1999) (“[I]t is that chance 
in and of itself— the lost opportunity of avoiding the presenting 
problem and achieving a better result —that becomes the item of 
value for which the patient seeks compensation. ”); Mohr v. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 Grantham, 262 P.3d 490, 496 (Wash. 2011) (“[T]he loss of a 
chance is the compensable injury[.] ”).   
  Those states that have adopted the separate injury 
approach to the loss of chance doctrine have identified the 
shortfalls in the traditional approach, and have noted that 
patients regard “a chance to survive or achieve a more favorable 
medical outcome as something of value. ”  Dickhoff , 836 N.W.2d at 
334; see Mohr, 262 P.3d 490.  This approach has been defended as 
being “administrable and consistent[.]”  DeBurkarte v. Louvar , 
393 N.W.2d 131, 137 (Iowa 1986) (quoting King, Causation, supra, 
at 1378).  We read the ICA’s opinion in this case as following 
the separate injury approach.  The ICA held that,  “[w]hen one is 
deprived of a chance to survive due to a medical provider’s 
negligence, the actual loss suffered is the lost chance itself 
and not the ultimate injury or death.”  Estate of Frey, 2018 WL 
3199216, at *5.  The IC A stated that this approach was 
“consistent with the traditional rules of negligence.”  Id.  
However, the separate injury approach does not clearly follow 
from Hawai ʻi’s traditional negligence rules based on the 
substantial factor test, and it unnecessarily creates a new 
cause of action when our negligence rules are already flexible 
enough to address the problem at hand.  Rather  than adopting 
this incongruous approach, we look for guidance to a third *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 approach taken by a number of states with negligence rule
s more 
similar to our own.  
  The third approach, a “middle ground” sometimes 
referred to as the “relaxed standard of proof ” approach, 
“requires [the] plaintiff to present evidence that a substantial 
or significant chance of survival or better recovery was lost.”  
Pipe v. Hamilton, 56 P.3d 823, 827 (Kan. 2002) (quoting Delaney , 
873 P.2d at 184- 85).  This approach, also referred to as the 
“substantial chance” approach, id. at 828, is consistent with 
the Mitchell test and our long- established rules of negligence.  
It has been adopted in a number of jurisdictions which, like 
Hawaiʻi, use a substantial factor test for proximate causation.  
See, e.g., Jones v. Montefiore Hosp., 431 A.2d 920, 923 (Penn. 
1981); Thornton v. CAMC, 305 S.E.2d 316, 324- 25 (W.Va. 1983); 
Ehlinger v. Sipes, 454 N.W.2d 754, 758- 59 (Wis. 1990); Rivers v. 
Moore, Myers & Garland, LLC, 236 P.3d 284, 291 (Wyo. 2010).   
  For example, under Pennsylvania’s  negligence rules, as 
under Hawai ʻi’s, 
“[p]roximate cause . . . may be established by 
evidence that a defendant’s negligent act or failure to act was 
a substantial factor in bringing about the harm inflicted upon a 
plaintiff” and “this substantial factor need not be . . . the 
only factor, i.e., ‘th at cause which . . . produces the 
result.’”  Jones, 431  A.2d at 923.  Applying these rules in  a 
medical malpractice action, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 held that the jury should have been instructed to impose 
liability if it decided that the defendan ts’ negligent conduct 
“increased the risk of harm and that such increased risk was a 
substantial factor in bringing about the harm actually 
inflicted” upon the plaintiff.  Id. at 924.  Similarly, in 
Wisconsin, “[t]o establish causation . . . , the plaintif f bears 
the burden of proving that the defendant’s negligence was a 
substantial factor in causing the plaintiff’s harm.”  Ehlinger , 
454 N.W.2d at 758.  In a medical malpractice case, the Supreme 
Court of Wisconsin held that , 
where the causal relationship b etween the defendant’s 
alleged negligence and the plaintiff’s harm can only be 
inferred by surmising as to what the plaintiff’s condition 
would have been had the defendant exercised ordinary care, 
to satisfy his or her burden of production on causation, 
the plaintiff need only show that the omitted treatment was 
intended to prevent the very type of harm which resulted, 
that the plaintiff would have submitted to the treatment, 
and that it is more probable than not the treatment could 
have lessened or avoided  the plaintiff’s injury had it been 
rendered.  It is then for the trier of fact to determine 
whether the defendant’s negligence was a substantial factor 
in causing the plaintiff’s harm.   
 
Id. at 759.  That court distinguished the substantial chance 
approach from the “all or nothing” rule:  
 We disagree with the court of appeals’ conclusion in 
Finn [v. Schammel, 412 N.W.2d 147 (Wis. Ct. App. 1987),] 
that in a case of this nature Wisconsin law follows the 
“all or nothing” approach.  In a case such as this, the 
plaintiff need not show that proper treatment more probably 
than not would have been successful in lessening or 
avoiding the plaintiff’s injuries as a prerequisite to 
satisfying his or her burden of production on the issue of 
causation.  In addition to the other requirements 
previously noted, all that is required is that the 
plaintiff establish that proper treatment could have 
lessened or avoided the plaintiff’s harm.  Compare Hicks, 
368 F.2d at 632.  The trier of fact may consider evidence *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 of the likelihood of success of proper treatment in 
determining whether the negligence was a substantial factor 
in causing the harm, and may yet conclude that it was not 
because the injuries would have occurred irres
pective of 
the negligence.  See Restatement (Second) of Torts, sec. 
432 and comment b to that section.  If the defendant’s 
negligence is found to have been a substantial factor in 
causing the harm, the trier of fact may also consider 
evidence of the likelihood of success of proper treatment 
in determining the amount of damages to be awarded.   
 
Id. at 763.   
  As these cases make clear, in jurisdictions that use a 
substantial factor test for causation, it is not necessary to 
recognize a loss of chance as a separate compensable injury.  
Nor is it necessary to abandon or adjust the substantial factor 
test for negligence in order to account for negligence by a 
medical professional that allegedly reduces a plaintiff’s chance 
of survival.  Rather, the substantial factor test is adaptable 
enough to apply to such cases without any need to change 
traditional negligence rules.  
Thus, we hold that, under Hawaiʻi 
law, “loss of chance” is not an independent cause of action, but 
is a relevant consideration in determining whether a defendant’s 
negligence was a substantial factor in causing the plaintiff’s 
injury.  In the words of
 the Supreme Court of Kansas:  
 Considering the various approaches adopted by the 
courts, we are of the opinion that the middle ground or so -
called relaxed causation standard of proof approach is the 
better rule.  In an action to recover for the loss of a 
chance to survive . . . , the pl
aintiff must first prove 
the traditional elements of a medical negligence action by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  The plaintiff must prove 
that the defendant was negligent in treating the patient, 
that the negligence caused harm to the plaintiff, and that 
as a result the plaintiff suffered damages.  In proving 
that the plaintiff suffered harm, the plaintiff must prove *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 that the lost chance of survival . . . was a substantial 
loss of the chance.  
 
Delaney, 873 P.2d at 185-86.   
  Although this case is the first in which we have fully 
considered the loss of chance doctrine under Hawaiʻi law, we note 
that Hawaiʻi courts, and federal courts applying Hawaiʻi law, 
have never recognized loss of chance as an independent and 
separately compensable cause of action.  Nor have they embraced 
a theory of legal causation other than the one articulated in 
Mitchell.   
  The earliest case addressing the loss of chance 
doctrine under Hawai ʻi law was McBride v. United States, in which 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit applied Hawaiʻi 
law to a claim of medical negligence against a doctor at the 
Tripler Army Hospital.  462 F.2d at 73.  The Ninth Circuit held 
that the district court erred in holding that the plaintiff had 
failed to show the essential causal connection between a 
patient’s nonadmittance to the hospital and his death.  Id. at 
74.  With regard to the correct causal showing, the Ninth 
Circuit said: 
 When a plaintiff’s cause of action rests upon an 
allegedly negligent failure to give necessary treatment, he  
must show, with reasonable medical probability, that the 
treatment would have successfully prevented the patient’s 
injury.  He need not prove with certainty that the injury 
would not have occurred after proper treatment.  In most 
situations the best medical treatment in the world cannot 
provide an absolute guarantee of success; medicine is not 
an exact science in that sense.  Yet the absence of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 positive certainty should not bar recovery if negligent 
failure to provide treatment deprives the patient of a 
significant improvement in his chances for recovery.  We 
think the plaintiff demonstrated the requisite reasonable 
medical probability in this case.   
 
Id. at 75 (footnotes omitted).  We understand the Ninth 
Circuit’s holding to be that a plaintiff in a medical negligence 
case is not required , as the plaintiff would be under the “all 
or nothing” rule,  to show with “positive certainty” that a 
negligent act or omission caused an injury, only that a 
reasonable finder of fact could conclude that it did.  Thus, the 
holding in McBride was consistent with our substantial factor 
causation rule.  See Futi, 2010 WL 2900328, at *26 (recognizing 
that, although this court had not yet addressed the loss of 
chance doctrine, “the Ninth  Circuit interpreted [Hawai ‘i] law as 
allowing the lost chance doctrine to apply to medical 
malpractice claims”).   
  Hawaiʻi courts ha
ve cited to McBride  for the 
proposition that medical opinions  must be based on reasonable 
medical probability.  See  Craft, 78 Hawaiʻi at 305,
 893 P.2d 138, 
156; Barbee, 119 Hawaiʻi at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125.  The ICA in 
Barbee also considered a loss of chance argument.  It held that, 
because the plaintiffs had fa iled to provide expert medical 
testimony, the circuit court had not erred in granting judgment 
as a matter of law on that question to the defendants.  119 
Hawaiʻi at 164, 194 P.3d at 1126.  However, it did not reject the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 argument that the plaintiffs could 
have recovered for a loss of 
chance.  It merely stated that the plaintiffs could not recover 
without the requisite expert testimony.   
B.  The Claim Letter submitted by the Estate asserted a medical 
negligence claim that met the requirements of the MCCP statute.   
  The MCCP —now MICP —statute requires  a medical tort 
claimant to “submit a statement of the claim” before a suit can 
be commenced on the claim.  HRS § 671- 12(a) (1993).  The statute 
sets three simple requirements for these claim statements:  they 
must be submitted “in writing [,]” they must “set forth facts 
upon which the claim is based [,]” and they must  “include the 
names of all parties against whom the claim is or may be made 
who are then known to the claimant.”  Id.  These requirements 
are informal and undemanding, and the history of the MCCP 
process shows that they are intentionally so
.  The introduction 
of the MCCP process was “[a] significant aspect of the 
legislative effort to make the [medical malpractice] system less 
costly and more efficient[.] ”  Tobosa v. Owens, 69 Haw. 305, 
312, 741 P.2d 1280, 1285 (1987).  The process was designed “to 
encourage early settlement of claims and to weed out 
unmeritorious claims.”  Id. (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
417, in 1976 House Journal, at 1460).  It is therefore 
unsurprising that the requirements to initiate a claim under HRS 
§ 671-12 (1993) are designed to be simple .  Cf. HRS § 671- 13 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 (1993) 
(hearings are to be “informal”);  HRS § 671 -15 (1993) 
(MCCP decisions must be rendered within thirty days of a 
hearing); HRS § 671-19 ( Supp. 1995 ) (parties and insurers are 
required to cooperate to achieve “a prompt, fair, and just 
disposition or settlement”) .10 
  
The Claim Letter submitted by the Estate and the other 
Claimants met the requirements of the statute.  It was in 
writing, identified Dr. Mastroianni as the party against whom 
the claim was being made, and contained a brief summary of the 
alleged facts underlying the claim.  Nothing in the statute 
required the Claimants to lay out the legal theories that they 
would later pursue in the circuit court.  
 
  Under HRS § 671- 1 (1993), a “[m]edical tort” is 
defined to include “professional negligence, the rendering of 
professional service without informed consent, or an error or 
omission in professional practice, by a health care provider, 
which proximately causes death, injury, or other damage to the 
patient.”  The Claim Letter alleged that Dr. Mastroianni was 
                     
10 Further emphasizing the informality of the MCCP process, the 
legislature renamed the panels Medical Inquiry  and Conciliation Panels in 
2012, based on its finding that “many claims now filed with medical claim 
conciliation panels tend to function as inquiries rather than actual claims, 
and patients or their families tend to use these proceedings to seek 
information regarding adverse events that they  associate with medical 
treatment[,]”  rather than to make “claims based on substantive analysis of 
the applicable standard of care.”   2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 296, §1 at 1004 -
05.  The legislature stated that the purpose of the MICP statute was “to more 
closely reflect actual practice and the original intent for panels to serve 
in a conciliatory function.”  Id. at 1006.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 Frey’s treating physician and that he discharged Frey after two 
days in the hospital with a diagnosis of
 bronchitis, despite 
indications that he had pneumonia.  It alleged that, after being 
discharged by Dr. Mastroianni, Frey had trouble breathing and 
was readmitted to the hospital, where his condition deteriorated 
until he died.  It identified specific acts or omissions of Dr. 
Mastroianni that allegedly fell beneath the standard of care, 
and alleged that “it is likely that [Frey] would have survived” 
if certain actions had been taken.  Thus, the Claim Letter set 
forth facts to support
 the Claimants’ assertio n that Dr. 
Mastroianni committed medical negligence or an error or omission 
in professional practice which was the legal cause of injury to, 
and ultimately the death of, Robert Frey.   
  The circuit court in this case held that it did not 
have jurisdiction over the loss of chance “claim” because the 
Estate had failed to raise it before the MCCP.  The ICA, based 
on its determination that a loss of chance is a separate 
compensable injury, agreed.  Estate of Frey, 2018 WL 3199216, at 
*7.  The circuit court and the ICA were correct that the 
requirements of the MCCP statute are “pre-condition[s]” and 
“jurisdictional prerequisites” to bringing a lawsuit.  Yamane v. 
Pohlson, 111 Hawai ʻi 74, 83, 137 P.3d 980, 989 (2006) (quoting 
Tobosa, 69 Haw. at 314, 741 P.2d at 1287) (citing Garcia v. 
Kaiser Found. Hosps., 90 Hawaiʻi 425, 441, 978 P.2d 863, 879 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 (1999)); see  Dubin, 89 Hawai ʻi at 
195, 970 P.2d at 503.  The 
circuit court would not have had jurisdiction if the Estate had 
not complied with the MCCP procedures set out in Part II of HRS 
Chapter 671.  However, as explained above, loss of chance is not 
a distinct cause of action, but a factor that may be relevant in 
determining whether a defendant’s negligence was a substantial 
factor in causing a plaintiff’s harm.  Therefore, the Estate was 
not required to specifically raise loss of chance, or any other 
legal theory, before the MCCP in order to later file suit on the 
claim, so long as it otherwise met the requirements of HRS § 
671-12(a) (1993).  It was sufficient for the Claimants to set 
out facts upon which their medical tort claim is based as 
required by HRS § 671-1 (1993).   
C.  The circuit court erred in granting judgment as a matter of 
law to Dr. Mastroianni. 
 
 A motion for judgment as a matter of law may be 
granted only when there is no evidence to support a jury verdict 
in favor of the non- moving party.  Kawakami , 142 Hawai ʻi at 513, 
421 P.3d at 1283.  In this case, there was ample evidence to 
support a jury finding in favor of the Estate.   
  In a  medical negligence claim, the plaintiff has the 
burden of establishing “a duty owed by the defendant to the 
plaintiff, a breach of that duty, and a causal relationship 
between the breach and the injury suffered.”  Barbee, 119 Hawaiʻi *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 at 158, 194 P.3d at 1120 (quoting Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawaiʻi 
371, 377, 903 P.2d 676 (App. 1995)).  A medical negligence 
plaintiff is  required to establish legal causation through the 
introduction of expert medical testimony,  id., and such 
testimony must be “based on a ‘reasonable medical 
probability[,]’” id. at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125 (quoting Craft , 78 
Hawaiʻi at 305, 893 P.2d at 156).  As to wrongful death claims, 
the plaintiff has the burden of establishing that the death of 
one person was caused by “the wrongful act, neglect, or default” 
of another, HRS § 663- 3 (Supp. 1997), which, in this case, would 
be “medical negligence .”   
 
 The testimony of the Estate’s expert witnesses , 
summarized at length above, provided ample  evidence for a 
reasonable jury to conclude that Dr. Mastroianni’s failures to 
meet the standard of care were a legal cause , or significant 
factor, of  Frey’s death  to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability.  In particular, Dr. Schultz testified that if Frey 
had stayed i
n the hospital, he “would have received treatment 
that might have included things to help him survive until the 
antibiotics could take effect ” and that if certain measures had 
been taken, “there is a significant chance that [Frey] could 
have done better th an he eventually did.”  He also testified 
that Frey’s chance of survival would have improved 
“significantly” if he had stayed in the hospital and if the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
40 steps that were taken to combat Frey’s sepsis had been taken 
earlier.  Dr. Smith testified that if Frey
 had remained in the 
hospital and if certain steps had been taken, those steps “would 
all ensure [Frey’s] safety[,]” that there would have been “an 
advantage” to administering antibiotics to Frey in the hospital, 
and that Frey “would have responded much better” if he had been 
administered antibiotics sooner. 
  In spite of this evidence, the circuit court and the 
ICA both concluded that judgment as a matter of law was 
appropriate.  This conclusion appears to have rested on the 
requirement that expert medical
 testimony in medical malpractice 
cases must be based on reasonable medical probability, as the 
circuit court found that none of the Estate’s experts “opined to 
a reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether Mr. 
Frey would have survived had he not been discharged by Dr. 
Mastroianni.”     
 
 Because “the causal link” between alleged acts of 
medical negligence and their specific results  is often “not 
within the realm of ‘common knowledge[,]’” a jury generally must 
rely on “expert medical testimony to  determine whether and to 
what extent any alleged negligence” contributed to the alleged 
harm.  Barbee, 119 Hawaiʻi at 161,
 194 P.3d at 1123.  But because 
causation in the medical field cannot always be determined with 
perfect accuracy, “expert testimony on causation must be based *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
41 on a ‘reasonable medical probability[.]’”  Id. at 163, 194 P.3d 
at 1125 (quoting Craft , 78 Hawai ʻi at 305, 893 P.2d at 156); see  
McBride, 462 F.2d at 75.  This means that testimony that 
“[falls] short of providing  the causal nexus” between alleged 
negligence and harm to the patient is insufficient as a matter 
of law.  Barbee, 119 Hawaiʻi at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125 .  However, 
when testimony asserting such a causal nexus is provided, it 
falls to the jury to determine whether the party presenting the 
testimony has met its burden of proof
.  Dzurik v. Tamura, 44 
Haw. 327, 329, 359 P.2d 164, 165 (1960) (“A case involving a 
medical issue . . . is no exception to the rule that, when there 
are conflicting inferences and conclusions, it is the function 
of the trier of facts to select the one which it considers most 
reasonable.”)   
  In this case, the circuit court erred when it found 
that none of the Estate’s experts “opined to a reasonable degree 
of medical probability as to whether Mr. Frey would have 
survived had he not bee n discharged by Dr. Mastroianni[,]”  and 
the ICA repeated the error in holding that “the expert medical 
testimony fell short of providing a causal nexus between Dr. 
Mastroianni’s alleged negligence and Frey’s death.”  Estate of 
Frey, 2018 WL 3199216, at *9.  To the contrary, a jury could 
have found that the testimony from these experts did establish 
causation to a reasonable degree of medical probability.  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
42 “reasonable medical probability” requirement did not require the 
Estate’s experts to present theories  of medical causation with 
absolute certainty, but with enough certainty to, “in the 
jurors’ eyes, rise to the requisite degree . . . to establish a 
medical probability.”  Craft, 78 Hawai ʻi at 305, 893 P.2d at 156.  
Unlike the testimony at issue in Barbee,  the testimony of the 
Estate’s experts in this case provided sufficient certainty  
about the effect of Dr. Mastroianni’s actions that the jury 
could conclude that there was a causal nexus to establish a 
medical probability; it was not “left to speculate  whether [Dr. 
Mastroianni’s] action or inaction might or could have resulted 
in” Frey’s death.  See 119 Hawaiʻi at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125.   
  Furthermore, each of the Estate’s expert witnesses  
expressly stated that his testimony was to a reasonable degree 
of medical probability.  As we held in Dzurik , however, such an 
explicit statement is not necessary for a  jury to consider 
whether a failure to meet the standard of care was, to a 
reasonable degree of medical probability, a legal cause, or 
significant factor, for an injury:  
 When causation of the injury is a medical issue,     
. . . “[the] matter does not turn on the use of a 
particular form of words by the physicians in giving their 
testimony, ” since it is for the trier of facts, not the 
medical witnesses, to make a legal determination of the 
question of causation.  Here, the failure of a medical 
witness to testify positively as to what was the cause of 
the injury, or his statement that the accident “might” be 
or “probably” was the cause of the injury, is merely a 
circumstance to be taken into consideration by the trier of 
facts.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
43  
44 Haw. at 330, 359 P.2d at 165-66 (quoting Sentilles v. Inter-
Caribbean Shipping Corp., 361 U.S. 107, 109 (1959)).   Although 
explicit statements from experts that a failure to meet the 
standard of care was a legal cause or significant factor of an 
injury “based upon a reasonable degree of m edical probability” 
are frequently elicited in medical negligence cases, our holding 
in Dzurik that such express language is not necessary remains 
good law.   
Neither Barbee  nor Craft require  that a me dical expert 
explicitly state th at causation exists to a reasonable degree of 
medical probability.  In Barbee, medical experts testified that 
the deceased’s condition was “ongoing and progressive”  and that 
“a hemoglobin of three indicates ‘severe anemia, likely 
incompatible with life[ .]’”  119 Hawai ʻi at 163, 194 P.3d at 
1125.  The ICA found that the expert testimony established, at 
most, that it was possible “[d]efendants’  ‘action or inaction 
might or could have ’ resulted”  in causing Barbee’s death , and 
thus left the jury to speculate.  Id. (quoting Wicklund v. 
Handoyo, 181 S.W.3d 143, 149 (Mo. Ct. App. 2005)).  In Craft, 
this court stated that the medical testimony of Craft’s experts 
introduced new theories of medical causation not sufficiently 
tested, and thus  the jury was appropriately instructed to 
disregard any medical opinion that was not based upon reasonable *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
44  /s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
medical probabilities.  Craft, 78 Hawai ʻi at 305, 893 P.2d at 
156.  
Thus, in determining whether a medical expert’s 
statement is to a reasonable degree of medical probability, we 
look not to whether the medical expert made an explicit 
statement characterizing their testimony as “to a reasonable 
degree of medical probability ” but rather, to the evidence  
itself.  In this case, sufficient expert testimony  existed in 
the record for the jury to consider the issue of causation.  The 
ICA therefore erred in  ruling that Frey failed to present any 
expert medical testimony establishing that Dr. Mastroianni 
caused Frey’s death “ to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability” . 
IV.  CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s memorandum 
opinion and judgment on appeal are vacated, the circuit cou rt’s 
judgment in favor of Dr. Mastroianni is vacated, and the case is 
remanded to the circuit court for a new trial consistent with 
this opinion.  
  
  
 
 
 
    
  Anthony L. Ranken    
 Samuel P. S  hnider
for Petitioner     
 
 
 Thomas E. Cook     
 Brandford F.K. Bliss     
 for Respondent     