 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-20-0000727 01-JUL-2025 09:12 AM Dkt. 19 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
---o0o---
ROLAND S. GUIEB, individually and derivatively on behalf of 
GUIEB INCORPORATED, Respondent/Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
ROBERT S. GUIEB, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
GUIEB INCORPORATED, 
Petitioner/Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
PACIFIC WELDING AND MANUFACTURING, LLC; 
GUIEB GROUP LLC; RSG ENTERPRISES, LLC, 
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
SCWC-20-0000727 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-20-0000727; CASE NO. 1CC171001045) 
 
JULY 1, 2025 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., 
WITH CIRCUIT JUDGE VIOLA IN PLACE OF DEVENS, J., RECUSED  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
Two brothers ran an automotive business together. Robert 
invited his older brother Roland to join his business. They 
formed Guieb Inc. and opened several muffler repair shops 
together before their relationship soured. 
Roland sued Robert after Robert made decisions Roland 
disagreed with. Roland complained that Robert used their 
company, Guieb Inc., for his sole benefit, and that Robert used his personal companies to steal Guieb Inc.’s trade name and most 
profitable shop. 
Roland alleged unfair and deceptive trade practices (UDAP) 
and unfair methods of competition (UMOC) under Hawaiʻi Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 480-2 (2008), and deceptive trade practices under HRS § 481A-3 (2008) in count 12. He alleged that Robert 
used the trade name “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi Kai” for his 
personal LLC (Guieb Group LLC). This caused confusion with 
their joint venture Guieb Inc.’s trade name, “Exhaust Systems 
Hawaii.” 
The circuit court granted Robert’s motion for partial 
summary judgment (MPSJ) and dismissed count 12. 
It did not see 
a “genuine issue of material fact as to any passing off goods or 
services of those of another because the two entities . . . were 
selling the exact same product and service.” See HRS § 481A-
3(a)(1). 
2  
   
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Roland sought punitive damages for several claims, 
including fraud, misrepresentation, nondisclosure, and breach of 
fiduciary duty.   Before the jury heard closing arguments, the 
trial court granted Robert’s motion for judgment as a matter of law (JMOL), denying Roland’s punitive damages request. Punitive 
damages did not go to the jury. Later the court denied Roland’s 
renewed JMOL on that issue.   
Last, Roland claimed that Robert breached a fiduciary duty 
of “kinship.” 
Robert filed an MPSJ arguing that brotherhood did 
not establish a fiduciary duty. He argued that he had a 
fiduciary duty to the corporation, and that duty arose solely 
from his status as an officer and director of Guieb Inc. The 
circuit court granted Robert’s motion. It ruled the caselaw was 
“clear that kinship by itself is not sufficient to establish a 
confidential relationship.” 
Both brothers appealed. The ICA reversed the circuit court 
on three issues. 
First, the ICA held that Roland’s UDAP claim (count 12) 
should have gone to the jury because Roland presented evidence that Robert represented Guieb Inc. and Guieb Group as the same 
entity. 
Second, the ICA held that the jury should have considered 
punitive damages. The ICA reasoned that because Robert took the 
most profitable muffler shop for his own LLC without telling 
3  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Roland, and because the jury found in Roland’s favor on the 
fraudulent non-disclosure, unjust enrichment, and trade name 
infringement claims, the court should have instructed the jury 
on Roland’s punitive damages claim. 
Last, the ICA agreed with Roland - brotherhood created a 
kinship fiduciary duty. Summary judgment was not appropriate, 
the ICA said. A jury may have found that Roland, based on his 
“confidential familial relationship” with Robert, relied on Robert’s representations. They may have found that Robert only 
acquired majority ownership of Guieb Inc. because he promised 
Roland that the ownership imbalance would not affect the 
business. And the jury may have found that Robert breached his 
kinship fiduciary duty when he allegedly “eliminate[d] Roland’s 
check-writing authority, reduce[d] his salary, and 
misappropriate[d] [Guieb Inc.’s] King Street shop and other 
assets.” Thus, the ICA held, Roland established a genuine issue 
of material fact regarding breach of fiduciary duty based on kinship. 
We agree with the ICA that the jury should have considered 
Roland’s count 12 claims and punitive damages. But we disagree 
that kinship creates a fiduciary duty. 
The ICA correctly reversed the circuit court’s dismissal of 
count 12. Though we rule that Roland lacked standing for his 
UDAP claim and diverge from the ICA there, Roland presented 
4  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sufficient evidence to overcome summary judgment for his HRS 
§ 480-2(e) UMOC and HRS § 481A-3 deceptive trade practices 
claims. Therefore, count 12 should have gone to the jury 
Next, we agree with the ICA that punitive damages should 
also have gone to the jury. We conclude that Roland presented 
sufficient evidence for the jury to decide whether Robert acted 
with the state of mind to justify punitive damages. There was 
evidence that may have supported a jury’s punitive damages finding. A reasonable juror may have concluded (1) that 
“stealing” the King Street shop for Robert’s personal company 
(Guieb Group), (2) taking employees from Guieb Inc. to benefit 
Guieb Group, (3) reducing Roland’s salary, and (4) making Guieb 
Inc. pay most advertising costs (to the benefit of Guieb Group) 
showed Robert’s intent to harm Roland, or that Robert acted with 
reckless disregard for the risk of harm to Roland. 
Thus, we affirm the ICA’s conclusion that the circuit court 
erred in granting Robert’s JMOL on the punitive damages issue. 
Last, we disagree with the ICA that Robert had a fiduciary 
duty to Roland based on their brotherly relationship. A 
“kinship” duty does not exist in Hawaiʻ i law. And we decline to 
adopt it now. We affirm the circuit court’s MPSJ on this issue. 
I. 
In the 1980s, Robert Guieb asked his older brother, Roland 
Guieb, to work with him. They registered Guieb Inc. in 1991 and 
5  
   
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did business as “Exhaust Systems Hawaii.” The corporation 
specializes in welding repair, and procuring, installing, 
replacing, and repairing automobile exhaust systems and related 
components. Robert is the majority owner at 55% while Roland 
owns 45%. They are Guieb Inc.’s only directors, officers, and 
owners. Roland is the corporation’s treasurer. 
Guieb Inc. opened its first shop in Waipahu in 1985. That 
property is owned by RSG Enterprises LLC, an LLC that Robert and Roland both own. The second shop opened on King Street in 1989, 
and a third location opened in Kailua two years later. 
The brothers’ relationship began to fracture in 2011. In 
2014, Robert established his own entity, Guieb Group LLC (Guieb 
Group), to sell and service mufflers. Guieb Group used the 
trade name “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai.” Roland accused 
Robert of stealing Guieb Inc.’s trade name and intentionally 
confusing its customers. Robert claimed Roland agreed that 
Guieb Group could use the trade name. 
In 2016, Robert canceled Guieb Inc.’s monthly lease at the 
King Street Shop. Guieb Group, which Robert wholly owned, took over the shop. Robert said the decision was intended to lower 
Guieb Inc.’s expenses. Roland accused Robert of “stealing” the 
most profitable shop. 
Roland alleged that Robert implemented arbitrary policy 
changes that benefitted Robert at Roland’s expense, such as 
6  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
relocating personnel from one location or job function to 
another to benefit Robert’s own companies, and decreasing 
Roland’s salary. Robert also claimed Roland misappropriated 
Guieb Inc.’s funds for his personal use. As a result, Robert 
restricted Roland’s access to and control over Guieb Inc.’s 
finances. Both brothers maintain that the other ignored their 
meeting requests. 
In June 2018, Roland, individually and derivatively on 
behalf of Guieb Inc., filed a first amended complaint. Roland named Robert, Guieb Inc., Pacific Welding and Manufacturing, LLC 
(Robert’s wholly owned company), Guieb Group, and RSG 
Enterprises as defendants. Relevant to this appeal, Roland 
alleged breach of kinship fiduciary duty, unfair and deceptive 
trade practices and unfair methods of competition. Roland also 
requested punitive damages. 
Count 4 of Roland’s amended complaint alleged “Breaches of 
Fiduciary Duties Arising Out of Kinship.” Roland’s complaint said that he “co-founded” Guieb Inc. “based upon his kinship 
with Robert, and his trust and confidence in Robert based upon 
his lifetime of brotherhood. . . . Robert has breached 
fiduciary duties to Roland arising out of the close kinship 
which were the basis of and motivation for” Guieb Inc. 
Count 11 alleged that Robert registered the trade name 
“Exhaust Systems Hawaii” for Guieb Inc. Twenty years later, 
7  
   
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Robert registered “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai.” 
According to Roland, Guieb Group passed off the “Exhaust Systems 
Hawaii Kalihi-Kai” trade name as being identical to Guieb Inc. 
This “misappropriation” of Guieb Inc.’s trade name, he claimed, 
confused Guieb Inc.’s customers. 
Count 12 alleged “Unfair and Deceptive/Unfair Competition” 
under HRS §§ 480-2 and 481A-3. Roland contended Robert injured 
him and Guieb Inc. by employing unfair and deceptive trade practices and unfair methods of competition, including (1) 
passing off goods or services as those of Guieb Inc.; (2) 
misrepresenting or causing confusion about the goods or 
services; and (3) disparaging Guieb Inc.’s business. 
Before the jury trial, the brothers both filed motions for 
partial summary judgment.  Relevant to the appeal issues, 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit Judge John M. Tonaki granted 
Robert’s motion for partial summary judgment on counts 4 and 12. 
Regarding Roland’s count 12 claim, the circuit court 
reasoned that no genuine issue of material fact remained because both Guieb Inc. (Exhaust Systems Hawaii) and Guieb Group 
(Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai) sold the same product. See 
HRS § 481A-3(a)(1). 
Roland requested punitive damages for several counts: 
breach of fiduciary duty, fraud, misrepresentation and nondisclosure, oppressive conduct intended to squeeze him out, 
8  
   
 
 
   
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and wanton usurpation of corporate opportunity. The court 
granted Robert’s judgment as a matter of law motion as to 
Roland’s punitive damages requests. 
As for Roland’s kinship fiduciary duty claim (count 4), the 
circuit court ruled that brotherhood did not establish a 
fiduciary relationship. 
On December 30, 2019, the jury returned a verdict in favor 
of Roland on his fraudulent non-disclosure, unjust enrichment, and trade name infringement claims. For fraudulent non-
disclosure, the jury awarded Roland $42,000 against Robert, and 
$28,000 against Guieb Group. For unjust enrichment, the jury 
awarded Guieb Inc. $42,000 against Guieb Group. Last, for trade 
name infringement, the jury awarded Guieb Inc. $10,000 against 
Robert and $20,000 against Guieb Group. 
II. 
A. Roland’s Count 12 Claims Should Have Gone to the Jury 
The circuit court erred by granting Robert’s MPSJ on count 
12. Roland offered sufficient evidence to overcome summary 
judgment on that count. 
Count 12 alleged unfair and deceptive trade practices and 
unfair methods of competition under HRS § 480-2, and deceptive 
trade practices under HRS § 481A-3 (Uniform Trade Practices 
Act). Robert characterized count 12 as duplicative of other 
counts, and a “novel combination” of HRS chapters 480 and 481A. 
9  
   
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
He filed a MPSJ, arguing that Roland’s trade name infringement 
and unfair competition claims were baseless. “Exhaust Systems 
Hawaii,” Robert said, is a generic trade name that merely 
describes the nature of Guieb Inc.’s business, and “merits no 
legal protection.” Robert also argued that Roland leveled anti-
trust accusations, yet had no proof that Guieb Group’s use of 
“Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai” harmed or reduced 
competition. 
Robert explained that courts use a “likelihood of 
confusion” standard when analyzing trade name infringement and unfair competition claims. Under that standard, a generic trade 
name has no legal protection. Because “Exhaust Systems Hawaii” 
merely described the nature of Guieb Inc.’s business, Robert 
argued, it was generic. 
Roland countered. There was strong evidence of “confusion” 
due to Robert’s use of “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi Kai.” 
Roland maintained that both trade names - “Exhaust Systems Hawaii” and “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi Kai” – were used for 
different businesses that both sold, installed, and repaired
“similar, if not identical, muffler systems.” (Emphases added.) 
Roland also said Robert’s expert undermined his claim that using 
“Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi Kai” did not affect Guieb Inc.’s 
business. Robert’s expert reported that the Guieb Inc. website 
did not distinguish between the two companies: “[Guieb Inc.’s] 
10  
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
website address is https://www.exhaustsystemsHawaii.net/. 
Reviewing the website, it could appear that Exhaust Systems 
Hawaii and Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai are one entity as 
all the shops are listed. There is nothing on the website to
delineate the two different ownership groups.” (Emphasis added.) 
The court granted Robert’s MPSJ and dismissed count 12. It 
did not see a “genuine issue of material fact as to any passing off goods or services of those of another because the two 
entities . . . were selling the exact same product and service.” 
The ICA reversed. It reasoned that Robert’s own expert 
stated that Guieb Group, trade name “Exhaust Systems Hawaii,” 
could be viewed as a competitor to Guieb Inc., trade name 
“Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi-Kai.” The expert also said that 
Guieb Inc.’s website did not distinguish between the two 
ownership groups.  Thus, the ICA concluded that the jury should 
have considered Roland’s HRS § 480-2 and HRS § 481A-3 UDAP claims. 
We agree with the ICA’s result, but mention a standing 
issue the ICA missed. Roland’s UDAP claim is barred because he 
lacks standing as a non-consumer under § 480-2(d). 
“Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts 
or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce are 
unlawful.” HRS § 480-2(a). But subsection (d) limits who can 
11  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
bring a claim under the chapter: “No person other than a 
consumer, the attorney general or the director of the office of 
consumer protection may bring an action based upon unfair or 
deceptive acts or practices declared unlawful by this section.” 
HRS § 480-2(d) (emphasis added). 
Because Roland was not a consumer, the AG, or director of 
the office of consumer protection, he had no standing to bring a 
UDAP claim. HRS § 480-2(d). 
But though HRS § 480-2(d) barred Roland’s UDAP claim, he 
still had standing to bring a UMOC claim under HRS § 480-2(e). That subsection allows “[a]ny person [to] bring an action based 
on unfair methods of competition declared unlawful by this 
section.”  HRS § 480-2(e). Roland qualifies as “any person” per 
HRS §§ 480-1 (2008) and 480-2(e). Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel
Ltd.
, 122 Hawaiʻi 423, 429, 228 P.3d 303, 309 (2010).  
The conduct that supports Roland’s UDAP claim may also 
support his UMOC claim. Hawaii Medical Ass’n v. Hawaii Medical
Serv. Ass’n, Inc.
, 113 Hawaiʻi 77, 111, 148 P.3d 1179, 1213 
(2006) (“[P]laintiffs may rely upon HMSA’s alleged unfair or deceptive acts or practices to support their claims of unfair 
methods of competition.”). The UDAP and deceptive trade 
practice claims are alike. 
Id.“[P]laintiffs may bring claims 
of unfair methods of competition based on conduct that would 
also support claims of unfair or deceptive acts or practices.” 
12  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. Thus, Roland may use the same conduct to prove both his 
UDAP and UMOC claims. See id.
Roland’s HRS § 481A-3 claim may also have merit. The same 
UMOC conduct may support the deceptive trade practices claim. 
Hawaii Medical Ass’n, 113 Hawaiʻ i at 111, 148 P.3d at 1213 
(quoting Star Markets, Ltd. v. Texaco, Inc., 945 F. Supp. 1344, 
1348 (D. Haw. 1996) (cleaned up) (“[T]he same allegations could 
support claims of both §§ 481A and 480–2 unfair methods of 
competition.”). HRS § 481A-3, titled “Deceptive Trade 
Practices,” reads in part: 
(a) A person engages in a deceptive trade practice when, 
in the course of the person’s business, vocation, or 
occupation, the person: 
(1) Passes off goods or services as those of another; 
(2) Causes likelihood of confusion or of 
misunderstanding as to the source, sponsorship, 
approval, or certification of good or services; 
(3) Causes likelihood of confusion or of 
misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection, or 
association with, or certification by, another; 
HRS § 481A-3(a)(1)-(3) (emphasis added). 
“Confusion” is one way to win a HRS chapter 481A deceptive 
trade practices claim. See HRS § 481A-3(a)(2)-(3). Because 
Robert used the trade name “Exhaust Systems Hawaii Kalihi Kai,” 
Roland believed there was strong evidence of “confusion.” 
Roland pointed to the near identical trade names, and Robert’s 
expert’s testimony about the Guieb Inc. website. 
13  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Like the ICA, we believe Roland presented sufficient 
evidence to overcome summary judgment on count 12’s HRS § 481A-3 
unfair trade practices claim and HRS § 480-2(e) unfair methods 
of competition claims. The circuit court erred.  
B. The Circuit Court Erred in Dismissing Roland’s Punitive 
Damages Demand 
Next, punitive damages. 
Tort law is predominantly common law. 
The common law’s 
tradition evolves, and courts make decisions to reflect societal values. 
As the common law rambles on, this court often turns to the 
American Law Institute’s (ALI) restatements to track 
advancements in tort law. See Bynum v. Magno
, 106 Hawaiʻi 81, 86 
n.12, 101 P.3d 1149, 1154 n.12 (2004). 
Now decades since our leading punitive damages case, the 
ALI has urged adjustments to the remedy that deters and punishes 
egregious tortious conduct. 
These changes streamline the mental 
states that may yield punitive damages awards, and they clip 
dated language. 
Like before, we rely on the ALI’s insight to refresh Hawaiʻi 
law. To recover punitive damages, we hold that a plaintiff must (1) establish recoverable tort liability, and (2) establish by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant intended to 
harm the plaintiff or others, or recklessly disregarded a 
14  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substantial risk of harm to the plaintiff or others, or 
otherwise acted in an outrageous or malicious manner. 
Restatement (Third) of Torts § 39 (Am. L. Inst., Tentative Draft 
No. 3, 2024). 
Here, the circuit court erred by granting Robert’s JMOL on 
punitive damages. Roland presented sufficient evidence to get 
punitive damages before the jury. 
1. The Punitive Damages Standard 
Hawaiʻi’s go-to p
unitive damages case, 
Masaki, reaffirmed 
this court’s Territory era standard. Masaki v. Gen. Motors
Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 16-17, 780 P.2d 566, 575 (1989). “The 
plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the 
defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such malice 
as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to 
civil obligations, or where there has been some wilful 
misconduct or that entire want of care which would raise the 
presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences.” Id. 
(citing Bright v. Quinn, 20 Haw. 504, 512 (Haw. Terr. 1911)). 
But Masaki broke from precedent. It adjusted the standard 
of proof from “preponderance of the evidence” to “clear and 
convincing.” 71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575. 
Masaki covered many punitive damages law concepts. It 
channeled the Second Restatement’s approach to acts or omissions 
that do not support that remedy. “[P]unitive damages are not 
15  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
awarded for mere inadvertence, mistake, or errors of judgment.” 
Id. at 7, 780 P.2d at 571 (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts 
§ 908, cmt. b). 
In one big way, Masaki tacked from the Second Restatement. 
This court held that punitive damages may be awarded for strict 
products liability (a mental state-less tort). In contrast, the 
Second Restatement recommended that punitive damages be awarded 
only if the defendant’s conduct reflected an intent to harm or reckless indifference. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 908, 
cmt. b (1979). “Since the purpose of punitive damages is not 
compensation of the plaintiff but punishment of the defendant 
and deterrence, these damages can be awarded only for conduct 
for which this remedy is appropriate — which is to say, conduct 
involving some element of outrage similar to that usually found 
in crime. The conduct must be outrageous, either because the 
defendant’s acts are done with an evil motive or because they are done with reckless indifference to the rights of others.” Id. 
Masaki departed from the Second Restatement’s focus on a 
tortfeasor’s mental state. Instead, the wrongdoer’s aggravated 
conduct justified punitive damages. See Masaki, 71 Haw. at 11, 
780 P.2d at 572-23. In some cases, the court held, there was no state of mind precondition. “We see no reason,” the court said, 
“why punitive damages may not also be properly awarded in a 
16  
  
   
  
    
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
products liability action based on the underlying theory of 
strict liability where the plaintiff proves the requisite 
aggravating conduct on the part of the defendant.” Id.Removal 
of the mental state inquiry “does not preclude consideration of the defendant’s aggravating conduct for the purpose of assessing 
punitive damages.” Id.This holding, the court reasoned, still 
served the deterrent goal of punitive damages because “‘something more’ than mere commission of a tort” is needed. Id. at 12-13, 780 P.2d at 573. 
In Hawaiʻ i, negligence may support a punitive damages award.  
“
This court has long recognized that punitive damages are 
recoverable in tort action based on negligence.” Id. at 10, 780 
P.2d at 572 (citing 
Bright, 20 Haw. at 511). “In rejecting the 
argument that [punitive] damages are incompatible with the underlying theories of negligence and strict liability,” a 
Wisconsin Supreme Court case proved persuasive: 
This court has rested its analysis of punitive damages not 
on the classification of the underlying tort justifying 
compensatory damages but on the nature of the wrongdoer’ s 
conduct. . . . 
Punitive damages rest on allegations which, if proved, 
demonstrate a particular kind of conduct on the part of the wrongdoer, which has variously been characterized in our 
cases as malicious conduct or willful or wanton conduct in reckless disregard of rights or interests. 
Id. (quoting Wangen v. Ford Motor Co., 294 N.W.2d 437, 442 (Wis. 
1980)). Masaki reasoned that “[s]o long as the plaintiff 
established the requisite ‘outrageous’ conduct[] . . . there was 
17  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
no reason to disallow an award of punitive damages in a 
negligence or strict liability action.” Id.(citing Wangen, 
294 N.W.2d at 443). 
Thus, Hawaiʻ i’s punitive damages standard allows juries to 
award punitive damages for negligence or strict liability. 
2. A New Punitive Damages Standard 
This court values the ALI’s wisdom, but we do not 
unblinkingly follow the Restatement’s principles. 
Here, we believe the Third Restatement sensibly evolves 
Hawaiʻi’s punitive damages law.  We adopt our new standard from 
the Restatement (Third) of Torts § 39 Punitive Damages: 
(a) A plaintiff who establishes a defendant’s liability in 
tort, and 
(1) who further establishes that the defendant is 
liable for compensatory or nominal damages (§§ 2- 38), or 
who establishes a right to recover money or other property through an equitable or restitutionary remedy (§§ 42, 61-
63) or through replevin, ejectment, quiet title, or a 
similar remedy (§§ 58- 59), and 
(2) who further establishes by clear- and-convincing 
evidence that the defendant intended to harm the plaintiff 
or others, recklessly disregarded a substantial risk of 
harm to the plaintiff or others, or otherwise acted in an 
outrageous or malicious manner may also recover punitive damages in the discretion of the factfinder. 
Restatement (Third) of Torts § 39. 
We also adopt the ALI’s contemporary definitions of 
intentionally and recklessly. “A person intends a harm or other 
consequence if ‘(a) the person acts with the purpose of 
producing that consequence; or (b) the person acts knowing that 
18  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the consequence is substantially certain to result.’” 
Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, cmt. e (quoting Restatement 
(Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 1 (2010)). 
The Third Restatement also defines recklessly: 
A person acts recklessly in engaging in conduct if: 
(a) the person knows of the risk of harm created by the 
conduct or knows facts that make the risk obvious to another in the person’s situation, and (b) the precaution 
that would eliminate or reduce the risk involves burdens 
that are so slight relative to the magnitude of the risk as 
to render the person’s failure to adopt the precaution a 
demonstration of the person’s indifference to the risk.   
Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, cmt. e (quoting Restatement 
(Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 2)).  
The ALI’s Restatement (Third) of Torts: Remedies, approved 
in 2024, aligns with and enhances our present caselaw. 
It 
offers a streamlined approach and refines the complicated 
standard that presently guides our courts. 
The ALI’s new punitive damages standard complements the 
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Physical & Emotional Harm. There 
the ALI updated its defintions for the mental states associated 
with torts. “This Restatement states a similar but not 
identical standard in language more consistent with the general 
approach to mental states and tortious conduct in the 
Restatement Third, Torts.” Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, 
cmt. e. 
Second, the Restatement shed outdated mental state 
concepts. It simplified the punitive damages inquiry. Id.
19  
  
 
 
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Punitive damages are appropriate when “‘defendant intended to 
harm the plaintiff or others’ (a clearer mental standard than 
‘evil motive’), or when defendant has ‘recklessly disregarded a 
substantial risk of harm to the plaintiff or others’ (arguably a 
clearer mental standard, and as explained below, a more 
appropriate mental standard, than ‘reckless indifference to the 
rights of others’).” Id. 
These standards, the Restatement explained, are based on 
mental state definitions revised by the Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical and Emotional Harm. Id. The 
Third Restatement “unblends” the Second Restatement’s previously-singular definition of “intent” into two forms of 
intent: “purpose” and “knowledge.” Restatement (Third) of 
Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 1. 
The Third Restatement also updates the Second Restatement’s 
definition of “recklessness.” The shift reflects an 
understanding that wrongdoing to support liability comes in many forms and that courts and jurors may find it hard to parse 
mental states when applying old-fashioned and overlapping terms 
like “wanton” and “willful.” Restatement (Third) of Torts: 
Phys. & Emot. Harm § 2. 
Terms conveying the idea of wrongdoing that is 
aggravated — even though falling short of the wrongdoing 
involved in intentional torts — are common in the discourse 
of torts. Sometimes, the term used is “gross negligence.” 
Taken at face value, this term simply means negligence that 
is especially bad. Given this literal interpretation, 
20  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
gross negligence carries a meaning that is less than 
recklessness. The term “willful or wanton misconduct” is 
also frequently employed. “Willful misconduct” sometimes 
refers to conduct involving an intent to cause harm; but 
“wanton misconduct” is commonly understood to mean 
recklessness. Frequently, courts refer to conduct that displays a “reckless disregard for risk” or a “reckless 
indifference to risk.” When a person’ s conduct creates a 
known risk that can be reduced by relatively modest precautions, to state that the person displays a reckless 
disregard for risk is equivalent to stating that the person’s conduct is reckless. 
Id. § 2, cmt. a. 
The Restatement’s recalibrated treatment of mental states 
highlights the wide range of “aggravated conduct” that may 
establish a tort. And the Restatement better defines that scope 
by pulling rusty terms like “willful,” “wanton” and “gross 
misconduct.” SeeRestatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. 
Harm § 2. 
The Restatement (Third) of Torts § 39 moves away from 
similarly ill-fitting words. Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39 
(“[A plaintiff must] establish[] by clear-and-convincing 
evidence that the defendant intended to harm the plaintiff or 
others, recklessly disregarded a substantial risk of harm to the 
plaintiff or others, or otherwise acted in an outrageous or 
malicious manner may also recover punitive damages in the 
discretion of the factfinder.”). The punitive damages standard for intent and recklessness now complements the intentional and 
reckless state of mind standard from the Restatement (Third) of 
Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm §§ 1 & 2. 
21  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
What about long-standing punitive damages terms like 
“malicious” or “outrageous”? 
The Third Restatement reasons that those words retain 
marginal utility. The Restatement explains that most outrageous 
or malicious conduct includes either the intent to harm or 
reckless disregard of a substantial risk of harm. Restatement 
(Third) of Torts § 39, cmt. e. Yet because aggravated conduct 
to merit punitive damages may straddle situations where a mental state did not clearly drive the conduct, or should not operate 
to spare a wrongdoer from a punitives remedy, the Restatement 
does not entirely sideline the seasoned terms. The Third 
Restatement “preserves the ‘outrageousness’ language of the 
Restatement Second, Torts, as an alternative catch-all for 
situations in which a factfinder determines that defendant’s 
conduct is so outrageous as to deserve punishment or deterrence 
through punitive damages, even if plaintiff does not prove 
defendant’s mental state, or if the factfinder views the effects on plaintiff as seriously wrongful but not necessarily harmful.” 
Id. “Outrageous” and “malicious” remain, the Restatement also 
explains, because many older statutes and cases still rely on this traditional language. Id.
The ALI’s preservation of “malicious” and “outrageous” also 
reflects how punitive damages increasingly remedy social rather 
than purely individual harms. Rather than focusing on intent or 
22  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recklessness that harms a person, the ALI suggests that punitive 
damages also aim to deter conduct that risks injuring non-party 
bystanders or larger societal groups (like consumers). See
Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, cmt. e. These principles 
align with developments in our caselaw. See Bright, 20 Haw. at 
512; Masaki, 71 Haw. at 10-11, 780 P.2d at 572-73. Hawaiʻi 
courts may award punitive damages for negligence or strict 
products liability to deter socially harmful conduct. See
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 10-11, 780 P.2d at 572-73. Thus, “malicious” 
and “outrageous” retain vitality in our punitive damages 
framework. 
The Restatement (Third) of Torts acknowledges the social 
loss caused by outrageous or malicious conduct, even if the tortfeasor did not act with intent or recklessness. See 
Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, cmt. e. The Third Restatement explains that the mental states set forth in 
§ 39(a)(2) include harms to the plaintiff “or others.” 
Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, cmt. e. It tagged “or 
others” to the reckless definition because “recklessness is rarely directed at any specific target. A reckless driver 
endangers everyone in the same segment of highway, and a 
manufacturer who sells a defective product endangers everyone 
who uses the product.” Id.Thus, broader harms (or risk of 
harm) to society as a whole justify punitive damages. See id. 
23  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Developments to the ALI’s punitive damages principles show 
the remedy’s value to redress broad social harms - beyond 
discouraging socially undesireable behaviors directed at others. 
See David J. Gilmartin, Status and Trends in State Product
Liability Law: Punitive Damages, 14 J. of Legis. 249, 250 (1987) 
(“One primary objective of the deterrent function is to prevent 
businesses from treating compensatory damages as a cost of doing 
business.”).  Scholars have also commented on the shift from the 
“narrow band of malicious, intentionally wrongful conduct” to 
“‘reckless’ conduct, performed with lack of attention to the 
consequences for the health and safety of others in society.” 
Catherine M. Sharkey, Punitive Damages Transformed into Societal 
Damages, in Punishment and Private Law 155, 161 (Elise Bant, 
Wayne Courtney, James Goudkamp & Jeannie Marie Paterson eds., 
2021). Redressing social harms, a goal advanced by product 
liability cases, shapes punitive damages’ purpose beyond 
retribution, the “cruelty between individuals.” See id.
An attention to social cost fits our caselaw. See Bright, 
20 Haw. at 512; Masaki, 71 Haw. at 10-11, 780 P.2d at 572-73. If the conduct is malicious or outrageous, then punitive damages 
may be awarded for negligence or strict products liability. 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 10-11, 780 P.2d at 572-73 (“So long as the 
plaintiff established the requisite ‘outrageous’ conduct[] . . . 
there was no reason to disallow an award of punitive damages in 
24  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a negligence or strict liability action.”); see Bright, 20 Haw. 
at 512 (negligent defendant “continued on his way in his 
automobile without stopping to render assistance or make any 
inquiries” after causing accident with a street car). 
The Third Restatement’s approach also aids the advancement 
and understanding of Hawaiʻ i’s common law.  States of mind like 
“malice” and “wanton” are hard to pin down. See Randall H. 
Endo, Punitive Damages in Hawaii: Curbing Unwarranted Expansion, 
13 U. Haw. L. Rev. 659, 673-74 (1991). “Hawaii’s verbose 
standard [still] includes terms such as ‘willful,’ ‘wanton,’ 
‘oppressive,’ and ‘malicious’ . . . [but] these terms are not 
clearly defined.”  Id. And unlike some other states, Hawaiʻi 
lacks statutory definitions covering the elements of punitive 
awards. Id.
 at 673 n.97; see, e.g., Cal. Civ. Code § 3294 
(allowing punitive damages for “oppression, fraud, or malice,” 
and defining those statutory terms) . 
Punitive damages are civil, yet quasi-criminal in their 
purpose and effect. See Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 39, 
cmt. f (supporters of higher burdens of proof in punitive 
damages point to the “quasi-criminal nature of a punitive-
damages determination”); Masaki, 71 Haw. at 16, 780 P.2d at 575 
(“[P]unitive damages are a form of punishment and can stigmatize 
the defendant in much the same way as a criminal conviction.”). 
25  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, we believe it’s useful to look back at the removal of 
“malice” from criminal law. It resembles similar improvements 
identified by the ALI to civil law. 
Terms like “malice” and “wanton” once were criminal law 
staples. In 1962, though, the Model Penal Code decommissioned 
“malice.” See Paul H. Robinson & Markus D. Dubber, The American
Model Penal Code: A Brief Overview, 10 New Crim. L. Rev. 319, 
334 (2007). Malice had long separated murder from manslaughter. Id. But the concept became obsolete for criminal law purposes. 
Id. “In criminal law - where malice once enjoyed historical 
prominence - contemporary commentators have dismissed malice as 
an opaque ‘legal term of art with little connection to its non-
legal meaning.’” Marc O. DeGirolami, Reconstructing Malice in
the Law of Punitive Damages, 14 J. Tort L. 193, 205 (2021). 
Pre-statehood criminal law in Hawaiʻ i used the term “malice” 
to classify homicides. 
For instance, the Supreme Court of the 
Kingdom of Hawaiʻ i ruled that absent “malice aforethought,” a 
jailer’s deadly blow to an inmate was manslaughter, not murder. 
The King v. Sherman, 1 Haw. 88, 88 (Haw. Kingdom 1853). 
After 
the overthrow, the Revised Laws of Hawaiʻ i provided that 
“[w]hoever kills a human being without malice aforethought and 
without authority, justification or extenuation by law is guilty 
of the offense of manslaughter.” Territory v. Braly, 29 Haw. 7, 
12 (Haw. Terr. 1926) (citing Revised Laws of Hawaiʻ i § 4119 
26  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(1925)). “[M]alice is the element which distinguishes murder 
from manslaughter.” Territory v. Alcantara, 24 Haw. 197, 200 
(Haw. Terr. 1918). Then during early statehood, “malice aforethought” endured as murder’s state of mind. State v.
Moeller, 50 Haw. 110, 116, 433 P.2d 136, 141 (1967). 
In 1972, the Hawaiʻi Penal Code detached “malice” and its 
cognates. The state of mind associated with “evil motive,” “ill-will,” and “spite” was out. Also out were other outmoded 
terms, “wanton” and “wilful.” Four mental states, 
“intentionally,” “knowingly,” “recklessly,” and “negligently,” 
were in. 1972 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 9, § 206 at 43. 
Turning to the civil justice system, m
alice has long guided 
punitive damages. SeeBright, 20 Haw. at 512; Lake Shore & M.S.
Ry. Co. v. Prentice, 147 U.S. 101, 107 (1893). Yet “malice” is 
ill-defined. While “malice as a textual element of punitive 
damages is practically ubiquitous, there is, at present, no cohesive account of what malice means.” DeGirolami, supra, at 
198. 
In Bright, the court adopted “malice” as a feature of 
punitive damages. It quoted an 1893 U.S. Supreme Court case to hold that a court may award punitive damages if the defendant 
“has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such malice as 
implies a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to civil 
obligations.” See Bright, 20 Haw. at 512 (quoting Prentice, 147 
27  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
U.S. at 107). Bright then quoted another Supreme Court case to 
complete the second part of its punitive damages test: punitive 
damages may also be awarded where there has been “some wilful 
misconduct or that entire want of care which would raise the 
presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences.” Id.
(quoting Milwaukee & St. P.R. Co. v. Arms, 91 U.S. 489, 495 (1875)). Decades later, Masaki recited this standard word for 
word: 
The plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing 
evidence that the defendant has acted wantonly or 
oppressively or with such malice as implies a spirit of 
mischief or criminal indifference to civil obligations, or 
where there has been some wilful misconduct or that entire 
want of care which would raise the presumption of a 
conscious indifference to consequences. 
71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575 (citing Bright, 20 Haw. at 
512). 
Since the late 1800s, our caselaw has stuck to “wantonly,” 
“oppressively,” “malice,” and “wilful.” Bright imitated the 
federal standard. SeeBright, 20 Haw. at 512. But since 
Bright, this court has not distinctively defined these terms. 
See Masaki, 71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575; Chin Kee v. Kaeleku Sugar Co., Ltd., 29 Haw. 524, 532 (Haw. Terr. 1926) 
(“This court has further held that vindictive damages are 
recoverable in actions of tort when the defendant’s misconduct 
has been wilful or when he has acted with a reckless 
indifference to the rights of others.”); Goo v. Continental Cas. 
28  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Co., 52 Haw. 235, 239, 473 P.2d 563, 566 (1970) (“In this 
jurisdiction we have long recognized the wisdom of allowing 
punitive damages for willful, malicious, wanton or aggravated 
wrongs where a defendant has acted with a reckless indifference 
to the rights of another.”). 
Then, those terms made more sense. But today, where the 
law has regrounded mental states for precision and relevance to 
modern times, they no longer fit. “Malice,” along with 
“wantonly” and “oppressively,” have a dated quality unhelpful to 
the contemporary fact-finder. As one commentator put it: “To 
define these terms as conduct which ‘implies a spirit of 
mischief or criminal indifference to civil obligations,’ does 
not significantly help the trier of fact to determine punitive 
damage liability.” Endo, supra, at 673 n.99; see Masaki, 71 
Haw. at 11, 780 P.2d at 572. We believe that clearer 
definitions will help sharpen the punitive damages inquiry and 
better assist juries. 
Our civil jury instructions reflect the unwieldy present 
standard. The Pattern Civil Jury Instruction on punitive damages – last updated last century - has clunky subparts. 
Wordy definitions populate the law that our courts command 
jurors to follow. For example, “[a]n act is ‘wanton’ when it is 
reckless, heedless, or characterized by extreme foolhardiness, 
or callous disregard of, or callous indifference to, the rights 
29  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or safety of others.”  Pattern Civil Jury Instruction 8.14. 
Also, “[a]n act is ‘willful’ when it is premeditated, unlawful, 
without legal justification, or done with an evil intent, with a 
bad motive or purpose, or with indifference to its natural 
consequences.” Pattern Civil Jury Instruction 8.13. And “[a]n 
act is ‘malicious’ when it is prompted or accompanied by ill 
will or spite.” Pattern Civil Jury Instruction 8.16. These 
arcane, multi-part definitions are apt to vex jurors and muddle the punitive damages question.  
This court has long-respected the ALI’s analysis of common 
law advancements to tort law. Bynum recapped instances when 
this court relied on the Restatement (Second) of Torts to 
advance common law doctrines: 
This court has many times relied on the Restatement 
(Second) of Torts as persuasive authority.   See, e.g.,  Hac  
v.  Univ.  of  Hawaiʻi,  102 Hawaiʻi 92, 106, 73 P.3d 46, 60 
(2003)  (adopting elements and approach of  Restatement 
(Second) of Torts § 46 (1965)  for tort of intentional 
infliction of 
emotional distress);  Knodle  v.  Waikiki  
Gateway  Hotel,  Inc.,  69 Haw. 376, 386, 742 P.2d 377, 384 
(1987)  (relying on  Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314(A) 
(1965)  to establish the duty of innkeeper to guest “to take 
reasonable action to protect the latter against 
unreasonable risk of physical harm”);  Ono  v.  Applegate,  62 
Haw. 131, 137– 38, 612 P.2d 533, 539 (1980)  (citing  
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 285 (1965)  to hold that 
Hawaiʻi’s “liquor control statute does impose a duty upon a 
tavern keeper not to serve a person under the influence of 
liquor”);  Stewart  v.  Budget  Rent–A–Car  Corp.,  52 Haw. 71, 
75, 470 P.2d 240, 243 (1970)  (adopting  Restatement (Second) 
of Torts § 402A (1965)  for strict products liability); and  
Chun  v.  Park,  51 Haw. 462, 468, 462 P.2d 905, 909 (1969)  
(adopting  Restatement (Second) of Torts § 552 (Tentative 
Draft No. 12, 1966)  as “a fair and just restatement of the 
law on the issue of negligent misrepresentation”).   
See Bynum , 106 Hawaiʻi at 86 n.12, 101 P.3d at 1154 n.12. 
30  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
To propel Hawaiʻ i’s punitive damages standard to 
contemporary times, we rely on the Restatement again. 
The ALI’s latest revision offers a clearer mental standard 
for courts, parties, and jurors. In contrast, malice with its 
“evil motive” and other similar mental states lack practical 
applicability and precision. See Restatement (Third) of Torts, 
§ 39, cmt. e. The ALI recast punitive damages to be “more consistent with the [Restatement’s] general approach to mental 
states and tortious conduct.” Id.We agree. 
Still, as mentioned, we do not completely discard long-
standing punitive damages concepts like “malicious” and 
“outrageous.” Retaining malicious and outrageous conduct in our 
law protects inclusion of wide-ranging conduct that may justify 
punitive damages awards. SeeRestatement (Third) of Torts, 
§ 39, cmt. e (“The standards stated here retain outrageousness and malice as necessary backups for the inevitable ambiguities 
of these categories as applied to widely varied fact 
patterns.”). 
This “catch all” is important because Hawaiʻi law allows 
punitive damages for negligent torts. See 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 4-
5, 780 P.2d at 569-70. Thus, we believe that negligent torts and strict liability torts committed in a “malicious” or 
“outrageous” manner may support a punitive damages award. See
id. 
31  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Last, we address the need for a plaintiff to establish 
recoverable tort liability. This requirement focuses on some 
form of recoverable liability (either in equity, or via nominal 
damages), but does not necessarily require compensatory damages. 
Because this court has previously held that plaintiffs may 
recover punitive damages without establishing compensatory 
damages, this standard aligns with our caselaw. See Howell v.
Associated Hotels, Ltd., 40 Haw. 492, 500 (Haw. Terr. 1954) (“In 
other words, where the plaintiff had proved a violation of a 
legal right, [they] should be able to recover punitive damages 
if the case is such as would call for punitive damages.”). 
“Punitive or exemplary damages are generally defined as those 
damages assessed in addition to compensatory damages for the 
purpose of punishing the defendant for aggravated or outrageous 
misconduct and to deter the defendant and others from similar 
conduct in the future.” Masaki, 71 Haw. at 6, 780 P.2d at 570 
(emphasis added) (citing D. Dobbs, Handbook on the Law of 
Remedies, § 3.9, at 204 (1973); Restatement (Second) of Torts 
§ 908 (1979)). Thus, while compensatory damages are not a 
prerequisite for punitive damages, plaintiffs must establish recoverable tort liability. 
We hold that a plaintiff must (1) establish recoverable 
tort liability, and (2) establish by clear and convincing 
evidence that the defendant intended to harm the plaintiff or 
32  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
others, or recklessly disregarded a substantial risk of harm to 
the plaintiff or others, or otherwise acted in an outrageous or 
malicious manner. 
3. The Punitive Damages Evidentiary Standard 
We now turn to the plaintiff’s burden of proof to get the 
punitive damages issue before the jury. 
In a jury trial, a judge first determines as a matter of 
law whether to allow the jury to consider punitive damages. A plaintiff must present sufficient evidence to support a factual 
finding that a defendant acted with “inten[t] to harm the 
plaintiff or others, recklessly disregarded a substantial risk 
of harm to the plaintiff or others, or otherwise acted in an 
outrageous or malicious manner.” See Restatement (Third) of 
Torts § 39(a)(2). 
Here, the circuit court granted Robert’s JMOL dismissing 
Roland’s punitive damages issue. Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 50, Judgment as a Matter of Law guides the 
sufficient evidence inquiry. HRCP Rule 50(a)(1) reads: 
If during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard on 
an issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary 
basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party on that 
issue, the court may determine the issue against that party 
and may grant a motion for judgment as a matter of law 
against that party with respect to a claim or defense that 
cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated without a favorable finding on that issue. 
(Emphasis added.) 
33  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Only if all the evidence and its reasonable inferences, 
viewed in the plaintiff’s favor, reveal “no evidence to support 
a jury verdict” on punitive damages, does a defendant win a 
motion for judgment as a matter of law regarding punitive 
damages. See Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawaiʻ i 1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 
(2004). 
A circuit court does not determine whether a jury could 
find punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence. Goran
Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 Hawaiʻ i 224, 239-40, 439 P.3d 176, 191-92 
(2019). 
The trial court does not assess the burden of proof. 
Rather, the court simply determines if there is any legally 
sufficient evidence to instruct the jury on punitive damages. 
The jury then evaluates the quality of that evidence and whether 
it meets the clear and convincing standard. See Goo, 52 Haw. at 
239, 473 P.2d at 566; 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 26, 780 P.2d at 580. 
4. The circuit court erred in granting Robert’s JMOL on 
punitive damages because Roland presented sufficient 
evidence to support a punitive damages finding 
We agree with the ICA that punitive damages should’ve gone 
to the jury. 
After the evidence closed, Robert moved for JMOL as to 
punitive damages. The court granted the motion. So the jury 
heard nothing about punitive damages. 
34  
   
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellate courts review a trial court’s JMOL rulings anew. 
Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawaiʻ i 253, 261, 259 P.3d 
569, 577 (2011). 
A court must deny a JMOL regarding punitive 
damages if there is any evidence that supports that remedy. See
HRCP Rule 50(a)(1); Miyamoto, 104 Hawaiʻ i at 7, 84 P.3d at 515 
(JMOL is only appropriate if there is 
no evidence to support a 
jury verdict). The circuit court’s standard is whether there is 
“sufficient evidence,” not whether there is “clear and 
convincing” evidence. Goran Pleho, LLC, 144 Hawaiʻ i at 239-40, 
439 P.3d at 191-92. 
Under Masaki
, the circuit court erred by granting Robert’s 
JMOL. There was sufficient evidence to instruct a jury on 
punitive damages. Also, under the standard we adopt today, 
Roland presented evidence that a jury could find that Robert 
intended to harm Roland, that he recklessly disregarded the risk 
of harm to Roland, or that he acted in an outrageous or 
malicious manner. Restatement (Third) of Torts § 39(a)(2). 
Roland identified five evidentiary areas that may merit a 
punitive damages award. First, Roland presented evidence that Robert “stole” the King Street shop from Guieb Inc., decreasing 
the corporation’s annual revenue by hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. Second, Roland elicited evidence to suggest that 
Robert misappropriated the Guieb Inc. trade name “Exhaust 
Systems Hawaii” because Robert’s own company, Guieb Group, used 
35  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the trade name “Exhaust Systems Kalihi Kai” without Roland’s 
permission. 
Third, Roland showed that Robert hired away “valued 
employees” from Guieb Inc. for his own business (Guieb Group); 
one an experienced general manager who made the King Street shop 
especially profitable. Fourth, Roland presented evidence that 
Robert “drastically” reduced his salary. Last, Roland presented 
evidence to suggest that Robert manipulated Guieb Inc. and Guieb Groups’s advertising costs so that Guieb Inc. paid more than its 
share. 
Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to non-
movant Roland, we conclude there was sufficient evidence to send 
the punitive damages question to the jury. Again, the court 
does not decide whether Roland wins under the “clear and 
convincing” standard. Here, because there was some evidence 
that may support a jury verdict, punitive damages should go to 
the jury. See HRCP Rule 50(a)(1); Miyamoto, 104 Hawaiʻ i at 7, 84 
P.3d at 515. 
We hold that there was sufficient evidence to instruct the 
jury on punitive damages. We affirm the ICA’s judgment on this 
issue and remand for further proceedings. 
C. The ICA Wrongly Held that a Kinship Fiduciary Duty Exists 
Hawaiʻi
 does not 
recognize a fiduciary duty based solely on 
kinship. We decline to do so now. 
36  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The closest Hawaiʻ i has to a kinship fiduciary duty is a 
constructive trust based largely on the “confidential 
relationship” between family members. See Kam Oi Lee v. Fong
Wong, 57 Haw. 137, 139, 552 P.2d 635, 637 (1976). That 
constructive trust, though, requires a promise to hold or convey 
property. See id. at 139-40, 552 P.2d at 637-38. Those facts 
don’t exist in Roland and Robert’s case. 
Kam Oi Lee recognized that a confidential relationship may 
impose a fiduciary duty. Id. at 139, 552 P.2d at 637. The case 
involved a constructive trust between a father and his children. 
Id. They held interest in the same property as tenants in 
common. Id. at 138, 552 P.2d at 637. The children signed a 
quitclaim deed because the father promised he would sell the property and transfer the children’s share of the proceeds to 
them. Id.However, the father left the property to his second 
wife when he passed away a year later. Id. at 138-39, 552 P.2d 
at 637. This court held that the children could recover under a 
constructive trust arising from an abuse of a confidential 
relationship. Id. at 142, 552 P.2d at 640. 
“A constructive trust arises where a person holding title 
to property is subject to an equitable duty to convey it to another on the ground that [they] would be unjustly enriched if 
[they] were permitted to retain it.” Id. at 139, 552 P.2d at 
637. To apply an “‘abuse of confidence’ constructive trust,” a 
37  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
party had to show: “(1) a confidential relationship; (2) 
conveyance to the grantee based upon, and arising out of a 
confidential relationship; (3) a promise to hold for, or 
reconvey to, the grantor or a third person; and (4) a subsequent 
refusal to reconvey resulting in the grantee’s unjust 
enrichment.” Id. at 140, 552 P.2d at 638. 
“Kinship, by itself, is not sufficient to establish a 
confidential relationship[,]” Kam Oi Lee explained. Id.
“However, when parties are closely related, the imposition of 
great trust and the letting down of all guards is natural, and 
the relationship, coupled with evidence as to intrusting, the 
status of the parties as to health, age, education and 
dominance, may lead a court to find that a confidential 
relationship existed.” Id.Because the father “exercise[d] 
influence and dominion over his children[,]” and the children trusted that their father would act in their best interests, 
there was a confidential relationship. Id. at 141, 552 P.2d at 
639. Failure to sell the property and transfer the proceeds to 
the children constituted an abuse justifying imposition of a constructive trust. See id. at 142, 552 P.2d at 640. 
The constructive trust in Kam Oi Lee that created a 
fiduciary duty to convey real property is not the same as the 
Guieb brothers’ business partnership. The Guiebs were just two 
brothers who grew an automotive business together and grew apart 
38  
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
personally and professionally. Before forming Guieb Inc., 
Robert leased space to perform automotive work, specifically 
exhaust systems. Roland, at the time, worked in a restaurant. 
As Robert’s business flourished, he asked Roland if he wanted to 
join him and grow the business. 
Our holding does not rule out unique situations that may 
create a fiduciary duty between relatives. “Special 
circumstances” may give rise to a fiduciary duty, and include the degree of kinship between the parties, the disparity in age, 
education, and business experience, and the extent to which one 
party placed trust and confidence in the other. See Autotech
Tech. Ltd. P’ship v. Automationdirect.com, 471 F.3d 745, 749 (7th Cir. 2006). We identified similar factors in Kam Oi Lee. 
47 Haw. at 140, 552 P.2d at 638 (“health, age, education and 
dominance” may lead a court to find that confidential 
relationship exists). 
Even if we considered those features, Roland and Robert’s 
brotherly relationship does not approach the level of confidence and trust that would impose a separate fiduciary duty 
on Robert. 
We decline to impose special fiduciary duties on siblings 
simply because they are siblings who do business together. We 
affirm the circuit court’s July 16, 2020 order granting Robert’s 
MPSJ with respect to count 4. 
39  
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. 
We affirm in part the ICA’s September 6, 2024 Judgment on 
Appeal and remand count 12 to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. We reverse in part 
the ICA’s judgment and affirm the circuit court’s July 16, 2020 
order granting Robert’s MPSJ with respect to count 4. 
John D. Ferry III /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
(Bruce D. Voss and Michael C. 
Carroll on the briefs) /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
for petitioners 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins
Fred Paul Benco for respondent /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Matthew J. Viola 
40 