                                                                 
                                                                 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000838 30-JUN-2016 
07:44 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
ELUJINO V. ALVAREZ, III, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-12-0000838
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-12-0000838; CR. NO. 11-1-0216)
 
JUNE 30, 2016
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case arises out of a routine traffic stop and the
 
subsequent arrest of Elujino V. Alvarez III for possession of
 
methamphetamine. 
Prior to trial, Alvarez filed a motion to
 
suppress drug evidence recovered as a result of a canine screen
 that was performed on his vehicle. Alvarez argued that the
 evidence was obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment to the
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
U.S. Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution. All of the issues in Alvarez’s appeal relate to 
his motion to suppress. 
Alvarez was driving a vehicle that was stopped by
 
police because one of the two passengers was not wearing a
 seatbelt. During the stop, police officers recognized Alvarez as
 being involved in prior unrelated police investigations for
 drugs. Based on the police officers’ recognition of Alvarez, the
 officers telephoned another officer to come to the scene with his
 police dog to conduct a canine drug screen on the car. The
 canine alerted to the presence of contraband, and Alvarez was
 arrested for possession of a controlled substance. 
Alvarez filed a motion to suppress that evidence, which
 
was denied by the circuit court.
1 Alvarez entered a conditional
 
no contest plea, and was convicted and sentenced for promotion of
 a dangerous drug in the third degree. 
On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed
 
Alvarez’s conviction. However, we conclude that the ICA erred in
 affirming the denial of Alvarez’s motion to suppress. The canine
 narcotics screen was a separate unlawful seizure that was not
 reasonably related in scope to the original traffic stop. 
Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment on appeal and the
 circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence, and remand
 for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal. 
A. Alvarez’s Arrest and Indictment2
 
On June 9, 2011, Officer Brian Souki, Detective Paul
 
Fukuda, and Detective Tod Bello were performing traffic
 enforcement in Hilo.
3 Detective Fukuda spotted a vehicle with a
 
female front-seat passenger who was not wearing her seatbelt, and
 the vehicle was subsequently stopped by Detective Bello. 
Following the stop, Detective Fukuda recognized the driver of the
 vehicle as Alvarez. Detective Fukuda had previously encountered
 Alvarez and the two passengers of the vehicle, Mamone-McKeague
 and Kama, while he was assigned to the Hilo Vice Section. 
Detective Fukuda also stated that he had received “reliable
 confidential information” within the past five days that Alvarez
 was distributing crystal methamphetamine. Upon recognizing the
 occupants, Detective Fukuda contacted canine handler Officer
 David Reis to screen the vehicle. Officer Reis was at the Hilo
 police station when he received the call. 
After stopping the vehicle, Detective Bello began
 
issuing citations to Alvarez for driving without a valid license
 
2
 The summary of facts regarding Alvarez’s arrest is taken from
 
Officer Souki’s police report and testimony given at Alvarez’s June 15, 2011
preliminary hearing.  These facts are not in dispute.
 
3
 Although these officers were conducting traffic enforcement on
 
that particular day, their normal duty assignments were to the Area One Vice
Section.
 
3
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and without insurance, and to Kama for not wearing a seatbelt. 
After Officer Reis arrived at the scene, he screened the outside
 of the car with his dog, Nalu, who alerted to the presence of a
 controlled substance in the car. All three suspects were then
 arrested for promotion of a dangerous drug in the third degree. 
The police obtained a search warrant to search the car.
 
Officers found a bag containing a digital scale, two cut straws,
 two zip packets containing a crystal-like substance which tested
 positive for methamphetamine, seven empty unused zip packets, and
 numerous pieces of mail addressed to Alvarez. 
Alvarez was charged with four counts on June 13, 2011. 
Count 1 alleged Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree. 
Count 2 alleged Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia. 
Count 3 alleged Driving without a License. Count 4 alleged
 Conditions of Operation of and Registration of Motor Vehicles,
 “commonly referred to as No No-fault Insurance”. 
B. Motion to Suppress
 
On February 8, 2012, Alvarez filed a motion to suppress 
evidence. Alvarez requested that the court suppress all evidence that was collected as a result of the canine screen of his car, on the ground that it had been obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Alvarez argued that the circuit court should suppress
 
the evidence for two reasons. First, Alvarez argued that the
 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
police officers improperly expanded the scope of the traffic stop
 
into an unrelated drug investigation when they called for a
 canine screen without “specific and articulable facts” that gave
 them reasonable suspicion of any drug-related criminal activity. 
Alvarez argued that although Officer Souki had allegedly heard
 that Alvarez was involved in drug distribution, Officer Souki
 stated this was from a confidential informant, and therefore that
 it was “non-specific” and “non-articulable.” 
Second, Alvarez argued that the police officers
 
improperly extended the length of time to issue the traffic
 citations to allow time for the canine screening unit to arrive. 
Alvarez argued that police officers may detain defendants no
 longer than is “absolutely necessary under the circumstances,”
 and that at a hearing, he would be able to prove that the
 officers improperly extended the length of time it took to issue
 the traffic citations. As such, Alvarez argued that “all
 evidence in the instant matter that was collected based upon the
 improper canine screen of Defendant’s motor vehicle should be
 suppressed.” 
On April 5, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Alvarez’s motion to suppress.
4 At the hearing, Alvarez called as
 
witnesses Officers Souki and Reis, and Detectives Bello and
 
4
 The transcript of this hearing in the record is dated April 5,
 
2011.  However, this date is before Alvarez’s motion to suppress was filed,
and before he was even arrested.  In his opening brief and application,
Alvarez states the hearing was held on April 5, 2012. It thus appears that
the year on the transcript is in error, and should be 2012.
 
5
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fukuda. 
1. Officer Souki’s testimony
 
Officer Souki testified to the following. On June 9,
 
2011, he, Detective Fukuda, Detective Bello, and Officer Moniz
 were conducting traffic enforcement. Detective Fukuda observed a
 car in which a female passenger was not wearing a seatbelt, and
 Detective Bello stopped the car. After the car had been stopped,
 Officer Souki contacted Officer Reis by phone to do a canine
 screening on the vehicle because Officer Souki recognized Alvarez
 from prior contacts with him, and because he had received
 information within the past five days from a “[r]eliable
 confidential informant” that Alvarez was dealing crystal
 methamphetamine. 
However, Officer Souki could not recall having been
 
given any information that Alvarez would be conducting drug
 transactions specifically on the day of Alvarez’s arrest. 
Officer Souki also testified that he did not notice Alvarez in
 possession of any drugs or drug paraphernalia prior to calling
 Officer Reis. When the dog alerted to the presence of drugs,
 Officer Souki arrested all three occupants of the car. 
2. Detective Fukuda’s testimony
 Detective Fukuda’s testimony regarding the initial stop
 
of Alvarez’s car corroborated that of Officer Souki. Detective
 Fukuda also testified that he called Officer Reis’s cell phone
 after he had been informed of the identity of the vehicle’s
 
6
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
occupants, but that he did not observe any criminal activity
 
other than the seatbelt violation.5
 
3. Detective Bello’s testimony
 Detective Bello testified that while he was issuing
 
citations to Alvarez and Kama, they were not free to leave. 
Detective Bello testified that he had, within a week prior to the
 arrests, obtained information from a confidential informant that
 Kama was involved in drug distribution. However, Detective Bello
 had not received any information that Alvarez, Kama, or Mamone-
McKeague would be in possession of any drugs specifically on
 June 9, 2011, and he did not observe any drugs or drug
 paraphernalia in the car. 
4. Officer Reis’s testimony
 Officer Reis testified that he was at the police
 
station when he was called by Officer Souki at approximately 3:30
 p.m. on June 9, 2011. He was also called again sometime later by
 Detective Fukuda. Officer Reis stated that aside from the canine
 alert, Officer Reis did not see any other signs of drugs or drug
 paraphernalia in the car. 
After Officer Reis had testified, defense counsel
 
indicated that he had been attempting to track down and subpoena
 both Kama and Mamone-McKeague as witnesses, but so far had been
 
5
 Detective Fukuda stated that, prior to the traffic enforcement
 
operation on June 9, 2011, Detective Fukuda had asked Officer Reis to be
available if needed–-not because he necessarily expected to encounter any
individuals sought by vice, but because if such a situation should arise, “a
dog screen or a canine is always a big tool in our investigations.” 
7
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unsuccessful.6 The circuit court then scheduled a further
 
hearing for May 11, 2012. 
5. May 11, 2012 hearing
 
On April 12, 2012, at Alvarez’s request, the clerk of
 
the Third Circuit Court issued subpoenas for Kama and McKeague to
 testify at the May 11, 2012 hearing. 
On May 11, 2012, the parties appeared before the
 
circuit court for the continued hearing on Alvarez’s motion to
 suppress. Before any witnesses testified, the parties stipulated
 into evidence exhibits 16 and 17, which were Officer Reis’s cell
 phone records. These records showed that Officer Reis received
 two calls from Detective Fukuda: one at 3:31 p.m. and one at
 3:42 p.m, and that Officer Souki called Officer Reis once, at
 3:31 p.m. 
Additionally, Detective Bello testified again to
 
clarify his testimony at the prior hearing. Detective Bello
 testified that his statement at the April 5, 2012 hearing that he
 had “utilized the confidential informant to conduct a controlled
 purchase from Jaclyn Kama a week prior” was not correct. He
 stated that, after checking his records, he realized the
 controlled purchase from Kama actually occurred approximately one
 month before Alvarez’s arrest.
7
 
6
 Subpoenas for Kama and Mamone-McKeague were issued on March 20,
 
2012 for the April 5, 2012 hearing.
 
7
 At the May 11, 2012 hearing, there was also testimony from
 
Lieutenant Randall Ishii, the custodian of records for HCPD, and Roydon
(continued...)
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After the witnesses had testified, defense counsel
 
discussed with the court whether Alvarez would testify, and the
 
following exchange occurred:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Your Honor, given the
testimony I have no further questions–-we have no
further testimony except for my client.  I’d like a
 minute to speak to him whether he would testify or
not.
 
THE COURT: 
 So is it really a minute or more
 
than a minute?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  I would–-hopefully it’s a
 
minute.  I’ve had several conversations with him about
 this in the last couple days.
 
THE COURT: 
 Okay.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: 
 If it’s gonna be more than a
minute I’ll notify the Court as soon as I can.
 
THE COURT: 
 You’re asking for a recess or you’re
asking to talk to your client?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEl]: 
 Just a minute to talk to my
 
client.
 
(The 
defendant and his counsel held a discussion
off the record at 11:40 a.m.)
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Your Honor, my client has
advised me that at this point in time he’s not going
to elect to make a statement at this time, Your Honor.
 
The court did not ask Alvarez or defense counsel any
 
further questions about Alvarez’s decision not to testify. The
 
court asked the parties to submit written closing arguments
 regarding the motion to suppress, and set a deadline of June 7,
 
(...continued)
Kobayashi, a police dispatcher for HCPD, who both testified regarding an event
chronology for Alvarez’s arrest on June 9, 2011.  This chronology was
consistent with the testimony offered by Detectives Fukuda and Bello, as well
as Officer Souki.
 
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2012 for these submissions. The court also set a status hearing
 
on June 25, 2012. 
On June 6, 2012, the State filed its opposition to 
Alvarez’s motion to suppress. The State first argued that Alvarez did not have standing to object to the canine screen, and argued in the alternative that the canine screen was not a “search.” The State further contended that even if the police needed reasonable suspicion to conduct the screen, the officers’ prior encounters with the vehicle’s occupants were sufficient to establish a reasonable suspicion. Finally, the State argued that even if Alvarez had established a constitutional violation, he had not established that the evidence at issue should be suppressed. The State quoted from State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 
462, 475, 946 P.2d 32, 45 (1997) (“where the connection between the illegal acts and the discovery of the evidence is so attenuated that the taint has been dissipated, the evidence is not a ‘fruit’ and, therefore, is admissible”) in support of its argument. However, the State provided no further support for its contention that Alvarez’s “fruit of the poisonous tree” claim should be rejected based on his failure to establish where the evidence was located. 
On June 7, 2012, Alvarez filed his reply in support of
 
his motion to suppress. Alvarez argued that the only basis for
 the traffic stop was the seatbelt violation, and that the police
 officers unconstitutionally expanded this stop into a drug
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
investigation when they called Officer Reis to perform the canine
 
screen. According to Alvarez, any investigation beyond the
 traffic infractions had to be “reasonably related in scope” to
 the infractions for which Alvarez’s vehicle was stopped, unless
 the police had an “independent and reasonable articulable [sic]
 suspicion that criminal activity was afoot.” Alvarez contended
 that here, the canine screen was an investigation that was not
 reasonably related to the traffic stop, and was not based on any
 “specific and articulable facts” that would warrant the search. 
C. Alvarez’s motion to reopen the initial motion to suppress
 
On June 25, 2012, the parties appeared before the
 
circuit court for a status hearing. Apparently, prior to this
 hearing, the circuit court had indicated to the parties that it
 would deny Alvarez’s motion to suppress. However, the court’s
 proposed ruling indicating that it would deny the motion does not
 appear to be in the record.
8 At the beginning of the hearing,
 
defense counsel requested that the circuit court reopen Alvarez’s
 motion to suppress because the two witnesses he had previously
 intended to call–-Kama and Mamone-McKeague–-were now available. 
In response to the court’s question as to what the offer of proof
 was, defense counsel stated that, based on his discussions with
 
8
 At the June 25, 2012 hearing, defense counsel stated that “I did
 
get a copy of the court’s decision this morning.”  In addition, at a later
hearing on July 18, 2012, the deputy prosecuting attorney stated that “after
the Court indicated what the proposed ruling was, I’ve prepared findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and an order.”  Further, in his opening brief to the
ICA and application to this court, Alvarez states when referring to the June
25, 2012 hearing that “the Trial Court had previously indicated it would deny”
the motion. 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the witnesses’ counsel, both witnesses would testify that “from
 
the time of the arrest to the time that the dog showed up it was
 more like 30 minutes,” and that Alvarez had informed him that
 “during that time period, the police officers were speaking to
 them about other drug investigations.” The court directed
 defense counsel to file the motion to reopen the suppression
 hearing. 
On July 12, 2012, Alvarez filed his motion to reopen
 
the suppression hearing with an attached declaration of counsel,
 in which defense counsel explained that despite three attempts,
 he was previously unable to subpoena either witness because of
 their involvements as defendants in other criminal prosecutions. 
In the declaration, defense counsel stated, as a ground for
 reopening the motion:
 
16. This Honorable Court denied Defendant’s Motion to
 
Suppress in part on the basis that the canine alert in
the instant case occurred within in [sic] the time
allowed to conduct a traffic investigation, and that
there was no actual drug investigation during that
period, and Defendant believes that witnesses Jacklyn
[sic] Kama and Angelina Mamone-McKeague, who were
subpoenaed for the earlier hearings, but through not
[sic] fault of Defendant, were unable to be served,
will be able to testify in support of his allegations
of grave constitutional violations.  However, both
witnesses are currently in custody and [sic]
residential drug treatment on the Big Island, and have
been served, and are currently able to testify in this
matter.
 
17. Accordingly, Defendant requests to re-open the
portion of the hearing on the Motion to Suppress
regarding the above referenced witnesses’ testimony.
 
The State filed a response objecting to Alvarez’s
 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion to reopen the hearing. The State argued that Alvarez had
 
offered no offer of proof for the witnesses and no reasonable
 explanation as to why he could not have called Mamone-McKeague as
 a witness at the earlier hearing. The State did concede that
 “[g]iven that [Kama] was a fugitive from justice” at the time of
 the first hearing, Alvarez had provided a reasonable explanation
 for being unable to call Kama as a witness at the first hearing. 
The State also argued that Alvarez intentionally waited until
 after the circuit court had issued its proposed ruling to request
 reopening, which was improper “gamesmanship.” 
At a hearing on August 3, 2012, the circuit court
 
indicated that it would grant Alvarez’s motion to reopen the
 hearing on his motion to suppress. The parties, and the one
 witness who was present at the hearing (Mamone-McKeague), were
 ordered to return to court for a further hearing on August 31,
 2012. 
On August 31, 2012, the parties appeared before the
 
circuit court for the continued hearing. Kama and Mamone-
McKeague appeared as witnesses. 
1. Jaclyn Kama’s testimony
 Kama testified that on June 9, 2011, she was a
 
passenger in Alvarez’s vehicle when it was stopped because she
 was not wearing her seatbelt. Regarding the conversations she
 had with the officers during the traffic stop, Kama testified
 that Officer Souki asked her “about a prior incident that
 
13
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
involved me before,” and then acknowledged that the incident was
 
“related to a prior drug contact[.]” Kama also stated that she
 spoke to Detective Bello, and asked him why it was taking so long
 to write the ticket. In response, Detective Bello told Kama that
 the officers were “waiting for a ticket book” because they had
 run out of tickets. 
2. Angelina Mamone-McKeague’s testimony
 Mamone-McKeague also testified that on June 9, 2011,
 
she was in Alvarez’s vehicle when it was stopped by police
 officers. Mamone-McKeague stated that the only conversation she
 heard between the officers and the vehicle’s occupants was that
 one of the officers told Alvarez to take the key out of the
 ignition and that they had been stopped for a seatbelt violation.
 
3. Alvarez’s request to testify
 After Kama and Mamone-McKeague had testified, Alvarez,
 
through counsel, requested to be allowed to testify: “Your
 Honor . . . Mr. Alvarez, although he didn’t speak at the earlier
 motion to suppress, based upon the testimony of the last two
 witnesses, he would like to, um, invoke his right to speak at
 this . . . to testify at this particular hearing.” The State
 objected on the grounds that the court had reopened the motion to
 suppress only to allow the two witnesses to testify, Alvarez had
 a full and fair opportunity to testify at the initial hearing,
 which he declined, and that his request to testify now was
 gamesmanship. Defense counsel argued that Alvarez had intended
 
14
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to testify “from the beginning” and had only changed his mind
 
because of the unavailability of Kama and Mamone-McKeague. As an
 offer of proof, defense counsel stated:
 
Your Honor, my understanding, speaking to him, the
offer of proof would be . . . Alvarez would testify
that he was the driver when the vehicle was pulled
 over.  That the vehicle was pulled over for, uh,
approximately thirty minutes before, um, any, uh, drug
screening.  An arrest was made for him that, in his
experience, uh, that time was far in excess of what is
normally, um, used to uh, issue a ticket.  He would
 also state that, um, Officer Bello, he believes, did
engage, um, him in conversation, uh, regarding, uh,
didn’t he know that Jaclyn Kama, uh, I guess the whole
vehicle, but he felt it was addressed to him, was why
was Jaclyn Kama out, her husband had just been
arrested for two eight balls.
[9]   He would also testify
 
as to specific acts that occurred that, uh, buttress
his belief as to the length of time that this took
place.
 
After the State again objected, the circuit court
 
indicated that it would not allow Alvarez to testify:
 
THE COURT:   . . . [W]e’re supposed to reopen it
just for the testimony of these two witnesses so, you
know–­
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  I understand that that is
 
what my specific motion did state, but I would just
make the record that, um, these were two key 
witnesses that would, um, rebut the police officer’s
testimony in this particular case.  And my client had
intended to testify, until the point in time where he
didn’t have these witnesses.
 
THE COURT:  All right.  So I don’t–-I don’t
 
think I will allow Mr. Alvarez to testify at this
juncture, because it was supposed to have been a
limited reopening, was my impression.  So you got what
you wanted in terms of the specific motion, and I
think that should be the extent of it.
 
9
 An “eight ball” commonly refers to a unit of measurement for 
narcotics equaling one-eighth of an ounce.  See State v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawai 'i 
489, 491, 979 P.2d 85, 87 (App. 1999).  
15
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After hearing brief arguments from each side, the
 
circuit court indicated to the parties that it would not change
 
its prior decision to deny Alvarez’s motion to suppress:  “I
 don’t see anything that would change my mind, at this juncture,
 about the court’s prior ruling, so I’ll let that stand.” 
On September 19, 2012, the circuit court entered its
 
“findings of fact, conclusions of law denying defendant’s motion
 to suppress evidence” and order. The circuit court made the
 following findings of fact (FOFs):
 
1. On June 9, 2011 Defendant was the driver of
a vehicle stopped by police because a passenger in his
vehicle, Jaclyn Kama, was not wearing her seatbelt.
 
2. Police subsequently learned that Defendant
did not have a valid driver’s license.
 
3. Due to his lack of a driver’s license,
Defendant was unable to legally drive the vehicle away
from the location of the traffic stop.
 
4. After recognizing the persons in the
automobile as being known drug users, officers at the
scene of the traffic stop called for a narcotic
detection canine to screen the vehicle.
 
5. The narcotic canine screen alerted to the
 
presence of illegal drugs within the vehicle prior to
Detective Tod Bello completing the traffic citations.
 
6. After Officer David Reis brought the
narcotic detection canine from the police station to
the scene of the traffic stop, the canine screen
itself took approximately ten seconds before there was
an alert.
 
7. The initial detention of Defendant and the
 
vehicle was only to the degree necessary to issue
traffic citations.
 
8. The narcotic detection canine did not enter
 
the vehicle, and sniffed only the airspace surrounding
 
16
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the vehicle.
 
[8a.  No law enforcement officer asked the
 
occupants of the stopped vehicle any questions
regarding the possession or use of illegal drugs prior
to the narcotic canine alert.]
10
 
9. The canine screen took place during an
otherwise valid detention for the traffic violations.
 
10. The presence of the narcotic canine was
not, under the circumstances of this case, soembarrassing or intrusive as to constitute a searchunder the Hawai 'i or United States constitutions. 
11. The use of the narcotic canine was not
 
unreasonable or abusive in this case.
 
The circuit court then made the following conclusions
 
of law (COLs):
 
1. The stop of Defendant’s vehicle was valid at
its inception.
 
2. Police did not need independent reasonable
suspicion to conduct the narcotic canine screen on
Defendant’s vehicle.   State v. Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168,
 
171 (1984).
 
3. Once the narcotic canine alerted to the
 
presence of illegal drugs within the vehicle, police
had probable cause to arrest the occupants of the
vehicle pending the application for a search warrant.
 
4. The narcotic canine screen did not 
constitute an unreasonable search, as generally acanine sniff around the airspace of a closed containeris not a “search” under the United States and Hawai 'i 
constitutions.  State v. Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168, 171 
(1984). 
5. Suppression is not warranted in this case.
 
D. Plea, conviction, and sentencing 
On September 7, 2012, Alvarez entered a conditional no
 
10
 Paragraph 8a was added as a change to the FOFs, COLs and order,
 
and thus appears at the end of the document, after the order. 
17
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contest plea to promotion of a dangerous drug in the third
 
degree, in exchange for the State dismissing all other counts and
 mitigation of his mandatory minimum term to time served. The
 circuit court entered its judgment of conviction and sentence on
 September 17, 2012, sentencing Alvarez to five years imprisonment
 with credit for time served. 
E. Appeal to the ICA
 
Alvarez filed a notice of appeal from the circuit
 
court’s order denying his motion to suppress evidence. 
In his opening brief, Alvarez argued that the circuit
 
court erred in denying his motion to suppress because (1) the
 police officers had no “specific and articulable facts” that
 warranted expanding the traffic stop into a drug investigation;
 (2) the police improperly extended the time of the traffic stop;
 and (3) the circuit court erred when it denied him his right to
 testify on his own behalf. 
The ICA issued a memorandum opinion, concluding that
 
the circuit court did not err in denying Alvarez’s motion to
 suppress. 
First, the ICA reasoned that the canine screen of
 
Alvarez’s car was not a “search” because an individual has no
 reasonable expectation of privacy in the airspace around his or
 her vehicle, relying on Snitkin, 67 Haw. at 171, 681 P.2d at 983. 
Second, the ICA held that there was no “separate seizure” of
 Alvarez beyond the legitimate traffic stop, and further that the
 
18
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
length of the stop did not violate Alvarez’s constitutional
 
rights. Finally, the ICA held that the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying Alvarez’s request to testify at
 the reopened hearing. Relying on two cases which held that
 defendants’ rights to testify were not violated when courts
 denied their requests to testify at reopened suppression
 hearings, United States v. Childress, 721 F.2d 1148 (1982) and
 People v. Peterson
, 777 N.Y.S.2d 48 (App. Div. 2004), the ICA
 
concluded that “a trial court’s refusal to allow a defendant to
 reverse field and request to testify during a reopened hearing is
 not a violation of a defendant’s constitutional rights.” The ICA
 affirmed the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence. 
Alvarez timely filed his application for writ of
 
certiorari, presenting the following two questions:
 
A.	 Did the [ICA] gravely err in its denial of
[Alvarez’s] Motion to Suppress on the grounds
that (a) the canine screen was not a “search”,
and (b) that there was no separate seizure of
Alvarez?
 
B.	 Did the ICA gravely err in its decision that the
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 denying Alvarez’s request to testify at the
reopened suppression hearing?
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Denial of motion to suppress
 
We review a circuit court’s findings of fact in a
pretrial ruling according to the following standard:
 
Appellate review of factual determinations
made by the trial court deciding pretrial
motions in a criminal case is governed by
the clearly erroneous standard.  A finding
 
19
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the
record lacks substantial evidence to
 support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the
finding, the appellate court is
nonetheless left with a definite and firm
 conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai 'i 383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89
(1995) (citations and internal quotation marksomitted).  “The circuit court’s conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard.”  State v. Pattioay, 78 Hawai 'i 455, 459, 896 P.2d 911, 915
(1995) (citation omitted).  Furthermore, 
. . . the proponent of a motion to suppress has
the burden of establishing not only that the
evidence sought to be excluded was unlawfully
secured, but also, that his or her own Fourth
Amendment rights were violated by the search and
seizure sought to be challenged.
 
State v. Abordo , 61 Haw. 117, 120-21, 596 P.2d 773,
775 (1979) (citation and footnote omitted) . . . . Theproponent of the motion to suppress must satisfy this“burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.” Pattioay, 78 Hawai 'i at 466, 896 P.2d at 922 . . .
(citation omitted). 
State v. Anderson,  84 Hawai' i 462, 466-67, 935 P.2d 1007, 1011-12 
(1997) (brackets and emphases omitted).
 
III.
 Discussion
 
We agree with Alvarez that the circuit court erred in
 
denying his motion to suppress.11 For the reasons discussed
 
below, we conclude that the use of the canine screen was not
   
“reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified
 
the interference in the first place.”  State v. Perez, 111
 
11
 Alternatively, Alvarez argues that the circuit court erred when it
 
denied his request to testify at the reopened hearing.  In light of our
disposition, it is unnecessary to resolve this question, and accordingly, the
ICA ruling as to this issue is also vacated.
 
20
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawai'i 392, 397, 142 P.3d 1039, 1044 (2006). Consequently, the 
evidence of contraband recovered from Alvarez’s vehicle was 
unlawfully obtained. Accordingly, we vacate Alvarez’s conviction and sentence. A. The permissible scope of investigative detentions
 
“A stop of a vehicle for an investigatory purpose 
constitutes a seizure within the meaning of the constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and seizures.” State v. 
Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i 261, 270, 218 P.3d 749, 758 (2009). 
Whether a seizure pursuant to an investigative stop is 
reasonable depends on the application of a two-part inquiry that was first articulated by the U.S. Supreme Court in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 19-20 (1967), and later adopted by this court in State v. Perez, 111 Hawai' i at 397, 142 P.3d at 1044. If the 
police action fails to satisfy both parts of the Perez test, the evidence originating from that unlawful action must be suppressed. See Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 273, 218 P.3d at 762. 
As to the first part of the Perez test, the court must
 
determine “whether the action was justified at its inception.” 
Id. “To justify an investigative stop, . . . the police officer
 
must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which,
 taken together with rational inferences from those facts,
 reasonably warrant that intrusion.” State v. Barnes, 58 Haw.
 
333, 338, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 (2011) (internal quotations and
 citations omitted). 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It is well settled that an investigative stop based on 
an officer’s observation of an apparent traffic violation 
satisfies the first part of the Perez test. See Estabillio, 121 
Hawai'i at 273, 218 P.3d at 761 (noting that a fraudulent 
registration sticker and speeding provided valid justification for traffic stop); State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 378, 56 
P.3d 138, 146 (2002) (observing that initial traffic stop was appropriate where defendant was seen swerving and crossing the double center line). Here, Alvarez was initially stopped for a traffic violation because his passenger was not wearing a seatbelt. Accordingly, Alaverz’s initial detention was “justified at its inception.” Perez, 111 Hawai' i at 397, 141 
P.3d at 1044. 
It is the second part of the Perez test that is at 
issue here. Under that part, the court must determine “whether the search as actually conducted was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). This scope may be exceeded in either of two ways. First, any “temporary investigative detention” such as a traffic stop must be “truly temporary,” i.e., it must “last no longer than is necessary to effectuate the purpose of the detention.” Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 270, 218 P.3d at 758. Second, the 
subject matter and intensity of the investigative detention must be limited to that which is justified by the initial stop. See 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
id. at 271-72, 218 P.3d at 759-60 (initiation of an unrelated 
drug investigation when defendant was pulled over for a traffic infraction violated defendant’s constitutional rights); see also State v. Goudy, 52 Haw. 497, 502, 479 P.2d 800, 804 (1971); Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i at 378-79, 56 P.3d at 146-47; State v. 
Kaluna, 55 Haw. 361, 369, 520 P.2d 51, 58-59 (1974). 
In this case, we hold that the investigation regarding 
Alvarez’s alleged involvement with drugs was not reasonably related to the initial stop for the traffic offense, and was thus a separate and unrelated investigation that required independent reasonable suspicion. See Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 273, 218 
P.3d at 761; Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i at 379, 56 P.3d at 147; State 
v. Bolosan, 78 Hawai' i 86, 92, 890 P.2d 673, 679. 
B.	 The canine screen that led to Alvarez’s arrest was not
 
reasonably related in scope to the original traffic stop
 
Alvarez argues that the evidence recovered was 
impermissibly obtained in violation of his constitutional rights. 
He contends that this case is similar to Estabillio, in which a defendant who was pulled over for traffic infractions was also obliged to undergo a canine narcotic screen that led to the discovery of drugs. 121 Hawai' i at 265, 218 P.3d at 753-54. 
Alvarez contends that, as in Estabillio, the police officers stopped his car for a traffic violation and then expanded the stop into a drug investigation that was not reasonably related in scope to the traffic stop or justified by any specific or articulable facts. For the reasons stated below, we agree. 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In Estabillio, Vice Officer Brian Prudencio called
 
traffic enforcement Officer Robert Pauole to request assistance
 
with a traffic stop of Estabillio. Id. at 263, 218 P.3d at 751. 
Officer Prudencio informed Officer Pauole that Estabillio’s car
 registration sticker was expired, and told him that he believed
 there were drugs in the car. Id. Officer Pauole testified that
 
he understood that the plan was for him to stop the car for the
 expired registration sticker, and that vice officers would then
 arrive to conduct a drug investigation. Id. at 263-264, 218 P.3d
 
at 751-52. When Officer Pauole pulled over Estabillio, Officer
 Prudencio and other vice officers arrived at the scene. Id.
 
Upon arrival, Officer Prudencio told Estabillio that a
 
confidential informant had advised him that Estabillio was a mid-
level cocaine dealer. Id. at 265, 218 P.3d at 753. Officer
 
Prudencio then called Officer Kenneth Quiocho to the scene to
 conduct a canine screen of Estabillio’s car. Id. When the dog
 
arrived, it alerted the officers to the presence of a controlled
 substance in the car. Id. at 265, 218 P.3d at 753-754. 
The circuit court denied Estabillio’s motion to 
suppress. Id. at 267-268, 218 P.3d at 755-756. On appeal, this 
court applied the two-part test from Perez. While the traffic stop for speeding and an expired registration was “clearly justified at its inception,” we held that the separate drug investigation of Estabillio was not “reasonably related in scope” to the initial stop. Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 273, 218 P.3d at 
24
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
761. This holding was based on the fact that Officer Prudencio
 
had conducted a “drug investigation” that was “separate and
 
distinct from the traffic investigation.” Id. at 274, 218 P.3d
 
at 762. 
Here, Alvarez was stopped initially because Detective
 
Fukuda observed a passenger in Alvarez’s car not wearing a
 seatbelt. As in Estabillio, the police officers’ initial stop of
 Alvarez was therefore justified at its inception. In addition,
 as in Estabillio, the canine screen that led to Alvarez's arrest
 was not reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which
 justified the original traffic stop.
 
In Estabillio, Officer Prudencio began to question 
Estabillio regarding his involvement with drugs as soon as he arrived at the scene of the traffic stop. 121 Hawai' i at 265, 
218 P.3d at 753. This inquiry was not based on the discernible presence of any drugs or paraphernalia in the car, but rather on the assumption that Estabillio was “known to sell drugs” and information that Officer Prudencio had received from a confidential informant that Estabillio was “a mid-level cocaine dealer.” Id. at 266, 218 P.3d at 754. This general information 
did not justify initiating an investigation into potential drug distribution. Id. at 267, 274, 218 P.3d at 755, 762. 
Noting the lack of justification for the drug
 
inquiries, this court then held in Estabillio that “the
 investigation regarding Estabillio’s alleged involvement with
 
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
drugs was not  reasonably related to the initial stop for the
 
traffic offenses.” Id. at 273, 218 P.3d at 761 (emphasis in
  
original). This court determined that the ICA had erred in not
 
considering the drug-related questioning instigated by Officer
 Prudencio in conjunction with the canine screen, and that it was
 this separate avenue of investigation that impermissibly expanded
 the detention beyond the scope of the original traffic stop:
 
After the traffic stop occurred, Vice-Officer
Prudencio–-by his own admission–- proceeded to the
scene of the traffic stop to investigate Estabillio
for possible drug dealing, not for traffic offenses. 
Upon arrival, Vice-Officer Prudencio approached
Estabillio and began talking to him about drug
dealing, using the words to the effect that Vice
Officer Prudencio “had received information from a
 confidential informant saying that [Estabillio] was a
mid-level cocaine dealer.”  He then requested that
Estabillio consent to a search of his vehicle. . . .
 [S]uch questioning amounted to a separate seizure,
which was independent of and distinct from the traffic
investigation.  As such, the ICA’s sole focus on the
canine screen-–without discussion of whether Vice-
Officer Prudencio’s separate drug investigation
constituted a seizure–-was error.
 
Id. at 272, 218 P.3d at 760 (emphasis in original).
 
In the instant case, Alvarez was similarly subjected to
 
an investigation that had no reasonable relation to the initial
 
traffic stop. Like Estabillio, Alvarez was pulled over for a
 traffic infraction and subjected to a canine screen even though
 the officers did not notice any drugs or paraphernalia in the
 vehicle prior to ordering the canine screen. The screen was
 based primarily on information obtained from a confidential
 informant that Alvarez was involved in dealing crystal
 
26
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
methamphetamine. Both Officer Souki and Detective Fukuda
 
explained that they had obtained reliable information within the
 five days preceding the arrest that Alvarez was involved in drug
 distribution. However, neither could recall receiving any
 information that Alvarez, Kama, or Mamone-McKeague would be
 involved in possessing or dealing narcotics on the particular day
 of the arrest. 
While police officers may investigate matters unrelated
 
to the original stop if they have an independent basis for
 reasonable suspicion to indicate that criminal activity is afoot,
 no such basis existed here. The only suggestion that Alvarez was
 involved in distributing contraband on the day of his arrest
 stemmed from a tip provided by a confidential informant, as well
 as police recognition of Alvarez and his passengers from prior
 drug-related contexts. As noted in Estabillio, a tip from a
 confidential informant under the circumstances here is “not
 sufficient to establish reasonable suspicion for an investigatory
 detention.”
12 Id. at 274, 218 P.3d at 762. Moreover, if police
 
12 There are, of course, circumstances under which a tip from a 
confidential informant can generate reasonable suspicion to support an
investigative stop.  Where the informant is known to law enforcement, courtshave considered whether that person had provided reliable information in thepast, or whether there is an adequate factual basis that the person is areliable informant.  See, e.g. , State v. Ward , 62 Hawai 'i 459, 461, 617 P.2d
565, 567 (1980); State v. Joao , 55 Haw. 601, 602-04, 525 P.2d 580, 582-83
(1974).  
Howev
er, the tip here lacked any specificity, only generally
stating that Alvarez was dealing crystal methamphetamine, was provided fivedays before Alvarez was stopped, and no drugs were observed in the car. Furthermore, like in
 Estabillio, no evidence was presented to establish that
the confidential informant was a reliable informant.  121 Hawai 'i at 273-74,
(cont
inued...)
 
27
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recognition of Alvarez served as a basis for a separate
 
investigative detention, any traffic stop could be improperly
 utilized to detain individuals based on their previous
 misconduct.
 
In the case at bar, the canine screen that occurred 
after the traffic stop was an investigatory act aimed specifically at the crimes of dealing or possessing narcotics. Given the complete absence of any reasonable indication that Alvarez’s vehicle contained illegal contraband, the narcotics detection screen had no justifiable connection to the seatbelt violation that warranted the initial detention. Consequently, the request for and initiation of the drug screen in this case was unjustified, and such an action subjected Alvarez to the same kind of “separate, distinct, and unrelated investigation” that this court deemed constitutionally invalid in Estabillio. Id. at 
273, 218 P.3d at 761. Lacking sufficient independent grounds to 
expand the stop into a narcotics investigation, the drug screen was unrelated to the seatbelt infraction. We therefore hold that the canine screen, as conducted under these circumstances, was an unreasonable and unlawful expansion of the initial traffic detention in violation of article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution. See Perez, 111 Hawai' i at 397, 142 P.3d at 1044. 
As such, the evidence against Alvarez obtained as a result of the 
12(...continued)
218 P
.3d at 761-62.  Thus, the tip was not sufficiently reliable to establish
reasonable suspicion for a separate investigation.
 
28
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
screen must be suppressed as “fruit of the poisonous tree.” 
Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 274, 218 P.3d at 761 (quoting State v. 
Biggar, 68 Haw. 404, 409, 716 P.2d 493, 496 (1986)). 
In light of our holding, the ICA incorrectly concluded
 
that Estabillio is distinguishable from the instant case “because
 there was no separate search or seizure of Alvarez during the
 traffic stop.” The ICA apparently reasoned “that inquisitive
 questioning by law enforcement” was necessary to establish that a
 “separate, distinct, and unrelated investigation” took place, and
 because the circuit court found “that no police officer
 questioned the vehicle occupants about possession or use of
 illegal drugs prior to the canine alert,” there was no separate
 investigation. 
However, we did not require “inquisitive questioning by 
law enforcement” in Estabillio. In Estabillio, we held that the subsequent drug investigation was separate and distinct from the traffic investigation inasmuch as it was not “reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place. Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i at 273, 218 P.3d at 761 
(applying Perez, 111 Hawai' i at 397, 141 P.3d at 1044). Here, 
law enforcement brought the canine to the scene of the traffic stop to investigate Alvarez for possible drug dealing that was unrelated to the traffic offenses that justified the initial stop. Under Perez, this became a “separate, distinct, and unrelated investigation” that required reasonable suspicion. 
29
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appropriately applied, Estabillio is directly applicable to the
 
facts of this case. 
Finally, citing to State v. Snitkin, the ICA concluded
 
that the manner of the canine screen did not unreasonably intrude
 on Alvarez’s privacy interests. However, Snitkin is
 distinguishable from the instant case. In Snitkin, a Drug
 Enforcement Agency canine was patrolling a Federal Express cargo
 area to detect packages carrying narcotics. The dog alerted his
 handler to a package addressed to Alan Snitkin as possibly
 containing contraband. 67 Haw. at 169-70, 681 P.2d at 982. 
Based on this identification, the officer obtained a search
 warrant, opened the package, and confirmed that it contained
 cocaine. Id. at 170, 681 P.2d at 982. The officer then resealed
 
the package, allowed Snitkin to pick up the package, and arrested
 him. Id. This court held that the dog’s sniff of the airspace
 
around the package did not constitute a search and we reversed
 the circuit court’s suppression order. Id. at 171-72, 681 P.2d
 
at 983.
 
In Snitkin, we specifically noted that the packages
 
were not detained. By contrast, the use of the canine here was
 for the purpose of conducting an entirely separate investigation
 unrelated to the initial traffic stop, and thus constituted a
 distinct seizure that was not supported by any independent
 reasonable suspicion of current drug activity. Accordingly, the
 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
canine drug screen of the outside of Alvarez’s vehicle was
 
impermissible.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
We hold that the canine screen was an unlawful seizure 
that was not reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified police involvement in the first place. Therefore, it violated Alvarez’s rights under article I, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. Accordingly, we vacate (1) the 
ICA’s May 7, 2015 judgment on appeal, and (2) the circuit court’s September 17, 2012 judgment of conviction and sentence, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Justin P. Haspe
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Shaunda A.K. Liu
 
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
31
 