*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
PETER DAVID, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-19-0000319 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000319; CASE NO. 1PC111000050) 
 
SEPTEMBER 9, 2021 
 
NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.; 
AND RECKTENWALD, C.J., DISSENTING 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
 
On the night of New Year’s Day 2011, Peter David killed his 
cousin Santhony Albert.  The two had been drinking at family 
gatherings.  They fought outside a relative’s apartment.  David 
stabbed Albert.  David said he acted in self-defense.   Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000319
09-SEP-2021
07:55 AM
Dkt. 5 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 2 A jury convicted David of assault in the first degree.  The 
Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed.  
David challenges the trial court’s ruling preventing him 
from advancing evidence of Albert’s .252 blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) level unless he called an expert to explain 
its meaning.     
We hold that the trial court erred in conditioning the BAC 
evidence on such expert testimony.  Excluding the BAC evidence 
undercut David’s constitutional right to present any and all 
competent evidence to support his defense.  It violated David’s 
due process right to a fair trial.   
We vacate David’s conviction for assault in the first 
degree and remand the case to the circuit court.1  
                                                 
1  In this appeal, David also argues that several remarks made during 
trial by the deputy prosecuting attorney constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct.  Because we do not find reversible error in the ICA’s analysis of his prosecutorial misconduct claim, s ee State v. David, No. CAAP- 19-0000319, 
2020 WL 5821323 at *5-*9 (App. Sept. 30, 2020) (mem. op.), we decline to 
address this issue.  Given that the trial court’s error regarding the BAC 
evidence only affected David’s conviction in Count 1, we affirm the ICA’s 
Judgment on Appeal and the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s Judgment of Conviction and Sentence relating to Count 2.  In Count 2, the jury convicted 
David of assault in the third degree relating to an incident after the 
stabbing.  Because the jury could not unanimously answer a special 
interrogatory asking whether the assault was “ committed in a fight or scuffle 
entered into by mutual consent,” the court convicted David of assault in the 
third degree’s petty misdemeanor variant ( Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS)
  
§ 707-712(2)(1993)).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 3 I. BACKGROUND 
This was David’s second jury trial.2  In his first trial, 
David faced a murder in the second degree charge.3  The jury 
convicted him of manslaughter.  Because the trial court had 
admitted improper rebuttal testimony, this court vacated David’s 
conviction.  State v. David, 141 Hawaiʻ i 315, 317, 409 P.3d 719, 
721 (2017).   
On retrial, the prosecution called several of David and 
Albert’s relatives.  David also testified.4  
David and Albert spent New Year’s Day socializing with 
family members.  Like most of the men at the family gatherings, 
they drank alcohol.  Late in the evening, the cousins fought in 
a parking lot fronting a family member’s apartment.  David 
stabbed Albert.  Albert died. 
Before the fatal altercation, David and Albert were 
drinking in the apartment.  David testified he asked Albert for 
a beer.  Albert responded by punching him in the face.  He also 
struck David with a beer bottle and boasted, “you see, I can 
beat you up.”  Albert’s comment appeared connected to an earlier 
incident at a different family member’s apartment.  There, David 
                                                 
2  The Honorable Paul B. K. Wong presided.  
3  The Honorable Randal K. O. Lee presided.   
4  A Chuukese interpreter interpreted David’s testimony and interpreted 
for him during the trial.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 4 explained, he went outside.  Albert followed him and taunted:  
“[W]hat [are you] looking at[?] . . .[Y]ou want me to beat you 
up[?]”  David said he ignored Albert.  He knew Albert was 
“drunk.”  
David testified that not long after Albert punched him and 
hit him with a beer bottle, Albert went downstairs to the 
parking lot.  He called David to meet him there.  David did, but 
only to ask Albert to return to the apartment, not to fight.  
David said Albert kicked and punched him.  David fell facedown; 
he was pinned between two cars.  Albert stood above him.  Albert 
continued to kick and punch him.  David said he feared for his 
life.  He felt “very scared” and thought he was “going to die 
from what [Albert was] doing.”  
David told the jury he acted in self-defense.  He “grabbed 
something.”  He swung the object behind him toward Albert.  When 
asked about his state of mind, David explained: “I was 
protecting myself, thought that something was going to happen to 
me.  So that’s –– that’s why I did that, not knowing at what he 
was going to –– what the assault was going to be.”  David 
insisted he “was just trying to protect [him]self from injury, 
continuing threat . . . in a moment of rush.”     
David was unsure whether he contacted Albert with the 
object.  But Albert stopped hitting him.  Albert ran away.  
David followed.  Soon, he saw Albert walking to the apartment *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 5 with help from another relative.  He saw Albert fall to the 
ground.  David left; he later learned that Albert had died. 
The next day, a forensic pathologist performed an autopsy.  
Albert’s blood was drawn and tested.  The toxicology report 
showed that Albert’s BAC was .252.  
At David’s first trial, the State presented BAC evidence 
testimony from the forensic pathologist.  She informed the jury: 
“[Albert] did have alcohol, and the level was .25 percent.”  
The second trial was different.  This time, the State moved 
in limine to preclude admission of the .252 BAC evidence.  The 
trial court ruled that the presence of alcohol in Albert’s blood 
was admissible.  But the court prevented any references to the 
“actual number.”  It reasoned:   
With respect to the toxicology result performed on Santhony 
Albert as part of the autopsy that was conducted by the 
Honolulu Medical Examiner’s office, the Court denies 
State’s motion in limine.  The presence of blood alcohol 
level in . . . Mr. Albert’s body is relevant and 
corroborative of testimony that is going to be presented in 
this case.  So the fact that there is alcohol in the 
decedent’s blood is admissible. 
The actual number, though, the .252, the Court is going to 
preclude, unless there’s linkage, unless there is going to 
be some kind of testimony that will explain what the .252 
means or does or how it affects the particular decedent in 
this case.  So that’s a very high bar, I think, because 
alcohol has different effects on different people. 
And how drunk the decedent might have been is available to 
both parties by way of lay testimony and the percipient witnesses that observed the decedent on the date of the 
offense. 
(Emphases added.) 
 Before the forensic pathologist testified, David moved the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 6 court to reconsider its ruling.  The court denied the motion:  
The actual [BAC] number does provide the opportunity for 
the jury to speculate and perhaps even be confused because without any expert testimony to explain the meaning of the 
number, it is, in this Court’ s opinion, speculative.  As 
indicated by [the State], alcohol affects people differently.  In addition to tolerance of individuals, 
their weight and their metabolic makeup also affect the ability to process alcohol in a person’s system and 
therefore minimize or enhance the effect of any particular 
blood alcohol on that person.  So without any anchoring 
testimony to explain the number, it is in fact speculative.   
And with respect to common understanding as to the legal 
limit for driving, while .08 is the legal limit established 
by the legislature to delineate the line in the sand as to 
whether or not a person is operating a vehicle under the 
influence of an intoxicant, it really doesn’ t point out to 
the amount of impairment that person is actually 
experiencing.  At one point in time, the legal limit not 
too long ago was .10, and for other states, it has been a 
different number, and again, that number, without some 
anchoring testimony, is speculative and does not add 
anything to the jury’ s consideration of the case.   
So based on [Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule 403, 
[David’s] request is respectfully denied.   
(Emphasis added.)  The court further ruled that defense counsel 
could not ask the forensic pathologist whether there was a “high 
level of alcohol” in Albert’s blood.5  
The expert then testified that Albert’s blood contained 
alcohol; she did not reference his BAC or generally describe the 
level of alcohol in his blood.6   
                                                 
5  The court believed:  
The amount of intoxication that the decedent actually 
experienced is more accurately portrayed by the demeanor or 
the actions as seen by percipient witnesses and the amount 
of perhaps Budweiser or hard liquor drank by the decedent 
by percipient witnesses rather than the number or whether 
or not the blood level or blood alcohol level at the 
autopsy is high or low. 
6  At trial, the forensic pathologist also testified that a stab- like 
wound penetrated Albert’s lung and heart, “slightly at an upward angle,” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7 David’s defense centered on his account of what happened.  
It also featured a Honolulu Police Department officer’s 
testimony.  Officer Violet Williams recounted an unconnected 
incident where an intoxicated Albert acted aggressively and 
irrationally toward her and other officers.  Officer Williams 
testified that she responded to a “fight call” in November 2008.  
About twenty people were yelling at each other in a parking lot.  
As she was instructing everyone to leave, Albert approached her 
from behind.  He pushed her left arm.  He yelled, “fuck you, you 
bitch.”  He called her “pig” and other vulgarities.  Officer 
Williams described Albert’s demeanor as “extremely irate,” 
“uncooperative,” and “disrespectful.”  She smelled alcohol on 
his breath; he “appear[ed] to be intoxicated.”  When she tried 
to arrest Albert, he resisted.  After he was placed in a police 
car, he kicked toward Officer Williams and other officers. 
During closing argument, defense counsel spotlighted 
Albert’s drunken, aggressive behavior to support David’s 
defense: 
[W]e know how [Albert] is when he’s drunk, intoxicated.
This is circumstantial evidence as to who is first
aggressor in this case.
At another time how was [Albert] acting when he was 
intoxicated, even to a police officer?  He’s drunk, he’s 
argumentative, he’s belligerent, he’s swearing.  This is a 
causing severe bleeding leading to his death.  She opined that the “small 
irregular- shaped hole” in Albert’s upper left chest was inconsistent with a 
knife wound; it was likely caused by “a narrow, pointed, elongated 
object . . . at least 4 inches or more in length.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
8 window, circumstantial evidence as to what Santhony Albert 
was on this particular January 2nd, 2011.  He was the first 
aggressor, ladies and gentlemen.7 
The jury heard evidence about David and Albert’s drinking.  
The witnesses generally discussed that “the men” at the family 
gatherings were drinking.  But no witness testified about the 
quantity and frequency of Albert’s alcohol consumption.  And 
only one witness (aside from David) described Albert’s condition 
as “drunk.”8  Albert’s BAC - the only evidence objectively 
quantifying the extent and degree of Albert’s intoxication – was 
kept from the jury.
II. DISCUSSION
A. The probative value of the BAC evidence was not
substantially outweighed by the danger of confusing or 
misleading the jury or unfairly prejudicing the State 
Neither the trial court nor the ICA believed the BAC
7The defense’s opening statement also focused on Albert’s intoxicated, 
violent behavior: 
A bruise to the forehead, a black eye to the right eye, a 
severe laceration to the bridge of his nose, a laceration 
to his neck, abrasions or lacerations to the right forearm, abrasions to his knee, some bruising to his back, some 
injuries to his heel and his feet.  
The evidence will show these are the visible injuries that 
[David] sustained from a drunken attack from his own 
cousin, Santhony Albert, on New Year’ s night, 2011.  What 
the evidence will show is that it came to a split- second 
decision, a choice between getting beaten up bad and 
potentially being killed or defending himself against his 
own cousin. 
(Emphasis added.) 
8On cross- examination, this witness conceded that in an earlier 
proceeding (David’s first trial), she had testified Albert appeared drunker 
than David.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 9 evidence was irrelevant.  Rather, its preclusion was based on 
the defense’s failure to hire an expert to explain its meaning.  
We conclude that defense expert testimony was not necessary 
to admit Albert’s .252 BAC.9   The typical adult citizen has the 
aptitude to understand, weigh, and value the reasonable inferences drawn from a decedent’s .252 BAC in a self-defense 
case.  This ability comes from jurors’ common knowledge and life 
experience regarding BAC and alcohol’s association with aggression.  The trial court’s concern about confusing or 
misleading the jury was misplaced.  The court erred in requiring 
expert testimony about Albert’s BAC and its behavioral impact.  
1. Albert’s .252 BAC was highly probative to David’s 
defense 
 
 Protecting himself against his heavily intoxicated and 
violent cousin formed the nucleus of David’s defense.  David’s 
self-defense claim pivoted on evidence that Albert became 
aggressive after drinking a lot of alcohol.  The defense 
unveiled its theory during opening statement and bookended it in 
closing argument.  
To support his defense, David testified that shortly before 
the fatal event, Albert was drinking alcohol and got violent with him.  David asked Albert for a beer.  Albert did not give 
                                                 
9  Proper foundation must be laid to admit BAC results.  State v. Villena, 
140 Hawaiʻ i 370, 376, 400 P.3d 571, 577 (2017).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 10 him a beer.  Instead, Albert struck David with a beer bottle and 
punched him in the face.  
David described the moments preceding Albert’s death.  
David told the jury that Albert started the fight.  Albert 
punched and kicked him.  Albert continued to attack him after 
David fell to the ground.
  David feared for his life.  So he 
stabbed Albert.  
To further support his defense theory, David called Officer 
Williams.  Her testimony was relevant to Albert’s history of 
exhibiting combative behavior when drunk.  She described 
responding to a “fight call” where an intoxicated, “extremely 
irate” Albert pushed her from behind, yelled vulgarities at her, 
and acted irrationally and aggressively toward police officers. 
By showing Albert’s violent, drunken behavior, David 
provided a sufficient basis to admit the BAC evidence.  See 
Swilley v. State, 295 So. 3d 362, 365-66 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 
2020) (reasoning that the jury could hear BAC evidence where the defendant claiming self-defense testified that the complainant 
was aggressive when drinking and smelled like alcohol during the 
incident).  
The BAC evidence provided an objective, scientific basis 
for the jury to evaluate the extent and degree of Albert’s 
intoxication.  The evidence certified Albert’s highly inebriated
condition.  It had a tendency to prove consequential facts  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 11 central to David’s defense: It would have (1) aided the jury’s 
determination as to who was more likely the aggressor; (2) 
assisted the jury in understanding David’s state of mind and his 
perception of imminent harm; and (3) helped corroborate David’s 
view that Albert was acting violently and erratically while 
intoxicated, causing David to believe lethal force was necessary 
to protect himself.  See Durrett v. Commonwealth, No. 2014-SC-
000177-MR, 2015 WL 4979723 at *5 (Ky. Aug. 20, 2015) (mem. op.) (“Anytime someone is killed and the killer claims that he did so 
to protect himself, the behavior of the victim is obviously 
going to be of principal importance.  And evidence that the 
deceased was intoxicated when he died can be relevant to 
assessing who was the aggressor by allowing for a fuller 
understanding of the victim’s behavior and the killer’s 
perception of imminent harm.”) ; State v. Baker, 623 N.E.2d 672, 
10
                                                 
10  In Durrett, the Kentucky Supreme Court further opined that  
BAC evidence was relevant insofar as [the decedent’s] 
inebriation might help explain the aggressive behavior 
alleged by Durrett and thereby corroborate Durrett’ s 
version of events.  And it could also have been further 
relevant to explain why Durrett may have been acting under an erroneous belief of the need to act in self- defense or 
in the degree of force necessary as part of an imperfect self-defense, which Durrett was entitled to have the jury 
consider.   
2015 WL 4979723 at *5.  However, the Durrett court ultimately held that the 
trial court did not abuse its discretion by excluding the deceased’s BAC because it was “not particularly corroborative” of the defendant’s self-
defense claim.  Id. at *6.  Unlike the present case where David and Albert 
drank together and had a physical altercation before the deadly incident, 
Durrett did not interact with the deceased “except, possibly, locking eyes” 
right before he shot him.  Id. at *5.  The alleged threat in Durrett occurred 
hours before the shooting.  Id.  The Durrett court held that “[d]ue to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 12 677 (Ohio Ct. App. 1993) (holding that the trial court erred in 
excluding evidence of the decedent’s blood alcohol level because 
it was “important to the issue of self-defense, relevant 
specifically to the issue of who was more likely the aggressor 
in the incident”). 
Albert’s .252 BAC had high probative value.  It far 
exceeded the evidentiary value attached to witness testimony 
recalling Albert’s drinking or lay opinion testimony describing him as “drunk.”   
2.
 HRE Rule 403 favors admission of the BAC evidence 
without “anchoring” expert testimony 
 
a. BAC levels and the association between excessive alcohol consumption and aggression are within the common knowledge and experience of ordinary jurors 
 
Blood alcohol concentration evidence requires little 
explanation.  The national standard for driving under the 
influence of alcohol is .08.  See Missouri v. McNeely, 569 U.S. 
141, 169-70 (2013) (Roberts, C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“All 50 States and the District of Columbia 
have laws providing that it is per se illegal to drive with a 
BAC of 0.08 percent or higher.”); see also HRS § 291E-61(a)(4) 
(2020) (prohibiting operation of a vehicle “[w]ith .08 or more 
                                                 
shooting’s temporal remoteness to the only instance of alleged aggressive 
behavior by [the deceased], the probative value of the BAC evidence here was 
very low.”  Id.  In contrast, t he probative value of Albert’s BAC was high 
given the testimony regarding Albert’s drinking and his aggressive behavior 
toward David both shortly and immediately before the deadly fight.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 13 grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters or cubic
centimeters of blood”).
  11 
BAC tests numerically quantify alcohol consumption.  The 
decimal .08 is possibly the most recognizable number in criminal 
law.  The mass media communications industry routinely publishes 
BAC numbers.12  Public safety and health advisements also 
reference BAC levels.13  The ordinary person may not understand 
                                                 
11  Hawaiʻi adopted the .08 threshold in 1995.  See 1995 Sess. Laws Act 226, 
§ 9 at 587 (amending former HRS § 291-4 governing “[d]riving under the 
influence of intoxicating liquor” to set the BAC threshold at .08).  Hawaiʻ i 
law recognized the dangers associated with high BAC levels by providing for 
increased punishment for “highly intoxicated drivers” (defined as those with 
a BAC level exceeding .15).  HRS §§ 291E-1 (2007), 291E-41(b) (2007 & Supp. 
2008), 291E-61(b) (2007 & Supp. 2008).  In 2009, the legislature removed 
these increased sanctions.  2009 Sess. Laws Act 88, § § 5, 6 at 215, 217.  And 
in 2010, it repealed the definition of “highly intoxicated driver.”  2010 
Sess. Laws Act 166, § 5 at 399.  In July 2021, the legislature resurrected 
the definition of “highly intoxicated driver” and re- imposed increased 
sanctions on these drivers.  Act 216 (July 6, 2021).     
12  See, e.g., Richard Winton, Judge expunges Mel Gibson’s drunk- driving 
conviction, L.A. TIMES (Oct. 7, 2009, 12:00 AM PT), 
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la- xpm-2009-oct-07-me-gibson7- story.html 
[https://perma.cc/D65K- SFB2] (discussing actor Mel Gibson’s 2006 drunk 
driving conviction based on his .12 BAC and his belligerent behavior at the 
time of the arrest, including “profane outbursts” and “repeated threats 
against the arresting deputy”) .  
13  See, e.g., Planning and Implementing Screening and Brief Intervention 
for Risky Alcohol Use: A Step- by-Step Guide for Primary Care Practices, CDC 
4, 8, n.c. (2014) (emphasis added), https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fasd/documents/alcoholsbiimplementationguide.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/73RJ- T733] (defining “binge drinking” as consuming more 
than the CDC’s single day limit within a two- hour period because “drinking at 
this level typically brings the average adult’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) above 0.08 g/dL” and reporting that “[b]inge drinking is associated 
with a wide range of . . . health and social problems, including sexually transmitted diseases, unintended pregnancy, and violent crime”); Traffic 
Safety Facts: 2018 Data,  NAT’L HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMIN. 1 (2019), 
https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812864 [https://perma.cc/Z42E- PCLK](“In 2018 there were 10,511 fatalities in motor 
vehicle traffic crashes in which at least one driver had a BAC of .08 g/dL or 
higher.”).    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 14 how a BAC level is calculated or what it means chemically.  See 
State v. Werle, 121 
Hawai‘i 274, 282, 218 P.3d 762, 770 (2009) 
(stating “[b]lood alcohol tests are scientific in nature”).  But
adults in the United States generally share a basic 
understanding that .08 is a threshold quantification of alcohol 
consumption that impairs an individual’s physical and mental 
faculties and ability to safely drive a car.  It is also common 
knowledge, and an unremarkable proposition, that the higher a 
person’s BAC, the more impaired the person becomes by alcohol’s 
effects.   14 
“Scientists and nonscientists alike have long recognized 
a[n] . . . association between alcohol consumption and violent 
or aggressive behavior.”15  A strong association between alcohol 
                                                 
14  See The ABCs of BAC: A G uide to Understanding Blood Alcohol 
Concentration and Alcohol Impairment, N AT’L HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMIN. (2016) 
(emphasis removed), https://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/809844-
TheABCsOfBAC.pdf [ https://perma.cc/B6W2- A3PG] (explaining that “[t]he more 
you drink, the higher your BAC” and “the greater the effect [of alcohol]” and 
conveying that “[d]rivers with a BAC of .08 are approximately 4 times more likely to crash than drivers with a BAC of zero” while those with a BAC of 
.15 are “at least 12 times more likely to crash than drivers with a BAC of 
zero”).  As the Dissent points out, see dissent at 2, n.1, various sources 
cited in this opinion’s footnotes, including those published by reputable 
media and international organizations as well as U.S. government agencies, were not before the trial court.  This fact does not preclude us from relying 
on them to show that BAC and the association between alcohol and aggression 
are well-known.  See State v. Won, 137 Hawaiʻ i
 330, 366, 372 P.3d 1065, 1101 
(2015) (Nakayama, J., dissenting) (citing various publications from the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and California Department of 
Motor Vehicles to explain the link between “extreme OVUII,” “ recidivism,” and 
“drunk-driving fatalities”).   
15  Alcohol Alert, NAT’L INST. ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOLISM (updated Oct. 2000), 
https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/aa38.htm [ https://perma.cc/JE6B-
NQ2B].   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
15 use and domestic violence and sexual violence is likewise well-
known.  Increased alcohol consumption may not cause 
violent or
aggressive behavior, but ordinary adults understand the link between the two.
  1716  
Courts have long recognized that alcohol’s effects such as 
violence are within jurors’ common understanding.  See Byrd v. 
State, 123 So. 867, 869 (Miss. 1929) (acknowledging that “it is 
a matter of common observation that intoxication excites or 
emphasizes the ordinary characteristics of the person and makes 
a quarrelsome or dangerous man more so”); see also State v. 
Ferrer, 95 Hawai‘ i 409, 427, n.17, 23 P.3d 744, 762, n.17 (App. 
2001) (citations omitted) (recognizing that “certain reactions 
to alcohol are so common that [courts] take judicial notice of 
16See Preventing violence by reducing the availability and harmful use of 
alcohol, WHO 3 (2009), 
https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/alcohol.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/RJ2H- PQ7L] (“Importantly, the role of alcohol in aggression 
extends across many different forms of violence, including youth violence, sexual violence, intimate partner violence, child maltreatment and elder 
abuse.”). 
17See U.S. DEP’T. OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVS., Tenth Special Report to the U.S. 
Congress on Alcohol and Health: Highlights from Current Research 63 (2000) 
[hereinafter, Special Report to the U.S. Congress] (“ Studies of violent 
incidents have continued to find that alcohol use often precedes violent events and that the amount of drinking is related to the severity of the 
subsequent violence.”); see also Raul Caetano, et al., Alcohol- Related 
Intimate Partner Violence Among White, Black, and Hispanic Couples in the 
United States, NAT’L INST. ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOLISM, 
https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh25- 1/58-65.htm 
[https://perma.cc/G9H4- WEUM] (citations omitted) (“A considerable proportion 
of the violence that occurs in the United States is associated with alcohol.  A review of the literature on alcohol and violent crime concluded . . . 
homicide victims are more likely than their assailants to have been intoxicated if they provoked the fight.”).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 16 them” and these reactions include “[d]isorderly or unusual 
conduct”); State v. Randles, 334 P.3d 730, 734 (Ariz. Ct. App. 
2014) (stating that it is “common knowledge that alcohol can 
cause belligerence and aggressiveness”); Lyons Farms Tavern, 
Inc. v. Mun. Bd. of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 261 A.2d 345, 
351–52 (N.J. 1970) (noting that “[i]t is common knowledge that 
the use of intoxicants frequently unduly excites the tempers, 
emotions and actions of those who indulge”).    
The temporal and individual variations of alcohol’s impact 
are similarly within jurors’ common understanding.  They 
understand that alcohol affects people in different ways.  See 
Lynn v. Stinnette, 31 P.2d 764, 767 (Or. 1934) (“It is common 
knowledge that intoxicating liquor has varying effects on 
different individuals.  Some it impels to boisterousness and 
loud talking; others, to quarrelsomeness and sullenness.”); 
State v. Noble, 250 P. 833, 834 (Or. 1926) (declaring it was a 
“matter of common knowledge” that drinking alcohol “has some 
effect upon the person drinking it, and that this effect 
continues for a longer or shorter period, according to the 
amount drunk, and the individual drinking it”).   
 Because BAC and the link between alcohol and aggression are 
within ordinary adults’ common knowledge, David’s jury was 
“fully capable of making the connections to the facts of [this] 
particular case before them and drawing inferences and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 17 conclusions therefrom.”  State v. Salavea, 147 Hawaiʻi 564, 582, 
465 P.3d 1011, 1029 (2020). 
b. Expert testimony about Albert’s BAC and its 
effects was unnecessary 
 
Under HRE Rule 702,18 a person with “specialized knowledge” 
may testify if the knowledge “will assist the trier of fact to 
understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue.”   
Specialized knowledge testimony imparts “knowledge not possessed 
by the average trier of fact who lacks the expert’s skill, 
experience, training, or education.”  State v. McDonnell, 141 
Hawai‘i 280, 291, 409 P.3d 684, 695 (2017) (citation omitted). 
When the issues in the case are within jurors’ common 
knowledge, however, “expert testimony is unnecessary.”  Brown v. 
Clark Equip. Co., 62 Haw. 530, 537, 618 P.2d 267, 272 (1980).  
We conclude that alcohol and its association with violence fall 
into this category.  Understanding the BAC evidence and 
alcohol’s impact on Albert is not beyond the firsthand personal 
experiences and secondhand information accumulated by typical 
jurors.  The jury knows an individual’s .252 BAC means that the 
                                                 
18  HRE Rule 702 (1992) provides:  
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge 
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or 
to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an 
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise.  In determining the issue of assistance to the 
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness and validity of the scientific technique or mode of 
analysis employed by the proffered expert.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 18 individual is highly drunk; using the common knowledge about 
intoxication and its association with aggression, the jury can 
evaluate the BAC and its behavioral impact.  So it was improper 
for the circuit court to make the defense hire an “expert” to 
explain the BAC evidence before the jury could hear that 
evidence.    
Courts in other jurisdictions have not required expert 
testimony in similar situations.  In State v. Randles, an 
Arizona self-defense case, the trial court admitted a defense 
expert’s testimony regarding cocaine’s effects.  334 P.3d at 
733.  Expert testimony on alcohol’s effects, however, was 
excluded.  Id.  Thus, without expert testimony, the jury 
considered evidence of the decedent’s .13 BAC.  Id. at 734.  In 
upholding the ruling, the Randles court reasoned that the jury 
was able “to fully evaluate [the defendant’s] self-defense claim” based on “the common knowledge that alcohol can cause 
belligerence and aggressiveness,” in combination with other evidence presented to the jury.  Id.  See also Dixon v. Stewart, 
658 P.2d 591, 597 (Utah 1982) (observing that “it is generally held that expert testimony is not required in the case of 
intoxication with alcohol”).  
Alcohol’s behavioral effects are familiar to the average 
juror.  But the behavioral effects of drugs may not be.  
Reflecting this difference, some courts require expert testimony *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 19 on the effects of drugs, but not on the effects of alcohol.  See 
id. (observing that “some jurisdictions have specially held that 
a more trained or experienced observer is necessary to testify 
as to the intoxicating effects of drugs” while expert testimony 
on alcohol’s impact is generally not required). 
Even so, Hawaiʻ i courts have allowed evidence about an 
eyewitness’s drug use and addiction without expert testimony.  
See State v. Sabog, 108 Hawai‘ i 102, 111, 117 P.3d 834, 843 (App. 
2005) (holding that expert testimony was not a precondition to 
cross-examine a witness about drug use and addiction near the 
time of the incident); see also State v. Calara, 132 Hawai‘ i 391, 
402, 322 P.3d 931, 942 (2014) (acknowledging that “a defendant 
is entitled to cross-examine a witness concerning the witness’s 
drug use and addiction at or near the time of the incident to 
the extent that it affected the witness’s perception or 
recollection of the alleged event” (cleaned up)). 
On subjects that are unfamiliar to the jury, we have 
acknowledged the trial court’s discretion to admit expert 
testimony.  See State v. Udo, 145 Hawaiʻ i 519, 525-30, 454 P.3d 
460, 466-71 (2019) (referencing expert testimony on cause of death in a homicide case); State v. Yamada, 99 Hawai‘ i 542, 546, 
57 P.3d 467, 471 (2002) (referring to a defense expert’s 
testimony that the defendant’s mental disorder substantially 
impaired his “capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 20 conduct and to conform his actions to the requirements of the 
law”).   
Although alcohol’s general behavioral impact could be an 
appropriate subject for expert testimony,19 we conclude that 
specialized knowledge testimony was not required to admit the BAC evidence.  The link between excessive alcohol intake and 
increased aggression is not a “widely held misconception[]” or 
“constrain[ed] [by] popular myths.”  McDonnell, 141 Hawai‘ i at 
291–92, 409 P.3d at 695–96 (citation omitted).  
This court has shared misgivings about an expert-centric 
approach to fact-finding.  With experts’ “aura of special 
reliability and trustworthiness,” there is a danger that jurors will “abdicate their role of critical assessment” or “surrender 
their own common sense in weighing testimony.”  State v. 
Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 51 (1990) (cleaned up);  
see also State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai‘ i 206, 225-26, 297 P.3d 
1062, 1081-82 (2013) (mentioning that some judges prefer eliminating the term “expert” from jury proceedings to “ensure 
that juries are not overwhelmed by the so-called experts, so as 
to deprive them of their right to determine the facts of a case 
based upon all of the evidence and to ensure that trial courts 
                                                 
19  See, e.g., Rapoza v. Parnell, 83 Hawaiʻ i 78, 86 -87, 924 P.2d 572, 580- 81 
(App. 1996) (allowing a defense expert in a negligence case to testify about 
plaintiff’s BAC and alcohol’s impact to establish a possible causal 
relationship between plaintiff’s intoxication and the accident). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 21 do not inadvertently put their stamp of authority on expert 
testimony” (cleaned up)).  These concerns do not undermine the 
value of expert testimony in assisting the jury with 
understanding evidence.  But when the topic is familiar to the 
typical juror, conditioning admissibility on expert testimony 
devalues the collective wisdom of twelve citizens.  
Jurors are expected to rely upon their general knowledge of 
how humans operate in the world.  See Hawai‘ i Pattern Jury 
Instructions – Criminal, Instr. 3.03 (“You must consider only the evidence that has been presented to you in this case and 
inferences drawn from the evidence which are justified by reason 
and common sense.”).  Based on a case’s evidence and their common knowledge, jurors can form their views about whether a 
person with a high BAC was, for instance, “boisterous[],” Lynn, 
31 P.2d at 767, “amorous,” Pezzo v. State, 903 So. 2d 960, 961 
(Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2005), “belligeren[t],” Randles, 334 P.3d 
at 734, “happy,” State v. Griffin, 529 P.2d 399, 404 (Or. Ct. 
App. 1974), or “quarrelsome,” Byrd, 123 So. at 869.   
Hence, expert testimony on what Albert’s .252 BAC meant was 
unnecessary.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 22 c. The probative value of the BAC evidence was not 
substantially outweighed by the risks of 
confusing the jury or unfairly prejudicing the 
State 
 
We disagree with the trial court’s conclusion that HRE Rule 
40320 prevented the BAC evidence’s admission without expert 
testimony to explain its behavioral impact.   
The BAC evidence was highly probative.  See supra section 
II.A.1.  One prosecution witness described Albert as drunk.  
This colloquial and subjective account of Albert’s condition 
crudely measured his alcohol consumption.  The chemical analysis 
of Albert’s blood, in contrast, revealed a reasonably accurate 
measure of his intoxication.  
It is difficult to see how jurors could be confused and 
misled by Albert’s .252 BAC without testimony from a defense expert.  The commonly understood .08 benchmark for impaired 
driving tethered the BAC evidence; it was a suitable anchor to 
evaluate the extent of Albert’s intoxication.  Cf. State v. Van
Dyke, 101  377, 381, n. 11, 69 P.3d 88, 92, n. 11 (2003) 
(pointing out in a homicide case involving self-defense that 
retrograde extrapolation evidence of the defendant’s .198 BAC Hawai‘i 
                                                 
20  HRE Rule 403 (1980) provides: 
  
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading 
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 23 “amount[ed] to two-and-one-half times the legal drinking 
limit”).  As Van Dyke suggests, the .08 legal drinking limit is 
a useful, recognized benchmark for fact finders to gauge the 
degree and extent of intoxication.  21
  The trial court overstated the evidence’s potential to confuse jurors.  The court admitted Albert’s .252 BAC in David’s 
first trial.  No expert testified about the BAC’s meaning.  It 
seems the jury ascribed weight and value to the evidence without confusion.  Further, this court has decided homicide cases with 
self-defense claims where the jury heard BAC evidence without 
expert testimony about its behavioral effects.  See, e.g., State 
v. Maluia, 107 Hawai‘ i 20, 23, 108 P.3d 974, 977 (2005) 
(describing evidence of the decedent’s .195 BAC and the 
defendant’s .131 BAC).  
The BAC evidence would not, as the trial court believed, 
invite juror speculation.  The jury heard about Albert’s 
behavior on New Year’s Day.  It learned of his intoxicated, 
aggressive encounter with Officer Williams.  All the case’s 
evidence could and should be evaluated against the backdrop of the jurors’ common knowledge about BAC and alcohol’s effects.  
                                                 
21  See also Special Report to the U.S. Congress at 56 (emphasis added) 
(reporting that, in one study involving drinking by criminal offenders, “the 
estimated average blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of offenders who had been 
drinking was in the range of double or triple the thresholds of impairment of 
most commonly used in State driving while intoxicated (DWI) laws,” using the 
DWI laws as an anchor to compare the levels of intoxication).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 24 The jurors’ consideration of Albert’s BAC in these circumstances 
can hardly be dismissed as “speculative.”  See Newell v. State, 
49 So. 3d 66, 72-73 (Miss. 2010) (rejecting the trial court’s ruling that toxicology results invited speculation by the jury 
because the decedent’s aggressive and violent behavior had been 
presented before the toxicology-related testimony).  
The trial court believed that an explanation about “how 
[BAC] affect[ed] the particular decedent in this case” was necessary “because alcohol has different effects on different 
people.”  We disagree.   
First, whether expert testimony is admissible does not 
depend on its ability to provide case-specific, individualized 
opinions.  See 
McDonnell, 141 Hawai‘ i at 293, 409 P.3d at 697 
(concluding that the trial court properly admitted expert 
testimony when the expert “indicated that he was not familiar 
with any of the facts of the case” and did not even mention the 
child victim); see also State v. Plew, 745 P.2d 102, 107 (Ariz. 
1987) (holding that “the expert may and often should properly refrain from specifically stating that this particular person must have acted in this precise manner at this exact point”).   
Second, the absence of expert testimony about alcohol’s 
“particular” effects did not stop the trial court from allowing 
general evidence of Albert and David’s drinking.  If the 
ordinary juror lacked understanding about alcohol consumption *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 25 and its resulting behavioral effects, the court would presumably 
have foreclosed the testimony.  But it did not.  Further, under 
the court’s rationale for excluding the BAC evidence, a routine 
feature of assault trials – testimony about how much, what, 
when, and where a person drank alcohol – would seemingly be 
inadmissible without expert testimony to explain the evidence.   
Additionally, we are not persuaded by the trial court’s 
reasoning that an individual’s level of intoxication is more 
accurately portrayed by testimony regarding the individual’s 
demeanor.  Although a witness may generally opine on another’s 
sobriety, we have recognized flaws with opinion testimony based 
on observation.  See State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai‘ i 8, 25, 904 
P.2d 893, 910 (1995) (citation omitted)(observing that field 
sobriety tests “avoid the shortcomings of casual 
observations”).22   
We have not expressed the same concern with reliable BAC 
evidence.23  BAC levels are a useful gauge of alcohol consumption 
and its likely effects.  See supra section II.A.2.a.  If a lay 
witness can express an opinion regarding the sobriety of another, there is no logic to limiting the admissibility of 
                                                 
22  In State v. Jones, 148 Hawai‘ i 152, 176, 468 P.3d 166, 190 (2020), we 
held that police officers cannot give a lay or expert opinion that a driver 
appeared “intoxicated” in drunk driving prosecutions.    
23  At trial and on appeal, the State did not challenge the reliability of 
the toxicology test performed on Albert.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 26 reliable, objective evidence showing a person’s intoxication 
level.   
In rejecting David’s evidence, the trial court and the ICA 
both concluded that it was cumulative.  The trial court ruled: 
“how drunk the decedent might have been is available to both 
parties by way of lay testimony and the percipient witnesses 
that observed the decedent on the date of the offense.”  The ICA 
reasoned that there was “extensive evidence that Albert had been drinking” and mentioned that there was other testimony about his 
violent conduct while intoxicated. 
  
Evidence is not cumulative unless it is “substantially the 
same as other evidence that has already been received.”  State 
v. Pulse, 83 Hawai‘ i 229, 247, 925 P.2d 797, 815 (1996).  Unlike 
situations where witnesses testify to the same thing or images 
show the same thing, BAC evidence captures more than what 
general testimony about drinking conveys.  Here, it proved that 
Albert was excessively intoxicated.  No other evidence did.24   
Additionally, David was entitled to present his own 
evidence about the extent and degree of Albert’s intoxication.  
See State v. Lowther, 7 Haw. App. 20, 26, 740 P.2d 1017, 1021 
(1987) (citation omitted) (acknowledging that criminal 
                                                 
24  The dissent points to the “ample other evidence of Albert’s 
intoxication.”  See dissent at 6.  The evidence showed, as we acknowledge, 
that Albert drank or he was drunk; yet it did not reveal how drunk he was.  
One witness’s testimony on cross- examination that Albert was drunker than 
David did not indicate the extent of his intoxication.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 27 defendants have “the right to present their own evidence”).  
Much of the evidence relating to Albert’s drinking came from the 
State’s witnesses – family members who were unsympathetic to 
David’s plight.  Their general testimony did not fully frame the 
volatile situation David described finding himself in.  David 
wanted to present a defense in which the jury could consider 
evidence that Albert’s degree of intoxication exceeded three 
times the legal limit to drive – not merely that he had been 
drinking an unknown amount of alcohol.   
Finally, even if there was some uncertainty about what a 
.252 BAC could prove, any doubt should have been resolved in 
David’s favor.  See State v. Kato, 147 Hawai‘ i 478, 494, 465 P.3d 
925, 941 (2020) (advising that “a trial court should resolve a 
close question of admissibility in favor of the defendant”).   
We conclude that the trial court misapplied HRE Rule 403 
when it excluded the BAC evidence unless the defense hired an 
expert.  It did not confuse or mislead the jury; it wasn’t 
prejudicial25 or cumulative.  The jury was fully capable of 
                                                 
25  Other than holding that the BAC evidence introduced without expert 
testimony would be “speculative,” neither the trial court nor the ICA 
identified any unfair prejudice to the State which would emerge from David’s 
evidence.  “Unfair prejudice means an undue tendency to suggest a decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional one.”  
State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawaiʻ i
 280, 289, 67 P.3d 779, 788 (2003) (cleaned 
up).  We do not believe the jury would decide the case emotionally or on any 
improper basis if it considered Albert’s .252 BAC.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 28 weighing and valuing the BAC evidence alongside all the case’s 
evidence.26   
B. Excluding Albert’s BAC level violated David’s 
constitutional right to present a complete defense 
 
David argues that excluding Albert’s .252 BAC violated his 
due process right to present a complete defense.  The ICA held 
that the trial court’s ruling was “not substantially 
detrimental” to David’s defense.  We disagree.   
 A defendant’s right to present a complete defense is vital 
to due process.  State v. Williams, 147 Hawaiʻ i 606, 614, 465 
P.3d 1053, 1061 (2020).  An accused has the “constitutional right to present any and all competent evidence” to support a 
defense.  State v. Abion, 148 Hawai‘ i 445, 448, 478 P.3d 270, 273 
(2020) (emphases added) (citation omitted).  We have further 
explained:  
Where the accused asserts a defense sanctioned by law to 
justify or to excuse the criminal conduct charged, and 
there is some credible evidence to support it, the issue is 
one of fact that must be submitted to the jury, and it is 
reversible error for the court to reject evidence which, if 
admitted, would present an essential factual issue for the 
trier of fact. 
 
Id. (emphases added) (cleaned up).  
David said he acted in self-defense.  See HRS § 703-304(2) 
(1993 & Supp. 2001) (“The use of deadly force is 
                                                 
26  We hold that expert testimony is not a precondition to admit BAC 
evidence for the purposes underlying David’s defense.  We do not foreclose 
expert testimony regarding BAC. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 29 justifiable . . . if the actor believes that deadly force is 
necessary to protect [the person] against death, [or] serious 
bodily injury . . . .”).  David’s jury was instructed on his 
defense.   
Presenting a rational explanation for his conduct 
underpinned David’s defense.  He boosted his theory of the case 
by calling Officer Williams and testifying himself about 
Albert’s aggressive behavior while intoxicated.  Evidence of 
Albert’s .252 BAC could have affected the jury’s understanding 
of Albert’s motive or intention.  It could have similarly 
influenced the jury’s understanding of David’s state of mind and 
his belief that danger was imminent.  It also corroborated his 
testimony concerning Albert’s aggressive behavior.  The evidence 
would have helped explain David’s perception that Albert was 
volatile due to being excessively intoxicated.  
David’s defense hinged on his credibility – the 
believability of his testimony about Albert’s violent, 
irrational behavior and how it influenced David’s conduct.  See 
State v. Lealao, 126 Hawai‘ i 460, 470, 272 P.3d 1227, 1237 (2012) 
(recognizing that in a self-defense case, the defendant’s 
credibility is “at the crux” of the case because the jury must 
decide “whether the defendant did in fact subjectively believe 
the use of force was necessary”).  The BAC evidence was 
instrumental to bolstering David’s credibility.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 30 Because David’s defense depended on his account of Albert’s 
behavior before the fatal altercation and, by extension, on his 
credibility, we hold that there is a reasonable possibility that 
excluding the BAC evidence affected the trial’s outcome.  See 
State v. DeLeon, 131 Hawai‘i 463, 486, 319 P.3d 382, 405 (2014) 
(holding that because the defendant’s self-defense argument 
relied largely on the decedent’s behavior immediately before the 
shooting, the exclusion of expert testimony that “the presence 
of cocaine could [have] render[ed] [the decedent’s] level of 
intoxication perhaps a stage higher” presented a reasonable 
possibility that it could have affected the trial’s outcome, and 
therefore it “compromised [the defendant’s] ability to present a 
complete defense”)27; see also Harris v. Cotton, 365 F.3d 552, 
556-57 (7th Cir. 2004) (recognizing the state court’s finding 
that “[h]ad the jurors known of [the decedent’s] blood alcohol 
level and his use of cocaine, they [might] have credited [the 
defendant’s] claim of [the decedent’s] hostile and erratic 
behavior” and holding that there was “a reasonable probability 
that the outcome of the proceedings would have been different if 
the toxicology results were presented”); Cromartie v. State, 1 
                                                 
27  Although the trial court allowed a defense expert to testify about the 
decedent’s BAC and the effects of alcohol in DeLeon, 131 Hawai‘ i at 474, 319 
P.3d at 393, the case addressed a different issue: the exclusion of expert 
opinion regarding cocaine use.  Id. at 481-86, 319 P.3d at 400- 05.  The issue 
we resolve here - whether the defense must present expert testimony regarding 
BAC evidence - was not examined.       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
31 So. 3d 340, 341, n.2, 343 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2009) (holding 
that exclusion of the decedent’s .19 BAC violated the 
defendant’s due process rights by preventing him from presenting 
evidence which “could have been critical in bolstering his 
theory of defense”).   Given Albert’s erratic and belligerent 
conduct toward David before the fatal incident, the degree of his intoxication mattered.  Albert’s BAC was the only evidence 
that provided a reliable measurement of his inebriation.  It was critical to bolstering David’s credibility. 28
The circuit court’s error in excluding the BAC evidence 
affected David’s right to a fair trial.  See Pulse, 83 Hawai‘ i at 
247-48, 925 P.2d at 815-16 (observing that excluding competent
evidence that violated an accused’s constitutional right was
considered presumptively prejudicial and holding that the trial
court’s error in disallowing a defense witness’s testimony at a
suppression hearing was not harmless); Arias v. State, 20 So. 3d
980, 983-84 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2009) (citation omitted)
(holding that excluding the toxicology evidence showing the
decedent’s .21 BAC was reversible error because “a homicide
28The ICA distinguished Cromartie from the present case on the basis that 
in Cromartie there was no other evidence regarding the decedent’s drinking or 
any testimony concerning the decedent’s violent behavior.  Although the 
underlying facts may differ, Cromartie supports the overarching principle 
that any evidence bolstering a defendant’s self- defense theory should be 
admitted unless there are valid countervailing reasons.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 32 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins
 defendant is afforded wide latitude in the introduction of 
evidence supporting his self-defense theory”).   
The right to due process entitled David to present any and 
all competent evidence tending to show that he acted in self-
defense.  Abion, 148 Hawai‘ i at 448, 478 P.3d at 273.  Because 
the trial court rejected admissible evidence that was probative 
to consequential factual issues connected to David’s defense, we 
hold that it violated David’s right to present a complete 
defense.  
III. CONCLUSION 
We vacate the ICA’s Judgment on Appeal and the circuit 
court’s Judgment of Conviction and Sentence regarding David’s 
conviction for assault in the first degree.  The case is 
remanded to the trial court for proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
for petitioner  
 Brian R. Vincent,
for respondent  
 