 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000731 15-JUN-2017 
09:08 AM 
---oOo--
-
TRUST CREATED UNDER THE WILL OF SAMUEL M. DAMON, Deceased  
SCWC-12-0000731  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-12-0000731; P. NO. 6664; EQUITY NO. 2816
-A)
 
JUNE 15, 2017
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, WILSON, JJ.
   
 
OPINION OF THE COURT  BY McKENNA, J.
  
I. Introduction 
This case concerns the objections of two beneficiaries, 
Christopher Damon Haig (“Christopher”) and Myrna B. Murdoch 
(“Myrna”), of a testamentary trust created under the will of 
Samuel M. Damon (“Damon Trust” or “Trust”), to the decisions  
 
 
                          
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
1  made by the Probate Court of the First Circuit (“Probate Court”)
that underpinned its August 2, 2012 Judgment, specifically the 
approval of the Trust’s accounts from 1999 to 2003. The 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed the Probate 
Court’s August 2, 2012 Judgment. See  In re Estate of Samuel M. 
Damon & Trust Created under the Will of Samuel M. Damon   (In re 
Trust of Damon), No. CAAP-12-0000731 (App. June 2, 2016) (mem.).    
Separately, Christopher and Myrna each timely applied for a 
writ of certiorari from the July 11, 2016 Judgment on Appeal entered by the ICA pursuant to its June 2, 2016 Memorandum 
Opinion (“Mem. Op.”). Among other things, both Christopher and 
Myrna assert that the Trustees violated their duty to inform 
beneficiaries pursuant to  trust law and  Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes 
§ 560:7-303 (2006), that their due process rights were violated 
when they were not granted access to documents disclosed to the 
court-appointed Master by the Trustees of the Damon Trust 
(“Trustees”) thereby preventing them from making informed 
objections to the Master’s Report regarding the Trust’s accounts 
from 1999-2003, and that the Trustees breached their fiduciary duty to keep full, accurate, and orderly records of the status  
The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided. 
2
 1 
 
 
                          
    
 
 
 
 
4. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law in holding 
that a beneficiary waived all objections to the sale of 
Trust assets without a hearing where the Trustees failed 
to: (1) obtain prior court approval of the sale in 
violation of [HRS] § 554A -5; (2) disclose their personal 
self-interest in the transaction; and (3) follow their own 
conflicts of interest policy.  
   
 
 
 
[2]. 
 
 
 
[3]. 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
of the Trust’s  administration when certain documents went 
2   inexplicably missing.              
2 Christopher’s Application presents four questions: 
1. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law in denying a 
beneficiary the right to review trust records at the time of account approval necessary to submit proper objections, 
where such denial is obviously inconsistent with Hawaii 
Supreme Court and federal court decisions. 
2. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law by denying  a 
beneficiary’s rights to constitutional procedural due 
process in holding secret, ex parte   proceedings between the 
Master and Trustees, and whether this denial is obviously 
inconsistent with Hawaii Supreme Court and federal court 
decisions stating that it is unconstitutional to prejudge a 
case before giving a party reasonable access to the 
information and an opportunity to present his case.  
3. Whether the ICA made grave errors of law when it 
ignored a beneficiary’s claim for breach of fiduciary 
duties relating to the trustees’ loss of books and records 
for the Trust.  
Myrna’s Application presents three questions: 
[1]. 
Whether the ICA erred in affirming the probate 
court’s decision that improperly rubber -stamped the 
Master’s Report, refused to compel the Trustees to produce documents, and violated [Myrna ’s] constitutional right to 
due process. 
Whether the ICA erred by misapplying the presumption 
afforded to trustees under Campbell because the Trustees 
had no discretion whether to apply the statutory and common 
law duty to keep Myrna reasonably informed. 
Whether the CA [sic] erred in applying too 
restrictive a threshold to the claim that the Trustees 
committed spoliation, erred in applying the Campbell 
presumption to the issue of spoliation, and erred in 
affirming the probate court’s decision in light of the 
spoliation. 
3
  
 
 
  
 This probate case was previously heard b  y this court 
regarding a separate issue.  See  In re Estate of Damon,  119 
Hawaiʻi 500, 199  P.3d 89 (2008) (holding that the court-appointed
master was disqualified due to a conflict of interest and that 
objector-beneficiary’s challenge to master’s appointment was 
timely). Accordingly, some of the following factual and procedural background is repeated from that opinion.  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
For the reasons  discussed, the ICA erred in affirming the 
Probate Court’s approval and adoption of the Master’s Report 
without first granting Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests to 
access Trust administration documents,  contrary to the 
requirements of HRS § 560:7-303.   
II. Background 
 
A. Factual Background 
On November 10, 1914, a testamentary trust was 
created by the Last Will and Testament of Samuel M. Damon 
(“Trust”).   Samuel M. Damon died on July 1, 1924.  
During the 1999 –2003 accounting period,  the Trustees 
managed the Trust’ s assets with roughly half of its value 
in publicly traded securities and the other half in real estate.  The securities portion of the Trust’ s assets 
consisted mostly of a 13% interest in BancWest Corporation 
common stock.  The real estate portion of the Trust’ s 
assets consisted primarily of prime industrial and commercial lands in Honolulu under long -term leases, a 
sizeable cattle ranch on the island of Hawai ʻi, two walnut 
ranches located in California, and an industrial property 
located in California.  
In 2001, the Trust sold its entire 13% interest in 
BancWest Corporation common stock.  In 2003, the Trust sold 
its prime industrial and commercial land in Honolulu, two 
walnut ranches, and a significant portion of real estate 
located on the island of Hawai ʻi.  The net proceeds from 
these transactions has  [sic] been reinvested into a  
diversified securities portfolio that is being advised and 
managed by Goldman, Sachs & Company.  
4
  
 
 
   
 On April 30, 2004, the Trustees filed a “Petition for 
Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal  
Accounts” (“Petition”) in Equity No. 2816  -A and Probate No. 
6664. The Petition represented that the Trustees  
 
   
 
  
 
                         
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
In re Estate of Damon , 119 Hawaiʻ i  at 501–02, 199 P.3d at 90 –91.    
The Trust terminated on November 9, 2004 when the last 
measuring life, Samuel M. Damon’s granddaughter, Joan Damon 
Haig, passed away. On termination, the Trust’s  estate was 
valued at $836 million. There is no dispute that  Christopher 
3  and Myrna were beneficiaries of the Trust from 1999 to 2003.  
According to counsel for the Trustees, Christopher ’s and Myrna’s  
interests in the Trust total  “slightly over three percent [3%].” 
Three percent of $836 million is approximately $25 million.  
B. Procedural Background 
sent annually to all adult beneficiaries who are entitled 
to income by the terms of the Will copies of their annual accounts for the calendar years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 
2003, showing detailed expenditures of [sic] receipts and 
income and  principal for these years, together with 
inventories as of the end of each year, and copies of Consolidated Financial Statements and Schedules of the Estate of S.M. Damon, and the Independent Auditor’s Reports 
prepared by KPMG LLP, for each year.  
(footnote omitted).  
 
After the Probate Court ’s initially appointed m aster for 
the Petition was disqualified upon Christopher’s objections , see 
In re Estate of Damon , 119 Hawaiʻ i 500, 199 P.3d 89, the Trustees 
Christopher is a son of Joan Damon Haig and the brother of one of the 
Trustees, David Haig (“David”). Myrna wa s previously married to David. 
5
 3 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 At a hearing on February 18, 2010, the Probate Court 
granted the Trustee’s petition for the appointment of a new 
master (“Master”), who was appointed  by Order of Reference filed  
March 22, 2011. In accord with Hawai ʻi Probate Rules (“HPR”) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
petitioned for another  court-appointed master to examine the 
Estate’s accounts. Christopher objected to the Trustee’s 
petition for the appointment of another master, and instead 
filed a “Petition for Assignment to Civil Trials Calendar of the 
First Circuit Court”  (“First Assignment Petition”)  on February 
11, 2010, asserting   the following issues regarding the   Trust’s 
1999-2003 accounts:   
1. Whether the trustees adequately managed the estates’ 
[sic] securities portfolio[.]   
2. Whether the trustees obtained a satisfactory premium 
for the First Hawaiian Bank stock. 
3. Whether the trustees obtained fair market value for the 
real estate portfolio of the trust. 
4. Whether the trustees had conflicts of interest in the 
foregoing matters. 
Myrna, pro se, appeared to join in Christopher’s concern 
regarding the appointment of a new master and his request for 
the assignment of the case to the civil trials calendar.  The 
hearing for the First Assignment Petition was set for April 1, 
2010, which fell after the date set for the court’s hearing on 
the appointment of a new master.   
6

  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
                         
  
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Rule 29,4 that Order stated that “[t]he [Trustees] shall . . . 
make all books and records of the Damon Estate available to the 
Master.” 
The court held a hearing on the First Assignment Petition 
on April 1, 2010. After hearing argument from the parties, the 
court decided to continue the matter until the court had an 
opportunity to review the Master’s Report.5 
On October 7, 2011, the Probate Court received 
Christopher’s “Petition to Renew Request for Assignment of Case 
to Circuit Court Pursuant to Probate Rule 20 or in the 
Alternative, for Appointment of a Discovery Master” 
(“Christopher’s Renewed Assignment Petition ”). On October 10, 
2011, through counsel, Myrna similarly filed a “Petition for 
Assignment of Case to Circuit Court Pursuant to Probate Rule 
20(a) through 20(c) or in the Alternative, for an Order Pursuant 
to Probate Rule 20(d) Compelling Discovery and Appointing a 
Discovery Master” (“Myrna’s Assignment Petition”). Both 
Christopher’s Renewed Assignment Petition and Myrna’s Assignment 
Petition asserted that each had requested information from the Trustees regarding Trust administration, those requests were 
denied or ignored, and that when assistance was sought from the 
4 “The master shall have unlimited access to the books and records of the 
fiduciary with respect to the trust or estate that are not protected by 
privilege . . . .” HPR Rule 29. 
5 Court minutes reflect that “by agreement of counsel, [the First Assignment 
Petition] [wa]s continued until moved on in both [probate and equity] cases.” 
7
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Master, the Master stated that she did not have the power to 
compel the Trustees to provide discovery and advised Myrna and 
Christopher to take up the issue with the Probate Court. 
A hearing on Christopher’s Renewed Assignment Petition and 
Myrna’s Assignment Petition was held on Decemb er 1, 2011. At 
the hearing, the Master indicated that the Report would not be completed until sometime in mid-February 2012 because deadlines 
for submissions were suspended pending the outcome of 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s petitions. The Probate Court judge 
reminded the parties that the First Assignment Petition had been continued so that the Master’s R eport could be completed. The 
court also indicated the parties would be better able to focus on discrete issues of concern after the Master’s Report is sued, 
which would limit the scope of any potential discovery. 
Christopher explained that he filed the Renewed Assignment 
Petition because “[al]though the trustees provided information in the past, they have now refused.” Christopher and Myrna 
argued that they had a right as beneficiaries to the requested 
information, or, at the very least, information that was 
disclosed to the Master
, and that they had already narrowed 
their objections. In their memoranda, Christopher and Myrna each cited to HRS § 560:7-303,
 Bogert’s on Trusts § 962 (“Duty 
8

  
 
 
    
  
 
                         
  
 
 
  
    
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to Respond to Beneficiaries’ Requests for Information”) ,6 and the 
Restatement (Second) of Trusts  
§ 173 (“Duty to Furnish 
Information”)
,7 to show that the Trustees had a duty to provide 
them with the requested Trust documents and information.  
Moreover, because the Master’s document review was in part based 
on the general objections already noted  by Christopher and 
Myrna, they explained they would be unable to “submit . . . more 
meaningful objection[s]”  to the Master  if they did not get 
access to those very documents provided to the Master by the 
Trustees. As an example,  Christopher’s memorandum cited his  
securities and real estate experts, who  indicated “they cannot 
[issue] a report unless they have more information.” The 
Trustees countered that “[t]he Order of Reference by definition 
6 The Duty to Respond to Be neficiaries’ Requests for 
Information 
Generally, if a beneficiary of a trust requests 
information about the trust from the trustee, the trustee 
must promptly furnish it. The duty to provide information 
about the trust property and its administration in response 
to a request from a beneficiary has long been recognized by the common law and has been codified in most jurisdictions.   
Although the duty is fundamental and widely if not universally recognized, it is subject to several 
limitations. First, the duty extends only to information 
requests that are reasonable.  . . .  
Bogert’s on Trusts  
§ 962 (3d ed. 2010) (footnotes omitted) . 
7	 Duty to Furnish Information 
The trustee is under a duty to the beneficiary to give him 
upon his request at reasonable times complete and accurate 
information as to the nature and amount of the trust 
property, and to permit him or a person duly authorized by 
him to inspect the subject matter of the trust and the 
accounts and vouchers and other documents relating to the 
trust.  
Restatement (Second) of Trusts
  
§ 173 (1959). 
9
  
 
 
   The Probate Court  concluded that Christopher and Myrna 
failed to show that discovery was necessary prior to the 
completion of the Master’s Report . The court emphasized that 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s issues were preserved, and that they 
would be given an opportun ity to respond to the Master’s R eport. 
8  Accordingly, the court denied their petitions.   
 The Master’s Report, concluding the Trust’s 1999–2003 
income and principal accounts should be approved,  was filed on 
March 9, 2012. In it, among other things, the Master noted the 
following: 
 Your Master verified the accuracy and reliability of 
the Trust’ s financial accounts  by examining the statements 
of assets and liabilities, income and expenses, and random 
examination of the 2003 receipts and invoices.  The 1999-
2002 receipts and invoices were unlocatable and, according 
to Controller Mizuno, were probably destroyed as part of 
the Trust’ s regular document culling process.  Controller 
Mizuno assured the Master that he has seen and audited most 
of the 1999 -2002 receipts and invoices when he was part of 
the KPMG LLP (hereinafter KPMG) audit team and approved 
some of the 2002 receipts and invoices when he was hired as 
the Estate’ s Controller in October 2002.  The 1999- 2003 
annual statements, which were mailed annually to all Beneficiaries, were created from the receipts and invoices.   
He also confirmed that the Trust ’s internal controls 
requiring at least three levels of approval, including 
those of the Trustees, were uniformly followed in all of 
the years in the 1999 -2003 Accounts Period.  
 The Damon Trust accounts are annually audited by KPMG 
who issued annual “ Independent Auditors ’  Report”  of its 
findings.  The audits process included, inter alia, random 
reviews of the receipts and invoices to confirm that 
                         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
is an ex parte process. We are required to meet with the 
Master, again, as the eyes and ears of the Court and  provide her 
with access to the books an d records. We’re doing that.”    
The record does not reflect whether the court ruled on the First Assignment 
Petition. 
10
 8 
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
internal controls, such as the  approval process for all 
invoices, were in place and properly followed.   KPMG’s 
audits are attached to the 1999 -2003 Accounts Petition.  
Based on 
the examination of the financial statements, 
receipts, and KPMG ’s annual audits, your Master is 
satisfied that the Trust ’s 1999 - 2003 financial accounts 
as presented to the Probate Court are fair and accurate. 
At a status conference on March 20, 2012, the court set the 
following deadlines:  April 25, 2012 for responses or objections  
to the Master’s Report; May 25, 2012 for any reply; June 21, 2012 for the hearing on the Trustee’s Petition.  
On April 17, 2012, Christopher submitted to the Probate 
Court a “Petition to Compel Production of Documents and Continue 
Deadline to Respond to Master’ s Report ” (“Petition to Compel”) , 
which was joined by  Myrna.  The Trustees objected to the 
Petition to Compel on numerous grounds, including that Myrna’s requested documents were  irrelevant to the Trustee’s Petition, 
or were ones she already received from the Trustees or could have received from other sources.   The Petition to Compel was 
set for a May 31, 2012 hearing.    
Concurrent to submitting briefing on the Petition to 
Compel, both Myrna and Christopher timely submitted their 
objections to the Master’s R eport on April 25, 2012. 
Christopher maintained that although he submitted general objections to the Master’s Report, he was unable to adequately 
and completely respond to the Master’s Report because he was  not 
provided with the documents he requested of  the Trustees.  On 
11

  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
May 25, 2012, the Master and Trustees filed their responses to 
these objections.9 
At the May 31, 2012 hearing on the Petition to Compel, the 
Probate Court listened to the parties’ arguments but made no 
additional inquiries or comments. The Probate Court ruled on 
the Petition to Compel by way of a minute order issued on June 
19, 2012: 
After review of the record and pleadings herein, 
review of the Master’s Report filed on March 9, 2012 and 
objections and responses thereto, and having considered the 
representations, arguments and objections made, the court 
hereby denies the Petition [to Compel].  
The court finds that there is no basis to compel the 
trustees to produce all the documents reviewed by the Master. The court also denies the Petitioner’s request to 
transfer the matter to the civil trials calendar.  
Based on the foregoing, the court denies the request 
to continue the deadline for the beneficiaries to respond to the Master’s Report.  
(some capitalization omitted). The ruling was formalized in the 
Probate Court’s July 6, 2012 “Order Denying Beneficiary 
Christopher Damon Haig’s Petition to Compel Production of 
Documents and Continue Deadline to Respond to Master’s Report, 
Filed April 18, 2012.”    
At the June 21, 201
2 hearing regarding the Petition and the 
Master’s Report, Christopher and Myrna primarily argued that the 
Petition should not be granted because they were not given an 
opportunity to review the underlying Trust documents examined by 
  Past the court- imposed deadline of May 25, 2012, the parties continued to 
file briefs. On June 8, 2012, Christopher filed supplemental objections, and 
Myrna filed a reply with the Master.  On June 18, 2012, the Trustees 
responded to Christopher’s and Myrna’s June 8, 2012 filing. 
12
 9 
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 Myrna and Christopher  each timely filed   a Notice of Appeal  
with the ICA indicating that they appealed the August 2, 2012 
Judgment “and all orders, findings of fact, rulings and conclusions of law, either stated or subsumed therein which the 
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the Master in her preparation of the Report so that they may 
better articulate objections. They also requested an 
evidentiary hearing. The Probate Court entered a minute order 
on July 3, 2012, stating: 
After review of the record and pleadings herein, 
review of the Master’s Report filed on March 9, 2012 and 
objections and responses thereto, and having considered the representations, arguments and objections made, the court 
hereby grants the Petition, subject to the recommendations 
of the Master, which are approved and adopted. The 
Master’s fees are approved.  
(some capitalization omitted). The “Order Granting Petition for 
Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal 
Accounts” was filed on August 2, 2012. Judgment was entered on 
August 2, 2012 as to that order in addition to the orders denying Christopher’s Renewed Assignment Petition, Myrna’s 
Assignment Petition, and Christopher’s Petition to Compel to 
which Myrna had joined.
10 
C. Appeal to the ICA 
10 The judgment did not address any order that may have issued with respect 
to the First Assignment Petition. 
13
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
                         
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Judgment made final.”11 The ICA summarized Christopher’s and 
Myrna’s combined points of error as: 
[Christopher and Myrna contend] the probate court erred 
when it: (1) did not compel trustees David M. Haig, Paul 
Mullin Ganley, and Walter A. Dods, Jr. . . . to respond to requests for information or make documents  available to 
Appellants; (2) adopted the “Petition for Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal Accounts” . 
. . without an independent review; (3) approved the 
Trustees’ 1999 -2003 Accounts Petition despite evidence of 
spoliation; (4) did not assign the case to the trial court 
docket; (5) denied [Christopher’s] conflict of interest 
objections to the sale of BancWest Corporation . . . stock; 
and (6) denied [Christopher’s objections to the sale of 
real estate assets.  
In re Trust of Damon , mem. op. at 1–2 (footnote omitted). 
The ICA began its analysis with “the well -settled principle 
that trustees benefit from a presumption of regularity and good 
faith.” In re Trust of Damon , mem. op.  at 6 (citing In re 
Estate of Campbell, 42 Haw. 586, 607 (Haw. Terr. 1958)) 
(quotation omitted). Hawai ʻi law “imposes upon the person 
questioning the trustee’s action the burden of overcoming the 
presumption, but which requires the trustee ultimately to 
justify his action if sufficient evidence is produced to 
overcome the presumption.” Id.  (citing In re Estate of 
Campbell, 42 Haw. at 607).    
With respect to the first point of error, the ICA focused 
11 As Christopher was the second party to file a “notice of appeal,” he re -
titled his Notice of Appeal as a Notice of Cross -Appeal, and subsequently re -
filed it. Myrna also filed a “Notice of Cross Appeal” on September 7, 2012, 
although it is unclear why she did so. 
14
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12*** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
on the portion of HRS § 560:7-30312 that states, “The trustee 
shall keep the beneficiaries of the trust reasonably informed of the trust and its administration . . . .” The ICA noted that 
Christopher and Myrna  received annual accounts  and audited 
financial statements for each year of the 1999-2003 accounting period, did not object to those documents at the time of 
receipt, and therefore were kept “reasonably informed,” as noted 
in the Master’s Report.  
 In re Trust of Damon  , mem. op. at 8  –9.    
Moreover, the ICA 
noted that Christopher’s and Myrna’s 
repeated requests for a “large swath of information” from the 
Trustees did not point to specific reasons for the requested 
documents. In re Trust of Damon , mem. op. at 9.  The ICA 
therefore concluded that Christopher and Myrna failed to meet 
their burden of overcoming the presumption of regularity and 
The statute states in relevant part: 
Duty to inform and account to beneficiaries.  The trustee 
shall keep the beneficiaries of the trust reasonably 
informed of the trust and its administration . . . . In 
addition: 
. . . . 
(2) Upon reasonable request, the trustee shall 
provide the beneficiary with a copy of the terms of the 
trust which des cribe or affect the beneficiary’ s interest 
and with information about the assets of the trust and the 
particulars relating to the administration.
 (3) Upon reasonable request, a beneficiary is 
entitled to a statement of the accounts of the trust annually and on termination of the trust or change of the trustee. 
HRS § 560:7- 303. 
15
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
See In re Trust of Damon 
                         
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
good faith of the Trustees because they did not show what they  
would gain from the documents.  See id.    As such, the ICA 
concluded the Probate Court  did not err  when it denied   
Christopher’s and Myrna’s petitions to appoint a discovery 
master.  The ICA also  appeared to have  concluded that for these 
same reasons, the Probate Court  did not err when it denied the  
Petition to Compel, nor were Christopher and Myrna deprived of 
their due process rights when they were not granted access to 
the same information made available to the Master. See id.   
Relatedly, as to the fourth point of error, the ICA 
concluded that the 
Probate Court did not err when it retained 
the case on the probate calendar and denied the Petition to 
13	 and HRS §  560:1-302 (2006),  14Compel. Pursuant to HPR Rule 20
the ICA determined that the 
Probate Court had wide discretion to 
decline transferring the matter to the civil trials calendar or 
to permit discovery. , mem. op. at 13.  
13   “The court by written order may r etain a contested matter on the regular 
probate calendar or may assign the contested matter to the civil trials 
calendar of the circuit court.” HPR Rule 20(a).  
14	 (a) To the full extent permitted by the Constitution and 
except as otherwise provided by law, the court has 
jurisdiction over all subject matter relating to: 
(1)
 Estates of decedents . . . ; 
. . .  
(3)
 Trusts. 
(b) The court has full power to make orders, judgments and 
decrees and take all other action necessary and proper to administer justice in the matters which come before it. 
HRS § 560:1- 302. 
16
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Regarding the second point of error,  Christopher and Myrna 
had relied upon  Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Board of Land & Natural 
Resources, 136 Hawai ʻi 376, 363 P. 3d 224 (2015), for their due 
process arguments. However, the ICA observed  the record shows 
the Probate Court did not pre  -judge the matter and carefully 
reviewed the Master’s Report ,  see  In re Trust of Damon , mem.  op.  
at 10–11, in contrast to the facts presented in Mauna Kea.   The 
ICA thus concluded this   case was distinguishable from  Mauna Kea .   
Furthermore, because Christopher and Myrna were granted the same 
access to the Master as the Trustees, and because the Master 
addressed their objections in her Report, their due process 
rights were not violated. In sum,  the ICA concluded  
Christopher’s and Myrna’s due process arguments lacked merit. 
See  In re Trust of Damon, mem. op. at 11.     
As to the third point of error, the ICA 
summarized 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s arguments as follows: “Appellants 
contend that the Trustees committed spoliation because the 
Trustees either destroyed or lost the 1999-2002 receipts and 
invoices. Appellants argue that this destruction of evidence necessitates the presumption that the 1999-2003 Accounts 
Petition cannot be approved.” 
In re Trust of Damon,  mem. op. at 
13. The ICA noted that the Master had extensively reviewed 
documents to ensure that the information contained in the 
Trust’s accounting period was supported by other available 
17

  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
documents, and that there was no evidence of intentional 
document destruction. See id.  at 15–16. Therefore, the ICA 
concluded that given Christopher’s and Myrna’s failure to 
overcome the presumption of good faith a
nd regularity in favor 
of the Trustees, their spoliation argument lacked merit. See  
id. at 16. 
With respect to the fifth and sixth points of error 
concerning Christopher’s objections to the sale of the BancWest 
stock and various parcels of real estate, the ICA determined 
that the Probate Court  did not err in affirming the Master’s 
determination that Christopher’s objections to those sales were barred by waiver and the doctrine of laches. See id.  at 19.   
 
The Master had found that Christopher approved the stock sale, 
and the ICA noted that Christopher did not  provide evidence to 
the contrary.  See  id. at 17.  As to the real estate  
transactions, the ICA concluded that because Christopher did not 
object to them until over seven years later, the doctrine of laches applied, and therefore, Christopher’s argument that the 
Probate Court erred by approving the Master’s Report as to these 
transactions without first allowing him to review Trust records 
lacked merit. See  id.  at 17, 19.    
D.  Applications for Writ of Certiorari 
Christopher and Myrna each timely applied for 
a writ of 
certiorari from the July 11, 2016 Judgment entered by the ICA 
18
  
 
 
   
    
  
 
                         
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
pursuant to its June 2, 2016 Memorandum Opinion.15 Briefly 
stated, both Christopher and Myrna   assert  that the ICA gravely  
erred when it affirmed the Probate Court ’s adoption of the 
Master’s Report. They argue that the Master’s Report should not 
have been adopted as they were not first granted access to Trust 
documents as they requested, or at a minimum, to the same Trust 
documents that were  made available to the Master.  Without such 
access, they were unable to raise meaningful, specific 
objections to the Master’s Report by way of their own experts’ 
analyses or otherwise. For example, Christopher argues that 
without access to Trust documents, he was unable to  contest the 
Master’s conclusion that he had waived any objections to the sale of BancWest stock. Without the ability to raise meaningful 
objections for the Probate Court’s consideration, Myrna 
additionally argues that the Probate Court  “rubber stamped” the 
Master’s Report.  
According to both Christopher and Myrna, as beneficiaries, 
they have a right by way of statutory law, common law, and due 
process to obtain trust administration documents or information 
from the Trustees. Myrna argues that any presumption of 
“regularity and good faith” afforded the Trustees does not 
abrogate the Trustees’ duty to provide information related to 
15 The questions presented by Christopher and Myrna are quoted at supra note 
2. 
19
  
 
 
  Christopher and Myrna also take issue with the Master’s 
observation that certain Trust documents relating  to the 1999-
2003 accounting period were destroyed or missing. Christopher 
argues that this fact alone demonstrates a breach of fiduciary 
duty that requires  the Probate Court  to resolve “doubts or 
discrepancies” against the Trustees ; Myrna argues that the  
Master’s Report should not have been adopted by the Probate 
Court without a determination as to whether spoliation occurred.   
In either case, it appears that Christopher and Myrna assert that the Master’s Report should not have been adopted  because, 
at a minimum, they should have been granted access to the same documents as the Master in order to determine  whether the Master 
was correct in stating that she could nevertheless verify the Trust accounts without the missing receipts or other documents,  
thus permitting them to   raise appropriate objections to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the administration of the Trust when requested by a beneficiary, 
because such a duty: (1) is not discretionary   , (2) is not  
“limit[ed] to time periods prior to the Petition being filed,” 
(3) “does not end at the Probate Court door,” and (4) is not 
curtailed by the appointment of a master.  Christopher also 
asserts that the ICA erred when it stated he needed to justify  
his request for Trust documents  before being granted access to 
them.  
20

  
 
 
   
   
 
   
    
 
  
 
    
   
  
  
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Probate Court if necessary. Myrna also appears to ask that this 
court clarify trust law and standards on spoliation. 
Although Christopher had taken issue with the ex parte 
meetings held by the Master, at oral argument, counsel for both 
Christopher and Myrna indicated that the remedy they now seek is 
access to the Trust documents previously requested, including 
those reviewed by the Master, and for the case to be remanded. 
With respect to Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests for 
documents, the Trustees do not dispute they have a duty to keep beneficiaries reasonably informed pursuant to HRS § 560:7-303.  
However, they assert that the duty is not unlimited, but rather 
extends only to requests that are reasonable. The Trustees 
emphasize that Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests for copies of 
documents reviewed by the Master were not reasonable because 
they were “very overbroad” “fishing expedition -type request[s]” 
and that the Hawaiʻ i Probate Rules require that only the Master 
be granted unlimited access to Trust documents.  
Moreover, the Trustees assert that they more than satisfied 
the disclosure requirements of HRS § 560:7-303 as they had provided annual voluminous records to beneficiaries and had an 
“‘open door’ policy [until the Estate office closed in 2007] 
where Beneficiaries could meet with the Trustees and Estate 
staff, review Estate records and documents, and ask questions on 
trust-related matters.” According to the Trustees, both Myrna 
21
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
      
 
  Kikuchi v. Brown,  
 
   
 
 
  
                         
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
and Christopher used that opportunity multiple times during the 
1999–2003 accounting period.16 The Trustees acknowledged, 
however, that at no point in time were Christopher and Myrna 
granted access to each of the documents reviewed by the Master.  
III. Standard of Review 
“Interpretation of a statu te is a question of law which 
[is] review[ed] de novo .”  110 Hawaiʻ i 204, 
207, 130 P.3d 1069, 1072 (App. 2006) (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
The multiple issues raised by Christopher and Myrna 
fundamentally turn on the interpretation of HRS § 560:7-303, 
which grants beneficiaries the right to request of trustees 
“particulars relating to the administration” of the Trust, 
including access to documents.  Both Christopher and Myrna 
submitted requests for Trust documents to the Trustees.  When 
the Trustees declined to address their requests, Christopher and 
Myrna sought assistance from the Master. When that route 
provided no relief,17 they filed petitions with the Probate Court 
16  The Trustees also point out that after the first master was disqualified 
due to a conflict of interest,  see  In re Estate of Damon,
 119 Hawaiʻ i 500, 199 
P.3d 89, that Myrna attempted to raise additional objections before the 
subsequent master that were not initially raised before the first.  This does 
not appear to address Myrna’s subsequent request for Trust documents, 
however. 
17 The Master was correct in declining to resolve Christopher’s and Myrna’s 
requests for discovery and instead directing them to the Probate Court. 
22
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
       
 According to the ICA, Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests 
for Trust administration documents were not reasonable primarily *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to compel the Trustees to provide the requested documents, to 
appoint a discovery master, or to transfer the case to the civil 
trials calendar so that discovery may proceed under the Hawai  ʻi  
Rules of Civil Procedure.   The Probate Court denied the motions,  
stating that with respect to the Petition to Compel, Christopher 
and Myrna had “no basis to compel the trustees to produce all 
the documents reviewed by the Master.” Thus, at the core of 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s petitions and their appeals to this 
court are their requests for Trust administration do cuments  
pursuant to HRS § 560:7  -303.    
As conceded by the Trustees, a trustee’s duty to inform 
beneficiaries under HRS § 560:7
-303 does not cease when an 
accounting is filed in probate court or a master is appointed. 
For the following reasons, after considering the statute’s plain 
language, its legislative history, and established treatises, we 
conclude that the ICA erred in affirming the Probate Court ’s 
denial of the Petition to Compel, and therefore also erred in affirming the Probate Court’s “Order Granting Petition for 
Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal 
Accounts.” 
A.	 The Plain Language of HRS § 560:7-303 Does Not Require a 
Beneficiary to Overcome the Presumption of Good Faith 
Afforded Trustees 
23
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
because Trustees had routinely provided beneficiaries with 
annual financial statements and accounts, and Christopher and 
Myrna failed to provide specific reasons why they needed 
documents beyond these statements. In particular, the ICA 
pointed out that because Christopher and Myrna were unable to 
articulate what they hoped to gain from the requested documents, 
they had “fail[ed] to meet their burden of overcoming the 
presumption of regularity and good faith of the Trustees.” In 
re Trust of Damon, mem. op. at 8 –9. 
We now consider whether the factors considered by the ICA 
were appropriate in light of 
the plain language of HRS § 560:7 -
303, which states in relevant part: 
Duty to inform and account to beneficiaries.  The trustee 
shall keep the beneficiaries of the trust reasonably 
informed of the trust and its administration . . . . In 
addition: 
. . . . 
(2) Upon reasonable request, the trustee shall 
provide the beneficiary with a copy of the terms of the 
trust which des cribe or affect the beneficiary’ s interest 
and with information about the assets of the trust and the particulars relating to the administration.
 (3) Upon reasonable request, a beneficiary is 
entitled to a statement of the accounts of the trust 
annually and on termination of the trust or change of the 
trustee. 
The relevant portion of the   statute clearly imposes three 
18  separate duties on t  rustees.  The first is an affirmative duty
18 See Eugene F. Scoles, “Administration of Trusts,” in 2 Uniform Probate 
Code Practice Manual 588, 595 (Richard V. Wellman ed., 2d ed. Am. Law Inst. 
1977) (“Scoles 
on Trusts”) (characterizing the initial duty to inform 
(continued . . .) 
24
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
                   
(. . . continued)
                                                              
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to “keep the beneficiaries . . . reasonably informed of the 
trust and its administration.” The second and third duties 
outlined in parts (2) and (3), respectively, spring to life 
“upon reasonable request” of a beneficiary.   Because these 
duties are distinct, a trustee’s compliance with , for example,  
two of the three duties, does not abrogate responsibility for 
the third.    
Accordingly, although 
trustees may fulfill their 
affirmative duty by supplying annual accountings to a beneficiary, trustees must still provide “information about the 
assets of the trust and the particulars relating to the 
administration” upon the beneficiary’s “reasonable request.” 
HRS § 560:7-303(2). Put another way, by a plain reading of the 
statute, the distribution of annual accountings that may provide 
information similar to that requested does not alter the 
analysis of a request’s “reasonableness” — it neither heightens 
the standard of “reasonableness” applied to beneficiary requests, nor does it undermine the degree of “reasonableness ” 
beneficiaries in [Uniform Probate Code] [s]ection 7 -303 as an “affirmative” 

one).
 
The 1976 House Testimony Folder for S.B. 79 
(later enacted and codified 
at HRS § 560:7- 303) contained a copy of UPC Notes , July 1972.  For an 
analysis of the trust provisions in the UPC, that publication referred to an 
essay by Eugene F. Scoles, “Administration of Trusts,” contained in the first 
edition of the Uniform Probate Code Practice Manual.  Although the first 
edition is not readily available, the second edition notes that Scoles’ essay 
is “identical to that contained in the original Manual.” 
Scoles on Trusts, 
at 588. 
25
  
 
 
   
  
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
of the requests. The ICA therefore erred when it concluded that 
because the Trustees already provided beneficiaries with annual 
financial statements and accounts, Christopher and Myrna were 
required to provide additional reasons to overcome the 
presumption of regularity and good faith of the Trustees. 
That 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests “cover ed a large 
swath of information ” also does not bear on whether their 
requests were “reasonable.” HRS § 560:7-303(2) does not 
condition a trustee’s duty on the complexity or numerosity of a 
trust’s transactions. Unlike the legions of documents that 
might result from requests for unlimited access to trust records, which courts have denied, 
see, e.g., Bogert’s on Trusts  
§ 962 n.8 (3d ed. 2010) (cases cited), here, Christopher and 
Myrna requested the documents reviewed by the Master, who 
focused on discrete issues during a discrete period. Thus, the 
volume of those documents relates more to the nature of the 
administrative activity of the Trust rather than to any unwieldly scope of the request, and therefore does not weigh 
against the “reasonableness” of Christopher’s and Myrna’s 
requests. See, e.g., Strauss v. Superior Court, 224 P.2d 726, 
731 (Cal. 1950) (
“The fact that the [trustee] may find it 
inconvenient or troublesome to produce voluminous records will 
26
  
 
 
  
     
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
      
 
  
   
    
  
  
 
                         
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
not defeat petitioner’s right of inspection.” (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted)).19 
The Trustees also argue that Christopher’s and Myrna’s 
requests were not “reasonable” because “open door” access had 
previously been granted to them.  However, nothing in HRS § 
560:7-303 restricts a beneficiary from obtaining access to trust 
administration documents because the beneficiary was previously 
granted access but did not take advantage of it at that time. 
Indeed, the Trustees fail to explain why Christopher’s and 
Myrna’s April 2012 requests in the Petition to Compel (filed 
consequent to the March 2012 Master’s Report) were rendered 
unreasonable because of “open door” access that ended in 2007. 
For these reasons, the ICA erred in concluding that 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests were not “reasonable.”  T he 
plain language of the statute does not support consideration here of the factors applied by the ICA. 
B.	 Based on the Legislative History of HRS § 560:7-303 and 
Established Treatises , “Reasonable” Refers to the Time and 
Place at Which a Request Is Made, and Does Not Refer to the Scope of the Request 
The statute’s legislative history and established trust 
treatises also do not support the ICA’s conclusion that 
Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests for trust documents were not 
19  We observe that HRS § 560:7 -303(2) does not require trustees to provide 
copies of all requested trust administration documents. Trustees may fulfill 
their duties by providing a sufficient or adequate opportunity to review and 
inspect these requested documents. 
27
  
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
“reasonable.” Rather, these sources indicate that “reasonable” 
in HRS § 560:7-303 refers to the time and place at which a 
request is made, and is not directed at the scope of the 
request. 
Aside from a change of gendered terms, the relevant 
portions of HRS § 560:7-303 remain  unchanged since the statute’s  
inception in 1976. See  1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 200, § 1 at 
466–67 (enacting S.B. 79). Additionally, the 1976 statute is nearly identical to the 1969 Official Text of the Uniform  
Probate Code (“UPC”), with the sole exceptions that parts (2) and (3) were instead denoted by (b) and (c) in the UPC, and that 
the UPC contained the word “relevant” prior to “information” in 
part (b). See Uniform Probate Code   § 7-303 (1969).  In sum, HRS 
§ 560:7-303 (2006) is substantially the same as HRS § 560:7-303 (1976) and the 1969  UPC upon which the law was based.   Because 
of this continuity,  the legislative history of HRS § 560:7-303  
(1976)  is probative of the legislature’s ongoing intent 
regarding a trustee’s duty to inform.  
That history, including the documents and testimony 
considered by the legislature,  demonstrates a clear recognition 
that trustees have a duty to supply trust information to requesting beneficiaries. For example,  the House Research  
Office’s November 7, 1975 
Comparison and Analysis of the Uniform 
Probate Code, included as part of the 1976 House Testimony 
28  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Folder for S.B. 79, specified,  “The UPC imposes on the trustee 
the duty to account to beneficiaries rather than the court. In 
addition, the trustee must  supply the beneficiary with 
information concerning the terms and assets of the trust if requested.” House Research Office, Comparison & Analysis of the 
Uniform Probate Code  (Nov. 7, 1975) (unpaginated; under the 
header for “Sec. 7-303. Duty to Inform and Account to 
Beneficiaries”) (emphas es added).   This  House commentary echoes 
the careful analysis of the Judicial Council of Hawaii’s 1972 
Hawaii Probate Code Revision Project, which was chaired by Chief 
Justice William S. Richardson. See  William S. Richardson, 
“Letter on behalf of the Judicial Council of Hawai i to the Hon. 
David C. McClung, President of the Senate,” Feb. 27, 1973 
(submitting the Judicial Council’s report to the legislature “in 
response to Act 128 of the 1970 Session,” which appropriated 
funds “to study and review the probate laws of the State o f 
Hawaii and to prepare for enactment in Hawaii, with appropriate 
conforming amendments, the Uniform Probate Code”); Judicial 
Council of Hawaii, Hawaii Probate Code Revision Project, The 
Uniform Probate Code (Hawaii)  384 (1972) (“[Section 7 -303 of] 
[t]he U.P.C. imposes on the trustee the duty to account to 
beneficiaries rather than the court. In addition, the trustee 
must supply the beneficiary with information concerning the 
terms and assets of the trust if requested .”  (emphases added)).   
29

  
 
 
       
 
                         
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
See also Judicial Council of Hawaii, Hawaii Probate Code 
Revision Project, at 383 (observing the UPC comment on section 
7-
303 states that “further information may be obtained by the 
beneficiary upon request”). 
In sum, neither the UPC commentary, the Judicial Council of 
Hawaii’s analysis, nor the House Research Office’s observations support an interpretation of  the phrase , “upon reasonable 
request,”  as one that limit s  a beneficiary’s  access to only 
certain trust documents.   Nothing in the legislative history of  
S.B. 79 states to the contrary. 
See, e.g. , Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 
24-76, in 1976 Senate Journal, at 872 (commenting on section 7-303 only insofar that part (1) was changed from the initial 
draft to “clarify who is entitled to receive notice of 
20 registration”).  
This is in accord with the fundamental tenet that, “[f]or 
the reason that only the beneficiary has the right and power to enforce the trust and to require the trustee to carry out the trust for the sole benefit of the beneficiary, the trustee’s 
denial 
of the beneficiary’s right to information constitutes a 
breach of trust.” Bogert’s on Trusts  § 961, at 3–4 (2d rev. ed. 
20 Indeed, section 813 of the 2010 Uniform Trust Code, “Duty to Inform and 
Report,” which is derived from the 1969 UPC, “allows the beneficiary to 
determine what information is relevant to protect the beneficiary’s interest” 
by requiring “a trustee [to] promptly respond to a beneficiary’s request for 
information related to the administrati on to the trust,” without any 
qualification that the request be “reasonable.” Uniform Trust Code  § 813(a) 
& cmt. (2010). Instead, a trustee’s “[p]erformance is excused only if compliance is unreasonable under the circumstances.” Id. (emphasis added). 
30
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Restatement (Second) of Trusts   § 173 (1959)  (emphasis added).   
Although “at reasonable times” can be interpreted to modify  
either when the request  must be made by the beneficiary,  or by 
when the trustee must give information, commentary  in the 
Restatement (Third) of Trusts  points to the former:  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
1983). Accordingly, so long as documents requested of a trustee 
pertain to “information about the assets of the trust and the 
particulars relating to the administration ,” any limitation on a 
beneficiary’s access to trust administration documents imposed by the phrase,” “upon reasonable request,” is not based on the 
type or volume of the documents requested. 
Although the UPC and 
the legislative history behind Act 200 
do not expressly define the term, “upon reasonable request,” at 
the time of the statute’s implementation, the Restatement 
(Second) of Trusts illustrated what constituted a “reasonable 
request”: 
Duty to Furnish Information 
The trustee is under a duty to the ben eficiary to give him 
upon his request at reasonable times  complete and accurate 
information as to the nature and amount of the trust 
property, and to permit him or a person duly authorized by 
him to inspect the subject matter of the trust and the 
accounts and vouchers and other documents relating to the 
trust. 
(2) Except as provided in § 74 or as permissibly modified 
by the terms of the trust, a trustee also ordinarily has a duty promptly to respond to the request of any beneficiary 
for information concerning the trust and 
its 
administration, and to permit beneficiaries on a reasonable 
basis 
to inspect trust documents, records, and property 
holdings. 
31
  
 
 
  Bogert’s on Trusts elaborates on the reasonableness of the 
time and place of a request:  
 
 
 
  § 961, at 4 (2d rev. ed. 1983) (emphasis 
 
 Thus,  if a beneficiary’s reque st for trust administration 
21 documents  is made at a reasonable time and place and not 
vexatiously or at unreasonable intervals, it should be 
                         
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Restatement (Third) of Trusts   § 82(2) (2007) (emphasis added); 
see also Restatement (Third) of Trusts  § 82 cmt. a (clarifying  
that “on a reasonable basis” refers to a beneficiary’s inquiries 
being made at “reasonable hours and intervals”). As such, 
whether a beneficiary’s request for trust administration documents pursuant to HRS § 560:7-303 is “reasonable” depends on 
the time and place the request is made.  
If the beneficiary asks for relevant information 
about the terms of the trust, its present status, past acts 
of management, the intent of the trustee as to future 
administration, or other incidents of the administration of 
the trust, and these requests are made at a reasonable time 
and place and not merely vexatiously,
 it is the duty of the 
trustee to give the beneficiary the 
information which he 
has asked. 
Bogert’s on Trusts
added). 
21 Unless ordered by a court, “trust administration documents” do not include 
sensitive personal information about other beneficiaries, such as the 
diagnosis of a serious illness, that may be in the possession of trustees. 
See  Restatement (Third) of Trusts  § 82 cmt. f (“When a beneficiary’s request 
for information may encompass sensitive, private information acquired by the 
trustee about other beneficiaries, the extent of the trustee’s duties may 
require a balancing of competing interests. While recognizing the requesting 
beneficiary’s ‘need to know’ . . . , a trustee —  and ultimately a court —  may 
need to provide some response that offers a compromise between the 
confidentiality or privacy concerns of some and the interest -protection needs 
of others.”).  
32
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
                         
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
considered a “reasonable request” for the purposes of HRS § 
560:7-303.  
The record here shows that the requests were neither 
vexatious nor made at unreasonable times.  Rather, in multiple 
hearings on the issue p rior to the issuance of the Master’s 
Report, the Probate Court explained that Christopher’s and 
Myrna’s requests for documents would be considered after the 
filing of the Master’s Report. Although a probate court has the 
discretion to decide whether a probate matter is transferred to 
the civil trials calendar, or whether to retain the matter and 
permit discovery, a probate c ourt’s discretion as to a 
beneficiary’s request for trust administration documents under HRS § 560:7-303 is limited to determining whether the request 
falls within the scope of the statute, i.e., was made at a 
reasonable time and place and not vexatiously.
22 
Accordingly, the ICA erred in affirming the Probate Court ’s 
approval and adoption of the Master’s Report without first granting Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests to access Trust 
administration documents.  The ICA too narrowly construed the scope of HRS § 560:7-303 and inappropriately determined that the 
statute was trumped by the presumption of regularity and good 
22 The probate court retains broad discretion to consider all the 
circumstances of a case, including the volume of documents requested, in 
determining whether a request was made vexatiously. As noted in Part IV.A., however, the potential burden on trustees due to a large volume of requested 
documents, alone, does not render a request unreasonable or vexatious. 
33
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
                         
 
   
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
faith typically afforded trustees.23 Rather, pursuant to HRS § 
560:7-303, Christopher’s and Myrna’s requests for access to 
Trust administration documents that were reviewed by the Master 
should have been granted. Any other requests for Trust 
documents pursuant to HRS § 560:7-303 by Christopher and Myrna 
should be evaluated on remand as to whether they were made at a 
reasonable time and place and not merely vexatiously. 
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Probate Court’s 
August 2, 2012 Judgment and the ICA’s July 11, 2016 Judgment on 
Appeal filed pursuant to its  June 2, 2016 Memorandum Opinion  as 
to the Probate Court’s  “Order Denying Beneficiary Christopher 
Damon Haig’s Petition to Compel Production of Documents and 
Continue Deadline to Respond to Master’s Report , Filed April 18, 
2012” and “Order Granting Petition for Approval of 1999, 2000,  
2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal Accounts.”   The Probate 
Court’s August 2, 2012 Judgment and the ICA’s July 11, 2016 
Judgment on Appeal are otherwise affirmed. This matter is  
23  The court need not reach the issue of spoliation.  As Christopher and 
Myrna have not yet been granted access to Trust documents to determine if the 
Master’s conclusions regarding the loss of trust documents was indeed 
unproblematic or harmless to the approval of the accounts, it would be premature for this court to clarify the law of spoliation at this time. 
34
  
 
 
  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack  
 
Michael D. Wilson   
Rebecca A. Copeland, Peter 
Van Name Esser, and Thomas  
R. Sylvester for petitioner  
Myrna B. Murdoch   
                           
J. Thomas Van Winkle, Duane  
R. Miyashiro, and Melissa   
H. Lambert for respondent  
Trustees under the Will and  
of the Estate of Samuel M.  
Damon  /s/ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
remanded to the Probate Court for proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
A. Bernard Bays and M  ichael    
C. Carroll for petitioner  
Christopher Damon Haig         
 
George W. Van Buren  for  
respondents Brendan  Damon  
Ethington and John Philip  
Damon 
 
35
 