 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-13-0001498 30-JUN-2016 07:46 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
---oOo---
DORINDA HAMILTON,
  
Petitioner and Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
  
  
vs.
  
 
DAVID HAMILTON,
  
Petitioner and Respondent/Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant.
  
SCWC-13-0001498
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-13-0001498; FC-D NO. 10-1-163K)
 
JUNE 30, 2016
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
 
I. Introduction 
This case arises from an appeal and cross-appeal from 
monetary decisions in a Divorce Decree. David Hamilton 
(“Husband”) and Dorinda Hamilton (“Wife”) seek review of the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals ’ (“ICA”) September 25, 2014 
Judgment on Appeal, filed pursuant to its August 29, 2014  
 
      
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
                         
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Memorandum Opinion. The ICA affirmed in part and vacated in 
part the June 7, 2013 Divorce Decree of the Family Court of the 
Third Circuit (“family court”).1 
The parties dispute the impact of a multi-million dollar 
inheritance received by Husband on the family court’s 
determinations of property division, alimony, and attorney’s fees and costs.  With respect to property division, the family 
court found that a premarital economic partnership existed and 
implied that proceeds from an illegal marijuana operation may 
have constituted a portion of the marital real estate.  In 
ultimately dividing and distributing the property, the family 
court awarded all inheritance funds remaining at trial to 
Husband as his marital separate property.  It credited Husband 
for all sums withdrawn from his inheritance funds as a capital 
contribution to the marital estate.  It then deducted these sums 
from the marital estate, thereby creating marital debt.  That 
marital debt was then equally split between the parties, resulting in Wife owing Husband a substantial equalization 
payment. The family court then found that equitable 
considerations justified a deviation from marital partnership 
principles and credited Wife with an amount equal to her 
equalization payment. The family court awarded Wife spousal 
support during the pendency of the divorce proceedings and until 
1 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr., presided. 
2
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
December 2016, and the court also awarded her attorney’s fees 
and costs. 
On appeal, the ICA ruled that the family court’s premarital 
economic partnership finding was erroneous because it was based 
in part on an illegal business enterprise.  The ICA vacated and 
remanded the portions of the Divorce Decree pertaining to 
property division and spousal support to the family court for 
recalculation after segregating proceeds from the illegal 
marijuana operation. 
We hold that, under the circumstances of this case, the ICA 
erred in vacating the property division and alimony awards to 
require a recalculation of these awards based on a segregation 
of proceeds from the illegal marijuana operation. We also hold 
that the family court erred, either by characterizing the entire 
$1,511,477 expended from Husband’s inheritance account as 
Marital Partnership Property or by characterizing the $2,051,293 
remaining in his inheritance account as Marital Separate Property, because the $1,511,447 expended included payment of 
inheritance taxes on Husband’s entire inheritance , and if 
inheritance taxes are paid out of Marital Partnership Property, 
the remaining inheritance cannot be classified as Marital 
Separate Property. We further hold that the family court erred 
in summarily ruling before trial that all funds expended by 
Husband from his Marital Separate Property inheritance account 
3
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constituted Category 3 Marital Partnership Property for which he 
was entitled to be repaid, without requiring Husband to fulfill 
his burden of establishing that such expenditures were in the 
nature of a contribution to or an investment in Marital 
Partnership Property, and then compounded the error by failing 
to allow and consider evidence of donative intent. We also hold 
that the family court erred in ordering an equal distribution of 
alleged partnership capital losses before deciding whether 
equitable considerations justified deviation from an equal 
distribution. Finally, we hold that the family court improperly 
applied marital partnership principles to fashion a property 
division award that was not just and equitable. We find no 
error in the award of attorney’s fees and costs. 
We therefore affirm in part the ICA’s Judgment on Appeal to 
the extent that it vacated the property division and alimony 
awards and remanded the case to the family court, but vacate the 
portion of the ICA’s Jud gment on Appeal directing the family 
court on remand to segregate the proceeds of the alleged 
marijuana operation from the property division. We remand the 
case to the family court for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
4
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
Husband and Wife were married on June 21, 1985 (“date of 
marriage”) and separated in June 2010. The couple ha s two adult 
children. 
The parties met in early 1976 in New Zealand and began 
living together there soon after that.  At the time, Wife had 
just finished her final semester at the University of Hawai ‘i at 
Hilo, while Husband worked on repairing a home and a forest 
restoration project. Approximately four or five months later, 
the parties moved to Massachusetts, where they lived and worked 
on Husband’s family’s farm and store for about three months. 
After leaving Massachusetts, the parties moved to the 
island of Hawai‘ i (“Big Island”) in November 1976, where Husband 
began working on a county road crew.  While on the Big Island, 
the parties apparently started an illegal marijuana operation.  
Wife testified that she was involved in the processing and 
transportation of the marijuana. Husband testified that the 
parties did not have a joint or mutual marijuana operation. He 
indicated it was a sideline with a few friends that continued 
until his son was born in 1987. 
At trial, the parties disputed whether marijuana proceeds 
were used to purchase real property. Wife testified that 
marijuana proceeds were used to purchase multiple properties prior to the date of marriage, as well as one additional 
5
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                         
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
property after the date of marriage, while Husband denied that 
allegation. On one of the properties, purchased in 1978 and 
titled in Husband’s name, the parties jointly constructed a two-
story house. 
In 1990, five years after the date of marriage, Husband 
obtained his real estate brokerage license. In 2003, he opened his own real estate firm. Husband testified that his income 
declined in 2006 due to a falling market and his father’s 
passing. After Wife’s 201 0 divorce filing, Husband reported his 
gross monthly income as $1,000. 
Wife performed part-time work or was a housewife not 
employed outside the home for much of the parties’ relationship. 
From approximately 1996 to 2009, Wife worked part-time at her 
children’s schools to obtain tuition assistance and health 
insurance. She also sold hand-painted clothing.  As of the date 
of final separation in contemplation of divorce (“date of final 
separation”), she was collecting unemployment benefits.  At the date of conclusion of the evidentiary portion of trial 
(“conclusion of trial”) ,
2 she earned approximately $1,500 per 
month as a nanny. 
Between 2007 and 2011, Husband inherited amounts totaling 
$3,550,770 from his parents’ estates. He deposited the monies 
2 The family court’s February 13, 2013 Order Re: Divorce Trial Held 
on December 22 and 23, 2011 specified that December 22 and 23, 2011 should be 
considered the conclusion of trial. 
6
  
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
into his separate Bank of Hawai ‘i account (“inheritance 
account”). At the conclusion of trial, the inheritance account 
had $2,051,293 remaining. 
Prior to marriage, the parties filed no joint tax returns. 
A. Family Court Proceedings 
1. Pre-Trial Proceedings 
On June 23, 2010, Wife filed a Complaint for Divorce. She 
then filed a motion for temporary relief, seeking, in part, 
temporary spousal support. In granting this request, the family 
court made the following finding: 
Husband has historically used his existing inheritance 
funds for payment of the marital expenses and Wife’s 
support. Having reviewed Wife’s Income and Expense 
statement filed, the [family court] finds that it would be 
just and equitable to order that in addition to the above support orders, Husband shall pay to Wife $2000 per month 
in temporary spousal support beginning October 1, 2010.  
Wife later moved for an advance of attorney’s fees , 
indicating a gross monthly income of $2,080.  Wife contended 
that an advance for fees was necessary because Husband had filed 
multiple pretrial motions for partial summary judgment. The 
family court granted t he request for attorney’s fees without 
prejudice to additional subsequent requests from Wife for good 
cause shown, and ordered Husband to advance $25,000 to Wife’s 
counsel. 
One of Husband ’s pretrial motions for partial summary 
judgment, entitled “Husband’s Motion for Partial Summary 
7
  
 
   
 
  
                         
  
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Judgment to Strike the Defense and/or Argument that Husband 
Wasted his Category 3 Assets by Spending Money on Items Not 
Related to the Marriage or the Children” (“Category 3 motion for 
partial summary judgment ”), asserted that Wife could not provide 
admissible evidence to establish that he “wasted” Category 3 
assets.3 In a declaration in support of the motion, Husband 
asserted: 
In response to Plaintiff’s Request for Answers to Interrogatories 
and for Production of Documents and Things, request number 9, I 
itemized all of the disbursements I made from my inheritance money with 
the exception of $88,597.80, which was disbursed for the marriage and 
children’s expenses. This amount was not itemized in Defendant’s 
response to Plaintiff’s interrogatory number 9, either because it consisted of small dollar transactions too numerous to breakdown [sic], 
e.g.[sic] $70 to KTA, etc [sic], or the credit card amounts were too 
difficult to itemize the family or children expenses [sic] without 
additional extensive effort, i.e.[sic] recreating the complete 
accounting. 
 
Although Husband’s motion summarily asserted that all sums 
expended were for mari tal and children’s expenses , his response  
to interrogatory number 9 included amounts such as $ 111,885.00 
to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Taxes and $326,540.00 to 
the United States Treasury.   In addition,  Husband’s heading for  
his interrogatory 9 itemization of alleged Category 3 disbursements included the following characterization: “Category 3 Inheritance Account.” After this heading, he 
included the inheritance tax payments.  
3 Category 3 property includes the date -of acquisition net market 
value, plus or minus, of property separately acquired by one spouse by gift 
or inheritance during the marriage but excluding the net market value 
attributable to property that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to 
the other spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party.  Tougas v Tougas , 76 
Hawai
‘i 19, 27, 868 P.2d, 437, 445 (1994) (citation omitted). 
8
   
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
                         
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Wife objected to the motion based on Husband’s failure to 
establish prima facie entitlement to a grant of the motion and 
due to the existence of genuine issues of material facts as to 
whether all sums were expended for marital purposes.   
4 The family court nevertheless granted this  motion, ruling   that 
“[Husband] spent his Category 3 assets for marital purposes[] 
[for] which he is entitled to be repaid.”  
2. Trial Order and Divorce Decree 
After trial, o
n February 13, 2013, the family court entered 
its Order Re: Divorce Trial Held on December 22 and 23, 2011.   
The family court found that the parties had formed a premarital economic partnership  in 1976 that lasted until they married in 
1985:  
9. The parties met in New Zealand in 1976. They 
began living together soon after they met. They continued 
to cohabitate uninterrupted until DOM. 
10. The parties financially supported each other 
during their cohabitation before DOM. 
11. They resided and worked together in New Zealand, 
Massachusetts, and Hawaii prior to DOM. 
12. Husband worked at various jobs while Wife 
contributed her services to their living arrangement.  Wife 
did, however, work on Husband’s parents’ farm and store in Massachusetts, which contributed to the parties’ living 
expenses and support.  
13. After moving to Hawaii and prior to DOM, Husband 
worked for the County of Hawaii.  The parties received food 
stamps and Husband received a stipend from the State of 
Hawaii. Wife was not employed, but contributed to the 
parties’ living support. 
4 The family court’s ruling appears in an order denying a different 
amended motion for partial summary judgment. 
9
  
 
  
 
 
 
 From 2007 to 2011, Husband inherited from his parents’ 
estates amounts totaling $3,550,770, and  he deposited these 
funds into his separate  inheritance account.    As of the 
conclusion of trial , $2,051,293 remained in Husband’s 
inheritance account.  The family court found that the parties 
had no written premarital or post-marital agreement ,  and  
categorized this sum as Husband’s Marital Separate Property , 
finding:  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
14. In 1977, the parties started growing marijuana 
and both worked on growing, processing, transporting the 
finished product, and selling it. 
15. In 1978, the parties jointly purchased property 
for $17,000. The parties jointly built a two -story house 
on that property. 
16. During 1977 and 1978 the parties travelled 
together to Thailand to look for orchids to establish an orchid company with other business partners. They 
purchased orchids and shipped them back to Hawaii. 
17. The parties also bought and sold other real 
property prior to DOM from the proceeds of their joint 
earnings. 
24. 
Husband expressly classified his inherited funds 
as his separate property  by depositing them into the Bank 
of Hawaii and labeled it “separate.” This account was 
created solely for the purpose of holding and maintaining 
Husband’s inheritance. No funds from any other source were 
deposited into this account and this account was maintained by itself and was funded only by interest earned.  
The family court also found that the entire $1,499,477 
withdrawn by Husband had been used “to invest in a business that 
eventually failed and has no present value, for the purchase of 
the Kala Cottage office, automobiles, and other assets, to fund 
the Vanguard account in the amount of $50,000, to pay taxes, to 
pay for the private school and post-high school education of the 
10

  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
parties’ children, and to support and maintain the family and 
the family’s lifestyle.” Consistent with its pretrial summary 
judgment ruling, the family court then  found that the entire  
amount was a Category 3 capital contribution credit.   With an 
additional $12,000 for a 2009 cash gift from Husband’s mother to 
him that had apparently been spent, the family court found that 
Husband’s Category 3 credits totaled $1,51  1,477.   
As noted earlier, the family court had 
already ruled before 
trial that Husband was entitled to be repaid all of his Category 3 expenditures as having been used for marital purposes.  After 
trial, the family court found that “[that] Wife did not meet her 
burden that Husband specifically intended these funds as a gift 
to her. 
By the conclusion of trial, the value of the parties’ 
assets was $466,522. Because of its finding of $1,511,477 in 
Category 3 expenditures by Husband, the family court found a 
marital estate valued at negative $1,044.955, for which Wife would otherwise have to repay Husband $522,478 as an 
equalization payment. For property division, Wife was awarded 
$1,396 in bank accounts, a retirement account worth $13,000, and 
a used Suzuki valued at $13,000. Wife’s equalization payment 
increased by half of those amounts, to a total of $549,873. 
In addition to retaining the $2,051,293 remaining in his 
inheritance account, for property division, Husband was awarded 
11
  
 
  
 
                         
  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
$57,835 in liquid cash accounts, a $8,645 IRA account, a $32,865 
Chevy Camaro, a $1,000 Jeep Cherokee, the marital residence with 
equity of $243,781, and his office cottage then valued at 
$95,000.  
 
With respect to the marital residence and the office 
cottage awarded to Husband, the family court found that in 2007, 
Husband had purchased it for $180,000 with inheritance funds. 
Prior to its purchase, Wife had co-signed a $250,000 equity loan 
secured by the marital residence so that Husband could purchase 
the cottage for his real estate business. The equity loan was 
supposed to be paid off from the anticipated inheritance, and 
Wife testified she would not have agreed to co-sign the home 
equity loan if she had known that Husband was not going to pay 
off the equity loan with his inheritance.  
Both parties were awarded their respective pe
rsonal and 
household property. 
Because of the significant equalization payment that would 
otherwise be owed by Wife to Husband, the family court then 
determined that sufficient “valid and relevant considerations”
Hawai‘i courts frequently refer to “valid and relevant 
considerations”, “valid and relevant circumstances”, and “equitable 
considerations” when discussing deviation from partnership principals. 
Equitable considerations permit the family court to deviate from the 
partnership model in dividing the parties ’ Marital Partnership Property upon 
divorce. Hussey v. Hussey , 77 Hawai‘ i 202, 208, 881 P.2d 1270, 1276 (App. 
1994) (“If the family court rightly decides that all valid and relevant 
considerations are not equal, the family court must assess and weigh all 
valid and relevant considerations, exercise its equitable discretion, and 
decide whether and, if so, how much to deviate from the Partnership Model.”) . 
12
 5   
5  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
existed to justify an equitable deviation from marital 
partnership principles. It ruled that giving Wife a credit  
equal to her equalization payment would be just and equitable. 
In support of this deviation, the family court considered the 
following: 
57. . . . Wife’s equalization payment to Husband is 
substantial.  
58. Husband’s marital separate property 
and Category 
1 and 3 capital contribution credits far exceed the value 
of the property that is being allocated between the 
parties. 
. . . . 
60. Wife is 57 years old and has been employed from 
time to time at little over minimum wage over the years the 
parties have been together. She needs further assistance 
to meet her needs at the lifestyle she has been accustomed 
to during the years the parties resided together. 
61. Husband is 59 years old, has worked all his 
life, has owned and operated several businesses, and has 
sufficient assets to support himself very well for a number 
of years. 
62. Husband’s employability is much better than 
Wife’s. 
63. Husband is entitled a substantial capital 
contribution credit due of his Category 1 and 3 assets.  
Wife will be left with comparably very nominal assets. 
Further, Husband has substantial marital separate property 
he inherited from his parents’ estates. 
64. The parties started their PEP in 1976 and have 
resided together for about 34 years. This is a relatively 
long relationship. 
As to spousal support, the family court made the following 
findings: 
68. The parties have lived together since 1976 and 
separated in 2010. Over these approximate 34 years, they 
have enjoyed a modest life style; raising children 
together, purchasing and selling real property, operating 
several businesses, building the marital residence, etc.  
Husband was the primary bread winner. Although Wife worked 
from time to time, she remained primarily a homemaker the 
13
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
majority of the time and generally stayed at home to raise 
the parties’ children and to support the family. 
The 
children attended private school and they are now adults.  
69. When Wife was laid off from Parker School in 
2009, she began receiving unemployment benefits. In 2011 
she found work as a nanny and makes approximately $1,600 
gross a month. 
70. Husband inherited  over 3.5 million dollars from 
his parents’ estates resulting in the parties enjoying a 
relatively higher standard of living. Wife enjoyed regular 
therapy, massages, new clothing, and elective cosmetic 
dental work. Husband enjoyed an expensive vintage car and multiple trips to Southeast Asia. They built a modest home 
together.  
71. Wife has received $2,000 per month in court -
ordered temporary spousal support. 
72. Wife is employable, albeit limited, because of 
her age. 
73. After divorce, Wife will, 
however, need 
continued support to pay for her health insurance and other 
medical expenses as well as to assist her in other daily 
and monthly expenses. 
74. Following the divorce, Wife will no longer have 
the benefit of residing at the marital residence. She will 
now need further financial assistance. 
75. Husband currently spends about $12,000 per month 
for family support. He will now live at the marital 
residence. His monthly expenses will go down. 
76. It would be just and equitable to award Wife 
continued spousal support for a period of five years 
commencing January 2012 (the month following trial), as 
follows: $2,000 per month until Wife moves out of the 
marital residence, then $3,000 per month commencing the 
first month after Wife moves out of the marital residence and through December 2017. 
Later, in response to Husband’s motion for reconsideration, 
the family court amended finding of fact   No. 76 regarding 
6 spousal support to reduce Wife’s alimo ny award by one year.  
6 In addition to reducing the length of Wife’s alimony award, 
the family court also added the following sentence: “Spousal support 
shall terminate upon Wife’s remarriage or upon the death of either 
Husband or Wife.” 
14
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
                         
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to attorney’s fees and costs, the family court concluded 
that because of Husband’s superior financial condition, it would 
be just and equitable to award Wife a portion of her attorney’s 
fees and costs up to $5,000. Wife’s counsel later submitted an 
itemized accounting of fees incurred through preparation of the closing argument and reply, reflecting fees and costs totaling 
$86,126.17.
7 On June 7, 2013, the Family Court entered its 
Divorce Decree. 
B. Appeal to the ICA 
Wife appealed and Husband cross-appealed to the ICA. The 
ICA first addressed Husband’s c ross-appeal. 
1. Husband’s Cross -Appeal 
In his appeal, Husband argued that the family court erred 
when it (1) found a premarital economic partnership existed 
based on illegal marijuana sales, (2) denied Husband Category 1 
credits for property in his name at the date of marriage, (3) 
found equitable deviation and waived the equalization payment, and (4) awarded Wife temporary spousal support and attorne y’s 
fees before trial based on his inheritance. Husband requested that the family court’s decision be vacated and remanded and 
that the attorneys’ fees and costs award be reversed. 
7 Wife’s counsel stated that this amount did not include the 
attorney’s fees incurred after the reply, which were still accumulating. 
15
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Noting that “[t]he family court considered the parties’ 
joint financial acts, cohabitation since 1976, economic and non-
economic contributions, and other financial arrangements in 
finding that the parties formed a premarital economic 
partnership in 1976,” the ICA stated that one basis for the 
premarital economic partnership finding was “the parties’ 
‘growing, processing, transporting the finished product, and 
selling’ marijuana in 1977.”  Hamilton  v. Hamilton , No. CAAP-13-
1498, at 12 (App. Aug. 29, 2014) (mem.).   The ICA ruled that the 
family court’s equitable powers to divide marital property 
pursuant to HRS § 580-47 do “not authorize [the family court] to 
provide relief to parties to an illegal agreement.” Hamilton ,  
mem. op. at 13. The ICA concluded, however, t hat “[t]he fact 
that the parties’ illegal marijuana operation provided funds for 
their premarital economic partnership was not determinative of 
whether the partnership was valid.” Hamilton , mem. op. at  15.   
Therefore, the ICA rejected Husband’s argument t hat the illegal 
marijuana business was the foundation of the premarital economic partnership on the bases that (1) “[n]o evidence presented 
reasonably supported a finding, that the purpose of the parties’ 
premarital cohabitation and financial arrangements was the 
growing and sale of marijuana[,]” and (2) evidence of the 
parties’ premarital non -marijuana operations sufficiently 
16

  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
support a finding that a premarital economic partnership existed 
as a matter of law. Id.  
Although the ICA determined that the family court’s 
premarital economic partnership fi
nding was not in error, it 
ruled that the “finding that the parties’ marijuana operation 
was part of that premarital economic partnership constitutes an 
error as a matter of law.” Id. In this regard, the ICA ruled 
that “[t]he family court should have segregated the illegal 
marijuana operation from its considerati on of the parties’ 
alleged premarital economic partnership .” Id. 
(citing 59A Am. 
Jur. 2d Partnership § 54 at 233 (separation of mixed legal and 
illegal purposes)). Therefore, the ICA concluded that the 
premarital economic partnership was “valid to the extent that it 
included legal partnership activities and its ‘legitimate objectives’ can be segregated from the illegal marijuana 
business.” Hamilton , mem. op. at 16.  Noting the parties’ 
conflicting testimony as to whether marijuana proceeds were used 
to purchase real property, the ICA explained that “[s]egregating 
the economic contribution of the marijuana operation to the 
parties’ premarital economic partnership , however, would require 
a credibility determination regarding [the parties ’] testimony 
as to whether proceeds from the marijuana operations were used 
to purchase [certain properties] and, further, ascertaining how 
the proceeds from the subsequent sales of those properties were 
17
  
 
  
  
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
allocated to marital and legitimate premarital asset s.” Id.   
The ICA vacated the family court’s Divorce Decree, in part, and 
remanded with instructions to re-assess the property division in 
consideration of a premarital economic partnership excluding the 
marijuana operation.  
Hamilton, mem. op. at 16-17. 
Next, as to equitable deviation, the ICA concluded that 
“the family court’s applicat ion of its finding that a premarital 
economic partnership existed to support deviation from the 
Partnership Model constituted reversible error to the extent the 
deviation was based on the illegal marijuana business.” 
Hamilton, mem. op. at 17. 
With respect to temporary alimony awarded to Wife during 
the pendency of the divorce, the ICA held that “[t]here was no 
abuse of discretion in the family court’s consideration of 
[Husband’s] financial resources in ordering temporary spousal 
support for [Wife].” Hamilton, mem. op. at 18. 
As to attorney’s fees, the ICA rejected Husband’s argument, 
noting a lack of authority in support  of Husband’s contention 
that the award would “invade” his inheritance, as well as the 
family court’s authority to award attorneys’ fees and costs 
during the pendency of divorce proceedings under HRS § 580-9 and 
divide property under HRS § 580-47(a).  Hamilton , mem. op. at  
18.   The ICA therefore  concluded that the family court did not 
err in “allocating responsibility for attorneys’ fees and costs 
18

  
 
  
  
 
    
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
amongst the parties upon granting the divorce.” Hamilton, mem. 
op. at 19. 
Accordingly , the ICA held that “[t] he family court 
did not abuse its discretion by awarding [Wife] $5,000 in 
attorneys’ fees and costs in its Order Re: Divorce Trial.” Id. 
The ICA also rejected Husband’s argument that the Order Re: 
Fees and Costs was void for lack of jurisdiction, explaining 
that the “Order Re: Fees and Costs confirmed the $5,000 award 
that had already been set in the [] Order Re: Divorce Trial . . 
. .” Hamilton, mem. op. at  20.  
2. Wife’s Appeal 
In her appeal, Wife argued that the family court erred when 
it (1) treated 
60% of Husband’s inheritance as M arital Separate 
Property and 40% as Category 3 assets, (2) subtracted capital 
contributions in excess of the marital assets and found that 
Wife owed Husband for half of the partnership loss, (3) awarded 
Wife virtually nothing from the marital estate, and (4) awarded 
insufficient post-divorce alimony. 
The ICA rejected Wife’s arguments regarding Husband’s 
inheritance and capital contribution credits, holding that “[t]he family court did not abuse its discretion in determining 
that [Husband] could be credited for expenditures from the 
Inheritance Account for household expenses.” 
Hamilton , mem. op.  
at 23.   Nevertheless, the ICA  declined to affirm the family 
court’s findings in support of the  property division on the 
19

  
 
  
     
 
  
  
   
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
basis that the court’s “reliance on [an erroneous premarital 
economic partnership finding] to justify equitable deviation 
constitutes reversible error.” Id.; accord id. at 24. 
Regarding post-divorce alimony, the ICA concluded that 
“[t]he family court considered all required factors and 
determined [Wife] would be able to find employment to support 
herself by the end of December 2016.” Hamilton, mem. op. at 24 
(citing HRS § 580-47(a)). Nevertheless, t he ICA “vacate[d] the 
[post-divorce] alimony award as reversible error[]” to the extent that it “may have been premised, in part, on premarital 
activities connected to the illegal marijuana operations,” and 
directed the family court on remand to “exclude from its 
determination of [Wife’s] alim ony award any consideration of 
those premarital economic activities connected to the marijuana operation.” Hamilton , mem. op. at 25. 
Accordingly, the ICA vacated Parts Four and Five of the 
Divorce Decree regarding alimony and property division, affirmed all other parts, and remanded the case for further proceedings. 
C. Applications for Writs of Certiorari 1. Husband’s Application 
In summary, Husband argues that the family court erred in 
(1) finding that a premarital economic partnership based on an 
illegal marijuana business venture existed  , where the parties 
kept their finances separate prior to marriage; (2) deviating 
20
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the Marital Partnership Model based on his inheritance; (3) 
awarding Wife temporary alimony during the divorce proceeding; 
(4) and awarding Wife attorneys’ fees and costs. 
2. Wife’s Application 
In summary, Wife  alleges that the family court erred in its 
(1) characterization of all amounts inherited by Husband as Marital Separate Property, (2) characterization of the entire 
$1,511,477 apparently  then expended by Husband from his 
inheritance as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property for which 
Husband is entitled to be repaid; (3) finding that Wife incurred 
a debt to Husband payable by an equalization payment when their 
marital partnership assets were insufficient to repay the 
alleged Category 3 expenditures; (4) application of equitable 
deviation principles in it property division award; and (5)  
failure to consider altering the amount and duration of alimony 
to compensate Wife for the one-sided property division.  Wife 
also challenges the ICA’s decision to remand the case to the family court on the “minor issue” of the illegal marijuana 
operation, without addressing Husband’s $3.5 million 
inheritance.  
We address the issues on certiorari as follows. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Family Court Decisions 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in 
making its decisions and those decisions will not be set 
21
  
 
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, 
we will not disturb the family court ’s decision on appeal 
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of 
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party 
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason. 
Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai‘ i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 
(2012) (quoting Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai ‘i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 
355, 360 (2006)).  
It is well established that a family court abuses its discretion where “(1) the family court disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment 
of a party litigant; (2) the family court failed to 
exercise its equitable discretion; or (3) the family 
court’s decision clearly  exceeds the bounds of reason.”  
Id. at 155-56, 276 P.3d at 724-25 (emphasis omitted) (quoting 
Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai‘ i 19, 26, 868 P.2d 437, 444 (1994)). 
B. Property Division 
Hawaii’s appellate courts “review the family court’s final 
division and distribution of the estate of the parties under the 
abuse of discretion standard, in view of the factors set forth 
in HRS § 580-47 and partnership principles.” Tougas, 76 Hawai ‘i 
at 26, 868 P.2d at   444 (quoting Gussin v. Gussin , 73 Haw. 470, 
486, 836 P.2d 484, 492 (1992) (footnote omitted)).   “The family 
court’s determination of whether facts present valid and 
relevant considerations authorizing a deviation from the 
partnership model division is a question of law that this court 
reviews under the right/wrong standard of appellate review. ” 
Gordon v. Gordon, 135 Hawai ‘i 340, 348, 350 P.3d 1008, 1016  
22

  
 
   
   
  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2015) (citing Jackson v. Jackson , 84 Hawai ‘i 319, 332 –33, 933 
P.2d 1353, 1366–67 (App. 1997)). 
C. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
The family court’s FOFs are reviewed on appeal under the 
“clearly erroneous” standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support 
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support 
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left 
with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made. “Substantial evidence” is credible evidence which is 
of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  
On the other hand, the family court’s COLs are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong 
standard. COLs, consequently, are [ ]not binding 
upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable  for 
their correctness.  
Kakinami , 127 Hawai ‘i at 136, 276 P.3d at 705 (quoting Fisher, 
111 Hawai‘ i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360).  
IV. Discussion 
A. Illegality 
and the Premarital Economic Partnership 
The ICA ruled that although there was substantial other 
evidence of a premarital economic partnership, the property 
division and alimony awards needed to be recalculated to exclude 
consideration of premarital economic activities connected to the 
marijuana operation. 
Husband argues that the ICA erred in concluding that (1) 
the fact that the parties’ illegal marijuana operation provided funds for their premarital economic partnership was not 
determinative of whether the partnership was valid; and (2) 
legal partnership activities existed that could be segregated 
23
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the marijuana operation.   He contends that “ even a partial 
reliance  on an illegal enterprise would be contrary to public 
policy and would require a finding that no PEP existed.” In 
addition, Husband asserts that insufficient evidence existed to 
support the premarital economic partnership insofar as “it is 
clear that both the parties did not intend to create a PE P.”  
Wife contends that the ICA did not err in affirming the 
premarital economic partne rship finding because (1) Husband’s 
“trial testimony flatly contradicts [his] position asserted on 
appeal[]” to the extent that Husband denied having a “joint or 
mutual marijuana operation” at trial and testified that 
premarital properties held in his name 
were purchased with 
“savings,” “not marijuana money[;]” (2) Husband failed to raise 
his illegality argument below; and (3) Husband “cannot use this 
couple’s marijuana business 25 years ago to eliminate the PEP, 
but also demand $125,000 in Category 1 credits for assets 
purchased in his name before DOM with [marijuana proceeds].” In addition, Wife asserts that the family court found independent 
grounds for the premarital economic partnership. 
It is true that, generally, courts will not enforce an 
illegal agreement. According to the United States Supreme 
Court, “[i]n case any action is brought in which it is necessary 
to prove the illegal contract in order to maintain the action, 
courts will not enforce it, nor will they enforce any alleged 
24
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rights directly springing from such contract.”   McMullen v. 
Hoffman, 174 U.S. 639, 654 (1899).   With respect to cases that 
involve partly illegal and partly legal partnership purposes, 
however, courts are split as to whether recovery is available to 
parties to the illegal transaction. For example, although the 
Court stated in McMullen  that “[i]t has been sometimes said that 
where a contract, although it be illegal, has been fully 
executed between the parties,  so that nothing remains thereof 
for completion, if the plaintiff can recover from the defendant 
moneys received by him without resorting to the contract the 
court will permit a recovery in such case[,]”  174 U.S. at 654-
55, it held in Bruce’s Juices v. Am erican  Can Co., 330 U.S. 743  
(1947) that “[w]here a contract is outlawed by statute or is 
otherwise contrary to public policy, the illegality may be set 
up as a defense to a suit for enforcement despite the absence of 
a legislative recognition of that defense.”   330 U.S. at 761.   
The Court has also held, however, that  where proceeds from 
an illegal operation have changed form, recovery may be possible despite the initial illegality. In Brooks v. Martin , 69 U.S. 70 
(1864), the Court held that “[a]fter a partnership contract 
confessedly against public policy has been carried out, and 
money contributed by one of the partners  has passed into other 
forms, . . . a partner, in whose hands the profits are, cannot refuse to account for and divide them on the ground of the 
25

  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
illegal character of the original contract.” 69 U.S. at 71 
(emphasis omitted). 
Hawai‘i cases hav e also addressed enforcement of illegal 
contracts.  In Beneficial Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida , 96 Hawai‘ i 289, 
30 P.3d 895 (2001),  this court stated, “t he general rule is that  
severance of an illegal provision of a contract is warranted and 
the lawful portion of the agreement is enforceable when the 
illegal provision is not central to the parties’ agreement and 
the illegal provision does not involve serious  moral turpitude, 
unless such a result is prohibited by statute.”   96 Hawai‘i at 
311, 30 P.3d at 917. In analyzing the availability of relief to  
parties to an illegal transaction in  Rego v. Bergstrom Music 
Co., 26 Haw. 407 (Terr. 1922), the territorial court initially 
explained that recovery is not available to a plaintiff who 
resorts to an illegal transaction, either in whole or in part, 
to establish a prima facie case or defense despite joint 
participation by the opposing party. 26 Haw. at 410-11 
(“Neither a plaintiff nor a defendant may found his case, either in whole or in part, upon a fraudulent transaction, although his 
antagonist may have participated therein.” (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted)). Despite holding that a party may 
not base his or her case upon an illegal transaction, however, 
Rego  further held that “a plaintiff may recover if he is able to 
make out his case without calling upon the fraud for help[; 
26

  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
however,] he must fail if such help is indispensable.” 26 Haw. 
at 411. 
In this case, 
Wife is not requesting enforcement of an 
illegal agreement. Rather, she requests a division of marital 
property and an alimony award. In a divorce case, the family 
court’s obligation is to rule in a “just and equitable” manner. 
HRS § 580-47(a).  At trial, Husband denied that proceeds from 
the marijuana operation were included in any marital property, 
denied keeping records, and denied depositing marijuana proceeds 
into bank accounts. Thus, it appears that the ICA’s mandate to 
exclude consideration of such proceeds to recalculate property 
division and alimony is impracticable.  In addition, the illegal 
enterprise is no longer in existence, and Wife is requesting a 
property division award from proceeds that have changed form, 
into real estate. 
Furthermore, as the ICA otherwise correctly concluded,  
substantial other evidence of the parties’ premarital , non -
marijuana operations sufficiently supports the finding that a  
premarital economic partnership  existed as a matter of law.  
Fisher, 111 Hawai‘ i at 46, 137 P.3 d at  360 (quoting In re Doe , 95 
Hawai‘i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001)) (“‘Substantial 
evidence’ is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.”).  
27

  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“[A] premarital economic partnership is formed when, ‘prior 
to their subsequent marriage, [two people] cohabit and apply 
their financial resources as well as their individual energies 
to and for the benefit of each other’s person, assets, and 
liabilities.’” Collins v. Wassell , 133 Hawai ‘i 34, 45, 323 P.3d 
1216, 1227 (2014) (citation omitted).  The formation of a 
premarital economic partnership depends upon the parties’ 
intentions. Id.   In determining whether the parties intended to 
form a premarital economic partnership, in the absence of an 
express agreement, “the family court must consider the totality 
of the circumstances, including both the economic and non-
economic contributions o f the parties.” 133 Hawai ‘i at 46, 323 
P.3d at 1228 (citation omitted).  “[R]elevant considerations may 
include, but are not limited to, joint acts of a financial 
nature, the duration of cohabitation, whether —  and the extent 
to which —  finances were commingled, economic and non-economic 
contributions to the household for the couple’s mutual benefit, 
and how the couple treated finances before and after marriage.” 
Id.  
First, the family court’s findings that the parties resided 
and worked together in New Zealand, Massachusetts, and Hawai ‘i 
prior to their date of marriage,   and financially supported each 
other during their cohabitation before  marriage are suppor  ted by 
the parties’ testimony. The testimony established that over the 
28

  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
course of one year, the parties met in New Zealand, flew to 
Honolulu where they stayed with Wife’s mother for one to two 
weeks, flew to Los Angeles where they purchased a van with funds 
provided by Wife’s mother, drove to Husband’s family’s farm in 
Massachusetts where they worked unpaid, and eventually moved to 
Hawai‘i where they jointly purchased property.  In addition to 
working at Husband’s family’s store, Wife also helped with the 
construction of a house purchased in 1978 and traveled to 
Thailand with Husband to research orchids for a prospective 
business. Therefore, as  the ICA stated, “[t]he family court 
considered the  parties’ joint financial acts, cohabitation since 
1976, economic and non-economic contributions, and other financial arrangements in finding that the parties formed a 
premarital economic partnership in 1976[.]” Accordingly, the 
ICA correctly concluded that substantial evidence of the 
parties’ pre-marital, non-marijuana operations sufficiently 
supported the premarital economic partnership finding. See  
Fisher 
, 111 Hawai‘ i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360.  
Thus, we hold that, under the circumstances of 
this case, 
the ICA erred in vacating the property division and alimony 
awards because the family court had not excluded possible 
proceeds from an illegal marijuana operation. Although the ICA 
erred in setting aside the family court’ s property division 
29
  
 
  
 
    
  
 In Hawai‘ i, “[t]here is . . . no fixed rule for determining 
the amount of property to be awarded each spouse in a divorce 
action other than as set forth in HRS § 580 –47.”  Gussin, 73 
Haw. at 479, 836 P.2d at 489 (citation omitted). 
Under HRS § 
8 580-47 (Supp. 2011),  the family court has wide discretion to 
divide Marital Partnership Property in a manner that is “just 
and equitable” under the facts and circumstances of each case. 
Tougas, 76 Hawai‘ i at 26, 868 P.2d 444. “In addition to HRS § 
580–47, Hawai‘ i case law has created a framework based on 
partnership principles that provides further guidance for family 
courts to use in dividing property upon divorce.” Kakinami , 127 
Hawai‘i at 137, 276 P.3d at 706.  See also  Tougas, 76 Hawai ‘i at 
28, 868 P.2d at 446 (“ The partnership model is the appropriate 
law for the family courts to apply when exercising their discretion in the adjudication of property division in divorce 
proceedings.”); Gussin , 73 Haw. at 471, 836 P.2d at 486 (“The 
partnership model of marriage provides the necessary guidance to 
                         
    
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
award based on illegality, we affirm the vacating of these 
awards for the reasons provided below. 
B. Property Division 
1. Overview of Hawaii’s Property Division Framework 
8 HRS § 580– 47(a) provides, in relevant part, that upon granting a 
divorce, the family court “may make any further orders as shall appear just 
and equitable . . . finally dividing and distributing the estate of the 
parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community, joint, or separate [.]” 
30
  
 
  Under the Marital Partnership Model, “[m]arriage is a 
partnership to which both parties bring their financial 
resources as well as their individual energies and efforts.  In 
divorce proceedings regarding division and distribution of the 
parties’ estate, partnership principles guide and limit the 
range of the family court’s choices.” Gussin, 73 Haw. at  470-
71, 836 P.2d at 485 -
86. Moreover, “the family court shall 
consider ‘the respective merits of the parties, the relative 
abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will 
be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party 
for the benefit of the children of the parties, . . . and all 
other circumstances of the case.’” HRS § 580–47(a).  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the family court in exercising its discretion and for appellate 
review.”).  
The Marital Partnership Model recognizes the following 
general classifications of property in a divorce proceeding: 
Premarital Separate Property . This was the property owned 
by each spouse immediately prior to their marriage or 
cohabitation that was concluded by their marriage. Upon 
marriage, this property became either Marital Separate 
Property or Marital Partnership Property.  
Marital Separate Property. This is the following property 
owned by one or both of the spouses at the time of the 
divorce: 
a.
 All property that was excluded from the marital 
partnership by an agreement in conformity with the 
Hawai‘i Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (HUPAA), HRS 
chapter 572D (Supp. 1992)[;]  
. . . . 
b.
 All property that was excluded from the marital 
partnership by a valid contract[;] and 
31
  
 
  
 With respect to Marital Partnership Property, this court 
has established five categories of net market values (“NMVs” ) as  
guidance in divorce cases:  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
c. All property that (1) was acquired by the spouse -
owner during the marriage by gift or inheritance, (2) 
was expressly classified by the donee/heir -spouse-
owner as his or her separate property, and (3) after acquisition, was maintained by itself and/or sources 
other than one or both of the spouses and funded by sources other than marital partnership income or 
property.  
Marital Partnership Property . All property that is not 
Marital Separate Property. 
Hussey, 77 Hawai‘ i at 206 –07, 881 P.2d at 1274 –75 (internal 
citations omitted), overruled on other grounds by  State v. 
Gonsales, 91 Hawai‘ i  446, 984 P.2d 1272 (App. 1999) . “Upon 
marriage, Premarital Separate Property becomes either Marital 
Separate Property or Marital Partnership Property.” Kakinami , 
127 Hawai‘ i at 131, 276 P.3d at 700 (citing Hussey, 77 Hawai ‘i at 
206, 881 P.2d at 1274).  
Category 1. The net market value ( NMV ), plus or minus, of 
all property separately owned by one spouse on the date of 
marriage (DOM) but excluding the NMV attributable to 
property that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to the other spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party. 
Category 2.  The increase in the NMV of all property whose 
NMV on the DOM is included in category 1 and that the owner 
separately owns continuously from the DOM to the DOCOEPOT 
[date of the conclusion of the evidentiary part of the 
trial] 
Category 3.  
The date- of-acquisition NMV, plus or minus, of 
property separately acquired by gift or inheritance during 
the marriage but excluding the NMV attributable to property 
that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to the 
other spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party. 
Category 4.  The increase in the NMV of all property whose 
NMV on the date of acquisition during the marriage is 
32
  
 
  
 
 We recently reaffirmed the manner in which the family court 
is to address the division of property, as follows:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
included in category 3 and that the owner separately owns 
continuously from the date of acquisition to the DOCOEPOT. 
Category 5.  The difference between the NMVs, plus or minus, 
of all property owned by one or both of the spouses on the 
DOCOEPOT minus the NMVs, plus or minus, includable in categories 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
Tougas, 76 Hawai‘ i at 27, 868 P.2d at 445 (citation omitted).      
The significance of these category classifications is as 
follows: 
the NMVs in Categories 1 and 3 are the parties’ “capital 
contributions,” and pursuant to general partnership law, 
they are returned to each spouse. Categories 2 and 4 are 
the “during -the marriage increase in NMVs of the Categories  
1 and 3 Properties owned at DOCOEPOT[,]” which similar to partnership profits, are generally to be shared equally. In 
sum, this court stated, “if there is no agreement between the husband and wife defining the respective property 
interests, partnership principles dictate an equal division 
of the marital estate where the only facts proved are the 
marriage itself and the existence of jointly owned 
property.”  
Kakinami , 127 Hawai ‘i at 138, 276 P.3d at 707 (internal citations 
omitted) (quoting  Tougas , 76 Hawai‘ i at 27-28, 868 P.2d at 445-
46).  
The partnership model requires the family court to 
first find all of the facts necessary for categorization of the properties and assignment of the relevant net market values. Second, the court must identify any equitable 
considerations justifying deviation from an equal 
distribution. Third, the court must “decide whether or not 
there will be a deviation,” and in its fourth step, the 
court decides the extent of any deviation.  
Gordon, 135 Hawai‘ i at 350, 350 P.3d at 1018 (internal citations 
omitted) (citing Jackson , 84 Hawai‘ i at 332, 933 P.2d at 1367).  
“Each partner’s individual contributions to the marriage, i.e., 
33

  
 
  We address the parties’ arguments in light of these guiding 
principles. 
 
  
 As stated above , “[t]he partnership model requires the 
family court to first find all of the facts necessary for 
categorization of the properties and assignment of the relevant 
net market values.” Gordon, 135 Hawai ‘i at 350, 35 0 P.3d at 1018 
(internal citations omitted).  
  
 Wife alleges that the family court erred in characterizing 
the $2,051,293 remaining in Husband’s inheritance account as 
Marital Separate Property, instead of characterizing it as 
Marital Partnership Property subject  to division in this 
divorce. In Kakinami , this court clarified the distinction 
between Marital Separate Property and “separately owned” Marital 
9 Partnership Property,  and addressed the issue of whether Marital 
        
9                   
 “Separately owned” Marital Partnership Property is Category 1 or 
3 Marital Partnership Property that may be titled in the name of one spouse.  
As Marital Partnership Property, such property is subject to division in a 
divorce proceeding. See  Myers v. Myers,  70 Haw. 143, 144, 764 P.2d 1237, 
1238 (1988) (quoting Kastely, An Essay in Family Law: Property Division, 
Alimony, Child Support, and Child Custody
, 6 U. Haw. L. Rev. 318, 393 (1984).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the values of Category 1 and Category 3, are to be repaid to the 
contributing spouse absent equitable considerations justifying a 
deviation.” 135 Hawai ‘i at 349, 350 P.3d at 1017 (footnote 
omitted). 
2. Categorization and Assignment of Values 
a. Funds Remaining in Husband’s Account 
34
  
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Separate Property can be awarded to the non-owner spouse in 
divorce. A majority of this court held that Marital Separate 
Property is a narrow category of separate property “that has 
been excluded from the marital partnership, and thus, not 
subject to division.” 127 Hawai‘ i at 142, 276 P.3d at 711.  See 
also  127 Hawai‘ i at 141 n.9, 276 P.3d at 710 n.9 ( “Marital 
Separate Property is a narrow category of ‘separate property’ 
that, in our view, provides a practical means of segregating 
certain property from the marital estate, the segregation of 
which can influence the equitable distribution of the parties’ 
other assets.”).   Although Marital Separate Property is not 
subject to division,  if marital assets are used to maintain a   
gift or inheritance, then the gift or  inheritance is subject to  
division as Marital Partnership Property:  
if a party receives a gift or inheritance during the 
marriage, but the party does not expressly classify that gift or inheritance as separate property, or uses marital 
assets or efforts to maintain that gift or inheritance, 
then the gift or inheritance would be subject to division 
as Marital Partnership Property. 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai ‘i at 141, 276 P.3d at 710.  
In this case, Husband placed his inheritance funds in a 
separate account, and labelled it as such. The family court 
ruled that the $2,051,293 remaining in Husband’s “separate” 
inheritance account was Marital Separate Property because the 
account had been created solely for the purpose of holding and 
maintaining his inheritance, no funds from any other source were 
35
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
deposited into the account, and the account was maintained by 
itself and funded only by interest earned.  If, as stated above, 
however, “marital assets” we re used to maintain the inheritance, 
then the inheritance is subject to division as Marital Partnership Property. 
At trial, Wife ’s forensic accounting expert testified 
pursuant to his report that a total of $463,455 had been paid 
for Husband’s inheritance taxes . He referenced his report, 
which included the itemized listing in Husband’s answers to 
interrogatory number 9. The inheritance taxes were included in 
the amounts that the family court had ruled, before and after 
trial, were “Category 3 assets [used] for marital purposes for 
which Husband is entitled to be repaid.” 
Thus, t
hose alleged “Category 3” disbursements included the 
$463,455 paid by Husband as inheritance taxes for his entire 
inheritance. The entire $2,051,293 remaining in that 
inheritance was nonetheless characterized by the family court as “Marital Separate Property.” Pursuant to 
Kakinami , however, if 
a party uses marital assets to maintain an inheritance, the inheritance is no longer Marital Separate Property, but becomes 
subject to division as Marital Partnership Property. Thus, if 
the $463,455 in inheritance taxes for the entire inheritance 
came out of Category 3 Marital Partnership Property for which 
Husband was entitled to be repaid, as ruled by the family court, 
36

  
 
   
  
 
 
    
 There are additional issues that must be addressed on 
remand with respect to the $1,511,447 expended from Husband’s 
account, which the family court characterized in its entirety as 
Category 3 Marital Partnership Property.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
then Marital Partnership Property was used to maintain the 
“separate” inheritance account, disqualifying the remaining 
funds from being characterized as Marital Separate Property. 
In order for the $2,051.293 remaining in Husband’s 
inheritance account to be his Marital Separate Property, as 
ruled by the family court, the $463,455 paid as inheritance 
taxes had to be excluded from Category 3 Marital Partnership 
Property. Thus, we hold that the family court erred, either by 
characterizing the entire $1,511,477 expended from Husband’s 
inheritance account as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property 
or by characterizing the $2,051,293 remaining in the account as 
Marital Separate Property. To reiterate, if inheritance taxes 
are paid out of Marital Partnership Property, the inheritance 
cannot be classified as Marital Separate Property. 
We therefore vacate the property division award.  The 
family court must, on remand, address this inconsistency in its 
decision. 
b. Funds Expended from Husband’s account 
Under the Marital Partnership Model, each partner is 
entitled to be repaid his or her contributions to partnership 
37
  
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
property, whether made by way of capital or advances.  Tougas, 
76 Hawai‘ i at 27,  868 P.2d at 445.  Under partnership principles, 
Husband has the burden of proving that he contributed property 
to the marital partnership and of establishing the property’s 
value at the time of contribution. See  Mark IV Pictures, Inc. 
v. C.I.R., 969 F.2d 669, 672 (8th Cir. 1992)    (“The [partner]  
bears the burden of proving that he contributed property to the 
partnership and of establishing the property ’s value at the time 
of contribution.”).   According to Epp v. Epp , 80 Hawai‘ i 79, 905 
P.2d 54 (App. 1995) , “[u]nder the Partnership Model, a spouse’s 
Category 1 and 3 NMVs are that spouse’s ‘partner’s 
contributions’ to the Marital Partnership Property that, 
assuming all relevant and valid considerations are equal, are 
repaid to the contributing spouse-partner   . . . .” 80 Hawai ‘i at 
82, 905 P.2d at 57.   In addition, pursuant to Wong v. Wong , 87 
Hawai‘i 475, 960  P.2d  145 (App. 1998), “a [marital] partner who 
invests  money into partnership accounts and/or real and/or 
personal property into the partnership name or the names of   the 
partners does not thereby gift the invested money and/or real 
and/or personal property to his/her partners.” 87 Hawai ‘i at 
482, 960 P.2d at 152  (emphasis added).  
Therefore, as a threshold issue
, in order to be categorized 
as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property, Marital Separate 
Property must be expended as a contribution to or an investment 
38
  
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in Marital Partnership Property. This would include 
expenditures for down payments, improvements, or toward the 
principal of loans related to Marital Partnership Property real 
estate, expenditures for Marital Partnership Property stock or 
business interests, or other advances or payments toward Marital 
Partnership real or personal property or Marital Partnership 
investments. Accordingly, expenditures for things such as a 
spouse’s or children’s educations, meals, trips, socializing, 
entertainment, requirements for daily living, etc., do not 
qualify, unless they are in the nature of a contribution to or 
investment in Marital Partnership Property. 
In this case, the family court summarily categorized all 
expenditures made by Husband from his Marital Separate Property 
account as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property for which he 
was entitled to be repaid upon divorce as a capital 
contribution. This already improperly included the $463,455 
paid as inheritance taxes, as noted in Section IV.B.2.a above.  It also appears to have included expenditures for Wife and the 
children’s trips, private school and university tuition and 
expenses, cars, extracurricular activities, restaurant meals, 
birthday and holiday presents, etc.  This does not comport with 
our case law, as explained above. If such sums are 
automatically characterized as Category 3 Marital Partnership 
Property, a wealthy spouse could summarily be entitled to 
39
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reimbursement for half of all sums arguably expended on behalf 
of the spouse or children upon divorce.  It would be highly 
unusual for a wealthy spouse to make expenditures during a 
marriage with a non-wealthy spouse for items not related to 
investment funds or assets while expecting to be repaid half of 
such expenditures upon divorce. It defies logic to allow a 
wealthy spouse to make substantial expenditures that a non-
wealthy spouse would never choose to make, has no control over, 
and probably never envisioned having to repay, and then to order 
the non-wealthy spouse to reimburse the wealthy spouse for half 
of such expenditures at the time of divorce.  Under our case 
law, expenditures made from a Marital Separate Property account 
qualify for characterization as Category 3 Marital Partnership 
Property only where they are in the nature of a contribution to 
or an investment in Marital Partnership Property. 
Even if expenditures 
pass the threshold of being able to 
qualify as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property, the family court must still address the secondary issue of whether they 
were actually contributions or investments with an expectation 
of repayment upon divorce. In this regard, Category 3 Marital 
Partnership Property includes property separately acquired by 
gift or inheritance during the marriage, but excludes the net 
market value attributable to property “
that is subsequently 
legally gifted by the owner to the other spouse, to both 
40

  
 
    
    
 
 
  
 
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
spouses, or to a third party .” Tougas, 76 Hawai ‘i at 27, 868 
P.2d at 445 (emphasis added, citation omitted). To constitute 
a gift, there must be: (1) donative intent; (2) delivery; and 
(3) acceptance. 76 Hawai ‘i at 27, 31, 868 P.2d at 445, 449. 
In this case, the family court first erroneously ruled that 
all of Husband’s expenditures from the Marital Separate Property 
account qualified as Category 3 Marital Partnership Property 
without examining the expenditures to ascertain whether they 
were in the nature of contributions to or investments in Marital 
Partnership Property. The family court then also erred by 
ruling, before hearing evidence on donative intent, that Husband 
was entitled to be repaid the entire $1,511,447 expended from 
his inheritance account. Even though Wife briefly attempted to 
testify at trial that Husband had not expected to be paid back 
any of this money, the family court had already ruled before 
trial that none of these amounts were gifts, effectively 
precluding evidence and argument on either issue. 
Thus, we hold that, under the circumstances of this case, 
the family court erred in ruling before trial that all funds 
expended by Husband from his Marital Separate Property 
constituted Category 3 Marital Partnership Property for which he 
was entitled to be repaid. Upon remand, the family court must 
also address the two issues discussed in this section. 
41
  
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Equitable Deviation 
The family court  followed an erroneous approach to  
equitable deviation. As stated above, the partnership model 
requires the family court to “identify any equitable 
considerations justifying devia tion from an equal distribution”  
of the marital estate before  deciding “whether or not there will 
be a deviation[.]” Gordon, 135 Hawai‘ i at 350, 350 P.3d at 1018 
(internal citations omitted).   If the family court decides 
equitable considerations justify deviation from an equal 
distribution, then it must  “decide[] the extent of any 
deviation.” Id.  
In this case, the family court 
first ordered an equal 
distribution of alleged partnership losses, to the extent it 
ruled that Husband was entitled to an equalization payment from 
Wife of $549,873, before deciding whether equitable 
considerations justified deviation from such an equal distribution. 
Whether equitable considerations exist to justify deviation 
must be determined, however,  at the time the family court 
decides whether to credit one partner for all of his  or her 
capital contributions, whether and how to distribute marital 
assets, and whether to award alimony. See Gordon , 135 Hawai ‘i at 
349, 350 P.3d at 1017  (“Each partner’s individual contributions 
to the marriage, i.e., the values of Category 1 and Category 3, 
42

  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
are to be repaid to the contributing spouse absent equitable 
considerations justifying a deviation.”). In determining 
whether the circumstances justify deviation from the partnership 
model, the family court must consider the following: the 
respective merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the 
parties, the condition in which each party will be left by the 
divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit 
of the children of the parties, and all other circumstances of 
the case.  135 Hawai ‘i at 350, 350 P.3d at 1018.  See also   
Tougas, 76 Hawai‘ i at 32, 868 P.2d at 450 (“The court may, 
nevertheless, alter alimony, child support and . . . the 
ultimate distribution of the marital estate based on the 
respective separate conditions of the spouses.”).    
In this case, the family court should have considered 
whether equitable considerations justifying deviation from an equal distribution  of Marital Partnership Property existed 
before ordering a 100% credit of Husband ’s alleged Category 3 
contributions. In this regard, Husband ’s arguments based on 
Wong, 87 Hawai‘ i  475, 960 P.2d 145, are unpersuasive.   In that 
case, the family court  did not award the husband the full value  
of his capital contribution. In Wong, a husband and wife 
jointly purchased two parcels of real property with $400,000 for 
down payments received from the husband’s parents. Upon 
divorce, the family court ruled that the $400,000 was the 
43

  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
husband’s Category 3 property. 87 Hawai ‘i at 480, 960 P.2d at 
150. The family court recognized that “[i]f [the husband] were 
to be returned his capital contribution, not only would [the 
husband] be awarded all of the parties’ assets but [the wife] 
would also need to reimburse [the husband] about $109,000, 
because [] the current net market   value of the marital estate” 
had declined. Id.    
This statement does not 
require the family court’s 
deduction of capital contributions in excess of the marital estate, as Husband asserts. In ultimately dividing the marital 
estate, the family court in Wong 
awarded the husband three out 
of four jointly owned properties, one of which had a negative 
net market value.  The value of real property awarded to each 
spouse totaled $96,454 to the husband and $81,000 to the wife.  
See id.  In affirming the property division on appeal, the ICA 
noted that the husband left the marriage with less than his 
capital contribution, while the wife left with “much more” than 
her negative capital contribution. Id.  Thus, contrary to 
Husband’s assertion, 
Wong does not stand for the proposition 
that a complete return of capital contributions is always 
required. Rather, pursuant to the principles above, the family 
court must first decide whether equitable considerations justify 
deviation from such an equal distribution of marital assets. 
44
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Husband argues that the ICA erred in affirming the family 
court’s deviation from the Marital Partnership Model based on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Following the proper process could have significantly 
different results for property division. For example, in this 
case, the family court could have found equitable considerations 
justifying departure from an equal distribution of partnership 
property based on the fact that Wife had virtually no assets and 
would be left without a home in which to reside if an equal 
distribution was made, before ordering a 100% credit of 
Husband’s alleged Category 3 contributions. The family court 
could then have decided the extent of the deviation with a view 
toward reaching a just and equitable result, as more fully 
discussed in Section IV.B.5 below. Instead, the family court 
ordered an equal distribution of the alleged partnership losses. 
Therefore, we also hold that the family court erred in 
ordering an equal distribution of alleged partnership losses 
before deciding whether equitable considerations justified 
deviation from an equal distribution. On remand, the family 
court must first address whether any equitable considerations justifying deviation from an equal distribution exist, then 
address whether or not there will be a deviation, then decide 
the extent of any deviation. 
4.	 Consideration of Husband’s Inheritance to Deviate 
from the Marital Partnership Model 
45
  
 
   
 
 
 
 Although we have already set aside the family court’s 
property division, we address these arguments to provide 
guidance on remand.  In Kakinami , we affirmed the ICA’s ruling 
that “the mere existence of [] an inheritance does not, without more, mandate  deviation from the Marital Partnership Model.” 
127 Hawai‘ i at 143, 276 P.3d at 712 (internal quotation marks and 
brackets omitted) (quoting Kakinami v. Kakinami , No. 29340 (App. 
May 11, 2011) (SDO)). This court also stated, however, that 
“although Marital Separate Property cannot be awarded to the 
non-owner spouse [in divorce], it can influence  the division of 
Marital Partnership Property.” 127 Ha wai‘i at 142, 276 P.3d at 
711 (emphasis added). See also Hussey  , 77 Hawai‘ i at 207, 881 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
his Marital Separate Property inheritance. He requests a 
determination that the family cour t’s reliance on his 
inheritance to justify a deviation was erroneous, or 
alternatively, that the property division be vacated and 
remanded with instructions to modify the equalization payment to 
eliminate any consideration of his inheritance. 
In response, Wife argues that Husband unfairly received 
both 100% of his remaining Marital Separate Property inheritance and 100% of the Marital Partnership Property. She contends that 
she would have received at least 50% of the approximately 
$450,000 marital assets if they had filed for divorce before 
Husband received the inheritance. 
46
  
 
 Gordon, 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.2d at 1275 (“Although Marital Separate Property cannot be used 
by the family court to offset . . . the award of Marital 
Partnership Property to the other spouse, it can be used by the 
family court to alter the ultimate distribution of Marital 
Partnership Property based on the respective separate conditions 
of the spouses.” (internal citations, quotation marks, ellipses, 
and brackets omitted)), overruled on other grounds by  Gonsales, 
91 Hawai‘ i 446, 9 84 P.2d 1272.  
Moreover, in determining whether equitable considerations 
justify a deviation from the partnership model, the family court must consider the following: “ the respective merits of the 
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in 
which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens 
imposed upon either party for the benefit of the children of the 
parties, and all other circumstances of  the case.” 135 
Hawai‘i at 352-53 , 350 P.3d at 1020-21 (citing HRS § 580-47(a)).  
“The family court’s determination of whether facts present valid 
and relevant considerations authorizing a deviation from the 
partnership model division is a question of law that this court 
reviews under the right/wrong standard of appellate review.” 
Gordon, 135 Hawai‘ i at 348, 350 P.3d at 1016 (citing Jackson, 84 
Hawai‘i at 332–33, 933 P.2d at 1366 –67).  
Here, the family court’s findings in support of deviation 
refe
rence Wife’s “substantial” equalization payment to Husband, 
47
  
 
  
 
 Under HRS § 580-47, the family court has wide discretion to 
divide Marital Partnership Property in a manner that is “just 
and equitable” under the facts and circumstances of each case. 
“In addition to HRS § 580–47, Hawai‘ i case law has created a 
framework based on partnership principles that provides further 
guidance for family courts to use in dividing property upon 
divorce.” Kakinami , 127 Hawai‘ i at 137, 276 P.3d at 706 ; Gussin, 
73 Haw. at 471, 836 P.2d at 486 (“The partnership model of 
marriage provides the necessary guidance to the family court in 
exercising its discretion and for appellate review.”).  
 Under the Marital Partnership Model, “[m]arriage is a 
partnership to which both parties bring their financial resources as well as their individual energies and efforts. In 
divorce proceedings regarding division and distribution of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Husband’s “substantial” Marital Separate Property and capital 
contribution credits in excess of the marital estate, and the 
parties’ thirty-four year  economic partnership, ages, and 
employability.  Thus, the deviation was not based on the mere 
existence of Husband’s inheritance. 127 Hawai ‘i at 143, 276 P.3d 
at 712. Therefore, the family court did not err in considering 
the existence of Husband’s Marital Separate Property inheritance 
to deviate from partnership principles.  
5.	 A Property Division Award Must Be Just and 
Equitable 
48
  
 
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
parties’ estate, partnership principles guide and limit the 
range of the family court’s choices.”  Gussin, 73 Haw. at 470-
71, 836 P.2d at 485-86. However, “the family court shall 
consider ‘the respective merits of the parties, the relative 
abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will 
be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party 
for the benefit of the children of the parties, . . . and all 
other circumstances of the case.’” HRS § 580–47(a).   
Importantly, the family court is empowered to make orders that 
are “just and equitable .” Id.  (emphasis added).  
W
ith respect to Wife’s assertion that the family court 
erred in failing to divide and distribute Husband’s inheritance 
in a just and equitable manner, she cites to Carson v. Carson, 
50 Haw. 182, 436 P.2d 7 (1967), and Cassiday  v. Cassiday, 68 
Haw. 383, 716 P.2d 1133 (1986), in support of her contention 
that the family court can award separate property to the non-
owning spouse. The separate property at issue in both cases was actually Marital Partnership Property, not Marital Separate 
Property that is now clearly governed by 
Kakinami
. If on 
remand, the family court determines that Husband’s remaining 
inheritance is actually Marital Partnership Property, then the 
inheritance will be subject to division.  If not, pursuant to 
Kakinami , it will not. 
49

  
 
  In Cassiday , this court recognized that other unique 
factors beyond those set out in HRS § 580-47 may come into play, 
such as “the length of the marriage, the separate financial 
contribution of each party to the upkeep of those assets, and the involvement, direct or indirect, in the management and 
maintenance of them.” 68 Haw. at 389, 716 P.2d at 1137. In 
reversing the property division award, this court stated that 
the family court had failed to consider “the extent to which the 
marriage in and of itself  affected the accumulation or *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Other principles in  Carson  and Cassiday , however, remain 
instructive. In Carson , this court held that the family court 
must fully and properly consider all of the factors enumerated 
in Revised Laws of Hawai ‘i (RLH) § 324-37 (1955), the precursor 
to HRS § 580-47, including the respective merits of the parties, 
the ability of the husband, the condition in which the parties 
will be left by the divorce, and all other circumstances of the 
case, and further, that “[u]ndue emphasis on a particular 
factor, [such as the source of the asset,] excluding the 
consideration of other factors, constitutes an abuse of 
discretion.” 50 Haw. at 182, 436 P.2d at 8; accord  50 Haw. at 
183, 436 P.2d at 9. This court clarified that “all other 
circumstances of the case” encompass “all other matters which 
would have a bearing on the division and distribution of 
property.” 50 Haw. at 187, 436 P.2d at 11.  
50

  
 
  
 Cases such as Carson  and Cassiday  demonstrate the manner in 
which the family court, in its application of the partnership 
model, can unduly emphasize money or property brought into a 
marriage over other non-economic considerations, such as the 
contribution of services during the marriage, the value of which 
is not as readily quantifiable. These cases demonstrate how one 
spouse’s non-economic contributions to the marriage can affect 
the accumulation or preservation of the other spouse’s separate 
holdings, whether Marital Separate Property or Marital 
Partnership Property, and that the family court must take those 
factors into consideration in fashioning a just and equitable 
distribution of Marital Partnership Property under the 
circumstances of the case. “[M]arriag e is a partnership to 
which both partners bring their financial resources as well as 
their individual energies and efforts.” Collins, 133 Hawai ‘i at 
43, 323 P.3d at 1225 (quotation marks and citations omitted). 
“That one partner brings to the marriage su bstantially greater 
assets than the other does not make this any less the case.” 
Cassiday, 68 Haw. at 387, 716 P.2d at 1136.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
preservation of [the husband’s] separate property.” 68 Haw. at 
387, 716 P.2d at 1137. 
In this case, the family court’s property division award, 
awarded Wife, who has few employment prospects  after a thirty-
four year partnership,   $1,396 in bank accounts, a retirement 
51
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
account worth $13,000, and a used Suzuki valued at $13,000, 
while awarding Husband, who had $2,051,293 in his bank account, 
the marital residence with equity of $243,781, an office cottage 
valued at $95,000, a $32,875 Camaro, a $1,000 Jeep, $57,835 in 
liquid cash accounts, and an IRA account valued at $8,645.  This 
simply does not meet a “just and equitable” standard. For thi s 
reason, also, the property division award would have been set 
aside for abuse of discretion, even if we had not already 
ordered it set aside for the reasons above. 
C. Temporary Spousal Support 1. During the Pendency of Divorce Proceedings 
Turning to other issues on certiorari, Husband argues that 
the ICA erred in affirming the family court’s award of temporary 
support to Wife during the pendency of the divorce proceedings 
because Wife was “effectively awarded [Husband’s] inheritance” 
despite its subsequent classification as Marital Separate 
Property.  He further argues that the ICA and family court 
failed to consider that Wife’s gross monthly income was greater. 
In response, Wife contends that Husband’s argument lacks merit 
because he was ultimately credited with these payments when the 
family court treated his spent inheritance funds as his Category   
3 property and deducted  it from the marital estate.   
The family court is authorized to order temporary support 
under HRS § 580-9 (2006), which provides, in relevant part: 
52
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After the filing of a complaint for divorce or separation 
the court may make such orders relative to the personal 
liberty and support of either spouse pending the complaint 
as the court may deem fair and reasonable and may enforce 
the orders by summary process. 
“An award for temporary support is a sum necessary for the 
maintenance of a party pending litigation.” Farias v. Farias, 
58 Haw. 227, 233, 566 P.2d 1104, 1109 (1977). “ If one party has 
insufficient income but the other party has sufficient income f
or both, then neither’s capital should be impaired [while the 
action is pending] absent special circumstances.” Horst v. 
Horst, 1 Haw. App. 617, 622, 623 P.2d 1265, 1269 (1981). See 
also Richards v. Richards , 44 Haw. 491, 497, 355 P.2d at 193 
(1960) (affirming an award of temporary alimony where wife had 
insufficient income to maintain her standard of living without 
impairing the capital of her separate estate). As the ICA 
stated, “‘financial resources of the husband’ are given ‘due 
consideration’ in awarding the spouse temporary support.”  
Hamilton
, mem. op. at 18 (quoting Richards , 44 Haw. at 497, 355 
P.2d at 193, superseded on other grounds in Epp, 80 Hawai‘ i at 
91, 905 P.2d at 66). Moreover, Marital Separate Property may 
factor into the family co urt’s decision to “alter alimony . . . 
based on the respective separate conditions of the spouses.” 
Tougas, 76 Hawai‘ i at 32, 868 P.2d at 450, overruled on other 
grounds by Gonsales  
, 91 Hawai‘ i 446, 984 P.2d 1272. 
53

  
 
  In this case, neither spouse had sufficient income to  
maintain each’s  respective standard  of living.   Wife received 
approximately $1,380 per month as a nanny.  Comparatively, 
Husband reported a lower gross monthly income of $1,000; 
however, Husband held significantly greater assets.  Therefore, 
the temporary spousal support award appears to have been  “fair 
and reasonable”  in light of Husband’s significant financial 
resources, which were sufficient to cover expenses for both  
himself and Wife during the divorce.   Moreover, the family 
court’s  finding in support of the pre-divorce temporary spousal 
support award refers to  Wife’s Income & Expense statement and 
the parties’ previous use of Husband’s inheritance funds  for 
marital expenses.   Thus, the family court properly considered 
the parties’ respective incomes  and Husband’s large assets as 
compared to Wife’s in requiring Husband to pay temporary alimony 
for the purpose of Wife’s maintenance pending litigation . See  
HRS § 580-9.  Accordingly, the ICA did not err in ruling that  
“[t]here was no abuse of discretion in the family court’s 
consideration of [Husband’s] financial resources in ordering 
temporary spousal support for [Wife].” Hamilton,  mem. op. at  
18.  
   
 The family court ordered Husband to pay spousal support of 
$2,000 per month until Wife moved out of the marital residence *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. Failure to Award Permanent Spousal Support 
54
  
  We have vacated the family court’s property division award. 
As the need for spousal support will be related to the property 
division, we hereby also vacate the spousal support award. See  
Gordon, 135 Hawai‘ i at 355, 350 P. 3d at  1023.  On remand, the 
family court is to decide spousal support in light of the 
following considerations.  
 HRS § 580-47(a) requires the family court to consider the 
following criteria when making further orders for the support 
and maintenance of either spouse:   “the respective merits of the 
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in 
which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens 
imposed upon either party for the benefit of the children of the 
parties, . . . and all other circumstances of the case.” The 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
then $3,000 per month thereafter until December 2016. Wife 
argues that the family court erred in failing to consider  
altering the amount or duration of post-divorce temporary 
spousal support to compensate her for the “grossly unequal 
property division caused by [ Husband’s] inheritance.”   Comparing 
the award of spousal support during the divorce proceedings to the post-divorce award,  Wife contends that an increase of $1000 
per month was “obviously inadequate” to cover her expenses where 
pre-divorce spousal support also included housing and medical expenses. 
55
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
family court must also consider all of the following factors in 
ordering spousal support and maintenance: 
(1) Financial resources of the parties; 
(2) Ability of the party seeking support and maintenance 
to meet his or her needs independently; 
(3) Duration of the marriage; 
(4) Standard of living established during the marriage; 
(5) Age of the parties; 
(6) Physical and emotional condition of the parties; 
(7) Usual occupation of the parties during the marriage; 
(8) Vocational skills and employability of the party 
seeking support and maintenance; (9) Needs of the parties; 
(10)  Custodial and child support responsibilities; 
(11) Ability of the party from whom support and 
maintenance is sought to meet his or her own needs while 
meeting the needs of the party seeking support and maintenance; 
(12) Other factors which measure the financial condition 
in which the parties will be left as the result of the 
action under which the determination of maintenance is made; and 
(13) Probable duration of the need of the party seeking 
support and maintenance. 
HRS § 580-47(a).   See  Cassiday, 6 Haw. App. at 215  , 716 P.2d at 
1151 
(“When deciding in a divorce case whether one party must 
pay periodic support to the other, for how long, and how much, 
the family court must consider all of the factors enumerated in 
HRS § 580–47(a)[.]”) , aff’d in part , rev’d in part , 68 Haw. 383, 
716 P.2d 1133 (1986).  
56
  
 
   
 
  
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Attorneys’ Fees 
Over the course of the entire divorce proceeding, Wife 
received from Husband $60,450 out of $86,126.17  in attorney’s 
fees and costs. Wife’s counsel declared that the amount 
requested did not include attorney’s fees incurred after 
preparation of the closing argument and reply, which were still 
accumulating.  
Husband argues that the attorneys’ fees and costs award to 
Wife constituted an abuse of discretion because he had insufficient income and the award “invaded” his inheritance, 
which he contends should have been “taken out of the equation” 
as Marital Separate Property . Wife contends that Husband’s 
argument lacks merit because he was ultimately credited with 
these payments when the family court treated his spent 
inheritance as a Category 3 asset and deducted it from the 
marital estate. 
This court has explained that “an award of attorney’s fees 
is in the sound discretion of the trial court, limited only by the standard that it be fair and reasonable.” Farias, 58 Haw. 
at 233, 566 P.2d at 1109 (citing Carson , 50 Haw. at 188, 436 
P.2d at 11; Richards , 44 Haw. at 496, 355 P.2d at 192).  With 
respect to attorney’s fees and costs advanced to Wife during the pendency of the divorce, HRS § 580-9 (2006) provides, in 
relevant part: 
57
  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The court may also compel either spouse to advance 
reasonable amounts for the compensation of witnesses and 
other expenses of the trial, including attorney’s fees, to 
be incurred by the other spouse and may from time to time amend and revise the orders. 
We have further stated: 
In determining the fair and reasonable amount of attorney’s 
fees, the trial court should consider the financial ability of the parties and the amount necessary for the efficient 
prosecution or defense of the action. The latter depends 
on the character of the litigation, services to be 
performed, and all other circumstances which may tend to lessen or increase the probable expenses of the litigation. 
58 Haw. at 233, 566 P.2d at 1109 (citations omitted). 
In this case, the family court’s award of attorney’s fees 
and costs appears to be fair and reasonable under the 
circumstances. Wife’s trial expenses were increased by 
Husband’s filing of five motions for partial summary judgment, which required extensive expert review of voluminous financial 
documents; a motion for reconsideration of an order granting and  
denying in part a motion to compel; and a motion in limine.   
Considering the parties’  financial abilities, discussed above,  
the family court did not abuse its discretion in requiring 
Husband to advance amounts totaling $55,450 for trial expenses.  
Regarding attorney’s fees awarded after divorce, HRS § 580-
47(f) provides, in relevant part:  
(f)   Attorney’s fees and costs.   The court hearing 
any motion for orders either revising an order for the 
custody, support, maintenance, and education of the 
children of the parties, or an order for the support and 
maintenance of one party by the other, or  a motion for an 
order to enforce any such order or any order made under 
subsection (a) of this section, may make such orders 
requiring either party to pay or contribute to the payment 
of the attorney’s fees, costs, and expenses of the other 
58
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
party relating to such motion and hearing as shall appear 
just and equitable after consideration of the respective 
merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the 
parties, the economic condition of each party at the time 
of the hearing, the burdens imposed upon either party for 
the benefit of the children of the parties, the concealment of or failure to disclose income or an asset, or violation 
of a restraining order issued under section 580 -10(a) or 
(b), if any, by either party, and all other circumstances of the case. 
Here, the family court concluded that Husband’s “superior 
financial condition” justified requiring him to pay Wife’s 
attorney’s fees. This finding is supported by the parties’ 
Asset and Debt statements, which show Husband as having significantly greater assets than Wife.  As stated 
supra, 
Husband’s individually held assets totaled more than $2 million, while Wife’s individually held assets totaled approximately 
$19,000. Therefore, the evidence shows  the family court 
properly considered the factors in HRS § 580  -47(f), in 
particular the parties’ relative abilities and post -divorce 
economic conditions . Given the family court’ s broad discretion, 
its award of attorney’s fees to Wife did not amount to an abuse 
of discretion. Accordingly, the ICA did not err in affirming 
the attorney’s fees and costs award to Wife.  
V. 
Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and vacate in 
part the ICA’s September 25, 2014 Judgment on Appeal, filed pursuant to its August 29, 2014 Memorandum Opinion, which 
affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded the family 
59
  
 
  
 
 
 
Rebecca A. Copeland     
for petitioner/cross-appellant   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court’s June 7, 2013 Divorce Decree. We remand this case to the 
family court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Peter Van Name Esser and    
Michael S. Zola  
for petitioner/cross-appellee   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
60
 