                                                                 
                                                                 ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000784 09-OCT-2018 08:03 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
BRIAN E. BENNETT and DEBRA S. BENNETT,
Respondents/Plaintiffs-Appellees-Cross-Appellants,
vs.
 
SAMUEL JONG HOON CHUNG and LINDA HYUNKONG CHUNG,
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellants-Cross-Appellees.
 

 
SCWC-16-0000784
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-16-0000784; CIVIL NO. 11-1-0882)
 
OCTOBER 9, 2018
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
After an arbitrator issues an arbitration award,
 
parties to the arbitration proceeding may file motions to confirm
 
or to vacate the award in court. 
Generally, a party must file a
 
motion to vacate an arbitration award within ninety days after it
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
receives notice of the award. Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 
658A-23 (Supp. 2001). On the other hand, a party may file a 
motion to confirm the award at any time after receiving notice of the award. HRS § 658A-22 (Supp. 2001). This case presents two related questions involving these provisions: first, whether the time to file a motion to vacate an arbitration award is limited by the opposing party’s filing of a motion to confirm; and second, how an order denying a motion to vacate an arbitration award can be properly appealed. 
In this case, Respondents/Plaintiffs-Appellees-Cross-
Appellants Brian E. Bennett and Debra S. Bennett (collectively,
 “the Bennetts”), after receiving notice of an arbitrator’s award
 in their favor, filed a motion to confirm the award in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). Before the
 ninety-day period in which Petitioners/Defendants-Appellants­Cross-Appellees Samuel Jong Hoon Chung and Linda Hyunkong Chung
 (collectively, “the Chungs”) could file a motion to vacate the
 award had expired, the circuit court granted the Bennetts’ motion
 to confirm. The Chungs then filed a motion to vacate the award
 within the ninety-day period. The circuit court denied their
 motion to vacate, and the Chungs appealed the judgment of
 confirmation and the order denying the motion to vacate. The
 Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) dismissed the Chungs’ appeal
 
2
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
after they failed to file a jurisdictional statement and opening
 
brief. 
Back in the circuit court, the Chungs filed a motion to
 
amend the previous order denying their motion to vacate because
 they believed that the arbitration statute barred such orders
 from being appealed. The circuit court agreed, and amended its
 order to “again confirm” the award to allow the Chungs to appeal. 
However, the ICA dismissed the Chungs’ subsequent appeal for lack
 of appellate jurisdiction. On certiorari, the Chungs argue that
 the ICA erred in dismissing their appeal.
 
We agree. As a preliminary matter, the Chungs could
 
not have appealed from the circuit court’s first order denying
 their motion to vacate the award because HRS Chapter 658A does
 not permit appeals from such orders. Therefore, the circuit
 court properly amended its order and judgment and reconfirmed the
 award to allow the Chungs to appeal. Second, because HRS § 658A­23 clearly provides that the Chungs had ninety days, not less, to
 file a motion to vacate, and they filed a motion to vacate within
 that period, the Chungs had a right to timely appeal from the
 circuit court’s amended order and amended judgment.
 
We conclude that the ICA has appellate jurisdiction to
 
adjudicate the Chungs’ appeal. Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s
 August 8, 2017 Order Dismissing Appeal for Lack of Appellate
 
3
           
     
     
        
       
           
          
         
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Jurisdiction and remand the case to the ICA to resolve the
 
Chungs’ appeal on the merits.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The Chungs and the Bennetts were involved in a dispute
 
arising out of the sale of real property, and decided to resolve
 the dispute through arbitration. On February 11, 2015, an
 arbitrator issued a final award that awarded the Bennetts money
 damages and attorneys’ fees and costs. On February 12, 2015, the
 Chungs were notified of the arbitrator’s award by email. 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings - Motion to Confirm
 
On February 17, 2015, five days after the Chungs were
 
notified of the arbitrator’s award, the Bennetts filed a motion
 
1
in the circuit court  to confirm the arbitrator’s award (Motion
to Confirm) pursuant to HRS § 658A-22.2
 
On March 2, 2015, the Chungs filed a memorandum in
 
opposition to the Motion to Confirm. In their memorandum, the
 Chungs informed the circuit court that they “intend[ed] to file a
 motion to vacate under Section 658A-23 of the Hawaii Revised
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 
2
 HRS § 658A-22 (Supp. 2001) provides:
 
Confirmation of award . After a party to an
arbitration proceeding receives notice of an award, the
party may make a motion to the court for an order confirming
the award at which time the court shall issue a confirming
order unless the award is modified or corrected pursuant to
section 658A-20 or 658A-24 or is vacated pursuant to section
658A-23.
 
4
           
        
          
        
        
         
         
         
        
        
         
          
          
        
   
          
          
    
 3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3
Statutes,[ ] thus making the [Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm]
premature.” They further explained that under HRS § 658A-23(b),
 they “[had] a statutory right to file a motion to vacate by May
 13, 2015.” The Chungs therefore requested “that the Court defer
 any decision on the [Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm] until it can
 decide a motion to vacate on the merits.” The Chungs did not
 argue any issue on the merits or provide any substantive reason
 to deny the Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm at that time.
 
A hearing was held on the Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm
 
on March 10, 2015, approximately one month after the Chungs
 received notice of the arbitration award. At that time, the
 Chungs had not yet filed a motion to vacate the award. At the
 hearing, the issue of whether the circuit court was required to
 
HRS § 658A-23 (Supp. 2001) provides in relevant part:
 
Vacating award . (a) Upon motion to the court by a
party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate
an award made in the arbitration proceeding if: [reasons].
(b) A motion under this section shall be filed within
ninety days after the movant receives notice of an award
pursuant to section 658A-19 or within ninety days after the
movant receives notice of a modified or corrected award
 pursuant to section 658A-20, unless the movant alleges that
the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or other undue
means, in which case the motion shall be made within ninety
days after the ground is known or by the exercise of
reasonable care would have been known by the movant.
 
. . . .
 
(d) If the court denies a motion to vacate an award,
it shall confirm the award unless a motion to modify or
correct the award is pending.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
           
  
        
         
          
        
         
       
         
             
            
          
        
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
wait to confirm the arbitration award until the Chungs filed a
 
motion to vacate the award was discussed. First, the Chungs
 contended that confirming the award without waiting the requisite
 ninety days prejudiced them:
 
[THE  CHUNGS’  COUNSEL:]  I  mean,  we  have  90  days.   And
 
what  has  happened  here  and  I  guess  what  you  could  do,
according  to  the  [Bennetts],  if  the  award  comes  out,  you
just  move  to  confirm  the  next  day.   And  it  forces  a  party  on
the  other  side  like  myself  and  the  Chungs  to,  like,  move
fast  on  this.  .  .  .  I  mean,  I  have  the  pieces,  but  I  would
like  to  put  together  a  good  motion  to  vacate  and,  I  mean,  I
can’t  do  that  to  beat  this  motion,  and  I  don’t  think  the  way
the  statute  is  written  it’s  intended  to  do  that.   And  I
 
think  what  the  Court  should  do  is  just  delay  this  decision
on  this  motion  until  the  motion  to  vacate  is  filed.  .  .  .
 
THE  COURT:  Okay.   But  they  did  move  fast  .  .  .  to
confirm,  but  the  award  is  issued  February  11th,  right?
 
Motions  [sic]  filed  six  days  late,  February  17th.   The
 
hearing  is  today,  so  you  had  about  30  days  to  file.
[THE  CHUNGS’  COUNSEL:]  Yes.   Yes.   And  I  have  sixty
 
more  days  to  file.   It  is  not  my  intent,  Your  Honor,  to
delay  until  the  90  day.  .  .  .  I  mean,  conversely,  if  the
Court  says,  “I  confirm  now,”  then  the  statutory  right  to
move  to  vacate  is  meaningless.   And  all  I’m  asking  for,  Your
Honor,  is  time  within  that  statutory  period  to  get  the
motion  filed  there  and  heard,  and  then  the  Court  can  decide.
 
The Bennetts argued that any court order confirming the
 
award at that time would not hamper the rights of the Chungs to
 file a motion to vacate in the future:
 
[A]s I read the law, the rights of the defendant or
respondent in this matter are not abridged by the Court
granting the motion to affirm. If [the Chungs bring] a
motion which identifies a valid basis, legal and factual,
upon which the Court concludes that vacating the award is
appropriate under the circumstances, the Court will vacate
and that will terminate and seize whatever benefits we have.
 . . . But I’m entitled to by –- we’re –- for 658-22 says,
 “shall” not “may.” This is one of those kinds of rules are
 black and white [sic]. And so I’m entitled to the
 affirmation of the award today without prejudice to whatever
[the Chungs’ counsel] thinks he has or doesn’t have.
 
In response, the Chungs’ counsel argued that in the interest of
 
6
           
           
           
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
judicial economy, it would be better for the circuit court to
 
wait to rule on the Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm until the Chungs
 filed their motion to vacate, even if no motion to vacate was
 currently pending. Specifically, the Chungs’ counsel voiced his
 concern that an order granting the Bennett’s Motion to Confirm
 would trigger appellate deadlines that would differ from the
 deadlines triggered by a subsequent order on the Chungs’ motion
 to vacate.
 
While acknowledging the Chungs’ argument regarding
 
judicial economy, the circuit court nevertheless concluded:
 
[T]he court is guided by 658-22. And, to me, it’s very
 
clear that it requires me [sic]. It says, “shall issue a
 confirming order unless the award is modified or corrected
pursuant to those sections or is vacated pursuant to Section
658A-23.[”]
The  award  was  issued  February  11th.   The  motion  was
 
filed  February  17th.   The  hearing  is  set  today.   [The
 
Chungs]  had  about  30  days  to  file.   If  a  motion  to  vacate
 
had  been  filed  and  was  currently  pending  before  the  Court,
then  I  –- it  would  be  very  clear  to  me  that  I  would  look,
also,  to  658A-23.   And  at  that  point  the  concerns  of
judicial  economy  would,  to  me,  seem  to  dictate  that  there
just  be  one  hearing  on  both  motions.  But  at  this  point  the
motion  to  vacate  is  being  discussed  just  purely  in
hypothetical  terms  and  it  has  not  been  filed  yet,  although
[the  Chungs]  have  represented  that  they  are  going  to  file
 
one.
 
Given  my  reading  of  658-22,  the  Court’s  –- my  decision
is  going  to  be  to  grant  the  confirmation  of  the  award.   I
 
think  I’m  constrained  by  this  particular  section  which  I
agree  with  the  movants  is  very  clear  that  I  shall  issue  the
confirming  order.   So  for  those  reasons  and  other  reasons
 
indicated  in  the  moving  papers,  the  Court  is  going  to  grant
the  motion.
 
On April 6, 2015, the circuit court entered a written
 
order granting the Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm (Order Granting
 
Motion to Confirm), and a final judgment (Judgment of
 
7
           
           
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Confirmation) in favor of the Bennetts. The Chungs did not
 
appeal the Order Granting Motion to Confirm or the Judgment of
 Confirmation.
 
B.	 Circuit Court Proceedings and First Appeal - Motion to
Vacate
 
On May 13, 2015, the Chungs filed, within the statutory
 
ninety-day window provided by HRS § 658A-23(b), a motion to
 
vacate the arbitration award (Motion to Vacate).
4 Therein, the
 
Chungs’ alleged evident partiality by the arbitrator. The
 Bennetts filed a memorandum in opposition to the Chungs’ Motion
 to Vacate and challenged the Chungs’ claims regarding the
 arbitrator’s evident partiality.
 
The circuit court held a hearing on the Chungs’ Motion
 
to Vacate on June 26, 2015. At the hearing, the parties disputed
 whether the arbitrator demonstrated evident partiality. At the
 conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court orally denied the
 Chungs’ Motion to Vacate. Specifically, the circuit court stated
 that it was not persuaded that the arbitrator demonstrated
 evident partiality and case law was “very clear that the Court’s
 role is not to second-guess the arbitrator’s award.” 
On July 22, 2015, the circuit court entered a written
 
order denying the Motion to Vacate (Order Denying Motion to
 
The ninety-day window closed on May 13, 2015, ninety days after the
 
Chungs received notice of the arbitrator’s final award.
 
8
 4           
 
     
        
       
       
      
       
       
 
      
           
         5 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Vacate).
 
The Chungs filed a notice of appeal from the April 6,
 
2015 Judgment of Confirmation and the July 22, 2015 Order Denying
 
Motion to Vacate. The Chungs subsequently did not file a
 jurisdictional statement or opening brief. However, on 
November 2, 2015, in response to the Bennetts’ motion to dismiss,
 the Chungs filed a memorandum noting that “there may be a
 jurisdictional issue.” Specifically, the Chungs stated that “an
 appeal does not lie from an order denying a motion to vacate an
 arbitration award,” and cited HRS § 658A-28 (Supp. 2001).
5
 
Therefore, the Chungs concluded that the way to properly appeal
 the circuit court’s Order Denying Motion to Vacate was “to have
 the trial court enter an amended judgment, such that an appeal
 can be taken which would be sanctioned by the statute[.]”
 
On December 23, 2015, the ICA dismissed the Chungs’ 
appeal pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
HRS § 658A-28 (Supp. 2001) provides:
 
Appeals. (a) An appeal may be taken from:
 
(1)	 An order denying a motion to compel arbitration;
 
(2)	 An order granting a motion to stay arbitration;
 
(3)	 An order confirming or denying confirmation of
an award;
 
(4)	 An order modifying or correcting an award;
 
(5)	 An order vacating an award without directing a
rehearing; or
 
(6)	 A final judgment entered pursuant to this
chapter.
 
(b) An appeal under this section shall be taken as
from an order or a judgment in a civil action.
 
9
           
       
         
       
           
          
         
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6
Rule 30  because the Chungs did not timely file a jurisdictional
statement or opening brief, and did not otherwise respond to the
 
subsequent notice of default. 
C. Circuit Court Proceedings of the Instant Appeal
 
On August 15, 2016, eight months after the ICA
 
dismissed the Chungs’ first appeal, the Chungs filed a motion to
 
enter an amended judgment in the circuit court “in order to
 appeal the denial of their motion to vacate arbitration award”
 (Motion to Amend). In their Motion to Amend, the Chungs stated
 that they believed they could not have appealed the circuit
 court’s Order Denying Motion to Vacate, because denials of
 motions to vacate are not appealable orders under HRS § 658A-28. 
Therefore, they requested that an amended judgment be entered so
 that a proper appeal could be taken. 
On September 22, 2016, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on the Chungs’ Motion to Amend. At the hearing, the Bennetts
 conceded that the Chungs’ Motion to Vacate was timely. However,
 the Bennetts appeared to argue that because the circuit court
 granted their Motion to Confirm, it also ruled on any motion to
 
HRAP Rule 30 (2015) provides in relevant part:
 
When the brief for appellant is not filed within the
time required, the appellate clerk shall forthwith give
notice to the parties that the matter will be called to the
attention of the appellate court on a day certain for such
action as the appellate court deems proper and that the
appeal may be dismissed.
 
10
 6           
     
    
            
           
         
           
            
          
           
        
           
          
            
         
            
           
             
           
               
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
vacate at that time:7
 
[THE  BENNETTS’  COUNSEL:]  But  the  idea  that  there’s  a
second  different,  dispositive,  segregable  set  of  facts  and
law  that  would  entitle  [the  Chungs]  to  separate  and
different  legal  rights  is  simply  incorrect.   The  fact  that
 
[the  Chungs’  counsel]  has  –- that  he  has  to  file  –- if  we
 
had  filed  nothing  and  he  filed  his  motion  in  90  days  and
then  there  was  a  motion  to  confirm  afterwards,  it  would  have
been  fine.   But  the  courts  would  have  considered  the  motion
 
to  confirm  and  reserved  the  motion  to  vacate,  considered
exactly  the  same  set  of  facts  and  law,  and  if  it  didn’t,
it’s  because  [the  Chungs’  counsel]  didn’t  bring  that
information  to  the  court’s  attention  when  the  motion  to
 
confirm  was  argued  and  briefed.  .  .  .
THE  COURT:  He  had  90  days  to  file  his  motion  to
vacate.
 
[THE  BENNETTS’  COUNSEL:]  Which  he  did.
THE  COURT:  Y eah.
 
[T
HE  BENNETTS’  COUNSEL:]  But  I’ve  never  said  his
motion  to  vacate  was  untimely.   I’m  saying  that  the  motion
to  vacate  is  the  other  side  of  the  motion  to  confirm,  the
two  are  identical  sets  of  facts  and  law.
 
The Chungs’ counsel disputed that the facts and law on
 
which a party might rely in a motion to confirm were the same as
 
the facts and law in a motion to vacate:
 
So when [the Bennetts’ counsel] said this is the different
side of the same coin, it is not the different side of the
same coin. They’re two different things. Because I can put
together a petition to confirm an arbitration award in half
an hour. I cannot put together a motion to vacate that
 fast. And that’s why I asked for the abeyance, to hold it
in abeyance, to give me what the legislature gave me, which
was the 90 days, in order to prepare and present the motion
to vacate, which is different, qualitatively different. And
 if the legislature said, oh, you know what, if a petition to
confirm comes a couple days after the award is issued, well,
you’re out of luck then. We don’t –- this 90-day thing is
 just out the window. Legislature’s not saying that.
They’re saying, here is the time you got to test the award.
And no one’s saying I didn’t do that right. I did.
 
This position appears to be contrary to the one the Bennetts held in the
 
previous hearing on the Motion to Confirm, where the Bennetts’ counsel stated
 that “the rights of [the Chungs] . . . are not abridged by the Court granting
the motion to affirm.”
 
11
 7           
         
         
      
           
        
           
          
            
       
          
       
     
         
          
          
           
          
         
           
          
        
           
            
        
    
         
          
        
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Chungs further argued that this court’s decision in Salud v.
 
Financial Security Insurance Co., 69 Haw. 427, 430, 745 P.2d 290,
 293 (1987), provided the means in which a party could appeal an
 order denying a motion to vacate an arbitration award. 
On October 25, 2016, the circuit court filed an Amended
 
Order Denying Defendants’ Motion to Vacate Arbitration Award
 (Amended Order). In amending its previous Order Denying Motion
 to Vacate, the circuit court explained:
 
5. The nonappealability of an order denying a motion
to vacate is consistent with case law. In [ Salud],the
Hawaii Supreme Court interpreted the predecessor Chapter
658, which also did not provide for a direct appeal of an
order denying a motion to vacate an arbitration award.
 
6. The Salud Court, however, noted that the lack of a
statutory right to appeal a denial of a motion to vacate,
did not mean that such orders could never be reviewed. . . .
 
7. Salud’s holding that “a confirmation should
 
follow” a court’s denial of a motion to vacate award, is
consistent with the current pertinent provision contained in
HRS § 658A-23(d).
 
8. HRS § 658-23, entitled “Vacating award,” governs a
 
motion to vacate an award. Subsection (d) states “[i]f the
court denies a motion to vacate an award, it shall confirm
the award unless a motion to modify or correct the award is
pending.” This means that a court must confirm an award
 
following a denial of a motion to vacate an award .
 
9. In this case, this court did not confirm the award
after denying the motion to vacate, as required by HRS §
658A-23(d).
 
10. Because the award had already been confirmed
prior to the filing of the motion to vacate award, it did
not occur to the court, nor to any of the parties, that the
award should be confirmed again, to strictly follow the
dictates of HRS § 658A-23(d).
 
11. This court’s failure to confirm the award after
 
the denial of the motion to vacate as HRS § 658A-23(d)
requires, however, has rendered the order denying the motion
to vacate herein, unappealable under HRS § 658A-28.
 
12
           
         
       
          
         
         
        
      
 
       
          
        
    
         
        
   
        
        
         
          
     
      
       
      
 
            
          
          
          
            
             
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12. This court agrees with [the Chungs], that under
the unique procedural circumstances of this case, [theChungs] should be afforded relief in the form of an amendedjudgment upon which [the Chungs] can exercise their right toappeal. The court concludes such relief is warranted under [Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure] HRCP Rule 60(a), (b)(1),
8
and  (b)(6),[ ] HRS § 658A-23(d), and Salud, supra.
13. An Awarded [sic] Order and Judgment confirming
the award, and denying the motion to vacate should have been
entered following the court’s denial of the motion to
vacate, under HRS § 658A-23(d).
 
(Emphases in original.) 
Accordingly, the Amended Order stated:
 
For the reasons set forth supra and the reasons set
forth in [the Chungs’] submissions, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED,
ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that:
The Order [Denying Motion to Vacate] is amended to
also order that the arbitration award is again confirmed
after the denial of the motion to vacate the arbitration
 award. Thus, the last sentence of the Order [Denying Motion
to Vacate] is amended as follows:
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED
that the motion is hereby DENIED, and the
arbitration award, dated February 11, 2015, is
again CONFIRMED.
 
An amended judgment was also entered on October 25, 2016 (Amended
 
Judgment). 
The Chungs, believing that they finally had an
 
appealable order, timely filed a notice of appeal on November 4,
 2016 from the circuit court’s Amended Order and Amended Judgment. 
The Bennetts filed a notice of cross-appeal. 
HRCP Rule 60(b) (2006) allows courts to “relieve a party or a party’s
 
legal representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding” for reasons
 
such as: “(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect;” or “(6)
 any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment.”
“The motion shall be made within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1),
(2), and (3) not more than one year after the judgment, order, or proceeding
was entered or taken.” HRCP Rule 60(b).
 
13
 8           
            
          
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. ICA Proceedings
 
The Chungs raised one point of error on appeal: whether
 
the trial court erred in denying their Motion to Vacate because
 
of the evident partiality of the arbitrator. On April 10, 2017,
 the Bennetts filed an answering brief responding to the merits of
 the Chungs’ opening brief.
9
 
On August 8, 2017, the ICA dismissed the Chungs’ appeal
 
for lack of appellate jurisdiction for two reasons. First, the
 ICA held that the Chungs failed to “timely” file a motion to
 vacate the award (and/or failed to timely appeal the circuit
 court’s original Order Granting Motion to Confirm). Second, the
 ICA determined that the Chungs defaulted on their first appeal
 when they did not file a jurisdictional statement or opening
 brief, and the circuit court’s Amended Judgment did not cure the
 default. 
With respect to the timeliness of the Motion to Vacate,
 
the ICA held that while HRS § 658A-23(b) provides that a motion
 to vacate an arbitration award shall be filed within ninety days,
 “[t]he Chungs were not entitled to assume that they had the full
 ninety day period to file their Motion to Vacate.” For support,
 the ICA cited a Texas Court of Appeals case, Hamm v. Millennium
 
On March 1, 2017, the Bennetts also filed an opening brief in their
 
cross-appeal, alleging that the trial court erred in entering its Amended
Order and Amended Judgment.
 
14
 9           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Income Fund, L.L.C., 178 S.W.3d 256, 264-65 (Tex. App. 2005),
 
which construed a similarly worded statutory provision and held
 that the ninety-day period was the maximum, and not the absolute,
 period upon which a losing party may rely to vacate an
 arbitration award. Therefore, the ICA concluded that “[w]hen the
 Bennetts filed their Motion to Confirm within a week of the
 arbitrator’s issuance of the Final Award, it was incumbent on the
 Chungs to oppose the Motion to Confirm and/or to file their
 Motion to Vacate.” Additionally, the ICA stated that the Chungs
 could have appealed the circuit court’s April 6, 2015 Order
 Granting Motion to Confirm or the April 6, 2015 Judgment of
 Confirmation, but did not do so. 
With respect to the Chungs’ ability to appeal the
 
Amended Judgment, the ICA held that even if it were to consider
 the Chungs’ Motion to Vacate as a post-judgment motion under HRCP
 Rule 60(b), the Chungs defaulted on their first appeal from the
 Order Denying Motion to Vacate because they failed to file a
 jurisdictional statement and an opening brief. 
Under these circumstances, the ICA concluded that the
 
Chungs “were not entitled to the entry of an Amended Judgment.” 
It noted that the Amended Judgment itself “did not change the
 substance of the Circuit Court’s April 6, [2015], Judgment [of
 Confirmation] or its Order Denying Motion to Vacate but was
 
15
           
          
          
         
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
entered for the sole purpose of giving the Chungs another chance 
to appeal the Circuit Court’s prior decisions.” The ICA stated that a trial court could not restart the time period to appeal by filing an amended judgment that did not “amend a prior judgment in a material and substantial respect.” (Citing Korsak v. Hawaii Permanente Med. Grp., 94 Hawai' i 297, 304, 12 P.3d 1238, 1245 
(2000).) Therefore, the ICA concluded that “the Amended Judgment did not restart the time period for appeal,” making the Chungs’ appeal and the Bennetts’ cross-appeal untimely. Accordingly, the ICA dismissed the appeal and cross-appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
On October 9, 2017, the Chungs filed an application for
 
writ of certiorari.
10
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Jurisdiction
 
We are empowered “[t]o hear and determine all questions
 
of law, or of mixed law and fact, which are properly before [us]
 on any appeal allowed by law from any other court or agency.” 
Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw. 648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986)
 (alterations in original) (emphasis omitted) (citing HRS § 602­
The Bennetts did not file an application for writ of certiorari
 
challenging the ICA’s decision to dismiss their cross-appeal for lack of
appellate jurisdiction. Therefore, the arguments raised in their cross-appeal
 are not at issue here.
 
16
 10           
        
         
          
         
         
   
        
        
       
          
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
5(1) (Supp. 1984)).
 
Moreover, it is axiomatic that we are under an
obligation to ensure that we have jurisdiction to hear and
determine each case and to dismiss an appeal on our own
motion where we conclude we lack jurisdiction. When we
 perceive a jurisdictional defect in an appeal, we must, sua
sponte, dismiss that appeal.
 
Id. (citations and quotations omitted).
 
B. Statutory Interpretation
 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” Gray v. Admin. Dir. of the Court, 84 
Hawai'i 138, 144, 931 P.2d 580, 586 (1997) (citing State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 10, 928 P.2d 843, 852 (1996)). Furthermore, 
this court’s statutory construction is guided by established 
rules: 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is obtained primarily from the language
contained in the statute itself. And we must read statutory
language in the context of the entire statute and construe
it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
Id. at 148, 931 P.2d at 590 (citations and quotations omitted) 
(quoting State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 8, 18-19, 904 P.2d 893, 
903-04 (1995)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The Chungs present one question on certiorari:
 
“[w]hether the ICA erred by ruling that the ninety day period in
 which to move to vacate an arbitration award, as provided by [HRS
 § 658A-23(b)], does not provide for ninety days to move to vacate
 
17
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the award.” The Chungs argue that the plain language of HRS §
 
658A-23(b) gives them a full ninety days, not less, to file a
 motion to vacate an arbitration award. The Bennetts counter that
 because the Chungs failed to file a jurisdictional statement and
 opening brief in their appeal of the circuit court’s Order
 Denying Motion to Vacate, they “destroyed their appellate
 jurisdiction.” 
Neither party appears to directly address the argument
 
raised by the other. But their arguments, and the ICA’s
 reasoning in dismissing the Chungs’ appeal, suggest that there
 are two issues that must be resolved in determining whether the
 ICA has appellate jurisdiction to decide this case. The first
 issue is whether an order denying a party’s motion to vacate an
 arbitration award is, by itself, an appealable order. The second
 is whether HRS § 658A-23(b) provides a moving party an entire
 ninety days to file a motion to vacate an arbitration award.
 
A.	 An order denying a motion to vacate an arbitration award is
not a final appealable order.
 
In their response to the Chungs’ application for writ
 
of certiorari, the Bennetts argue that court rules governing the
 
time to properly bring appeals bar the Chungs from appealing from
 the circuit court’s Amended Judgment. The Bennetts note that the
 Chungs filed an appeal from the Order Denying Motion to Vacate,
 
18
           
           
        
         
         
            
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
but failed to file a jurisdictional statement and opening brief,
 
which led the ICA to dismiss their first appeal. The Bennetts
 argue that the Chungs’ purpose for pursuing an amended judgment
 was “to escape from their own mistakes, and not to correct any
 mistakes that may have been made by the Circuit Court.” 
Regarding amended judgments, this court has stated:
 
The general rule is that where a judgment is amended in a
material and substantial respect, the time within which an
appeal from such determination may be taken begins to run
from the date of the amendment, although where the amendment
relates only to the correction of a clerical . . . error, it
does not affect the time allowed for appeal.
 
Korsak, 94 Hawai' i at 304, 12 P.3d at 1245 (ellipsis in original) 
(quoting Interstate Printing Co. v. Dep’t of Revenue, 459 N.W.2d 
519, 523 (Neb. 1990)). Moreover, “[i]f the amendment for the purpose of correcting a ‘clerical error’ either materially alters rights or obligations determined by the prior judgment [or decree] or creates a right of appeal where one did not exist before, the time for appeal shall be measured from the entry of the amended judgment.” Id. (alterations in original) (emphasis 
added). 
Here, the Bennetts argue that the circuit court’s
 
Amended Judgment did not change the previous judgment in any
 material or substantial respect. Rather, they argue that the
 Amended Judgment “incorporated the Judgment [of Confirmation] ‘in
 
19
           
          
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
its entirety . . . by reference.’”11 Therefore, the Bennetts 
contend that under Korsak, the Amended Judgment did not 
“substantially and materially alte[r] the original Judgment” and does not trigger a new time period for appeal. (Citing 94 Hawai'i at 304, 12 P.3d at 1245.) 
We disagree. The Amended Order amended the circuit 
court’s previous Order Denying Motion to Vacate in a “material and substantial respect.” See Korsak, 94 Hawai' i at 304, 12 P.3d 
at 1245. This is so because the Chungs could not have appealed an order denying their Motion to Vacate, and the circuit court’s subsequent order that “again confirmed” the award created a right of appeal where one did not exist before. Id. 
We have previously concluded that an order denying a
 
motion to vacate an arbitration award is not appealable. See
 
Salud, 69 Haw. at 430, 745 P.2d at 292-93. In Salud, this court
 examined the appeal provision in the predecessor arbitration
 statute to HRS Chapter 658A, which read, “an appeal may be taken
 from an order vacating an award, or from a judgment entered upon
 an award, as from an order or judgment in an action, otherwise no
 appeal may be had.” HRS § 658-15 (1972) (emphasis added). We
 concluded that HRS § 658-15 “proclaim[ed] . . . in unmistakable
 
This is incorrect. The Amended Judgment incorporated the October 25,
 
2016 Amended Order by reference, not the April 6, 2015 Judgment of
Confirmation.
 
20
 11           
          
        
         
        
         
         
    
       
        
        
       
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
terms” that an order denying a motion to vacate was not
 
appealable. Salud, 69 Haw. at 430, 745 P.2d at 292-93.
 
But this court then described how a denial of a motion
 
to vacate could properly be appealed:
 
Still, this does not mean that the denial of a motion
to vacate an award by the circuit court necessarily
forecloses an appeal sanctioned by HRS § 658-15. The
 unsuccessful movant’s recourse would then be a motion to
 confirm the award. Since the circuit court has already
reviewed the award and decided no grounds exist for vacating
it, a confirmation should follow.
 
Id. at 430, 745 P.2d at 293 (emphasis in original). In other
 
words, we instructed that a denial of a motion to vacate an
 arbitration award should be followed by an order confirming an
 award, which was appealable. See HRS § 658-15 (1972).
 
While the Salud court interpreted a predecessor to the
 
current arbitration statute, that instruction nevertheless
 applies here, because HRS Chapter 658A similarly bars an appeal
 from an order denying a motion to vacate. HRS § 658A-25(a)
 (Supp. 2001) provides, “[u]pon granting an order confirming,
 vacating without directing a hearing, modifying, or correcting an
 award, the court shall enter a judgment in conformity therewith.” 
Furthermore, HRS § 658A-28(a) lists the orders in which appeals
 may be taken:
 
(1)	 An order denying a motion to compel arbitration;
 
(2)	 An order granting a motion to stay arbitration;
 
(3)	 An order confirming or denying confirmation of an
award;
 
(4)	 An order modifying or correcting an award;
 
(5)	 An order vacating an award without directing a
 
21
           
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rehearing; or
 
(6) A  final  judgment  entered  pursuant  to  this  chapter.
 
HRS § 658A-28(a). An order denying a motion to vacate an award
 
is not identified in HRS §§ 658A-25(a) or 658A-28(a) as an
 appealable order.
 
This indicates that just as the now-repealed HRS § 658­
15 (1972) barred appeals from a denial of a motion to vacate, so
 does our current HRS Chapter 658A. Accord Salud, 69 Haw. at 430,
 
745 P.2d at 292-93. Accordingly, the Chungs could not have
 appealed from the circuit court’s Order Denying Motion to Vacate. 
But Salud presents the unsuccessful movant with a
 
solution. We stated in Salud that after denying a motion to
 vacate, the court should then confirm the award in order to allow
 the losing party to appeal. 69 Haw. at 430, 745 P.2d at 293. 
This instruction is codified today in HRS § 658A-23(d) (Supp.
 2001), which states, “[i]f the court denies a motion to vacate an
 award, it shall confirm the award unless a motion to modify or
 correct the award is pending.”
 
While the circuit court admitted that it did not follow
 
Salud in the first instance when it failed to confirm the award
 after denying the Chungs’ Motion to Vacate, it subsequently
 reconfirmed the award, which rendered the Amended Order
 appealable. See HRS § 658A-28(a) (“An appeal may be taken from:
 
. . . (3) An order confirming or denying confirmation of an
 
22
           
 
         
         
         
        
        
          
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
award[.]”). Because the circuit court’s Amended Order “create[d] 
a right of appeal where one did not exist before,” the Order Denying Motion to Vacate was “amended in a material and substantial respect.” See Korsak, 94 Hawai' i at 304, 12 P.3d at 
1245. Accordingly, “the time within which an appeal from such determination may be taken begins to run from the date of the amendment.” Id. 
Here, the date of the amendment was October 25, 2016. 
The Chungs’ notice of appeal, filed on November 4, 2016, was
 therefore timely filed pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(1). Therefore,
 the ICA erred in dismissing the Chungs’ appeal on the basis that
 the Order Denying Motion to Vacate was not amended in a material
 and substantial respect.
 
B.	 HRS § 658A-23(b) gives the Chungs an entire ninety days to
file a motion to vacate an arbitration award.
 
HRS § 658A-23(b) provides that a motion to vacate an
 
arbitration award
 
shall be filed within ninety days after the movant receives
notice of the award pursuant to section 658A-19 or within
ninety days after the movant receives notice of a modified
or corrected award pursuant to section 658A-20, unless the
movant alleges that the award was procured by corruption,
fraud, or other undue means, in which case the motion shall
be made within ninety days after the ground is known or by
the exercise of reasonable care would have been known by the
movant.
 
HRS § 658A-23(b) (Supp. 2001) (emphasis added). The Chungs
 
contend that HRS § 658A-23(b) is clear and unambiguous, and that
 
23
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“[it] means what it says; that is, a losing party has ninety days
 
in which in [sic] move to vacate the arbitration award.” The
 Chungs further argue that the ICA erred when it stated that
 “[t]he Chungs were not entitled to assume that they had the full
 ninety day period to file their Motion to Vacate.” 
We agree. The plain language of HRS § 658A-23
 
indicates that the Chungs had ninety days to file a motion to
 vacate the arbitration award, not less. Therefore, the ICA erred
 in dismissing their appeal on this basis as well.
 
The language of HRS § 658A-23(b) is clear –- a movant
 
has ninety days after receiving notice of a final arbitration
 award to file a motion to vacate that award. Here, the Chungs
 received notice by email of the arbitration award in favor of the
 Bennetts on February 12, 2015. It is undisputed that the Chungs
 filed their Motion to Vacate on May 13, 2015, within the ninety-
day period required by HRS § 658A-23. 
However, the ICA relied on a Texas Court of Appeals
 
decision, Hamm, 178 S.W.3d 256, to conclude that “[w]hen the
 Bennetts filed their Motion to Confirm within a week of the
 arbitrator’s issuance of the Final Award, it was incumbent on the
 Chungs to oppose the Motion to Confirm and/or to file their
 Motion to Vacate.” We believe the ICA’s reliance on Hamm is
 misplaced.
 
24
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The issue in Hamm, like the issue here, involved
 
whether a losing party could file a motion to vacate an
 
arbitration award after the trial court ruled on the motion to
 confirm. 178 S.W.3d at 258. The Hamm court concluded that the
 losing party could not. Id. at 272. The vacate provision of the
 
Texas Arbitration Act (TAA) read, “[a] party must make an
 application under this section not later than the 90th day after
 the date of delivery of a copy of the award to the applicant.” 
Id. at 262 (emphases omitted) (citing Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code
 Ann. § 171.088 (West 2005)). In evaluating Section 171.088, the
 Hamm court concluded that the ninety-day period to move to vacate
 an award “represents the maximum, not an absolute period upon
 which the challenging party may always rely.” Id. at 264.
 
Specifically, the Hamm court stated that “if a party
 
moves to confirm the arbitration award, then the party opposing
 the award may not ‘idly stand by, allow the award to be confirmed
 and judgment thereon entered, and then move to vacate the award
 just as though no judgment existed.’” Id. at 265 (citing The
 
Hartbridge, 57 F.2d 672, 673 (2d. Cir. 1932)). Therefore, the
 Hamm court held that a trial court need not wait the requisite
 ninety days before confirming the award, and that “the trial
 court had no discretion but to confirm the arbitration award if
 the [losing party] did not file a motion to vacate or to modify .
 
25
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . the award before the ruling on [the] motion to confirm.” Id.
 
at 272. 
But in coming to this conclusion, the Hamm court also
 
noted that “[t]he scant case law on the issue conflicts,” and
 
made clear that “the only Texas authority on this issue
 necessitates today’s holding.” Id. at 264 (citing City of
 
Baytown v. C.L. Winter, Inc., 886 S.W.2d 515, 521 (Tex. App.
 1994). Moreover, the TAA was not modeled on the Uniform
 Arbitration Act (UAA). Compare Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code Ann.
 
§ 171.088 (West 2005) with Unif. Arbitration Act § 23(b) (Unif.
 Law Comm’n 2000).
 
This makes the Texas Court of Appeals’ reasoning in 
Hamm inapposite to the reasoning we must employ in this case, because the Legislature made clear when it amended our arbitration act in 2001 that it wished to “standardize Hawaii’s arbitration laws . . . by replacing the current statutory chapter on arbitration and awards with the Uniform Arbitration Act.” See 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 115, in 2001 Senate Journal, at 905. Indeed, we previously recognized that “[t]he legislative history reflects that the legislature globally adopted the UAA ‘to standardize Hawaii’s arbitration laws with those used in other states . . . .’” Daiichi Hawai' i Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 
103 Hawai' i 325, 327 n.1, 82 P.3d 411, 413 n.1 (2003) (citing 
26
           
          
 
          
         
         
         
         
         
           
          
   
  
          
 
        
            
          
         
         
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 115, in 2001 Senate Journal, at 905),
 
superseded on other grounds by statute, HRS § 658A-12, as
 recognized in Nordic PCL Const., Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawai' i 
29, 44-45, 358 P.3d 1, 16-17 (2015). Accordingly, HRS § 658A­23(b) (vacating award provision) mirrors UAA Section 23(b), and
HRS § 658A-22 (confirming award provision) mirrors UAA Section
  
22.
12
 
Because the Legislature intended to adopt the UAA
 
wholesale, the comments to UAA Section 22 are particularly
 instructive, because they discuss the situation at issue here,
 i.e., what happens when a motion to confirm an arbitration award
 
12
 Uniform Arbitration Act § 23(b) (Unif. Law Comm’n 2000) provides in
 
relevant part:
 
A [motion] under this section must be filed within 90 days
after the [movant] receives notice of the award pursuant to
Section 19 or within 90 days after the [movant] receives
notice of a modified or corrected award pursuant to Section
20, unless the [movant] alleges that the award was procured
by corruption, fraud, or other undue means, in which case
the [motion] must be made within 90 days after the ground is
known or by the exercise of reasonable care would have been
known by the [movant].
 
(Alterations in original.)
 
Uniform Arbitration Act § 22 (Unif. Law Comm’n 2000) provides in
relevant part:
 
After a party to an arbitration proceeding receives notice
of an award, the party may make a [motion] to the court for
an order confirming the award at which time the court shall
issue a confirming order unless the award is modified or
corrected pursuant to Section 20 or 24 or is vacated
pursuant to Section 23.
 
(Alteration in original.)
 
27
           
          
           
           
          
        
         
           
       
          
         
          
             
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is filed before a motion to vacate the award. Comment 1 to UAA
 
Section 22 states:
 
Although a losing party to an arbitration has 90 days after
the arbitrator gives notice of the award to file a motion to
vacate under Section 23(b) or to file a motion to modify or
correct under Section 24(a), a court need not wait 90 days
before taking jurisdiction if the winning party files a
motion to confirm under Section 22 . Otherwise the losing
party would have this period of 90 days in which possibly to
dissipate or otherwise dispose of assets necessary to
satisfy an arbitration award. If the winning party files a
motion to confirm prior to 90 days after the arbitrator
gives notice of the award, the losing party can either (1)
file a motion to vacate or modify at that time or (2) file a
motion to vacate or modify within the 90-day statutory
period.
 
Unif. Arbitration Act § 22 cmt. 1 (Unif. Law Comm’n 2000)
 
(emphases added). The comment addresses two issues. First, the
 comment permits courts to “take jurisdiction” of the award when a
 party files a motion to confirm, even if the requisite ninety
 days in which a motion to vacate can be filed has not yet
 elapsed. Id. However, the comment also ensures that losing
 
parties have a full ninety days to file a motion to vacate. Id. 
This indicates that a losing party may file a motion to vacate
 after a motion to confirm is filed, as long as the ninety-day
 period has not elapsed.
 
A case from the Nevada Supreme Court illustrates this
 
principle. Casey v. Wells Fargo Bank, 290 P.3d 265 (Nev. 2012). 
In Casey, the Nevada Supreme Court examined a similar factual
 situation to the one presented here and held that the district
 court erred in not allowing the losing party a full ninety days
 
28
           
          
         
        
         
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to file a motion to vacate an arbitration award. 290 P.3d at
 
268. There, Casey, the losing party, received notice of an
 arbitrator’s award to Wells Fargo on November 4, 2010. Id. at
 
267. Wells Fargo then filed a motion to confirm the award on
 
December 22, 2010, well within the ninety-day period in which
 Casey could file a motion to vacate. Id. “Within hours, the
 
district court granted Wells Fargo’s motion.” Id. at 266.
 
In evaluating whether Casey could file a motion to
 
vacate the award, the Nevada Supreme Court noted that Nevada’s
 Arbitration Act was “almost identical” to the UAA, and therefore
 determined that “comment 1 to section 22 is useful in
 interpreting our statute.” Id. at 268. After examining the
 
comment, the court then explained:
 
The error in this case thus was not in the district
 
court accepting jurisdiction over the motion to confirm. It
 
was in summarily adjudicating the motion to confirm, without
giving Casey the opportunity to file an opposition to the
motion or to file a motion to vacate, modify, or correct,
while she was still within the 90-day period to so move.
 
Id. In other words, the Casey court distinguished between the
 
court’s “taking jurisdiction” over the motion to confirm, and
 
adjudicating the motion to confirm. See id. It allowed the
 
former but disapproved the latter because the ninety-day period
 to move to vacate had not yet elapsed. Id. Relatedly, the Casey
 
court also concluded that a losing party must have an opportunity
 within the ninety-day period to challenge the winning party’s
 
29
           
 
          
             
             
      
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion to confirm. Id. 
Additionally, the Washington Court of Appeals
 
interpreted a similarly-worded vacate provision in their
 
arbitration statute to permit the filing of a motion to vacate
 even after the trial court had confirmed the arbitration award.
13
 
Martin v. Hydraulic Fishing Supply, Inc., 832 P.2d 118 (Wash. Ct.
 App. 1992). In Martin, an arbitration award was issued on
 December 21, 1990, and a motion to confirm the award was filed on
 December 28, 1990. Id. at 119. The trial court entered judgment
 
confirming the award on January 9, 1991. Id. The award was thus
 
confirmed before the statutory three-month period to file a
 motion to vacate expired. Hydraulic Fishing Supply (HFS), the
 losing party, filed a motion to vacate the award on February 28,
 1991, within the three-month period. Id. The motion to vacate
 
was denied on March 21, 1991, and HFS appealed. Id.
 
While the Washington Court of Appeals ultimately
 
affirmed the trial court’s denial of HFS’s motion to vacate, it
 also held that HFS was entitled to file a motion to vacate after
 the trial court confirmed the award. Id. at 120. In explaining
 
its rationale, the Martin court stated that a plain reading of
 
Revised Code of Washington (RCW) 7.04.180 (1943) provided, “Notice of a
 
motion to vacate, modify or correct an award shall be served upon the adverse
party, or his attorney, within three months after a copy of the award is
delivered to the party or his attorney.”
At that time, Washington had not yet adopted the UAA.
 
30
 13           
      
           
          
         
         
          
       
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
its arbitration scheme indicated that confirming an arbitration
 
award was “not intended to cut off a party’s rights under RCW
 7.04.180 before the 3-month period it provides for has expired.” 
Id. It further determined that “[i]n the absence of any
 
provision explicitly providing that a party’s rights under RCW
 7.04.180 are limited by entry of an order confirming the judgment
 
14
 under RCW 7.04.150,[ ] we must conclude that the motion to
vacate the judgment here was permissible under RCW 7.04.180.” 
Id. 
Applying the rationale employed in Martin and Casey
 
here, we first observe that similar to Washington’s statute, a
 party’s rights under the vacate provision in our arbitration
 statute (HRS § 658A-23) are not limited by the confirmation
 provision (HRS § 658A-22).
15 In fact, HRS § 658A-22 specifically
 
states that a party may file a motion to confirm the arbitration
 award, and the court shall issue a confirming order, “unless the
 award is . . . vacated pursuant to section 658A-23.” (Emphasis
 added.) This suggests that the vacate provision actually places
 
14
 RCW 7.04.150 (1982) provided in relevant part:
 
At any time within one year after the award is made, unless
the parties shall extend the time in writing, any party to
the arbitration may apply to the court for an order
confirming the award, and the court shall grant such an
order unless the award is . . . vacated, modified, or
corrected as provided in RCW 7.04.160 and 7.04.170.
 
15
 See supra notes 2 and 3.
 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a limitation on a court’s ability to confirm an award. Because
 
nothing in HRS Chapter 658A explicitly provides that a party’s
 rights under HRS § 658A-23 are limited by an order confirming an
 award, a timely motion to vacate an award, even if filed after a
 court confirms that award, is permissible under our statutory
 scheme. See Martin, 832 P.2d at 120. Finally, our statutory
 
scheme mirrors the UAA, and thus requires that a party be allowed
 an entire ninety days after receiving notice of an award to file
 a motion to vacate that award. See Casey, 290 P.3d at 268.
 
This leads us to conclude that the ICA erred when it
 
relied on Hamm to hold that the Chungs did not have a full ninety
 days to file a motion to vacate. Instead, the language of HRS
 Chapter 658A and clear legislative intent indicate that the
 Chungs had an entire ninety-day period to file a motion to vacate
 after receiving notice of the award. Because they filed their
 Motion to Vacate within the ninety-day period, the Chungs did not
 lose their right to timely appeal the circuit court’s decision to
 deny their motion.
 
C.	 Absent the filing of a motion to vacate, a court should wait
to file an order confirming an arbitration award until the
ninety-day period in which to file a motion to vacate has
expired.
 
Because the circuit court subsequently decided the
 
Chungs’ Motion to Vacate on the merits, there is an adequate
 
32
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
record on which the ICA may evaluate the Chungs’ appeal. The
 
circuit court held a hearing on the Motion to Vacate, considered
 oral and written submissions by the parties regarding the Chungs’
 allegation of evident partiality by the arbitrator, and
 subsequently filed an order denying the Motion to Vacate. 
Moreover, when the circuit court amended its order to “again
 confirm” the arbitration award, the circuit court issued an
 appealable order that the ICA should have considered on the
 merits. While the circuit court admitted that it had erred in
 not immediately confirming the award after denying the Chungs’
 Motion to Vacate, the circuit court’s subsequent decision to
 reconfirm the award was proper under the circumstances.
 
But in the future, in the interest of judicial economy,
 
a circuit court presented with a motion to confirm an arbitration
 award should wait until after the statutory ninety-day period to
 file a motion to vacate expires before issuing an order
 confirming the award. Here, the circuit court recognized the
 Chungs’ concerns regarding judicial economy, but ultimately
 concluded that without a motion to vacate before it, and because
 HRS § 658A-22 provided that the court “shall issue” a confirming
 order, it was required to grant the Bennetts’ Motion to Confirm. 
This conclusion, as discussed above, is not mandated by our
 arbitration statute.
 
33
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Therefore, in the interest of judicial economy, absent
 
the filing of a motion to vacate, a circuit court should wait to
 
file an order confirming an arbitration award until the ninety-
day period in which to file a motion to vacate has elapsed.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Because the Chungs timely appealed an order that
 
amended the circuit court’s previous order denying their Motion
 to Vacate in a “material and substantial respect,” and because
 the Chungs originally filed their Motion to Vacate within the
 statutory ninety-day period, the ICA erred in dismissing the
 Chungs’ appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction.
 
Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s August 8, 2017 Order
 
Dismissing Appeal for Lack of Appellate Jurisdiction, and remand
 the case to the ICA to resolve the Chungs’ appeal on the merits.
 
Carl H. Osaki for 
petitioners/defendants­appellants-cross-appellees
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
Robert E. Badger for respondents/plaintiffs­appellees-cross-appellants /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
34
 