*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, 
Respondent /Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
STANLEY CANOSA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-20-0000650  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-20-0000650 , CAAP-20 -0000438, CAAP-20 -0000506;    
CR. NO. 1PC 091001524)  
 
JANUARY 1 7, 2023 
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J.  
 
  This case raises the issue of whether a sixteen-month 
delay in sentencing  deprived  the defendant  of due process,  where 
the delay in sentencing  precluded  the defendant  from being 
sentenced  prior to the expiration of the ordinary  maximum term.   Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-20-0000650
17-JAN-2023
09:59 AM
Dkt. 15 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2  We also consider  whether the delay in sentencing  
rendered  the defendant’s  allocution  constitutionally  
inadequate.   
For the reasons discussed  below, we hold that in this 
specific  instance,  the State caused an unreason able delay in 
sentencing  which deprived  the defendant  of due process and a 
sentencing  proceeding  that was fundamentally  fair, in violation  
of article 1, section 5, of the Constitution  of the State of 
Hawai‘i and the Fourteenth  Amendment to the United State s 
Constitution . 
We also hold that the State’s unreasonable  delay in 
sentencing  deprived  the defendant  of the opportunity  for 
allocution,  in violation  of the due process clause under article 
1, section 5, of the Constitution  of the State of Hawai‘i.  As 
such, we need not reach the defendant ’s additional  points of 
error.    
Therefore, t he Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (“ICA”) 
judgment on appeal  is vacated.  The defendant is to be released 
forthwith, and this case is remanded to the circuit court to 
impose a sentence of time served, nunc pro tunc  from the date of 
release.   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 I.  BACKGROUND  
A. Circuit Court Proceedings  
1. Canosa I: The First Trial and First Appeal  
 On September 29, 2009, the State of Hawai‘i charged 
Petitioner/ Defendant -Appellant Stanley Canosa (“ Canosa”)  with 
burglary in the first degree , in violation of Hawaiʻi Revised 
Statutes (“HRS”) § 708-810(1)(c) (2014) (Count 1) ; sexual assault 
in the first degree , in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(a)  (Supp. 
2013) (Count 2) ; unauthorized entry in a dwelling , in violation 
of HRS § 708-812.6 (Supp 2010) (Count 3) ; and two co unts of 
sexual assault in the third degree , in violation of HRS § 707-
732(1)(f) (Supp. 2013) (“Counts 4 and 5”).  On May 27, 2011, a 
jury in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court” ) 
found Canosa guilty of Count 1, Count 2, and Count 3, and 
acquitted Canosa of Counts 4 and 5.1  On November 29, 2011, the 
circuit court  sentenced Canosa to  extended term s of twenty years 
imprisonment for Count 1, life with the possibility of parole 
for Count 2, and ten years imprisonment for Count 3.   The 
circuit court imposed all terms to run concurrently with credit 
for time served.    
Canosa appealed  to the ICA.  State v. Canosa , No. 
CAAP-11-0001051, 2014 WL 503045  (Haw. App. Feb. 7, 2014) (mem.) 
                     
1  The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 (“Canosa I ”).  Canosa argued  on appeal  that the Deputy 
Prosecuting  Attorney committed prosecutorial misconduct that 
deprived Canosa of a fair trial.  Id. at *4.  The ICA held that 
the State committed prosecutorial misconduct during closing 
arguments, vacated the judgment, and remanded the case for a new 
trial.2  Id. at *5-6. 
2.   Canosa II: The Second Trial and Second Appeal  
Canosa’s second trial began on April 8, 2015.3  The 
circuit court declared a mistrial on April 14, 2015 following 
Canosa’s request for a new attorney.  Trial commenced again on 
March 30, 2016.4  The circuit court dismissed the sexual assault 
charge (Count 2) after the jury deadlocked on that charge.   The 
jury found Canosa guilty on Count 1 (burglary in the first 
degree) and Count 3 (unauthorized entry in a dwelling).   
During the sentencing phase of t he trial, the jury 
made findings as to both Count 1 and Count 3 that the State had 
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that:  Canosa was a persistent 
offender (in that he had previously been convicted of two or 
more felonies committed at different times when he was 18 years 
                     
2  The ICA concluded that since a new trial wa s warranted in light 
of the prosecutorial misconduct during closing arguments, it did not need to 
reach Canosa’s assertion of other alleged incidents of prosecutorial 
misconduct.  Id. at *6. 
 
3  The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.  
 
4  The Honorable Kare n S.S. Ahn presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 of age or older); Canosa was a multiple offender (in that he was 
being sentenced for two or more felonies); and extended 
sentencing was necessary to protect the public.  
The circuit court entered its judgment on June 27, 
2016, and sentenced Canosa to extended term s of twenty years 
imprisonment for Count 1, and ten years imprisonment for Count 
3.  The circuit court imposed those terms to run consecutively.  
Canosa appealed  to the Intermediate Court of Appeals .   
State v. Canosa , No. CAAP -16-0000497, 2018 WL 1889511  (Haw. App. 
Apr. 20, 2018) (SDO)  (“Canosa II ”).  On appeal, Canosa argued, 
that the circuit court abused its discretion by imposing a new 
sentence that was more severe following retrial in violation of 
HRS § 706 -609.  Id. at *2.  The ICA agreed, and found that “due 
to the imposition of consecutive terms in Canosa’s second 
sentence, the maximum possible imprisonment was increased from 
twenty to thirty years.  Therefore, Canosa’s second sentence was 
more severe and violated HRS § 706 -609[.]”  Id. at *3.   
The ICA vacated the June 27, 2016 judgment and 
sentence and remanded for resentencing on April 20, 2018.  Id. 
at *4.  The ICA issued its judgment on appeal on November 15, 
2018 ordering the same.  Canosa filed an application for writ of 
certiorari, which this court rejected on January 18, 2019.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 On remand for resentencing, the circuit court held a 
sentencing hearing on June 4, 2020.5  On the morning of June 4, 
2020, Canosa filed a written objection to resentencing, and 
during the hearing  made oral objections on the basis that he did 
not agree with the argument his counsel was making.    
Canosa argued  that he was prejudiced by the delay in 
resentencing, both with respect to parole considerations, and 
with respect to being deprived of a “fai r opportunity to present 
mitigation and/or allocution of [his] sentence.”  Canosa also 
argued that extended terms could not be imposed because the 
ordinary maximum ten -year and five -year sentences had already 
expired on September 22, 2019 for Count 1, and September 22, 
2014 for count 3 .  In support of this argument, Canosa asserted 
that “[t]he time still run.   And before you was [sic] able to 
sentence me, that time expired, the ordinary terms.   And one 
extended term is in essence extending the ordinary sent ences 
beyond the statutory terms.  And once that expired, I mean, what 
is there to extend?”    
Further, Canosa argued that when the ICA vacated the 
June 27, 2016 judgment and sentence , the ICA vacated the entire 
sentence, and not just to the extent it impos ed consecutive 
terms.   
                     
5  The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7  The circuit court overruled Canosa’s objections as 
follows:  
THE COURT:   Okay.  So the Court ’s ruling on the objections. 
There was an objection.  One of th e objections defendant 
raised is the delay.  And there was a delay from the t ime 
that the Supreme Court rejected certiorari from January 
2019 to the time the  sentencing -- we began to try to 
schedule -- try to reschedule this resentencing.  So you 
know, Mr. Canosa, I can tell you that it ’s unfortunate that 
the delay occurred.  But the fact that there was a delay in 
having this resentencing -- and this is my ruling -- does 
not mean that in any way that the Court cannot legally 
resentence you or that the State -- there's any kind of 
waiver by the State .  And the Court ’s ruling is that  the 
fact that there was a delay in coming to this resentencing 
does not mean that there is an infirmity with the Court 
proceeding with sentencing today.  
 
THE DEFENDANT:  What do you mean one infirmity?  
 
THE COURT:   I’m ruling, sir. Okay?   
 
The Court reta ins jurisdiction, the power, the authority, 
and the duty to resentence defendant in accordance with the 
directive of the appellate court.  So that is the ruling on 
the delay objection .   
 
There was objections made on consecutive sentencing.   The 
State is n ot asking for consecutive terms. I ’m not going to 
impose consecutive terms, so I ’m not going to address those 
objections. They are moot.   
  
THE DEFENDANT:   Your Honor -- (inaudible).  Excuse me one 
minute.  I understand what you ’re saying,  but he not 
arguing, you know, for me. That ’s why I gotta speak on my 
behalf.   
 
THE COURT:   Sir, I’ve read your objections.  I let you talk 
today briefly.  I understand what you ’re saying.  I'm going 
to rule.   Okay?  
  
THE DEFENDANT:   How can I have one fair  opportunity to 
argue myself?  He not arguing for me .  
 
THE COURT:  I will let you speak at resentencing.  Okay? 
I’m going to address the objections  regarding imposition of 
extended terms.  
 
Defendant argued today and in his written pleading that the 
extended terms can not be imposed because the ordinary 
maximum term already expired.  And he argues that it ’s 
logically impossible to extend a sentence that is already 
expired and does not exist.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 This Court interprets the remand as having vacated the 
prior sentences and th e ICA remanded it back here for 
resentencing consistent with the appellate court order. 
Defendant ’s status is post conviction pending resentencing, 
and the Court retains jurisdiction to resentence.  
 
So the ICA ’s order vacated the June 27, 26 sentence with an 
order to resentence.  So this Court -- my conclusion is 
that the 2016 sentence is vacated.  Defendant ’s pending 
sentencing.  He is being held on existing trial custody 
orders.  He is receiving all jail credit he ’s entitled to 
on Counts 1 and 3.  
 
The vacated sentence does not mean that the ordinary 
sentence for Counts 1 and 2 was still running.  And it 
doesn’t mean that the ordinary sentence was running and 
expired and can no longer exist.  So the Court rejects that 
argument that the Court can no longer sentence defendant to 
extended term because the ordinary sentence has run.  
 
This argument -- the Court ’s ruling is that this argument 
made by the defense is premised on the erroneous legal 
assumption that the ordinary sentences are still in effect 
and are running.   And that ’s not the case.  
 
So for these reasons, the objections are  rejected and 
overruled.  I’ve made my ruling.  
 
(emphasis added).  
The circuit court then sentenced Canosa to ten years 
extended to twenty years for Count 1 and five years extended  to 
ten years for Count 3.  The circuit court ruled that the terms 
were to run concurrently , with credit for time served.    
The circuit court entered its judgment resentencing 
Canosa on June 4, 2020, and Canosa filed a timely notice of 
appeal on July 6, 20 20 initiating case number CAAP -20-0000438.  
On July 10, 2020, the circuit court entered an amended judgment 
(“2020 Amended Judgment”) , correcting clerical errors.  Canosa 
filed a timely notice of appeal to the 2020 Amended Judgment on 
August 12, 2020, thus  initiating case number CAAP-20-0000506.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 3.   Canosa III: Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence  
and Third Appeal 
 
On August 24, 2020,  Canosa filed pro se6 a motion to 
correct an illegal sentence pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (“ HRPP”) Rule 35(a).  Canosa argued in his motion  that 
having completed serving the ordinary terms of imprisonment 
statutorily prescribed by HRS § 706 -660 (ten years for Count 1, 
five years for Count 3) which had expired on Sept ember 22, 2019 
before the resentencing court could impose extended sentences , 
the extended sentences were in violation of Canosa’s right to 
due process under article 1, section 5, of the Hawai‘i State 
Constitution and the Fourteenth  Amendment to the United  States 
Constitution.   Canosa concluded that the court was unauthorized 
to impose extended sentences once the ordinary terms of 
imprisonment prescribed by HRS § 706 -660 had expired, and 
requested remedying the illegal sentence by declaring time 
served nunc pro tunc  with respect to Counts 1 and 3.    
The circuit court issued an order denying Canosa’s 
HRPP Rule 35(a) motion on October 21, 2020 (“Order Denying 
Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence”).   Canosa timely filed an 
                     
6  Canosa noted that he filed pro se “because after directing my 
court-appointed counsel  . . . to file a Rule 35(a) motion for correction of 
illegal sentence, [counsel] has not kept me info rmed of whether or not such 
motion was filed.  Accordingly, I am proceeding pro se only to the extent of 
making sure that this motion is filed within the 90 day time period  . . . . 
subsequently, I expect that [counsel] will assist in representing me at the  
hearing on this motion.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 appeal of the circuit court’s denial of his HRPP Rule 35(a) 
motion, initiating case number CAAP-20-0000650.  The ICA 
consolidated Canosa’s three appeals from his June 4, 2020 
resentencing (CAAP -20-0000438,  CAAP-20-0000506, and CAAP -20-
0000650) under CAAP -20-0000650 (“Canosa III ”). 
B. Intermediate C ourt of Appeals 
1. Canosa’s Opening Brief  
On appeal, Canosa presented the following questions:  
(1) “Did the trial court abuse its discretion in re -sentencing 
[Canosa]  to an extended sentence after his underlying maximum 
sentence h ad already expired? ”7 and (2) “Did the trial court 
abuse its discretion in denying [Canosa] ’s Motion for 
[C]orrection of Illegal Sentence? ” 
  As to the circuit court’s abuse of discretion in re -
sentencing Canosa to an extended sentence after his underlying 
maximum sentence had already  expired, Canosa relied on State v. 
March, 94 Hawai‘i 250, 255, 11 P.3d 1094 , 1098 (2000) and State 
v. Kahalewai , 71 Haw. 624, 626 , 801 P.2d 558, 560 (1990) in 
arguing that in this “case of first impression,” the circuit 
court did not have the statutory au thority to extend the 
ordinary terms of imprisonment prescribed by HRS § 706 -660 
because they had already expired, constituting an illegal 
                     
7  Canosa defines “underlying maximum sentence” in a footnote as 
“the maximum penalty prescribed by law for the underlying charged offenses.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 sentence not authorized by statute that violated his right to 
due process.  Canosa further  argued that “by operation of 
serving and satisfying the ordinary terms of imprisonment 
prescribed by HRS [§] 706-660 . . . before a legal sentence was 
ever imposed,” it was “the court’s duty in rendering a legal 
disposition of this case . . . to declare time served, [n]unc 
pro tunc  . . . because no other sentence could be imposed in 
accordance with HRS [§] 706-660 and nor could any other sentence 
of imprisonment be authorized by statute.”   
  Canosa next contested  the circuit court’s ruling that 
a delay does not impair the court’s j urisdiction, authority and 
duty to resentence a defendant in accordance with the directive 
of the appellate courts.   To this point, Canosa asserted that 
the court’s jurisdiction and duty to resentence Canosa ended 
when the maximum sentences for each convic tion were served on 
September 22, 2014 and September 22, 2019 respectively.   
  Canosa then argued that from the time the ICA issued 
its November 15, 2018 Judgment on Appeal ordering a remand for 
sentencing, the State had a duty to act diligently and pruden tly 
in completing resentencing by September 22, 2019 and failed to 
do so.  According to Canosa, “the State gave up its right to 
pursue extended sentencing as [Canosa] had fully served the 
maximum term of imprisonment for the underlying charges  prior to 
an extended sentence being sought to be imposed.”   Canosa *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 asserted that since there was no underlying sentence to extend 
after September 22, 2019, the June 4, 2020 sentence was “an 
egregious violation of Canosa’s right not to be punished twice 
for the same of fenses [sic] in accordance with the principles of 
double jeopardy.”    
  As to the circuit court’s abuse of discretion in 
denying Canosa’s HRPP Rule 35(a) motion for correction of 
illegal sentence, Canosa again raise d violation of due process 
and double jeo pardy claims, and relie d on Ex parte Lange , 85 
U.S. 163 (1873),  for the proposition that because Canosa served 
the underlying maximum penalty before being resentenced on June 
4, 2020, a second judgment on the same verdict is void , and he 
therefore must be discharged .     
  Canosa conclude d by requesting that the ICA vacate his 
sentence and order him immediately released after having fully 
served a ten -year term prior to being resentenced on June 4, 
2020.   
2.   The State’s Answering Brief  
  In answer, t he State assert ed that Canosa’s points of 
error essentially allege d the same error —that the court abused 
its discretion in imposing an extended sentence after his *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 underlying maximum sentence as to both charges had expired.8   
The State’s rebuttal cite d Hussey v. Say and relie d on law of 
the case doctrine in concluding “[t]hat the circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion in imposing an extended term is law of 
the case and cannot be re -litigated.”  Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai‘i 
181, 185, 384 P.3d 1282, 1286 (2016) .  The State support ed this 
finding with the following language from Canosa II : “[g]iven 
that the jury made the required factual findings under HRS § 
706-662, it was within the Circuit Court’s discretion to 
sentence Canosa to extended terms of imprisonment .”  Canosa II, 
2018 WL 1889511, at *3 .  On this basis, the State contend ed that 
when the ICA vacated the circuit court’s judgment  in Canosa II , 
it only did so “to the extent it imposes consecutive sentences 
in violation of HRS § 706 -609[,]” and that when i t “remand[ed] 
for resentencing consistent with this summary disposition 
order[,]” the only portion of the judgment that was vacated was 
the consecutive sentence, and therefore “the only task left for 
the circuit court was to enter a judgment of conviction and 
sentence without the consecutive sentence.”   The State conclude d 
that “[b]ecause the portion of the judgment relating to Canosa’s 
                     
8  The State considers Canosa’s opening brief  argument that the 
“extended sentence was  an abuse of discretion as the State did not prove that 
[he] was a danger to the public” to be waived pursuant to Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (“ HRAP”) Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as it was not a point of 
error raised.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 underlying and extended sentences were not vacated[,]”  Canosa’s 
argument had no merit.   The State request ed that the ICA a ffirm 
the 2020 Amended Judgment and Order Denying Motion to Correct 
Illegal Sentence.  Canosa did not file a reply brief.      
3.   The ICA’s Memorandum Opinion9 
  The ICA affirmed the 2020 Amended Judgment and the 
Order Denying Motion to Correct Illegal Se ntence, finding that 
the circuit court properly exercised its authority to resentence 
Canosa to extended terms of imprisonment in counts 1 and 3, with 
each sentence to run concurrently.   First, the ICA concluded 
that the circuit court retained authority on  remand in 2020 to 
resentence Canosa to extended terms “regardless of whether the 
time under an ordinary maximum sentence for his convictions 
would have expired by the time of resentencing.”   According to 
the ICA, Canosa was never sentenced to “an ordinary  maximum 
sentence under HRS § 706 -660 for Counts 1 and 3 [;]” instead, his 
sentences on Counts 1 and 3 “have always been for  extended term 
sentences, including under the 2016 Judgment.”   The ICA, citing 
State v. Keck , agreed with the circuit court’s reasoni ng that 
when Canosa’s second sentence under the 2016 judgment was 
vacated,  “[h]is status, in essence, reverted to that of an 
unsentenced felon .”  State v. Keck , Nos. 29530, 29531, 2010 WL 
                     
9  The ICA held oral argument on April 20, 2022.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 4491240, at *1 (Haw. App. Nov. 10, 2010) .  The ICA further noted 
Canosa’s failure to cite —and the ICA’s failure to find —any 
authority supporting the proposition that “a defendant's 
sentence automatically defaults to the statutory maximum term 
for the convicted crime when the defendant's consecutive 
extended sentences have been vacated and the case is remanded 
for resentencing.”    
Second, the ICA found Canosa’s double jeopardy 
argument to be without merit.  The ICA distinguished Canosa’s 
case from Lange,10 and cited Jones v. Thomas  for the proposition 
that “the Double Jeopard y Clause prohibits punishment in excess 
of that authorized by the legislature[.] ".  Jones v. Thomas , 491 
U.S. 376, 383 (1989)  (citing United States v. DiFrancesco , 449 
U.S. 117, 139 (1980 )).  The ICA reasoned that since HRS § 706 –
662 authorized extended se ntencing for counts 1 and 3, and 
because a jury made the necessary findings such that extended 
sentences for counts 1 and 3 were proper, the circuit court’s 
sentence was not in excess of statutory authority.  On that 
basis, and pursuant to the law of the c ase under Canosa II , the 
ICA concluded that Canosa was not punished for the same crime 
twice.   
                     
10  The ICA argued that unlike Canosa’s case, the statute at issue in 
Lange authorized the imposition of only one of two alternative sentences, but 
that the defendant in Lange was ultimately subjected to both .   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 Third, the ICA rejected Canosa’s contention that the 
plain language of HRS § 706 -600 limited the circuit court ’s 
resentencing authority.   Relying on State v. Ha ugen,11 the ICA 
concluded that “it would be absurd for sentences to default to 
the statutory maximum term while defendants await resentencing 
upon successfully exercising their right to appeal, especially 
when a jury makes the necessary findings that a defe ndant meets 
the criteria for extended terms of imprisonment.”  State v. 
Haugen, 104 Hawai‘i 71, 77, 85 P.3d 178, 184 (2004) . 
Having concluded the circuit court did not err in 
resentencing Canosa in 2020, the ICA thus concluded (without 
further analysis) th at there was no error when the circuit court 
denied Canosa’s motion to correct his sentence.    
Finally, the ICA determined that Canosa’s assertions 
of plain error were raised for the first time at oral argument 
and therefore waived pursuant to HRAP Rule 28 (b)(4) and (7).   
With respect to Canosa’s argument that the circuit court 
committed plain error by resentencing him to extended sentences 
without requiring the State to prove that he still remained a 
danger to the public at the time of resentencing, the IC A 
determined that Canosa “failed to raise this issue as a point of 
                     
11  The ICA cited to State v. Haugen , 104 Hawai‘i 71, 77, 85 P.3d 178, 
184 (2004) which concluded that an absurdity would result if the court 
applied a statute on sentencing for first -time drug offenders to a defendant 
with a prior drug conviction in an other state.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17  error or provide any substantive argument, in violation of 
[HRAP] Rule 28(b)(4) and (7)[.]”.   The ICA then argued that 
United States v. Booker , 543 U.S. 220 (2005) was inapposite to 
Canosa’s assertions, concluding that Booker does not invalidate 
Canosa’s sentence on the basis that four years passed between 
the jury’s determinations for extended sentencing and Canosa’s 
2020 resentencing.  
Canosa's second argument that the ICA deemed waived 
was that he was prejudiced by the State’s sixteen month delay in 
his resentencing after certiorari was denied on January 18, 
2019, which resulted in adverse impacts on parole and his 
ability to obtain services while incarcerated (among other 
assertions) .    The ICA deemed this argument waived for purposes 
of this appeal, but without prejudice to Canosa raising it in a 
HRPP Rule 40 petition, finding that (1) Canosa never argued this 
claim before the circuit court, (2) there was no factual support 
for this clai m in the record, and (3) the State had no ability 
to anticipate this claim being raised at oral argument.   
The ICA affirm ed the 2020 Amended Judgment and the 
Order Denying Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence, while noting 
that “Canosa may pursue his claim of prejudice due to the delay 
in his 2020 resentencing through a HRPP Rule 40 petition.”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 C. Application for Writ of Certiorari  
  Canosa timely filed an  application for writ of 
certiorari on August 5, 2022 .  In his application, Canosa argues 
that the ICA g ravely erred  in this “unique case of first 
impression”  by:  
1. reasoning that because a [j]ury on June 22, 2016, made 
the required factual findings under HRS [§] 706-662 
(2014) that Petitioner is a persistent and multiple 
offender and that extended terms of i mprisonment was 
necessary for the protection of the public, the 
resentencing court was, on June 4, 2020, upon remand for 
resentencing from Petitioner, authorized to resentence 
him to extended terms of imprisonment and,  
  
2. for using that reasoning to affirm the Amended Judgment 
of conviction and sentence filed July 10[,] 2020, and 
the Order Denying Defendant’s Motion to Correct Illegal 
Sentence pursuant to Rule 35(a) of the Hawaii Rules of 
Penal Procedure  filed October 21, 2020 by the Circuit 
Court of the Fir st Circuit , and thereby constitut es 
[sic] grave error s because it resulted in the violation 
of Petitioner’s right to be free from the unlawful 
restraint of his liberty, in violation of the Fourteenth 
Amendment under the United States Constitution as he is 
still being held in prison on an illegal sentence.  
First, Canosa argue s that the ICA erred by affirming 
the circuit court’s use of the 2016 jury’s findings under HRS § 
706-662 to impose extended terms of imprisonment beyond the 
ordinary terms of imprisonme nt prescribed by HRS § 706 -660 for 
Counts 1 and 3.   He argue s that the circuit court no longer had 
authority to “use the jury’s findings under HRS § 706 -662 to 
extend the ordinary terms of imprisonment” because “those 
ordinary terms of imprisonment prescri bed by HRS § 706 -660 for 
both his convictions [( ten years for Count 1, five years for *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 Count 3)] were already expired before the resentencing court 
could extend it beyond its statutorily prescribed range.”    
Canosa further argues that “the ICA knew and/or s hould 
have known” the following: (1) “that when a court imposes an 
extended term of imprisonment [,] what the court extends from, 
and beyond, is the ordinary terms of imprisonment (statutory 
maximum penalty) prescribed by HRS [§] 706-660”; (2) “by the 
time [Canosa] was resentenced on June 4, 2020, the ordinary 
terms of imprisonment prescribed by HRS [§] 706-660 for both his 
[b]urglary conviction  (count 1) and his unauthorized entry in a 
[d]welling conviction  (count 3) had already expired on September 
22, 2019, and September 22, 2014, respectively”; (3) “the 
State’s and/or resentencing court’s unreasonable delay to comply 
with the remand order for resentencing  . . . had  allowed the 
ordinary terms of imprisonment prescribed by HRS [§] 706-660 to 
expire”; (4) “during [Canosa]’s resentencing  on June 4, 2020 , he 
argued that the extended terms cannot be imposed because the 
ordinary maximum terms had already expired ”; and (5) “[Canosa]’s 
contention for [the ICA’s ] review on appeal was that the circuit 
court erred by extending the ordinary terms of imprisonment 
prescribed by HRS [§] 706-660 for both his [b]urglary conviction 
(count 1) and his unauthorized entry in a [d]welling conviction 
(count 3)  without being authorized by statute.”    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 Canosa further contends that (1)  “there [is] no 
tolling period for the ordinary terms of imprisonment prescribed 
by HRS [§] 706-660” and (2) “there is no language under HRS [§] 
706-662 or any other statute that authorized the resentencing 
court on June 4, 2020 to extend the already expir ed ordinary 
terms of imprisonment prescribed under HRS § 706 -660[.]”   
Canosa also contests  the ICA’s agreement with the 
circuit court’s reasoning that when Canosa’s sentence was 
vacated and remanded for sentencing Canosa’s status reverted to 
that of an un sentenced felon.   Here, Canosa repeats his 
arguments that the ICA “knew and/or should have known” that once 
the ordinary terms of imprisonment for counts 1 and 3 expired, 
it was “impossible to extend” those terms beyond their 
“statutorily prescribed range[ s].”  Canosa further contends that 
the ICA “knew and/or should have known” that “the resentencing 
court’s only duty and obligation during resentencing was to 
declare time served, nunc pro tunc , because no other sentence 
could be imposed in accordance with HRS § 706 -600 (2014), which 
states, “ [n]o sentence shall be imposed otherwise than in 
accordance with this chapter.”   
Canosa concludes that the ICA therefore should have 
reversed the order denying Canosa’s motion to correct illegal 
sentence, and subsequen tly corrected his sentence to reflect 
time served, nunc pro tunc , on the expiration dates of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21  ordinary terms of imprisonment prescribed by HRS § 706 -660 for 
counts 1 and 3, and asks this court “to correct his illegal 
sentence” ; he requests this court to  “order his release from the 
unlawful restraint of his liberty.”    
The State did not file a response to the application.   
Canosa’s application for writ of certiorari was accepted .  
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Sentencing   
A sentencing judge generally has bro ad discretion in 
imposing a sentence.  The applicable standard of review for 
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court 
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its 
decision.  Factors that indicate a plain and manifest abuse 
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious actions by the 
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant ’s 
contentions.  In general, to constitute an abuse it must 
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason 
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to 
the substantial detriment of a party litigant.  
   
State v. Tauiliili , 96 Hawaiʻi 195, 198, 29 P.3d 914, 917 (2001) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted).   
B. Motion to Correct Sentence  
 A circuit court's denial base d on a conclusion of law, 
of a defendant ’s HRPP Rule 35 motion to correct illegal sentence 
is reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard of review.  
Questions of constitutional law and statutory interpretation are 
reviewed under the same standard.  State v. Kido , 109 Hawaiʻi 
458, 461, 128 P.3d 340, 343 (2006).  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 C. Constitutional  Questions  
“We review questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case.”   State v. Phua , 135 Hawai‘i 504, 511 -12, 
353 P.3d 1046, 1053-54 (2015).   Therefore, we review questions 
of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.  Id.  
IV.  DISCUSSION   
Canosa argues that he was prejudiced by the State’s 
sixteen-month delay in his sentencing after certiorari was 
denied on January 18,  2019.  The ICA deemed this argument waived 
for purposes of this appeal, finding that (1) Canosa never 
argued this claim before the circuit court, (2) there was no 
factual support for this claim in the record, and (3) the State 
had no ability to anticipate  this claim being raised at oral 
argument  before the ICA .  The ICA erred in its waiver analysis 
and conclusion.  
As discussed  infra in section IV.A.3, the record 
clearly reflects that Canosa raised his prejudice argument 
before the circuit court on June 4, 2020, both  in writing and 
with oral argument .  The State and the circuit court thus had 
notice of Canosa’s prejudice claim.  In addition, the record 
does contain factual support for Canosa’s claim, as the Barker 
analysis below makes clear.  Canosa’s prejud ice claim was not 
waived.  As the ICA erred on these points, the ICA also erred in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23  affirming the circuit court’s 2020 Amended Judgment and the 
Order Denying Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence .   
For reasons set forth below, we find that the 
unreasonable de lay of Canosa’s sentencing deprived Canosa of due 
process, and sentencing proceedings that were fundamentally 
fair. 
A. The government’s unreasonable delay of Canosa’s sentencing 
deprived Canosa of due process and sentencing proceedings 
which were fundamentall y fair. 
Canosa correctly contends that the sentencing in this 
case has been delayed to the degree that he has been deprived of 
his right to  due process pursuant to  article 1, section 5 of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution and the Fourteenth  Amendment to the United 
States Constitution . 
In Betterman  v. Montana , 578 U.S. 437 (2016), the  
Supreme Court expl icated the due process rights and liberty 
interests of  convicted individuals with respect to delay in 
sentencing proceedings:  
[A]t the third phase of the criminal -justice process,  i.e., 
between conviction and sentencing, the Constitution's 
presumption -of-innocence -protective speedy trial right is 
not engaged.  That does not mean, however, that defendants 
lack any protection against undue delay at this stage. The 
primary safeguard comes from statutes and rules. The 
federal rule on point directs the court to “impose sentence 
without unnecessary delay.”   Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 32(b)(1)  
.... Further, as at the prearrest stage, due process serves 
as a backstop against exorbita nt delay  .... After 
conviction, a defendant's due process right to liberty , 
while diminished, is still present. He retains an interest 
in a sentencing proceeding that is fundamentally fair.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 578 U.S. at 447 –48 (emphasis added).  Further, the court noted 
that “[f]or inordinate delay in sentencing, although the Speedy 
Trial Clause does not govern, a defendant may have other 
recourse, including, in appropriate circumstances, tailored 
relief under the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments .”  Id. at 439 (emphasis added).   
In her concurring opinion, Justice Sotomayor suggested 
using the test the Court applies to violations of the Speedy 
Trial Clause set out in  Barker v. Wingo , 407 U.S.  514 (1972):  
[I]t seems to me that the Barker factors cap ture many of 
the concerns posed in the sentencing delay context  and that 
because the  Barker test is flexible, it will allow courts 
to take account of any differences between trial and 
sentencing delays.   The majority of the Circuits in fact 
use the Barker test for that purpose. See  United States v. 
Sanders,  452 F.3d 572, 577 (C.A.6 2006) (collecting cases) . 
In the appropriate case, I would thus consider the correct 
test for a Due Process Clause delayed sentencing challenge.  
 
578 U.S. at 451 (Sotomayor, J., concurring) (internal 
citation omitted) (emphasis added) . 
This court has long relied on the Barker factors for 
analyzing violations of speedy trial rights.   See State v. Lau, 
78 Hawai‘i 54, 62, 890 P.2d 291, 299 (1995).  Under 
the Barker test, courts consid er four factors: (1) the length of 
the delay, (2) reasons for the delay, (3) the defendant ’s 
assertion of his right, and (4) prejudice to the defendant .  Id.  
Justice Sotomayor notes that “[n] one of the four factors is 
‘either necessary or sufficient, ’ and no one factor has a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 ‘talismanic qualit[y]. ’”  Betterman , 578 U.S. at 451  (citing 
Barker, 407 U.S. at 533 ).  
We now adopt the Barker factors for analyzing 
violations of due process in the delayed sentencing context.   
1. Length of the delay  
 On April 20, 2018 , the ICA vacated Canosa’s illegal 
sentence and remanded for sentencing.  On November 15, 2018, the 
ICA issued its judgment on appeal ordering the same.   Canosa 
applied for a writ of certiorari, which this court rejected on 
January 18, 2019.   The length of  delay from this court’s January 
18, 2019 denial of certiorari until Canosa’s June 4, 2020 
sentencing is sixteen months and seventeen  days.  The Betterman  
court—faced with a fourteen -month delay in sentencing —found 
that “a defendant’s due process right to liberty, while 
diminished, is still present” and that “he retains an interest 
in a sentencing proceeding that is fundamentally fair.”  578 
U.S. at 447 –48.  In the speedy trial context, this court has 
considered a delay of seven months sufficient to trigger  an 
inquiry into the other Barker factors.  See State v. Almeida , 54 
Haw. 443, 509 P.2d 549 (1973).  Here, Canosa’s sentencing delay 
of sixteen months and seventeen days is especially striking in 
that it encompassed the expiration of the ordinary statutory  
terms on September 22, 2019, thus depriving Canosa of a 
proceeding on remand wherein he could present argument and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 allocution asking for an ordinary maximum term.  On these facts, 
the length of delay in Canosa’s sentencing is sufficient to 
warrant an inqu iry into the remaining Barker factors.  
2. Reasons for  the delay  
Canosa contends that the State and/or the circuit 
court caused an unreasonable delay in complying with the ICA’s 
remand order for sentencing.  The State admitted at oral 
argument before this cou rt12 that Canosa’s sentencing “slipped 
through the cracks.”  The State further conceded that it “looked 
at the record”  and that “there doesn’t seem to be an explanation 
for why it happened.”  The State went on to explain the process 
for sentencing on remand , noting that “when a case is sent down 
and remanded for resentencing it is typically the circuit court 
that puts it on [the] calendar and sets it, or [The State] will 
ask for a status for the case to be set.”   During the June 4, 
2020 sentencing hearing, the circuit court also acknowledged 
that “there was a delay from the time that the Supreme Court 
rejected certiorari from January 2019 to the time we began to 
try to reschedule this resentencing [,]” and acknowledged  to 
Canosa “it's unfortunate that the dela y occurred.”    
This acknowledgement of shared responsibility across 
the State and the circuit court for calendaring Canosa’s 
                     
12  Oral argument was held on October 18, 2022.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 sentencing on remand leads to the conclusion that unexplained 
government inaction caused the delay in the instant case.   
State v. Visintin  summarizes how this court, in 
accordance with the U nited States Supreme Court's decision 
in Barker, analyzes whether the government’s reason(s) for delay 
violate a defendant’s constitutional rights.  See State v. 
Visintin , 143 Hawaiʻi 143, 15 9, 426 P.3d 367, 38 3 (2018).  When 
the government’s delay deliberately attempts to hamper the 
defense, that will be weighed heavily against the government.  
Id. (internal citations omitted).  When the reason behind the 
government’s delay is more “neutral” such as “negligence or 
overcrowded courts” this factor should be “weighted less heavily 
but nevertheless should be considered since the ultimate 
responsibility for such circumstances must rest with the 
government rather than with the defendant.”   Id.  (quoting 
Barker, 407 U.S. at 531 ).  On that basis, this court has held 
that when a government delay results from a more neutral reason, 
the second Barker factor weighs in favor of the defendant.  Id.  
See also Lau, 78 Hawai‘i at 63, 890 P.2d at 300   (determining 
that the “more neutral” reason of court congestion “still tips 
the scales in favor of [the defendants][.]”).   Here, the State 
concedes that Canosa’s sentencing “slipped through the cracks” 
and that the record is devoid of any explanation as to why.  
This rea son for the government’s delay falls within the more *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 neutral “negligence” category.  Because the government was 
negligent in causing the delay, and because the record reflects 
no amount of the delay is attributable to Canosa, this factor 
must be weighed ag ainst the State and in favor of Canosa.  
3. Assertion of the right  
Applying the Barker factors in the speedy trial 
context, this court has held that  the State, not the defendant, 
has the duty to bring about the commencement of proceedings:  
[A] defendant has n o duty to bring himself [or herself] to trial; 
the [S]tate has that duty.”   State v. Wasson , 76 Hawai‘i 415, 420, 
879 P.2d 520, 525 (alterations in original) (quoting  Barker, 407 
U.S. at 527).  “Thus, a defendant does not waive his or her right 
to a speedy  trial by failing to demand one.”   Id. (citing Barker, 
407 U.S. at 526).   However, the assertion of the right to a 
speedy trial “is entitled to strong evidentiary weight in 
determining whether the defendant is being deprived of the 
right.”  Id.  (quoting  Barker, 407 U.S. at 531 -32, 92 S.Ct. 
2182). 
 
Visintin , 143 Hawai‘i at 160, 426 P.3d at 384 (internal citations 
cleaned up).  
We now apply these principals in analyzing Canosa’s 
assertion of his rights with respect to his delay in sentencing.   
The record ref lects that Canosa asserted his right to 
be sentenced without unreasonable delay in a written objection 
to sentencing filed on the morning of June 4, 2020.   Canosa 
asserted that the State’s failure and/or unreasonable delay to 
sentence him prior to the Sept ember 22, 2019 expiration of the 
ordinary maximum term deprived him of his due process rights *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 under article 1, section 5 of the Hawai‘i Constitution and the 
Fourteenth  Amendment to the United States Constitution.   
Further, Canosa testified at the June 4, 2020 
sentencing hearing that he wrote a letter to his attorney before 
the September 2019 expiration of the ordinary terms of his 
sentence, asking why he wasn’t being sentenced.  Canosa offered 
the letter to the court, which declined to consider it in the 
following exchange:  
THE DEFENDANT:  And I could have had one  chance to persuade 
you; right? One fair opportunity to  persuade you to give me 
that, at least consider it.  But now I cannot have one fair 
opportunity to do that because  that expired.  
 
But you kno w what else?   I wrote to my lawyer . I wrote to 
my lawyer before September, before the  ordinary terms 
expired asking him, eh, how come I not  getting sentenced ?  
I like present this so I can convince  you to just give me 
the 10 and the 5 and run ‘em concurren t.  I get one letter 
right here. You want to  see it? 
 
THE COURT: No, sir.  It's not part of what I  can consider 
today.  Okay? 
 
In addition to this court’s recognition that it is the 
State’s duty to bring a defendant to trial, and that a defendant 
has no du ty to demand one, this court has also recognized that a 
defendant’s failure to assert speedy trial rights shall not 
weigh against them where “there appears to have been no 
conventional forum in which [defendant] could have asserted the 
right[.]”  Visintin , 143 Hawai‘i at 161, 426 P.3d at 38 5.  
In Visintin , this court recognized that for the period 
of seven months during which time the defendant’s status was *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 post-arrest and preindictment, there “ [did] not appear to have 
been any standard legal proceeding in which Visintin could have 
demanded a speedy trial.”  Id.  Here, as in Visintin , there does 
not appear to have been any standard legal proceeding in the 
record during the sixteen months and seventeen  days leading up 
to the June 4, 2020 sentencing where Cano sa could have asserted 
his right to be sentenced without unreasonable delay.  
Additionally, it was reasonable for Canosa to presume that there 
would be such a proceeding, at least in the form of a sentencing 
hearing, prior to the September 22, 2019 expirat ion of the 
ordinary maximum sentence that he was eligible to receive.13  The 
State failed to provide one.  As such, the June 4, 2020 
proceeding was the first conventional forum in which Canosa 
could assert his rights since this court’s denial of certiorari 
on January 18, 2019.  A closer look at Canosa’s remand timeline 
proves useful in analyzing Canosa’s opportunity to assert his 
rights to be sentenced without undue delay . 
HRPP Rule 32(a)  provides that “ [a]fter adjudication of 
guilt, sentence shall be impose d without unreasonable delay .”  
Canosa was therefore entitled to the reasonable presumption that 
when his illegal sentence was vacated and remanded on April 20, 
                     
13  Because we conclude the State’s unreasonable delay in sentencing 
deprived Canosa of due process, we need not reach Canosa’s remaining points 
of error, including Canosa’s claims with respect to the expiration of the 
ordinary terms.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 2018, he would have the opportunity to be sentenced before the 
September 22, 2019 expiration of  his ordinary maximum term 
(approximately seventeen months later).  It is also reasonable 
that this court’s denial of certiorari on January 18, 2019 would 
only strengthen Canosa’s presumption that he would be sentenced 
prior to September 22, 2019, and that  he would be afforded a 
proceeding  and an allocution  prior to that date, during which 
time he could argue for an ordinary maximum term.  As a 
convicted felon awaiting sentencing who had exhausted his 
appeals, no other proceeding would be reasonably foresee able.  
In this respect, Canosa did not have a need to assert his right 
to be sentenced without unreasonable delay prior to September 
22, 2019.  As such, it would be error to weigh Canosa’s failure 
to assert his right to be sentenced against him where there  was 
(a) no conventional forum in which Canosa could do so, and (b) 
prior to September 22, 2019, no apparent basis for Canosa to do 
so. 
On these grounds, and in accordance with Visintin , 
Canosa did assert his rights on June 4, 2020, and any failure to 
assert his right to be sentenced prior to June 4, 2020 shall not 
weigh against him.  
We now turn to the State’s argument that Canosa’s 
sentencing delay should not be considered by this court as an 
actual or appearance of injustice  because Canosa’s counsel *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 stated before the ICA that counsel did not need to bring 
attention to the sentencing delay for strategic reasons.  With 
respect to counsel’s statement, this alone is not dispositive in 
resolving this factor against Canosa.  First, it was the State’s 
duty, and n ot Canosa’s, to ensure Canosa was sentenced without 
unreasonable delay.  Second, Canosa’s testimony regarding his 
letter to counsel, along with Canosa’s offering of the letter to 
the court, evinces Canosa’s desire to assert his rights with 
respect to being  sentenced prior to the expiration of the 
ordinary maximum terms.  Third, the transcript from the June 4, 
2020 sentencing hearing makes clear that Canosa was in strong 
disagreement with his counsel’s strategy and arguments, and that 
Canosa explicitly told the court his counsel was not arguing for 
him during that proceeding:  
THE DEFENDANT:  Your Honor  -- (inaudible).  Excuse me one 
minute.  I understand what you're saying,  but he not 
arguing, you know, for me. That's why I gotta speak on my 
behalf.   
 
THE COURT:  Sir, I've read your objections. I  let you talk 
today briefly.  I understand what you're  saying.  I'm going 
to rule. Okay?  
  
THE DEFENDANT:  How can I have one fair  opportunity to 
argue myself? He not arguing for me .  
 
Canosa’s repeated on -the-record rejection of and 
departure from his counsel’s arguments and strategy has 
relevance when determining to what extent counsel’s strategy 
remark should weigh against Canosa in resolving this factor.  In 
this regard, the weight to be given counsel’s strategy statement *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 is less than perhaps it otherwise would be, though it does place 
a thumb on the scale for the government.  
We now turn to the balancing of this factor, and begin 
with summarizing the issues that favor each party.  
The issues that favor Canosa are :  (1) Canosa asserted 
his due process rights to be sentenced without unreasonable 
delay in his written objection to sentencing filed on June 4, 
2020, which was the first standard legal proceeding afforded to 
Canosa since this court’s January 18, 2019 deni al of certiorari; 
(2) Canosa’s time on remand awaiting sentencing appears to have 
lacked any other standard legal proceeding through which Canosa 
could have asserted his right to be sentenced without 
unreasonable delay; (3) Canosa had no duty to demand he be 
sentenced; (4) the State did have a duty to sentence Canosa 
without unreasonable delay; and (5) Canosa’s testimony about his 
letter to counsel, which he offered to the court for 
consideration, evinces his intent to be sentenced prior to 
September 22, 20 19. 
For all the above reasons, the third Barker factor 
would tip squarely in Canosa’s favor if not for counsel’s 
strategy comment.  This court finds that counsel’s strategy 
comment cannot be imputed to Canosa , who demonstratively 
distanced himself from cou nsel’s arguments during the June 4, 
2020 sentencing hearing and pleaded with the court to consider *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 his prior correspondence with counsel seeking  a timely 
sentencing.   Compare Barker, 407 U.S. at 535 (finding that the 
record strongly suggested the defendant  “hoped to take advantage 
of the delay [in trial] in which he had acquiesced and thereby 
obtain a dismissal of the charges” but that the defendant 
“definitely did not want to be tried”).  Because Canosa’s 
assertion of his rights on June 4, 2020 is entitled  to strong 
evidentiary weight, and in view of all the other issues weighing 
in Canosa’s favor, the third Barker factor—the timeliness of 
Canosa’s assertion of undue delay —weighs in favor of  Canosa.       
4. Prejudice to the defendant  
We now turn to the fourt h Barker factor to determine 
whether the delay in sentencing prejudiced Canosa .  In Barker, 
the United States Supreme Court analyzed prejudice by placing a 
premium on whether the delay impaired the defense:   
Prejudice, of course, should be assessed in the light of 
the interests of defendants which the speedy trial right 
was designed to protect.  This Court has identified three 
such interests:  (i) to prevent oppressive pretrial 
incarceration; (ii) to minimize anxiety and concern of the 
accused; and (iii) to limit the possibility that the 
defense will be impaired. Of these, the most serious is the 
last, because the inability of a defendant adequately to 
prepare his case skews the fairness of the entire system .  
 
Barker, 407 U.S. at 532 (footnote omitted)(emph asis added).   
Given the seriousness of Canosa’s liberty interest at 
stake, we begin with analysis of the third interest enumerated 
in Barker.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35  
(continued . . .)  Canosa contends  that the government’s undue delay in 
sentencing  prejudiced  him with respect to parole considerat ions, 
and deprived  him of his constitutional right to allocution.   
With respect to parole considerations, Canosa argues that the 
unreasonable delay in sentencing prejudiced him by delaying his 
ability to commence mandatory minimum term proceedings with the  
Hawaiʻi Paroling Authority  (“HPA”), which in turn impaired his 
ability to access rehabilitative programming, and extended the 
time he would be ineligible  for rehabilitative services.  
Canosa’s argument has merit.  It is axiomatic that an undue 
delay in se ntencing necessitates  a corresponding undue delay in 
commencing proceedings with the H PA.  This court agrees that the 
State’s delay in sentencing Canosa effected a corresponding 
delay in Canosa’s proceedings with the HPA, which substantially 
prejudiced Can osa by impairing his ability to obtain a mandatory 
minimum term and commence rehabilitative services.    
With respect to allocution, a  convicted defendant  is 
guaranteed  the right of allocution pursuant to  the due process 
clause, article 1, section 5, of the  Constitution of the State 
of Hawai‘i, and as enshrined in HRPP Rule 32(a) and HRS § 706 -
604(1).14  See State v. Carlton, 146 Hawai‘i, 16, 25, 455 P.3d 
                     
14 See Carlton, 146 Hawai‘i at 25, 455 P.3d at 365 (“It is the duty 
of the trial court to directly address the defendant and ensure the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 356, 365 (2019).   This court has held that in order for the 
right of allocution to be meaningful, a defen dant must be 
afforded an opportunity to exercise the right at a meaningful 
time and in a meaningful manner , as follows :  
As stated, the right of presentence allocution is an 
important constitutional right guaranteed under the due 
process clause of the Hawai‘i Constitution.  State v. 
Hernandez , 143 Hawai‘i 501, 509, 431  P.3d 1274, 1282 (2018). 
We have observed that “procedural due process requires that 
a person have an ‘opportunity to be heard at a meaningful 
time and in a meaningful manner.’”  In re Applicati on of 
Maui Elec. Co. , 141 Hawai‘i 249, 269, 408  P.3d 1, 21 (2017) 
(quoting  Freitas v. Admin. Dir. of Courts , 108 Hawai‘i 31, 
44, 116 P.3d 673, 686 (2005)). As a due process right, a 
defendant's right of allocution is violated if the court 
fails to afford t he defendant an opportunity to exercise 
the right at a meaningful time and in a meaningful 
manner. See, e.g. , State v. C arvalho, 90 Hawai‘i 280, 286, 
978 P.2d 718, 724 (1999) (a sentencing court must afford a 
defendant the right of presentence allocution 
“before ruling on the applicability of the young adult 
defendants statute”). In order to be meaningful, the 
opportunity for allocution must be reasonably calculated to 
achieve its  purposes of providing the defendant with an 
opportunity to plead for mitigati on, contest the factual 
bases for sentencing, and acknowledge wrongdoing.  See State 
v. Chow, 77 Hawai‘i 241, 250, 883 P.2d  663, 672 (App. 1994) . 
 
Carlton, 146 Hawai‘i at 25–26, 455 P.3d at 365–66. (internal 
citations cleaned up).  
                     
(. . . continued) 
 
defendant's right of allocution is upheld.  See State v. Schaefer , 117 Hawai‘i 
490, 498, 184  P.3d 805, 813 (App. 2008) (“We know of no effective or adequate 
manner in which a defendant's right of presentence allocution may be 
constitutionally realized than to affirmatively require that the trial court 
make direct inquiry  of the defendant 's wish to address the court before 
sentence is imposed.” (quoting  Chow, 77 Hawai‘i at 247, 883 P.2d at 669)). 
This duty is also imposed on the trial court by the language of  HRS § 706 -
604(1), which, as noted above, provides that “ the court shall afford  a fair 
opportunity to the defendant to be heard on the issue of the defendant's 
disposition.” (Emphasis added.) HRPP Rule 32(a) uses similar mandatory 
language, instructing that “before suspending or imposing sentence,  the court 
shall address the defendant p ersonally .”)(emphasis in original).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 Here, a review of the reco rd in the instant case makes 
clear that Canosa was deprived of his constitutional right to 
allocution  at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner  by 
the State’s failure to sentence Canosa prior to the expiration 
of the ordinary terms . 
As discussed here in under the third Barker factor, 
Canosa was entitled to the reasonable presumption that when his 
illegal sentence was vacated and remanded on April 20, 2018, he 
would be resentenced before the September 22, 2019 expiration of 
his ordinary maximum term (ap proximately seventeen months 
later).  The alternative scenario makes the reasonability of 
this presumption plainly evident : should t he State fail to 
impose sentence by that time , it would create the unusual 
situation whereby a sentencing court, empowered t o use its 
discretion to impose an ordinary maximum term, would find that 
the defendant  had already been materially detained beyond it.   
Such a circumstance  may deprive the defendant’s sentencing 
proceedings of the appearance of justice , where a sentencing  
court faced with such a dilemma may be perceived as having been 
constrained by these facts to impose extended terms , or—even 
more unjust —actually doing so.   Such circumstances may also 
suggest that the only way to preserve the appearance of justice 
under these facts would be to impose the ordinary maximum term 
and acknowledge the State’s error of over -detention.  This too *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 is inadequate, as the court may also feel constrained in so 
doing, and desire to impose extended terms but dare not for 
concern with res pect to the optics of injustice .  
For these reasons and more, t he instant case  raises 
this court’s concern that  Canosa has not received the appearance 
of justice, and was deprived of sentencing proceedings that were 
fundamentally fair.   
The State had nine  months from the denial of 
certiorari, and seventeen months from the ICA’s judgment  on 
appeal, to sentence Canosa prior to the expiration of his 
ordinary terms.  That the government failed to do so because of 
neglect brings the unreasonable nature of Canos a’s delay in 
sentencing into sharp relief.   
This unreasonable delay in sentencing Canosa 
prejudiced Canosa and depriv ed him of his right to allocution 
and argument for receiving an ordinary term before it expired.  
Canosa (1) had served nearly ten years o f imprisonment; (2)  was 
on remand awaiting sentencing following the vacatur of his 
illegal sentence, with a new  opportunity to be sentenced  to an 
ordinary maximum term ; and (3) faced the prospect of an 
additional decade  of imprisonment  should he be unable to 
persuade the resentencing court to impose the ordinary term .  
His right of allocution was an opportunity to marshal resources 
to prepare for an effective allocution aimed at protecting his *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 serious liberty interest in the decade that h ung in the balance.   
Without any notice, and without any justification, the State 
impaired Canosa’s defense by allowing the expiration of Canosa’s 
ordinary maximum term to elapse prior to sentencing.   
Thus, the State’s failure to provide Canosa th e 
opportunity for allocutio n prior to the expiration of the 
ordinary term is evidence  of the State ’s failure  to provide 
allocution in a “meaningful time” and a “meaningful manner.”   
Canosa’s right to allocution  was constitutionally impaired, 
satisfying the third and most critical pr ong of this prejudice 
factor.  The weight of this finding renders analysis of the 
other two prongs, oppressive incarceration and anxiety, 
unnecessary.   
The record plainly demonstrates that  the State’s undue 
delay in sentencing prejudiced Canosa with respe ct to parole 
considerations, and deprived  him of his constitutional right to 
allocution.   
5. Balance of the factors  
Canosa has been subject to a sentencing delay of 
sixteen months and seventeen days that deprived him of his right 
to allocution and a sentenci ng proceeding that was fundamentally 
fair.  The government was negligent in allowing Canosa’s 
sentencing to “slip through the cracks,” and while this is a 
more neutral reason than an intentional delay, it still weighs *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
40 in Canosa’s favor.  Canosa asserted hi s rights to be sentenced 
without unreasonable delay, and even if we were to find that 
Canosa bears some responsibility for the situation in that his 
counsel stayed silent and failed to request a timely sentencing 
prior to June 4, 2020, the facts remain tha t (1) Canosa has no 
obligation to ask to be sentenced,  and (2) the State  failed to 
fulfill its duty to sentence Canosa in a timely manner .  
Further, the prejudice here is truly significant and materially 
impaired Canosa’s defens e, as Canosa  (1) was unable to commence 
proceedings with the HPA and remained ineligible for 
rehabilitative services, and  (2) was not afforded the 
opportunity for allocution in a meaningful time , and in a 
meaningful manner , where an additional decade of imprisonment 
was at stake.   
We conclude that in light of the reasons for the delay 
and the prejudice established by Canosa, and considering all the 
circumstances, the delay in Canosa’s resentencing violated the 
due process clause under article 1, section 5 of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution and the Fourteenth  Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.   In so finding, we do not need to reach Canosa’s 
remaining points of error.  
We highlight  the narrowness of this holding.  This is 
an unusual case where the chronology and facts compel the 
conclusion that Canosa’s rights were violated for the reasons *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
41 set forth herein.  This court’s finding that Canosa’s due 
process rights were violated by the unreasonable delay in 
sentencing constitutes the third instance of government error in 
the Canosa trilo gy:  Canosa I  was vacated and remanded for 
retrial on prosecutorial misconduct grounds ; Canosa II  vacated 
an illegally severe sentence and remanded for sentencing ; and 
Canosa III  finds Canosa was deprived of due process with respect 
to unreasonable delay i n sentencing, as well as with respect to 
allocution rights.  
6. Remedy for the violation  
There being a clear due process violation with respect 
to defendant’s sentencing, pursuant to this court’s authority 
under Hawai‘i Revised Statutes § 602 -5(a)(6)(2016) to “take such 
other steps as may be necessary . . . for the promotion of 
justice in matters pending before it,”  the Petitioner is to be 
released from State custody forthwith , and the remainder of his   
sentence is vacated.  
V.  CONCLUSION  
  For the foregoing r easons, the ICA’s June 6, 2022 
Judgment on Appeal is vacated .  Petitioner is to be released 
from State custody forthwith.  The case is remanded to the 
circuit court to enter an order (1) vacating its Order Denying 
Defendant’s HRPP Rule 35(a) Motion to Corr ect Illegal Sentence 
and (2) amend ing its July 10, 2020 Amended Judgment of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
42                                    /s/ Todd W. Eddins      Conviction and Sentence  to reflect time served, nunc pro tunc  
from the date of Petitioner’s release.   
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Petitioner /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
 
       /s/ Paula A. N akayama  
Stephen K. Tsushima,
for Respondent   
   
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
 
       /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
  
