        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000762 18-DEC-2013 09:54 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
SUSHIL BASNET, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-11-0000762
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000762; FC-CR. NO. 11-1-1675)
 
December 18, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold first, that respectfully, the Family Court of 
the First Circuit (the family circuit court) should have 
arraigned Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Sushil Basnet (Basnet) in accordance with Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
10(a), but because it failed to do so, the case must be dismissed without prejudice. 
Second, in the event of retrial, we hold that 
the charge was sufficient inasmuch as it “fully defin[ed] the         
       
        
            
        
     
       
        
       
         
     
          
         
         
        
          
         
 
        
       
       
      
        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons
 
of common understanding.” State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 282,
 
567 P.2d 1242, 1245 (1977). Accordingly, the family circuit
 court’s judgment of conviction and sentence entered on September
 23, 2013 is vacated and the case is dismissed without prejudice. 
I.
 
A. Arrest and Complaint
 
Basnet was arrested following an incident that took
 
place the morning of June 7, 2011 at the Himalayan Kitchen
 restaurant. Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (the 
State) filed a Complaint against Basnet on June 9, 2011. The
 caption on the Complaint stated “IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE
 FIRST CIRCUIT” and the Complaint stated as follows:
 
The undersigned Deputy Prosecuting Attorney of the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii charges:
 
On or about the 7th day of June, 2011, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, SUSHIL BASNET did
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly physically abuse
[Basnet’s wife], a family or household member , thereby
committing the Offense of Abuse of Family or Household
1
Members [(AFHM)], in violation of Section 709-906(1)[ ] of
the Hawaii Revised Statutes [(HRS)]. SUSHIL BASNET is
 
1 HRS § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2006) provides:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in
concert, to physically abuse a family or household member or
to refuse compliance with the lawful order of a police
officer under subsection (4). The police, in investigating
any complaint of abuse of a family or household member, upon
request, may transport the abused person to a hospital or
safe shelter.
 
For purposes of this section, “family or household member”
means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses or
reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a child in
common, parents, children, persons related by consanguinity,
and persons jointly residing or formerly residing in the
same dwelling unit.
 
2
         
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
subject to sentencing in accordance with Section 709-906(5)(a) of
the [HRS].
 
(Emphasis added.) Basnet posted a $1,000 cash bail and received
 
a notice to appear at the “FAMILY [court] - Alakea” on June 21,
 2011. 
B. Proceedings Before Judge Choy
 
On June 21, 2011, a hearing apparently took place in
 
the family district court before Judge Darryl Y.C. Choy. The
 Pre-Trial Order in the record, entered on June 21, 2011 by Judge
 Choy states at the top of the form that the order is from the
 “Family Court of the First Circuit.” In the section of the form
 titled “Trial Setting”, it indicates that Basnet waived reading
 of the charge, entered a plea of not guilty, and that a jury
 trial was demanded, and thereby the case was committed to circuit
 court. Basnet was ordered to appear next on September 19, 2011,
 at 1111 Alakea St., Courtroom 8C.
 C. Pre-Trial Proceedings Before Judge Castagnetti
 
On September 19, 2011, the parties appeared before the
 
Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti, in the family circuit court. 
Both parties indicated that they were ready to proceed to trial,
 and the family circuit court ordered the parties back to appear
 the following day for trial. 
On Tuesday, September 20, 2011, the family circuit
 
court informed the parties that the case was a “backup case[] for
 trial this week,” and ordered the parties to return that
 Thursday, September 22, 2011. The deputy prosecuting attorney
 
3
         
         
               
           
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
also made an oral motion to amend the Complaint in the case. He
 
stated that “[b]asically, the heading at the top says in the
 District Court. However, it was filed in the Family Court, and I
 just have corrected that with an amended [C]omplaint.” At that
 time, defense counsel stated that he had “a rather lengthy
 objection”. Defense counsel gave his notes he had made outlining
 his objection to Judge Castagnetti, after he indicated that the
 notes did not contain any privileged communications. The family
 circuit court indicated that it would take the State’s oral
 motion to amend the Complaint under advisement, to address when
 the parties returned later that week.
 
On Thursday, September 22, 2011, the family circuit
 
court addressed the issue of amending the Complaint that was
 raised by the deputy prosecuting attorney at the prior hearing. 
The deputy prosecuting attorney maintained that the purpose of
 amending the Complaint was to correct the typographical error
 that the case was in family court, and not in district court. 
Defense counsel stated his position that the error was
 substantive rather than typographical. In his view, the court
 lacked jurisdiction because Basnet was arraigned in circuit
 court
2 and should have instead been arraigned in district court. 
He stated as follows:
 
2
 As will be discussed infra, there was ongoing confusion regarding
 
the status of the court presided over by Judge Choy. It was actually a family
district court, but defense counsel at this stage of the case apparently
thought it was a family circuit court, perhaps because, as noted, Judge Choy’s
pre-trial order had the heading “Family Court of the First Circuit.”
 
4
         
            
  
       
        
          
        
         
         
          
          
 
       
        
            
       
      
           
           
        
          
     
        
         
         
          
        
           
          
          
          
          
        
          
          
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Your Honor, my position is that it is not a typographical error.
It is substantive.
 
This court has no jurisdiction for two very
fundamental reasons. And I understand that it’s probably
very upsetting because what it means is that all of these
cases are inappropriately being processed. Yet, as you
know, the appellate court did strike down hundreds of -­several hundred DUI cases last year because they, in fact,
were not being properly charged. My argument is, one, this
case is not properly charged and, two, it is not being
properly processed.
It’s very clear that the family court rules
specifically state that the [HRPP] govern these types of
cases. And, in fact, there are no rules in the family court
rules governing the charge, the arraignment, and the
processing of the defendant. That’s clear.
 
So we look to the [HRPP]. [The HRPP] are also very
clear on its face, and it says that if someone is charged
with a non-felony, they don’t get arraigned in circuit
court. Family court is circuit court. It was inappropriate
 to arraign Mr. Basnet here .  I
t’s  -- so  as  a  consequence,
 
that  a rraignment  is  void.
Th
e appropriate place is in the district court. And
then when an individual either refuses to elect jury trial
or demand jury trial, it is incumbent upon the [district]
court to transfer it to the circuit court, and the circuit
court does not obtain jurisdiction until the district court
3
does so .[ ] So I’m not simply arguing that he cannot amend
 
the [C]omplaint. I’m arguing that this court does not have
 jurisdiction.
 
(Emphases added.) Defense counsel also made further arguments
 
regarding the sufficiency of the Complaint for failure to define
 “physical abuse” or “family or household member”, alleging that
 the Complaint should be dismissed pursuant to State v. Wheeler,
 121 Hawai' i 383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009). 
The family circuit court rejected defense counsel’s
 
arguments regarding the arraignment, because it noted that Basnet
 was actually arraigned in a family district court: 
THE COURT: . . . . First, let’s deal with the issue
of the State’s oral motion to amend the [C]omplaint to have
the heading listed as it being in the family court as
opposed to the district court which [the deputy prosecuting
 
3
 This is the basis of defense counsel’s ultimate argument on this
 
issue, specifically, that Basnet should have been re-arraigned in the court
that conducted the jury trial.
 
5
         
         
      
        
    
     
          
       
         
    
    
   
          
        
         
       
         
     
  
   
           
        
       
          
      
        
 
   
         
            
           
          
         
        
         
         
            
          
       
 
      
         
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
attorney] has represented is a typographical error. So I
 
understand [defense counsel’s] argument that this court
lacks jurisdiction over the subject -- are you saying
 
subject matter of the [C]omplaint?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] . . . Yes.
THE COURT: Okay. And you’re also saying that the
Rules of Penal Procedure were not followed appropriately
because the defendant was arraigned in a circuit court as
opposed to a district court?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] That’s correct.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: Okay, what about the fact that under the
[HRS] that there are family district judges appointed who
have the same powers as district court judges, and the
courtroom next-door where the arraignment took place, those
were family district court judges , and the family court has
exclusive original jurisdiction over cases involving
husbands and wi[ves]?
 . . . .
 
(Emphases added.) The court explained that the statutory scheme
 
establishes both family district courts and family circuit
 courts, and concluded that Basnet had been properly arraigned in
 the family district court:
 
THE COURT: Okay. All right. All right, so [HRS]
Chapter 571 pertains to family court, and specifically, [HRS
4
§] 571-3 [(2006) ] establishes that family courts are
divisions of the circuit courts within the state . HRS [§]
571-8 [(2006)] establishes district family courts in
addition to the district courts established under HRS [§]
5
604-1 [(1993) ] .
4 HRS § 571-3 provides:
 
The family courts shall be divisions of the circuit courts
of the State and shall not be deemed to be other courts as
 that term is used in the State Constitution. A family court
shall be held at the courthouse in each circuit, or other
duly designated place, by the judge or judges of the
respective family courts as herein defined. The chief
 justice of the supreme court may temporarily assign a family
court judge to preside in another circuit when the urgency
of one or more cases requires the chief justice to do so.
In any case in which it has jurisdiction the court shall
exercise general equity powers as authorized by law.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
 HRS § 604-1 provides, in relevant part:
 
There shall be established in each of the judicial circuits
of the State a district court with the powers and under the
(continued...)
 
6
         
        
          
          
        
       
          
         
        
        
          
         
        
          
  
   
      
           
         
         
         
        
          
        
        
   
 
      
         
           
        
          
         
         
        
         
       
         
 
      
     
   
         
      
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6
Pursuant to HRS [§] 571-8(b)[ ], the Chief Justice may
designate a district family judge to act as a district judge
and, when so appointed, shall have all the powers of a
district judge appointed pursuant to HRS [§] 604-2 [(Supp.
7
1994) ].
8
[HRS §] 571-8.5 [(2006) ] gives district family judges
the power to make and issue all orders and writs necessary
or appropriate in aid of their original jurisdiction . And
 
HRS [§] 571-14 [(Supp. 2008)] gives the family court
exclusive original jurisdiction to try an adult charged with
an offense other than a felony against the person of the
defendant’s husband or wife, and in particular, that’s
 
5(...continued)
conditions herein set forth, which shall be styled as
follows:
 
(1) For the First Judicial Circuit: The District Court of
 
the First Circuit.
 
. . . .
 
6 HRS § 571-8(b) states, in relevant part:
 
(b) When in the discretion of the chief justice of the
supreme court the urgency or volume of cases so requires,
the chief justice may appoint one or more district family
judges for each judicial circuit . In addition, within any
circuit, the chief justice may designate any district judge
of the district court to act as a district family judge
within that circuit; the judge when so designated shall
exercise the powers of a district family judge appointed
pursuant to this section.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7 HRS § 604-2 provides, in pertinent part:
 
(b) The chief justice shall appoint district judges to serve
on a per diem basis and as may be necessary to provide
auxiliary judicial functions in the several districts of the
State. Per diem district judges may engage in the private
practice of law during their term of service, and shall
receive per diem compensation for the days on which actual
service is rendered based on the monthly rate of
compensation paid to a district court judge. For the
 purpose of determining per diem compensation in this
section, a month shall be deemed to consist of twenty-one
days.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
8
 HRS § 571-8.5 provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) The district family judges may:
 
. . . .
 
(3) Make and issue all orders and writs necessary or
appropriate in aid of their original jurisdiction;
 
. . . .
 
7
         
  
         
         
           
         
         
          
         
          
           
          
      
         
     
   
      
   
      
       
   
 
        
            
            
               
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9
[HRS §] 571-14(2)(B)[ ].
So I’m going to find that this court has jurisdiction,
and also, that the defendant was properly arraigned by a
district family court judge . And so I’m going to grant the
State’s oral motion to amend the [C]omplaint. I’ll also
 
find that there’s been no prejudice to the defendant with
respect to the amendment . It was, as the State represented,
a typographical error, that this case is a family court
criminal matter. It was assigned to a family court criminal
number, and it was just a matter of changing the heading to
be in the family court of the first circuit, State of
Hawaii.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Defense counsel then asked the family circuit court to
 
take judicial notice “of the lack of a commitment order from the
 
district court to the circuit court.” He also stated that he
 “would like findings with respect to whether the family circuit
 court is declaring that it is unnecessary for the family district
 court judge and the family district court, if you will, then, to
 not abide by the [HRPP] which specifically require a commitment
 order and a second arraignment within 14 days[.]”
10 The family
 
circuit court declined to make the requested findings, but stated
 that there was no commitment order that was issued by the
 
9 HRS § 571-14 provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) Except as provided in sections 603-21.5 and 604-8, the
[family] court shall have exclusive jurisdiction:
 
. . . .
 
(2) To try any adult charged with:
 
. . . .
 
(B) An offense, other than a felony,
against the person of the defendant’s husband or
wife[.]
 
. . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
10
 Defense counsel was presumably referring to HRPP Rule 10(a),
 
discussed further infra, which provides that “A defendant who has been held by
district court to answer in circuit court shall be arraigned in circuit court
within 14 days after the district court’s oral order of commitment . . . .”
(Emphasis added.)
 
8
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
district family judge after arraignment of the defendant. 
Defense counsel responded that “there was no subsequent
 arraignment within the 14 days, as required by the rules.” 
As to defense counsel’s argument based on Wheeler, the
 
family circuit court took Basnet’s oral motion to dismiss the
 Complaint under advisement and indicated that it would make
 findings as to the issues raised regarding the sufficiency of the
 Complaint.
 D. Trial, Sentencing, and Post-Trial Proceedings
 
The family circuit court then heard the motions in
 
limine and the case proceeded to voir dire and jury selection. 
Trial commenced that same day. 
The following day, September 23, 2011, trial was set to 
continue. Before the jury was brought in, the family circuit court orally ruled on defense’s oral motion to dismiss the Complaint pursuant to Wheeler for failure to state a claim or failure to state an offense. Relying on Wheeler, and State v. Mita, 124 Hawai' i 385, 245 P.3d 458 (2010), the family circuit 
court denied the motion. 
Defense counsel also asked the family circuit court to
 
reconsider its earlier finding that “because a District Court
 judge conducted the arraignment, the matter occurred in the
 District Court of the . . . Family Court, District Court
 division.” Defense counsel averred that Judge Choy was a per
 diem judge, but not necessarily a District Court judge. He
 therefore argued that there was no evidence that the earlier
 
9
         
        
       
       
         
         
         
            
          
        
       
         
         
      
       
        
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
proceeding occurred in the District Court, and that, in the
 
alternative, even if it was in the District Court, there was no
 commitment order to the Circuit Court. 
The family circuit court then asked defense counsel how
 
his client was prejudiced by any of the proceedings “from the
 time he was arrested to arraignment and plea to today[.]” 
Defense counsel responded that “[Basnet] has been prejudiced by
 the [family circuit] court not having jurisdiction or he wouldn’t
 be here today.” Defense counsel said:
 
And it’s our opinion that the [family circuit] court
doesn’t have jurisdiction, that the rules require, again,
arraignment in the District Court, followed by commitment
orders, followed by a second arraignment . Now, at that
second arraignment, Mr. Basnet may have already had time to
consult with counsel, had gone to the Public Defender, may
or may not have waived jury trial. It’s unknown in terms of
 what sequence of events would have occurred. But he was
 denied a second arraignment which he was entitled to.
 
(Emphasis added.) This was construed as an oral motion for
 
reconsideration of the family circuit court’s ruling. The family
 circuit court asked defense counsel to put the motion in writing,
 said it would give the State an opportunity to brief the issue,
 and stated that the motion would be contingent on the outcome of
 trial.
 
Trial then continued that day, with the family circuit
 
court giving the jury the following instructions, in pertinent
 part:
 
In the [C]omplaint, the defendant, Sushil Basnet, is
charged with the offense of Abuse of Family or Household
Members.
 
A person commits the offense of Abuse of Family or
Household Members if he intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly physically abuses a family or household member.
There are three material elements to the offense of
 
Abuse of Family or Household Members, each of which the
 
10
         
      
   
          
       
     
       
       
     
        
       
     
        
      
        
       
       
   
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These three elements are:
 
1. That on or about June 7, 2011, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i, the defendant
physically abused [the defendant’s wife]; and
2. That at that time, the defendant and [the
defendant’s wife] were family or household members; and
3. That the defendant did so intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly as to each of the foregoing
elements.
 
Family or household member mean spouses or reciprocal
beneficiaries, former spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries,
persons who have a child in common, parents, children,
persons related by consanguinity, and persons jointly
residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
Physical abuse means causing bodily injury to another
person.
Bodily injury means physical pain, illness, or any
impairment of physical condition.
 . . . .
 
The jury deliberations took place that day, and in the
 
afternoon the jury indicated that it had reached a verdict. The
 
jury found Basnet guilty of AFHM. Basnet was also sentenced the
 same day to two years’ probation, including, as special terms and
 conditions of probation, that Basnet serve two days in jail with
 credit for time served, pay $55.00 as a Crime Victim Compensation
 Fee, pay a Probation Service Fee of $150.00, and undergo domestic
 violence intervention as directed by his probation officer. 
Basnet was ordered to appear on October 19, 2011 for execution of
 the sentence or conditions of bail pending appeal. 
After sentencing, the family circuit court briefly
 
raised the issue of Basnet’s previous motions, stating that they
 were denied for the reasons that the court had already indicated. 
Defense counsel indicated that he did not intend to file his
 motion for reconsideration in writing, but rather decided to
 “leave it to appeal.” The following exchange regarding
 arraignment then took place:
 
11
         
           
           
         
         
        
         
           
         
      
        
          
        
          
          
         
         
         
  
          
   
     
     
          
      
          
           
         
          
          
   
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
THE COURT: Okay, I understand that. All right. So
 
as to -- we can do this then. [Deputy prosecuting
 
attorney], as -- as to [defense counsel’s] then oral motion
for reconsideration of his motions to dismiss for lack of
 jurisdiction, I think particularly under [] Wheeler or -­
and, also, the motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction,
specifically that -- I think we -- there [were] a number of
 arguments -- and, [defense counsel], you can correct me if
I’m not stating this properly -- the  fact  th
 at  the  Family
Dist
rict Court lacked jurisdiction under -- under the Rules
 
of Penal Procedure and that after -- and that the defendant
 should have been arraigned in District Court, is that
correct, and then after he demanded a jury trial, the matter
should have been committed to Circuit Court by way of a
commitment order, and then once in Circuit Court, he was
required to have an arraignment within 14 days of his
arraignment , and then the matter should have been set -­
[Defense counsel:] Yes.
THE COURT: -- for trial? That’s the basis -­[Defense counsel:] Correct.
 THE COURT: -- of your motion?
Okay, [deputy prosecuting attorney], anything
further you want to put with respect, on the record, to
that?
 
[Deputy prosecuting attorney:] No, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: All right. And, again, the court is
 
denying that motion. There’s -- hasn’t -- as the court sees
 it, no prejudice to the defendant with respect to the
procedure that was followed in this case. And, of course,
if the appellate courts disagree, then we will find out once
they go up -­. . . .
 -- on appeal.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
II.
 
A. Basnet’s Opening Brief
 
1. HRPP Rule 10(a)
 On October 18, 2011, Basnet filed a notice of appeal
 
with the ICA. Basnet’s first point of error was that “[t]he
 [family circuit] court jurisdictionally erred in denying Basnet’s
 motion to dismiss for failing to hold an arraignment within
 fourteen days of Basnet demanding a jury trial in the Family
 District court pursuant to HRPP Rule 10(a).” In connection with
 this argument, Basnet pointed out that the family circuit court
 
12
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
failed to conduct an arraignment even when he objected to not
 
having been properly arraigned. 
2. Sufficiency of the Complaint
 Basnet’s second point of error was that “the
 
[C]omplaint failed to define the terms ‘physical abuse’ and
 ‘family or household member.’” In connection with this argument,
 Basnet contended that “physical abuse” is an element of the
 offense of AFHM that “should be defined [in the Complaint] as to
 provide him with fair notice of what the element means.” Basnet
 further argued that while HRS § 709-906(1) provides a definition
 of “family or household member,” the definition was not included
 in the Complaint and thus the “mere citation in the written
 charge to HRS § 709-906(1) . . . simply does not cure the defect
 in the charge.” 
B. State’s Answering Brief 
1. HRPP Rule 10(a) Applicability
 In its Answering Brief, the State first alleged that
 
Basnet should be judicially estopped from arguing that he should
 have been re-arraigned in the circuit court, because he had
 argued before the trial court judge that the family circuit court
 lacked jurisdiction because there was no arraignment in the
 district court at all.
 
The State argued in the alternative that, should the
 
appellate court consider Basnet’s claim regarding the
 arraignment, the arraignment did in fact comport with HRPP Rule
 10. 	On this point, the State contended that “the record shows
 
13
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that Basnet was initially arraigned in the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit” rather than the District Court, and thus “HRPP
 Rule 10(a)’s mandate is inapplicable to his situation.” Hence,
 the State alleged, the arraignment in the family court of the
 first circuit did not deprive the family court of jurisdiction to
 hear the case.
 
2. Sufficiency of the Complaint
 With respect to Basnet’s second point of error, the
 
State argued that the family circuit court correctly interpreted
 Wheeler and Mita in denying Basnet’s motion to dismiss for lack
 of jurisdiction because the terms “physical abuse” and “family or
 household member” were not defined in the charge. The State
 contended that “[a] person of ordinary understanding would know
 the common meaning of the words ‘physical,’ ‘abuse,’ ‘family,’
 ‘household,’ and ‘member.’” Hence, the State argued that Basnet
 had sufficient notice of the cause of the accusation, because
 “[h]e understood that he was charged with causing pain, i.e.,
 physical abuse, to his wife, i.e., a family member.” 
C. ICA’s Memorandum Opinion
 
As noted, the ICA filed a Memorandum Opinion in this
 
case on June 19, 2013. State v. Basnet, No. CAAP-11-0000762,
 
2013 WL 3094944, at *1 (App. June 19, 2013). 
1. Interpretation and Application of HRPP Rule 10
 The ICA first addressed Basnet’s contention that the
 
circuit family court lacked subject matter jurisdiction because
 his arraignment did not comply with the HRPP. Id. at *2. 
14
         
          
           
            
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Notably, the ICA concluded that “[a]lthough the State argues
 
11
 otherwise,[ ] Basnet correctly asserts he was arraigned in the
district family court, not the circuit family court. The
 presiding judge at the arraignment hearing was a per diem
 judge[], and per diem judges serve as district judges only.” Id.
 
(emphasis added) (citing HRS § 604-2 and HRS § 571-8).
 
However, the ICA determined that any impropriety with
 
respect to the arraignment and failure of the family district
 court to enter a separate commitment order “constituted harmless
 error and did not warrant dismissal.” Id. According to the ICA,
 
“[t]he purpose of arraignment is to inform the defendant of the
 charges and of their [sic] rights and to give the opportunity to
 plead.” Id. Thus, in this case, where Basnet waived reading of
 
the charge, entered a plea of not guilty, and elected jury trial
 during his arraignment in the family district court, and where
 the pre-trial order entered by the family district court
 specifically noted the case was committed to the family circuit
 court for jury trial, Basnet could not show that “the alleged
 irregularities affected his substantial rights.” Id. 
2. Sufficiency of the Complaint
 Second, the ICA noted that this court’s opinion in Mita
 
held that “‘the State need only allege the statutory definition
 
11
 To reiterate, in its Answering Brief, the State had argued that
 
HRPP Rule 10 was inapplicable because “the record shows that Basnet was
 
initially arraigned in the Family Court of the First Circuit” rather than the
 family district court.
 
15
          
         
        
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of a term when it creates an additional essential element of the 
offense, and the term itself does not provide a person of common understanding with fair notice of that element.” Id. (quoting 
Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 392, 246 P.3d at 465). Applying Mita’s 
holding, the ICA stated that “Basnet does not contend that either of the terms [‘physical abuse’ or ‘family or household member’] created an additional essential element of the offense.” Id. at 
*3. 
The charge was sufficient according to the ICA, because
 
the use of terms in the charge was consistent with commonly
 understood meanings, such that Basnet had fair notice. Id. It
 
noted that this court has held that the ordinary reading of
 “physical abuse” gives sufficient notice of the prohibited
 conduct, id. (citing State v. Kameenui, 69 Haw. 620, 623, 752
 P.2d 1250, 1252 (1988)), and that the [C]omplaint did not need to
 set forth the full statutory definition of “family or household
 member” because “it adequately informed Basnet of the nature and
 cause of the accusation against him.” Id. Hence, the ICA
 
upheld the judgment of the family circuit court as to both of
 Basnet’s points of error.
 
III.
 
Basnet lists the following questions in his
 
Application:
 
(1) Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
failure to arraign Basnet in [family circuit court] was
harmless error where Basnet timely objected before trial?
 
16
         
          
       
         
         
         
       
          
       
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2) Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
[AFHM] charge was sufficient under State v. Wheeler ?
 
The State did not file a Response.
 
IV.
 
A. Challenge to Arraignment Procedures
 
In connection with his first question, Basnet argues
 
the family circuit court “lacked jurisdiction because [Basnet]
 
had never been arraigned in that court as required by [HRPP] Rule
 10(a).” HRPP Rule 10(a) provides, to reiterate:
 
(a) A defendant who has been held by district court to
answer in circuit court shall be arraigned in circuit court
within 14 days after the district court’s oral order of
commitment following (i) arraignment and plea, where the
defendant elected jury trial or did not waive the right to
jury trial or (ii) initial appearance or preliminary
hearing, whichever occurs last.
 
(Emphasis added.) Basnet avers instead that, “[The family
 
circuit court] just ordered the jury trial to proceed overruling
 [Basnet’s] objection.” According to Basnet, (1) “there must be
 an arraignment which is intended to identify . . . the accused,
 inform[] him of the charge, and obtain a plea[,]” (citing
 Territory v. Marshall, 13 Haw. 76, 83 (Haw. Terr. 1900)), (2)
 “[a]n arraignment is a critical stage of a criminal
 proceeding[,]” (citing Hamilton v. Alabama, 368 U.S. 52, 54
 (1961)), and “it must [be] before a judge with proper
 jurisdiction[,]” (citing State v. Patterson, 780 S.W.2d 675, 680
 (Mo. App. 1989)), (3) “the [family] district court arraignment
 was a nullity as it was not in the court in which Basnet was
 tried,” and (4) “a conviction is invalid if there is no
 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
arraignment and the defendant makes a valid timely objection[,]”
 
(citing Blanton v. State, 115 N.E.2d 122, 123 (Ind. 1953)). 
Basnet contends that, as with a timely objection to the
 
sufficiency of a charge, a criminal defendant should also not be
 required to show prejudice where he or she makes a timely
 objection to the lack of an arraignment, because “there is no
 charge for the defendant to answer.” Basnet asserts that,
 contrary to this rationale, the ICA, “in effect, applied the
 liberal construct construction standard, essentially a harmless
 error standard, to determine if [Petitioner] was entitled to
 relief.” (Citing State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1014,
 1019 (1983).) Basnet maintains that “[w]here a defendant makes a
 proper and timely objection, [the liberal construction standard]
 has no application.” (Citing State v. Walker, 126 Haw. 475, 489,
 273 P.3d 1161, 1175 (2012).)
 B. Challenge to the Sufficiency of the Charge
 
Regarding Basnet’s second question, he asserts that
 
“[s]ince this court’s decisions in Wheeler [] and Mita [], there
 has been much confusion as to when definitions not included in a
 criminal statute must be included in a charge so that a criminal
 defendant receives fair notice of the charge.” According to
 Basnet, “[t]he ICA . . . chose to follow Mita[,] where this court
 held that the meaning of ‘animal nuisance’ was apparent from the
 words themselves rather than Wheeler which held that a definition 
18
         
   
      
              
            
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not in the criminal statute must be expressly charged because the
 
definition included an element of the offense.” 
Basnet construes Wheeler and Mita as holding that “a
 
person charged with a crime is thereby on notice of all
 definitions that apply to the terms used in the charge unless the
 definition includes an additional element of the offense in the
 form of an attendant circumstances.” He argues that such a
 holding is “patently arbitrary” and that “[t]his court should
 review this case in order to clarify/refine when Wheeler or Mita
 applies to particular facts in a given case or whether one should
 be overruled.” Basnet concludes that in this case, the terms
 ‘physical abuse’ and ‘family or household member’ are not self-
evident and an ordinary person has no idea of what they mean[,]”
 therefore, the ICA gravely erred in applying Mita to this case. 
V.
 A.
 
As a preliminary matter, it is noted that the ICA
 
concluded (1) that Basnet was initially arraigned in the family
 district court, with Judge Choy presiding, and (2) that no court
 entered a separate commitment order.
12 The ICA premised its
 
12
 There  appears  to  be  no  separate  written  commitment  order  as  part
 
of  the  record  on  appeal,  in  accordance  with  HRPP  Rule  5(b)(3),  although  a
checked  box  on  Judge  Choy’s  Pre-Trial  Order  indicates  that  the  case  was
committed  to  the  circuit  court.   The  State  apparently  does  not  challenge  the
conclusion  that  there  was  no  written  commitment  order.
 
In 
his Application, Basnet does not appear to premise his
arguments on the lack of a written commitment order, but rather on the lack of
an arraignment by the circuit court. Also, there is no transcript available
for the June 21, 2011 hearing in which the family district court would have
(continued...)
 
19
         
           
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
conclusion on an interpretation of HRS § 604-2 and HRS § 571-8, 
in conjunction with information about Judge Choy from the State of Hawai' i Judiciary’s 2011 Annual Report. Basnet, 2013 WL 
3094944, at *2 n.5. See The Judiciary State of Hawai' i, 2011 
Annual Report, at 32 (December 31, 2011), http://www.courts. state.hi.us/news_and_reports/reports/annual_report_stat_sup_archi ve.html. According to HRS § 604-2(b), district court judges can be appointed on a per diem basis. HRS § 571-8 establishes a district family court in each judicial circuit. No statute or court rule provides for circuit court judges to be appointed on a per diem basis. Thus, insofar as Judge Choy was a per diem judge, he presided in the family district court. Although the State argued before the ICA that Basnet was actually arraigned in the family circuit court, it did not file a Response, and thus does not appear to challenge the conclusion by the ICA that Basnet was arraigned in family district court. 
Family district courts in Hawai' i are courts of limited 
jurisdiction. See HRS § 571-8 and HRS § 571-8.5. HRS § 571-8.4 
directs that “[t]he senior judge or judge of the family court of the circuit may direct that any case coming within the jurisdictional provisions of this chapter, or all cases of a class or within a district to be designated by the senior judge or judge, shall be heard by the district family judge.” The 
12(...continued)
entered an oral commitment on the record. Under these circumstances, the
alleged lack of a written commitment order in this case need not be addressed.
 
20
         
 
         
         
         
          
               
             
              
           
             
              
              
             
            
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instant case involves “[a]n offense, other than a felony, against
 
the person of the defendant’s . . . wife[,]” HRS § 571­14(a)(2)(B). Thus, this case fell within the jurisdictional
 provisions of Chapter 571, and accordingly, could initially be
 assigned to a district family judge, that is, until the defendant
 requested a jury trial.
13 HRS § 571-8.4.
 
District courts are also courts of limited
 
jurisdiction. HRS § 604-8 states that “[i]n any case cognizable
 by a district court under this section in which the accused has a
 right to a trial by jury in the first instance, the district
 court, upon demand by the accused for a trial by jury, shall not
 exercise jurisdiction over the case, but shall examine and
 discharge or commit for trial the accused as provided by law[.]”
14
 
In this case, Basnet demanded a jury trial, and, as noted, the
 family district court stated in its Pre-Trial Order that the case
 was committed to the family circuit court.
 
HRPP Rule 5(b)(1) provides:
 
ARRAIGNMENT. In the district court, if the offense charged
against the defendant is other than a felony, the complaint
shall be filed and the proceedings shall be had in
 
13 The offense of AFHM, HRS § 709-906(1), is a misdemeanor, carrying
 
a maximum prison term of one year. See HRS § 706-663 (1993) (“the court may
sentence a person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor . . . to
imprisonment for a definite term to be fixed by the court and not to exceed
one year in the case of a misdemeanor . . . .”).
 
14 Basnet had a constitutional and statutory right to trial by jury in
 
this case. See HRS § 806-60 (1993) (any defendant charged with a crime for
which the defendant may be imprisoned for six months or more has the right to
trial by jury); State v. Kasprycki , 64 Haw. 374, 375, 641 P.2d 978, 978-79
(1982) (noting that petty offenses without the right to trial by jury are
those for which the term of imprisonment is thirty days or less).
 
21
         
            
         
         
         
        
            
       
          
         
         
          
          
  
           
             
            
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
accordance with this section (b) . . . . When the offense is
charged by complaint, arraignment shall be in open court, or
by video conference when permitted by Rule 43. The
 arraignment shall consist of the reading of the complaint to
the defendant and calling upon the defendant to plead
thereto . . . . The defendant may waive the reading of the
complaint or the recitation of the essential facts
constituting the offense charged at arraignment . . . . In
addition to the requirements of Rule 10(e), the court shall
in appropriate cases, inform the defendant of the right to
jury trial in the circuit court and that the defendant may
elect to be tried without a jury in the district court.
 
As noted, HRPP Rule 10(a) provides that “[a] defendant who has
 
been held by district court to answer in circuit court shall be
 arraigned in circuit court within 14 days after the district
 court’s oral order of commitment following (i) arraignment and
 plea, where the defendant elected jury trial or did not waive the
 right to jury trial . . . .” (Emphasis added.) 
Rule 10(a) requires that the defendant be arraigned in
 
circuit court after the order of commitment. In the instant
 case, the defendant was not arraigned in the family circuit court
 after the family district court’s order of commitment, as
 indicated in its Pre-Trial Order. Thus, it is clear that the
 family circuit court erred by not arraigning Basnet.
15
 
B. 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines “arraignment” as “[t]he
 
initial step in a criminal prosecution whereby the defendant is
 brought before the court to hear the charges and to enter a
 plea.” Black’s Law Dictionary 123 (9th ed. 2009). As noted,
 
15
 No arraignment at all took place in the family circuit court in
 
this case. Basnet did not explicitly raise any other issue with respect to
the arraignment request under HRPP Rule 10(a), and so our decision is limited
to the issue raised.
 
22
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRPP Rule 10(d) provides that “[a]rraignment in the circuit court
 
shall be conducted in open court or by video conference when
 permitted by Rule 43. The arraignment shall consist of reading
 the charge to the defendant or stating to the defendant the
 substance of the charge and calling on the defendant to plead
 thereto. The defendant shall be given a copy of the charge
 before the defendant is called upon to plead.”
 
In his Application, Basnet mentions the three purposes
 
of an arraignment, as set forth in Marshall. Marshall stated
 
that, “[t]he general rule is that there must be in every criminal
 case an arraignment and a plea, the object of the arraignment
 being to identify the accused, inform him of the charge and
 obtain his plea, the object of the plea being to make an issue to
 be tried.” 13 Haw. at 83.
 
Basnet further references State v. Kikuchi, 54 Haw.
 
496, 510 P.2d 781 (1973), for the proposition that a defendant
 can waive his or her right to an arraignment by failing to
 properly object to the lack of arraignment, where the defendant
 was fully aware of the charge. In Kikuchi, the defendant was
 initially charged in the district court for violating an
 ordinance Section 15-6.4(3a). 54 Haw. at 496, 510 P.2d at 781. 
However, after a trial, he was found guilty of the offense of
 violating Section 15-6.4(2a), for which he had never been
 charged. Id. Although the procedure is not clear from the
 
opinion, the defendant apparently then “appealed to the circuit
 
23
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court of the first circuit for a trial de novo[,]” and the
 
circuit court found him guilty of violating Section 15-6.4(2a). 
Id. This court noted, however, that the record on appeal did not
 
show that there was an arraignment of the defendant for violating
 Section 15-6.4(2a), or that he entered a plea of not guilty. Id.
 
at 496-97, 510 P.2d at 781.
 
Kikuchi posed the question of whether it is “mandatory
 
that a defendant in a criminal case be arraigned in open court
 and that he or the court enter a plea of not guilty? Or, can
 arraignment and entry of a plea of not guilty be waived
 specifically by defendant or by the conduct of the defendant
 during the course of trial?” Id. at 498, 510 P.2d at 782. This
 
court noted that “the record, as in the present case, clearly
 shows that [the defendant] was represented by counsel, was fully
 aware of the nature and substance of the accusation [under
 Section 15-6.4(2a)], knew what he was being prosecuted for,
 postured himself as being not guilty of the accusation, was tried
 as if he had pleaded not guilty, and raised no objection during
 the course of trial[.]” Id. at 500, 510 P.2d at 783 (emphasis
 
added). Under these circumstances, Kikuchi held that, “[w]e are
 of the opinion that as in the instant case where it appears from
 the record that [the defendant] had sufficient notice of the
 accusation and an adequate opportunity to defend himself in the
 prosecution he has suffered no prejudice.” Id. 
24
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
C.
 
In his Opening Brief to the ICA, Basnet alleged that
 
Kikuchi is distinguishable, on the basis that the defendant in
 
Kikuchi failed to object to the lack of an arraignment at trial,
 whereas Basnet did object in the proceedings before the family
 circuit court in this case. Indeed, Basnet maintained his
 objection throughout trial.
 
An objection to the lack of an arraignment may be 
analogized to an objection to the sufficiency of the charge, since one of the purposes of an arraignment, as noted in Marshall, is to “inform [the defendant] of the charge and obtain his plea[.]” Marshall, 13 Haw. at 83. In the sufficiency of the 
charge context, this court has applied different principles depending on whether an objection is made before the trial court or for the first time on appeal. The failure of the charging instrument to state an offense is reversible error, Jendrusch, 58 Haw. at 281, 567 P.2d at 1244, and this court has held that “[t]he failure of an accusation to charge an offense may be raised ‘at any time during the pendency of the proceedings.’” State v. Merino, 81 Hawai' i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 672, 686 (1996) 
(quoting HRPP 12(b)(2)). 
However, pursuant to the “post-conviction liberal
 
construction rule,” adopted by this court in State v. Motta, 66
 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1019, 1019-20 (1983) and State v. Wells, 78 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawai'i 373, 381, 894 P.2d 70, 78 (1995), an appellate court will 
liberally construe indictments and complaints that are challenged 
for the first time on appeal. Merino, 81 Hawai' i at 212, 915 P.2d 
at 686. In those circumstances, “‘this court will not reverse a conviction based upon a defective indictment or complaint unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment or complaint cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime.’” Id. (quoting Wells, 78 Hawai' i at 381, 894 P.2d at 78) (brackets 
omitted) (other citation omitted). 
Where the defendant has timely objected to the
 
sufficiency of the charge, however, this rule does not apply.
 See State v. Robins, 66 Haw. 312, 314, 660 P.2d 39, 41 (1983)
 (stating that where the alleged deficiency in the indictment was
 raised by a timely motion, “[t]he liberal construction rule laid
 down in Motta” was inapplicable). Thus, where the issue was
 raised at trial, the case will be dismissed without prejudice
 without resort to the Motta/Wells standard.
 
These principles are instructive here, and lead to two
 
conclusions. First, because Basnet timely objected, he did not
 need to show that he was prejudiced by the family court’s failure
 to arraign in accordance with HRPP Rule 10(a).
 
Second, respectfully, the ICA erred in applying the
 
harmless error standard. See Basnet, 2013 WL 3094944, at *2. In
 
the context of sufficiency of the charging instrument, it is 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
well-established that a charge that fails to provide the accused
 
with fair notice of the essential elements “amounts to a failure
 to state an offense, and a conviction based upon it cannot be
 sustained, for that would constitute a denial of due process.” 
Jendrusch, 58 Haw. at 281, 567 P.2d at 1244. Thus, such errors
 are not subject to harmless error analysis. Similarly, since one
 of the purposes of arraignment is also to inform the defendant of
 the charge, if a defendant objects at trial to the lack of an
 arraignment, then the conviction “cannot be sustained[,]” because
 it would correspondingly constitute a denial of due process.
 Accordingly, Basnet’s conviction must be vacated, and the case
 dismissed without prejudice.
 
VI.
 
We reach Basnet’s second point of error in the event 
charges will be re-filed against Basnet. Basnet maintains that the charge is legally insufficient, and alleges that the ICA erred in its application of Mita and this court should clarify or overrule Wheeler and Mita. This court has held that “[w]here the statute sets forth with reasonable clarity all essential elements of the crime intended to be punished, and fully defines the offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons of common understanding, a charge drawn in the language of the statute is sufficient.” Jendrusch, 58 Haw. at 282, 567 P.2d at 
1245; see State v. Cummings, 101 Hawai' i at 143, 63 P.3d at 1113 
27
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2003). In the instant case, the charge did “fully define[] the
 
offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons
 of common understanding,” Jendrusch, 58 Haw. at 282, 567 P.2d at
 1245, and thus, contrary to Basnet’s allegation, the charge was
 legally sufficient. 
A.
 
First, the charge was not required to include the
 
statutory definition of the term “family or household member.” 
As noted, HRS § 709-906(1) provides that “‘family or household
 member’ means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
 or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons in a dating relationship as
 defined under section 586-1, persons who have a child in common,
 parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
 jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.” 
Without this definition, the charge still “fully define[d] the
 offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons
 of common understanding,” because the charge included the name of
 Basnet’s spouse, therefore indicating specifically who was the
 relevant family or household member. Where the actual name of
 his wife was part of the charge, defining the term “family and
 household member” as “wife” was not required to apprise Basnet of
 the charges he needed to be prepared to meet. 
Contrary to Basnet’s argument, this case is
 
distinguishable from Wheeler, where this court held that the
 charge was insufficient because it failed to include the 
28
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
statutory definition of the term “operate.” Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 
at 393, 219 P.3d at 1180. That conclusion was based on the fact 
that the use of the phrase “operate” in the charge did not provide adequate notice to the defendant that the State was required to prove that his operation of the vehicle occurred on a public way, street, road or highway. Id. at 395, 219 P.3d at 
1182. In this case, on the other hand, Basnet is not persuasive in arguing that the term “family or household member” did not provide him with adequate notice, absent the statutory definition, because the term “family or household member” is readily comprehendible to a person of common understanding. Thus the proposed application of Wheeler is inapposite. 
B.
 
Second, the term “physical abuse” need not be defined 
in the written charge. In Kameenui, this court held that although the statute does not specifically define the term “physical abuse” the statute including that term, HRS § 709­906(1) is not void for vagueness because “[p]ersons of ordinary intelligence” would have a reasonable opportunity to know that “physical abuse” includes “physical injury.” 69 Haw. at 623, 753 P.2d at 1252. Further, in State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai' i 413, 903 
P.2d 718 (1995), the ICA noted that “[f]rom Kameenui and the [dictionary] definition of the word ‘physical,’ it is evident that to ‘physically abuse’ someone means to maltreat in such a 
29
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
manner as to cause injury, hurt or damage to that person’s body 
. . . .” and that “a more precise definition would ‘require the legislature to list every type of conduct covered under the statute [which] would be counterproductive.’” Nomura, 79 Hawai' i 
at 416, 903 P.2d at 721 (quoting Kameenui, 69 Haw. at 623, 753 P.2d at 1252). Thus, this court has held that the term “physical abuse” is readily understandable, and as such, it provided sufficient notice to Basnet as part of the charge in this case. 
Finally, although the family circuit court gave an 
instruction to the jury in this case regarding “family and household member” and “physical abuse” in this case, this court has not held that the charge must mirror the jury instructions given in a particular case. Rather, this court has held that “the trial court is not required to instruct the jury in the exact words of the applicable statute but to present the jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in applying that law to the facts of the case.” State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 
325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
VII.
 
Accordingly, the ICA’s July 19, 2013 judgment and the
 
family circuit court’s September 23, 2011 judgment of conviction
 and sentence are vacated, and the case is remanded to the family 
30
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
circuit court to enter an order dismissing the case without
 
prejudice.
 
Steven T. Barta,
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
James M. Anderson,
for respondent
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
31
 