***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
MUSTAFA BAKER,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-16-0000115 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16 -0000115; CR. NO. 13- 1-0078) 
 
JUNE 18, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. , WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J. , 
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, AND WITH NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  In this case, we are called upon to determine whether 
one of our most critical procedural safeguards, the 
constitutional right against compelled self-incrimination, was 
upheld.  The appeal involves the admission at trial of a 
confession, given by the defendant during the course of a Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000115
18-JUN-2020
12:23 PM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 custodial interrogation.  Because we find that the tactics used 
by the interrogating police officer were so coercive that they 
rendered the defendant’s statement involuntary, we hold that it 
should not have been admitted against him at trial.   
I. BACKGROUND AND CIRCUIT COURT PROCEEDINGS 
  Mustafa Baker was arrested on January 8 , 2013, based 
upon allegations that on December 31, 2012,  he committed assault 
in the first degree in violation of Hawai ‘i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 707-710.1  Baker was subsequently indicted in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) on two counts of 
sexual assault in the first degree in violation of HRS §  707-
730(1)(a)2 and one count of sexual assault in the third degree 
pursuant to HRS § 707-732(1)(f).3   
A.  Motion to Determine Voluntariness 
  T he State filed a Motion to Determine Voluntariness of 
Defendant’s Statement to Law Enforcement (motion to determine 
                     
 1 HRS § 707 -710 (1993) provides in relevant part as follows: “(1) A 
person commits the offense of assault in the first degree if the person 
intentionally or knowingly causes serious bodily injury to another person.”  
 
 2 HRS § 707-730 (Supp. 2009) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the 
first degree if:  
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to 
an act of sexual penetration by strong compulsion[.]  
 3 The circuit court dismissed the third degree sexual assault 
charge on the morning of the first day of trial because the charging language 
was deficient.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 voluntariness) in accordance with HRS § 621- 26.4  In its motion, 
the State argued that a statement Baker gave to Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD) Detective (Det.) Brian Tokita during the course 
of a custodial interrogation on January 8, 2013, was voluntarily 
given and should be freely admissible at trial.  A hearing on 
the motion was held at which Det. Tokita testified about the 
circumstances of Baker’s custodial interrogation,  which occurred 
on the day Baker was arrested.5  Det. Tokita testified that 
before commencing the interrogation he read a standardized form 
to Baker that informed him of his constitutional rights.  Baker 
said that he understood his rights, Det. Tokita stated, and then 
signed the form indicating that he waived his rights.   Det. 
Tokita testified that the HPD was in possession of an audio 
recording and a written transcript of the interrogation, which 
were introduced into evidence.  The court took the State’s 
motion under advisement pending its review  of the audio 
recording and transcript.   
  T he audio recording of the interrogation discloses 
that the interrogation proceeded as follows.  Det. Tokita began 
the interrogation by asking Baker several introductory 
                     
 4 HRS § 621-26 (1993) provides as follows: “No confession shall be 
received in evidence unless it is first made to appear  to the judge before 
whom the case is being tried that the confession was in fact voluntarily 
made.” 
 5 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided over the motion and trial 
proceedings.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 questions, such as his date of birth, level of educational 
attainment, age, and place of employment.  Baker stated that he 
was 23 years old and was currently employed at a bakery, but he 
had only completed the eighth grade.  Baker did not know his 
home address, but he indicated that he was living in Wai
manalo 
and knew the name of the street on which he lived. 
  Det. Tokita then 
informed Baker that he had “been 
working on this case from the time it start ed,” that Baker 
“clearly” did not “know what [Tokita] kn[e]w about this case,” 
and that Baker should “trust [him] ” when he tells Baker that he 
“know[s] a lot about what happened. ”  Det. Tokita  informed Baker 
that he knew Baker met the complaining witness (CW) on New 
Year’s Eve in the Kailua District Park.  The detective next told 
Baker “now here’s your chance, tell me what happen[ed] from 
there in detail.”  Baker responded that he was drinking liquor 
in the park with his sister KK6 and the CW, and GK arrived there 
and “did something” with the CW.7  Baker explained  that “[GK] 
told [him] he had sex with her, that’s all.  That’s all I know 
. . . I was not involved in this at all. ”  This had occurred, 
Baker said, when he went with his friends LKG and JKG to get 
                     
 6 All minors referenced in this opinion are referred to by 
abbreviation.   
 
 7 Throughout the trial and Baker’s interrogation, GK and KK were 
frequently referred to as Baker’s siblings due to their close relationship, 
but he is actually their  cousin.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 cigarettes.  When he returned,  “[GK]’s getting ready to fight 
with this boy.  This boy was that girl’s boyfriend.”   
  Det. Tokita interrupted and told Baker “Okay, no, I 
know that’s not true. .  . .  I know that didn’t happen.  Like I 
said I’ve been investigating this case for a long time. . . .  
And I know what happened. . . .  I’m just giving you a chance to 
see if you going tell me what happened.”   
Baker then admitted that he was trying to protect GK, and 
explained that GK was bloody when
 he arrived back at the p ark.  
Det. Tokita interrupted Baker again, stating “I know that’s . . 
. not how it went.”  Baker re sponded that he would not have 
sexually assaulted someone because he was “raped as a kid.”   
  Det. Tokita expressed that Baker was a “straight up 
guy” because, while Baker had a record as a juvenile, he did not 
have a record as an adult.  Continuing with a friendly tone, 
Det. Tokita stated, “I don’t know if you was doing any other 
drugs, but I know you was drinking.  I know you was smoking 
weed. . . .  Everyone gets blasted on New Year’s Eve and that’s 
where I think everything went wrong because you just made an 
error in judgment.”  Without pausing, Det. Tokita then accused 
Baker and GK of beating the CW and further accused  Baker of 
“put[ting] [his] penis in her vagina, and [GK] did after [Baker] 
and [Baker] came back and []did it again.”  Baker  responded  
“Woah” to this accusation.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6   Det. Tokita then  offered another mitigating narrative 
to Baker, saying “I don’t think you did it or meant to do it.  
You were just not in the right frame of mind. . . .  That’s 
where people go wrong, when they’re in the wrong frame of mind.  
Then, Det. Tokita stated “Alcohol is . . . . where people get 
themselves into trouble, cause they lose their inhibitions[.]”  
The detective continued, “W omen are a lot more promiscuous, you 
know.  They flirt more, you know when they’re on alcohol . . . 
cause they lose their inhibitions.”  
After again discussing 
Baker’s juvenile record, Det. Tokita assured Baker that, 
compared to other offenders,
 he was not a “bad dude.”  “I know.  
I just want to show that I not like that, ” Baker replied.  “So 
I’m giving you a chance now, Mustafa.  This is how you’re going 
to be remembered,” the detective said.  Baker again denied 
committing a crime, repeating his assertion that he was “not 
like that.”  Returning to the mitigating narrative, Det. Tokita 
stated “Everybody fucks up in life, okay. . . .  [O]ur brains 
are programmed a certain way, you know. . . .  Guys are 
programmed to procreate.”  “Yeah, ” Baker responded.  Det. Tokita 
continued, “Even movie stars right?  We all get busted.  This is 
how our brains are wired.  You know what I mean?  Now you put 
that brain on alcohol and drugs, now you’re all fucked up and 
your thinking is all screwed up at that point.”   Before Baker ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 could respond, Det. Tokita warned, “So I know what happened. . . 
.  [H]ow [do] you want to be remembered, dude ?”   
  Continuing the interrogation, Det. Tokita changed 
tactics again, warning  Baker about what it “sounds like on the 
outside.”  “The girl’s a minor, ” Det. Tokita stated.  “She’s not 
an adult. . . .  [I]f this hits the media, it would be . . . 
twenty-three year old boy rapes a fucking juvenile and how does 
that sound?”  Baker answered “That’s not me.” and Det. Tokita 
replied, “Exactly.  Cause when people hear that, what they going 
think that juvenile, [] how that juvenile is, you think?”  Baker 
again said, “I’m not like that, ” prompting Det. Tokita to tell 
him, “I know you’re not like that.  I’m being straight with you 
cause you haven’t had a record
. . . .  You just drank too much, 
dude.  You drank too much.  You smoked  too much.   Bad error in 
judgment.  But it’s time to come clean.”   
  Det. Tokita then asked Baker, “ When you go to court, 
you think people want to hear somebody that’s going to fucking 
deny, deny when the evidence is like insurmountable against 
them, but they’re just going to deny, deny to the bitter end.”  
“No,” Baker responded, and Det. Tokita continued, “they want to 
hear somebody that’s you know what, .  . . I made a mistake, . . 
. that’s not me, but I made a fucking mistake, I did and I’m 
sorry.  What do you think they want to hear?”  Baker said that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 people would want to hear the truth, and then Det. Tokita 
warned, “I don’t want to be jerked around.”   
  At this juncture Baker had not admitted to any 
criminal activity, and the detective changed course.  Det. 
Tokita told Baker, “w e g[o]t physical evidence, so you cannot 
deny that you didn’t have sex with her. . . .  We have physical 
evidence and nobody can deny physical evidence.”   
  Baker repeated his statement that he did not beat the 
CW, which prompted Det. Tokita to respond, “ Mustafa come on.  
Now you’re jerking me around again.”  Baker again repeated that 
he did not beat the CW.  Det. Tokita returned to the sexual 
assault allegation, telling Baker, “Did she want to fuck?  No. . 
. .  So why ’d you fuck her then?”  Then, for the first time, 
Baker admitted to having sex with the CW, explaining, “[c]ause I 
was all fucked up.”  “You wasn’t thinking straight, ” Det. Tokita 
offered, to which Baker said,  “We had four bottles of Jack 
Daniels. . . .  I was smoking weed off the chain.  I was all 
fucked up.”  After this Baker  again denied beating the CW, 
stating that GK beat her with a bottle.    
  Det. Tokita then provided a sequence of events, 
accusing Baker of having sex with the CW against her will three 
times.  The detective stated that first Baker had vaginal sex 
with the CW, then GK had vaginal sex with her, then Baker 
returned and had anal sex and vaginal sex with the CW.  “T hat’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 why I know there’s physical evidence that you guys cannot deny 
because there’s DNA in there and yo u know that DNA’s one of [ a] 
kind,” Det. Tokita said.  After Baker replied “Yeah,” Det. 
Tokita stated, “Exactly, so I know what happened already, cause 
there’s physical evidence.”   
  Baker again stated  that he “did not beat her up.”  
This prompted Det. Tokita to ask , “so you admit you fucked her, 
penis in vagina?”  Baker said “Yes.”  Det. Tokita followed this 
admission by trying to get Baker to adopt the detective’s 
version of events.  Baker, resisting Det. Tokita’s narrative, 
responded, “I only went twice.”   Det. Tokita again recited his 
version of events to Baker, telling him “[R]emember you don’t 
know what I know now?”  He then warned Baker, “you’re losing me 
when you bullshit me.”  Baker repeated his statement that he 
only had sex twice, to which Det. Tokita again pressed Baker to 
accept the detective’s version of the events.  Baker then 
appeared to adopt Det. Tokita’s version, replying,  “Okay.”   
  To clarify Baker’s possible admission, Det. Tokita 
asked “You tell me, am I right or am I wrong?” to which Baker 
answered, “I don’t know.”  Det. Tokita responded , “what [do] you 
mean you don’t know?”  Baker explained that he had not had anal 
sex with the CW because “she was laying on her back the whole 
time.”  Det.  Tokita again told Baker his version of the events 
and warned, “I have the physical proof Mustafa.”  Det. Tokita ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 then asked Baker whether he was “going to own up. ”  Baker said 
“Yes.  I ain’t going to argue with you no more.”  Det. Tokita 
once again attempted to get Baker to confess to the version of 
events that the detective had set forth.  Baker finally admitted 
to Det. Tokita’s narrative.  Det. Tokita demanded to know why 
Baker denied having sex with the CW in the manner that Det. 
Tokita described up until that point, to which Baker responded,  
“I was scared.”   Det. Tokita again warned Baker, “I told you 
already, I know what happened.  . . .  Once you stray from the 
real story, I know already.”  Det. Tokita then reassured Baker 
that he was not trying to manipulate him, he was simply seeking 
“the straight answers.”  Det. Tokita asked Baker,  “look Mustafa, 
. . . have I steered you wrong?”  “No, ” Baker responded.  “I’m 
not playing games with you, right?  What I’m telling you is 
straight up.  I’m being straight up with you, ” the detective 
continued.  Baker responded,  “Right, right, ” to this , and Det. 
Tokita said, “And that’s what  I want you to be with me.  You 
know what I mean?  Fair is fair.”  
  After  this exchange, Baker told Det. Tokita , “I didn’t 
beat her[,] all I did [was] grab[] her and thr[o]w her to the 
ground.”  Det. Tokita rejected this, telling Baker,  “I know [ GK] 
hit [the CW] with the bottle already, but I know the both of you 
beat her.”  Baker once more  denied beating the CW, which 
prompted Det. Tokita to exclaim,  “Dude.”  Baker attempted to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 explain further, saying,  “I tried to sit her here, she tried to 
get up.  So I pushed her, she fell right on her face again[.]”  
Det. Tokita again rejected Baker’s 
response, stating, “[Baker]  
the both of you beat her.  I know the both of you beat her.  I 
know that for a fact, dude.”  Baker denied , for the thirteenth 
time, beating the CW.   
  Det. Tokita then presented Baker with a
n assault 
narrative, explaining to him, “You told [GK], smash her head 
with the bottle, bash her on the head, okay? . . .  I believe 
you, okay, but you start beating her.”  Baker attempted to 
explain that GK hit the CW in the face with the bottle, before 
saying, “I don’t know why I did ‘um.”  He said  that afterwards 
he picked the CW up and helped her put her clothes back on.  
Apparently accepting this statement , Det. Tokita told Baker, 
“See that checks out . . . because you told me you have ADHD 
. . . [s]o maybe you got a little bit of that, . . . . 
[s]ometimes maybe you snap.”8  Baker agreed that he snaps, saying 
“I do.  It’s . . . it’s normal.”  Continuing, Det. Tokita 
stated, “when you on alcohol and you’re on drugs, chances of 
that happening would be worse . . . 
you’re not yourself.”  
Drawing connections between himself and Baker, Det. Tokita said,  
                     
 8 In the preliminary stages of the interrogation, Baker informed 
Det. Tokita that he took Ritalin for “ADHD” as a child, but that he stopped 
taking it over ten years prior to the interrogation because his father did 
not approve of the medication.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 “I do some fucked up things when I drink, dude, let me tell you 
that.”  He further attempted to draw parallels between Baker and 
himself, saying, “I do some fucked up things when I drink and 
that’s part of the reason why,  fuck, I’m divorced, you know what 
I mean?  Cause I did some fucked up things.”  “Me, too.”  Baker 
responded.  Baker then offered that he was divorced as well. 
  After this exchange, Baker once again denied beating 
the CW.  This appeared to frustrate Det. Tokita, who responded, 
“Dude, come on.   Now this is when I know you’re not being 
straight with me.  You know what I mean and when I write my 
report, that’s what it’s going to reflect.  That you weren’t 
being straight with me about that.”  Baker asked, “What do you 
want to hear , officer?  What question do you want to ask? ”  “I 
want to hear the truth from you, ” Det. Tokita stated. “Why did 
you hit her and why did you kick her like that?” Det.  Tokita 
questioned.  “I was scared” Baker responded, and then stated 
that he didn’t want to remember, and that he was still scared.  
Det. Tokita pressed Baker further, asking, “why did you beat her 
up?”  Finally, Baker offered, “I was drinking.  It was in the 
moment.  I was fucked off my ass.”   
 
 Det. Tokita once more urged Baker to take 
responsibility for direct ing the attack on the CW, telling him, 
“[GK] didn’t want to fuck her either.  He was scared. . . .  But 
you told him to [do] it.  Do you remember?”  Baker responded, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 “No.”  Det. Tokita appeared unwilling to drop the point, 
stating, “Well that’s what happened[. ]”  The detective tried 
once more, asking Baker what he would say to GK if he was 
present.  Baker responded,  “GK had nothing to do with it until I 
told him to.”  Det. Tokita responded “you told him to . . . hit 
her over the head, right, with the bottle? . . .  To have sex 
with her.”  Baker did not respond to this suggestion.  The 
interview concluded with Baker affirming that he was not coerced 
or forced to make his statement.   
  Following the hearing, the circuit court issued a 
minute order granting in part the State’s motion to determine 
voluntariness and making several findings of fact and 
conclusions of law.  The court f ound that Baker was administered 
his Miranda rights, and that he subsequently waived them when 
making his statement to the police.  The court further found 
that, despite only completing the 8th grade, Baker displayed “no 
signs of any inability to understand questions or to respond 
appropriately to any given question.”   
  Additionally, the circuit court found that Det. Tokita 
engaged in “apparently deceptive assertions” and “urged [the] 
defendant to tell the truth, sometimes using an insistent tone.”  
The court found that these tactics implicated intrinsic facts 
and were not deliberate falsehoods extrinsic to the facts of the 
case and that Baker was able to deny certain allegations when he ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 wanted to.  Considering the totality of the circumstances, the 
court concluded that “the State ha[d]
 proven by a preponderance 
of the evidence that [ the] defendant gave the bulk of his 
January 8, 2013, statement voluntarily, knowingly, and 
intelligently.”  The court denied the State’s motion in part, 
finding that the State
 had failed to prove that Baker’s 
statement was voluntary as to the final portion of the interview 
in which “the detective sought to get the defendant to admit 
that he directed [GK] to hit and assault the complaining 
witness.”   
B.  The Trial 
  At trial, t
he State called Det. Tokita to testify 
about his investigation and interrogation of Baker.  A redacted 
version of the audio recording of the interrogation was played 
for the jury.9  Regarding the interrogation, Det. Tokita 
testified that he told Baker during the interrogation that he 
had DNA evidence.  When asked “was that an a
ccurate statement,” 
Det. Tokita said, “Not at that time, no.”  Det. Tokita 
                     
 9 Prior to trial, the State produced a redacted transcript of the 
interrogation that it sought to have admitted.  The State had redacted 
Baker’s statement, “I’ve been raped as a kid,” contending that its inclusion 
would be unduly prejudicial pursuant to Hawai ‘i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
403.  The circuit court admitted the redacted transcript over defense 
objection, reasoning that the statement should be redacted because it was too 
vague and could affect the jury’s decision by arousing sympathy for Baker or, 
conversely, causing the jury to assume that Baker would be more likely to 
commit sexual assault as a victim of sexual assault.  The redacted transcript 
of the audio recording was provided to the jury while the recording was 
played for the jury.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 acknowledged that he lied to Baker during the interrogation to 
“try[] to get the truth out of him.”   
  LKG  testified that she and her brother, JKG, were at 
the park on the afternoon of New Year’s Eve where she saw Baker, 
GK, and the CW drinking and having fun.  The CW smoked 
marijuana, LKG testified, and kissed Baker while sitting on his 
lap.  LKG said she did not see Baker and the CW have sex.  After 
the CW kissed Baker, LKG and JKG went to a different part of the 
park for approximately 30 minutes, LKG explained.  LKG said  that 
when they returned to the area where Baker, GK, and the CW had 
been, LKG found the CW sitting outside the bathroom by herself, 
covered in blood.    
  JKG also testified , stating that he did not see anyone 
doing drugs, but he did see other people drinking alcohol.  JKG 
further testified that he did not see the CW talk to, kiss, or 
have sex with Baker.   
  The CW then gave her account of what transpired.  She 
was with Baker and his cousin  KK at the p ark, the CW explained, 
and they were all drinking and smoking marijuana.  The CW denied 
ever flirting with, kissing, or asking Baker for sex.  The CW 
testified that she fled into a bathroom after police officers 
approached the trio in the p ark.  Baker came into the bathroom 
and propositioned her, the CW elaborated.  The CW stated that 
she repeatedly told Baker no, but when she started to leave, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 Baker and GK, who had entered the bathroom, began punching, 
hitting, and kicking her.  Someone hit her with a bottle, 
causing her to lose consciousness, the CW explained.  The CW 
testified that, when she awoke, Baker had his penis in her 
vagina.  GK then had vaginal sex with her to completion,  after 
which Baker put his penis in her anus and then her vagina, the 
CW stated.  The CW testified that she never consented to sex 
with either Baker or GK.  
When asked to describe her injuries, 
the CW explained that she was “bleeding from head to toe,” had 
cuts on her face, a black eye, cuts on her eyelid and lips, and 
damage to her jaw that required surgery.   
  KK  testified that she was with the CW on New Year’s 
Eve, when the two of them went to Kailua “to go find drugs” and 
“people to go party with[ .]”  She said that, before meeting up 
with Baker, they got acid, methamphetamine, marijuana, and 
alcohol.  The CW and KK consumed “[t]he acid, the 
methamphetamine, the alcohol, [and] the marijuana” together, KK 
testified.  KK did not see the CW kiss Baker or sit on his lap, 
but she did see them sit next to each other and “being pleasant 
with each other.”10   
  The State also called Officer David Esaki, a 
criminalist with the HPD
, who had analyzed DNA evidence 
                     
 10 KK indicated that at the time she “couldn’t see anything clearly” 
and “couldn’t comprehend what was going on” due to the acid.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 collected from the CW’s breast, mouth, vagina, and anus.  Baker 
was conclusively ruled out as a contributor of the DNA from the 
CW’s vagina and the results were inconclusive as to the rectal, 
chest, and mouth DNA, Officer Esaki testified.    
  Doctor (Dr.) Wayne Lee, a licensed physician and 
surgeon working at the Sex Abuse Treatment Center, testified on 
behalf of the State as an expert in the examination and 
treatment of sexual abuse patients.  Dr. Lee examined the CW on 
January 1, 2013, wherein he collected the DNA swabs and 
conducted a pelvic and anal examination.  The CW had redness, 
swelling, and multiple shallow lacerations on her external 
genitalia, and multiple acute, tender anal fissures all 
consistent with trauma.   
  GK , who was called as a witness for the defense, 
explained that he was at the p ark that afternoon  with his 
brother Baker, LKG, and JKG.  He  testified that, alo ng with 
drinking with everyone present, he “did acid with [the CW].”  
The CW and Baker were kissing, GK explained, before the two went 
to the bathroom to have sex.  GK testified that he did not hear 
any yells, screams, or the sound of someone being hit while 
Baker and the CW were in the bathroom.  GK then propositioned 
the CW, who refused to have sex with him.  When the CW refused 
to have sex with him, he hit her with a bottle, started beating 
her, and then had sex with her, GK testified.  Baker did not hit  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 or beat the CW at all, GK testified, nor did he force himself on 
the CW.  GK explained that he put his penis in the CW’s anus and 
that Baker was not present.   
 
 GK also testified that in January of 2013 he gave a 
statement to Det. Tokita in which he said that it was Baker who 
told him to hit the CW with a bottle and beat and kick the CW.  
At trial, GK admitted that his statements to Det. Tokita were 
lies, which he told because he was scared and “thought that by 
doing that, [he] would get in less trouble.”  Further, because 
Baker had already had consensual sex with the CW, GK testified, 
he thought he could blame it on Baker.   
  The j ury found Baker guilty as cha rged on both counts.  
In determining Baker’s sentence , the circuit court noted that 
Baker had no record, was young, and had a family to support.  
Among other reasons cited by the court, it stated that 
it was 
greatly concerned by the fact that Baker did not appear to have 
told the truth during his interrogation and that Baker had 
“taken no responsibility at any time[. ]”  Considering these 
factors and others, the circuit court sentenced Baker to a 
twenty-year  term of imprisonment  in each count to be served 
consecutively.   
  Baker appealed from the Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (circuit court judgment) to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA).  On appeal, he contended that the circuit court ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 erred in finding that his statement to the  police was voluntary  
and admissible.  Baker also contended that his constitutional 
right to present a defense was violated and that the imposition 
of a consecutive sentence was an abuse of discretion
 and 
violation of his constitutional rights.   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  In its opinion affirming the circuit court judgment,11 
the ICA first addressed the voluntariness of Baker’s statements 
to Det. Tokita.   
  The ICA evaluated Det.
 Tokita’s tactics during the 
interrogation and concluded that they were not improperly 
coercive.  Det. Tokita, the ICA explained, “refused to accept 
Baker’s ‘initial version[s] of events’” and “persistently urged 
Baker to ‘come clean’ and ‘own up .’”  (Alteration in original.)  
This conduct was permissible, the ICA held, because the 
detective “never made any threats or promises to Baker.”  The 
ICA was also not convinced that Det. Tokita “raised the threat 
of media publicity” during the interrogation because he “never 
threatened to publicize the details of the assault if Baker did 
not tell a particular story.”  Because Det. Tokita merely 
advised Baker that it would be better for him to tell the truth 
                     
11 The ICA’s opinion can be found at State v. Baker, 142 Hawai ‘i 466, 
421 P.3d 674 (App. 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 rather than threatening Baker, the detective’s conduct did not 
render Baker’s statement involuntary, the ICA concluded.   
  The ICA also found that Det. Tokita repeatedly told 
Baker that he had physical evidence when no such evidence 
existed.  These misrepresentations “were falsehoods intrinsic to 
the facts of the alleged offense, ” the ICA held, and therefore 
were not coercive per se.  T he ICA accordingly analyzed  the 
totality of the circumstances surrounding Baker’s interrogation 
in determining the voluntariness of his confession.  The ICA 
concluded that Baker’s confession was not involuntary because 
“Detective Tokita’s questioning was not of a type that would 
reasonably induce a false confession.”12   
  The ICA accordingly  affirmed the circuit court’s 
judgment.13  Baker timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari, which this court accepted. 
III. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
  We have “appl ied a ‘clearly erroneous ’ standard  of 
review to the [findings of fact ] made by the court in connection 
                     
 12 The ICA also considered whether Baker’s mental and physical 
condition rendered his statement involuntary and concluded that it did not.   
 
 13 Additionally, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in redacting Baker’s statement, “I’ve been raped as a 
kid,” because the statement could have caused the jury to make an 
emotionally- based decision and because Baker was able to present a complete 
defense.  The ICA further held that Baker’s consecutive sentence was properly 
imposed under HRS § 706 -606, was not cruel and unusual, and did not violate 
Baker’s constitutional rights under Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 
(2000).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 with a voluntariness hearing” to determine whether to admit a 
confession into evidence at trial.  State v. Hoey , 77 Hawai ‘i 17,
32, 881 P.2d 504, 519 (1994).  This is based on the rationale 
that “[w]hether the defendant invoked his right to counsel and 
whether he waived the right are primarily questions of fact. ” 
Id. (alteration in original) (quoting State v. Villeza, 72 Haw. 
327, 330-31, 817 P.2d 1054, 1056 (1991)).  
 This court has also recognized that “in a . . . 
technical sense, waiver is a question that requires application 
of constitutional principles to the facts as found.”  Villeza , 
72 Haw. at 331, 817 P.2d at 1056 (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  Accomplishing this task “requires us to examine the 
entire record  and make an independent determination of the 
ultimate issue of voluntariness based upon that review and the 
totality of circumstances  surrounding [the defendant ’s] 
statement.”  State v. Kelekolio , 74 Haw. 479, 502, 849 P.2d 58, 
69 (1993) (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).   Thus, we apply a de novo standard of appellate review
to “the ultimate issue [of the] voluntariness” of a confession. 
Hoey, 77 Hawai ‘i at 32, 881 P.2d at 519 (alteration in original). 
  
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Voluntariness of Confession – General Principles
Under the F ifth Amendment to the United States
Constitution and article I , section 10 of the Hawai ‘i ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 Constitution, “no person shall be compelled in any criminal case
to be a witness against himself or herself.”  State v. 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 501, 849 P.2d 58, 69 (1993) (internal 
quotation marks and alterations  omitted).  Accordingly, “ [t]he 
constitutional right against self- incrimination prevents the 
prosecution’s use of a defendant’s extrajudicial admissions of 
guilt where such admissions are the product of coercion.”  State
v. Matsumoto, 145 Hawai‘i 313, 324, 
452 P.3d 310 , 321 (2019) 
(quoting Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at  502, 849 P.2d at  69).  The 
reasons for barring coerced confessions include “the inherent 
untrustworthiness of involuntary confessions, a desire that 
criminal proceedings be accusatorial rather than 
inquisitorial[,] and a desire that the police not become law 
breakers in the process of achieving society’s valid law 
enforcement objectives.”  Id. (alteration in original).   
 
  In order for a statement to be voluntarily given, the 
decision to give the statement must have been a free and 
unconstrained choice.  See  State v. Yong Shik Won, 137 Hawai ‘i 
330, 340, 372 P.3d 1065, 1075 (2015) (“Voluntariness means a 
‘free and unconstrained choice.’” (quoting State v. Shon, 47 
Haw. 158, 166, 385 P.2d 830, 836 (1963))).  A decision to give a 
statement is free and unconstrained if it is not coerced.  Id. 
at 341, 372 P.3d at 1076.  Generally, determining whether a 
defendant’s confession during a custodial interrogation was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 coerced requires case-by- case consideration of the totality of 
the circumstances surrounding the defendant’s statement.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 502, 849 P.2d at 69 (citing, inter alia, 
Frazier v. Cupp, 394 U.S. 731, 739 (1969) ).  Crucially, a court 
must not analyze the individual circumstances in isolation, but 
must weigh those circumstances in their totality.  Wilson v. 
Lawrence Cty., 260 F.3d 946, 953 (8th Cir. 2001) (“[A] totality 
of the circumstances analysis does not permit state officials to 
cherry-pick cases that address individual potentially coercive 
tactics, isolated one from the other, in order to insulate 
themselves when they have combined all of those tactics in an 
effort to overbear an accused’ s will.”).   
  Under certain circumstances, however, we have held 
that the need for a “totality of circumstances” analysis is 
obviated by the inherently coercive nature of the improper 
interrogation techniques that were  used in a custodial setting.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.  Specifically, this 
court has held that when the police employ a falsehood that is 
extrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense and is of a type 
reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence 
an accused to make a confession regardless of guilt, any 
subsequent statement by the accused is automaticall y considered 
involuntary.  Id.  Thus, Hawai ‘i c
ourts evaluate “the legitimacy 
of the use of ‘deception’ by the police in eliciting confessions ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 or inculpatory statements from suspects and arrestees” 
differently depending on whether the deception  involved 
information intrinsic to the alleged offense or extrinsic to the 
alleged offense.  Id .   
  Intrinsic falsehoods include, for example, a statement
that a murder victim is still alive, a claim that articles of 
clothing were found at a crime scene, or an assertion that 
cameras were recording the area of the crime.  Matsumoto, 145 
Hawai‘i at 324, 452 P.3d at 321
.  Although intrinsic factual 
deception is not considered so coercive as to automatically 
render the accused’s statement involuntary, it may still be 
unduly coercive and its presence is a relevant circumstance that
should be considered as part of the “totality of circumstances.”
Kelekolio , 74 Haw. at 51 3, 849 P.2d at 74  (finding that 
confessions pro cured through intrinsic factual deception are 
subject to a “totality of circumstances” analysis).  In 
Kelekolio,  this court found that if the police obtain a 
confession through the use of intrinsic factual deception that 
is of a type reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement, 
then the statement will be determined to be involuntary.  See 
id. (holding that the misrepresentations used by detectives 
“were not of a type that would reasonably induce a false 
confession” and therefore did not render the defendant’s 
inculpatory statements involuntary).  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25   As stated, extrinsic falsehoods are falsehoods that 
incorporate considerations beyond the immediate facts of the 
alleged offense.  Ex amples include assurances of divine 
salvation in the event of a confession, promises of mental 
health treatment instead of imprisonment, and misrepresentations 
of legal principles or the results of a polygraph test.  Id. at 
512, 849 P.2d at 73 ; Matsumoto , 145 Hawai‘i at 327,
 452 P.3d at 
324.  Like intrinsic falsehoods, extrinsic falsehoods are 
evaluated based on whether they are “reasonably likely to 
procure an untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a 
confession regardless of guilt
.”  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 512, 849 
P.2d at 73.  If the police officer’s conduct meets the extrinsic 
falsehood test, it will be regarded as coercive per se, and the 
statement of the accused is automatically considered 
involuntary.  Id. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73 .   
  In cases when the police’s use of extrinsic deception 
does not obviate the need for the inquiry, the totality of the 
circumstances surrounding an accused’s statement to the police 
must be examined in order to determine whether the statement was 
the product of coercion or otherwise involuntary.  Id. at 502, 
849 P.2d at 69.  Of the various circumstances that bear on 
voluntariness, the use of coercive interrogation tactics by the 
police is the most salient in determining whether the confession 
was the product of coercion.  See  id. at 503, 849 P.2d at 70 (“A ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 confession may be rendered involuntary by ‘impermissible police 
conduct.’” (quoting State v. Amaya -Ruiz, 800 P.2d 1260, 1272 
(Ariz. 1990)).   
  In Kelekolio, this court  directly addressed the 
coercive effect of the interrogating officer’s use of deception.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505- 13, 849 P.2d at 71- 74.  As discussed, 
we crafted a rule holding that deliberate intrinsic falsehoods 
would be evaluated under the totality of the circumstances, 
while deliberate extrinsic falsehoods that are o f a type 
reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence 
an accused to make a confession regardless of guilt would be 
considered coercive per se.  Id.  at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.  While 
our rule specifically addressed falsehoods, our purpose was 
broader: to curtail the improper use of manipulative and 
deceptive tactics during custodial interrogations.  See id. (“In 
our view, the relevant case law and scholarly authority .  . . is 
amenable to the formulation of a rule by which to measure the 
legitimacy of the use of ‘deception’ by the police in eliciting 
confessions or inculpatory statements from suspects and 
arrestees.”).   
  Deception can be “[ t]he act of deliberately causing 
someone to believe that something is true when the actor knows 
it to be false.”  Deception , Black’s Law Dictionary  510 (11th 
ed. 2019).  But deception can also be “[ a] trick intended to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 make a person believe something untrue.”  Id.   This court has 
never held that improperly coercive interrogation techniques 
must involve a deliberate misrepresentation to the accused.  
Indeed, in Kelekolio, we held that assurances of divine 
salvation upon confession are so manipulative and prone to 
producing coerced confessions that they are coercive per se-- but 
we did not require that the assurances be shown to be a 
falsehood.  74 Haw. at 512, 848 P.2d at 73.  For example, if the 
police induce a confession by promising that the accused will be 
released on bail if the defendant admits to the underlying 
conduct, such a promise would be impermissibly coercive even if 
the accused was released on bail after making the confession.   
  As such, we clarify that the relevant inquiry in 
determining whether deceptive interrogation tactics are 
improperly coercive is whether the deception is reasonably 
likely to procure an untrue statement or influence an accused to 
make an involuntary confession.  Our law requires us to examine 
the entire record and make an independent determination of the 
voluntariness of Baker’s custodial statement to the police.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 502, 849 P.2d at 69 (quoting State v. 
Villeza, 72 Haw. 327, 330-31, 817 P.2d 1054, 1056 (1991)) .  
Accordingly, we examine Det. Tokita’s conduct during the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 interview to determine whether deceptive interrogation tactics 
were used.14 
1. Baker’s Confession W as Involuntary Under the Totality of the 
Circumstances.  
a. Detective Tokita’s Interrogation Tactics 
  During the interrogation , Det. Tokita  suggested what 
the public perception of Baker’s conduct would be and the manner 
in which the media would report on his offenses.  Specifically, 
Det. Tokita asked Baker
, “if this hits the media, it would be 
. . . twenty-three year old boy rapes a fucking juvenile and how 
does that sound?”  “That’s not me.” Baker said in response, and 
Det. Tokita replied, “Cause when people hear that, what they 
going think that juvenile, [] how that juvenile is, you think?”  
Baker replied, “I’m not like that.”   
 
 Comments during a custodial interrogation about how 
the public will perceive the conduct of the accused and what the 
media coverage will be like 
“if it hits” the news communicate to 
the accused that confessing may result in a better public 
perception.  Additionally, such comments convey that the alleged 
crime may receive less news coverage if the defendant confesses 
                     
 14 Even though Baker contends that the entirety of his confession 
was not voluntarily made, Justice Nakayama’s dissent notes that this opinion 
reviews the coerciveness of certain statements made during the interroga tion 
that Baker did not specifically challenge.  Nakayama, J., Dissenting 
(Dissent) at 33- 34.  However, it is well settled that an appellate court is 
required to review the entire record and make an independent determination of 
the voluntariness of a custodial statement.  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 502, 849 
P.2d at 69. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 because it may not “hit the media.”  Conversely, the parallel 
implication is that not  confessing may result in a more negative 
portrayal of the accused in media coverage and that the extent 
of the coverage may be greater.15 
  Effectively, Det. Tokita ’s question  was an implied 
promise that Baker would receive a benefit if he chose to 
confess and consequences
 if he did not.   See State v. 
Rettenberger, 984 P.2d 1009, 1018 (Utah 1999) (“ Promises of 
leniency necessarily imply the threat of harsher punishment.”) .  
A promise, even when merely implied, of more favorable treatment 
in the event a confession is made is an interrogation tactic 
that is reasonably likely to elicit an untrue statement or to 
influence an accused to make an involuntary confession.   
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 511-12, 849 P.2d at 73 (noting that 
promises of more favorable treatment in the event of a 
confession are reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement 
or to influence an accused to make a confession regardless of 
guilt); see also Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 753 
(1970) (“To be admissible, a confession must be free and 
voluntary: that is, 
[it] must not  be . . . obtained by any 
                     
 15 The ICA concluded that Det. Tokita’s comments about public 
perception were not coercive because Det. Tokita  did not explicitly threaten 
to personally publicize the details of Baker’s case.  The dissent reaches a 
similar conclusion.  Dissent at 31.  However, conveying to a defendant that 
confessing may result in a better public perception  of the defendant in the  
media does not depend on the interrogating officer personally publicizing the 
details, nor does it affect the implication that refusing to confess will 
result in a negative portrayal.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 (continued . . .)  direct or implied promises, however slight[.] ” (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added)) .  As such, this 
tactic of implying more favorable treatment if a confession is 
given is an improperly coercive interrogation technique, and its 
use by Det. Tokita during the  interrogation weighs toward 
Baker’s subsequent statement being involuntary.   
  The coercive nature of Det. Tokita’s question about 
public perception was compounded by his subsequent question 
about how Baker’s unwillingness to confess would be perceived in 
court.  Immediately after commenting 
on public perception, Det. 
Tokita asked Baker, “when you go to court, you think people want 
to hear somebody that’s going to fucking deny, deny  when the 
evidence is like insurmountable against them, but they’re just 
going to deny, deny to the bitter end.”  Det. Tokita implied 
that if Baker continued to deny his guilt in the face of the 
contrary evidence the jury would hold it against him.  The clear 
implication was that,  if Baker  confessed , the jury would not be 
as harsh because “they want to hear somebody that’s you know 
what . .  . I made a mistake, . . . that’s not me, but I made a 
fucking mistake, I did and I’m sorry.”16  Police statements of 
                     
 16 The dissent appears to acknowledge the implication of Det. 
Tokita’s comments about public perception and how a confession would be 
perceived in court but characterizes the comments as mere advice that it 
would be better for Baker to tell the truth.  Dissent at 31 (citing 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70) (“Detective Tokita’s line of 
questioning suggested to Baker that he would be able to salvage his 
reputation and improve his chances in court[.]”).  Asserting that a jury ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 this nature imply to the accused that,  by confessing, the 
accused will be better off because the jury will treat a 
repentant defendant with less sever ity than an unrepentant one.  
Through his implicit threats about how the jury  would react to a 
defendant that continued to deny guilt, Det. Tokita effectively 
communicated to Baker that a confession would result in more 
favorable treatment.   This tactic is of a type that  is 
reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence 
an accused to make an involuntary confession.   Kelekolio, 74 
Haw. at 511-1 2, 849 P.2d at 73.  Thus, Det. Tokita’s use of this 
coercive tactic weighs in favor of Baker’s confession not being 
voluntary.   
  Additionally, throughout the course of the 
interrogation, Det. Tokita described Baker’s conduct in ways 
that minimized the egregiousness of the alleged crimes.  Early 
in the interrogation, Det. Tokita stated, “I don’t know if you 
was doing any other drugs, but I know you was drinking.  I know 
you was smoking weed. . . .  Everyone gets blasted on New Year’s 
Eve and that’s where I think everything went wrong because you 
just made an error in judgment.”  Det. Tokita followed up on 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
“want[s] to hear” a defendant confess to the charged crime is not mere advice 
to tell the truth; it is an assertion that the defendant will benefit from 
confessing.  See Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70 (“[M]ere advice 
from the police that it would be better for the accused to tell the truth 
when unaccompanied by either a threat or promis e does not render a subsequent 
confession involuntary.” (emphasis added)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 this statement by saying that “A lcohol is . . . where people get 
themselves into trouble, cause they lose their inhibitions[.]”  
Shortly after, the detective told Baker,  “I don’t think you did 
it or meant to do it.  You were just not in the right frame of 
mind. . . .  That’s where people go wrong, when they’re in the 
wrong frame of mind.”   Then, Det. Tokita used gender stereotypes 
to normalize the alleged conduct by saying that “Women are a lot 
more promiscuous, you know.  They flirt more, you know when 
they’re on alcohol . . . cause they lose their inhibitions”  and, 
shortly after, “Guys are programmed to procreate.”  A fter Det. 
Tokita told Baker that it was futile to continue denying that he 
had sex with the CW because there was physical evidence, Baker 
adopted Det. Tokita’s minimized version of events and admitted 
that he had sex with the CW because he “was all fucked up.”  
Then, after Baker admitted to having sex with the CW, Det. 
Tokita reinforced the narrative by stat
ing, “when you on alcohol 
and you’re on drugs, chances of that happening would be worse 
. . . you’re not yourself.”  Finally, after Det. Tokita had 
repeatedly pushed Baker to admit to beating the CW and explain 
why he had done so,
 Baker relied on the minimized narrative 
again, stating, “I was drinking.  It was in the moment.  I was 
fucked off my ass.”
   
  When an interrogating officer suggests that the 
commission of the crime was understandable, justifiable, or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 otherwise excusable, it implies to the accused that if a 
confession is given and the officer’s version of events is 
adopted, the crime will be viewed less seriously and punishment 
will be more lenient.  Commonwealth v. DiGiambattista, 813 
N.E.2d 516, 527 (Mass. 2004) (citing F.E. Inbau et al., Criminal 
Interrogation and Confessions  419-22 (4th ed. 2004)).   Often 
referred to as “minimization,” the technique makes an implied 
promise that if the suspect adopts this minimized version of 
events, the crimes will be seen as less egregious.  
Rettenberger, 984 P.2d at 1018  (“[T]he interrogator communicates 
that the suspect will receive a reduced level of punishment 
. . . if he admits to a description of the offense the 
interrogator finds acceptable.” ( second alteration in original) 
(quoting Richard J. Ofshe & Richard A. Leo, The Decision to 
Confess Falsely: Rational Choice and Irrational Action, 74 Denv. 
U.L. Rev. 979, 999 (1997) [hereinafter The Decision to Confess 
Falsely]); see also Dassey v. Dittmann, 877 F.3d 297, 335 (7th 
Cir. 2017) (en banc) (Ro vner, J., dissenting)  (“Although a court 
must exclude a confession obtained by direct promise of 
leniency, the research demonstrates that minimization techniques 
are the functional equivalent in their impact on suspects.” 
(citation omitted)).17 
                     
 17 In response to the many authorities cited above, the dissent 
asserts that we are relying solely on DiGiambattista  and Rettenberger  to 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34   In DiGiambattista, the Supreme Court of Massachusetts 
observed that the officers repeatedly portrayed the defendant’s 
commission of arson as excusable  because he was stressed, under 
the influence of alcohol, and had not intended to harm anyone.  
813 N.E.2d at 526.  The court found that the use of these 
minimization techniques alone would not render a confession 
involuntary, but the combination of false statements about 
irrefutable evidence and minimization techniques, as well as 
references to “counseling,” rendered the defendant ’s statement 
involuntary.  Id. at 528.   
  Similarly, in Rettenberger, the Supreme Court of Utah 
found that the use of minimization techniques during a custodial 
interrogation “strongly weighs against the conclusion that the 
confession was voluntary.”   984 P.2d at 1018.  There, the 
interrogating officers made several references to the defendant 
being charged with capital murder, but they suggested that the 
crime could be recast as a less serious offens e if he were to 
confess.  Id.  The court observed that numerous  times during the 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
conclude that the minimization technique implies to the accused that adopting 
the minimized narrative will result in favorable treatment.  Dissent at 3 4.  
The dissent proceeds to reject the notion that the minimization technique can 
make an implied promise.  Dissent at 34.  The implied promise that the 
minimization technique makes, however, is well documented and has been the 
subject of scholarly research for decades.  See, e.g., Saul M. Kassin et al., 
Police Interrogations and Confessions: Communicating Promises and Threats by 
Pragmatic Implication, 15 L. & Hum. Behav. 233, 234 -35 (1991); The Decision 
to Confess Falsely, supra, at 999; F.E. Inbau et al., supra, at 419 -22. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 interrogation, the officers suggested that the killing was 
unintentional and that the “officers could ‘e xplain to the judge 
that this thing wasn’ t premeditated [.]’”  Id.   Similar to the 
court in DiGiambattista, the Rettenberger court found that 
minimization techniques alone may not be enough to render a 
confession involuntary but that at a minimum they are strong 
evidence that the defendant’s confession was coerced.  Id.  
  Here, Det. Tokita likewise repeatedly attempted to 
portray the commission of the alleged offense as understandable 
because of the drugs and alcohol that Baker and the  CW had 
consumed and because of stereotypes associated with his gender 
and the gender of the CW.  In doing so, Det. Tokita implicitly 
promised Baker  that he would receive more favorable treatment if 
he adopted Det. Tokita’s version of events and confessed.   This 
tactic was reasonably likely to influence Baker to make an 
involuntary confession, particularly when combined with other 
coercive interrogation tactics.  DiGiambattista
, 813 N.E.2d at 
528.  Therefore, Det. Tokita’s use of this tactic weighs in 
favor of Baker’s confession being involuntary
.   
  Moreover, Det. Tokita’s use of gender stereotypes was 
improper not only because it implicitly promised Baker leniency 
in exchange for a confession, it was also manifestly 
inappropriate gender-based discrimination.  By intimating that 
women are “more promiscuous . . . . when they’re on alcohol ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 (continued . . .)  . . . cause they lose their inhibitions” and that “ Guys are 
programmed to procreate,”  Det. Tokita appealed to improper 
prejudices about how men and women behave.  It is a fundamental 
duty of this court to call attention to those interrogation 
techniques that are “so offensive to a civilized system of 
justice that they must be condemned under principles of due 
process.”  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 513-14, 849 P.2d at 74 
(internal quotations omitted) (quoting Crane v. Kentucky, 476 
U.S. 683, 687 (1986)).  Gender discrimination is expressly 
prohibited by our constitution and precedent of the United 
States Supreme Court.  State v. Levinson, 71 H aw. 492, 499, 795 
P.2d 845, 849-50 (1990 ) (concluding that a defendant’s use of 
peremptory challenges in a criminal case to discriminate against 
potential jurors on the basis of gender was prohibited by 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai‘i
 Constitution); Weinberger v. 
Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 637-39 (1975) (holding that the Social 
Security Act’s disparate treatment of men and women on the basis 
of economic stereotypes violated due process).  Interrogation 
techniques that run afoul of our s tate’s prohibitions on 
discrimination are so offensive that they must not be 
countenanced under principles of due process.18  See Kelekolio, 
74 Haw. at 513-14, 849 P.2d at 74. 
                     
 18 The dissent agrees that Det. Tokita’s statements were 
discriminatory on the basis of gender, but concludes that it was appropriate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37   Additionally, we have not hesitated to exclude 
statements or evidence from being used at trial when necessary 
to preserve the integrity of the judicial process.  State v. 
Bowe, 77 Hawai‘ i 51, 59, 881 P.2d 538, 546 (1994) (holding that 
even in a situation when an accused is coerced into making a 
confession by a private individual, the state participates in 
that violation by allowing the coerced statements to be used as 
evidence); State v. Torres, 125 
Hawai‘i 382, 394, 262 P.3d 1006, 
1018 (2011) (“[C] ourts should not place their imprimatur on 
evidence that was illegally obtained by allowing it to be 
admitted into evidence in a criminal prosecution.”).  Indeed, 
this court has resolutely condemned appeals to discriminatory 
prejudice used in various  contexts.   See, e.g. , State v. Pitts, 
146 Hawai‘ i 120, 137-38, 456 P.3d 484, 501- 02 (2019)  (stating 
that a court’s inherent authority to administer justice would 
permit intervention if a peremptory challenge appeared to 
discriminate on a prohibited basis); State v. Rogan , 91 Hawai‘i 
405, 414, 984 P.2d 1231, 1240 (1999) (stating that appeals to 
prejudice “threaten[] our multicultural society and 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
for Det. Tokita to make these statements because he was “attempt[ing] to put 
Baker at ease.”  Dissent at 37.  We do not consider Det. Tokita’s purpose in 
making these statements to be relevant.  It is deeply troubling that the 
dissent endorses the use of discriminatory rhetoric in custodial 
interrogations to put a suspect “at ease” in order to induce a confession.  
If adopted, the dissent’s view would result in the tacit, indeed express, 
approval of discriminatory comments based on gender by a state actor during 
custodial interrogations, a position that we do not ascribe to.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 (continued . . .)  constitutional values”) ; State v. David, 141 Hawai ‘i 315, 327, 
409 P.3d 719, 731 (2017) (holding that the circuit court erred 
by failing to repudiate a prosecutor’s improper appeal to race 
at sentencing). 
  In the context of discriminatory interrogation 
tactics, the appropriate action may be exclusion of a confession 
obtained by the use of such tactics.  Matsumoto , 145 Hawai ‘i at 
324, 452 P.3d at 321 (“The reasons for barring coer ced 
admissions include . . . a desire that the police not become law 
breakers in the process of achieving society’ s valid law 
enforcement objectives.”  (internal quotation marks omitted)).  
Thus, in an effort to deter police interrogators from making 
discriminatory statements and to protect the integrity of the 
judicial system, we now hold that interrogation techniques that 
rely on stereotyping protected classes of persons are inherently 
coercive, and strongly weigh against any subsequent statement 
being voluntary.19  Here, Det. Tokita’s use of discriminatory 
                     
 19 Although we hold that a police interrogator’s use of a technique 
involving a discriminatory narrative is one factor to be examined under the 
totality of the circumstances, in extreme cases the discriminatory tactic may 
be so odious as to render any subsequent statement involuntary and 
inadmissible.  Cf. Rogan, 91 Hawai‘ i at 411, 984 P.2d at 1237.  Additionally, 
we clarify that our holding today applies without regard to the source of the 
legal protection from discrimination.  Compare  Haw. Const. art. I, § 5 
(proscribing discrimination on the basis of race, religion, sex, or ancestry) 
with HRS § 378-2(a)(1) (Supp. 2019) (prohibiting employers from 
discriminating on the basis of race, sex including gender identity or 
expression, sexual orientation, age, religion, color, ancestry, disability, 
marital status, arrest and court record, reproductive health decision, or 
domestic or sexual violence victim status).  Contrary to the dissent’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 interrogation tactics strongly weighs toward finding Baker’s 
statement involuntary.20   
  
Det. Tokita also sought to demonstrate his 
trustworthiness by assuring Baker that he was not trying to 
deceive him.  Early in the interrogation he told Baker,  “I’m 
being straight with you cause you haven’t had a record.”   
Shortly thereafter, Det. Tokita assured Baker that he was not 
trying to manipulate Baker and was not “playing games.”  He told 
Baker that he was “being straight up” and that , reciprocally, 
Baker should be honest with him because “ [f]air is fair.”   Soon 
after saying this, Det. Tokita drew connections between himself 
and Baker by stat ing that, like Baker, he does “some fucked up 
things when I drink, dude, let me tell you that.”  This 
statement was followed by Det. Tokita saying,  “I do some fucked 
up things when I drink and that ’s part of the reason why,  fuck, 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
assertions, we are not “polic[ing] the language” used by interrogating 
officers or “sanitizing” interrogations.  Dissent at 36-37.  We are simply 
refusing to place our imprimatur on the employment of discriminatory language 
during police interrogation and hold that its use, while weighing strongly 
against a finding of voluntariness, should be examined under the totality of 
the circumstances. 
 
 20 The dissent characterizes our conclusion that the use of such 
discriminatory tactics weighs toward a finding of involuntariness as 
“bizarre.”  Dissent at 35.  This conclusion is not surprising in light of the 
dissent’s view that the police should be permitted to use discriminatory 
rhetoric during custodial interrogations  so long as it is for a proper 
purpose, such as putting an accused “at ease.”  Dissent at 37; see supra note 
18.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 I’m divorced, you know what I mean?  Cause I did some fucked up 
things.” 
  This attempt by Det. Tokita to build a rapport between 
himself and Baker during the interrogation is an example of the 
“false friend” interrogation technique.  See  Rettenberger, 9 84 
P.2d at 1016.  Officers use this technique to represent to the 
accused that they are friends who will act in the accused’s best 
interest.21  2 Wayne R. LaFave et al., Crim inal Procedure § 
6.2(c) (4th ed.) (“Another type of deceit is the so-called 
‘false friend’ technique, whereby the interrogator represents 
that he is a friend acting in the suspect’s best interest.”).  
After establishing a rapport, “
the suspect is fooled into 
trusting that the interrogator’ s behavior will conform to the 
norms of friendship: the interrogator will loyally help the 
suspect out of the jam, advise the suspect to confess only if 
confession will be beneficial, and so on.”  Margaret L. Paris, 
Trust, Lies, and Interrogation, 3 Va. J. Soc. Pol’ y & L. 3, 21-
22 (1995).  Standing alone, this technique is typically not 
enough to render a confession involuntary, but its coercive 
effect may be exacerbated by its use in conjunction with other 
                     
 21 The dissent rejects the notion that a police officer’s attempts 
to build a false rapport with the accused during a custodial interrogation  
may be coercive and argues that the tactic is not recognized by our law.  
Dissent at 38 .  In Spano v. New York, a case we cited in Kelekolio  as an 
example of an extrinsic falsehood, the Supreme Court of the United States 
explicitly recognized the coercive nature of such deceptions.  Spano, 360 
U.S. 315, 323- 24 (1959); Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 513, 849 P.2d at 74.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 coercive interrogation tactics.  Rettenberger, 9 84 P.2d at 1017  
(“The significance of the [false friend] stratagem comes in 
relation to other tactics and factors.”).  
  Here, Det. Tokita sought to earn Baker’s trust by 
assuring Baker that he was being forthright and not “playing 
games.”  He implied that since he was “being straight up” with 
Baker, he was entitled to reciprocal treatment because “[f] air 
is fair.”  In doing so, Det. Tokita implied that there was a 
relationship of trust between himself and Baker, and that 
relationship created a mutual obligation of honesty.  
Additionally, the detective attempted to demonstrate empathy for 
Baker by suggesting that he also cannot control his behavior 
when intoxicated.  To the extent that Baker believed Det. Tokita 
was not his adversary, he was less likely to question the 
veracity of Det. Tokita’s statements, more likely to believe any 
promises or threats, and more likely to ultimately confess, 
regardless of guilt.  Rettenberger , 984 P.2d at 1017.  Because 
Det. Tokita used this tactic in conjunction with several other 
coercive interrogation techniques, we find that its use was 
reasonably likely to influence Baker to make an involuntary 
confession.  Therefore, its use weighs toward Baker’s confession 
being involuntary. 
  During the interrogation, Det. Tokita repeatedly 
encouraged Baker to confess to beating the CW, but Baker refused ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 to do so.  This culminated with Det. Tokita telling Baker “this 
is when I know you’re not being straight with me.  You know what 
I mean and when I write my report, that’s what it’s going to 
reflect.  That you weren’t being straight with me about that.” 
(Emphasis added.)  Baker, who had consistently denied beating 
the CW until this comment, asked Det. Tokita, “What do you want 
to hear, officer?  What question do you want to ask?”  When Det. 
Tokita again repeated the question “why did you beat her up?” 
Baker responded, “I was drinking.  It was in the moment.  I was 
fucked off my ass.”
 
  By informing an accused person that any untruthfulness 
will be recorded and reported to other persons or entities in 
the criminal justice system, the officer is making an implied 
threat that denying involvement in the crime will have adverse 
consequences.  The coercive nature of this tactic is exacerbated 
when, as here, it is deployed after repeated attempts to 
convince the accused to adopt the officer’s version of events 
have failed.  While “mere advice ” from the police that it would 
be better for the accused to tell the truth does not render a 
subsequent confession involuntary,  an interrogating officer’s 
exhortations to tell the truth accompanied by threats or 
promises are  more likely to re sult in an accused’s su bsequent 
statement being involuntary.  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505, 849 
P.2d at 70.  Det. Tokita warned Baker that the report itself ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 would be detrimental to Baker if it showed that he continued to 
deny assaulting the CW.  The detective’s statements were an 
implicit threat to Baker of adverse consequences if he continued 
in his denial, and Baker’s response indicates his clear 
understanding of that warning.  Thus, Det. Tokita’s reference to 
the report was reasonably likely to influence Baker to make an 
involuntary confession, and it also 
weighs in favor of Baker’s 
statement being involuntary.22   
b. Deception A bout Incontrovertible Physical Evidence 
  In addition to the coercive tactics already discussed , 
Det. Tokita deliberately and repeatedly told Baker during the 
interrogation that DNA evidence tied Baker to the sexual assault 
of the CW.  As Officer Esaki testified at trial , however, none 
of the DNA evidence recovered could be connected to Baker.  By 
Det. Tokita’s own admission,  this was a lie designed to elicit  
Baker’s confession.  Since the lie was in regard to the facts of 
the alleged offense, it was an intrinsic falsehood.  Matsumoto, 
145 Hawai‘ i at 324, 452 P.3d at 321.  Under Kelekolio , this 
tactic would be treated like  any other intrinsic factual 
                     
 22 The dissent asserts that Det. Tokita “in no way” was implying 
that Baker would suffer adverse consequences for not confessing to the 
narrative when the detective told Baker: “You know what I mean and when I 
write my report, that’s what it’s going to reflect.  That you weren’t being 
straight with me about that.”  Dissent at 39 (emphasis added).  The obvious 
implication made by the reference to the report is confirmed by Baker’s 
response, in which he replies to Det. Tokita, “What do you want to hear[?]”  
The dissent may fail to recognize the implication of Det. Tokita’s reference 
to the report, but Baker did not.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 deception.  See  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. At 513, 849 P.2d at 74.  
However, new developments have augmented our understanding of 
the inherently coercive nature of misrepresentations about 
incontrovertible physical evidence.   See Corley v. United 
States, 556 U.S. 303, 321  (2009) (stating that there is mounting 
empirical evidence that the pressures inherent in custodial 
interrogations can induce a “frighteningly high percentage of 
people to confess to crimes they never committed”) (citing 
Steven A. Drizin & Richard A. Leo, The Problem of False 
Confessions in the Post– DNA World , 82 N.C. L. Rev. 891, 906– 07 
(2004)).   As such, we now consider how a court tasked with 
determining the voluntariness of an accused’s statement should 
weigh an interrogating officer’s use of intrinsic factual 
deception about incontrovertible physical evidence.   
  The presentation of falsified incontrovertible 
evidence is designed to demonstrate to the accused that t hey 
will inevitably be found guilty of the alleged crime.  The 
Decision to Confess Falsely, supra , at 1013.  The fact that the 
accused has failed to convince the interrogating officer  of 
their innocence  demonstrates that the accused will also be 
unable to convince a prosecutor, judge, or jury.  Id.   When 
confronted with false evidence such as DNA, which is uniquely 
identifying and therefore appears to be truly incontrovertible, 
the accused can come to believe that there is no alternative but ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 to confess.  Richard J. Ofshe & Richard A. Leo, The Social 
Psychology of Police Interrogation: The Theory and 
Classification of True and False Confessions, 16 Stud. L. Pol. & 
Soc’y 189, 202 -203 (1997).  This is especially true when the 
false evidence is characterized as scientific because people 
generally expect scientific tests to be accurate  and 
trustworthy.  See Matsumoto , 145 Hawai ‘i at 326, 452 P.3d at 323; 
see also Miriam  S. Gohara, A Lie for a Lie: False Confessions 
and the Case for Reconsidering the Legality of Deceptive 
Interrogation Techniques, 33 Fordham Urb. L.J. 791, 822 (2006) 
(“Suspects tend to believe that ‘scientific’ evidence--such as 
DNA, fingerprints, and even lie detector tests-- are generally 
accepted by juries as infallible proof of guilt.” (footnote 
omitted)).  What ultimately makes deception about 
incontrovertible evi
dence insidious is the implied threat that 
it carries: independent incriminating evidence exists, so the 
accused should confess in order to enter a mitigating statement 
into the record.  Gohara, supra , at 825-26.   
  Other courts in addressing the coercive  nature of 
deceptions regarding incontrovertible physical evidence have 
found that fabricated physical evidence can render  a suspect’s 
confession invalid.  One such case is State v.  Cayward, a case 
this court cited in Kelekolio  as an example of when intrinsic 
factual deception may render a confession involuntary.  Cayward , ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 552 So.2d 971 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1989); Kelekolio , 74 Haw.  at 
514 n.17, 849 P.2d at 74 n.17.  In Cayward, a  Florida District 
Court of Appeal invalidated a confession obtained by police 
officers who presented the suspect with fabricated lab reports 
that purported to show that semen stains recovered from the 
victim’s clothes matched the suspect’s DNA.  
552 So.2d at  974-
75.  Similarly, in State v . Patton , the suspect’s confession was 
deemed per se involuntary under the totality of the 
circumstances test because it was induced by a doctored audio 
tape.  826 A.2d 783, 784 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2003).  The 
Supreme Court of Utah recognized the particularly coercive 
nature of false evidence “allegedly derived from scientific 
technologies” when it held that the police’s repeated and 
egregious lies about the existence of physical evidence rendered  
a suspect’s confession involuntary.  Rettenberger , 984 P.2d at  
1015-16 (quoting The Decision to Confess Falsely, supra, at 
1023) (holding a confession involuntary when, although no 
physical evidence existed against the defendant, the 
interrogating officers falsely told 
the defendant  they had 
fingerprint matches, blood matches, recorded phone calls, and 
more).   
  In regard to coerciveness, there is no meaningful 
difference in the impact to an accused between a forgery, as 
used in Cayward and Patton , and oral misrepresentations as used ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 in Rettenberger and this case.23  To the suspect, who does not 
expect the police to lie, there is no meaningful distinction 
between being given a piece of paper that purports to document 
guilt and an officer’s confident assertion that scientific 
evidence incontrovertibly establishes the suspect’s guilt.   
  Det. Tokita falsely told Baker several times that 
there was physical DNA evidence that would incriminate him.  
Prior to being told there was incontrovertible physical evidence 
implicating him, Baker refused to confess and repeatedly denied 
any wrongdoing.  It was only after Det. Tokita asserted that 
physical evidence conclusively established that Baker had sex 
with the CW that he began to confess.24  Each time Det. Tokita 
repeated his assertion that he had DNA evidence that would 
implicate Baker, Baker volunteered more information.  Every 
                     
 23 The Cayward  and Patton courts were particularly alarmed by the 
use of forgeries because of the “potential for mischief if the fabricated 
evidence found its way into the trial.”  Patton, 826 A.2d at 800.   
 
 24 The Chief Justice’s concurring and dissenting opinion 
distinguishes Det. Tokita’s statements that “we g[o]t physical evidence, so 
you cannot deny that you didn’t have sex with her” and “[w]e have physical 
evidence and nobody can deny physical evidence[,]” from the detective’s 
statement, “[t]hat’s why I know there’s physical evidence that you guys 
cannot deny because there’s DNA in there and you know that DNA’s one of [a] 
kind,” concluding that the former was not coercive because Det. Tokita did 
not specifically reference DNA.  Recktenwald, C.J., Concurring and Dissenting 
(Concurrence/Dissent) at 6 n.2.  However, an interrogating officer’s false 
assertion that the accused’s guilt is incontrovertibly established by 
physical evidence can be equally coercive to the accused without mentioning 
DNA.  In this case, for example, Baker refused to admit any wrongdoing prior 
to the detective’s false statement about undeniable physical evidence.  See 
Rettenberger, 984 P.2d at 1015 -16 (holding that an officer’s 
misrepresentations that “they had unspecified ‘physical evidence’” that 
linked defendant to the crime weighed toward defendant’s confession being 
involuntary).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 (continued . . .)  repetition of this assertion made the implied threat to Baker 
that his guilt was conclusively established by incriminating 
evidence.  And correlatively, every reiteration made the implied 
promise that he could confess now, enter a mitigating statement 
into the record, and receive 
more favorable treatment.25   
  Det. Tokita’s misrepresentations about physical DNA 
evidence implicate a matter intrinsic to the case and therefore 
are considered under the totality of the circumstances.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.  However, in light of 
the various studies and cases that have emerged since Kelekolio, 
we recognize that false claims of physical evidence result in an 
unsettling number of false or involuntary confession s.26  Gohara, 
                     
 25 Additionally, Det. Tokita previously told Baker that he was being 
honest with him because Baker did not have a criminal record as an adult.  
This likely aggravated the coercive effect of the detective’s lies about 
incontrovertible physical evidence tying Baker to the crime.  
 
 26 The infamous case of the Central Park Five provides a salient 
example.  One of the innocent boys who eventually confessed was told by a 
detective that his fingerprints would be found on the jogger’s body, even 
though the detective knew this was not true.  Gohara, supra, at 842 n.9.  The 
boys were convicted in 1990, based almost entirely on their coerced 
confessions.  However, in 2002 the Central Park Five’s convictions were 
vacated after defense moved to vacate the judgment, with the prosecution 
submitting a 57 page affirmation detailing the flaws and errors in the 
investigation.  People v. Wise, 752 N.Y.S.2d 837 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 2002).   
  The dissent distinguishes the Central Park Five case from this 
one because there is corroborating evidence of Baker’s culpability.   Dissent 
at 37 n.5.  The United State Supreme Court has rejected an approach that 
considers the existence of corroborating evidence in determining whether a 
confession was induced by impermissible methods:  
Indeed, in many of the cases in which the command of the 
Due Process Clause has compelled us to reverse state 
convictions involving the use of confessions obtained by 
impermissible methods, independent corroborating evidence 
left little doubt of the truth of what the defendant had 
confessed. Despite such verification, confessions were ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 supra, at 826 (“An innocent person and a guilty person alike are 
likely to see the ‘evidence’ for what it appears to be-- a threat 
of dire consequences awaiting them regardless of whether they 
confess. . . .  [B]y any rational calculation, a confession may 
ameliorate the otherwise inevitable and unhappy consequences 
awaiting the suspect, whether he is guilty or innocent.”); 
Drizin & Leo, supra, 906–07.  Thus, we reaffirm our holding in 
Kelekolio that intrinsic factual deception is analyzed under the 
totality of the circumstances, but we clarify that 
misrepresentations about the existence of incontrovertible 
physical evidence that directly implicates the accused is an 
exceptionally coercive interrogation tactic and its use is a 
strong indicator that the suspect’s statement was involuntary.27  
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
found to be the product of constitutionally impermissible 
methods in their inducement.  Since a defendant had been 
subjected to pressures to which, under our accusatorial 
system, an accused should not be subjected, we were 
constrained to find that the procedures leading to his 
conviction had failed to afford him that due process of law 
which the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees . 
 
Rogers v. Richmond, 365 U.S. 534, 541 (1961) (emp hasis added); see also  
Aleman v. Vill. of Hanover Park , 662 F.3d 897, 906 (7th Cir. 2011) (“The 
question of coercion is separate from that of reliability.  A coerced 
confession is inadmissible . . . even if amply and convincingly 
corroborated.” (citing Rogers, 365 U.S. at 540 -41)).   
 
 
 27 The dissent emphasizes the intrinsic nature of Det. Tokita’s 
deception “regarding the existence of incriminating evidence” and appears to 
conclude that that prevents it from being coercive.  Dissent at 4 1.  This is 
inconsistent with our law, which provides that intrinsic factual deception is 
coercive unless it is not of a type that would reasonably induce a false or 
involuntary confession.  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 513, 849 P.2d at 74 (“[W]e 
emphasize that we are not purporting to enunciate a bright line per se rule 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 In certain cases, lies about incontrovertible physical evidence 
may, standing alone, render the accused’s subsequent confession 
involuntary.  See Kelekolio, 74 Haw . at 514 n.17, 849 P.2d at 74 
n.17 (citing Cayward, 552 So. 2d at 972-74 ); Patton, 826 A.2d at 
784.  Accordingly, Det. Tokita’s lies to Baker about the 
existence of incontrovertible physical evidence implicating him  
in the attack on the CW strongly weigh toward Baker’s statement 
being involuntary.   
  The dissent maintains  that Det. Tokita was 
constitutionally permitted to use some of the impermissible 
tactics that were employed to elicit Baker’s confession because 
they had not been explicitly condemned by this court at the time 
of the interrogation in this case.  Dissent at 28.  In essence,  
the dissent argues that a tactic’s coerciveness is related to 
this court’s recognition of it, which is plainly incorrect.  
Interrogation tactics may render a confession involuntary if 
they are coercive; 
a tactic does not become coercive only after 
it has already been “prohibited by the courts or the Legislature 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
that the use of intrinsic factual deception cannot, given the totality of 
circumstances surrounding any given statement, result in an involuntary 
confession.”).  The Kelekolio  court in fact recognized that deception as to 
scientific evidence is eminently likely to induce a false or involuntary 
confession, even when the deception concerns intrinsic facts.  Id . at 513–14, 
514 n.17, 849 P.2d at 74, 74 n.17 (citing Cayward  as an example for when an 
intrinsic factual deception renders a confession involuntary under the 
totality of the circumstances).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 of this State.”  Dissent at 28.  The implication of the 
dissent’s contention is that coercive 
tactics previously not 
condemned by this court are shielded from review.  This is not 
an approach that we have ever taken .  Indeed,  this court 
recently vacated a defendant’s conviction after we unanimously 
held that an interrogating officer’s falsehood about polygraph 
results was extrinsic and per se coercive
, despite the fact that 
our determination was not announced prior to the defendant’s 
interrogation.28  Matsumoto , 145 Hawai ‘i at 325-27, 452 P.3d at 
322-24.   
c. Consideration of the Totality of the Circumstances 
  In determining the ultimate issue of voluntariness, 
the individual circumstances relevant to the voluntariness of 
                     
 28 The dissent states that we rely on “a law review article” to 
support our conclusions as to the coerciveness of Det. Tokita’s interrogation 
tactics.  Dissent at 38.  This disregards the numerous scholarly authorities 
cited in this opinion.  This court has consistently considered new 
developments in social science when deciding critical issues such as the one 
presented here.  See, e.g., State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai‘ i 302, 310, 277 P.3d 
1027, 1035 (2012) (stating that the “robust body of research” that had 
developed in the area of eye witness identifications supported requiring the 
circuit courts to give a specific jury instruction upon the request of the 
defendant regarding the trustworthiness of an eyewitness identification if 
such identification is central to the case); State v. Kaneaiakala, 145 Hawai‘ i 
231, 242, 450 P.3d 761, 772 (2019) (stating that a “robust body of 
scholarship and empirical research has emerged calling into doubt” whether 
certain factors previously adopted by the court were “sufficient indicators 
of reliability and admissibility”).   
  Allowing our understanding of the factual nature of coercion to 
be dictated by outmoded and disproven theories of human psychology, 
particularly in the face of robust scholarship and empirical research, would 
be an abdication of our constitutional duty to uphold a defendant’s right 
against self- incrimination.  See Matsumoto, 145 Hawai ‘i at 327, 452 P.3d at 
324 (“Extensive scientific literature and numerous documented cases have 
demonstrated the coercive nature of falsified polygraph test results[.]”).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 the accused’s statement must be considered in their totality.  
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 502, 849 P.2d at 69; Wilson, 260 F.3d at  
953.  During the course of the interrogation, Det. Tokita 
employed seven separate improperly  coercive interrogation 
techniques.  They  were as follows : (1) the comments suggesting 
the public and media would perceive Baker more favorably if he 
confessed; (2) the implication that Baker would be perceived 
less favorably in court if he continued to deny guilt; (3)  the 
minimization narratives suggesting the conduct was 
understandable because of the drugs and alcohol involved;  (4) 
the use of unlawfully discriminatory gender- based stereotypes to 
excuse or explain conduct; (5)  the use of the false friend 
technique; (6) the insinuation that  Baker’s refusal to admit to 
assaulting the CW would be set forth in the detective’s report 
and could adversely affect him; and (7) the detective’s false 
assertion that there was incontrovertible DNA evidence showing 
that Baker had sex with the CW, which, as  the detective 
testified at trial,  was told to Baker to “try[] to get the truth 
out of him.” 
  An interrogator’s use of multiple coercive 
interrogation tactics in conjunction can exacerbate the coercive 
effect of the individual tactics.  See DiGiambattista , 813 
N.E.2d at 528 (explaining that the coercive effect of an 
assertion about irrefutable evidence of guilt is worsened when ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
53 it is combined with minimization tactics); Rettenberger, 984 
P.2d at 1017 (“The significance of the [false friend technique] 
comes in relation to other tactics and factors.”).   All of the 
tactics used here, except for the improper gender stereotyping, 
made an implied promise to Baker that he would benefit if he 
confessed and suffer adverse consequences if he did not.  The 
use of these tactics in conjunction with one another exacerbated 
their overall coercive effect on Baker because  they ultimately 
presented the same implicit promise of gaining a benefit by 
confessing--and receiving a detriment by not admitting guilt.29   
  
The dissent maintains that the surrounding 
circumstances of the interview weigh in favor of voluntariness 
                     
 29 The dissent suggests that our analysis requires that any comment 
alluding to “positive outcomes for the defendant” is an implied promise of a 
benefit from confessing, and it concludes that each tactic Det. Tokita used 
was permissible under Kelekolio’s holding that “mere advice from the police 
that it would be better for the accused to tell the truth when unaccompan ied 
by either a threat or promise does not render a subsequent confession 
involuntary.”  Dissent at 32; Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70 
(brackets omitted).  Manifestly, the detective’s insinuations were not “mere 
advice” that it would be better for Baker to tell the truth; the detective 
repeatedly demanded that Baker confess to committing the crime in a specific 
manner, which he supplied through a minimized narrative of the incident.  
When Baker failed to conform his confession to the detective’s narrative, the 
detective intimidatingly informed Baker that such deviation would be 
reflected in his report, prompting Baker to ask the detective “What do you 
want to hear, officer?  What question do you want to ask?”  (Emphasis added.)  
Additionally, this court held in Kelekolio that exhortations to tell the 
truth are only appropriate if they are “unaccompanied by either a threat or 
promise.”  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70 (emphasis added).  Here, 
as discussed above, Det. Tokita’s tactics implied to Baker that he would 
benefit from confessing and suffer consequences if he did not.  It is 
incorrect to suggest that the interrogation consisted solely of “mere advice” 
that it would be better to tell the truth unaccompanied by either a threat or 
promise.  With the sole exception of Det. Tokita’s discriminatory comments, 
each of the impermissible tactics Det. Tokita employed was accompanied by 
implicit threats or promises, which is prohibited under Kelekolio.  Id.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
54 and accordingly concludes that Baker’s confession was not 
coerced.  Dissent at 42-44.  The dissent first points to the 
fact that Baker was 
informed of his constitutional rights and 
waived them.  However, the question of whether an accused’s 
decision to give a statement was a free and unconstrained choice 
is distinct from whether Miranda warnings were given and 
knowingly and intelligently waived.  Miranda  warnings do not 
immunize statements obtained during custodial interrogations 
from being the product of coercion.  See, e.g., Bowe, 77 Hawai ‘i 
at 53, 881 P.2d at 540 (holding that defendant’s confession was 
involuntary although defendant had been “given Miranda warnings 
and subsequently signed an HPD Form 81, waiving his 
constitutional rights”).30   
  The dissent also contends that Baker’s confession was 
voluntary because Det. Tokita “never raised his voice or 
vocalized aggressively.”  Dissent at 26 (quoting Kelekolio, 7 4 
Haw. at 489, 849 P.2d at 64) .  But psychological coercion does 
                     
 30 The dissent cites to Dassey v. Dittmann, 877 F.3d 297 (7th Cir. 
2017) (en banc), for the proposition that an accused’s adoption of a 
proffered narrative weighs towards a confession  being involuntary if the 
accused completely subsumes their will to that of the interrogating officer 
and adopts any proffered narrative in its entirety.  Dissent at 4 3.  To that 
point, the dissent inaccurately asserts that we rely on Baker “entirely” 
adopting Det. Tokita’s narrative.  Dissent at 4 3.  It is also incorrect that 
a confession can only be involuntary  if the accused completely subsumes their 
will to that of the interrogating officer and adopts any proffered narrative 
in its entirety.  Yong Shik Won, 137 Hawai‘ i at 340, 372 P.3d at 1075 
(“Voluntariness means a ‘free and unconstrained choice.’”).  The fact that 
Baker did not adopt every specific fact that Det. Tokita presented to him 
does not demonstrate that his confession was voluntarily given.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
55 not require an aggressive tone of voice.  See  Matsumoto, 145 
Hawai‘i at 326, 452 P.3d at 323  (“[F]alse polygraph results may 
psychologically prime an innocent suspect to make a 
confession.”); State v. Kazanas, 138 Hawai‘i 23, 26, 375 P.3d 
1261, 1264 (2016) (“[C]oercion can be mental as well as 
physical[.]” (first alteration in original) (quoting Miranda v. 
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 448 (1966)).  Additionally, the dissent 
asserts that Baker was a “mature individual.”  Dissent at 27 
(quoting Frazier, 394 U.S. at 739) .  Baker had only an eighth-
grade education, and his level of maturity clearly did not 
safeguard him from the detective’s psychologically coercive 
techniques.  See Clewis v. Texas, 386 U.S. 707, 712 (1967) 
(finding that the defendant’s low educational attainment weighed 
toward his confession being involuntary).  The dissent concludes 
that Baker answered all of Det. Tokita’s questions “with ease” 
and there is “no evidence”  that the detective coerced Baker’s 
confession in any way.  Dissent at 27, 43.  In fact,  the circuit 
court ruled that Baker’s statements during the final portion of 
his interrogation were involuntarily made because of Det. 
Tokita’s interrogation techniques, and the concurring and 
dissenting opinion concludes that an additional, separate 
portion of Baker’s confession was also not voluntaril y obtained.  
Concurrence/Dissent at 7.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
56   Ultimately, the nature and extent of the coercive 
interrogation tactics in this case strongly indicate that 
Baker’s statement was involuntary .  As extensively discussed, 
Det. Tokita utilized multiple  coercive tactics in conjunction to 
overbear Baker’s will, and it is clear that Baker’s statements 
did not result from a free and unconstrained decision to make a 
confession. Bowe, 77 Hawai‘i at 59, 881 P.2d at 546 (stating that 
the “right to make a meaningful choice between confessing and 
remaining silent” is “implicit in a fundamentally fair trial”). 
  Accordingly, under the totality of the circumstances, 
we conclude that Baker’s confession was not voluntarily 
obtained.   Det. Tokita’s use of multiple coercive interrogation 
tactics and their use in conjunction rendered Baker’s confession 
involuntary.31
  Therefore, the admission of the statement at 32
                     
 31 The circuit court suppressed the final portion of the 
interrogation “wherein the detective sought to get the defendant to admit 
that he directed his brother to hit and assault the complaining witness, 
which the brother did not want to do.”  We do not see an impactfu l difference 
between the coerciveness of Det. Tokita’s  tactics in the final portion of the 
interrogation and the rest of the interrogation.  Throughout the 
interrogation, as discussed, Det. Tokita employed impermissibly coercive 
techniques.  The dissent apparently disagrees with the circuit court’s 
determination that a significant portion of Baker’s confession was 
involuntary.  Dissent at 4 (“It is clear to me from the audio recording of 
Baker’s confession that Detective Tokita did not coerce Baker’s confes sion 
and that it was voluntarily given.”).   
 
 32 Baker did not contend that any of the coercive tactics used by 
Det. Tokita were per se coercive extrinsic falsehoods and thus we do not 
address the voluntariness of his statement under that rubric.  However,  it is 
noted that many of the tactics used, such as the comments about public 
perception, perception in court, and the detective’s report, implicate facts 
extrinsic to the alleged offense and may be extrinsic falsehoods under 
Kelekolio.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
57 trial violated Baker’s right against self- incrimination under 
article I, section 10 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution. 
 Matsumoto, 
145 Hawai‘ i at 324, 452 P.3d at 321 ( citing Kelekolio , 74 Haw. at
502, 849 P.2d at 69).  We note, however, that our decision does 
not rest solely on Det. Tokita’s use of multiple coercive 
tactics.  Although the use of multiple coercive tactics in 
conjunction rendered Baker’s statement involuntary, a single 
coercive interrogation technique may render a confession 
involuntary.  See Kelekolio, 74 Haw . at 511, 514 n.17, 849 P.2d 
at 73, 74 n.17 (citing Cayward  as an example of when an 
intrinsic falsehood would render a confession involuntary); 
Patton, 826 A.2d at 78 4; cf. Matsumoto, 145 Hawai‘i at 325-27, 
452 P.3d at 322 -24 (holding that an officer’s extrinsic 
falsehood about polygraph results was per se coerci
ve and 
rendered the defendant’s confession involuntary).    
B. Harmless Error  
 
 Once it has been determined that a confession was 
erroneously admitted into evidence, the appellate court must 
consider whether the erroneous admission was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  Matsumoto , 145 Hawai ‘i at 327, 4
52 P.3d at 
324.  The erroneous admission of evidence is not harmless when 
there is a reasonable possibility that the error might have 
contributed to the conviction.  State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai ‘i ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
58 203, 210, 87 P.3d 275, 282 (2004).  If such a reasonable 
possibility exists, then the error is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt and the judgment of conviction on which it may 
have been based must be set aside.  Id.  (quoting State v. Gano, 
92 Hawai ‘i 161, 176, 988
 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999)).  When a 
conviction is largely dependent on a jury’s determination as to 
the credibility of the complainant’s testimony,  the erroneous 
admission of evidence that contributes to the credibility of 
that testimony is not harmless error.  See  State v. Underwood, 
142 Hawai‘ i 317, 329, 418 P.3d 658, 670 (2018) (finding that 
prosecutor’s improper statements were not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt when conviction depended on credibility of 
complaining witness).   
 
 In this case, Baker’s statement to Det. Tokita 
strongly bolstered the evidence adduced by the State at trial 
that Baker was the perpetrator of the crime.  The State’s 
evidence as to identity was predicated on the credibility of the 
CW’s testimony, particularly because of the lack of physical 
evidence that Baker had committed the alleged crime.  
Additionally, Baker’s statement to Det. Tokita was contrary to 
the exculpatory evidence adduced by the defense and undermined 
its credibility.  Accordingly, the admission of Baker’s 
statement was not harmless error.  
Kazanas, 138 Hawai ‘i at 41, 
375 P.3d at 1279 (holding that when the case turns on the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
59 credibility of trial witnesses, the improper admission of a 
statement which harmed credibility was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt).   
Based on the foregoing, the circuit court erred in 
determining that Baker’s confession was voluntarily given, and 
the ICA erred in affirming the circuit court’s ruling .33 
V. CONCLUSION
We are cognizant of the very serious injuries that 
were suffered by the CW in this case and the egregious 
circumstances of the offenses.  This court has recognized, 
however, that “the more heinous the crime, the more care must be
exercised by the presiding judge to see that defendant’s rights 
are protected.”  State v. Uyesugi , 100 Hawai ‘i 442, 462, 60 P.3d
843, 863 (2002) (quoting Territory v. Hays, 43 Haw. 58 (
Haw. 
Terr. 1958)); see also Christopher J. v. Ames, 828 S.E.2d 884, 
894 (W. Va. 2019) (“[T]he horrific acts . . . committed against 
the victims in this case cannot prevent this Court from carrying 
 
 
33Our determination that Baker’s confession was involuntary renders 
it unnecessary to address Baker’s contention that the circuit court abused 
its discretion in redacting from his confession that he was “raped as a kid.”  
It is also unnecessary to resolve Baker’s arguments regarding consecutive 
sentencing and Apprendi  considerations.  However, we note that at sentencing 
the circuit court considered the fact that Baker had “taken no responsibility 
at any time” when deciding to impose consecutive sentences.  In relying on 
Baker’s unwillingness to take responsibility for the crime, the court 
violated the well- established rule that a sentencing court may not consider a 
defendant’s refusal to admit guilt in imposing sentence.  State v. Barnes, 
145 Hawai‘ i 213, 219, 450 P.3d 743, 749 (2019); State v. Kamana‘ o, 103 Hawai ‘i 
315, 316, 82 P.3d 401, 402 (2003).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
60 out its duty to apply the law equally to all litigants.”).  
Thus, our application of the law cannot turn on the nature and
circumstances of the charged crime, and the  commitment to this
principle is crucial to a defendant’s right to due process. 
Uyesugi, 100 Hawai ‘i at 462, 60 P.3d at 863
.  The Supreme Court
of the United States articulated this obligation many decades 
ago and explained that upholding a conviction that follows the
admission into evidence of  an involuntary confession is 
impermissible, even if the confession is likely to be true, 
because the methods used to obtain it offend  the underlying 
principles of our criminal justice system.   
 
 
 
[C]onvictions  following the admission into evidence of
confessions which are involuntary, i.e., the product of
coercion, either physical or psychological, cannot stand .
This is so not because such confessions are unlikely to be
true but because the methods used to ext ract them offen d an
underlying principle in the enforcement of our criminal
law: that ours is an accusatorial and not an inquisitorial 
system—a system in which the State must establish guilt by 
evidence independently and freely secured and may not by 
coercion prove its charge against an accused out of his own 
mouth. 
Rogers v. Richmond , 365 U.S. 534, 540 –41 (1961)  (emphases 
added). 
We also recognize that interrogations play an 
important role in our criminal justice system.  But police 
interrogations must be conducted in conformance with societal 
standards, and our society has been long -committed to the 
principle that criminal proceed ings should be accusatorial 
rather than inquisitorial.  The dissent disagrees with the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
61 outcome of this case and suggests that our holding will render 
“police officers wholly unable to question suspects.”  Dissent 
at 33.  This is simply not the case.  “Nothing we have said 
today affects the powers of the police to investigate ‘an 
unsolved crime[]’ by gathering information from witnesses and by 
other ‘proper investigative efforts.’”  State v. Kitashiro, 48 
Haw. 204, 214, 397 P.2d 558, 564 (1964) (citations omitted) 
(quoting Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478, 492 (1964)).  Our 
holding requires only that “when the process shifts from 
investigatory to accusatory--when its focus is on the accused 
and its purpose is to elicit a confession,” the interrogating 
officers may not use coercive interrogation techniques to induce 
a confession.  Id.  Our decision is an application of a 
principle to which we are constitutionally committed, that 
confessions should be freely and voluntarily given and must not 
be the product of coercion.  State v. Yong Shik Won, 137 Hawai‘i 
330, 340, 
372 P.3d 1065, 1075 (2015) (“Voluntariness means a 
‘free and unconstrained choice.’” (quoting State v. Shon, 47 
Haw. 158, 166, 385 P.2d 830, 836 (1963))); see also State v. 
Bowe, 77 Hawai ‘i 51, 57, 881 P.2d 538, 544 (1994) (“An 
involuntary confession is inherently untrustworthy because the
free will of an individual is overborne by the external 
influence exerted in obtaining it.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
62   Accordingly, the ICA’s February 2, 2018 J udgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s January 29, 2016 judgment are 
vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
 
 Dwight C.H. Lum 
for petitioner 
 
Sonja P. McCullen 
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
