 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________  
---o0o---
 
 ________________________________________________________________ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000071 03-MAR-2022 08:48 AM Dkt. 219 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
HEALOHA CARMICHAEL, LEZLEY JACINTHO,  
and 
NĀ  MOKU AUPUNI O KO ʻOLAU HUI,  
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellees/  
Cross-Appellants,  
 
vs.  
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, SUZANNE CASE,  
in her official capacity as Chairperson of the Board of Land and  
Natural Resources, the DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees/  
Cross-Appellants,  
 
and  
 
ALEXANDER & BALDWIN, INC., EAST MAUI IRRIGATION CO., LTD.,  
and HAWAIIAN COMMERCIAL AND SUGAR CO.,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,  
 
and  
 
COUNTY OF MAUI, DEPARTMENT OF WATER SUPPLY,  
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant/Cross-Appellee.  
SCWC-16-0000071  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-16-0000071; 1CC151000650)  
 
MARCH 3, 2022   
 
 2  
 
    
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
                     
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J.  1
Since 1986, the w ater rights for 33,000 acres of 
ceded lands in the Koʻolau Forest Reserve and Hanawi Natural Area 
Reserve have been governed by four revocable permits issued by 
Respondent/Defendant -Appellant/Cross -Appellee /Cross-Appellant 
the Board of Land and Natural Resources (“BLNR”) to for-profit 
corporate entities, Respondents/Defendants -Appellants/Cross -
Appellees Alexander & Baldwin, Inc. (“A&B”) and East Maui 
Irrigation Co., Ltd. (“EMI”) . In this case, we consider whether 
BLNR’s authorization of these four permits during the past 
decade to divert more than 100 millio n gallons of water per day 
from east Maui streams required an environmental assessment 
(“EA”) pursuant to the Hawaiʻi Environmental Policy Act (“HEPA”) , 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“ HRS”) chapter 343. 
Given the significant environmental impact of the 
permitted action, the BLNR’s authority to issue revocable 
permits is subject to the environmental review requirements of 
HEPA. The Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (“ICA”) July 31, 2019 
judgment on appeal pursuant to its June 18, 2019 memorandum 
opinion is therefore vacated , and this case is remanded to the 
1 Associate Justice Richard W. Pollack, who was a member of the 
court when the oral argument was held, retired from the bench on June 30, 
2020.                       
 
 3    
 
  
  
  
 
      
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”) for 
proceedings c onsistent with this opinion. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. 2000 Issuance of Revocable Water Permits 
In 1985, the BLNR approved the public -auction sale of 
a thirty -year water license that would have consolidated four 
license areas —the Honomanū  license area, the Huelo license area, 
the Keʻanae license area, and the Nāhiku license area 
(collectively, the “license areas”) —spanning approximately 
33,000 acres of ceded lands in the Koʻolau Forest Reserve and 
Hanawi Natural Area Reserve under a single license.2 However, 
issuance of th e thirty -year license was suspended at the request 
of the Department of the Attorney General pending the settlement 
of a separate water case. Water rights for the license areas 
came to be governed thereafter by annual revocable water permits 
issued for each fiscal year. 
2 The four license areas are “affected and partly governed by” the 
East Maui Water Agreement made in 1939 between the then —Territory of Hawaiʻi  
and EMI. That Agreement provided for “the joint use by the Territory and EMI
of the aqueduct system” and “enabled the State  to dispose of the water 
licenses at a public auction instead of restricting the sale only to EMI.” 
The aqueduct system runs through lands belonging to the government and to EMI.     
 
 4   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On May 2 6, 2000, the BLNR approved the issuance of 
four annual revocable water permits to A&B and EMI,3 effective 
July 1, 2000 and expiring on June 30, 2001. Each of the 
permits —S-7263 (Honomanū), S-7264 (Huelo), S -7265 (Keʻanae), and 
S-7266 (Nāhiku) (collectively, the “revocable permits”) —gave the 
permittee4 the “[r]ight, privilege, and authority for the 
development, diversion, and use of water ” from the relevant 
license area, “pursuant t o the terms and conditions ” in the 
relevant expired general leases. These permits authorized EMI 
to divert more than 100 million gallons of water per day from 
east Maui streams for sugar -cane irrigation by Hawaiian 
Commercial and Sugar Co. (“HC&S”), a nother subsidiary of A&B , in 
central Maui. The permits also authorized the delivery of 
approximately 8.6 million gallons of water per day from east 
Maui streams to Maui County water treatment facilities that 
provided the majority of water to a population of approximately 
35,000 people in upcountry Maui. Each of the revocable permits 
3 A&B is a for -profit corporation that was engaged at all relevant 
times primarily in real estate development in Hawaiʻi and sugar cultivation in 
central Maui, and EMI is a subsidiary of A&B. 
4 For the 2000 -01 fiscal year permits, A&B was the permittee for 
the Honomanū , Huelo, and Keʻanae license areas and EMI was the permittee for 
the Nāhiku license area.  
 
 5  
  
 
                     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated that they were issued pursuant to HRS § 171-58  (1993).  
The BLNR added, as a condition to the issuance of the revocable
permits,  that the Department of the Attorney General issue an 
opinion regarding compliance with HEPA as it related to these 
leases.    6 5
 
B. 2001 Long-Term Lease Application and Continuance of 
Revocable Permits 
On May 14, 2001, A&B and EMI filed an application 
requesting  that the BLNR (1) consolidate the four license areas 
5 HRS 171-58(c) (2011) provides: 
Disposition of water rights may be made by lease at public 
auction as provided in this chapter or by permit for 
temporary use on a month -to-month basis under those 
conditions which will best serve the interests of the State 
and subject to a maximum term of one year and other 
restrictions under the law; provided t hat any disposition 
by lease shall be subject to disapproval by the legislature 
by two-thirds vote of either the senate or the house of 
representatives or by majority vote of both in any regular 
or special session next following the date of disposition; 
provided further that after a certain land or water use has 
been authorized by the board subsequent to public hearings 
and conservation district use application and environmental 
impact statement approvals, water used in nonpolluting 
ways, for nonconsumptive purposes because it is returned to 
the same stream or other body of water from which it was 
drawn, essentially not affecting the volume and quality of 
water or biota in the stream or other body of water, may 
also be leased by the board with the prior appr oval of the 
governor and the prior authorization of the legislature by 
concurrent resolution. 
The text of the statute has remained unchanged since the 
BLNR first issued the revocable permits in 2000. 
Petitioners allege this fact in their first amended complaint, 
and the State and A&B Defendants admit so in their answers. A May 25, 2001
report from the Department of Land and Natural Resources (“DLNR”)  stated 
that, as of the BLNR’s May 26, 2000 meeting, “[t]he Attorney General ha[d] 
been reviewing the i ssues and w[ould] report on that review to the [BLNR].”
There is no evidence in the record that such an opinion was ever issued by the Department of the Attorney General.   
 6  
 
 6  
  
  
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under one thirty -year lease and sell the lease at public auction 
and (2) authorize “temporary continuation” of the four revocable 
permits pending issuance of the long -term lease (“proposed long-
term lease ”). On May 23, 2001, Petitioner/Plaint iff-
Appellee/Cross -Appellee/Cross -Appellant Nā Moku Aupuni O Koʻolau 
Hui (“Nā Moku”), a Native Hawaiian non -profit organization, 
along with three Native Hawaiian individuals, petitioned the 
BLNR, pursuant to HRS chapter 91, for a contested case hearing 
on the proposed long-term lease for the license areas. The 
contested case proceedings —which concerned  the same activity as, 
but do not form the basis for,  this appeal —continued for nearly 
six years. Those proceedings included an appeal to and remand 
from the circuit court, as well as the publication of several 
orders containing findings of fact and conclusions of law by the 
BLNR.    
1. 2001 “Holdover” of Revocable Permits 
At a May 25, 2001 meeting, the BLNR considered an 
agenda item titled “Discussion on Long -term Dispositions of 
Water Licenses and Issu ance of Interim Revocable Permits to 
[A&B] and [EMI] for the [License Areas.]” The administrator of 
the Land Division of the DLNR recommended that the BLNR 
authorize the issuance of interim revocable permits to EMI and 
A&B, and “explained that the long -term disposition process [was] 
subject to discussion, that there [was] going to be a [HEPA]  
 
 7  
 
 
  
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requirement, and that the applicant [would] be required to 
prepare the necessary environmental documents.” An A&B 
representative requested that the BLNR also approve the proposed 
long-term lease it had requested in its May 14 letter to the 
BLNR. However, a Deputy Attorney General “clarified that the 
only matter before the [BLNR] for action [was] the issuance of 
the 4 interim revocable permits” and that the proposed long-term 
lease was “listed on the agenda for discussion only and [could 
not] be acted on by the Board at [that] time.” A Nā Moku 
representative testified that they would be petitioning for a 
contested case hearing. The BLNR voted to defer action and 
instead “grant a holdover permit on a month -to-month basis [to 
EMI and A&B] , pending the results of the contested case hearin g” 
(“2001 holdover decision”). 
2. 2002 “Holdover” of Revocable Permits and Subsequent 
“Continuation” or “Renewal ” 
Nearly a year later, at the BLNR’s February 22, 2002 
meeting, the BLNR indicated that it would review the rental 
rates for the revocable perm its. At the BLNR’s May 24, 2002 
meeting, upon consideration of an agenda item titled 
“Re-issuance of Interim Revocable Permits to [A&B] and [EMI] for 
the [License Areas]” BLNR staff recommended that the BLNR 
“authorize the re -issuance of permits for the subject waters in 
the interim and pending the outcome of the contested case.” The 
BLNR Chair stated that the BLNR’s intention was “to keep the  
 
  
 (continued . . . ) 
8   
 
  
  
 
 
  
                     
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
status quo and that [the revocable permits] w[ere] brought back 
to the Board because of questions raised about a uthority to 
holdover permits beyond a year.” The BLNR again voted to “defer 
and grant a holdover of the existing revocable permit on a month-to-month basis pending the results of the contest  [sic]  
case hearing”  (“2002 holdover decision”).
    7
After the BLNR’s 2002 holdover decision, the revocable 
permits were annually “continued” by a process in which the BLNR 
reviewed and voted to approve for continuation a “master 
listing” of hundreds of revocable permits submitted by the DLNR .8 
This process continued th e revocable permits included on the 
master listing on a month -to-month basis for a one -year period. 
The DLNR’s submissions to the BLNR from 2002 to 2004 cite HRS § 
171-55 (1993) as its authority for this annual review process.9 
7 Documentation from the BLNR indicates that because the revocable 
permits were con tinued on a “holdover” basis, they did not appear on the 
December 2002 master listing. 
8 The revocable permits were not subject to this annual review and 
continuation process in 2003 or 2004 and first appeared on the master listing 
submitted to the BLN R on November 18, 200 5. In a declaration, the 
administrator of the Land Division of the DLNR stated that he put the 
revocable permits on the 2005 master listing “to be consistent with how all 
of the other revocable permits were being addressed by DLNR.”  
HRS § 171 -55 (2011) provides: 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the board of 
land and natural resources may issue permits for the 
temporary occupancy of state lands or an interest therein 
on a month -to-month basis by direct negotiation wi thout 
public auction, under conditions and rent which will serve 
the best interests of the State, subject, however, to those 
restrictions as may from time to time be expressly imposed 
by the board. A permit on a month -to-month basis may 9  
 
 9    
  
 
 
   
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The revocable permits issued to A&B and EMI appeared on the  
master listings  dated November 18, 2005; October 27, 2006;  
November 16, 2007;  October 24, 2008;  October 23, 2009;  November 
12, 2010;  January 13, 2012;  December 14, 2012;  January 10, 2014;  
and December 12, 2014.      10
C. Circuit Court Proceedings11 
In response to the BLNR’s December 12, 2014 decision 
approving the continuation of the revocable permits (“2014 
continuation decision”), on April 10, 2015, Petitioners/ 
Plaintiffs -Appellees/Cross -Appellees/Cross -Appellants Healoha 
Carmichael, Lezley Jacintho, and Nā Moku (collectively, 
“Petitioners”) filed a complaint for declaratory and injunctive 
relief against the BLNR , its interim chair, Carty Chang ,12 and 
the DLNR (collectively, “the State Defendants”) ; A&B, EMI, and 
(. . . continued) 
continue for a per iod not to exceed one year from the date 
of its issuance; provided that the board may allow the 
permit to continue on a month -to-month basis for additional 
one year periods. 
The text of the statute has remained unchanged since the DLNR 
first invoked it in 2002. 
10 At its December 12, 2014 meeting, consistent with the DLNR’s 
recommendation, the BLNR again approved the continuation of the revocable 
permits included in the master listing. The DLNR notified A&B and EMI in 
letters dated December 29, 2014 th at the revocable permits were continued “on 
a month-to-month basis for an additional year up to December 31, 2015.” 
11 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
12 Current BLNR Chair Suzanne Case was later substituted as a 
defendant for Carty Chang. See Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 25(d)(1) 
(2001).  
 
  
 (continued . . . ) 
10    
                     
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 . . . . 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HC&S (collectiv ely, “the A&B Defendants”) ;  and the Maui County 
Department of Water Supply (“the County”) in the circuit court. 
Petitioners  alleged  in their amended complaint that, under HRS 
§  343-5  (Supp. 2012),  the “renewal of [the A&B Defendants’] 1413
13 Petitioners’ amended complaint stated that the County was “only 
named as an interested party,” but in its answer, the County denied that it 
was only an interested party and argued that “[Petiti oners]’ prayed [sic] for 
relief could have serious and widespread consequences on Defendant County and 
its citizens, and therefore, Defendant County has a heavy interest in the 
outcome of these proceedings.” 
14 HRS § 343 -5 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Except as otherwise provided, an environmental 
assessment shall be required for actions that: 
(1) Propose the use of state or county lands or the 
use of state or county funds, other than funds to be 
used for feasibility or planning studies for possibl e 
future programs or projects that the agency has not 
approved, adopted or funded, or funds to be used for 
the acquisition of unimproved real property; provided 
that the agency shall consider environmental factors 
and available alternatives in its feasibi lity or 
planning studies; provided further that an 
environmental assessment for proposed uses under 
section 205 -2(d)(11) or 205 -4.5(a)(13) shall only be 
required pursuant to section 205 -5(b); 
(c) For environmental assessment for which a finding of no 
significant impact is anticipated: 
(1) A draft environmental assessment shall be made 
available for public review and comment for a period 
of thirty days; 
(2) The office shall inform the public of the 
availability of the draft environmental assess ment 
for public review and comment pursuant to section 
343-3; 
(3) The agency shall respond in writing to comments 
received during the review and prepare a final 
environmental assessment to determine whether an 
environmental impact statement shall be requ ired;  
 
 11                      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
revocable permit[s ]”  constituted applicant action proposing the 
use of State land and,  as such,  required the preparation of an 
EA pursuant to HEPA. Thus, Petitioners  contended  that HEPA  was 
violated (1) when the BLNR failed to order an EA before its 2014 
continuation decision, and (2) when A&B and EMI continued to 
divert water without preparing an EA.   Petitioners  asked the 
circuit court  to  declare that HEPA  had been violated, void  the 
revocable permits, order the completion of an EA, and enjoin 
further diversion of water from the license areas, provided that 15
(. . . continued) 
(4) A statement shall be required if the agency 
finds that the proposed action may have a significant 
effect on the environment; and 
(5) The agency shall file notice of the 
determination of the office. When a conflict of 
interest may exist beca use the proposing agency and 
the agency making the determination are the same, the 
office may review the agency’s determination, consult 
the agency, and advise the agency of potential 
conflicts, to comply with this section. The office shall publish the final determination for the public’s information pursuant to section 343 -3.  
The draft and final statements, if required, shall be 
prepared by the agency and submitted to the office. The 
draft statement shall be made available for public review 
and comment through the office for a period of forty -five 
days. The office shall inform the public of the 
availability of the draft statement for public review and 
comment pursuant to section 343 -3. The agency shall 
respond in writing to comments received during th e review 
and prepare a final statement. 
The office, when requested by the agency, may make a 
recommendation as to the acceptability of the final 
statement. 
15 Petitioners asserted —and the A&B and State Defendants admitted in 
their respective answers to  Petitioners’ amended complaint —that no EA has 
ever been completed in connection with the revocable permits.   
 
 12  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
up to 8.4 million gallons per day could still be diverted to the 
County for the public health, safety, and welfare of existing 
customers served by East Maui surface -water diversions. 
1. Petitioners ’ Motion for Partia l Summary Judgment and 
the A&B Defendants’ Cross -Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment 
On October 21, 2015, Petitioners filed a motion for 
partial summary judgment (“MPSJ”) asking the circuit court to: 
A. Declare that Defendants [A&B] and [EMI] violated HRS 
chapter 343. 
B. Declare that the [State Defendants] violated HRS chap -
ter 343. 
C. Declare that [the revocable permits] are null and void. 
D. Declare that Defendants [A&B] and [EMI] have no legal 
or statutory authority to continue using the land areas or 
diverting water covered by [the revocable permits]. 
E. Declare that [the State Defendants] have no legal or 
statutory basis to authorize Defendants A&B and EMI’s con-
tinued use of land areas or diversion of water covered by 
[the revocable permits].  
The A&B Defendants filed a cross -MPSJ, which was joined by the 
State Defendants and the County. Opposing Petitioner s’ MPSJ, 
the A&B and State Defendants argued that the decision 
authorizing the use of State lands occurred on May 26, 2000 , 
when the revocable permits were first issued, and that the 
annual review process and continuation of the revocable permits 
did not constitute “use of State land ” or “applicant action” for 
which an EA was required under HEPA. The A&B Defendants 
contended , moreover, that Petitioners ’ complaint and MPSJ, 
actually constituted an untimely challenge to the 2002 holdover  
 
  
 (continued . . . ) 
13    
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision. Petitioners disputed that they  were  “relitigating the
2002 holdover[  decision]’s validity” and responded that the 2002
holdover decision “ha[d] no legal significance” and that the 
BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision was “[t]he only relevant decision” at issue.    
 
2. Circuit Court’s Order 
The circuit court granted  Petitioners ’ MPSJ. In a 
minute-order decision, the  circuit court  found  that the BLNR’s  
2014 continuation decision was  not HEPA  “action ”  requiring an 
EA, but held that the  revocable permits  were,  nonetheless,  
invalid because they exceeded the BLNR’s authority under HRS chapter 171 to issue temporary permits:  
At the outset, the December 2014 revocable  permits are not 
“actions” subject to Chapter 343 environmental assessment 
requirements. The December 2014 revocable permits were not 
programs or projects INITIATED by DLNR, BLNR, or the De-
fendants. Instead, the December 2014 revocable permits 
were of a continuing (preserving the status quo), temporary nature placing the occupancy of the lands in a holdover 
status. Nevertheless, both HRS §§ 171 -40[16] and 171-55 
16 HRS § 171 -40 (2011) provides: 
Upon expiration of the lease term, if the leased land is 
not otherwise disposed of, the board of land and natura l 
resources may allow the lessee to continue to hold the land 
for a period not exceeding one year upon such rent, terms, 
and conditions as the board may prescribe; provided that 
if, immediately prior to the expiration of the lease, the 
land was cultivated with crops having ratoons for at least 
one cycle, as defined hereinafter, the board may permit the 
lessee to continue to hold the leased land until the crops 
from the last remaining cycle have been harvested. The 
term “cycle” as used in this section means the period 
required to plant and cultivate the original crop, 
including the harvesting of the first ratoon, being a 
period exceeding two years.  
 
 14  
 
 
  
 
    
                     
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
speak to the “temporary” nature of the permits, notwith-
standing affording the board discretion  to continue the 
permit on a month -to-month basis for additional one year 
periods.   Temporary is not statutorily defined under Chap-
ter 171. Black’s Law Dictionary, 10th  Edition,  speaks  to  
“temporary” as “lasting for a time only; existing or con-tinuing for  a limited (usu. short) time; transitory.”  
The revocable permits expired on June 30, 2001. The Decem -
ber 2014 revocable permits which were either continued or 
renewed on a holdover status (uninterrupted for the last 13 
years through December 2014) are no t “temporary” as envi -
sioned under Chapter 171.   Otherwise, hold -over tenants 
could arguably be allowed to temporarily occupy “public lands”, almost in perpetuity for continuous, multiple one -
year periods, which would not be in a manner consistent with the public interest or legislative intent. (e.g., fi-
nite terms are set forth throughout Chapter 171, see HRS 
§  171-36, § 171 -54, § 171 -58.)  
(Emphasis added.)   The circuit court granted  Petitioner s’ MPSJ, 
invalidated  the revocable permits, and denied the A&B 
Defendants’ cross -MPSJ. In its order, the circuit court 
emphasized that the BLNR had exceeded its authority under HRS 
chapter 171  to authorize temporary  disposition of water rights 
in holding over the revocable permits for over a decade:  
[P]ursuant to HRS § 171-58(c), the BLNR authorized A&B’s 
use on a holdover basis. This holdover status has contin -
ued uninterrupted for the last 13 years. HRS §§ 171-10[17] 
and 171-55 authorize the “temporary” occupation of public 
lands. A&B’s continuous uninterrupted use of these public 
lands on a holdover basis for the last 13 years is not the 
“temporary” use that HRS Chapter 171 envisions. See also 
(. . . continued) 
Upon expiration of the one -year extension, if the board has 
not yet decided upon the re -lease of the land or 
reservation for other purposes, the board may issue a 
temporary permit to the lessee, subject to section 171 -55 
and the rent and such other terms and conditions as the 
board may prescribe. 
17 It appears that the circuit court mistakenly wrote “HRS § 171 -10” 
when it meant to write “HRS § 171 -40,” as it did in its minute order. HRS § 
171-10 (2011) does not authorize temporary occupations of public lands; it 
sets out the classifications of public lands used by the BLNR.  
 
  
 (continued . . . ) 
15  
     
   
   
  
    
  
  
 
   
                     
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Black’s Law Dictionary, 10th edition. Otherwise, holdover tenants could arguably be allowed to occupy public lands almost  in perpetuity for continuous, multiple one -year pe-
riods. Such a prospect is inconsistent with the public in-
terest and legislative intent.  
(Emphasis added .) 
D. ICA Proceedings 
The A&B Defendants , the State Defendants, the County, 
and Petitioners all appealed the circuit court’s order. 
Petitioners argued that the circuit court erred by holding that 
the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision did not constitute 
“action” subject to a mandatory EA under HEPA . HRS § 343 -
5(a)(1). However, P etitioners asserted that the circuit court 
did not err in granting their MPSJ, that a correct decision 
should not be disturbed on the grounds of incorrect reasoning , 
and that they filed their cross -appeal “in an abundance of 
caution.” The A&B Defendants argued that the circuit court 
erred by : (1) granting Petitioners ’ MPSJ despite its finding 
that the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision was not “action” 
subject to HEPA’s EA requirement; and (2) granting Petitioners ’ 
MPSJ when genuine issues of material fact existed as to whether 
the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision constituted “action” 
within the meaning of HRS § 343-5(a)(1).18 
18 The A&B Defendants also argued that the circuit court erred by: 
invalidating the revocable permits based on the BLNR’s authority (or lack 
thereof) under HRS chapter 171, when the only basis for relief asserted by Petitioners was under HEPA, and invalidating the revocable permits when the BLNR had the authority to issue such permits under the public trust doctrine.
The County and State Defendants  advanced similar arguments on cross -appeal. 
  
 
 16  
 
 
  
 
   
   
                     
  
 
 
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On June 18, 2019, the ICA filed a memorandum opinion 
vacating the circuit court’s order and remanding the case for 
further proceedings. The  ICA found that although HRS § 171-58 
did not give the BLNR authority to extend the revocable permits 
past one year of their issuance (i.e., past  July 1, 2001), HRS 
§  171-55  authorized the BLNR to place the revocable permits in 
holdover status  so long as the revocable permits were 
“temporary” and “serve[d] the best interests of the State .”   The 
ICA reasoned that the BLNR had authority under HRS § 171-55, 
“[n]otwithstanding any other law to the contrary” —that is, 
notwithstanding HRS § 171-58’s limitation of temporary per mits 
to a “maximum term of one year.” The ICA found there were 
genuine issues of material fact as to whether the BLNR’s 2014 
continuance decision (1) was “temporary” or “ de facto 
indefinite ,” and (2) “serve[d] the best interests of the State” 
under HRS § 171-55, and held that the circuit court erred by 
granting Petitioners ’ MPSJ. 
(. . . continued) 
The ICA found “no merit” to the Defendants’ arguments that they 
were not on notice as to the issue o f an HRS chapter 171 violation , and 
construed the HRS chapter 171 issue as if it had been raised in the 
pleadings , holding that it was “tried by implied consent. ” The ICA noted 
that the A&B and State Defendants had argued in their opposition memoranda to 
Petitioners’ MPSJ that the ongoing validity of the revocable permits came not 
from the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision, but “instead derived from a 
continuance of the [2002] holdover status ,” which was authorized under HRS 
chapter 171.  
 
 17    
 
 
  
 
 
                     
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Finally, the  ICA found that HRS § 171-55’s 
“notwithstanding” clause “nullified” HEPA’s EA requirement for 
temporary permits issued under HRS § 171-55, and held that the 
circuit court did not err in finding  HEPA  inapplicable, even 
though it used different reasoning. The ICA concluded that the 
purpose of HRS §  171-55 is to allow the BLNR to issue temporary 
permits to an applicant pursuing a long-term lease  and that the 
BLNR’s 20 14 continuation decision was not subject to HEPA’s EA 
and Environmental Impact Statement (“ EIS”)  requirements.  
E. Supreme Court Proceedings 
On certiorari,  Petitioners  contend  that the primary 
question is “what lawful authority, if any, BLNR acted under 
when it placed the challenged revocable permits in holdover 
status and thereafter continued to maintain them in holdover 
status for over a decade,” and urge us to conclude that the BLNR
acted with no lawful authority.   Petitioners  present five 
questions:  19 
1. Does HRS chapter 343 apply to BLNR’s decision to con -
tinuously renew revocable permits authorizing the daily use 
of public lands to divert millions of gallons of water on a 
holdover basis for over a decade and counting? 
2. Does HRS § 171 -55 allow for the renewal of 
revocable permits for the use of state land and water in -
definitely despite the maximum term of one year prescribed 
by HRS § 171 -58 for the disposition of water rights specif -
ically? 
19 The Sierra Club, Maui Tomorrow, and Mahi Pono LLC filed amicus 
curiae briefs in support of Petitioners.  
 
 18  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
    
    
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Did the Circuit Court err by refusing to grant summary 
judgment to Petitioners on the grounds set forth in counts 
1 and 2 of their First Amended Complaint? 
4. Did the ICA err by concluding HRS § 171 -55’s “notwith -
standing any other law to the contrary” language nullifies 
(a) the maximum term of one year prescri bed by HRS § 171 -58 
for “temporary” revocable permits and (b) HRS chapter 343 
EA and environmental impact statement (EIS) requirements 
for “temporary” revocable permits where such interpreta-
tions conflict with well -settled case law, are unsupported 
by the legislative history, and run contrary to the plain 
meaning of the statutes?  
5. Did the ICA err by refusing to rule that BLNR’s deci -
sion to renew the Revocable Permits on a holdover basis vi-olated HRS chapter 171 -55 as a matter of law due to BLNR’s 
failure to make findings that the permits are “temporary” 
and serve the “best interests of the State”?  
Petitioners argue that the ICA erred by ignoring rules of 
statutory construction, which led to an incorrect interpretation 
of HRS § 171-55 and the erroneous conclusion that HRS § 171-55’s 
“notwithstanding” clause implicitly exempts temporary revocable 
permits from compliance with (1) HEPA’s EA requirement and (2) 
HRS § 171-58’s one-year limit on revocable permits . Petitioners 
also argue that the ICA erred by upholding the revocable permits 
when the BLNR had not made explicit findings pursuant to HRS 
§ 171-55 that “the permit holder’s occupancy [was] temporary ” 
and that the permit was issued “under conditions and rent which 
will serve the best interests of the State.” 
The State Defendants assert that both HRS § 171 -55 and 
the public trust doctrine supported the BLNR’s 2014 continuance 
decision. The State Defendants argue that HRS § 171 -55 (1) is 
the applicable statute in this case, and (2) does not conflict 
with HRS § 171-58, which is not applicable to the disposition of  
 
 19   
   
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
water rights during the pendency of a contested case. The State 
Defendants claim that HRS § 171 -55’s “notwithstanding” clause 
applies not only to the public auction requirement, but to any 
contrary law , including HEPA’s EA requirement. Finally, the 
State Defendants contend that Petitioner s’ argument that the 
revocable permits are invalid is moot because the permits, 
continued in 2014 for the year 2015, have long since expired 
“and it would b e pointless to re -examine the basis for 
continuance.” 
The A&B Defendants add that Petitioners no longer have 
an adverse interest in the case, rendering their claims moot. 
The A&B Defendants claim “things have materially changed” since 
Petitioners initiated this case , namely, that: sugar 
cultivation has ceased, decreasing the water diverted subject to 
the revocable permits to a fraction of what it was before; the 
Commission on Water Resource Management (“ CWRM”) has set interim 
instream flow standards, en suring that Petitioners have 
sufficient water to support their customary and traditional 
practices; a draft EIS (“DEIS”) relating to the long -term lease 
has been published; and the BLNR has capped the diversions 
allowed under the revocable permits to 45 mi llion gallons of 
water a day for 2020 . The A&B Defendants also contend that, as 
a consequence of the CWRM’s actions and the publication of the 
DEIS, Petitioners no longer have an “effective remedy.” They  
 
 20    
  
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
argue further that this case does not fall under the exception 
to the mootness doctrine for cases that are capable of 
repetition yet evading review because the BLNR has approved the 
continuation of the revocable permits  for 2020 and a long-term 
lease is anticipated to be issued shortly thereafter, meaning 
that the revocable permits “will not be needed much longer.”  
The County adds  that Petitioners ’ interpretation of 
HRS § 171-55 would lead to absurd results : a “regulatory morass 
[that] would apply to hundreds of [revocable]  permits ”  that 
would require the BLNR to perform  independent environmental 
reviews for each revocable permit  in every case where there is a 
pending long-term lease. The County contends that this 
regulatory burden would prevent the BLNR from authorizing the  
use of State land  and, more  importantly, water  “that is 
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of 35,000 residents in upcountry Maui.”  
II. STANDARD S OF REVIEW 
A. Summary Judgment 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is re -
viewed de novo. Summary judgment is appropriate if the 
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and ad -
missions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, 
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact 
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a mat -
ter of law. 
Villaver v. Sylva , 145 Hawaiʻi 29, 34, 445 P.3d 701, 706 (2019) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets removed)  
 
 21  
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(quoting Nu‘uanu Valley Ass’n v. City & C nty. of Honolulu , 119 
Hawai‘i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)) . 
B. Statutory Interpretation 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” State v. Wheeler , 121 Hawaiʻi 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170 , 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted ) 
(quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 114 Hawai‘i 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007 )). This 
court’s construction of statutes is guided by the following: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty i s to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language conta ined in the statute itself. Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists. 
Id.   When there is ambiguity in a statute, “the meaning of the 
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, with 
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.” Id.   A 
court may also resort to extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent, such as legislative history or the reason and spirit of the law. Id.   
 
 22   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Constitutional Law 
“Questions of constitutional law are reviewed de novo, 
under the right/wrong standard.” In re Gas Co. , 147 Hawai‘i 186, 
198, 465 P.3d 633, 645 (2020). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The Public Interest Exception to the Mootness Doctrine 
Applies to Petitioners ’ Appeal 
Defendants contend that Petitioners ’ appeal is moot 
because: the revocable permits continued by the BLNR in December 
2014 have “long expired” ; changed circumstances have eliminated 
Petitione rs’ adverse interest ; and A&B published a DEIS in 
September 2019, which preclude s this court from ordering an 
effective remedy. Defendants also contend that the exception 
from the mootness doctrine for cases that are capable of 
repetition yet evading revi ew does not apply. Though Defendants 
are correct that the continuance granted by the BLNR in 2014 has 
expired and A&B has published a DEIS , Petitioners ’ appeal 
qualifies under the “capable of repetition, yet evading review” 
and public interest exception s to the mootness doctrine. 
Under the mootness doctrine, this court will generally 
refrain from deciding a case that has “ lost its character as a 
present, live controversy ,” and in which “the reviewing court 
can no longer grant effective relief.” In re Marn Family, 141 
Hawaiʻi 1, 7, 403 P.3d 621, 627 (2016) (quoting Cnty. of Haw. v. 
Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 Hawaiʻi 391, 405, 235 P.3d 1103, 1117  
 
 23  
 
 
  
  
 
                     
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2010), abrogated on other grounds by  Tax Found. of Haw. v. 
State, 144 Hawaiʻi 175, 439 P.3d 127 (2019)).   “However, this 
court has explicitly recognized two exceptions to the mootness
doctrine: (1) the ‘capable of repetition, yet evading review’ 
exception  .  .  . and (2) the public interest exception.” 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai ʻi 1, 5, 193 P.3d 
839, 843 (2008).  20 
The “capable of repetition, yet evading review” 
exception provides that “a court will not dismiss a case on the 
grounds of mootness where a challenged governmental action would 
evade full review because the passage of time would prevent any 
single plaintiff fro m remaining subject to the restriction 
complained of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit.” 
Id. (quoting In re Thomas , 73 Haw. 223, 226 -27, 832 P.2d 253, 
255 (1992)). Although this case is moot because the 2014 
continuation decision —which extended the revocable permits 
through 2015—has long since expired , the “capable of repetition” 
exception applies . Because the BLNR’s continuation decisions 
for revocable permits apply for only one calendar year at a 
time, those decisions “evade full review” and no plaintiff would 
be able to complete a lawsuit seeking to void the continuation 
20 Although these two exceptions have sometimes been treated as 
though th ey were the same, we have more recently clarified that they are 
“separate and distinct.” Kahoʻohanohano  v. State , 114 Hawaiʻi 302, 333 n.23, 
162 P.2d 696, 727 n.23 (2007).  
 
 24   
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of a permit before the continuation itself expired. Id.   Thus, 
this case satisfies the requirements for the “capable of 
repetition” exception to the mootness doctrine.  
The second exception, the public interest exception , 
is broader than the “capable of repetition” exception ; it 
overcomes Defendants ’ contention that because the 2014 
continuation decision has expired and a DEIS has been published, 
Petitioners no longer hav e an adverse interest or an effective 
remedy. In determining whether the public interest exception 
applies, this court considers “(1) the public or private nature 
of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an 
authoritative determination for future guidance of public 
officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the 
question.” Kaleikini v. Thielen , 124 Hawaiʻi 1, 12–13, 237 P.3d 
1067, 1078 –79 (2010) (quoting Hamilton , 119 Hawaiʻi at 6–7, 193 
P.3d at 844–45). In this case, all three fact ors weigh in favor 
of applying the public interest exception. 
The first factor considers whether the questions 
presented by the case are “personal to” the parties and “of a 
private nature ,” or if they implicate broader “political and 
legislative issues tha t affect a significant number of Hawaiʻi 
residents.” Hamilton , 119 Hawaiʻi at 7, 193 P.3d at 845. Here, 
although “the underlying proceedings are, at bottom, a private 
battle” between different users of water, Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawaiʻi  
 
 25    
 
   
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
                     
  
  
  
  
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
323, 327, 193 P.3d , 1067, 1071 (2007), the disposition of the 
water rights at issue directly affects a broad swath of the Maui 
community and these proceedings have required the involvement 
and input of numerous State agencie s. Thus, the first factor 
weighs in favor of applying the public interest exception. 
As to the second factor , this court’s analysis in the 
present case will provide necessary guidance to public officers 
in the future. The record indicates that the BLNR continues 
hundreds of revocable permits yearly. Given this practice, 
clarification of the BLNR’s authority to issue revocable permits 
under HRS § 171-58 and to continue such permits under HRS § 171-
55 would be of significant value to the BLNR and DLNR officials 
who oversee the administration of the revocable -permit system . 
Clarifying whether the BLNR is or is not required to conduct (or 
order applicants like the A&B Defendants to conduct)21 EAs and/or 
EIS’s under HEPA when continuing revocable permits would also be 
of value to these officials. Thus, the second factor weighs in 
favor of applyin g the public interest exception. 
21 The A&B Defendants contend that this court cannot order effective 
relief because A&B has already prepared and published a DEIS. As Petitioners 
note, the DEIS was published in 2019 and is not part of the record on appeal. 
Moreover, the scope of this case is not limited to the A&B Defendants’ 
unilateral decision to prepare an EIS; a c ore issue focuses on whether the 
BLNR was (1) authorized to continue the revocable permits under HRS chapter 
171 and (2) required to conduct or order the permit applicants to conduct EAs 
and/or EIS’s under HEPA . Thus, the fact that a DEIS has been publish ed does 
not render Petitioners’ appeal moot.  
 
 26  
   
 
   
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Finally, as to the third factor, which considers 
whether the issue will recur in the future, there is a strong 
likelihood that the question of whether it is permissible for an 
agency to continue revocable permits will recur.   As noted 
above, the BLNR continues hundreds of revocable permits every 
year. Disputes over the use of land and State resources are 
frequent in Hawaiʻi, and given the ubiquity of these revocable 
permits, disputes over revocable permits are likely to arise in 
the future . See Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 Hawaiʻi at 405-06, 235 
P.3d at 1117 -18 (noting the “volume of land development activity 
in the State” in the context of individual enforcement actions 
concerning the Land Use Commission). In other words, 
“[r]esolution of the issue may affect similarly situated parties 
who in the future seek to assert their right [s] . . . in 
proceedings before agencies and o ther governmental bodies.” In 
re Maui Elec. Co. , 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 257, 408 P.3d 1, 9 (2017). 
Thus, the third factor weighs in favor of applying the public 
interest exception. 
Given that all three factors weigh in favor of 
applying the public interest exception, Petitioners ’ appeal is 
not barred by the mootness d octrine. 
B. Statutory and Constitutional Authority for t he 2014 
Continuation Decision 
The ICA found that although the BLNR’s 2014 
continuation decision was not authorized by HRS §  171-58, which   
 
 27     
 
  
 
 
  
    
                     
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
limits the disposition of water rights by temporary permit to a 
maximum term of one year,22 it was potentially authorized by HRS 
§ 171-55, which allows the BLNR to continue revocable permits on 
a month-to-month basis for successive one -year periods.23 HRS 
§ 171-58 expressly limits the temporary disposition of water 
rights to a maximum term of one year ; thus, the ICA was correct 
in finding that the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision was not 
authorized under HRS §  171-58. Next, the ICA held  that although 
HRS §  171-55 potentially authorized  the BLNR in 2014 to place 
the revocable permits in holdover status for a  year, there were 
genuine issues of material fact as to whether the BLNR’s 
continuance decision (1)  was “temporary” or “ de facto  
indefinite,” and (2) “serve[d] the best interests of the State,” 
such that it was inappropriate to dispose of this case at the 
summary judgment stage.  
The ICA erred by ruling on the basis of perceived 
issues of material fact . HRS § 171-55 did not authorize the 
BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision because the BLNR did not make 
22 HRS 171-58(c) states, in relevant part, that “[d] isposition of 
water rights may be made by lease at public auction as provided in this 
chapter or by permit for temporary use on a month -to-month basis under th ose 
conditions which will best serve the interests of the State and subject to a 
maximum term of one year and other restrictions under the law .” (Emphasis 
added.) 
23 HRS § 171 -55 states, in relevant part, that “[a] permit on a 
month-to-month basis may co ntinue for a period not to exceed one year from 
the date of its issuance; provided that the board may allow the permit to 
continue on a month -to-month basis for additional one year periods .” 
(Emphasis added .)  
 
 28   
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factual findings or enter conclusions of law positing that it 
was serving the State’s best interests. As a trustee of the 
public trust, the BLNR failed to demonstrate that it properly 
exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute.  
1. HRS § 171-58 limits temporary disposition of water 
rights to a maximum of a year and did not authorize 
the BLNR to continue the revocable permits in 2014 . 
As an initial matter, HRS §  171-58  titled,— “Minerals 
and water rights” —is applicable to  the instant case.  As the ICA 
noted, the revocable permits themselves stated  that they were 
originally issued “pursuant to [HRS] section 171 -58.” Since  the 
BLNR  would have no authority to make  continuation decisions 
without valid revocable permits in the first place, the ICA did 
not err by considering whether the BLNR’s actions subsequent to 
the issuance of the revocable permits were authorized under HRS §  171-58.  
As the ICA concluded , HRS § 171-58 confer red authority 
on the BLNR to issue one -year revocable permits, but did not 
authorize the BLNR to extend the revocable permits past one year 
of their issuance, that is, past July 1, 2001. As noted above, 
HRS § 171-58 limits temporary permits for water rights to a term 
of one year : 
Disposition of water rights may be made by lease at public 
auction as provided in this chapter or by permit for 
temporary use on a month -to-month basis under those 
conditions which will best serve the interests of the State  
 
 29  
     
 
 
 
    
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and subject to a maximum term of one year  and other 
restrictions under the law [.]  
HRS §  171-58(c) (emphasis added).   The “fundamental starting 
point for statutory interpretation is the language of the 
statute itself” and “where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain and 
obvious meanin g.” Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻi at 390, 219 P.3d at 1177 
(quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. , 114 Hawaiʻi at 193, 159 
P.3d at 152). The language of HRS § 171-58 plainly and 
unambiguously limits temporary revocable permits to “a maximum 
term of one year” with no exceptions or conditions within § 171 -
58 that would allow the BLNR to extend a permit beyond that 
maximum term. 
Moreover, HRS § 171 -58 should be read in contrast 
with HRS § 171 -55. See Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Omiya , 142 
Hawai‘i 439, 450, 420 P. 3d 370, 381 (2018) (citing the canon of 
construction that laws in pari materia , or on the same subject 
matter, may be considered together). Significantly, HRS § 171 -
55 provides that a permit issued under that section “may continue for a period not to exceed one year from the date of
 
its issuance;  provided that the board may allow the permit to 
continue on a month-to-month basis for additional one year 
periods.”   (Emphasis added.)   By contrast, HRS § 171-58 omits 
this and any similar language, bolstering the conclusion that 
permits issued under its authority may not be renewed for  
 
 30   
 
  
  
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
additional one -year periods. Read together, it is clear that 
the former statute authorizes permits to be renewed for multiple 
one-year periods while the latter does not. 
Thus, th e ICA did not err in finding that the BLNR was 
not authorized under HRS § 171-58 to continue the revocable 
permits in 2014. 
2. HRS § 171-55 did not authorize the BLNR ’s 2014 
continuation decision because the BLN R did not 
demonstrate that the revocable permits served the best 
interests of the State . 
Defendants contend that the BLNR’s 2014 continuation 
decision was authorized under HRS §  171-55.    
HRS § 171 -55 states: 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the board of 
land and natural resources may issue permits for the  
temporary  occupancy of state lands or an interest therein 
on a month -to-month basis by direct negotiation without 
public auction, under conditions and rent which will serve the best interests of the State, subject, however, to those restrictions as may from time to time be expressly imposed by the board. A permit on a month -to-month basis may con-
tinue for a period not to exceed one year from the date of its issuance; provided that the board may allow the permit 
to continue on a month -to-month basis for additional one 
year periods.  
(Emphasis added.) 
The ICA agreed that the BLNR had authority under HRS 
§ 171-55 to continue the revocable permits in 2014 , so long as 
the continuation of the revocable permits was “temporary” and 
“serve[d] the best interests of the State.” HRS § 171 -55. 
However, the ICA concluded that there were genuine issues of 
material fact as to whether the BLNR’s 2014 continua tion  
 
 31    
 
 
 
                     
 
  
   
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision (1) was “temporary” or “ de facto  indefinite,” and 
(2)  “serve[d] the best interests of the State” under HRS §  171-
55.  
While the ICA  correctly  held that HRS §  171-55 
potentially authorized the BLNR to continue the revocable 
permits,  the ICA erred by ruling on the basis of perceived  
issues of fact.  First, the permits were “temporary” within the 
meaning of the statute. Second, the BLNR failed to demonstrate 
that the 2014 continuation of the revocable permits  “serve[d]  
the best interests of the State.”   HRS §  171-55. Because the  
BLNR did not make factual findings or enter conclusions of law positing that the permits served the State’s best interest s, the
BLNR failed to demonstrate that it properly exercised the 
discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute.     24
 
a. The revocable permits were temporary within the 
meaning o f HRS § 171 -55. 
Unlike the ICA, which found there to be genuine 
factual questions related to whether the permits were temporary, 
the circuit court held that the revocable permits, 
“uninterrupted for the last 13 years” and continued by the 
BLNR’s 2014 decis ion, were not “‘temporary’ as envisioned under 
24 This holds true notwithstanding that there i s a more specific 
statute, HRS § 171 -58, that deals with water rights. HRS § 171 -55 authorizes 
dispositions of “state lands or an interest therein. ” In turn, HRS § 171 -1 
(2011) defines “land” to include “all interests therein . . . including 
water.” Thus, HRS § 171 -55’s reference to “lands” also authorizes the BLNR 
to dispose of water rights.  
 
 32  
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Chapter 171.” (Citing  Temporary , Black’s Law Dictionary (10th 
ed. 2014) (defining “temporary” as “lasting for a time only; 
existing or continuing for a limited [] time; transitory ”).)   
The circuit court reasoned that if the revocable permits were 
“temporary,” then “holdover tenants could arguably be allowed to 
occupy public lands almost in perpetuity for continuous, 
multiple one-year periods,” which would be “inconsistent with 
the public interest and legislati ve intent.”  
The term “temporary” must be read in the context of 
the entire ty of HRS § 171-55, which expressly allows a permit to 
be continued “for a period not to exceed one year from the date 
of its issuance; provided that the board may allow the permit to 
continue on a month -to-month basis for additional one year 
periods.” HRS § 171-55. “Temporary,” as used in HRS § 171 -55, 
is used to distinguish revocable permits from long -term leases; 
it refers to the month -to-month nature of revocable permits and 
that such permits may last without additional approval for only 
one year . The term “temporary” does not, however, prohibit 
annual renewal of permit s. In fact, HRS § 171-55 explicitly 
authorizes the BLNR to continue revocable permits for 
“additional one ye ar periods. ” Thus, the BLNR ’s 2014 
continuation decision was not precluded by HRS § 171-55’s use of 
the term “temporary .”  
 
 33   
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
b. The BLNR did not sufficiently demonstrate that 
the 2014 continuation decision served the best 
interests of the State . 
The BLNR ’s authority to make the 2014 continuation 
decision was, however, limited by HRS § 171-55’s mandate that 
the issuance or continuance of a revocable permit “serve the 
best interests of the State .” The BLNR did not make factual 
findings or enter conclusion s of law positing that it was 
serving the State’s best interest s when it made its 2014 
continuation decision that wholesale continued the revocable 
permits along with more than 300 other permits. Thus, the 2014 
continuation decision was not authorized by HRS § 171-55 because 
the BLNR did not sufficiently demonstrate that it considered the 
“best interests of the State” as required by the statute and the 
BLNR’s obligation as a public trustee. 
As an initial matter, w hat constitutes “the best 
interests of the State ” is not explained by the statute . 
However, particularly when appraising the legislative history of 
HRS chapter 171 as a whole, it is clear that the BLNR’s power to 
issue and continue revocable permits under HRS § 171 -55 was 
intended to be narrowly exerci sed. 
Many of the provisions currently codified in HRS 
chapter 171 that govern the management and disposition of public 
lands were enacted in a 1962 omnibus public -lands bill , Act 32 . 
Act 32 was an urgency measure passed to provide “a set of laws  
 
  
 (continued . . . ) 
34                      
    
 
 
       
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for the management and disposition of our public lands in 
accordance with present day needs.” 1962 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 
32, § 1 at 95. Act 32 contained numerous provisions emphasizing 
that the public-auction process would  be the predominant means 
by which state lands would be leased. For example, Revised Laws 
of Hawai ʻi (“RLH”)  §  103A-14, titled, “Auction,” provided that 
“[e]xcept as otherwise specifically provided, all dispositions 
of public lands shall be made at public auction  after public 
notice as provided in section 16 of this chapter. ”   1962 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 32, § 2 at 101  (emphasis added).   Similarly, RLH 
§  103A-32, titled, “Policy,” stipulate d  that “[u]nless otherwise 
specifically authorized in this chapter or by subsequent 
legislative acts, all dispositions shall be by lease only, 
disposed of by public auction  in accordance with the procedure 
set forth in sections 14 and 15 of this chapter.”   1962 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 32, § 2 at 109  (emphasis added).   These 
provisions evinced  a strong legislative preference for public 
auction.2625
   A 1962 standing committee report  further  explained  27
25 RLH § 103A-14 is now codified as HRS § 171-14 (2011) and has 
remained substantively unchanged since its enactment. 
26 RLH § 103A-32 is now codified as HRS § 171-32 (2011) and has 
remained substantively unchanged since its enactment. 
27 In circumstances where disposition by public auction is not 
possible or appropriate (for example , the issuance of land licenses), the 
replacement disposition process must serve th e public interest. See HRS 
§ 171-54 (“The board of land and natural resources may issue land licenses 
affecting public lands for a period not exceeding twenty years. No land  
 
 35  
     
 
 
      
 
     
  
 
 
                     
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that  non-public-auction sales were  to be permitted only in cases 
of “overriding public interest”  and that lease negotiations were 
appropriate only “in certain limited situation s”:  
Your Committee believes that this bill, as amended, 
incorporates a sound policy for the administration, management, and disposition of the public lands of the 
State. Every consideration has been given throughout the 
bill, particularly in the disposition sections, to 
adequately preserve the assets of the State by authorizing only leases disposable only by public auction, except where an overriding public interest necessitates the disposition by sales in fee simple or by leases without public auction. 
These overriding considerations are seen in the need for 
houselots, for small personally occupied farm, dairy and 
pasture lots, and in cases of natural disasters. Due regard was also given that in certain limited situations, negotiations for leases should be permitted.  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 240, in 1962 House Journal , at 356 
(emphasis added). The standing committee report also reflects 
the legislature ’s original intent that the disposition of State 
land by non-public-auction lease would be limited to a narrow 
set of circumstances , such as “houselots , . . . small personally 
occupied farm, dairy and pasture lots, and . . . natural 
disasters .” Id. 
The legislative history of HRS § 171-55 also reveals 
the legislature’s efforts to constrain the use of revoc able 
permits by requiring annual review . HRS § 171 -55 has remained 
(. . . continued) 
license shall be disposed of except at public auction as provided in this 
chapter; provided that the board may  . . . dispose of a land license by 
negotiation, without recourse to public auction, if it determines that the 
public interest will best be served thereby .   The disposition of a land 
license by negotiation shall be upon such terms and conditions as the boarddetermines shall best serve the public interest .” (emphasis added)).    
 
 36     
  
  
   
                     
   
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
relatively unchanged, substantively, since it was first enacted 
in 1962 as RLH § 103A-52, a provision of Act 32.28 In 1967, the 
legislature amended the second sentence of RLH § 103A-52 to 
clarify that while annual continuations of a revocable permit 
were permitted, the BLNR would have to approve each continuation 
annually :29 
Section 103A -52 is amended to require that at the end of 
each year during a continuance of a permit, the board must 
give its approval before a permit may be continued.   It is 
intended that a permit on a month to month basis shall be for a duration of one year unless extended by the board. 
At the end of each year, if the permit on a month to month 
basis is extended for another year, the board approval must be had.   Certain language clarity was necessary inasmuch as 
existing law does not expressly state that a periodic annu-
28 As originally enacted , RLH § 103A-52 stated: 
The board may issue permits for the temporary occupancy of 
State lands or interest therein on a month -to-month basis 
under such conditions which will serve the best interests 
of the State, subject, however, to such restrictions as may 
from time to time be expressly provided by law. Where such 
permit on a month -to-month basis extends for a period 
beyond one y ear from the date of issuance, any renewal of 
the permit beyond such one year period shall be only upon 
approval of the board. 
1962 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 32 , § 2 at 116. 
29 The second sentence of RLH § 103A-52 originally read: 
Where such permit on a mon th-to-month basis extends for a 
period beyond one year from the date of issuance, any 
renewal of the permit beyond such one year period shall be 
only upon approval of the board. 
1962 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 32 , § 2 at 116. The above sentence was deleted and 
replaced with the following: 
Such permit on a month to month basis may continue for a period not to exceed one year from the date of its issu-
ance; provided, that the board may allow such permit to 
continue on a month to month basis for additional one year  
periods.  
1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 234, § 11 at 355 (emphasis added).  
 
 37  
 
 
   
  
 
   
   
   
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
al review is required but may be construed to mean that on -
ly one initial review is necessary after t he first one year 
period. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 522, in 1967 House Journal, at 670  
(emphasis added).  In 1990, the legislature amended HRS §  171-55  
to include  its current language by adding, in relevant part, the 
“[n]otwithstanding any other law to the contrary” clause and 
language stating that the BLNR could issue temporary permits “by 
direct negotiation and without public auction.” 1990 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 90, § 1 at 165-66. The legislative history indicates 
that this amendment  was intended  to make “absolutely clear”  that 
the  BLNR  had  the ability to approve permits without public 
auction. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2988, in 1990 Senate Journal, at 1218.  
Thus, the legislative history of HRS chapter 171 and 
HRS § 171-55 demonstrates the legislature’ s intent that 
temporary permits without public auction should be issued only 
in cases of “overriding public interest” and subject to annual 
review by the BLNR. While attempts were made by the legislature 
to clarify that the BLNR ha d the authority in certa in situations 
to issue temporary permits without public auction, nothing in 
the legislative history indicates that temporary permitting 
could or should be used as a long-term substitute for the  
 
 38    
   
 
 
   
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public-auction process.30 In the present case, the BLNR 
continued the revocable permits for more than ten years31—using a 
sweeping process that applied to hundreds of other permits — 
without scrutiny and without an adequate explanation as to why a 
continuance served the best interests of the State . 
Because the BLNR di d not make any findings of fact or 
conclusions of law demonstrating that the revocable permits 
“serve[d] the best interests of the State,” the BLNR did not 
comply with HRS §  171-55 or its public trust obligations.   “The 
Hawai‘i Constitution adopts the publ ic trust doctrine as a 
fundamental principle of constitutional law.” Kauai Springs, 
Inc. v. Plan. Comm’n of Kauai , 133 Hawai‘i 141, 171, 324 P.3d 
951, 981 (2014) (cleaned up) . The public trust encompasses all 
the water resources in the state, and it requires that state 
agencies “must take the initiative in considering, protecting, 
and advancing public rights in the resource at every stage of 
the planning and decision-making process.” Id.  at 172-73, 324 
P.3d at 982-83. In particular, where an agency performs as a 
30 There is evidence that at least one legislator, the chair of the 
House Committee on Lands, expressly disapproved of using temporary permitting 
as a matter -of-course alternative for l eases sold at public auction: before 
Act 32 was passed, during floor debate of the bill, he posited that one of 
the goals of Act 32 “was to get the State out of the business of having so 
many revokable [sic] permits for ten and twelve years.” 1962 House Journal, 
at 210 (exchange between Representatives Milligan and McClung). 
31 This does not include the 2001 and 2002 holdover decisions, but 
counts from the first continuation decision, made in 2005, when the revocable 
permits were included on the annual ma ster listings of permits.  
 
 39  
  
 
 
  
  
 
                     
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
trustee, it is “duty bound to demonstrate that it has properly 
exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and 
the statute.” Id. at 173-74, 324 P.3d at 9 83-84 (emphasis 
added) (quoting In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawai‘i 
97, 158, 9 P.3d 409, 470 (2000) ). 
In this case, the 2014 continuation decision was not 
authorized by HRS § 171-55 because the BLNR did not make any 
findings of fact or conclusions of law .32 The BLNR failed to 
demonstrate that it properly exercised the di scretion vested in 
it by the constitution and the statute.33 
In sum, the BLNR’s failure to make findings here was 
particularly troubling in light of the magnitude of the water 
diversions authorized and the BLNR’s role as a public trustee of 
the State’s wate r resources.   While we do not fully set out the 
scope of the BLNR’s duty to make the requisite findings, we note 
that the duty may vary in conjunction with the resources 
implicated.   At minimum, the BLNR must make findings “sufficient 
32 The A&B Defendants’ role under the revocable permits in 
delivering water “for residential domestic use, businesses, government 
institutions, schools, churches, farms, non -profits, fire prevention, and 
Hawaiian Homelands home steads in Upcountry Maui” is worth noting. 
33 We find no merit in the A&B and State Defendants’ argument that 
the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision was issued in accordance with the 
public trust doctrine. As this court has held —and as the BLNR recognized in 
a 2007 order issued in the contested case proceedings —“private commercial 
use” is not “a protected ‘trust purpose.’” In re Water Use Permit 
Applications, 94 Hawaiʻi at  138, 9 P.3d at  450.   Thus, the fact that some of 
the water would be used for public purposes does not necessarily justify the 
continued use of the remaining water for commercial purposes.   
 
 40    
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to enable an appellat e court to track the steps that the agency 
took in reaching its decision.” Kauai Springs , 133 Hawai‘i at 
173, 324 P.3d at 983 (citing Kilauea Neighborhood Ass’n v. Land 
Use Comm’n , 7 Haw. App. 227, 230, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988) ). 
C. Applicability of HEPA to the Revocable Permits 
1. HRS § 171 -55’s “notwithstanding” clause does not 
nullify HEPA’s EA requirement . 
In the present case, the State and the A&B Defendants 
argue that “there is a fundamental conflict between [HRS] § 171-
55 and the EA and EIS requiremen ts of [HEPA].” Defendants 
assert that the mandate in HRS § 343-5(a) that “an [EA] shall be 
required” for certain actions conflicts with HRS § 171-55’s 
provision authorizing the BLNR to issue revocable permits. 
Thus, because HRS § 171-55 also provides tha t it applies 
“[n]otwithstanding any other law to the contrary ,” Defendants 
argue that the provisions of HRS § 171-55 supersede and control 
over HEPA . The ICA agreed with Defendants that HRS § 171 -55’s 
“notwithstanding” clause “nullified” HEPA’s EA and EIS 
requirements for revocable permits. We disagree: HRS § 171 -
55’s “notwithstanding” clause does not “nullify” HEPA’s EA 
requirement . 
The first sentence of HRS §  171-55 states  that 
“[n]otwithstanding any other law to the contrary,” in certain 
circumstances, the BLNR may issue temporary revocable permits 
without public auction:   
 
 41  
 
    
 
  
   
 
   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the board of 
land and natural resources may issue permits for the temporary occupancy of state lands or an interest therein 
on a month -to-month basis by direct negotiation without 
public auction, under conditions and rent which will serve 
the best interests of the State, subject, however, to those restrictions as may from time to time be expressly imposed by the board.  
(Emphasis added.)  When  interpreting  “notwithstanding any other 
law to the contrary” clauses,  “[t]he term ‘contrary’ denotes a 
‘conflict.’” State v. Schnabel , 127 Hawaiʻi 432, 448, 279 P.3d 
1237, 1253 (2012) (citing Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate 
Dictionary  765 (10th ed. 1989))  (interpreting a 
“[n]otwithstanding any other law to the contrary” clause). “Two 
statutes conflict where it is not possible to give effect to 
both.” Id.  (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) 
(quoting State v. Richie , 88 Hawaiʻi 19, 35, 960 P .2d 1227, 1243 
(1998)). Thus, HRS § 171-55’s “notwithstanding” clause has the 
potential to nullify HEPA’s EA requirement only if it is 
impossible to give force to both statutes. HRS § 171-55 does 
not contain an environmental -review process, and similarly , HRS 
§ 343-5 does not address the BLNR’s authority to issue revocable 
permits without public auction. Because it is possible to 
integrate HRS § 343-5(a)’s EA requirement into the revocable -
permitting process authorized by HRS § 171-55, HEPA contains no 
“law to the contrary” of HRS § 171-55. 
Additionally, the legislative history of HRS §  171-55
supports our conclusion that the “notwithstanding” clause does   
 
 42   
 
  
   
 
 
Your Committee has therefore amended the bill by deleting it’s  [sic] substance and inserting language allowing the 
[BLNR] to issue permits for the temporary occupancy of State lands on a month -to-month basis by direct negotiation
without public auction.  
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not create an exemption from HEPA compliance. In 1990, t he 
legislature amended HRS § 171-55 to include the 
“notwithstanding ” clause. 1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 90, § 1 at 
165-66. The standing committee report explains the reason for 
the 1990 amendment : 
[T]he Office of the Attorney General has suggested that it 
is appropriate to make it absolutely clear that such tempo-
rary permits may be issued without public auction.   Your 
Committee finds that the Board of Land and Natural Re-sources should be allowed to issue such permits and be-
lieves that this bill should serve as the vehicle for it.  
 
S. Stand. C omm. Rep. No. 2988, in 1990 Senate Journal, at 1218 
(emphasis added). 
Thus, the purpose of the “notwithstanding” language 
was to clarify that the BLNR has authority to issue temporary 
permits without public action. The legislative history does not indicate that the “notwithstanding” clause was intended to 
create an exemption from HEPA or any other regulatory scheme. The “notwithstanding” clause was directed solely at the issue of 
whether public auction was required.  
2. HEPA’s EA requirement applies to the revocable permits 
so long as the A&B Defendants’ “action” does not 
qualify for an exemption pursuant to HRS § 343 -
6(a)(2). 
HEPA requires an EA “if three conditions are 
satisfied: (1) the proposed activity is an ‘action’ under HRS 
§  343-2 (2010); (2) the action proposes one or more of the nine  
 
 43   
 
   
   
  
 
    
   
  
                     
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
categories of land uses or administrative acts enumerated in HRS 
§ 343-5(a) []; and (3) the action is not declared exempt 
pursuant to HRS § 343 -6(a)(2) (2010).” Umberger v. Dep’t of 
Land & Nat. Res. , 140 Hawaiʻi 500, 512, 403 P.3d 277, 289 (2017). 
The circuit court held that HEPA was inapplicable to 
the present case because it found that “the December 2014 
revocable permits [we]re not ‘actions’ subject to [HEPA’s] [EA] 
requirement s” because the permits “were not programs or projects 
INITIATED by DLNR, BLNR, or the [A&B] Defendants .”34 Petitioners 
argue that, pursuant to HEPA, the BLNR should order the A&B 
Defendants to complete an EA because the A&B Defendants’ 
activity under the revocable permits constitute d “action” that 
involves the “use of state or county lands.”35 HRS §§ 343-2 
(2010), 343-5(a)(1). Petitioners are correct . Contrary to the 
conclusion of the circuit court , the A&B Defendants’ land use 
34 Although it has no bearing on this appeal , in 2003 the BLNR 
issued an order in the contested case proceedings for the long -term lease 
finding that the proposed long -term lease was “exempt from the requirements 
of an EA pursuant to [ Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (“HAR”)] § 11 -200-8(a)(1)” 
so long as “existing structures, facilities, equipment or topographical 
features” were kept in operation with no expansion or change of use. The 
circuit court reversed this finding on appeal. The BLNR is sued a second 
order in the contested case proceedings in 2005 denying “a summary ruling 
that an EA must be prepared prior to any interim disposition of water such as 
the [2002 holdover decision] and/or a stay or continuance of the contested 
case proceeding s with respect to the [2002 holdover decision] and the interim 
disposition of water.” (Emphasis omitted.) 
35 Before the circuit court, in opposition to Petitioners’ MPSJ, 
Defendants argued that the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision did not 
constitute “ action” under HEPA because it was not a “program” or “project” 
that was “initiated” by the BLNR or the A&B Defendants.  
 
 44     
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
    
   
  
  
     
                     
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under the revocable permits constitute d “action[] that ... 
[p]ropose[ d] the use of state or county lands” within the 
meaning of HRS § 343-5(a)(1). 
a. The A&B Defendants’ development, diversion, and 
use of water constitutes “action” within the 
meaning of HRS § 343-5(a). 
HEPA defines “action” as “any program or pr oject to be 
initiated by any agency or applicant.”36 HRS § 343-2. Because 
“program” and “project” are left undefined by HEPA, we “resort 
to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to 
determine the ordinary meaning” of those terms. Umberger , 140 
Hawaiʻi at 513, 403 P.3d at 290 (quoting State v. Guyton , 135 
Hawaiʻi 372, 378, 351 P.3d 1138, 1144 (2015)). “‘Program’ is 
generally defined as ‘a plan or system under which action may be 
taken toward a goal.’ ‘Project’ is defined as ‘a specific plan 
or design’ or ‘a planned undertaking.’” Id. (footnotes 
omitted) (citing Merriam-Webster.com ). 
In the present case, the activity Petitioners contend 
is a HEPA “action” is the A&B Defendants ’“development, 
diversion, and use of [the] water” located acro ss approximately 
33,000 acres of State land in Maui . In its minute -order 
36 “Agency” is defined as “any department, office, board, or 
commission of the state or county government which is a part of the execu tive 
branch of that government ” and “applicant” is defined as “ any person who, 
pursuant to statute, ordinance, or rule, officially requests approval for a 
proposed action. ” HRS § 343-2.  
 
 45  
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
                     
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision denying Petitioners’ MPSJ, the circuit court rejected 
Petitioners ’ argument and found no HEPA “action”: 
At the outset, the December 2014 revocable permits are not 
“actions”  subject to Chapter 343 environmental assessment 
requirements. The December 2014 revocable permits were not programs or projects  INITIATED by DLNR, BLNR, or the 
Defendants. Instead, the December 2014 revocable permits 
were of a continuing (preserving the status quo), temporary 
nature placing the occupancy of the lands in a holdover 
status
.  
(Emphasis added .) 
While the circuit court is correct that neither the 
BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision nor the revocable permits 
themselves a re HEPA “actions ,” the circuit court erred by 
concluding there is no HEPA “action” in the present case. As 
demonstrated by our opinion in Umberger , it is the applicant’s 
permitted activity —i.e., the activity for which the A&B 
Defendants initially sought permit approval —that const itutes 
“action” within the meaning of HEPA.37 140 Hawaiʻi at 514–15, 403 
P.3d at 291 –92 (finding that recreational —and commercial — 
aquarium collection conducted under permits issued by the DLNR 
qualifies as a HEPA “action”) . That the revocable permits here 
were not requested by the applicant does not preclude the 
permitted activity itself from qualifying as HEPA “action.” 
37 The A&B Defendants are “applicants” as defined by HRS § 343-2 
because they sought official approval from the BLNR pursuant to a statute — 
i.e., revocable permits pursuant to HRS § 171-5—to engage in the 
“development, diversion, and use of water” back in 2000.  
 
 46  
 
  
 
 
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The A&B Defendants’ permitted activity constitutes 
HEPA “action” because it qualifies as either a “project” or a 
program.” Th e activity is a “specific plan” or “planned 
undertaking” —and is, therefore, a “project” —because the permits 
facilitated a deliberate and coordinated effort by the A&B 
Defendants to use their water system to deliver water and manage 
water use for the permitted areas. See id. at 514, 403 P.3d at 
291 (finding that recr eational and commercial aquarium 
collection was a “project” because “it involve [d] the systematic 
and deliberate extraction of aquatic life” using established 
procedures “for the specific purpose of holding captive such 
aquatic life for aquarium purposes”) . The activity is also a 
“plan or system under which action may be taken” —and is, 
therefore, a “program” —because although each revocable permit 
corresponded to a separate geographical area, the four areas 
“were all a part of the same collection and delive ry system 
extending from Nahiku to Honopou” and the permits worked in 
conjunction to meet the A&B Defendants’ (and their customers’) 
water needs. See id. (finding that recreational and commercial 
aquarium collection was a “program” because it involve d “the 
purposeful and methodical extraction of aquatic life” designed 
to further the “desired goal” of “tak[ing] aquatic life from its 
habitat and hold[ing] it in a state of captivity for aquarium 
purposes”). The A&B Defendants’ permitted activity , whether  
 
 47     
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
                     
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
construed as a “project” or a “program,” constitute s “action” 
within the meaning of HEPA. HRS §§ 343-2, 343-5(a). 
Additionally, the A&B Defendants’ permitted activity 
constitutes “action” within the meaning of HEPA despite the 
“continuing” nature of the acti vity, which the defendants 
characterize as merely maintaining the status quo. In Umberger , 
this court held that aquarium collection authorized by one -year 
permits from the DLNR constituted “action” under HEPA even 
though the aquarium collection had been o ccurring for years. 
140 Hawaiʻi at 513-16, 403 P.3d at 290-93. The continuing water 
use in this case similarly constitutes “action” under HEPA. 
Furthermore, because the A&B Defendants’ water use was 
conditioned on one-year permits, the continued use under a 
renewed permit did not merely maintain the status quo. See Pit 
River Tribe v. U.S. Forest Serv. , 469 F.3d 768, 784 (9th Cir. 
2006) (holding that lease extension s did not “merely preserve[] 
the status quo” because “[w]ithout the affirmative re -extension 
of the 1988 leases, [the lease applicant] would have retained no 
rights at all to the leased property” ).38 
38 We note that HEPA contains provisions allowing agencies to 
consider and incorporate previous environmental review. See HAR § 11 -200.1-
11; HAR § 11 -200.1-12. “These provisions alleviate the concern that an 
environmental assessment would necessarily have to be prepared whenever an 
applicant applies for [a new one -year permit].” Umberger , 140 Hawaiʻi at 528, 
403 P.3d at 305.  
 
 48   
  
  
 
  
  
   
   
                     
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Next, where the “action” is proposed by an applicant 
and requires approval by an agency, in order for HEPA to apply 
the agency must “exercise[] di scretionary consent in the 
approval process. ”39 Umberger , 140 Hawaiʻi at 512, 403 P.3d at 
289 (citing HRS § 343 -5(e)). Under HEPA, “[a]pproval” is 
defined as requiring “discretionary consent . . . from an agency 
prior to actual implementation of an action ” and 
“[d]iscretionary consent” is defined as “consent, sanction, or 
recommendation from an agency for which judgment and free will 
may be exercised by the issuing agency.” HRS § 343 -2. The A&B 
Defendants’ “action” require d approval from the BLNR in the form 
of a revocable permit issued or continued pursuant to HRS § 171-
55. And the BLNR clearly exercise d “discretionary consent ” 
during the approval process . Under HRS § 171-55, the BLNR “may 
issue” revocable permits and “may continue” such permits “on a 
month-to-month basis for additional one year periods.” “The 
term ‘may’ is generally construed to render optional, 
39 In their opening brief , Petitioners contend that the “action” 
here qualifies as either an “agency action” (i.e., action proposed by the 
BLNR) or an “applicant action” (i.e., action proposed by the A&B Defendants). 
The present “action” is more accurately construed as an “applicant action.” 
The A&B Defendants “proposed” HEPA “action” by seeking the BLNR’s permission 
to develop, divert, and use the water across the license areas, that is: by 
expressly requesting that the BLNR “[a]uthorize temporary continuation of the 
year-to-year revocable permit[s] . . . pending issuance of the [proposed 
long-term] lease” in 2001. The BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision constituted 
such authorization, and th e BLNR conveyed the authorization to the A&B 
Defendants. Without the BLNR’s 2014 continuation decision, the revocable 
permits would have expired on January 1, 2015, and the A&B Defendants would 
not have been authorized in their ongoing water use. And u ntil the long -term 
lease is issued, the A&B Defendants will continue to derive the authority to 
engage in their water use from the revocable permits.  
 
 49     
    
  
   
    
  
   
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
permissive, or discretionary the provision in which it is 
embodied[.]” Umberger , 140 Hawaiʻi at 526, 403 P.3d at 303 
(quoting State v. Kahaw ai, 103 Hawaiʻi 462, 465, 83 P.3d 725, 728 
(2004)). The BLNR is not required to issue or continue a 
revocable permit; this authority is wholly discretionary under 
the statute. Thus, in continuing the revocable permits pursuant 
to HRS § 171-55 in 2014, the BLNR exercised “discretionary 
consent” in approving the A&B Defendants’ “action .” HRS § 343 -2. 
b. The A&B Defendants’ “action” involves the use of 
state lands under HRS § 343-5(a)(1). 
Next, the HEPA “action” must involve at least one of 
the nine categories of land uses or administrative acts 
enumerated in HRS § 343 -5(a). Umberger , 140 Hawaiʻi at 512, 403 
P.3d at 289. Under HRS § 343 -5(a)(1), an EA is required for 
actions that 
[p]ropose the use of state or county lands or the use of 
state or county funds, other than funds to be used for feasibility or planning studies for possible future 
programs or projects that the agency has not approved, 
adopted, or funded, or funds to be used for the acquisition 
of unimproved real property; provided that the agency shall 
consider environmental factors and available alternatives in its feasibility or planning studies; provided further that an environmental assessment for proposed uses under section 205 -2(d)(11) or 205 -4.5(a)(13) shall only be 
required pursuant to section 205 -5(b).  
HRS § 343 -5(a)(1) (emphasis added) . 
The A&B Defendants’ permitted activi ty constitutes 
HEPA “action” that involves “ the use of state land ” under HRS 
§  343-5(a)(1). The revocable permits granted the A&B Defendants 
the right to “ [o]ccupy  and use ” the Honomanū , Huelo, Ke ʻanae, and  
 
 50    
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
                     
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Nāhiku premises —all “parcel[s] of government lan d” —for the 
“development, diversion, and use of water.” The A&B Defendants ’ 
“action” undoubtedly “use [s]” state land within the meaning of 
HRS § 343 -5(a)(1). 
c. On remand, the circuit court should determine 
whether the A&B Defendants’ “action” is exempt 
from HEPA’s EA requirement . 
Having determined that the A&B Defendants’ permitted 
activity is HEPA “action” that constitutes a “use of state . . . 
lands,” we lastly consider whether such activity is exempt from 
HEPA’s environmental -review process under HRS § 34 3-6(a)(2). 
Umberger , 140 Hawaiʻi at 512, 403 P.3d at 289. HRS § 343 -6(a)(2) 
authorizes the environmental council40 to adopt rules that 
“[e]stablish procedures whereby specific types of actions, 
because they will probably have minimal or no significant 
effects on the environment, are declared exempt from the preparation of an [EA.]”   Pursuant to HRS § 343-6(a)(2), the
 
environmental council issued Hawaiʻi Administrative Rule s (“HAR”) 
§ 11-200-8, which provide s that the relevant agency may exempt 
certain “cla sses of actions” from environmental review under 
HEPA so long as the agency “obtain[ ed] the advice of other 
outside agencies or individuals having jurisdiction or expertise 
40 HRS § 343-6(a) refers to “the council,” which means “the 
environmental council.” HRS § 343-2. The envi ronmental council was created 
by HRS § 341-3(c) (2010).  
 
 51                      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
as to the propriety of the exemption.”  HAR § 11-200-8(a) 
(repealed 2019).   For example, under HAR § 11-200-8 , “action” 
involving  the “[o ]peration[], repair[], or maintenance of 
existing structures, facilities, equipment, or topographical 
features, involving negligible or no expansion or change of use 
beyond that previously existing ” may be exempt from HEPA’s EA 
requirement. HAR §  11-200-8(a)(1). However, HAR § 11-200-8  
also provides  that “[a]ll exemptions under the classes in this 
section are inapplicable when the cumulative impact of planned 
successive actions in the same place, over  time, is significant, 
or when an action that is normally insignificant in its impact 41
41 HAR § 11-200 was repealed and replaced by HAR § 11 -200.1 on 
August 9, 2019. HAR § 11-200.1-32, titled “Retroactivity,” provides that 
“[c]hapter 11 -200 shall continue to apply to environmental re view of agency 
and applicant actions which began prior to the adoption of chapter 11 -200.1.” 
Therefore, as the present case concerns HEPA “action” that occurred pre -2019, 
the provisions of HAR § 11 -200 apply. 
HAR § 11 -200-8(a) provides in relevant part: 
(a) Chapter 343, HRS, states that a list of classes of 
actions shall be drawn up which, because they will probably 
have minimal or no significant effect on the environment, 
may be declared exempt by the proposing agency or approving 
agency from the prepa ration of an environmental assessment 
provided that agencies declaring an action exempt under 
this section shall obtain the advice of other outside 
agencies or individuals having jurisdiction or expertise as 
to the propriety of the exemption. Actions decl ared exempt 
from the preparation of an environmental assessment under 
this section are not exempt from complying with any other 
applicable statute or rule. The following list represents 
exempt classes of action: 
(1) Operations, repairs, or maintenance o f existing 
structures, facilities, equipment, or topographical 
features, involving negligible or no expansion or change of 
use beyond that previously existing[.]  
 
 52  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on the environment may be significant in a particularly 
sensitive environment.” HAR § 11 -200-8(b). 
Because analysis under HAR § 11 -200-8 turns heavily on 
the nature and impact of the A&B Defendants’ specific “action,” 
we find that this inquiry properly lies within the circuit 
court’s purview. On remand, the circuit court should determine 
(1) whether the A&B Defendants’ “action” falls into one of the 
exempt classes enumer ated by HAR § 11 -200-8(a) and, if so, (2) 
whether HAR § 11 -200-8(b) renders the exemption inapplicable. 
If the circuit court finds that either HAR § 11 -200-8(a) does 
not apply or an exemption is inapplicable under HAR § 11 -200-
8(b), the circuit court shou ld determine how best to apply 
HEPA’s EA requirement to the revocable permits , taking into 
consider ation relevant actions already taken by Defendants 
toward issuance of the long -term lease, including A&B’s 
publication of a DEIS. 
Although the court is awa re that the permits in this 
case were continued along with hundreds of other permits, we do 
not opine on the validity of other permits not before the court. 
Given the duration, magnitude, and nature of the uses authorized 
by the revocable permits here, th ey may be distinguishable from 
other, smaller -scale uses similarly authorized by the BLNR.  
 
 53   
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
        
 
 
   
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s July 31, 2019 
judgment on appeal pursuant to its June 18, 2019 memorandum 
opinion is vacated and the circuit court’s October 21, 2015 
order granting Petitioners ’ MPSJ is affirmed in part as to its 
holding that the revocable permits were not authorized under HRS 
§ 171-55. The circuit court’s October 21, 2015 order is vacated 
in part as to its holding that there is no “ac tion” within the 
meaning of HRS § 343-5(a) and that HEPA’s environmental review 
process is, thus, inapplicable . The case is remanded to the 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. On remand, the circuit court should continue t o 
exercise its equitable power as it pertains to the municipal -
and residential -water needs of the upcountry Maui community. 
David  Kauila Kopper  
for petitioners  Healoha  
Carmichael,  Lezley Jacintho,   
and Nā Moku Aupuni O Ko ʻolau Hui
Linda L.W. Chow  (William J.  
Wynhoff  on the briefs) for  
respondents  BLNR, Suzanne Case
in her official  capacity as  
Chairman of BLNR, and DLNR  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
David Schulmeister  (Trisha  
H.S.T.  Akagi  on the briefs) for  
respondents  Alexander & Baldwin, Inc.
and East Maui Irrigation Co., Ltd.   
Caleb P. Rowe  (Kristin K. Tarnstrom  
on the briefs) for respondent  
County of Maui, Department of  
Water Supply  