*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
U.S. BANK TRUST, N.A., 
AS TRUSTEE FOR LSF9 MASTER PARTICIPATION TRUST, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN; PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN, TRUSTEE OF THE 
PATRICK LOWELL VERHAGEN REVOCABLE TRUST DATED OCTOBER 29, 1999 
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., 
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee. 
 
 
SCWC-17-0000746 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000746; CIVIL NO. 16-1-0147(1)) 
 
JUNE 21, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
 
This case concerns the admissibility and evidentiary weight 
of documents and declarations at issue in a foreclosure Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000746
21-JUN-2021
09:00 AM
Dkt. 25 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 
 proceeding.  We consider: whether promissory notes are hearsay, 
admissible only if they fall within an exception to the hearsay 
rule; whether a copy of a promissory note is self-authenticating 
under Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 902(9); the scope 
and limits of the business records exception to the hearsay 
rule; and the evidentiary burden mortgagees must meet to 
establish standing in the foreclosure context. 
We conclude that promissory notes are not hearsay, that 
copies of promissory notes are not self-authenticating under HRE 
Rule 902(9), and that, under the incorporated records doctrine, 
business records may, in certain circumstances, be admissible 
even absent testimony concerning the business practices or records of their creator.  We also clarify the evidentiary 
burden on mortgagees seeking to show their possession of a 
promissory note at the time a foreclosure complaint was filed. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Patrick Verhagen (“Verhagen”) owned real estate in Lahaina 
(the “Property”).  In September 2007, Verhagen executed a $1,730,000.00 note (the “Note”) in favor of Washington Mutual Bank, FA (“Washington Mutual”).  Verhagen secured the Note with 
a mortgage on the Property. 
The mortgage was later assigned to U.S. Bank.  Caliber Home 
Loans, Inc. (“Caliber”) is U.S. Bank’s current loan servicer.  
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (“JPMorgan Chase”) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 
 previously serviced the loan. 
Verhagen defaulted on the Note in February 2012.  He was 
sent notice of the default in August 2014.  The notice provided 
Verhagen thirty-five days to cure the default.  Verhagen did not 
timely cure the default. 
On March 23, 2016, U.S. Bank filed a verified foreclosure 
complaint in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (the 
“circuit court”). 
The complaint was accompanied by a Verification to 
Foreclosure Complaint by Julia Jackson, a Caliber employee.  Jackson said she was familiar with Caliber’s records and the 
manner in which Caliber maintains those records.  She “verified” 
and “confirmed” U.S. Bank’s possession of the original Note. 
On January 31, 2017, U.S. Bank filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure (“MSJ”) against 
Verhagen. 
In its MSJ, U.S. Bank argued it was entitled to summary 
judgment against Verhagen because: (1) A loan had been made to Verhagen; (2) Verhagen made, executed, and delivered the Note to 
the lender; (3) Verhagen secured the Note with a mortgage on the 
Property; (4) Verhagen is in default of the amounts due under 
the Note; and (5) U.S. Bank. holds the Note and has standing to 
foreclose against Verhagen. 
U.S. Bank supported its MSJ with a declaration (the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 
 “Salyers Declaration”) from Alyssa Salyers.  Salyers is a 
foreclosure document specialist at Caliber. 
Salyers declared she was familiar with both Caliber’s 
business records concerning the Note and the manner in which 
Caliber maintains those records.  Salyers also declared she had 
inspected a copy of the Note maintained by Caliber.  She 
attached a “true and correct” copy of the Note to her 
declaration.  She further declared that Caliber’s records concerning the Note include records incorporated from the prior 
loan servicer, JPMorgan Chase.  The records obtained from 
JPMorgan Chase, Salyers declared, are “kept and maintained by 
Caliber in the ordinary course of its business for the purpose 
of maintaining an accounting of payments received, expenses 
incurred, and amounts advanced with regard to the Subject Loan, 
and such records are relied upon by Caliber in the regular 
course of its business.” 
Verhagen’s opposition to U.S. Bank’s MSJ focused on U.S. 
Bank’s failure to demonstrate its ownership and possession of the Note at the time it filed suit.  Verhagen argued that this 
evidentiary deficiency was fatal for U.S. Bank: without a 
showing that it possessed the Note at the time it filed its 
complaint, U.S. Bank could not establish standing under Bank of 
America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻ i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 
(2017). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 
 We issued Reyes-Toledo on February 28, 2017: one month 
before Verhagen’s March 31, 2017 opposition and one month after 
U.S. Bank’s January 31, 2017 MSJ.  Reyes-Toledo held that in 
order to establish standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must prove “its entitlement to enforce the note at the commencement of the 
proceedings.”  Id. at 369, 390 P.3d at 1256. 
The circuit court granted U.S. Bank’s motion.  Verhagen 
appealed.  The ICA remanded the case to the circuit court to allow U.S. Bank to supplement the record in light of Reyes-
Toledo and another case, U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai‘ i 
26, 398 P.3d 615 (2017) .1  Mattos was issued after U.S. Bank 
submitted its proposed forms for the foreclosure judgment (May 17, 2017) but before the court entered judgment (September 25, 
2017).  In Mattos, we held that the employee of a plaintiff 
                         
1  U.S. Bank’s motion for remand came after it had, following a procedure 
described in Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 57 Haw. 249, 553 P.2d 464 (1976), 
asked the circuit court to indicate how it was inclined to rule on a motion 
to ratify the foreclosure judgment.   Verhagen neither opposed the substance 
of the motion U.S. Bank presented to the circuit court nor appeared at the 
related hearing.  Verhagen did, however, file jurisdictional objections to 
U.S. Bank’s proposed order granting the motion to ratify. 
 
Notwithstanding Verhagen’s jurisdictional objections, on July 27, 2018, 
the circuit court indicated its inclination to grant U.S. Bank’s motion to 
ratify.  Confusingly, though it lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate the motion, 
the circuit court styled itself as “granting” the motion to ratify.  As the 
ICA noted in its order granting U.S. Bank’s motion for temporary remand, the 
circuit court should have indicated its inclination to grant the motion 
rather than purporting to actually grant it.  See  Life of the Land, 57 Haw. 
at 251, 553 P.2d at 466 (“Accordingly, we consider that the procedure for motions under Rule 60(b), H.R.C.P., may and should be consistent with that 
for motions under Rule 33, H.R.Cr.P., where an appeal is pending in this court.  Jurisdiction is in this court while the appeal is pending, in both 
instances.  Nevertheless, the motion may be made and considered in the 
circuit court.  If that court indicates that it will grant the motion, the 
appellant may then move in this court for a remand of the case.”) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 
 bank’s loan servicer was not a “qualified witness” in relation 
to the bank’s records where the employee did not testify to 
familiarity with the bank’s record-keeping system or to the loan 
servicer’s incorporation of the bank’s records.  Id. at 33, 398 
P.3d at 622. 
On remand, U.S. Bank moved for ratification of the circuit 
court’s prior judgment.  Verhagen filed jurisdictional objections to the circuit court’s consideration of the motion but did not substantively oppose the motion to ratify.  U.S. 
Bank’s motion was accompanied by a supplemental declaration from 
Melinda Patterson (the “Patterson Declaration”).  Patterson 
stated she was a Caliber employee and was familiar with both 
Caliber’s books and records concerning the Note and the manner 
in which Caliber maintains its books and records.  Patterson’s 
declaration provided additional testimony concerning Caliber’s 
incorporation of prior loan servicers’ records.  Patterson 
declared: 
Caliber’s records include and incorporate records for the 
Loan obtained from [JPMorgan Chase] (“Prior Servicer”), the prior loan servicer for the Loan.  The records obtained by 
Caliber from the Prior Servicer are kept and maintained by 
Caliber in the ordinary course of its business for the 
purpose of maintaining an accounting of payments received, 
expenses incurred, and amounts advanced with regard to the Loan, and such records are relied upon by Caliber in the 
regular course of its business.  The information regarding 
the Loan transferred to Caliber from the Prior Servicer has 
been validated in many ways, including but not limited to, 
going through a due diligence phase, review of hard copy documents, and review of the payment history and accounting 
of other fees, costs, and expenses charged to the Loan by 
Prior Servicer.  It is Caliber’s regular practice, after 
these phases are complete, to receive records from prior *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7 
 servicers and integrate these records into Caliber’s 
business records at the time of acquisition.  Once 
integrated, Caliber maintains and relies on these business 
records in the ordinary course of its mortgage loan 
servicing business.
 
 
Patterson also declared that, based on her review of 
Caliber’s business records, U.S. Bank possessed the Note on 
March 23, 2016, when it filed its complaint against Verhagen: 
Plaintiff, or its agent on Plaintiff’s behalf, was in 
possession of the original wet- ink, indorsed in blank Note 
when the above- captioned foreclosure action was commenced 
on March 23, 2016 and since [that time]. . . .  
 
My personal knowledge of these statements is derived from 
my having inspected Caliber’s business records. Specifically, I researched Caliber’s business records, 
which includes “Certification” [sic] executed by Caliber 
employee, Jennifer Martin.  The “Certification” contained 
in Caliber’s business records evidence [sic] that the original wet ink, indorsed in blank Note was in Caliber’s possession on Plaintiff’ s behalf on February 9, 2016.  
Further, the “Certification” contained in Caliber’s business records indicates that the original wet- ink Note 
was indorsed in blank no later than February 9, 2016, as the original wet- ink Note was electronically scanned and 
uploaded to Caliber’s business records on or before 
February 9, 2016 and the scanned copy of the original wet-
ink Note that was uploaded to Caliber’s business records on 
or before February 9, 2016 contains a blank indorsement on 
page 6 of the Note. 
 
Patterson attached a copy of Jennifer Martin’s Certification to 
her declaration. 
 Patterson also declared that there was an attorney’s bailee 
letter agreement in Caliber’s business records.  The letter was dated December 9, 2016.  Patterson declared that Caliber sent 
the letter
2 to U.S. Bank’s legal counsel on or around that date 
                         
2 The bailee letter attached to Patterson’s declaration documented 
transmission of the original Note from Caliber to U.S. Bank’s foreclosure 
counsel.  At the bottom of the letter there was a signed December 16, 2016 
acknowledgement from a representative of U.S. Bank’s legal counsel recognizing receipt of the original Note. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8 
 along with the wet-ink indorsed-in-blank Note.  Verhagen did not 
object to the admission of Patterson’s testimony.  
On October 8, 2018, the circuit court filed amended 
findings of fact (“FOFs”) and conclusions of law (“COLs”).  
These amended FOFs and COLs addressed U.S. Bank’s compliance 
with Reyes-Toledo.  The circuit court found U.S. Bank possessed 
the indorsed-in-blank Note at the time it sued Verhagen: 
[Amended FOF 8] At the time the Complaint was filed, 
PLAINTIFF, or its agent on PLAINTIFF’s behalf, was in 
possession of the original indorsed in blank Note.  As 
evidence of this, the Verification filed with the 
Complaint, which was executed by Julia Jackson (an employee 
of Caliber Home Loans, Inc.) (“Servicer”), PLAINTIFF’S loan servicer, stated that Jackson had “verified and hereby 
confirm[ed] possession of the original Note by Plaintiff . 
. . [and that] [t]he Note is indorsed in blank . . .. ” 
Verification to Complaint, at ¶¶ 7- 8; see Nationstar 
Mortgage, LLC v. Ruth C. Alejandro, et al., CAAP 15- 0000107 
(March 23, 2017) (Summary Disposition Order) (discussing 
how similar verification established possession of note 
when case was commenced as required by Reyes- Toledo).  
Further, together with the Motion to Ratify, filed on June 18, 2018, PLAINTIFF submitted a further Declaration of Melinda Patterson (who was also an employee of Servicer), 
which provided additional evidence that: (i) Servicer had 
authority to act on behalf of PLAINTIFF and had been 
servicing the subject loan since prior to the filing of the 
Complaint (see Patterson Decl. at ¶¶ 3 and 6); and (ii) 
Servicer had been in possession of the original indorsed in 
blank Note since at least February 9, 2016, and through 
approximately December 9, 2016, when the original indorsed 
in blank Note was transmitted to PLAINTI FF’S counsel of 
record in this case to hold on PLAINTIFF’S behalf while the 
foreclosure action was being prosecuted (see Patterson 
Decl. at ¶ 8; Prather Declaration submitted with 
PLAINTIFF’S Reply Memorandum in Support of its Motion for 
Summary Judgment, file d April 3, 2016). 
 
The circuit court further found that U.S. Bank had 
possessed the Note since the filing of the complaint: 
[Amended FOF 11]  As a result, PLAINTIFF, its agent on 
PLAINTIFF’s behalf, or PLAINTIFF’S counsel on PLAINTIFF’S 
behalf, has been and remains in possession of the original 
indorsed in blank Note since before this foreclosure action *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 
 was commenced on March 23, 2016, and through the present.  
No evidence to the contrary was presented to the Court.  
  
The circuit court’s amended FOFs also considered the 
admissibility of the loan documents U.S. Bank submitted in 
support of its MSJ: 
[Amended FOF 10]  Further, the evidence establishing 
PLAINTIFF’S standing is admissible because the various 
declarants established their personal knowledge of the 
statements made and/or that the statements made were derived from the business records of the declarant’s 
employer, and not some other entity.  See U.S. Bank, N.A. 
v. Mattos, 140 Haw. 26, 32-33, 398 P.3d 615, 621- 622 (S. 
Ct. 2017) (foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing 
through admissible evidence; servicer could not testify to 
records of plaintiff without establishing familiarity with 
plaintiff’s record keeping system) . . . . 
 
The circuit court also addressed U.S. Bank’s standing: 
[Amended COL 2] PLAINTIFF had standing to bring this 
action and has standing at present because PLAINTIFF, its 
agent on PLAINTIFF’S behalf, or PLAINTIFF’S counsel on 
PLAINTIFF’S behalf, has been and remains in possession of 
the original indorsed in blank Note since before this 
foreclosure action was commenced on March 23, 2016, and 
through the present. 
 
Following the entry of the circuit court’s amended 
judgment, order, and FOFs and COLs, U.S. Bank filed an amended 
answering brief in the ICA.  In its brief, U.S. Bank argued 
that: (1) loan documents maintained by Caliber but created by 
prior loan servicers were admissible as “incorporated records” 
under the business records exception to the hearsay rule; and (2) declarations U.S. Bank submitted in support of its MSJ 
showed it possessed the Note at the time it filed the complaint 
and, in doing so, established U.S. Bank’s standing to sue 
Verhagen.
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 
 On October 2, 2020, the ICA issued an Amended SDO3 vacating 
the circuit court’s October 8, 2018, Amended Judgment and the 
Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Amended Order 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for 
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure.  U.S. Bank v. Verhagen, 
CAAP-17-0000746 (App. Oct. 2, 2020) (SDO). 
The ICA ruled that U.S. Bank lacked standing because it had 
not established it possessed the Note at the time it filed the 
foreclosure action.  See Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻ i at 368, 390 
P.3d at 1255 (holding that to establish standing a foreclosing 
plaintiff must establish entitlement to enforce the subject note 
at the time the action was commenced). 
The ICA reached this conclusion after determining that the 
copies of the Note U.S. Bank submitted in support of its MSJ 
                         
3  The ICA initially issued a summary disposition order (the “SDO”) 
vacating the circuit court’s September 25, 2017 Judgment and Findings of Fact 
and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff’ s Motion for Summary 
Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017.    
U.S. Bank moved the ICA to reconsider its SDO.  In addition to making several 
legal arguments about why the ICA should reconsider the SDO, U.S. Bank’s 
motion for reconsideration highlighted the fact that the ICA’s SDO did not address or acknowledge the circuit court’s October 8, 2020 Amended Judgment 
and Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting 
Plaintiff’ s Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of 
Foreclosure Filed January 31, 2017.  On October 2, 2020, the ICA issued a two-paragraph order granting in part U.S. Bank’s motion for reconsideration.  
The order granted the motion only to the extent it concerned the ICA’s 
failure to address the October 8, 2018 Amended Judgment and the Amended 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Amended Order Granting Plaintiff's 
Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure.  The 
ICA rejected all of U.S. Bank’s substantive legal arguments concerning the 
need for reconsideration.  It issued its Amended SDO that same day, October 
2, 2020. 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 
 were inadmissible hearsay.  None of the declarations U.S. Bank 
submitted were from a declarant familiar with the record-keeping 
practices of Washington Mutual, the entity that purportedly 
created the Note.  As such, the ICA ruled, there was not an 
adequate foundation for the admission of the Note under the 
“business records” exception to the hearsay rule. 
 In reaching this conclusion, the ICA cited Mattos’s 
quotation of State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawaiʻ i 354, 227 P.3d 520  
(2010), for the proposition that an employee of a business that 
received records from another business may be qualified to establish a foundation for their admission under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6): 
A person can be a “ qualified witness” who can authenticate 
a document as a record of regularly conducted activity 
under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) or its federal counterpart even if 
he or she is not an employee of the business that created 
the document, or has no direct, personal knowledge of how 
the document was created. As one leading commentator has noted:  
The phrase “ other qualified witness” is given a 
very broad interpretation.  The witness need 
only have enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business in question to explain how the record came into existence in 
the ordinary course of business.  The witness 
need not have personal knowledge of the actual creation of the documents or have personally 
assembled the records.  In fact, the witness 
need not even be an employee of the record-
keeping entity as long as the witness 
understands the entity's record- keeping system. 
 There is no requirement that the records have been prepared by the entity that has custody of 
them, as long as they were created in the 
regular course of some entity's business. 
 The sufficiency of the foundation evidence depends in part on the nature of the documents *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 
 at issue.  Documents that are “ standard records 
of the type regularly maintained by firms in a 
particular industry may require less by way of 
foundation testimony than less conventional 
documents proffered for admission as business 
records.” 
 
Verhagen, SDO at 7-8 (quoting Mattos, 140 Hawaiʻ i at 32, 398 P.3d 
at 621) (cleaned up). 
 The ICA also cited Behrendt’s discussion of the testimony 
necessary to support the admission of incorporated records: 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be qualified to 
provide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) even 
if the witness is not employed by the business that created 
the document or lacks direct, personal knowledge of how the document was created.  Id.  “There is no requirement that 
the records have been prepared by the entity that has custody of them, as long as they were created in the 
regular course of some entity's business.”  Id. (quoting 
State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawaiʻ i 354, 366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 
(2010)).  The witness, however, must have enough 
familiarity with the record- keeping system of the business 
that created the record to explain how the record was 
generated in the ordinary course of business.  Id. 
 
Records received from another business and incorporated 
into the receiving business’ records may in some 
circumstances be regarded as “ created” by the receiving 
business.  Id.  Incorporated records are admissible under 
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness 
testifies that the documents were incorporated and kept in 
the normal course of business, that the incorporating 
business typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents 
of the documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate 
the trustworthiness of the document.  See id.; Fitzwater, 
122 Hawaiʻi at 367- 68, 227 P.3d at 533- 34. 
 
Verhagen, SDO at 8 (quoting 142 Hawai‘ i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-
98). 
 The ICA then turned to explaining why the Jackson 
verification, Salyers declaration, and supplemental Patterson 
declaration each failed to establish the declarant’s 
qualifications to authenticate the Note as a business record *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 
 under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  
 Jackson’s verification — which described her familiarity 
with Caliber’s records and record-keeping system4 — did not 
qualify her as an “other qualified witness” for purposes of admitting the Note under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) because it did not 
demonstrate that she had “enough familiarity with the record-
keeping system of the business that created [the Note] to 
explain how [it] was generated in the ordinary course of business.”  Verhagen, SDO at 9 (alterations added) (quoting 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai‘i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97). 
 Salyers’ declaration5 was similarly deficient.  Because 
                         
4  Specifically, Jackson stated: 
 
I have access to and am familiar with Caliber’ s books and 
records regarding the Loan, including Caliber’ s servicing 
records and copies of the applicable loan documents.  I am 
familiar with the manner in which Caliber maintains its 
books and records, including computer records relating to 
the servicing of the Loan.  Caliber’ s records are made at 
or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an employee or representative with knowledge of the acts or events recorded.  Such records are 
obtained, kept and maintained by Caliber in the regular course of Caliber’s business.  Caliber relies on such 
records in the ordinary course of its business. 
 
5  Salyers declared, in relevant part: 
 
I have access to and am familiar with Caliber’ s books and 
records regarding the Loan, including Caliber’ s servicing 
records and copies of the applicable loan documents.  I am 
familiar with the manner in which Caliber maintains its 
books and records, including computer records relating to 
the servicing of the Loan.  Caliber’ s records are made at 
or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth in such records, by an employee or representative with knowledge of the acts or events recorded.  Such records are 
obtained, kept and maintained by Caliber in the regular course of Caliber's business.  Caliber relies on such 
records in the ordinary course of its business.  Caliber’ s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 
 Salyers did not attest to being familiar with “the record-
keeping system of Washington Mutual or JPMorgan [Chase]” Salyers 
was not a “qualified witness” for the admission of the Note 
under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
According to the ICA, even the supplemental Patterson 
declaration failed “to establish under Mattos and Behrendt that 
[Patterson] is a custodian of records or a qualified witness for purposes of admitting the Note as evidence pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6).”  Verhagen, SDO at 10. 
 In its December 28, 2020 certiorari application, U.S. Bank presented the following questions:  
(1) “To obtain summary judgment, is a foreclosing creditor 
in possession of the original note required to authenticate the 
note through HRE 803(b)(6), or is the note admissible under HRE 
902?”;  
(2)
 “Is the issue of standing based on possession of the 
promissory note distinct from the issue of admissibility of loan records, such that a lender can satisfy the possession 
requirement with a declaration that affirms pre-filing 
                         
records include and incorporate records for the Subject 
Loan obtained from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“ Prior 
Servicer” ), the prior loan servicer for the Subject Loan. 
The records obtained by Caliber from the Prior Servicer are 
kept and maintained by Caliber in the ordinary course of 
its business for the purpose of maintaining an accounting of payments received, expenses incurred, and amounts 
advanced with regard to the Subject Loan, and such records 
are relied upon by Caliber in the regular course of its 
business. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 
 possession of the note based upon personal knowledge and 
corroborating records of the custodian, irrespective of the 
declarant’s foundation to admit the note as a business record 
under HRE 803(b)(6)?”; and  
(3) “Did the debtor waive his right to dispute the Amended 
Judgment by failing to oppose Petitioner’s Motion to Ratify and 
the resulting Amended Order?” 
II. DISCUSSION 
A. The Note is not hearsay The Note is not hearsay. 
Out of court statements with independent legal 
significance, like verbal acts, are not hearsay since “[i]f the 
significance of an offered statement lies solely in the fact 
that it was made, no issue is raised as to the truth of anything 
asserted.”  Fed. R. Evid. 802(c) cmt.  See State v. Villena, 140 
Hawaiʻi 370, 378, 400 P.3d 571, 579 (2017) (“It is well-settled 
that statements of independent legal significance are not 
hearsay.”). 
Contractual documents have independent legal significance.  
See State v. Salavea, 147 Hawaiʻ i 564, 577 n.13, 465 P.3d 1011, 
1024 n.13 (2020) (citing Island Directory Co. v. Iva’s Kinimaka 
Enters., Inc., 10 Haw. App. 15, 21-22, 859 P.2d 935, 939 (1993), 
and describing it as “holding that statements that constitute 
the offer, acceptance, or terms of a contract are not hearsay *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 
 because the making of such statements are in themselves 
relevant[.]”). 
Promissory notes are a subspecies of written contracts 
because they record the terms of an agreement between lender and 
borrower.  See Remington Investments, Inc. v. Hamedani, 64 Cal. 
Rptr. 2d 376, 382 (Cal. Ct. App. 1997) (explaining “[t]he Promissory Note document itself is not a business record as that 
term is used in the law of hearsay, but rather is an operative contractual document admissible merely upon adequate evidence of 
authenticity”).  Since the Note has independent legal 
significance as evidence of the written contract between 
Verhagen and the Note’s holder, it is not hearsay.  Because the 
Note is not hearsay, it does not need to meet the business 
records exception to be admissible. 
B. Copies of the Note submitted by U.S. Bank are not self-
authenticating under HRE Rule 902(9) 
 
Though the original Note is self-authenticating under HRE 
Rule 902(9), the copies of the Note U.S. Bank submitted in 
support of its MSJ are not. 
Even non-hearsay evidence must be authenticated.  “The 
requirement of authentication or identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient 
to support a finding that the matter in question is what its 
proponent claims.”  HRE Rule 901.  Under HRE Rule 902, however, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 
 “[e]xtrinsic evidence of authenticity as a condition precedent 
to admissibility” is not needed with respect to “[c]ommercial 
paper, signatures thereon, and documents relating thereto to the 
extent provided by general commercial law.”  HRE Rule 902(9). 
Hawai‘i’s generally applicable commercial law is the Hawaiʻ i 
Uniform Commercial Code (the “U.C.C.”).  Under Article 3 of the 
U.C.C.:  
In an action with respect to an instrument, the 
authenticity of, and authority to make, each signature on 
the instrument is admitted unless specifically denied in 
the pleadings.  If the validity of a signature is denied in 
the pleadings, the burden of establishing validity is on 
the person claiming validity, but the signature is 
presumed[6] to be authentic and authorized unless the action 
is to enforce the liability of the purported signer and the signer is dead or incompetent at the time of trial of the issue of validity of the signature. 
 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 490:3-308(a) (2008).  
Promissory notes like the one Verhagen signed are negotiable 
instruments under the U.C.C.  See HRS § 490:3-104; see also Bank 
of New York Mellon v. Spielman, 146 Hawaiʻ i 205, 457 P.3d 844 
(App. 2020) (characterizing a promissory note as a “negotiable 
instrument” under Article 3 of Hawaiʻ i’s U.C.C.).  As such, the 
original Note is self-authenticating commercial paper under HRE 
Rule 902(9). 
HRE 902(9) does not specify whether it applies to 
                         
6  Article 3 of the U.C.C. provides that, “[w]henever this chapter creates 
a ‘presumption’ with respect to a fact, or provides that a fact is 
‘presumed’, the trier of fact shall find the existence of the fact unless 
evidence is introduced that supports a finding of its nonexistence.”  HRS § 
490:1-206. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 
 photocopies of commercial paper or only to original commercial 
paper.  At least one court has found that photocopies of 
commercial paper are not self-authenticating.  See United States 
v. Brandell, 35 M.J. 369, 371 (C.M.A. 1992) (holding that 
photocopies of checks are not “self-authenticating ‘commercial 
paper’ within the meaning of Mil.R.Evid. Rule 902(9),” which is 
identical to HRE Rule 902(9)).  We, however, have not addressed 
whether photocopies of commercial paper are self-authenticating under HRE Rule 902(9). 
HRE Rule 1003 is central to our analysis on this issue.  It 
provides: “[a] duplicate is admissible to the same extent as an 
original unless (1) a genuine question is raised as to the 
authenticity of the original, or (2) in the circumstances it 
would be unfair to admit the duplicate in lieu of the original.”  
HRE Rule 1003.   
Here, and indeed in all foreclosure cases where a mortgagee 
introduces a copy of a promissory note to establish standing, we conclude that it would be unfair to treat duplicates of 
promissory notes as self-authenticating under HRE Rule 902(9).   
The policy considerations that justify HRE Rule 902(9)’s 
special treatment of commercial paper do not apply in the 
context of duplicate promissory notes.  An original note is 
particularly trustworthy because it allows for the direct 
inspection of all its inscriptions.  But it is impossible to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 
 definitively match a copy of a given note’s frontside with a 
copy of the same note’s backside.   Moreover, limiting HRE Rule 
902(9) to original commercial papers makes sense given the mismatch between the significance of original commercial paper 
and copies thereof in everyday life: “[b]anks do not treat 
copies of checks and notes like originals,” and under the 
U.C.C., the “enforcement of a negotiable instrument by a person 
who does not possess the original instrument [is permitted] onlyunder very limited circumstances.”  31 Charles Alan Wright, 
Arthur R. Miller & Victor J. Gold, Federal Practice and 
Procedure § 7143(9) (1st ed. 2000 & Supp. 2021). 7
 
Accordingly, we hold that while original promissory notes 
are self-authenticating under HRE Rule 902(9), duplicates like 
those submitted by U.S. Bank in support of its MSJ are not self-
authenticating and are only admissible if they are authenticated 
by extrinsic evidence.  See HRE Rule 901. 
                         
7 As one treatise explained: 
 
[A] copy may not reveal all the information bearing on 
authenticity that is contained on an original.  For example, 
a check that has been deposited and processed through the banking system has information that is contained on both its 
front and back.  While both the front and back can be copied, 
often there is nothing about a copy of a given front and a 
given back that shows they match. Further, the bank imprints 
on the back of a check may not be clear on a copy. 
 
31 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Victor J. Gold, Federal Practice 
and Procedure § 7143(9) (1st ed. 2000 & Supp. 2021). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20 
 C. U.S. Bank properly authenticated the copies of the Note it 
submitted in support of its MSJ 
 
The copies of the Note U.S. Bank submitted in support of 
its MSJ are not self-authenticating commercial paper.  They are 
still admissible, however, if there is “evidence sufficient to support a finding” that they are what U.S. Bank claims they are.  
See HRE Rule 901(a).  Testimony of a witness with personal 
knowledge of a document may establish the foundation necessary for its admission.  HRE Rule 901(b)(1).
 
Salyers and Patterson’s testimony establishes an adequate 
foundation for the copies’ admission.  Both Salyers and 
Patterson declared under penalty of perjury that they had 
inspected a copy of the Note maintained by Caliber.  They both 
declared that “true and correct” copies of the Note they inspected were attached to their declarations.  U.S. Bank has 
thus adequately authenticated these copies of the Note.  D. The ICA erred in its application of the incorporated 
records doctrine 
 
In its Amended SDO, the ICA held that the Note was 
inadmissible because it was not authenticated by testimony from 
a witness with personal knowledge of the record-keeping systems 
of Washington Mutual or JPMorgan Chase.  Leaving aside the fact 
that the Note is not hearsay, the ICA’s holding relies on a 
conspicuous misreading of our incorporated records doctrine. 
Though hearsay is generally inadmissible, HRE Rule *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 
 803(b)(6) establishes a hearsay exception for “records of 
regularly conducted activity.”  It provides: 
A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any 
form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, 
made in the course of a regularly conducted activity, at or near the time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions, or 
diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the custodian or 
other qualified witness, or by certification that complies 
with rule 902(11) or a statute permitting certification, 
unless the sources of information or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness. 
 
HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
 Our incorporated records doctrine clarifies the application 
of this exception to documents that were created by one entity 
but which are maintained in the records of another.  We 
introduced this rule in Fitzwater, 122 Hawaiʻ i 354, 227 P.3d 520.  
In Fitzwater, we explained: “when an entity incorporates records 
prepared by another entity into its own records, they are 
admissible as business records of the incorporating entity 
provided that it relies on the records, there are other indicia of reliability, and the requirements of HRE Rule 803(b)(6) are 
otherwise satisfied.”  Id. at 367–68, 227 P.3d at 533–34 
(emphasis added). 
We affirmed this holding in Behrendt, explaining that 
“[r]ecords received from another business and incorporated into 
the receiving business’ records may in some circumstances be 
regarded as ‘created’ by the receiving business.”  142 Hawaiʻ i at 
45, 414 P.3d at 97.  The clear implication of this language is *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 
 that when a record is treated as “created” by the receiving 
business, a person is qualified to authenticate it if the person 
has “enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the 
business that ‘created’ the record,” i.e., the receiving or 
incorporating business.  Accordingly, a person may be qualified 
to authenticate an incorporated record even if the person lacks 
familiarity with the records or record-keeping practices of the 
entity that actually created the record. 
In Behrendt, we identified the circumstances in which it is 
appropriate to treat an incorporated record as “created” by the receiving business: 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies 
that [1] the documents were incorporated and kept in the 
normal course of business, [2] that the incorporating 
business typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents 
of the documents, and [3] the circumstances otherwise 
indicate the trustworthiness of the document. 
 
142 Hawaiʻ i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97.  If each of these three 
conditions is satisfied, an incorporated record is admissible 
even in the absence of testimony concerning its actual
 creation.  
This is because evidence that a business has incorporated and relied on a record created by another organization speaks 
directly to that record’s reliability.  When accompanied by 
testimony about other circumstances that also indicate the 
record’s trustworthiness, such evidence is an acceptable substitute for testimony concerning a record’s actual creation.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 
  Immediately before our discussion of the incorporated 
records doctrine in Behrendt, we addressed a slightly different 
situation: the case where a business has custody of another 
entity’s records but has not actually incorporated those records 
into its own.  In that situation, we explained, a witness need 
not be employed by the entity that created the documents to 
provide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  But the 
witness does need to have “ enough familiarity with the record-
keeping system of the business that created the record to 
explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of 
business.”  Id. at 45, 414 P.3d at 97. 
 In its SDO, the ICA incorrectly applied this standard to Caliber’s incorporated records.  It ignored the fact that the 
records created by JPMorgan Chase were incorporated into 
Caliber’s own records and were not merely in Caliber’s custody.  
In determining whether the records incorporated from JPMorgan 
Chase were admissible 
under HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the ICA should 
have considered whether there was testimony from a Caliber 
custodian or witness qualified to testify about Caliber’s 
records that: (1) Caliber incorporated and kept the documents in 
the normal course of business; (2) Caliber typically relies upon 
the accuracy of the contents of the documents; and (3) the 
circumstances otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the 
documents.  See id. at 45, 414 P.3d at 97.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 
  Patterson and Salyers8 both testified that JPMorgan Chase’s 
records were incorporated into Caliber’s own and kept and 
maintained by Caliber in the ordinary course of its business.  
They both further testified that Caliber used and relied on the 
incorporated records in the regular course of its loan servicing 
business.  The first two requirements for the admission of 
incorporated records are thus satisfied.   
Salyers’ testimony does not describe any circumstances that 
otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the documents Caliber incorporated from JPMorgan Chase.  But Patterson’s does.  
Patterson declared that: 
The information regarding the Loan transferred to Caliber 
from the Prior Servicer has been validated in many ways, 
including, but not limited to, going through a due diligence phase, review of hard copy documents, and review 
of the payment history and accounting of other fees, costs, 
and expenses charged to the Loan by Prior Servicer. 
 
Though scant, this testimony establishes circumstances 
indicating the trustworthiness of Caliber’s incorporated 
records.  It is evidence that before incorporating JPMorgan Chase’s documents, Caliber reviewed hard copies of the 
                         
8  Both Patterson and Salyers are knowledgeable about Caliber’s record 
keeping system and can describe Caliber’s incorporation of JPMorgan Chase’s 
documents.  They are thus “other qualified witnesses” who can authenticate 
Caliber’s records of regularly conducted activity under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).   
See Fitzwater, 122 Hawai‘i at 366, 227 P.3d at 532 (2010) (“ The phrase ‘ other 
qualified witness’ is given a very broad interpretation. The witness need 
only have enough familiarity with the record- keeping system of the business 
in question to explain how the record came into existence in the ordinary 
course of business.” (cleaned up)) 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 
 documents, engaged in a “due diligence” process, and reviewed 
the payment history and accounting associated with the loan.  
JPMorgan Chase’s documents were not, in other words, 
uncritically incorporated into Caliber’s own.  They were vetted 
by Caliber.  This pre-incorporation vetting, however nebulously 
described by Patterson’s testimony, is a circumstance that 
indicates the trustworthiness of the documents. 
Patterson’s testimony thus satisfies each of the three 
criteria in Behrendt.  The ICA should have held that Caliber’s 
incorporated records, as authenticated by Salyers9 and 
Patterson’s testimony, were admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  
E. The evidence, taken together, shows U.S. Bank had standing 
at the time it filed suit 
 
 Having addressed the admissibility of copies of the Note 
and Caliber’s incorporated records, we are left with an 
evidentiary issue: has U.S. Bank established its standing to sue 
Verhagen? 
  In Reyes-Toledo, we held that a foreclosing plaintiff must 
establish its standing to bring a lawsuit at the commencement of 
the proceeding, not merely at the summary judgment stage.  139 
                         
9 Salyers’ testimony contributes to the authentication of records Caliber 
incorporated from JPMorgan Chase by describing: (1) Caliber’s incorporation 
of those records in the normal course of its business; and (2) Caliber’s 
reliance on those records. Salyers’ testimony standing alone, however, would 
be insufficient to establish that Caliber’s incorporated records are 
admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  This is because Salyers’ testimony does 
not describe any other circumstances, beyond mere incorporation and reliance, that indicate the incorporated records’ trustworthiness.
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 
 Hawaiʻi 361, 369, 390 P.3d 1248, 1256.  In the mortgage 
foreclosure context, we noted, the requirement of standing 
overlaps with a plaintiff’s burden of proving its entitlement to enforce the subject promissory note.  Id.
 at 367, 390 P.3d at 
1254. 
Whether a party is entitled to enforce a promissory note is 
determined by application of HRS § 490:3-301, which provides: 
“Person entitled to enforce” an instrument means (i) the 
holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of 
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a 
person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled 
to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3- 309 or 
490:3-418(d).  A person may be a person entitled to enforce 
the instrument even though the person is not the owner of 
the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the 
instrument. 
 
U.S. Bank maintains that, at the time it initiated suit, it 
was entitled to enforce the Note because it held the indorsed-
in-blank Note.  U.S. Bank supports this claim with the following 
evidence: (1) Jennifer Martin’s February 9, 2016, certification 
certifying, under penalty of perjury, that at 12:51 p.m. on 
February 9, 2016, she personally verified Caliber’s possession 
of the original Note and attaching an indorsed-in-blank copy of the Note; (2) a bailee letter dated December 9, 2016, 
establishing that Caliber sent the Note to U.S. Bank’s counsel 
at that time; and (3) Patterson’s sworn testimony that, based on 
her review of Caliber’s records, and her knowledge of how those 
records are made and maintained in the ordinary course of 
business, “Plaintiff, or its agent on Plaintiff’s behalf, was in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 
 possession of the original wet-ink, indorsed in blank Note when 
the [Verhagen] foreclosure action was commenced on March 23, 
2016, and since.” 
The ICA held that this evidence was insufficient to 
establish U.S. Bank’s standing on the day it filed suit since 
“the Certification does not certify possession of the original 
Note by U.S. Bank at the time the Verified Complaint was filed, 
and the Attorney Bailee Letter was executed approximately nine months after U.S. Bank commenced the foreclosure action.”  As 
U.S. Bank observes, the implication of this holding is that only 
evidence gathered on the day the complaint was filed would be 
sufficient to establish a foreclosing plaintiff possessed the 
subject promissory note at the time of filing.  This is not, and 
should not be, the standard. 
U.S. Bank’s briefing raises a compelling question: if the 
Note wasn’t in Caliber’s possession between February 9, 2016, 
and December 9th of the same year, where did it go?  Here, Patterson testified that based on her knowledge of Caliber’s 
records and record-keeping practices, U.S. Bank had actual or 
constructive possession of the Note at the time it filed the 
complaint.  Such testimony, standing alone and uncorroborated by 
documentary evidence, would be insufficient to establish U.S. 
Bank possessed the Note when it filed the complaint.  Here, 
however, there is admissible documentary evidence showing that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 
 U.S. Bank possessed the Note both a mere six weeks before the 
filing of the complaint and at the time of summary judgment.  
Collectively, the evidence presented by U.S. Bank thus 
establishes the bank’s possession of the Note on the day the 
complaint was filed.  10
Of course, a defendant may counter this inference of 
possession at the time of filing with evidence setting forth 
“specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue” as to whether the plaintiff actually possessed the subject note at the 
time it filed suit.  See Hawaiʻ i R. Civ. Pro. Rule 56(e).  But 
that has not happened here.  Verhagen has not offered any 
evidence undermining Patterson’s testimony that Caliber possessed the Note on March 23, 2016.  And he has not offered 
any evidence that the Note left U.S. Bank’s custody in the ten 
months between Martin’s certification and the bailee letter.  
Nor has he offered any evidence contradicting or calling into 
question Martin’s certification.  Accordingly, U.S. Bank’s 
evidence establishes that the bank possessed the Note, indorsed 
in blank,
11 at the time it initiated suit.  The bank thus has 
                         
10  We reach this conclusion in part because Martin’s certification pre-
dates the filing of the complaint by less than two months.  An older 
certification, and a correspondingly larger gap between the certification’s 
date and that of the complaint, would leave more room for a “genuine issue” 
as to whether U.S. Bank actually possessed the Note when it sued Verhagen. 
 
11  Importantly, where, as here, standing is based on possession of a Note 
indorsed in blank, the admissible evidence must also show that the blank 
indorsement occurred before the initiation of the suit.  See HSBC Bank USA, 
Nat’l Ass’n v. Moore, CAAP-17-0000478, 2018 WL 1887197 (Haw. App. Apr. 20, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 
 standing to foreclose against Verhagen under Reyes-Toledo.  
The evidence that the Note existed, that Verhagen was in 
default under its terms, and that Verhagen received the 
necessary notice of his default is undisputed.  There is no 
genuine issue as to the Note’s existence, Verhagen’s default 
under its terms, or Verhagen’s receipt of the necessary notice. 
U.S. Bank is entitled to summary judgment and the ICA erred in 
reversing the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment to U.S. Bank. 
F. Verhagen waived his objections to U.S. Bank’s motion to 
ratify  
 
“Issues not properly raised on appeal will be deemed to be 
waived.”  Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 613, 837 P.2d 
1247, 1268 (1992).  Verhagen had an opportunity to oppose U.S. 
Bank’s motion to ratify but he did not do so.  As such, he has 
waived his objections to that motion.  Regardless, the ICA did 
not err in considering whether the Patterson declaration was 
admissible or sufficient to establish U.S. Bank’s entitlement to 
summary judgment.12    
                         
2018).  Here, this requirement is satisfied because the copy of the Note 
attached to Martin’s certification and authenticated by Patterson’s testimony 
is indorsed in blank.  
12 Even when a motion for summary judgment is wholly unopposed, the motion 
should only be granted when the moving party submits facts establishing there 
are no genuine issues of material fact and that it is entitled to summary 
judgment as a matter of law.  See Arakaki v. S CD-Olanani Corp., 110 Hawai‘ i 1, 
7-8, 129 P.3d 504, 510- 11 (2006).  As the ICA explained in its Amended SDO, 
its evaluation of whether or not U.S. Bank has met its burden on summary 
judgment is not constrained by Verhagen’s failure to object to certain *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 
 III. CONCLUSION 
 We vacate the ICA’s October 28, 2020, judgment on appeal 
and October 2, 2020, amended summary disposition order and 
affirm the circuit court’s October 8, 2018, amended judgment and 
amended order granting plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment 
and for interlocutory decree of foreclosure. 
 
Paul Alston, 
(David B. Rosen, David E. McAllister, Justin S. Moyer, 
and Madisson L. Heinze, 
on the briefs) for petitioner  
Keith M. Kiuchi, 
for respondent  Patricia J. McHenry, 
for Amicus Curiae  
Federal Housing Finance Agency  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 
                         
evidence at the circuit court level.   