 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 ---oOo---*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000349 04-MAY-2020 08:02 AM  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
REGINALD BOTELHO, Petitioner/Claimant
-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
ATLAS RECYCLING CENTER, LLC and HAWAIʻI EMPLOYERS’ MUTUAL 
INSURANCE COMPANY, Respondents/Employer/Insurance Carrier/ 
Appellees
,  
 
and  
 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND, Respondent/Appellee.  
 
 
SCWC-16-0000349  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-16-0000349; CASE NO. AB 2009  -334(H)(S)(DCD No. 1-06-
00818))  
 
MAY 4, 2020  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY M
cKENNA, J. 
I. Introduction 
This case concerns the Labor and Industrial Relations 
Appeals Board’s (“LIRAB”) award of attorney’s fees to Stanford  
 2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Masui (“Masui”) for his representation of Reginald Botelho 
(“Botelho”) in a workers’ compensation case. Masui submitted a  
request for attorney’s fees to LIRAB requesting an hourly rate of $325. LIRAB approved Masui’s request for attorney’s fees, but it reduced his hourly rate from $325 to $165.  Masui   
appealed LIRAB’s order reducing his requested hourly rate to the
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”), and the ICA affirmed 
LIRAB’s order in a summary disposition order (“SDO”).    
Masui’s application for certiorari (“Application”) presents 
three questions: 
1. Did the [ICA] gravely err in failing to construe sec. 
386- 94 HRS in light of its language and legislative 
history, since the statute does not explicitly grant theLabor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (“LIRAB”) nor
the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations (“DLIR”)[]
the power of setting hourly fee rates for attorneysproviding services under the Workers’ Compensation chapter,Chap. 386 HRS, but only allows the LIRAB and DLIR(collectively, “agencies”) to “consider” hourly rates of
attorneys “possessing similar skills and experience?” 
2. Did the ICA gravely err in utilizing the incorrect
standard of review of whether the LIRAB’s order was “ ultra 
vires”, i.e., should the ICA have applied the standard of
whether the LIRAB’s order was in “violation of 
constitutional or statutory provisions”, and/or “in excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency”instead of only an “abuse of discretion” standard asrequired for statutory interpretation under Sec. 91 -14 (g) 
(1), (2), and (6) HRS ? 
3. Did the ICA gravely err by failing to find that the 
LIRAB Order was arbitrary, or capricious, or characterizedby abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion since the LIRAB failed to articulate any
standard to establish hourly fee rate schedules for highly specialized secondary workers’ compensation appeals, whenno standards are stated in the enabling fee statute, 386 -94 
HRS, nor any LIRAB Rules of Practice and Procedure, nor any
other justification for using an outdated hourly fee rate
from 2009 to 2012 for secondary appellate work.  
 3 
    
    
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
With regard to Masui’s first question on certiorari, we 
hold that HRS § 386-94 (Supp. 2005) authorizes LIRAB to amend an 
attorney’s requested hourly rate in awarding reasonable 
attorney’s fees. Pursuant to the legislative intent of the 2005 amendment to HRS § 386-94, however, LIRAB is not authorized to predetermine a workers’ compensation attorney’s “authorized” 
hourly rate to be applied to that attorney’s future cases. 
Therefore, the ICA erred to the extent it held that HRS § 386-94 authorizes LIRAB to predetermine an attorney’s hourly rate. 
With regard to Masui’s second question, we hold that the 
ICA implicitly determined that LIRAB’s order was not in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions or in excess of its statutory authority when it held that LIRAB did not abuse 
its discretion. Therefore, the ICA did not err. 
With regard to Masui’s third question, we hold that the ICA 
erred in holding that LIRAB provided an adequate explanation for its reduction of Masui’s requested attorney’s fee as required by 
McLaren v. Paradise Inn Hawaiʻi LLC, 132 Hawaiʻi 320, 321 P.3d 
671 (2014)
. In explaining its reduction of attorney’s fees, 
LIRAB must provide more than a recitation of the factors it 
considers. In order to enable review for abuse of discretion, 
it must also provide some explanation as to how the factors affected its determination.  
 4 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We therefore vacate the ICA’s December 6, 2019 judgment on 
appeal and LIRAB’s April 20, 2016 attorney’s fee approval and 
order and remand to LIRAB for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion. 
II. Background 
A. Department of Labor and Industrial Relations Disability
Compensation Division proceedings 
On May 10, 2005, Botelho injured his wrist while working 
for Atlas Recycling (“Atlas”). On August 8, 2006, Botelho filed a claim for workers’ compensation benefits with the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations Disability Compensation Division (“DCD”), and he was represented by Masui. On January 
30, 2007, DCD issued a decision ordering Atlas and HEMIC, 
Atlas’s insurance carrier (collectively “Atlas/HEMIC”), to pay for Botelho’s medical care. 
On January 31, 2007, Masui sent HEMIC a letter calculating 
Botelho’s temporary disability entitlement as $1,386.58. HEMIC did not respond, and Botelho received no temporary disability payments from HEMIC for approximately two years. 
Thereafter, on May 15, 2009, DCD issued a decision ordering 
Atlas/HEMIC to pay for Botelho’s medical care and temporary total disability benefits. DCD also “assessed attorney’s fees 
and costs” against Atlas/HEMIC pursuant to HRS § 386-93(a)  
 5 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Supp. 2004) because Atlas/HEMIC “did not have reasonable 
grounds to defend the covered issues.”1 
B. LIRAB proceedings 
On June 3, 2009, Atlas/HEMIC appealed DCD’s decision to 
LIRAB. On October 16, 2009, Atlas/HEMIC filed a motion for 
partial summary judgment, asserting it was not liable for 
Botelho’s attorney’s fees because attorney’s fees were not part 
of the “whole costs of the proceedings” under HRS § 386-93(a).  On November 16, 2009, LIRAB granted Atlas/HEMIC’s motion for 
partial summary judgment. 
Botelho appealed LIRAB’s decision to the ICA. On February 
28, 2013, the ICA issued a memorandum opinion holding attorney’s 
fees were part of the “whole costs of the proceedings” under HRS 
§ 386-93(a).  Botelho v. Atlas Recycling Centers, LLC, No. 
30226, at 5 (App. Feb. 28, 2013) (mem.). The ICA vacated LIRAB’s decision and remanded for further proceedings. Id. 
Accordingly, on remand, LIRAB modified its May 15, 2009 decision and ordered Atlas/HEMIC to pay Botelho’s attorney’s fees on November 9, 2015. 
HRS § 386- 93(a) provides: “If the director of labor and industrial 
relations, appellate board or any court finds that proceedings under this 
chapter have been brought, prosecuted, or defended without reasonable groundthe whole costs of the proceedings may be assessed against the party who hasso brought, prosecuted, or defended the proceedings.” 1  
 6 
  
    
    
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, on November 19, 2015, Masui submitted a request to 
LIRAB for attorney’s fees for 88.6 hours of services at $325 per 
hour rendered before the ICA, and requested a total of 
$30,893.64 in fees as well as costs of $702.55.2 Masui’s request 
stated he had “approximately 30 year’s [sic] experience in workers’ compensation cases, participated in over 100 cases 
before [DCD] over the last 3 years, and approximately 50 cases 
before [LIRAB] over the last 3 years.” 
On April 20, 2016, LIRAB issued an “attorney’s fee approval 
and order” in response to Masui’s November 19, 2015 request (“Order” or “LIRAB’s Order”), but reduced Masui’s hourly rate from $325 to $165. LIRAB stated it did “not approve the 
requested attorney hourly rate of $325.00,” and that Masui’s 
“approved hourly rate for the period 2009 through 2012 was 
$165.00 per hour.” LIRAB listed factors it considered in reviewing and reducing Masui’s fee request, stating: 
[i]n reviewing the subject fee request, the Board took into
account the benefits obtained for Claimant in this appeal,the novelty and difficulty of issues involved on appeal,the amount of fees awarded in similar appeals, and the hourly rate customarily awarded workers’ compensation
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience,
including Attorney’s years of practice in the field ofworkers’ compensation law, the number of clientsrepresented before the Board, as well as Attorney’s responsiveness and timeliness. 
As indicated by LIRAB, it appears the requested costs had been approved 
through the first appeal to the ICA and are not at issue in this appeal. 
2   
    
 
  
	
    
 
   
   
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (continued . . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
LIRAB noted that Masui had practiced workers’ compensation law 
in Hawaiʻi for approximately 30 years and had represented 
approximately 100 clients before the DCD and approximately 50 clients before LIRAB in the past three years. LIRAB stated 
“[t]he total amount of $14,720.41 for Attorney’s fees is 
reasonable,” and approved that amount
.3 
C. ICA Proceedings 
1. Masui’s arguments 
On April 23, 2016, Masui appealed LIRAB’s Order to the ICA. 
On appeal, Masui argued the plain language of HRS § 386-94, 
“Attorneys, physicians, other health care providers, and other 
fees,” only authorized LIRAB to approve or disapprove attorneys’ fees, not to amend or set them.
4 Masui maintained LIRAB did not 
3 LIRAB’s Order also reduced Masui’s requested hour s.  However, Masui did
not appeal LIRAB’s reduction of his requested hours. 
4 HRS § 386- 94 provides: 
Claims for services shall not be valid unless approved by
the director or, if an appeal is had, by the appellate
board or court deciding the appeal. Any claim so approved shall be a lien upon the compensation in the manner and tothe extent fixed by the director, the appellate board, orthe court. 
In approving fee requests, the director, appeals board, or
court may consider factors such as the attorney’ s skill and 
experience in state workers ’ compensation matters, the 
amount of time and effort required by the complexity of the
case, the novelty and difficulty of issues involved, the
amount of fees awarded in similar cases, benefits obtainedfor the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience. In all cases, reasonable attorney ’s fees shall be awarded. 
7  
 8 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have implied power to amend hourly rates because such power was 
“not reasonably necessary to effectuate the express power to 
approve fees,” citing TIG Ins. Co. v. Kauhane, 101 Hawaiʻi 311, 
67 P.3d 810 (App. 2003). 
Masui also argued the legislative history of HRS § 386-94 
indicated the legislature did not intend to give LIRAB the power to set an attorney’s hourly rates.  In this regard, Masui 
pointed out that, in 2005, the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (“DLIR”) had proposed amendments to the workers’ compensation administrative rules that would have 
empowered the DLIR Director to “determine the maximum allowable 
hourly rate” of attorneys and to “adjust the hourly rate and the number of hours requested.” The legislature, however, rejected 
this proposal and stated in a standing committee report that the proposed amendment “represents a usurpation of legislative authority.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1527, in 2005 House Journal, at 1633. 
Masui contended that, in response to DLIR’s proposed 
changes, the legislature introduced Senate Bill (“SB”) 1808, with the purpose to: “(1) Codif[y] into law the existing HAR 
that reflect the purpose and intent of the Legislature in 
(continued. . .)
Any person who receives any fee, other consideration, or
gratuity on account of services so rendered, without approval, in conformity with the preceding paragraph, shall
be fined by the director not more than $10,000.  
 9 
    
 
    
   
 
    
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
enacting chapter 386, HRS; [and] (2) Assure[] that the 
Administration does not usurp the authority of the Legislature 
in creating laws by limiting the Director’s rulemaking 
authority . . . .” Id. The legislature further stated that, 
while DLIR was allowed to review attorneys’ fees, “[t]hat review . . . was not unfettered and fees that were reasonable 
were to be approved.” Id. The legislature also expressed 
concern that DLIR’s proposed amendments “would result in 
claimants being unable to secure attorneys in disputed 
compensability cases.” Id. 
Masui asserted that SB 1808 “was subsequently passed into 
law and reflects the current language contained in HRS 
§ 386-94.”  Masui argued that because the legislature rejected 
DLIR’s Hawai‘i Administrative Rules (“HAR”) amendments and 
because of the concerns it expressed in doing so, HRS § 386 
-94 
“acknowledge[s] the lack power” to amend requested hourly rates.  
Masui also argued that, because LIRAB did not have the power to 
amend or set attorneys’ fees, it had engaged in improper 
rulemaking pursuant to HRS chapter 91, and its “self-made rule of setting hourly rates is invalid.” 
Masui additionally asserted that, even if LIRAB had 
authority to amend hourly rates, LIRAB did not adequately explain its decision to amend his hourly rate. Masui cited Pickett v. Cheesecake Factory Rests., Inc.
, CAAP-15-0000593, at  
 10 
    
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7 (App. Aug. 31, 2016) (mem.), in which the ICA ruled that a 
“recitation of factors enumerated in HRS § 386-94 is not an 
explanation” for a reduction of an attorney’s hourly rate and 
that LIRAB was “required to apply those factors based on evidence submitted to it so that a reviewing body may adequately assess whether the LIRAB abused its discretion.” 
Finally, Masui argued LIRAB abused its discretion by 
considering factors not expressly enumerated in HRS § 386-94 when it considered the “number of clients represented before the 
Board, as well as Attorney’s responsiveness and timeliness.” 
2. Atlas/HEMIC’s arguments 
Atlas/HEMIC argued that LIRAB “retains the authority to 
determine reasonable attorney’s fees and costs,” and that if the legislature had intended to limit DLIR’s discretion, the 
legislature “would have initiated these statutory changes.” Atlas/HEMIC also contended that courts “should defer to the 
agency expertise of LIRAB acting within its area of expertise,” 
citing Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawaiʻi 263, 270-71, 47 P.3d 730, 
737-
38 (2002) and Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawaiʻi 402, 409 -
10, 38 P.3d 570, 577-7
8 (2001). 
3. SDO 
On October 8, 2019, the ICA issued its SDO affirming 
LIRAB’s Order. Botelho v. Atlas Recycling Center, LLC, CAAP-16-
0000349 (App. Oct. 8, 2019) (SDO).  
 11 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
First, the ICA rejected Masui’s argument that HRS § 386 -94 
did not authorize LIRAB to amend or set attorneys’ hourly rates.  
Botelho, SDO at 5.  The ICA reasoned that the “plain language of 
HRS § 386-94” authorized LIRAB to consider a list of factors, including “those usually and customarily taken into account in setting an attorney’s hourly billing rate . . . .”  Botelho, SDO 
at 6. The ICA also noted that Masui had previously argued that 
LIRAB was not allowed to “set” hourly rates in DeMello v. Gas Co., CAAP-15-0000527 (App. Aug. 12, 2016) (mem.), and it cited a 
portion of DeMello stating that “[n]othing in HRS § 386-94 
precludes [LIRAB] from employing the ‘lodestar method’ of calculating reasonable attorney’s fees, under which reasonable attorney’s fees are calculated by [multiplying] the number of 
hours reasonably expended by a reasonable hourly rate.”  
Botelho, SDO at 6 (quoting DeMello, mem. op. at 3).  Therefore, the ICA held that HRS § 386-94 gave “LIRAB discretion to vary 
the requesting attorney’s hourly billing rate . . . .” Id. 
Second, the ICA determined LIRAB had provided a reasonable 
explanation for its decision to reduce Masui’s attorney’s fees.  
Id. The ICA stated that the “burden is on the party seeking 
attorneys[’] fees to prove such fees were reasonably and necessarily incurred,” citing DFS Group L.P. v. Paiea 
Properties, 110 Hawaiʻi 217, 226, 131 P.3d 500, 509 (2006) (Moon, 
CJ., concurring). 
Botelho, SDO at 7.  The ICA noted that  
 12 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Masui’s fee application did not provide information about his 
experience in workers’ compensation secondary appeals, his level 
of experience in civil, criminal, family, or administrative 
agency appellate practice, the usual or customary hourly billing 
rates of Hawaiʻi lawyers who practice workers’ compensation 
secondary appeals , 
or the hourly billing rates of any Hawaiʻi 
appellate practitioners. Id. Therefore, the ICA held LIRAB had 
not abused its discretion in reducing Masui’s hourly billing 
rate based on the record before it.  Botelho, SDO at 7
-8. 
Third, the ICA held LIRAB did not abuse its discretion by 
considering factors not expressly enumerated by HRS § 386-94 because the “statute’s use of the phrase ‘such as’” indicated that the list of factors was not exhaustive. Botelho, SDO at 8. 
The ICA entered judgment on December 6, 2019.  
D. Application for writ of certiorari 
In his first question on certiorari, Masui argues the ICA 
erred in interpreting HRS § 386-94 because the plain language of the statute only allows LIRAB to “consider” the reasonableness 
of attorneys’ hourly rates, not to establish or set attorneys’ hourly rates.  Masui argues that even if the statute is ambiguous, the legislature “specifically declined to amend the 
law to give the DLIR the power to set hourly rates” in 2005. 
In his second question, Masui argues the ICA failed to use 
the correct standard of agency review under HRS § 91 -14(g)  
 13 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2016), “thus failing to consider if the LIRAB acted ultra vires.” Masui contends the proper standard of review is whether 
LIRAB’s decision was “in violation of [a] constitutional or statutory provision” or “in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency,” not the abuse of discretion standard. Masui also asserts that LIRAB had relied on a “fee 
schedule” and had “been setting hourly rates for all workers’ 
compensation attorneys for a period of years, (including Masui) without explanation . . . .” Masui argues that this practice 
is effectively a “rule” pursuant to HRS § 91-1 (Supp. 2017) and 
that LIRAB therefore “engaged in improper rulemaking” by acting in excess of its statutory powers. 
In his third question, Masui argues the ICA erred by 
failing to find LIRAB’s Order was arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by an abuse of discretion pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g).  Masui asserts the ICA’s SDO is “inconsistent with 
its other rulings regarding attorneys’ fees awarded” by LIRAB, 
and that the “mere recitation of statutory criteria that may be considered for fee approval” without further explanation of the fee reduction is an abuse of discretion.  
 14 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Administrative agency appeals 
“Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by HRS 
§ 91-14(g)[.]”   Igawa, 97 Hawaiʻi at 405  - 06, 38 P.3d at 573  -74.
HRS § 91-14(g) provides:   
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify thedecision and order if the substantial rights of thepetitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions;(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency;
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; (4) Affected by other error of law;(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterizedby abuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
B. Statutory interpretation 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law that 
is reviewed de novo.” Morgan v. Planning Dept., Cty. of Kaua‘i
104 Hawaiʻi 173, 179, 86 P.3d 982, 988 (2004) (quoting State v.Mara, 98 
Hawai‘i 1, 10, 41 P.3d 157, 166 (2002)).  ,  
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. And we must read statutory language in the conte xt of the entire statute and 
construe it in a manner consistent with its p urpose. 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, orindistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in astatute, an ambiguity exists . . . .  
 15 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the 
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context withwhich the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids indetermining legislative intent.  One avenue is the use of legislative history as an interpretive tool . 
104 Hawaiʻi at 179-80, 86 P.3d at 988-89 (quoting State v. 
Sullivan, 97 
Hawai‘i 259, 262, 36 P.3d 803, 806 (2001)). 
IV. Discussion 
A. The ICA did not fail to utilize the correct standard of 
agency review 
We address Masui’s second question first because it 
concerns the applicable standard of agency review.  Masui argues 
the ICA erred in “failing to use the correct standard of agency review” by only applying the abuse of discretion standard to 
LIRAB’s Order.  Masui asserts the ICA should have considered 
whether LIRAB’s actions were “in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions” or “in excess of the statutory authority 
or jurisdiction of the agency” pursuant to HRS § 91 -
14(g)(1) and 
(2). 
Because the issue before the ICA was whether HRS § 386-94 
authorized LIRAB to amend or set attorneys’ requested hourly rates, the proper standard of review under HRS § 91 -14(g) was 
whether LIRAB acted in excess of its statutory authority. The 
ICA did not specifically discuss this standard.  The ICA 
implicitly determined, however, that it was within LIRAB’s 
statutory authority to amend Masui’s hourly rate when it held  
 16 
    
  
   
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that LIRAB did not abuse its discretion in doing so. The ICA 
examined the plain language of HRS § 386-94 and determined that 
it authorized LIRAB to consider “the hourly rate customarily 
awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience,” and other factors including those “customarily taken into account in setting an attorney’s hourly billing rate . . . .” Botelho, SDO 
at 6. Thus, in this regard, the ICA did not err. 
B. The ICA’s statutory interpretation of HRS § 386-94 
1. HRS § 386-94 authorizes LIRAB to adjust attorneys’ 
requested hourly rates in awarding reasonable fees 
Masui’s first question on certiorari is whether the ICA 
erred in failing to construe HRS § 386-94 in light of the 
statute’s legislative history. The ICA held that HRS § 386-94 
authorizes LIRAB to “vary the requesting attorney’s hourly billing rate to arrive at an award of ‘reasonable attorney’s 
fees[.]’”  Botelho, SDO at 6 (brackets in original).  Masui 
argues the ICA erred in interpreting HRS § 386-94 because the plain language of the statute “only allows agencies to ‘examine’ or ‘inspect,’ among other factors, the reasonableness of the 
hourly rate that a workers’ compensation attorney may establish 
in their fee agreements with their clients.” Masui contends that even if the statute’s language is ambiguous, the 
legislative history and intent behind HRS § 386-94 “was to  
 17 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
specifically deprive the agencies of the power to set attorneys’
hourly fee rates in workers’ compensation cases.”   
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law that 
is reviewed de novo.” Morgan, 104 Hawaiʻi at 179, 86 P.3d at 
988.  “
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is obtained primarily from the language contained in the 
statute itself.”  Id. (quoting Sullivan, 97 Hawai‘i   at 262, 36 
P.3d at 806).   Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g)(2), courts may reverse
or modify an agency’s decision “if the substantial rights of the
petitioner[] may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative . . . order[ is] . . . [i]n excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency[.]”    
 
HRS § 386-94 provides that “[c]laims for services shall not 
be valid unless approved by the director or, if an appeal is had, by the appellate board or court deciding the appeal .” HRS 
§ 386-
94 additionally provides factors LIRAB may consider “[i]n 
approving fee requests,” stating: 
[T]he director,[5] appeals board, or court may consider
factors such as the attorney ’s skill and experience in 
state workers’ compensation matters, the amount of time and 
effort required by the complexity of the case, the novelty
and difficulty of issues involved, the amount of fees
awarded in similar cases, benefits obtained for the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience. In all cases,reasonable attorney’ s fees shall be awarded . 
HRS § 386-1 (2017) provides that “‘[d]irector’ means the director of 
labor and industrial relations” for the purposes of HRS chapter 386. 
5  
 18 
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Emphasis added.) 
HRS § 386-94 explicitly allows LIRAB, the director, as well 
as the courts, to consider hourly rates customarily awarded to 
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience in 
determining what constitutes a reasonable attorney’s fee.  Thus, 
the statute clearly allows LIRAB to adjust an attorney’s requested hourly rate in approving reasonable attorney’s fees.  
The sentence, “In all cases, reasonable attorney’s fees shall be 
awarded[,]” also requires LIRAB to reduce an attorney’s hourly rate if it is unreasonably high.  Thus, HRS § 386-94 is not ambiguous.  
Even if HRS § 386-94 was ambiguous, however, an examination 
of the statute’s legislative history shows that the legislature’s intent is consistent with the statute’s plain 
language. 
Hawaiʻi’s workers’ compensation law was enacted in 1915, and 
the section addressing attorneys’ fees provided, in relevant 
part, “Claims of attorneys and of physicians for services under 
this Act shall be subject to the approval of the board.”  
Revised Laws of Hawaiʻi (“RLH”) Act 221 § 45 (1915). In 1955, 
that section was amended to provide that “[c]laims of attorneys 
and physicians . . . shall not be valid unless approved by the 
director, or . . . unless approved by such court.”  RLH § 4453  
 19 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(1955). When the statute was again amended in 1985, a 
conference committee report noted that, “[c]laimant attorney and 
witness fees need to be regulated by the Director to protect the 
claimant against any excessive charges since such fees are enforced as a lien against the compensation awarded the claimant.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 74, in 1985 House Journal, at 
946-47 (emphasis added). 
In 2005, DLIR amended HAR § 12-10-69,
6 “Attorney’s fees,” by 
adding language to allow the DLIR director to “determine the maximum allowable hourly rate” of attorneys’ fees and “to adjust 
the hourly rate and the number of hours requested,” and adding factors the director may consider in doing so. Dept. of Labor & 
Indus. Relations, Recommendation to the Governor on Proposed 
Rules for Workers’ Compensation Reform 2005 120 (2005) (available 
at http://dlir.state.hi.us/labor/pdf/wc_recomm.pdf) (hereinafter “DLIR, Recommendation”).  The amendment to HAR § 12-10-69(b) 
read: 
The director shall determine the maximum allowable hourly 
rate of the attorney and reasonable time allowable on eachworkers’ compensation case. In approving attorney’s fee requests, the director will consider the approved hourly
rate of the attorney and the number of hours approved.  
Factors to be considered in determining an attorney’s approved hourly rate include the number of years practicingas an attorney, the number of cases representing workers’compensation claimants during the last three years, and any
other pertinent factors that should be considered in 
determining the hourly rate. Factors considered in determining the number of hours allowable include the timeand effort required by the complexity of the case, novelty 
HAR § 12- 10-69 implements HRS § 386 -94.  See HAR § 12- 10-69 (2011). 
6  
 20 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and difficulty of issues, benefits obtained for the injured
employee, and arguments made by the attorney and injured employee. The director reserves the right to adjust the
hourly rate and the number of hours requested. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Prior to DLIR’s 2005 amendments, HAR § 12  -10-69(b) had
provided:   
In approving fee requests, the director may consider 
factors such as: the attorney’s skill and experience in
Hawaii workers’ compensation matters; time and effort
required by the complexity of the case; novelty anddifficulty of issues; fees awarded in similar cases;benefits obtained for the claimant; hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skill and experience;
and fees awarded in compensation cases usually come out of
the employee’s award. 
Based on its concern regarding DLIR’s 2005 amendments to 
the workers’ compensation administrative rules, including the    
amendment to HAR § 12-10-69(b), in 2005, the legislature passed 
SB 1808 amending sections of HRS chapter 386 to “[a]ssure[] that  
the Administration does not usurp the authority of the 
Legislature in creating laws by limiting the Director’s 
rulemaking authority . . . .” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1527, in2005 House Journal, at 1634. In a standing committee report, 
the Committee on Finance specified:   
 
The intent of this measure is to protect the constitutional 
mandate that the Legislature draft the laws to establishpolicies governing the people of Hawaii. Any delegation ofour legislative powers to the Executive Branch for
rulemaking is administrative in nature and does not give 
the Executive Branch the power to make or change the lawsthrough rulemaking. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1527, in 2005 House Journal, at 1633. 
In another standing committee report, the Committee on Ways and 
  
 21 
  
    
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Means stated, “The purpose of this measure is to invalidate 
workers’ compensation rules adopted on or after January 1, 2005” 
and to “codif[y] administrative rules that were in effect prior 
to January 1, 2005, which fairly and reasonably implemented the underlying statutes.” Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 993, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1500 (emphasis added). 
The Committee on Finance stated that DLIR’s rule amendments 
regarding the payment of attorneys’ fees were “in direct conflict with existing statutory law, rules, policies and case 
law.” The Committee on Finance appeared to focus, however, on 
DLIR’s proposed factors for the director to consider in awarding 
fees and a cap on attorneys’ fees that was not actually adopted in the 2005 HAR amendments,
7 stating: 
[t]he Legislature provided for payment of attorney fees
upon review by the Director.  (Section 386 -94, HRS.)  That 
review, however, was not unfettered and fees that werereasonable were to be approved. (See section 386- 93(a), 
HRS.) The Administration proposes to impose factors that
are not relevant in determining if fees are reasonable.
(See proposed changes to section 12 -10-69(b), HAR.)  
Arbitrarily limiting claimant attorney fees to 15 percentof the compensation paid would result in no payment if the claimant loses on compensability and arbitrarily reduce
legal payments in other disputed areas of a claim. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1527, in 2005 House Journal, at 1634 . 
The Committee on Finance also expressed concern that limitations 
It appears DLIR initially proposed amending HAR § 12 -10-69 to cap “the 
maximum allowable attorney’s fees to be no greater than 15% of the benefits
awarded to claimants . . . .” DLIR, Recommendation at 37. However, thisprovision was withdrawn from DLIR’s proposed amendment based on testimony opposing the 15% cap. Id. at 38. 7  
 22 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on attorneys’ fees may discourage attorneys from practicing in 
workers’ compensation, stating, “In practicality, the proposed 
changes would result in claimants being unable to secure 
attorneys in disputed compensability cases . . . .”  Id. None 
of the standing committee reports for SB 1808 discussed whether the power to “approve” reasonable attorneys’ fees included the 
power to adjust attorneys’ hourly rates. 
The legislature then amended HRS § 386-72 (Supp. 2005) 
(repealed and reenacted 2007) to prevent all of DLIR’s 2005 rule amendments, including the amendment to HAR § 12-10-69(b), from 
having “the force and effect of law.” Importantly, however, the legislature also amended HRS § 386-94 by incorporating the pre-DLIR amendment version of HAR § 12-10-69(b) factors into the 
statute. Before DLIR’s 2005 amendments, HAR § 12-10-69(b) 
provided: 
In approving fee requests, the director may consider
factors such as: the attorney’s skill and experience in
Hawaii workers’ compensation matters; time and effort 
required by the complexity of the case; novelty anddifficulty of issues; fees awarded in similar cases;benefits obtained for the claimant; hourly rate customarilyawarded attorneys possessing similar skill and experience; 
and fees awarded in compensation cases usually come out of
the employee’s award. 
SB 1808 amended HRS § 386-94 to include language almost 
identical to the pre-DLIR amendment version of HAR 
§ 12-10-69(b), outlining factors that may be considered in approving attorneys
’ fees. The amended HRS § 386-94 added the 
following language:  
 23 
  
 
 
 
 
     
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In approving fee requests, the director, appeals board, or
court may consider factors such as the attorney’s skill andexperience in state workers’ compensation matters, the 
amount of time and effort required by the complexity of the
case, the novelty and difficulty of issues involved, theamount of fees awarded in similar cases, benefits obtainedfor the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily awardedattorneys possessing similar skills and experience.  In all 
cases, reasonable attorney’s fees shall be awarded. 
Thus, the legislative history of HRS § 386-94 shows that 
the legislature intended to give LIRAB the ability to adjust 
attorneys’ requested hourly rates. The 2005 amendment to HRS 
§ 386-94 explicitly authorized the director to adjust requested 
hourly rates in approving reasonable attorneys’ fees.  The legislature also adopted most of the pre-2005 amendment HAR 
§ 12-10-69 factors when it amended HRS § 386-94 in 2005.  Those 
factors permit the director, LIRAB, or a court to consider “the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience,” indicating an attorney’s requested 
hourly rate can be adjusted by the director, LIRAB, or a court 
when approving attorneys’ fees. 
Although the legislature nullified DLIR’s 2005 amendment s 
to HAR § 12-10-69, which explicitly articulated the director’s 
power to adjust hourly rates and added new factors to consider 
in approving fees, that blanket nullification applied to all of DLIR’s 2005 rule amendments, not just HAR § 12-10-69.  
Additionally, the legislature’s opposition to DLIR’s rule 
amendments focused on the addition of “factors that are not relevant in determining if fees are reasonable” through  
 24 
      
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rulemaking and arbitrary caps on attorneys’ fees. Yet, the 
legislature included language patterned on the pre-amendment 
version of HAR § 12-10-69(b) in amending HRS § 386-94. The 
legislature also stated that its amendments to HRS chapter 386 were meant to codify the pre-2005 amendment version of the workers’ compensation administrative rules, “which fairly and 
reasonably implemented the underlying statutes.” Stand Comm. 
Rep. No. 993, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1500. Thus, the 
director or LIRAB can adjust attorneys’ requested hourly rates 
in approving reasonable attorneys’ fees. 
We also note that HRS § 386-94 provides that courts may 
approve attorneys’ fees when “deciding [an] appeal.”  It would 
be absurd to interpret HRS § 386-94 as prohibiting courts, which 
regularly review attorneys’ fee requests, from adjusting hourly 
rates.
8 Awarding attorneys’ fees is also a judicial function.  
See In re Malone, 886 A.2d 181, 184 (N.J. Supp. Ct. App. Div. 
2005) (“Setting an award of counsel fees is, in our opinion, in 
the nature of a judicial function.”); see also Hoffert v. General Motors Corp., 656 F.2d 161, 165 (5th Cir. 1981) (holding the district court’s review of the reasonableness of attorney’s 
fees in approving the terms of a settlement agreement “was 
essential to the district court’s disposition of the case 
This is especially true for this court, which has the authority to
prescribe and enforce rules governing the reasonableness of attorney’s fees.
See Hawai‘ i Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.5 (2019). 8  
 25 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
presented to it for decision.”); Joseph v. C.C. Oliphant Roofing 
Co., 711 A.2d 805, 808 (1997) (holding that “regulation of 
attorney’s fees is a judicial function[.]”). Thus, prohibiting 
courts from reviewing the reasonableness of attorneys’ fees and from adjusting hourly rates would abrogate a judicial function.  Neither the language of HRS § 386-94 nor the statute’s 
legislative history indicates any such legislative intent. 
Therefore, the ICA did not err in interpreting HRS § 386-94 
as granting “LIRAB discretion to vary the requesting attorney’s hourly billing rate to arrive at an award of ‘reasonable 
attorney’s fees[.]’” Botelho, SDO at 6.  
2. HRS § 386-94 does not authorize DCD or LIRAB to 
predetermine hourly rates for workers’ compensation 
attorneys 
In his first question on certiorari, Masui also argues the 
ICA erred in interpreting HRS § 386-94 because the plain 
language of the statute does not allow LIRAB to set attorneys’ 
hourly rates or establish a “rate schedule,” and LIRAB “acted in 
excess of its statutory powers” when it “assumed the power to set attorneys’ hourly fee rates.” Masui notes that a “critical fact” is that LIRAB and the ICA “relied on [LIRAB’s] ‘approved 
hourly rate’ schedule (over a period of 2009-2012) for [him].”  
Masui contends that this “fee schedule” “clearly discloses that [LIRAB] has been setting hourly rates for all workers’ compensation attorneys for a period of years, (including Masui)  
 26 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
without explanation . . . nor any other source of statutory 
authority for rate-setting.” 
While Masui argued before the ICA that HRS § 386-94 did 
not give LIRAB the power to “amend or set” an attorney’s hourly rate, the ICA’s holding implies that HRS § 386-94 authorizes LIRAB to set attorneys’ hourly rates.  In addressing Masui’s 
argument that LIRAB did not have the power to “amend or set” 
hourly rates, the ICA simply stated, “[w]e disagree.”  Botelho, SDO at 5 (emphasis added).  The ICA then noted that Masui had 
made this argument in DeMello, and quoted the following portion 
of that case: 
DeMello argues that the LIRAB is not allowed to set hourly 
rates, and must only consider the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and
experience. Nothing in HRS § 386– 94 precludes the LIRAB 
from employing the “lodestar method” of calculating
reasonable attorney’ s fees, under which reasonable 
attorney’ s fees are calculated by the number of hours 
reasonably expended by a reasonable hourly rate. 
DeMello, mem. op. at 3 (emphasis added).  This quote’s 
discussion of the “lodestar method” does not, however, actually 
address Masui’s contention that HRS § 386-94 does not authorize LIRAB to set hourly rates.  The ICA then discussed LIRAB’s ability to “vary the requesting attorney’s hourly billing rate” 
when awarding attorneys’ fees, but it did not otherwise directly 
address whether LIRAB had a practice of setting, not just adjusting, workers’ compensation attorneys’ hourly rates. 
Botelho, SDO at 6.  
 27 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
     
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It appears, however, that DCD and LIRAB have a practice of 
predetermining workers’ compensation attorneys’ hourly rates to 
be applied to future cases.  A downloadable form titled 
“Attorney Hourly Rate Increase Request” currently appears on DCD’s website under the “Attorney Fee Request” form.
9 The form 
quotes HRS § 386-94’s factors that the director, LIRAB, or 
courts may consider in awarding attorneys’ fees.  The form then 
states: “Please complete the information below which will assist us in determining your authorized hourly rate as required under 
section 386-94, HRS.”  The form asks for attorneys to provide 
information regarding the date they were licensed, the number of 
years they have practiced law in Hawaiʻi, their years of Hawaiʻi 
workers’ compensation experience, the number of Hawai
ʻi workers’ 
compensation cases they handled in the last ten years, their 
last three workers’ compensation cases, their “current rate,” 
and the “rate being requested.”  (Emphasis added.) The form also provides space for the attorney’s “approved hourly rate” 
and for the signature of the official approving that rate.  DCD 
has apparently used some version of this form since at least 2012, as Pickett, a case also involving Masui, makes reference 
See DCD, Forms, https://labor.hawaii.gov/dcd/forms/ (last visited Mar. 
23, 2020) (form available at https://perma.cc/HJ29 -8KFA). This form is not 
included in the record. However, as the availability of this form on DCD’s
website is “capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sourceswhose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned,” this court takes judicial
notice of the form.  Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence Rule 201 (1980). 9  
 28 
  
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to a “DCD document, dated July 25, 2012, approving Masui’s 
request for an increase in his hourly rate to $160.”  Pickett, 
mem. op. at 3 (emphasis added). 
As discussed in Pickett, mem. op. at 2, the then-DCD 
director Dwight Takamine apparently approved Masui’s request for 
an increase of his hourly rate from $160 to $210. However, 
LIRAB reduced Masui’s requested hourly rate of $210 to $165. 
Masui filed a motion for reconsideration, arguing that the “artificially low rates” in workers’ compensation cases had 
reduced “access to legal representation for injured workers.”  
Pickett, mem. op. at 3.  He also asserted that LIRAB’s “past practice” had followed DCD’s hourly rates by “adding an additional $5.00 per hour, which is an arbitrary method.” Id. 
LIRAB denied Masui’s motion for reconsideration, stating: 
[T]here is no statutory requirement that the [LIRAB] must
automatically increase attorney hourly rates in tandem withDCD rate increases. Furthermore, the [LIRAB] refuses to
cede its statutory authority to review and approve fee
requests and attorney hourly rates based on a unilateral rate increase by the former Director that was tied solelyto years of experience. 
Pickett, mem. op. at 6. LIRAB then determined that an hourly 
rate of $165 for work before LIRAB was the rate “customarily 
awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience.” 
Pickett, mem. op. at 5.  LIRAB also noted that it “receives annual or semiannual requests from attorneys seeking to increase  
 29 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
their hourly rates for legal work on appeal.”  Pickett, mem. op. 
at 4 (emphasis added). 
Although LIRAB correctly stated that there is “no statutory 
requirement that [LIRAB] must automatically increase attorney hourly rates in tandem with DCD rate increases,” LIRAB appeared to rely on a previously set “approved hourly rate of $165.00” 
for work before LIRAB in awarding attorney’s fees to Masui.  
Pickett, mem. op. at 5-6.  Notably, this approved rate of $165 was $5 above DCD’s pre-increase rate of $160—consistent with 
Masui’s assertion that it was LIRAB’s practice to set hourly 
rates $5 above DCD’s hourly rates. See Pickett, mem. op. at 3.  Furthermore, LIRAB acknowledged that it received requests from attorneys seeking “increases” to their hourly rates, suggesting 
LIRAB had a practice of prospectively setting workers’ 
compensation attorneys’ hourly rates. Pickett, mem. op. at 4.  
This practice of predetermining hourly rates was also 
alluded to in DeMello, in which Masui argued that an hourly rate of $210 had been “approved by the DCD,” and that “the [LIRAB] rate” has “historically been $5 to $10 above the DCD rate.”  DeMello, mem. op. at 1.  Masui also stated that he “continue[d] 
to reserve [his] objection to the setting of hourly rates by the 
DCD and [LIRAB].”  DeMello, mem. op. at 2 (emphasis added).  In addressing an argument by the employer in that case, Masui noted that “[i]f hourly [rates] were freely established such rates  
 30 
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
would also parallel hourly rates customarily charged in the 
legal community,” suggesting workers’ compensation attorneys 
were not free to set their own hourly rates. Id. (emphasis 
added). 
In this case, it appears LIRAB similarly relied on a 
predetermined “approved hourly rate,” as it stated in its Order 
reducing Masui’s requested hourly rate from $325 to $165 that 
“[Masui’s] approved hourly rate for the period 2009 through 2012 was $165.00 per hour,” indicating that LIRAB had set Masui’s 
hourly rate at $165 for those four years. 
HRS § 386-94 authorizes DCD and LIRAB to adjust an 
attorney’s hourly rate when approving an attorney’s request for 
fees. The plain language of HRS § 386-94 provides factors that 
may be considered, such as an attorney’s experience in workers’ compensation and the hourly rate customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills and experience, “[i]n 
approving fee requests.” The language of the statute does not 
state, however, that DCD or LIRAB are authorized to set an attorney’s hourly rate before a request for attorneys’ fees has been submitted. 
Even if it could be argued that the statute’s language is 
ambiguous in this regard, the legislative history of HRS § 386-94 clearly shows that the legislature did not intend to allow DCD or LIRAB to set an attorney’s hourly rate before a  
 31 
    
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
request for attorneys’ fees has been submitted. In adopting the 
amended version of HRS § 386-94 in 2005, as noted, the 
legislature explicitly rejected and abrogated the 2005 amendment 
to HAR § 12-10-69(b) stating “The director shall determine the maximum allowable hourly rate of the attorney and reasonable time
[10] allowable on each workers’ compensation case.” The 
legislature also rejected DLIR’s attempt to impose “arbitrary” caps on attorneys’ fees out of concern that it would result in “claimants being unable to secure attorneys” in workers’ 
compensation cases. See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1527, in 2005 
House Journal, at 1634.  As expressed by the legislature, predetermining workers’ compensation attorneys’ hourly rates, especially at rates lower than those approved in other types of 
civil cases, may well discourage attorneys from accepting 
workers’ compensation cases.  
Thus, the DCD and LIRAB are not authorized by HRS § 386-94 
to predetermine workers’ compensation attorneys’ hourly rates, and the DCD “Attorney Hourly Rate Increase Request” form’s statement that HRS § 386-94 “requires” DCD to determine workers’ compensation attorneys’ “authorized” hourly rates is 
We note that in this case, Masui’s hours were also reduced, but that
Masui has not challenged this basis of his fee reduction. 10  
 32 
    
 
 
    
    
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unauthorized.11 See Haole v. State, 111 Hawai‘i 144, 152, 140 
P.3d 377, 385 (2006) (“Administrative rules and regulations 
which exceed the scope of the statutory enactment they were 
devised to implement are invalid and must be struck down.”) 
(citations omitted). 
LIRAB’s Order indicates LIRAB predetermined Masui’s hourly 
rate “for the period 2009 through 2012
” at $165
. Because it is 
not within LIRAB’s statutory authority to predetermine an attorney’s hourly rate to be applied to future cases, to the extent LIRAB relied on a predetermined hourly rate for Masui in 
reducing his requested hourly rate, it acted beyond its 
statutory authority and abused its discretion.  C. The ICA erred in holding that LIRAB adequately explained
its reduction of Masui’s attorney’s fees 
Masui’s third question on certiorari is whether the ICA 
erred in failing to find that LIRAB’s Order was arbitrary, 
capricious, or characterized by an abuse of discretion. In 
order to determine whether LIRAB abused its discretion by reducing Masui’s requested hourly rate, we must first determine 
whether LIRAB’s explanation for its reduction is adequate to 
enable judicial review. 
While the amount awarded to the individual attorney in past cases may
be a relevant consideration in evaluating a fee request, particularly if 
their qualifications have not changed, DCD and LIRAB nonetheless must make anindividualized determination of what constitutes “ reasonable” fees in a given 
case. 11  
 33 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In its SDO, the ICA held LIRAB’s explanation for its 
reduction of Masui’s hourly rate was adequate because “[t]he 
burden is on the party seeking attorneys[’] fees to prove such   
fees were reasonably and necessarily incurred,” citing a 
concurrence in a non-workers’ compensation case.  Botelho, SDO 
at 6 (citing DFS Group. L.P., 110 Hawaiʻi at 226, 131 P.3d at 509     
(Moon, C.J., concurring)). The ICA determined that because 
Masui’s request for attorneys’ fees did not provide the 
customary billing rates of Hawaiʻi lawyers practicing workers’ 
compensation secondary appeals or the customary billing rates of 
any Hawai‘i appellate practitioners, LIRAB’s explanation was 
adequate “based on the record before it.” Botelho, SDO at 7.  
The ICA erred in holding that it was Masui’s burden to 
prove that his requested fees were reasonable and by suggesting 
that Masui should have submitted information regarding the 
hourly rates of Hawaiʻi attorneys practicing workers’ 
compensation secondary appeals and the customary billing rates of 
Hawai‘i appellate practitioners.  Botelho, SDO at 7.  HRS 
§ 386-94 does not place a burden on the attorney seeking fees to 
prove that such fees were reasonable.  Rather, the statute gives the director, LIRAB, and courts the power to review fee requests and provides factors that may be considered in awarding 
reasonable attorneys’ fees.  The statute also does not require  
 34 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
attorneys’ fee requests to include information about other 
attorneys’ hourly billing rates. 
HAR § 12-10-69(a), which implements HRS § 386-94, similarly 
contains no requirement that attorneys’ provide information about other attorneys’ rates. HAR § 12-10-69(a) requires attorneys’ requests for fees to include a “breakdown of the time 
expended and cost incurred in each activity up to and including 
the date of the decision,” and it notes that the director “may require additional details and justification of time billed or 
costs claims.” Furthermore, DLIR’s standard “request for 
approval of attorney’s fees” form only lists as “required attorney information” an attorney’s years of experience in workers’ compensation cases, the number of cases that attorney 
participated in before DCD in the last three years, and the 
number of cases that attorney participated in before LIRAB in the last three years.
12 These requirements are permitted by 
statute, as HRS § 386-94 allows for consideration of an attorney’s experience in state workers’ compensation matters. However, neither HAR § 12-10-69 nor DLIR’s “request for approval of attorney’s fees” form requires attorneys to provide 
information about other attorneys’ hourly rates. 
Masui provided the “required attorney information” in his request for
attorney’s fees. Masui also attached a “breakdown of time expended and cost
incurred in each activity” related to the representation, as required by HAR § 12- 10-69. 12  
 35 
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Therefore, no statute or rule required Masui to provide 
information about the customary billing rates of Hawai ʻi  lawyers 
practicing workers’ compensation secondary appeals or of 
Hawai‘i 
appellate practitioners.  Although HRS § 386-94 explicitly 
allows consideration of “the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and experience” in awarding 
attorneys’ fees, it appears it would be the director, LIRAB, and 
the courts, and not individual attorneys, that have access to that information, and attorneys may not know what other attorneys charge per hour.  
In addition, LIRAB has an obligation to provide an adequate 
explanation for its reduction of his rate pursuant to McLaren.
13 
In McLaren, this court held that DCD was “required to set forth its reasons for reducing [an] attorney’s fees and costs” in 
order to “enable appropriate review for abuse of discretion” in 
awarding attorneys’ fees. 132 Hawaiʻi at 330-32, 321 P.3d at 
681- 
82.  McLaren involved DCD’s unexplained reduction of an 
attorney’s requested fees by 47%. 132 Hawaiʻi at 331, 321 P.3d 
at 683.  This court reasoned that, because LIRAB may review 
DCD’s award of attorneys’ fees for an abuse of discretion after a de novo hearing pursuant to HRS § 386-87 (1993), DCD was 
Notably, while the ICA determined that Masui’s application for
attorney’s fees did not provide relevant information, LIRAB’s Order did not
cite this lack of information as a reason for its reduction of Masui’s 
requested hourly rate. 13  
 36 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
required to “set forth its reasons for reducing an attorney’s 
fee request for appropriate LIRAB and possible judicial review 
of the reduction pursuant to HRS § 91-14.”  132 Hawaiʻi at 331, 
321 P.3d at 682.  As HRS § 368 -
88 (2015) provides for judicial 
review of LIRAB decisions, LIRAB must also provide an 
explanation “sufficient to enable appropriate review for abuse 
of discretion” when it amends an attorney’s requested fees. 132 
Hawaiʻi at 331-32, 321 P.3d at 682-83. 
Following our decision in McLaren, the ICA appropriately 
held in Pickett that an adequate explanation for a reduction of 
fees requires more than a recitation of the factors LIRAB 
considered.  Pickett, mem. op. at 9.  In Pickett, a case also involving Masui, LIRAB reduced Masui’s requested hourly rate of $210 to $165. Pickett, mem. op. at 1-
2.  While LIRAB provided 
some explanation for its reduction, that explanation consisted of factors LIRAB considered in determining Masui’s attorney’s fees, a statement of Masui’s experience in workers’ compensation 
and the number of clients he had represented before DCD and 
LIRAB in the last three years, and a statement that the reduced hourly rate was reasonable and “consistent with that customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills and experience 
before the [LIRAB].” Pickett, mem. op. at 2. 
The ICA held that LIRAB’s “recitation of factors enumerated 
in HRS § 386-94 is not an explanation” for a decision to reduce  
 37 
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requested attorneys’ fees, and that “LIRAB must base its decision to award or reduce [an] attorney’s fees on properly 
submitted evidence and its application of relevant factors in 
arriving at a reasonable fee, not just conclusory statements or beliefs about the factors it considers.” Pickett, mem. op. at 7-8. 
Although Pickett was an unpublished disposition, the ICA’s 
reasoning in that regard was sound.  Requiring LIRAB to do more than recite its considerations and to explain how it applied 
those considerations to its decision to reduce an attorney’s 
requested hourly rate and fees is consistent with both the legislature’s intent for DLIR to regulate claimant attorneys’ fees and its concern that arbitrary limitations on attorneys’ 
fees may result in claimants being unable to procure 
representation. While HRS § 386-94 does not require LIRAB to consider the factors listed in the statute, judicial review for 
an abuse of discretion requires that LIRAB provide reasoning for 
how it awarded attorneys’ fees.  We therefore hold that, in explaining its approval of attorney’s fees, LIRAB must provide more than a recitation of the factors it considers, and it must 
articulate how its considerations affected its ultimate 
determination of attorneys’ fees. 
We note that while Pickett held that “LIRAB must base its 
decision to award or reduce [an] attorney’s fees on properly  
 38 
  
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
        
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
submitted evidence,” HRS § 386-94 does not limit LIRAB’s 
considerations to submitted evidence. Pickett, mem. op. at 8.  
Rather, HRS § 386-94 provides a non-exhaustive list14 of factors 
the director, LIRAB, or courts may consider, including “the 
amount of fees awarded in similar cases, and “the hourly rate customarily awarded attorneys possessing similar skills and 
experience.” Therefore, while LIRAB should consider the record 
in awarding attorneys’ fees, its considerations are not limited to the evidence. 
LIRAB’s explanation for its reduction of Masui’s hourly 
rate in this case is almost identical to but even less detailed than its explanation in Pickett, which was held insufficient.  Pickett, mem. op. at 1-2. In Pickett, LIRAB stated that an 
hourly rate of $165 was reasonable and “consistent with that 
customarily awarded to attorneys possessing similar skills and experience before the [LIRAB].” Pickett, mem. op. at 2.  In 
this case, LIRAB reduced Masui’s hourly rate to $165 without any 
statement that such a rate was reasonable or consistent with rates customarily awarded to attorneys of similar skill and experience. Instead, LIRAB stated that “[Masui’s] approved 
hourly rate for the period 2009 through 2012 was $165.00 per 
HRS § 386- 94 states that DCD, LIRAB, or the court “may consider factors 
such as” those listed. Therefore, according to the plain language of HRS
§ 386- 94, the factors listed are not exhaustive . 14  
 39 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hour,” making it clear it relied on a predetermined hourly rate 
in reducing Masui’s requested hourly rate. 
As  in Pickett, LIRAB also recited its considerations in     
reviewing Masui’s fee request.  Those factors included:    
[T]he benefits obtained for Claimant in this appeal, the 
novelty and difficulty of issues involved on appeal, the
amount of fees awarded in similar appeals, and the hourly
rate customarily awarded workers’ compensation attorneyspossessing similar skills and experience, including Attorney’s years of practice in the field of workers’compensation law, the number of clients represented before
the Board, as well as Attorney’s responsiveness and
timeliness. 
LIRAB also acknowledged that Masui had practiced workers’ 
compensation law for approximately 30 years and that he had represented approximately 100 clients before DCD and 50 clients before LIRAB in the past three years.  LIRAB did not, however, 
explain how these considerations affected its decision to reduce 
Masui’s requested hourly rate and attorney’s fees. 
Because LIRAB recited factors it considered in reducing 
Masui’s requested attorney’s fees without explaining how it applied these factors, LIRAB’s explanation for its reduction of Masui’s hourly rate was inadequate.  Therefore, the ICA erred in holding that LIRAB’s explanation was adequate, and we are unable 
to review whether LIRAB abused its discretion in reducing 
Masui’s requested hourly rate. 
V. Conclusion 
We therefore vacate the ICA’s December 6, 2019 judgment on 
appeal and LIRAB’s April 20, 2016 attorney’s fee approval and  
 40 
  
   
      
  
  
  
      
   
      
   
 
 
   
 
 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order.  This case is remanded to LIRAB for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Stanford H. Masui
for Petitioner    
Brian G.S. Choy andKeith M. Yonamine  
for Respondent s  