________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-28592 28-JUN-2013 
08:47 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
--—o0o--­
HAWAIIAN ASSOCIATION OF SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISTS
 
A Hawai'i Non-Profit Corporation,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant-Cross-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
STACEY T.J. WONG, As Trustee of the Eric A Knudsen Trust,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee-Cross-Appellant.
 
SCWC-28592
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 28592; CIV. NO. 03-1-0026)
 
June 28, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.;
WITH POLLACK, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY,
WITH WHOM ACOBA, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCKENNA, J.
  
I.
 Introduction
 
Hawaiian Association of Seventh-Day Adventists, a 
Hawai'i non-profit corporation (“SDA”), filed suit seeking, among 
other things, a declaration that its rental of cabins to the 
public is permissible under its lease agreement with the Eric A. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Knudsen Trust (“Lease”). Stacey T.J. Wong, as trustee of the
 
Eric A. Knudsen Trust (“Wong”), counterclaimed for termination of
 the Lease and other remedies. The circuit court, inter alia,
 granted summary judgment in favor of Wong on SDA’s claim
 regarding cabin rentals, but granted summary judgment in favor of
 SDA on Wong’s claims for termination and equitable relief. The
 Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) vacated summary judgment as
 to the issue of cabin rentals, opining that such use of the
 Property is permissible under the terms of the Lease, and
 remanded the case for further proceedings.
 
We conclude that the ICA correctly vacated the court’s
 
judgment in favor of Wong on SDA’s claim regarding cabin rentals
 (Count I of the Complaint), but for the wrong reasons. Contrary
 to the parties’ stipulation and the ICA’s conclusion, we hold
 that Paragraph 16 of the Lease, which delineates permissible uses
 of the Property, is ambiguous. If, on remand, the fact-finder
 determines that Paragraph 16 prohibits the use of cabins by the
 general public, Wong may be entitled to damages for breach of
 contract and/or disgorgement of profits. The ICA therefore also
 erred in affirming summary judgment in favor of SDA on Wong’s
 claims for breach of contract and unjust enrichment (Counts II
 and III of the Counterclaim). We conclude that the ICA correctly
 vacated the circuit court’s order awarding attorneys’ fees and
 
2
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
costs to Wong; we also, however, vacate the ICA’s order awarding
 
costs on appeal to SDA because a prevailing party has yet to be
 determined. Except for Wong’s claim for termination of the Lease
 (Count I of the Counterclaim), on which the ICA properly affirmed
 summary judgment, we therefore vacate the ICA’s Judgment on
 Appeal and remand this case for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion. 
II. Background
 
A. Factual Background
 
The subject 200-acre parcel of land (“Property”) is 
part of a 940-acre parcel located in Koloa, Kaua' i, originally 
owned by the Augustus F. Knudsen Trust and the Eric A. Knudsen Trust (collectively, “the Trusts”). In 1949, the Trusts leased the Property to Valdemar L’Orange Knudsen who, in turn, assigned the lease to Kahili Mountain Park, Inc. (“KMPI”), a company owned by several beneficiaries of the Trusts. KMPI subsequently constructed campgrounds and facilities, including cabins that it rented to the general public as vacation residences. This area became known as Kahili Mountain Park (“the Park”). 
Beginning in 1982, KMPI negotiated to sell its capital
 
stock and its leasehold interest in the Park to SDA, which
 
planned to construct a school on part of the Property. SDA
 
3
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
closed its acquisition of KMPI’s outstanding stock in 1984, at
 
which point the 1949 lease was assigned to SDA, KMPI was
 dissolved, and a new lease was negotiated with the Trusts.
 
On December 31, 1984, SDA and the Trusts executed a new
 
sixty-year lease, effective January 1, 1985.  Paragraph 16 of the
 
subject Lease delineates allowable uses of the Property as
 
follows:
 
16. Use of Demised Premises. The demised premises shall be
used only for educational, recreation (including vacation
residence for members and staff of Lessee’s school and
 church), agricultural, health care and humanitarian uses. 
No dwellings shall be constructed or used on the demised
premises except for faculty, administrative staff, students
and employees.  If Lessee ceases to use the demised premises
for the above purposes, Lessor shall have the right to
terminate this Lease.
 
Paragraph 26 of the Lease is a nonwaiver clause, which 
gives SDA an thirty-day window to remedy any alleged breach: 
26. Nonwaiver. Acceptance of rent by Lessor or its agent
shall not be deemed to be a waiver by Lessor of any breach
by the Lessee of any term, covenant or condition of this
Lease herein contained, nor of Lessor’s right to declare and
enforce a forfeiture for any such breach, and that the
failure of Lessor to insist upon strict performance of any
of the terms, covenants or conditions of this Lease, or to
exercise any option herein conferred in any one or more
instances shall not be construed as a waiver or
 relinquishment for the future of any such terms, covenants,
conditions or options, but the same shall be and remain in
full force and effect; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that before any
forfeiture shall be enforced, Lessor shall give written
notice to Lessee of the breach constituting the ground of
forfeiture, and Lessee shall have thirty (30) days from the
date of such notice within which to remedy or cure such
breach, and if such breach shall be so cured or remedied,
then such breach shall be waived and no forfeiture shall be
 enforced for such breach . . . .
 
SDA’s principal objective in leasing the Property was
 
to develop and operate a kindergarten through twelfth-grade
 
4
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
school (“School”).  After obtaining the necessary permits, SDA
 
developed the Property, opened its new School, and constructed
 
houses for faculty and staff. In addition, SDA continued KMPI’s
 practice of renting cabins to the public, used the rental income
 to support the School, and constructed additional cabins pursuant
 to permits previously obtained by KMPI.
1
 
Between 1984 and 2000, the Trusts were aware of SDA’s
 
continued vacation rentals to the public. There was no
 communication from the Trusts that these rentals might violate
 the Lease. By late 2000, however, three major changes occurred:
 Valdemar L’Orange Knudsen, who had been a strong supporter of the
 School, died; the Augustus F. Knudsen Trust terminated and the
 Eric A. Knudsen Trust (“EAK Trust”) acquired a hundred-percent
 fee interest in the Property; and the trustee for EAK Trust
 changed from First Hawaiian Bank to Wong.
 
In an April 4, 2001 letter to SDA, Wong asserted that
 
“the Adventists are in material default of the Kahili Adventist
 School/Mountain Park lease with respect to the Permitted Uses
 provision.” Wong did not explain how SDA had violated the Lease
 or ask SDA to cease its practice of renting cabins to the public.
 He warned, however, that he could pursue several legal remedies
 
1
 SDA constructed a total of 17 additional cabins, in addition to
 
the 25 cabins that were in existence when KMPI sold its leasehold interest.
 
Of these 42 structures, approximately 31 were available for vacation rental
prior to March 2002, when SDA ceased its rentals.
 
5
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
against SDA including termination of the Lease, eviction from the
 
Property, and a suit for monetary damages and legal fees. Wong
 stated that he supported SDA’s vision of enhancing the property,
 and he hoped that they could work together to achieve this
 mission, fulfill the Property’s potential, and satisfy the past
 breach. Using SDA’s financial statements from June 1984 to
 January 2000, Wong calculated that SDA owed $642,551.33 in unpaid
 rent, based on a rate of ten percent of gross revenues from SDA’s
 cabin rentals. Wong proposed that SDA prepare a detailed five-
year business plan for expanding the Park, enter into a new lease
 that would permit commercial use of the Property, and pay EAK
 Trust ten percent of gross non-School related revenues.
 
SDA retained a consultant to prepare a five-year
 
business plan and evaluate Wong’s proposal for expansion;
 however, it refused to make retroactive payment of percentage
 
rents.  Wong rejected SDA’s business plan and characterized its
 
failure to tender payment as “evidence of bad faith.”  In a
 
letter dated March 6, 2002, Wong demanded that SDA cease “all
 
commercial vacation rental operations” and pay “an amount equal
 to ten percent (10%) of the gross revenues received by [SDA] from
 the commencement of the commercial vacation rental operations in
 1985 until the date such operations cease pursuant to this
 demand,” plus a ten percent interest rate and general excise tax.
 
On March 13, 2002, SDA notified Wong that it would
6
   
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
cease renting cabins to the public in order to avoid termination
 
of the Lease. SDA maintained, however, that rental of the cabins
 
to the public was a permitted recreational use. It also noted
 
that ceasing rentals would cause significant monetary losses and
 
could result in SDA closing its School. SDA immediately ceased
 
booking reservations for cabins but, pursuant to an agreement
 
with Wong, continued to honor reservations that had been made
 
before March 6, 2002.
 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On March 10, 2003, SDA filed a Complaint in the Circuit
 
2
Court for the Fifth Circuit (“circuit court”),  seeking a
declaratory judgment that its operation of the Park, including
 commercial uses of the Property and rental of cabins to the
 public as vacation residences, was permitted under the Lease
 
(“Count I of the Complaint”). 
SDA also alleged that the Lease
 
had been orally amended to permit continued rental of the cabins
 
(“Count II of the Complaint”); that Wong’s allegations of breach
 were barred by waiver and estoppel based on the Trusts’ knowledge
 of these rental activities (“Count III of the Complaint”); and
 that Wong should be enjoined from threatening to terminate the
 Lease and interfering with the cabins rentals, since these
 
2
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
7
   
 
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
actions would seriously and irreparably damage SDA (“Count IV” of
 
the Complaint”). In addition, SDA sought damages for Wong’s
 
wrongful demand that SDA halt its vacation rentals to the public
 
(“Count VI of the Complaint”). The Complaint did not contain a
 
Count V.
 
On April 1, 2003, Wong filed an Answer and
 
Counterclaim, seeking termination of the Lease on the ground that
 
SDA had violated its terms by conducting prohibited commercial
 
operations on the Property (“Count I of the Counterclaim”). In
 
addition, Wong claimed an entitlement to damages based on SDA’s
 
breach of contract, its failure to comply with the conditions for
 use, and its refusal to pay rent for its commercial operations
 
(“Count II of the Counterclaim”). He also claimed that SDA had
 
been unjustly enriched by its commercial operations on the
 
Property, and sought disgorgement of the profits therefrom
 
(“Count III of the Counterclaim”). Finally, he alleged that SDA
 
was obligated to defend and indemnify Wong for any loss or damage
 
in connection with the Lease (“Count IV of the Counterclaim”).
 
The parties each filed multiple motions for partial
 
summary judgment.
3 With respect to Count I of the Complaint
 
3
 The parties filed a total of nine summary judgment motions: (1)
 
[SDA’s] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Count I of the Complaint (Cabin
Rentals), filed July 28, 2005; (2) [SDA’s] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
on Counts II and III of the Counterclaim (Percentage Rents), filed August 10,
2005; (3) [SDA’s] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Count I of the
Counterclaim (Termination), filed August 10, 2005; (4) [SDA’s] Motion for
Partial Summary Judgment on Counts I, II and IV of the Counterclaim (Failure
(continued . . . )
 
8
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(cabin rentals), the parties stipulated that the Lease is
 
unambiguous, parol evidence is inappropriate, and the court’s
 interpretation should be limited to the four corners of the
 agreement.
 
Wong argued that Paragraph 16 clearly prohibits use of
 
the Property by anyone other than faculty, administrative staff,
 
students, and employees.  While maintaining that the Lease is
 
unambiguous, Wong cited letters and committee reports from School
 
representatives in support of his position that Paragraph 16
 
never contemplated rental of cabins to the public. He also
 
submitted deposition testimony from individuals who had been
 
involved in discussions regarding SDA’s use of the Property
 before the Lease was finalized. 
SDA, on the other hand, argued that permissible uses of
 
the Property include educational, agricultural, humanitarian,
 recreational, or health care, and the Lease does not prohibit use
 of the Property by the public for any of these permitted
 
purposes. It maintained that the parenthetical reference to
 
“vacation residence” provides an example of recreational use,
 
( . . . continued)
to Ex
haust Administrative Remedies), filed August 25, 2005; (5) [SDA’s] Motion
for Partial Summary Judgment on Count IV of the Counterclaim (Indemnity),
filed August 25, 2005; (6) [Wong’s] Motion for Summary Judgment with Respect
to Count I of the Complaint, filed, August 17, 2005; (7) [Wong’s] Motion for
Summary Judgment with Respect to Counts II, III, IV, and VI of the Complaint,
filed August 17, 2005; (8) [Wong’s] Motion for Summary Judgment Based Upon
[SDA’s] Violation of the Lease, filed August 17, 2005; and (9) [Wong’s] Motion
for Partial Summary Judgment with Respect to Count VI of the Complaint, filed
August 24, 2005.
 
9
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
while the subsequent reference to “dwellings” is a limitation
 
only as to those individuals who could permanently reside on the
 Property. SDA argued that Wong improperly cited opinion evidence
 from individuals who were neither involved in drafting the Lease
 nor qualified to make legal conclusions regarding interpretation
 of its terms. It contended that, if parol evidence were
 considered, communications pertaining to the negotiation and
 execution of the Lease expressly contemplated expansion of the
 existing cabin rental operations to generate income for the
 School.
 
With respect to Count I of the Counterclaim
 
(termination), Wong acknowledged that the law disfavors
 forfeitures and that the Lease provides SDA thirty days to cure
 any violation. 
Relying on Food Pantry v. Waikiki Business Plaza,
 
4
58 Haw. 606, 575 P.2d 869 (1978),  and Aickin v. Ocean View
4 In Food Pantry, lessee sought a declaratory judgment regarding its
 
assignment and subleasing of the premises without prior written consent from
lessor, and lessor sought termination of the lease based on breach of a non-
assignment provision.  58 Haw. at 608, 575 P.2d at 873.  The trial court
 concluded that lessee had materially breached the lease, and lessor was
entitled to damages based upon the fair market rental for the premises; the
court, however, refused to terminate the lease as long as lessee cancelled the
assignments and subleases or, alternatively, paid a higher rental for the
remainder of the term.  Id. at 613, 575 P.2d at 875. 
On appeal, we held that the trial court was empowered to grant
equitable relief to relieve a party from forfeiture and the court had not
abused its discretion in refusing to terminate the lease.  58 Haw. at 613-14,
575 P.2d at 875-76 (“Equity does not favor forfeitures, and where no injustice
would thereby be visited upon the injured party, equity will award him
compensation rather than decree a forfeiture against the offending party.”).
 
10
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5
Investments Co. , 84 Hawai' i 447, 935 P.2d 992 (1997),  however,
he argued that the court should exercise its powers in equity to
 
terminate the Lease as a result of SDA’s willful violations. In
 opposition, SDA contended that termination was inappropriate
 under paragraph 26 of the Lease where, upon receiving written
 notice from Wong, SDA timely cured any alleged violation by
 
ceasing its rental of cabins to the public.
 
With respect to Counts II and III of the Counterclaim
 
(breach of contract and unjust enrichment), Wong argued that SDA
 
violated the Lease by impermissibly renting cabins to the public
 and he was therefore entitled to a remedy for such breach, either
 in the form of reimbursement of revenues or disgorgement of
 profits. SDA argued, inter alia, that relief for an alleged
 breach was limited to the express terms of the Lease (i.e.,
 notice and opportunity to cure, followed by termination); that a
 
5 In Aickin, tenants who failed to timely renew a commercial lease, 
sought declaratory judgment restraining lessor from terminating the lease. 84 
Hawai'i at 449-51, 935 P.2d at 994-96.  After conducting a bench trial, the
circuit court concluded that tenants had materially breached the lease byfailing to timely exercise an option to extend, and lessor was entitled topossession of the premises.  Id. at 451-52, 935 P.2d at 996-97.
This court held that tenants were entitled to equitable relief if
they could show: (1) their conduct was not intentional, willful, or grosslynegligent; (2) lessor did not rely to its detriment on the failure to givenotice; (3) strict enforcement of the notice provision would result inunconscionable hardship to tenants; and (4) the delay in giving notice was notunreasonably long within the context of the lease itself.  84 Hawai 'i at 455­
56, 935 P.2d at 1000-01.  We noted that the lease had not yet expired whentenants gave notice of their intent to renew, the four-month delay was notunreasonably long in the context of a ten-year lease, and the failure totimely exercise the option was an oversight; on this basis, we concluded thatthe circuit court had abused its discretion by refusing to apply equitableprinciples and extend the lease.  Id. at 455, 935 P.2d at 1000. 
11
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
claim for percentage rents assumes the parties would have agreed
 
to such a clause at the time the Lease was signed; that the Lease
 contained no provision for monetary damages; and that Wong did
 not suffer any damages from the alleged breach.
 
After a hearing, the circuit court issued orders
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Wong on Counts I through IV
 of the Complaint (cabin rentals, oral amendment, estoppel, and
 injunctive relief), and granting summary judgment in favor of SDA
 
6
on Count VI of the Complaint (damages)  and Counts I through IV
of the Counterclaim (termination, breach of contract, unjust
 enrichment, and indemnification). The court did not elaborate on
 the grounds for its decision, and SDA filed motions for
 clarification and reconsideration. At a hearing on these
 motions, the court explained that it had found no ambiguity in
 the Lease and, therefore, had not considered parol evidence in
 making its decision. It then denied both motions.
 
Wong then filed a motion for costs and attorneys’ fees. 
SDA argued that Wong was not entitled to fees and costs because
 it had prevailed on two of the four main issues before the court:
 termination of the Lease and retroactive payment of percentage
 rents. 
The circuit court concluded that Wong was entitled to
 
6
 SDA had not moved for summary judgment on this count, and this
 
ruling appears to contradict the court’s ruling in favor of Wong on Count I of
the Complaint (vacation rentals).  It appears that the circuit court
recognized this contradiction by later dismissing Count VI in its Amended
Final Judgment.  See n.7, infra, and accompanying text.
 
12
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs because he had prevailed on
 
the disputed main issue in the Complaint (i.e., cabin rentals). 
It therefore awarded Wong $60,270.00 in fees and $27,206.90 in
 costs.
 
On May 21, 2007, the court entered its Amended Final
 
Judgment, disposing of all claims against the parties as follows:
 granting summary judgment in favor of Wong on Counts I through IV
 of the Complaint (cabin rentals, oral amendment, estoppel, and
 injunctive relief); granting summary judgment in favor of SDA on
 Counts I through IV of the Counterclaim (termination, breach of
 contract, unjust enrichment, and indemnification); dismissing
 
7
Count VI of the Complaint (damages);  awarding reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs to Wong; and dismissing all claims and
 counterclaims not specifically identified therein.
 
C. The ICA Opinion
 
SDA appealed the court’s judgment granting summary
 
judgment in favor of Wong on Count I of the Complaint (cabin
 
rentals), arguing, among other things, that rental of cabins to
 the public is a permissible recreational use, and that the Lease
 does not otherwise prohibit SDA from engaging in commercial
 
7
 As the ICA notes, it is unclear why the court dismissed Count VI
 
of the Complaint (damages), even though it had earlier granted summary
judgment in favor of SDA, and there was no subsequent stipulation by the
parties or decision by the court.  SDA, however, did not appeal this count.
 
13
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
activities on the Property.8
 
Wong cross-appealed the court’s judgment granting
 
summary judgment in favor of SDA on Counts I, II, and III of the
 
Counterclaim (termination, breach of contract, and unjust
 enrichment), arguing that he was entitled to terminate the Lease
 because SDA’s rental of cabins to the public was a persistent and
 willful material breach, and that he was entitled to monetary
 damages as compensation for SDA’s improper use of the Property.
 
In a Memorandum Opinion dated April 16, 2012, the ICA
 
concluded that the Lease does not prohibit SDA from renting
 
cabins to the public as vacation residences. The ICA opined that
 
“[t]he first sentence of Paragraph 16 does not authorize or
 
exclude use of the Property by [SDA] or any particular class of
 individuals” and “nothing in the text suggests that [SDA] is
 prohibited from collecting revenue from the permissible use of
 the Property.” While acknowledging that the second sentence of
 Paragraph 16 limits the use of “dwellings” to faculty, staff,
 students and employees of SDA, it concluded that this restriction
 does not apply to use of the Property for “vacation residence,”
 which is an expressly permitted recreational use. The ICA
 concluded, however, that although it was undisputed that at least
 some of the cabins were being used as vacation residences rather
 
8
 Although the court also granted summary judgment in favor of Wong
 
on Counts II, III and IV of the Complaint (oral amendment, estoppel, and
injunctive relief), SDA did not appeal these portions of the court’s judgment.
 
14
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
than permanent dwellings, the record contained very little about
 
what the cabins looked like, how they were used, and who used
 them. Accordingly, the ICA concluded that it could not grant
 summary judgment in favor of SDA, and remanded the case to the
 circuit court for further proceedings on this issue.
 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s decision as to
 
the remaining counts of the Complaint and Counterclaim. It
 
concluded, inter alia, that termination of the Lease was not
 
warranted because SDA had cured any alleged breach by ceasing
 cabin rentals to the public within thirty days of receiving
 written notice from Wong, and that Wong was not entitled to
 monetary damages because the circuit court had erred in
 concluding that SDA’s cabin rentals were prohibited by the Lease. 
Finally, the ICA vacated the order awarding attorneys’ fees and
 costs to Wong because, in remanding the case to the circuit
 court, a prevailing party had yet to be determined.
 
SDA then filed a motion for attorneys’ fees and costs.
 
On June 8, 2012, the ICA issued an order denying SDA’s request
 for attorneys’ fees and granting its request for costs in the
 
reduced amount of $16,377.92. It concluded that SDA was not
 
entitled to attorneys’ fees because a prevailing party had yet to
 
be determined, but an award of costs was appropriate because SDA
 
had prevailed on appeal.
 
15
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D. Questions on Certiorari
 
Wong raises the following questions on certiorari:
 
A. Whether the ICA gravely erred in vacating the Circuit
Court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Wong on Count
I of [SDA’s] Complaint seeking a declaratory judgment that
“continued operation of ‘Kahili Mountain Park’ and vacation
rental of the cabins . . . is permitted by the terms of the
lease.”
 
B. Whether the ICA gravely erred in affirming the Circuit
Court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of SDA on Count I
of Wong’s Counterclaim for termination of the lease on the
ground that [SDA] willfully violated Paragraph 16 of the
lease by renting cabins to the general public.
 
C. Whether the ICA gravely erred in affirming the Circuit
Court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of SDA on Counts
II and III of Wong’s Counterclaim seeking damages for breach
of contract and unjust enrichment, respectively.
 
D. Whether the ICA gravely erred by vacating the Circuit
Court’s Order Granting Fees and Costs and paragraph 4 of the
Amended Final Judgment awarding Wong attorneys’ fees and
costs.
 
III. Standard of Review
 
A motion for summary judgment is reviewed de novo,
 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the non­
moving party, under the same standard applied by the trial court. 
State v. Tradewinds Elec. Serv. & Contracting,  80 Hawai' i 218, 
222, 908 P.2d 1204, 1208 (1995); Foytick v. Chandler, 88 Hawai' i 
307, 313-14, 966 P.2d 619, 625-26 (1998). See also Hawai' i Rules 
of Civil Procedure Rule 56.
 
“Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,
 
16
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Pacific Int’l 
Serv. Corp. v. Hurip, 76 Hawai' i 209, 213, 873 P.2d 88, 92 (1994) 
(citation omitted). “A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.” Guajardo v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 118 Hawai' i 196, 
201, 187 P.3d 580, 585 (2008) (citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion
 
A. Count I of SDA’s Complaint (Cabin Rentals)
 
SDA and Wong both maintain that Paragraph 16 of the
 
Lease is unambiguous and enforceable.
9 They disagree, however,
 
on the effect of Paragraph 16’s parenthetical reference to
 “vacation residence” and the subsequent restriction on
 “dwellings.” Wong contends that SDA’s rental of cabins to the
 public violates the terms of the Lease because it constitutes use
 of a dwelling by someone other than faculty, administrative
 staff, students, and employees. SDA, on the other hand, argues
 
9
 Wong nevertheless offers certain extrinsic evidence “to explain
 
and reinforce the unambiguous use provision in Lease.” SDA argues, however,
that Wong’s reliance on select pieces of inadmissible parol evidence is
misleading where the Lease is unambiguous and the proffered evidence does not
accurately reflect the intent of the parties at the time the Lease was
executed.
 
17
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the use of cabins as vacation residences by the public is
 
expressly permitted as a recreational use and is distinguishable
 from the use of permanent dwellings.
 
1. Principles of Contractual Interpretation
 
“[T]he construction and legal effect to be given a 
contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate 
court.” Brown v. KFC National Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 239, 
921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). “The determination whether a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law that is freely reviewable on appeal.” Id. (citations omitted). 
Contract terms are interpreted according to their 
plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech. Cho Mark 
Oriental Food v. K&K Intern., 73 Haw. 509, 520, 836 P.2d 1057, 1064 (1992). The court’s objective is “to ascertain and effectuate the intention of the parties as manifested by the contract in its entirety.” Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 240, 921 P.2d at 
160 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
A contract is ambiguous when its terms are reasonably
 
susceptible to more than one meaning. Airgo v. Horizon Cargo
 
Transp., 66 Haw. 590, 594, 670 P.2d 1277, 1280 (1983).
 As a general rule, the court will look no further than the four
 corners of the contract to determine whether an ambiguity exists.
18
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Pac. Rent-All, 90 Hawai' i 315, 324, 
978 P.2d 753, 762 (1999) (noting that the parties’ disagreement 
as to the meaning of a contract does not render it ambiguous). The parol evidence rule “precludes the use of extrinsic evidence to vary or contradict the terms of an unambiguous and integrated contract.” Pancakes of Hawai' i v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai 'i 
300, 310, 944 P.2d 97, 107 (App. 1997) (citation omitted). This rule, however, is subject to exceptions that permit the court to consider extrinsic evidence when the writing in question is ambiguous or incomplete. Id. Where there is any doubt or 
controversy as to the meaning of the language, the court is permitted to consider parol evidence to explain the intent of the parties and the circumstances under which the agreement was executed. Hokama v. Relinc Corp., 57 Haw. 470, 476, 559 P.2d 
279, 283 (1977). The court may admit parol evidence to explain an ambiguity, whether latent or patent: 
In determining whether or not an ambiguity exists in a document,
under the parol evidence rule, the test lies not necessarily in
the presence of particular ambiguous words or phrases but rather
in the purport of the document itself, whether or not particular
words or phrases in themselves be uncertain or doubtful in
meaning.  In other words, a document may still be ambiguous
although it contains no words or phrases ambiguous in themselves.
The ambiguity in the document may arise solely from the unusual
use therein of otherwise unambiguous words or phrases. An
 
ambiguity may arise from words plain in themselves but uncertain
when applied to the subject matter of the instrument.  In short,
such an ambiguity arises from the use of such words of doubtful or
uncertain meaning or application.
 
Hokama, 57 Haw. at 474-75, 559 P.2d at 282 (citations omitted)
 
(emphasis added).
 
19
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. Paragraph 16's Use Provisions Are Ambiguous
 
As pointed out earlier, the parties stipulated that the 
Lease is unambiguous. We note, however, that the parties’ 
stipulation as to a question of law is not binding on the court, and does not relieve us from the obligation to review questions of law de novo. Chung Mi Ahn v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 126 
Hawai'i 1, 10, 265 P.3d 470, 479 (2011) (citations omitted). 
The main issue before this court is whether Paragraph
 
16 of the Lease prohibits SDA’s practice of renting cabins, as
 vacation residences, to members of the public not affiliated with
 the Church or School. Paragraph 16 provides:
 
16. Use of Demised Premises. The demised premises shall be
used only for educational, recreation (including vacation
residence for members and staff of Lessee’s school and
 church), agricultural, health care and humanitarian uses. 
No dwellings shall be constructed or used on the demised
premises except for faculty, administrative staff, students
and employees.  If Lessee ceases to use the demised premises
for the above purposes, Lessor shall have the right to
terminate this Lease.
 
Paragraph 16 begins by enumerating five permissible
 
uses of the Property. The first sentence states: “The demised
 
premises shall be used only for educational, recreation
 (including vacation residence for members and staff of Lessee’s
 school and church), agricultural, health care and humanitarian
 uses.” Focusing on the parenthetical phrase in this sentence,
 the ICA construed the word “including” as a term of enlargement,
 
20
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and concluded that the reference to vacation residence was
 
intended as an example of permissible recreational use rather
 than a limitation thereof. In doing so, the ICA relied upon
 Lealaimatafao v. Woodward-Clyde Consultants, 75 Haw. 544, 556-57,
 867 P.2d 226, 224 (1994).
 
In Lealaimatafao, this court addressed the scope of the
 
wrongful death statute, which provided damages for “pecuniary
 injury and loss of love and affection, including . . . loss of
 parental care, training guidance, or education, suffered as a
 result of the death of the person by . . . any person wholly or
 partly dependent upon the deceased person.” 75 Haw. at 550-51,
 867 P.2d at 223-24 (emphasis added). Citing a definition from
 Black’s Law Dictionary 763 (6th ed. 1990), this court focused on
 the term “including” and explained:
 
The term, “including” expresses “an enlargement and has the
meaning of and or in addition to, or merely specifies a
particular thing already included within the general words
theretofore used.”  By using the term “including,” the
legislature intended the enumerated claims to be exemplary
of the type of claims which may be brought for the loss of
love and affection.  The term “including” in no way implies
 exclusivity.  Thus it is irrelevant whether Appellants are
entitled to any of the enumerated claims inasmuch as they
have a general claim for the loss of love and affection.
 
75 Haw. at 556, 867 P.2d at 226 (brackets omitted).
 
Lealaimatafao involved statutory interpretation, not
 
contractual interpretation. More importantly, in Lealaimatafao,
 
this court relied upon only one of several definitions of the
 term “including.” According to the definition from Black’s Law
 
21
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Dictionary, however, “including” can construed to express
 
limitation as well as expansion, and interpretation of that term
 depends upon context. Black’s Law Dictionary 763 (6th ed. 1990)
 
(“‘Including’ within statute is interpreted as a word of
 enlargement or of illustrative application as well as a word of
 limitation.”). Thus, with respect to the first sentence of
 Paragraph 16, the parenthetical reference could indicate a
 limitation on how vacation residences may be used for
 recreational purposes by a particular category of persons. 
In addition, while Lealaimatafao involved statutory
 
construction, “expressio unius est exclusio alterius” is a
 fundamental canon of contractual interpretation. See Edwin W.
 
Patterson, The Interpretation and Construction of Contracts, 64
 C
OLUM. L. REV. 833, 853-55 (1964). Under this principle, the
 
express mention of a particular provision may imply the exclusion
 of that which is not included. Tsunoda v. Young Sun Kow, 23 Haw.
 
660, 665 (Haw. Terr. 1917) (“A reservation or exception may be
 implied from the language of the lease, although not expressly
 mentioned, where the language used shows such intent.” 
(Citations omitted.)).
10 If the parties had intended to identify
 
vacation residence as an example of recreational use, they could
 
10
 In Tsunoda , this court applied the rule “expressio unius est
 
exclusio alterius” and held that, where a lease contemplated the use of water
for irrigation of lands and lessee’s domestic purposes, the parties intended
to except any surplus water from operation of the lease.  23 Haw. at 665.
 
22
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
have done so without referring to a particular category of
 
persons entitled to use those vacation residences.11 It is
 
therefore unclear whether the parenthetical phrase states a
 limitation on who may use the Property as vacation residences,
 and the sentence is particularly ambiguous when read in context.
 
The following sentence of Paragraph 16 states: “No
 
dwellings shall be constructed or used on the demised premises
 except for faculty, administrative staff, students and
 employees.” The ICA acknowledged that the term “dwellings” was
 ambiguous insofar as it could refer broadly to a structure in
 which people live (as Wong contends) or, more specifically, to a
 place of primary or permanent residence (as SDA contends). It
 concluded, however, that the term was unambiguous within the
 context of the Lease.
 
Contract terms are interpreted according to their 
plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech. Cho Mark 
Oriental Food, 73 Haw. at 520, 836 P.2d at 1064. Where terms are undefined, the court may resort to legal or other well-accepted dictionaries to determine their ordinary meaning. Sierra Club v. 
Hawai'i Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai' i 242, 253, 59 P.3d 877, 888 
(2002). The ICA noted that because vacation residence was a permissible recreational use of the Property, it would be 
11
 Reading the parenthetical as the dissent does, without explaining
 
the import of this language, renders the reference “to members and staff of
Lessee’s school and church” superfluous.
 
23
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
unnatural to read the subsequent restriction as a limitation
 
thereof, and “dwellings” must therefore be construed to mean
 “primary, non-recreational residences” rather than temporary or
 short-term vacation residences.
 
This analysis begs the question of whether a vacation
 
residence constitutes a type of dwelling which, absent the
 parenthetical phrase, would be restricted to faculty,
 administrative staff, students, and employees. Given this
 ambiguity in the term “dwellings,” it is possible that Paragraph
 16's restriction on the construction and use of “dwellings”
 states the general rule, while the parenthetical reference to
 
“vacation residence” provides a limited exception thereto.  Under
 
this interpretation, Paragraph 16 could reasonably be construed
 
to allow members and staff of SDA’s School and Church—including
 those who might not be permitted to use dwellings—to use the
 Property for short-term vacation residence, but to prohibit such
 use by the general public.
 
The dissent suggests that interpreting “dwellings” to
 
encompass “vacation residence” would be illogical and
 inconsistent. Dissent at 17-24. We respectfully disagree,
 because the parenthetical phrase in the first sentence entitles a
 broader subset of individuals to use the property for “vacation
 residence” (i.e. members and staff of SDA’s school and church)
 than those permitted to use “dwellings” (i.e., faculty,
24
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
administrative staff, students, and employees). Further,
 
recognizing this ambiguity in the language of Paragraph 16 does
 not frustrate otherwise permissible uses of the Property, because
 any such limitation would apply only to the use of “dwellings,”
 which are defined broadly as any structure in which a person
 lives, a residence, or an abode. Black’s Law Dictionary 582 (9th
 
ed. 2009) (defining “dwelling-house”).
 
Thus, the terms of Paragraph 16 are reasonably
 
susceptible to more than one interpretation, there are genuine
 issues of material fact regarding the intent of the drafters, and
 summary judgment is therefore inappropriate. Although the ICA
 correctly vacated summary judgment in favor of Wong and remanded
 the case for further proceedings on the issue of cabin rentals,
 it did so for the wrong reason.
12 We vacate the ICA’s judgment
 
as to Count I of the Complaint (cabin rentals), and remand the
 case to the circuit court for a determination of whether the
 Lease permits SDA to use cabins as vacation residences for the
 general public. In making this determination, the fact-finder
 may consider additional evidence, including parol evidence,
 regarding the intent of the parties at the time of drafting.
 
12
 The ICA explained that there were disputed issues of material fact
 
as to whether cabins were used by SDA solely for the purpose of vacation
rentals.  Insofar as Wong contended that SDA rented cabins to the public for
both long-term and short-term use, the ICA concluded that SDA had failed to
present sufficient facts to dispose of this claim on summary judgment.
 
25
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3. The Lease Does Not Prohibit Commercial Activities
 
Although our analysis of Paragraph 16 effectively
 
disposes of Wong’s questions on certiorari, we address several
 
additional arguments to provide guidance on remand.
 
Wong claims that the Lease prohibits SDA from engaging
 
in commercial uses of the Property, including renting vacation
 residences to the public, because the five uses enumerated in
 Paragraph 16 are all “non-commercial.” This argument, however,
 lacks merit. A use that is educational, agricultural,
 recreational or related to health care is not, by design, non­commercial. A permissible recreational use does not cease to be
 recreational simply because SDA charges a fee.
13
 
Furthermore, neither Paragraph 16 nor the remainder of
 
the Lease expressly or implicitly prohibits SDA from conducting
 commercial activities on the Property. If the parties had
 intended to include such a prohibition, they could have easily
 
done so.  Based on the plain language of the Lease, we conclude
 
that SDA is not prohibited from collecting revenue from otherwise
 
permissible uses of the Property.
 
13 
As the ICA correctly explained: “Paragraph 16 plainly permits
 
[SDA] to use the Property to run a school, farm, or medical clinic.  Whether
 
[SDA] charges students a tuition, sells the harvest, or charges patients fees
for the provision of medical treatment is merely derivative of and incidental
to these uses.”
 
26
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. Count I of Wong’s Counterclaim (Termination)
 
Because the fact-finder could determine, on remand,
 
that Paragraph 16 of the Lease prohibits the use of cabins by the
 
general public, we must address whether Wong’s purported claim
 for termination of the Lease was effective.
 
Wong contends that he was entitled to terminate the
 
Lease due to SDA’s “intentional, willful, or grossly negligent”
 
breach in renting cabins to the public. SDA, however, argues
 
that the Lease cannot be terminated because it timely cured any
 
alleged violations within thirty days of receiving written notice
 from Wong.
 
Absent ambiguity, contract terms must be interpreted
 
according to their plain meaning. Cho Mark Oriental Food, 73
 
Haw. at 520, 836 P.2d at 1064. Under the terms of the Lease,
 Wong possesses a right to terminate if SDA ceases to use the
 Property for a permissible purpose. The right to terminate,
 however, is subject to Paragraph 26, which provides SDA thirty
 days within receipt of written notice to remedy any alleged
 breach. It is undisputed that Wong first demanded SDA cease its
 practice of renting cabins to the public in a letter dated March
 6, 2002.
14 SDA informed Wong that it would cease its vacation
 
14
 There is some evidence that the Trusts were aware of SDA’s
 
practice of renting cabins to the public between 1984 and 2000.  Prior to
 
Wong’s March 6, 2002 letter, however, there was no communication from the
Trusts that these rentals violated the terms of the Lease.
 
27
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
rental operations on March 13, 2002. Under these circumstances,
 
SDA timely cured the alleged breach within the required time
 frame and Wong was not entitled to terminate the Lease.
 
Wong’s reliance on Food Pantry, 58 Haw. at 613-14, 575 
P.2d at 875-76, and Aickin, 84 Hawai' i at 455-56, 935 P.2d at 
1000-01, is misplaced. Those cases recognized a policy against forfeiture, despite lessors entitlement to terminate under the express terms of a lease. As we explained in Food Pantry, “[e]quity does not favor forfeitures, and where no injustice would thereby be visited upon the injured party, equity will award him compensation rather than decree a forfeiture against the offending party.” 58 Haw. at 614, 575 P.2d at 876. In this case, the express terms of the lease do not permit Wong to terminate where SDA timely remedies an alleged breach within thirty days of receiving written notice. 
Thus, even if the fact-finder determines that SDA’s
 
vacation rentals violated the Lease, Wong was not entitled to
 termination. We therefore affirm the ICA’s judgment in favor of
 SDA on Count I of the Counterclaim.
 
C.	 Counts II and III of Wong’s Counterclaim
(Breach of Contract and Unjust Enrichment)
 
If, on remand, the fact-finder concludes that Paragraph
 
16 of the Lease prohibits the use of cabins by the general
 
28
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
public, it will also have to address Wong’s claim that he is
 
entitled to an award of monetary damages for breach of contract
 or disgorgement of profits from SDA’s rental operations.
 
SDA maintains that Wong is not entitled to damages
 
because the Lease does not contain a penalty provision, the court
 cannot rewrite the terms of the Lease to require payment of
 percentage rents, and it did not profit from its rental
 operations because those funds were used to support the School. 
SDA also argues that unjust enrichment is inappropriate as a
 quasi-contract claim where there is a valid, enforceable contract
 between the parties.
 
The ICA concluded that Wong could not seek damages or
 
disgorgement by virtue of the fact that he was not entitled to
 
termination of the Lease. A claim for breach of contract or
 
unjust enrichment, however, is distinct from a claim for
 
termination of the Lease.
 
A claim for breach of contract allows a party to 
recover just compensation for any loss or damage that is the natural and proximate consequence of an opposing party’s breach. Amfac v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 128, 839 P.2d 10, 32 (1992). A claim for unjust enrichment permits a party to seek restitution for benefits improperly conferred on an opposing party as a result of a wrongful act. Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai' i 
42, 55, 169 P.3d 994, 1007 (App. 2007) (citing Durette v. Aloha
29
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Plastic Recycling, 105 Hawai' i 490, 100 P.3d 60 (2004)). In 
deciding whether a party is entitled to restitution, the court is 
guided by its objective to prevent injustice. Small v. Badenhop, 
67 Haw. 626, 636, 701 P.2d 647, 654 (1985) (“One who receives a benefit is of course enriched, and he would be unjustly enriched if its retention would be unjust.” (Citation omitted.)). 
If the fact-finder concludes that SDA violated the
 
Lease by renting cabins to the public, Wong may be entitled to an
 award of monetary damages for breach of contract and/or equitable
 relief in the form of disgorgement of profits from SDA’s rental
 operations.
15 Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment in favor
 
of SDA on Counts II and III of the Counterclaim, and remand the
 case for further proceedings on these claims.
 
D. Attorneys’ Fees and Costs
 
In light of our decision that Paragraph 16 is 
ambiguous, we conclude that neither party has prevailed on 
appeal. Therefore, the ICA did not err in vacating the circuit court’s order awarding attorneys’ fees and costs to Wong. Because SDA has not prevailed on appeal, however, we vacate the ICA’s order awarding costs to SDA. See Hawai' i Rules of 
15
 It is unclear why the circuit court granted summary judgment in
 
favor of SDA on Counts II and III of the Counterclaim, while granting summary
judgment in favor of Wong on Count I of the Complaint.
 
30
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Appellate Procedure Rule 39(a) (“[I]f a judgment is affirmed in
 
part and reversed in part, or is vacated, or a petition granted
 
in part and denied in part, the costs shall be allowed only as
 ordered by the appellate court.”)
 
V. Conclusion
 
We conclude that the ICA correctly vacated summary
 
judgment in favor of Wong on Count I of the Complaint (cabin
 rentals), but for the wrong reasons. The ICA also correctly
 affirmed summary judgment in favor of SDA on Count I of the
 Counterclaim (termination). However, in light of our decision to
 remand the case on the permissibility of cabin rentals, we
 conclude that the ICA erred in affirming summary judgment in
 favor of SDA on Counts II and III of the Counterclaim (breach of
 contract and unjust enrichment).
 
Finally, we conclude that the ICA correctly vacated the
 
circuit court’s order awarding attorneys’ fees and costs to Wong. 
We also vacate the ICA’s order awarding costs on appeal to SDA
 because a prevailing party has yet to be determined.
 
31
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
We therefore affirm in part and vacate in part the
 
ICA’s judgment on appeal, and remand this case to the circuit
 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
Michael D. Tom, 
Lyle M. Ishida, and
David R. Harada-Stone for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Michael R. Marsh,
James M. Cribley, and
Mark G. Valencia
 for respondent
 
32
 