*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000758 06-FEB-2014 09:24 AM  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs.
 
MICHAEL W. BASHAM, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant, 
and
 
ALLIKEA BASHAM, aka Aliikea I. Basham, Petitioner/Defendant.
 
SCWC-11-0000758
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000758; CR. NO. 10-1-0663)
 
February 6, 2014
 
ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING,
WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J. JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Michael W. Basham
 
(Basham) appeals from the January 31, 2013 Judgment on Appeal of
 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), affirming the June 14,
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2011 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). This appeal raises
 the issue of whether a prosecutor in closing argument may orally
 provide definitions to key terms in a critical jury instruction,
 thereby modifying the instructions read to the jury. For the
 reasons set forth herein, we vacate the ICA and circuit court
 judgments and remand for a new trial. 
I.
 
On April 28, 2010, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State
 
of Hawai' i (State) indicted Basham and his son, Aliikea Basham 
(Aliikea), upon a charge of assault in the first degree under 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-710.
1 The State alleged that 
on September 22, 2007, Basham and Aliikea (collectively,
 
“Defendants”) intentionally or knowingly caused serious bodily
 injury to Steven Bloom (Bloom).
 
Defendants’ jury trial commenced in circuit court on
 
June 6, 2011.
2
 
A.
 
The State’s witnesses testified to the following facts. 
On September 22, 2007, Bloom and his wife, Jennifer
 
Chavez (Chavez) were driving in the Ewa Beach area, where they
 
1
 HRS § 707-710 (1993) provides: “(1) A person commits the offense
of assault in the first degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes
serious bodily injury to another person. (2) Assault in the first degree is a
class B felony.”
 
2
 The Honorable Randal K. O. Lee presided. 
-2­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
had recently purchased a house. Bloom was driving their car, a
 
white Saturn. As they were driving in search of a beach, they
 were involved in a minor motor vehicle collision with a blue car,
 which hit the back of their car. Neither Bloom nor Chavez was
 injured in the accident. 
Both cars then pulled off to the side of the road. 
Bloom got out and approached the driver of the blue car
 
3
 (Driver),  confirmed that Driver was uninjured, and suggested
that they exchange insurance information. Driver responded that
 he had to call his father.
 
Bloom returned to his car to retrieve his insurance
 
card. As he walked back towards the blue car, he saw a man, whom
 he later identified as Aliikea, come running up from the beach. 
Bloom testified that when Aliikea arrived at the scene, he was
 “extremely loud, accusing me of causing the accident, saying it’s
 all my fault, trying to intimidate me.” Aliikea approached Bloom
 and pushed him. 
Shortly after Aliikea arrived, Basham also came up to
 
the road from the beach. Bloom testified that “when he first
 came up, [Basham] was . . . just as excited,” but within a minute
 or so, Bloom heard Basham “say to the other one,” “don’t . . .
 
3
 Driver was not prosecuted in this case. Driver’s identity was
disputed by the parties. Aliikea testified that his brother Kepa Basham,
Basham’s second youngest son, was Driver. The State argued that Hanau Basham,
Basham’s youngest son, was Driver, based on Chavez’s identification during a
photographic lineup. 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hit him, don’t lick him.” Bloom thought, “Oh, he’s actually got
 
the cool head in this, so okay, calm down.” 
Bloom testified that once Aliikea and Basham arrived,
 
Driver “became more vocal.” Aliikea then pushed Bloom and put
 his hand up to or grabbed Bloom’s throat. Bloom knocked
 Aliikea’s hand away, and told Chavez to get behind him. Bloom
 does not recall what happened next, and remembers only regaining
 consciousness later in his car. 
Chavez testified to a similar sequence of events as
 
Bloom. When Aliikea arrived at the scene, he was “very upset,”
 telling Bloom, “This is your fault,” and “kind of pushing [Bloom]
 back.” When Chavez tried to get between Aliikea and Bloom,
 Aliikea pushed Chavez away. Bloom told Chavez to stay away in
 Spanish, which is Chavez’s first language. Aliikea “start[ed]
 getting very upset and started pushing” Bloom more strongly. 
Basham arrived and told Aliikea, “Don’t lick him.”
 
Chavez testified that Aliikea then pushed Bloom,
 
causing Bloom to fall backwards on the ground and hit his head. 
When Bloom tried to get up, Aliikea grabbed Bloom’s neck. Bloom
 tried to take Aliikea’s hand away, but fell again. Chavez
 testified that after Bloom fell again, “[B]y that time [Basham]
 grab [Bloom] from the back and hold him down, and then . . .
 [Aliikea] kick him, and then at that moment, the other guy . . .
 who was driving the car jump on top of [Bloom’s] belly.” 
-4­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross-examination, Chavez testified that she told
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Chad Barrett about
 
Basham grabbing and holding Bloom down by the shoulders, and
 about Aliikea kicking Bloom. However, she acknowledged that the
 written statement, which she had dictated to Officer Barrett just
 after the incident, did not include such information. Officer
 Barrett wrote her statement down for her because she was unable
 to write in English at the time. She signed the statement,
 attesting that it was “true and correct to the best of my
 knowledge.” Nevertheless, Chavez testified that she told Officer
 Barrett that Bloom was held down and kicked, but Officer Barrett
 did not write it down and it was not reflected in the written
 statement.
 
Chavez testified that after Bloom fell to the ground,
 
Driver “jump[ed] on top of [Bloom’s] belly,” and began punching
 Bloom in the face. Bloom started having a seizure, and Chavez
 “started screaming,” “He’s dead. . . . You’ll kill him.” Chavez
 testified that was when “they stop[ped].” Chavez helped Bloom
 walk to the car. She placed Bloom in the front passenger seat,
 got into the driver’s seat, and closed and locked all of the
 doors.
 
Chavez clarified that Basham held Bloom down by the
 
shoulders, “[o]nly in the beginning,” when Driver jumped on
 Bloom. No one held down Bloom’s shoulders when Driver began
 punching Bloom. On cross-examination, however, Chavez testified
 
-5­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that after Bloom fell, “they pushed him down again,” and by the
 
time Driver jumped on Bloom, “[b]y that moment . . . [o]ne was on
 the left side, the other on the right side. And that’s why
 [Bloom] couldn’t stand up.” 
Chavez was on the phone with a 911 operator throughout
 
the incident. Following the operator’s instructions, once she
 and Bloom were back in their car, she turned on the car in order
 to drive away. However, Basham began punching the window on the
 driver’s side door. The paramedics and police arrived soon
 after. 
Aliikea and Basham remained at the scene when the
 
police arrived. However, Driver had already run away at that
 point. 
HPD Officer Michael Dela Cruz testified that he was
 
patrolling in the Ewa Beach area on September 22, 2007. He
 responded to a dispatch and arrived at the scene of the accident
 at around 3:00 p.m. When he arrived, Bloom, Chavez, Basham and
 Aliikea were present at the scene. Officer Dela Cruz testified
 that he conducted a field show-up, in which officers “detain
 possible suspects to have a witness or a complainant make
 positive identification.” Bloom participated in the field show-
up and informed Officer Dela Cruz that “he could not positively
 
-6­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
identify either males [sic] at that time.” Chavez also
 
participated in the field show-up and identified Basham.4
 
HPD Officer Keola Kopa testified that on September 22,
 
2007, the police were dispatched to respond to “several males
 fighting.” Officer Kepa’s responsibility “was only to document
 the accident, . . . nothing more, just the vehicles involved.” 
He attempted to identify the driver of each car involved in the
 accident. He explained that “if there’s no one behind the
 driver’s seat, then we try to get witnesses, and we try to
 ascertain the driver, either by asking or just – anything at the
 scene that we can see to help us ascertain who was driving.” 
Based on his investigation, Officer Kopa determined that Basham
 was the driver of the blue car. Officer Kopa spoke to Basham,
 but could not remember whether Basham stated that the blue car
 was his. 
HPD detective John Coleman testified that on September
 
25, 2007, he was assigned to be the lead investigator on the
 case. He testified that during the course of his investigation,
 he determined that neither Basham nor Aliikea had any prior
 criminal history of arrests or convictions. Officer Barrett, who
 wrote down Chavez’s dictated statement after the incident, was
 not called as a witness by the State. 
4
 Although the prosecutor also asked Officer Dela Cruz if Chavez
identified Aliikea, the transcript of the trial does not indicate that Officer
Dela Cruz responded after the court overruled defense counsels’
objections. 
-7­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B.
 
Basham did not testify during the trial and did not
 
present any witnesses on his behalf. 
Aliikea testified to the following facts. He testified
 
that his father, Basham, most recently worked as an adult
 
correctional officer at the Halawa prison. On September 22,
 2007, Aliikea and his father were at the beach with family and
 friends. At some point during the day, his brother left to go
 and get some ice. 
Aliikea was on the beach when he noticed what appeared
 
to be an accident on the road involving his father’s car, which
 he knew his brother was driving. Basham told Aliikea to go and
 check on what had happened. Aliikea testified that when he
 approached the cars, he was “not calm” and “appeared angry ‘cause
 I was just frustrated with my brother” and could not “see how
 people could get in [an] accident on that bridge.” Upon
 arriving, he said, “[W]hat the hell is going on” to both his
 brother and to Bloom and Chavez. He went to talk to Driver about
 what had happened. Bloom came towards them to ask about
 insurance, and Aliikea told him, “[C]an you just back away and so
 I can figure out what is going on, my dad is almost here.” Bloom
 backed away but then “came back and kept on coming back to talk
 about the insurance.” Aliikea put up his hand to push Bloom
 away. He testified that he did not yell at Bloom or grab or
 choke Bloom’s neck.
 
-8­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
When Basham arrived, he began talking to Bloom, while
 
Aliikea tried to calm Driver down because “[Driver] was getting a
 
little crazy.” Basham then came back to where Aliikea and Driver
 were standing. Aliikea’s attention was directed towards Driver.
 Aliikea explained that as he was telling Driver to “just let dad
 handle it,” he heard Basham say watch out, and felt Basham push
 him out of the way. Aliikea turned and saw Bloom falling. He
 testified that Basham had pushed Bloom. He saw Bloom try to get
 up, and “all of a sudden” Driver was on top of Bloom, straddling
 him. Then Driver began punching Bloom in the face. Aliikea
 stood there “in shock” at first and then pulled Driver off of
 Bloom. Basham walked over to try to help Bloom up, but Chavez
 started “whacking” Basham, saying “you’re killing him.” At some
 point, Aliikea realized that Driver was no longer present. 
Aliikea testified that neither he nor Basham held Bloom
 
to the ground at any time. He also testified. that once Bloom
 and Chavez were in the car, Basham told him to stop the car
 because it looked like they were attempting to leave. Aliikea
 knew that the police were on their way. He stood in front of the
 car to prevent Bloom and Chavez from leaving. 
After the defense rested and the State re-called
 
Chavez, Defendants’ counsel moved for a judgment of acquittal “as
 to the issue of principal versus accomplice.” The court denied
 the motion. 
-9­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.
 
The State requested jury instructions related to
 
accomplice liability under HRS § 702-222, which provides that a
 
person is an accomplice of another in the commission of an
 offense if, with the intention of promoting or facilitating the
 commission of the offense, the person aids or agrees or attempts
 to aid the other person in planning or committing it. The
 State’s proposed instructions included four separate instructions
 on accomplice liability. However, the State did not request an
 instruction defining the mens rea element of intent to promote or
 facilitate the commission of the offense. 
During the settling of jury instructions, which
 
occurred just before closing arguments, the parties agreed that
 the court’s proposed instruction on accomplice liability would be
 given as modified. The court’s modified instruction did not
 include a definition for the phrase “intent to promote or
 facilitate the commission of the offense.” The prosecutor did
 not object to the lack of such definitions during the settling of
 jury instructions. 
Accordingly, prior to closing arguments, the court gave
 
the following jury instruction on accomplice liability: 
A defendant charged with committing an offense may be guilty
because he is an accomplice of another in the commission of
the offense. The prosecution must prove accomplice
liability beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
A person is an accomplice of another in the commission of an
offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of the offense, he aids or agrees or attempts to
 
-10­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
aid the other person in the planning or commission of the
offense.
 
Mere presence at the scene of an offense or knowledge that
an offense is being committed, without more, does not make a
person an accomplice to the offense. However, if a person
plans or participates in the commission of an offense with
the intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he is an
accomplice to the commission of the offense.
 
(Emphases added).
 
The court also instructed the jury generally:
 
“Statements or remarks made by counsel are not evidence. You
 
should consider their arguments to you but you are not bound by
 their recollections or interpretations of the evidence.” 
The prosecutor then proceeded with his closing
 
5
 argument . The prosecutor began his argument by characterizing
the case as a simple case turning on the issue of witness
 credibility:
 
Ultimately this is a simple case. It is a simple case
because it turns on one issue and one issue alone. That
 
issue is witness credibility. You have heard during this
relatively brief trial two versions of events as to what
transpired on that road leading to Oneula Beach Park. As
 the jurors, as the finders of fact, it is your sole
responsibility to determine the credibility of the
witnesses.
 
(Emphasis added). After stating that it was the “sole
 
responsibility” of the jurors “to determine the credibility of
 the witnesses,” the prosecutor declared, “on behalf of the
 
5
 The court allotted fifty minutes for the prosecutor’s closing
argument and twenty-five minutes for each defendant. Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 24.1(b) provides that “[i]n addressing the jury, each
party shall be allowed to fully and fairly state the party’s theory of the
case and the reasons that entitle the party to a verdict.”
 
-11­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prosecution,” Bloom and Chavez were “completely credible
 
witnesses” with “absolutely no reason” to lie: 
On behalf of the prosecution, I adamantly state to you, that
Mr. and Mrs. Bloom have been completely credible witnesses,
that they are worthy of your belief. They have no axe to
grind, no revenge to be had. They did not know the
Defendants Basham before this incident. They have
absolutely no reason to fabricate or otherwise make up the
accounts that they have recited to you in explicit detail.
 
(Emphases added). 
The prosecutor contrasted Bloom and Chavez with
 
Aliikea, and informed the jury that Aliikea “has absolutely no
 
reason to tell you the truth”: 
Defendant Aliikea Basham, on the other hand, has decided to
testify, which is his right. When a defendant testifies,
his credibility is to be weighed as any other witness. But
 
you need to keep something in mind. Defendant Aliikea
 Basham has absolutely no reason to tell you the truth. So
 the selection or the choice before you in weighing the
credibility of the witness is this. Your willingness to
believe two people who have no reason to lie to you versus
one person who has no reason to tell you the truth.
 
(Emphases added). 
The prosecutor then reviewed the charges against
 
Defendants, “[a]gainst that understanding” that the jury had to
 
make a choice between believing two people who have no reason to
 lie versus one person who has no reason to tell the truth. 
In discussing accomplice liability, the prosecutor
 
first stated the elements of such liability in accordance with
 the jury instructions: 
On page 24 of your instructions, and you don’t have to turn
to them now, allow me just to talk to you about it, the
concept of accomplice liability was explained to you. A
 person is an accomplice of another if in the commission of
Assault in the First Degree, with intent to promote or
facilitate the commission of Assault in the First Degree,
 
-12­   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the person aids or agrees or attempts to aid the person in
the planning or the commission of the offense.
 
(Emphasis added). The prosecutor continued, “Let’s define a
 
couple of those words and put it in everyday English that we can
 understand. A person is an accomplice if with intent to promote
 --what does that ‘promote’ mean? It simply means for our
 
purposes to encourage, the desire to bring about.” (Emphasis
 added).
 
Basham’s counsel immediately objected. During the
 
ensuing bench conference, Basham’s counsel objected that the
 prosecutor’s definition was a “far cry” from the legal definition
 of the term “intent to promote,” which was defined very narrowly
 to mean that the “defendant had the intent to promote the
 commission of the particular offense”:
 
[Basham’s counsel]: Ask the Court to instruct the jury the
use of the word “intent” clearly under Hawai' i state law,
State v. Yip, Yabusaki, Soares, the words “intent to
promote” is used in very narrow circumstances
, meaning that
with regard to accomplice liability proof must be had beyonda reasonable doubt that the defendant had the intent to promote the commission of the particular offense. And [theprosecutor’s] use of it is a far cry from what the legal
definition is under the Hawai' i case law and intent has to 
be construed in terms of the intentional state of mind that
 
the Court has given. So his current argument is highly
misleading and prejudicial if you let it stand. 
(Emphasis added). Aliikea’s counsel joined in the objection. 
However, the court overruled the objection. 
The prosecutor then continued to define the terms of
 
the jury instruction on accomplice liability, informing the jury
 that “promote” meant “to encourage,” and “facilitate” meant “to
 make easy” or “to bring about”: 
-13­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[Prosecutor]: The term “promote” means to encourage. What
 
does the word “facilitate” mean? Using your everyday life
experience, that’s a rather big word, to facilitate. How
 
about to bring about, that’s what facilitate means. 
Facilitate, for those of you who studied Latin, might be
based in the root of facile. What does facile mean? Easy
or to make easy or to bring about.
 
(Emphases added). The prosecutor argued that “at a minimum,”
 
Basham and Aliikea were “guilty of Assault in the First Degree as
 an accomplice.”
 
In discussing Basham’s role in the incident, the
 
prosecutor argued that Basham “lied to the police” because
 Officer Kopa identified Basham as the driver of the blue car, and
only Basham could have been the source of such information:
  
You know that Defendant Michael Basham lied to the police. 
How do you know that? When Officer Keola Kopa, the second
police officer who testified, he had the suit and the -- the
stubble, he told you his only job at the scene was to
document the minor motor vehicle collision. And whom did he
 identify as the operators? Steven Bloom, Michael Basham.
Who could the only source of that information be? Not
 Steven Bloom who had been knocked unconscious. Michael
 Basham. 
(Emphases added). The prosecutor argued, “In other words,
 
[Basham] took the role of his son as the driver and thus lied to
 the police.”
 
The prosecutor concluded his argument by stating that
 
Basham and Aliikea “intentionally or knowingly engaged in conduct
with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of
 Assault in the First Degree,” by “actively aiding the third
 Basham in literally rendering unconscious [Bloom].”
  
-14­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D.
 
Basham’s counsel then proceeded with his closing
 
argument. Counsel first reminded the jury that they were
 
required to apply the “specific legal definition” of terms as
 “they appear in the [jury] instructions and how they are defined
 to you,” rather than the “everyday common sense” definitions.
 Counsel then addressed the prosecutor’s statement that Aliikea
 had no reason to tell the truth:
 
 
Now, [the prosecutor] appears to be saying that when Aliikea
Basham took the stand he had no reason to tell you the
truth. 
Now, I take offense with that statement because
Aliikea took the stand, he took the oath to tell the truth
just like all the other witnesses in this case, and you
heard Judge Lee say when a witness testifies, whether it’s a
defendant or not, they’re supposed to be treated equally
like any other witness. So the way I take [the
prosecutor’s] statement you should not believe Aliikea
because he's a defendant in the case, it does violence to
that legal principle that the Judge has instructed us on. 
(Emphasis added).
 
Counsel continued by arguing that Chavez’s testimony
 
was not credible. Counsel argued that if anything, the State
 
would have to prove that Defendants were accomplices because
 neither Aliikea nor Basham actually caused the injuries to Bloom.
 He argued that based on Aliikea’s testimony, “certainly Michael
 is not guilty of anything.” Counsel contended that the
 prosecutor had not caught Aliikea in a lie during his testimony
 because “he wasn’t lying.” On the other hand, Chavez’s
 testimony, counsel argued, included facts favorable to both
 sides. 
-15­ Following closing arguments, Aliikea’s counsel moved
 
for mistrial based on two instances of alleged misconduct during
 
the prosecutor’s rebuttal, in which the prosecutor informed the
 
jury that Officer Barrett no longer lived on the island of O' ahu 
and argued that Aliikea’s testimony “tracked” Chavez’s dictated
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
E.
 
statement to Officer Barrett because Aliikea read the statement.6
 
The court had granted the motion to strike both comments during
 
the prosecutor’s rebuttal. 
Basham’s counsel joined in the motion, incorporating
 
the same objections and additionally arguing that the
 prosecutor’s use of the word “‘intent’ in the context of the
 accomplice liability issue” was “clearly erroneous.” Basham’s
 
counsel again noted that Hawai' i cases made it clear that the 
word “intent” as used in the accomplice liability statute
 
required the State to prove the defendant had the specific intent
 
6 During rebuttal, the prosecutor stated, “The defense would make a
big deal how come Officer Barrett isn’t here to testify? Well, as Officer
Dela Cruz told you, Officer Barrett is no longer a policeman. In fact Officer
 Barrett no longer lives on the island of Oahu.” No evidence had been adduced
 as to the fact that Officer Barrett no longer lived on the island, and the
court struck the comment. 
Later during the rebuttal, the prosecutor responded to Aliikea’s
counsel’s argument that Aliikea was telling the truth because he said things
that either hurt him or his father. The prosecutor stated, “The best kind of
lies are those that track the truth to a point and stop because those kinds of
lies make it difficult to distinguish if it’s in fact truth or lie.” The
 prosecutor argued that Aliikea “couldn’t come up and say I wasn’t there or I
wasn’t argumentative or I didn’t touch [Complainant] because to do so would
make his version so incredible, so unworthy of belief that he would
automatically have to be discredited.” Thus, the prosecutor argued, “[W]hat
[Aliikea] did was he tracked the statement. And [defense counsel] said it,
Aliikea Basham’s statement tracks [Chavez’s] dictated statement to Officer
Barrett. It does that because -- the reasonable inference is that Aliikea
 Basham read the statement[.]” 
-16­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to cause the resulting offense. The prosecutor’s argument was
 
“clearly a misstatement of the law and in no way is a reasonable
 construction of the accomplice liability statute.” Counsel
 argued that although the court had overruled his objection during
 the prosecutor’s closing, the court “also denied a request for .
 . . cautionary instructions, so the prejudice has not been cured
 and I move for mistrial at this time.” 
The court denied the motion, explaining with respect to
 
the prosecutor’s definition of intent, “the Court had instructed
 the jurors on the law and the law clearly indicates that the
 person is an accomplice if with the intent to facilitate the
 commission of an offense.” 
Subsequently on June 14, 2011, the jury returned
 
verdicts finding Aliikea and Basham guilty of assault in the
 first degree. The court sentenced both Aliikea and Basham to ten
 years of imprisonment. 
II.
 
A.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Basham argued in relevant part
 
that 1) the circuit court “abused its discretion in denying the
 defense’s motion for mistrial following the prosecutor’s numerous
 acts of misconduct during closing argument”; 2) the circuit court
 “abused its discretion in overruling the defense’s objection to
 the prosecutor’s misstatement of the law on accomplice liability,
 refusing to give a cautionary instruction, and then denying the
 
-17­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion for mistrial”; and 3) there was insufficient evidence to
 
sustain Basham’s conviction for assault in the first degree and
 any lesser-included offenses. 
In support of the first point of error, Basham
 
referenced several instances of prosecutorial misconduct,
 including the prosecutor’s assertion that Basham lied to the
 police by telling Officer Kopa that he was the driver of the blue
 car.
7 Basham contended that the prosecutor’s statement was not a
 
reasonable inference from the evidence “because there was more
 than one possible source, other than [Basham], for determining
 the driver.” In addition, Officer Kopa never testified that
 Basham told him he was the driver. Thus, Basham argued that the
 prosecutor’s statement was an attempt to attack his credibility,
 which was “especially offensive to his right to a fair trial
 because [he] did not testify.” 
In addition, Basham contended that the prosecutor, by
 
making the assertion, intended to comment on his failure to
 testify. The jury would also naturally and necessarily have
 interpreted the statement as “a comment on Michael’s failure to
 talk to the police and failure to testify.” Basham argued that
 the prosecutor’s misconduct was not harmless because the
 
7
 Additionally, Basham argued that the prosecutor committed
misconduct by: 1) stating that Officer Barrett no longer lives on the island;
2) stating that Aliikea’s testimony tracked Chavez’s dictated statement to
Officer Barrett; and 3) informing the jury that their verdict was important,
“not only to the defendants but . . . to an orderly community,” and stating,
“We resolve things by avoiding the use of violence.” 
-18­  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
statement attacked his credibility, no curative instruction was
 
given, and the State’s case “rested upon an accomplice theory and
 a single, biased eye-witness[.]”
8
 
With respect to the second point of error, Basham
 
argued that the prosecutor misstated the law on accomplice
 liability under HRS § 702-222 by separately defining the terms
 “promote” and “facilitate” used in the statute. By defining the
 terms, “there was a risk that the jury would confuse the State’s
 burden of proving that the defendants had the specific ‘intent to
 promote and facilitate the commission of the offense’ as
 synonymous with the element of aiding and agreeing or attempting
 to aid[.]” In other words, the jury was misled to believe that
 it was enough for the State to prove that the defendants merely
 ‘encouraged’ the driver to assault Bloom or ‘made easy’ the
 assault on Bloom, when the law requires that the State also
 prove” the mens rea of intent to promote or facilitate the
 commission of the assault.
9
 
8 Basham also argued that the cumulative effect of the four
instances of misconduct, see supra note 7, required a new trial. Basham
 
further argued that the double jeopardy clause barred the State from re-
prosecuting him because the prosecutor’s repeated misconduct “exhibited the
prosecutor’s willful purpose to undermine the trial process,” and it could not
be said beyond a reasonable doubt that he received a fair trial. 
9
 This argument was also raised to this court in Basham’s writ of
certiorari and at oral argument. See Audio recording: Oral Arguments, STATE 
OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee vs. MICHAEL W. BASHAM,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant, and ALIIKEA BASHAM, Aka Aliikea I. Basham,Defendant (No. SCWC-11-0000758) Thursday, August 15, 2013, at 15:25(Available at http://www.courts.state.hi.us/ courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc11758.html, last visited Jan. 21, 2014.) 
-19­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Basham contended that the jury should have minimally
 
been given a cautionary instruction that they adhere to the
 
court’s instructions on the law of accomplice liability. 
Third, Basham argued that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction for assault in the first
 degree and for any lesser-included offenses. He noted that the
 State prosecuted him under the theory of accomplice liability
 because it was clear he did not cause Bloom’s injuries. Viewed
 in the strongest light for the prosecution, the evidence
 established that Basham said “don’t hit him, don’t lick him,”
 either pushed or grabbed Bloom before Bloom fell to the ground,
 and held Bloom by the shoulders when Bloom was on the ground, but
 stopped once Driver jumped onto Bloom. Basham argued that by
 warning his son not to hit Bloom, he demonstrated his intent to
 prevent the assault, and the fact that he let go of Bloom’s
 shoulders when Driver jumped onto Bloom showed that he did not
 intend to promote or facilitate an assault. 
B.
 
In response, the State argued that neither defendant
 
objected to the prosecutor’s statement that Basham lied to the
 police; thus, the claim must be reviewed for plain error. The
 State contended that the “evidence was unequivocal that a young
 man with red-tinted hair was the driver.” The evidence
 demonstrated that Officer Kopa, after speaking to the witnesses
 at the scene, determined that Basham was the driver. According
 
-20­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the State, only four people were at the scene, and neither
 
Bloom nor Chavez would have identified Basham as the driver.
 Aliikea testified that his brother was the driver, leaving only
 Basham as the “sole person who would have lied to Officer Kopa.”
 Thus, the prosecutor’s assertion was a reasonable inference and
 did not constitute error. Additionally, the assertion was not a
 comment on Basham’s failure to testify. 
In regard to the prosecutor’s statement of the law on
 
accomplice liability, the State contended that the prosecutor
 referred several times to the court’s jury instruction. The
 State argued that because “promote” and “facilitate” are not
 defined by the statute, “the prosecutor utilized the words’ usual
 and ordinary meanings to assist the jury in understanding the
 words in the context of the accomplice liability instruction.”
 This was proper because “words of a law are generally to be
 understood in their most known and usual signification.” 
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
 
overruling the defense objections to the prosecutor’s
 definitions, denying the request for a cautionary instruction,
 and denying the defense’s motion for mistrial. 
The State contended that assuming arguendo that the
 
prosecutor’s remarks were improper, Basham was not denied a fair
 trial. The State argued there was “no reason to believe that the
 jury did not follow the court’s instructions,” and “the evidence
 
-21­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
adduced proving that the defendants were accomplices was very
 
strong.” 
Finally, on the sufficiency of the evidence issue, the
 
State argued that when viewed in the light most favorable to the
 prosecution, the evidence showed “that the defendants held
 [Bloom] down while the driver pummeled him.” Even assuming that
 Basham stopped holding Bloom when Driver jumped onto Bloom and
 began punching, “the defendants had already accomplished their
 purpose of aiding the driver’s commission of the crime, for
 [Bloom] was absolutely defenseless.” Thus, the State contended
 that there was substantial evidence supporting Basham’s
 conviction. 
C.
 
On the first issue, the ICA held that the prosecutor’s
 
statement that Basham lied to the police was a “permissible and
 reasonable inference based on evidence in the record that Basham
 misrepresented himself as the driver involved in the collision.” 
State v. Basham, No. CAAP-11-0000758, 2012 WL 6738798, at *2
 (Haw. App. Dec. 31, 2012) (SDO). On the second issue, the ICA
 determined that the prosecutor did not misstate the law by
 defining the words “promote” and “facilitate.” Id. at *3. 
Rather, the prosecutor “referenced the plain meaning of the
 words.” Id. 
Regarding the sufficiency of the evidence, the ICA
 
found that “Basham concedes the evidence shows Basham pushed or
 
-22­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
grabbed [Bloom] before [Bloom] fell to the ground, and that
 
Basham held [Bloom] to the ground.” Id. at *4. Although Basham
 
maintained that the evidence did not sufficiently demonstrate
 intent to assault because Basham stopped holding Bloom to the
 ground once Driver began punching Bloom, the ICA held that there
 was substantial evidence supporting the jury’s conclusion in this
 case. Id. 
Accordingly, the ICA affirmed Basham’s conviction. Id.
 
at *5.
 
III.
 
In his application for writ of certiorari (Application)
 
to this court, Basham raises two points of error for review: 
A. Whether the ICA gravely erred in determining that the
prosecutor did not engage in misconduct during closing
argument when: (1) the prosecutor argued that Petitioner
lied to the police, although Petitioner did not testify at
trial and the police officer could not remember what
Petitioner had told him and (2) the prosecutor misstated the
law on accomplice liability, thereby confusing the jury as
to the elements of the assault offense. 
B. Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
evidence was sufficient to sustain a conviction for assault
 
based upon accomplice liability. 
IV. 
We first address Basham’s argument that the prosecutor
 
misstated the law on accomplice liability during closing
 
argument. 
HRS § 702-222 (1993), titled “Liability for conduct of
 
another; complicity,” provides in relevant part that: “A person
 is an accomplice of another in the commission of an offense if:
 (1) With the intention of promoting or facilitating the
 
-23­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
commission of the offense, the person . . . (b) Aids or agrees or
 
attempts to aid the other person in planning or committing it[.]” 
In this case, the prosecutor informed the jury during
 
closing argument that the word “promote” “simply means for our
 purposes to encourage, the desire to bring about.” After the
 court overruled defense counsel’s objection, the prosecutor
 continued and informed the jury that the word “facilitate,” means
 “to bring about.” In addition, he stated that the root word of
 “facilitate” is “facile,” which he defined as “easy or to make
 easy or to bring about.” This argument is problematic for
 several reasons. 
First, HRS § 702-222 does not define the words
 
“promote” or “facilitate.” The statute is derived from the
 nearly identical accomplice liability provision within the Model
 Penal Code, Section 2.06 (1962), which also does not define the
 
terms.
10 See State v. Aiwohi, 109 Hawai' i 115, 126, 123 P.3d 
1210, 1221 (2005) (“The Hawai' i Penal Code is substantially 
derived from the Model Penal Code. Accordingly, it is
 
appropriate to look to the Model Penal Code and its commentary
 for guidance.” (Footnote omitted)). The Comment to Section 2.06
 of the Model Penal Code provides that an accomplice, in having
 
10
 Model Penal Code § 2.06(3) provides: 
A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission
of an offense if:
 (a) with the purpose of promoting  or facilitating the
commission of the offense, he
(i)	 Solicits such other person to commit it, or
(ii)	 Aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other person in
planning or committing it ***
 
-24­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the
 
offense, is required to “have as his [or her] conscious objective
 the bringing about of conduct that the Code has declared to be
 criminal”:
 
Subsection (3)(a) requires that the actor have the purpose
of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense,
i.e., that he have as his conscious objective the bringing
about of conduct that the Code has declared to be criminal. 
This is not to say that he must know of the criminality of
the conduct; there is no more reason here to require
knowledge of the criminal law than there is with the
principal actor. But he must have the purpose to promote or
facilitate the particular conduct that forms the basis for
the charge, and thus he will not be liable for conduct that
does not fall within this purpose. 
Model Penal Code § 2.06 cmt. (1962) (emphasis added).
 
The meaning of the phrase “intention of promoting or
 
facilitating the commission of the offense” as used in HRS § 702­
222 must be interpreted within the context of the accomplice
 statute and the derivative source of the statute, which is the
 Model Penal Code. See HRS § 1-15(1) (“meaning of ambiguous words
 
may be sought by examining the context . . . in order to
 ascertain their true meaning”). In the context of the accomplice
 statute, the Model Penal Code makes clear that “intent to promote
 or facilitate” means to have the conscious objective of bringing
 about the commission of the offense. 
Having an intent to make easy or to encourage criminal
 
conduct is not equivalent to having an intent to bring about the
 commission of the criminal offense. While the prosecutor
 referenced “to bring about” in defining both “promote” and
 “facilitate,” by also defining the words in terms of
 
-25­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“encouraging” or “making easy,” the prosecutor reduced the
 
culpability necessary to satisfy the statutory definition of an
 accomplice. 
The ICA held that the “prosecutor did not misstate the
 
law, but referenced the plain meaning of the words.” Basham,
 
2012 WL 6738790, at *3. However, the words “promoting” and
 “facilitating” can be attributed several ordinary meanings. 
“Promote” or “promoting” may be defined as “to advance in
 station, rank, or honor,” “to contribute to the growth or
 prosperity of,” “further,” or “to help bring (as an enterprise)
 into being.” Merriam-Webster.com, http://www.merriam
­
webster.com/dictionary/promoting (last visited Dec. 9, 2013).
 
“Facilitate” or “facilitating” may be defined as “to make
 easier,” “to help cause,” “to help (something) run more smoothly
 and effectively,” or “help bring about.” Merriam-Webster.com,
 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/facilitating
 (last
 
visited Dec. 9, 2013).
 
Neither party should be permitted to argue during
 
closing arguments for alternative definitions of terms in the
 jury instructions that best fits their own theory of the case. 
If such arguments were permitted, then either side could orally
 amend the court’s instructions during closing argument by
 providing their own popular definitions of key terms in the
 instructions. The jurors would then be able to select the
 definition they preferred or remembered when applying the court’s
 
-26­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instructions during deliberations. Such a practice would be
 
especially problematic if it involved critical instructions that
 are key to the State’s theory of prosecution, as the accomplice
 instruction was in this case.
 
It is precisely to avoid such confusion that the rules
 
provide a specific procedure for the court, rather than the
 
counsel or the parties, to instruct the jury on the law. Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 30(b) (2012) provides that 
parties “shall file written requests that the court instruct the jury on the law.” When a request is filed, counsel is “entitled to be heard thereon.” HRPP Rule 30(c). “The court may revise the language of any or all of the requested instructions which are approved by the court in whole or in part[.]” HRPP Rule 30(d). The court is required to “inform counsel of its proposed action with respect to any such revision made or instructions prepared by the court, and any changes thereon made by the court shall be reduced to writing and submitted to counsel prior to their arguments to the jury.” HRPP Rule 30(d). Jury instructions that are settled as set forth above “shall be read to the jury.” HRPP Rule 30(d). 
The rules prohibit oral amendments to the jury
 
instructions once they have been given to the jury. HRPP Rule
 30(e) provides that the court “shall in no case orally qualify,
 modify or explain to the jury any instruction . . . .” (Emphasis
 added). When the jury requests further instruction during
 
-27­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
deliberation on its verdict, the court may provide further
 
instructions, but the instructions must be “reduced to writing”
 and “first submit[ed]” to counsel. HRPP Rule 30(e)
 
In this case, the above procedures were followed by the
 
parties until the prosecutor orally modified the court’s
 accomplice instruction by defining the words “promote” and
 “facilitate.” The prosecutor did not submit a written request
 for such definitions, despite submitting four other proposed
 instructions related to accomplice liability. The prosecutor
 also did not object to the lack of such definitions during the
 settling of jury instructions, which occurred just before closing
 arguments. Thus, neither the court nor defense counsel had
 approved of defining “promote” as “to encourage” and “facilitate”
 as “to make easy.” 
“‘[A]rguments of counsel which misstate the law are 
subject to objection and to correction by the court.’” State v. 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i 127, 140, 176 P.3d 885, 898 (2008) (quoting 
State v. Mahoe
, 89 Hawai' i 284, 290, 972 P.2d 287, 293 (1998)) 
(brackets omitted). However, in this case, the court overruled defense counsel’s objection to the prosecutor’s definitions, and no curative instruction was given. Given that the prosecutor’s definitions reduced the culpability required by HRS § 702-222 and effectively amended the court’s jury instructions, the court was required
 to sustain defense counsel’s objection pursuant to HRPP 
Rule 30(e). Cf. State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 
-28­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
246, 256 (2001) (“[I]n our judicial system, the trial courts, not
 
the parties, have the duty and ultimate responsibility to insure
 that juries are properly instructed on issues of criminal
 liability.”), overruled in part on other grounds, State v.
 
Flores, __ Hawai' i __, __ P.3d __ (2013); State v. Kikuta, 125 
Hawai'i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011) (“With respect to jury 
instructions, it is the duty of the trial court to ensure that 
the jury is properly instructed.”). 
Because the court overruled defense counsel’s 
objection, the court endorsed the definitions given by the 
prosecutor. See Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 143, 176 P.3d at 901 
(Because defense counsel’s objections to prosecutor’s 
misstatement of law during closing argument were overruled, “the jury would reasonably perceive that the misstatement of the law 
was not incorrect.”); State v. Schnabel
, 127 Hawai' i 432, 453, 
279 P.3d 1237, 1258 (2012) (“[B]y overruling defense counsel’s 
objection, the court, at least tacitly, placed its imprimatur upon the [prosecutor’s] improper remarks.”) (quoting State v. 
Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83, 96, 26 P.3d 572, 585 (2001)) (quotation 
marks and brackets omitted)). Thus, the prosecutor’s definitions 
of the accomplice instruction became the court’s instructions upon the law, and the jury was essentially instructed that it was permissible to find the intent element of the accomplice instruction to be present if Basham acted with the “
intent to 
-29­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
encourage or to make easy the commission of the offense.” Such
 
an instruction is a misstatement of the law on accomplice
 liability.
11
 
“If improper comments are made by a prosecutor, ‘harm
 
or prejudice to a defendant can be cured by the court’s
 
instructions to the jury.’” Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 143, 176 
P.3d at 901 (quoting State v. Melear, 63 Haw. 488, 497, 630 P.2d
 
619, 626 (1981)) (brackets omitted). “Correlatively, the failure
 to correct misstatements of law by a prosecutor may result in
 reversal of a defendant’s conviction.” Id.
 
The prosecutor did not make a curative statement
 
specifically directed at correcting the improper definitions that
 had been provided. Additionally, no curative instruction was
 given by the circuit court. Although the court generally
 instructed the jury prior to closing arguments that “[s]tatements
 or remarks made by counsel are not evidence,” this instruction
 did not neutralize the prosecutor’s oral amendment to the
 accomplice instruction, which misstated the requirements of the
 law. “[I]nasmuch as the specific misstatements in question have
 to do with law and not evidence,” the court’s instruction that
 “statements or remarks by counsel are not evidence” is
 
11
 The dissent describes the prosecutor’s definitions of promote and
facilitate as a “routine rephrasing of the law, analogous with Basham’s
discussion of intent and “proof beyond a reasonable doubt.” Dissent at 5. 
The significant distinction is that the prosecutor’s definitions bore directly
on Basham’s alleged accomplice liability by orally modifying the instructions
given by the court with the effect of expanding culpable conduct beyond that
prescribed by statute.
 
-30­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“inapposite.” Id. See State v. Tuua , 125 Hawai' i 10, 17, 250 
P.3d 273, 280 (2011) (“[T]he prosecution has not pointed to 
Hawai'i case law suggesting that a court’s generic instructions 
that arguments of counsel are not evidence, issued prior to 
improper statements, can cure misconduct in close cases involving
the credibility of witnesses.”). 
 
Additionally, while the court properly instructed the
 
jury on accomplice liability, that instruction did not cure the
 prosecutor’s misstatements of the law, where no specific curative
 instruction relating to the misstatements was given. See Melear
,
 
63 Haw. at 497, 630 P.2d at 626-27 (trial court’s instruction to
 the jury to disregard prosecutor’s improper arguments and court’s
 “immediate reading of the entire charge to the jury removed any
 
harm or prejudice”); Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 143, 176 P.3d at 
901 (“While the court here did properly instruct the jury on the 
elements of the EMED defense . . . , that instruction could not cure [the prosecutor’s] misstatements of the law, where no specific curative instruction relating to the misstatements were given.”). 
The misstatement of the law for which no curative 
instruction was given was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
See Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 144, 176 P.3d at 902. The State’s 
evidence demonstrated that Basham told Aliikea not to hit Bloom, 
and after Aliikea caused Bloom to fall to the ground, Basham held Bloom down until Driver jumped on Bloom. There was conflicting 
-31­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testimony by Aliikea that Basham pushed Bloom, causing Bloom to
 
fall, but neither Aliikea nor Basham held Bloom down. The
 State’s primary basis for convicting Basham of assault in the
 first degree was to allege that he acted as an accomplice to
 Driver. The prosecutor’s misstatement of the law and the court’s
 lack of a curative instruction “bore directly” on Basham’s
 alleged accomplice liability. See id. Thus, “[t]here exists, at
 
the least, a reasonable possibility that the error complained of
 might have contributed to [Basham’s] conviction” for assault in
 the first degree. See id. (even assuming the State’s evidence
 
strongly indicated that defendant was not acting under extreme
 mental or emotional disturbance, there was at least a reasonable
 possibility that the error might have contributed to the
 conviction). 
Basham’s conviction is therefore vacated and the case
 
is remanded for a new trial.
12
 
V.
 
In order to provide guidance to the circuit court and
 
the parties on remand, we address Basham’s remaining claims of
 
prosecutorial misconduct.13 See State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83, 
12
 “[B]ecause it cannot be said that the prosecutor’s conduct was so
egregious that viewed under an objective standpoint, Petitioner was denied his
or her right to a fair trial, reprosecution is not barred under the double
jeopardy clause.” Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 144, 176 P.3d at 902. See State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 423, 984 P.2d 1231, 1249 (1999) (“[R]eprosecution is
barred where, in the face of egregious prosecutorial misconduct, it cannot be
said beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant received a fair trial.”). 
13
 “The term ‘prosecutorial misconduct’ is a legal term of art that
refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however harmless or
(continued...)
 
-32­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
88, 26 P.3d 572, 577 (2001) (vacating conviction and remanding
 
for new trial based on prosecutorial misconduct and addressing
 additional issues on erroneously admitted evidence, ineffective
 assistance of counsel, and choice of evils defense “[i]n order to
 provide guidance to the circuit court and the parties on
 
remand”); State v. Davia, 87 Hawai' i 249, 252, 953 P.2d 1347, 
1350 (1998) (vacating conviction and remanding for new change of 
plea hearing based on district court’s failure to establish that defendant’s plea was knowing and voluntary, but addressing defendant’s remaining points of error “in order to provide guidance to the district court and the parties on remand”). 
The second issue raised by Basham’s application is
 
whether the prosecutor engaged in misconduct during closing
 argument by arguing that Basham lied to the police, although
 Basham did not testify at trial and the police officer could not
 recall what information was given by Basham. Basham argued in
 his Application that if the prosecutor had attempted to introduce statements made by Basham to the police during the trial, those 
statements would have been subject to the Hawai' i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE), particularly Rules 402 through 404 regarding 
relevance, prejudice, and character evidence, and Rules 802 and
 803 regarding hearsay. He contended that the prosecutor’s
 statement during closing argument that Basham lied to the police
 
13(...continued)
unintentional.” 
(2005). State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 20, 25, 108 P.3d 974, 979 
-33­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“allowed the prosecutor to circumvent these evidentiary and
 
constitutional protections and cannot be condoned.” 
“[A] prosecutor, during closing argument, is permitted
 
to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence . . . .” State
 
v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996). 
“Although a prosecutor has wide latitude in commenting on the
 evidence during closing argument, it is not enough that . . .
 [the prosecutor’s] comments are based on testimony in evidence;
 his comments must also be legitimate.” State v. Mainaaupo, 117
 
Hawai'i 235, 253, 178 P.3d 1, 19 (2008) (quotation marks and 
citations omitted). “A prosecutor’s comments are legitimate when
 they draw reasonable inferences from the evidence.” Id. at 253­
54, 178 P.3d at 19-20.
 
“Whether the evidence bears a logical and proximate
 
connection to the point the prosecutor wishes to prove [is]
 perhaps the most obvious consideration[] in determining whether
 an inference is reasonable.” U.S. v. Waldemer, 50 F.3d 1379,
 
1384 (7th Cir. 1995). It is also relevant whether the prosecutor
 made the argument simply to enflame the passions of the jury. 
Id. Another consideration is whether the inference asked to be
 drawn 
cannot be justified as a fair comment on the evidence but
instead is more akin to the presentation of wholly new
evidence to the jury, which should only be admitted subject
to cross-examination, to proper instructions and to the
rules of evidence.
 
Klebig, 600 F.3d at 718 (emphasis added).
 
-34­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In Klebig, the court determined that it was prejudicial
 
error for a demonstration of physical evidence during the
 
prosecutor’s closing argument to allege new facts that had not
 been established during the trial. The Klebig court was
 concerned with preserving the defendant’s fundamental rights.
 
[I]t is important . . . that the inference be reasonable not
only to avoid abridging the defendant's right to cross-
examine possibly untrue testimony but also to prevent a
party from presenting to the jury in closing argument a fact
that might have been ruled inadmissible at trial (or at
least subject to a limiting instruction) simply by asserting
in closing argument that the jury could infer it from the
evidence that was presented and admitted. 
Klebig, 600 F.3d at 721 (emphasis added). That is, a defendant’s
 
fundamental rights to confront witnesses, test evidence, and to
 prevent the introduction of possibly inadmissible evidence may be
 compromised merely upon an assertion in closing argument that the
 jury could infer the fact from the evidence that was admitted. 
Closing arguments are not the place to introduce new evidence
 
outside the safeguards of the Hawai' i Rules of Evidence. See 
State v. Yip, 92 Hawai' i 98, at 111, 987 P.2d 996, 1009 (App 
1999) (“In closing arguments, it is improper to refer to evidence
 
which is not in the record or has been excluded by the court.”). 
In this case, during closing argument the prosecutor
 
argued, “You know that Defendant Michael Basham lied to the
 police.” (Emphasis added). In support of this statement, the
 prosecutor argued that Officer Kopa testified that he identified
 Bloom and Basham as the drivers of the two cars involved in the
 accident. The prosecutor contended, “Who could the only source
 
-35­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of that information be? Not [Bloom] who had been knocked
 
unconscious. Michael Basham.” “In other words, [Basham] took
 the role of his son as the driver and thus lied to the police.” 
The ICA held that the “prosecutor made a permissible
 
and reasonable inference based on evidence in the record that
 Basham misrepresented himself as the driver involved in the
 collision.” Basham, 2012 WL 6738798, at *2. 
The only evidence relevant to this issue was Officer
 
Kopa’s testimony that based on his investigation, he determined
 that Basham was the driver of the blue car. Officer Kopa was
 present at the scene in a limited capacity of documenting the
 minor motor vehicle collision and “nothing more.” He attempted
 to identify the operator of each car and indicated that “if
 there’s no one behind the driver’s seat,” then the police “try to
 get witnesses, . . . try to ascertain the driver, either by
 asking or just –- anything at the scene that we can see to help
 us ascertain who was driving.” 
However, Officer Kopa did not explain how he
 
ascertained that Basham was driving the blue car in this case. 
When he was specifically asked whether Basham told him that the
 car was his, Officer Kopa responded, “I don’t remember exactly
 what he said.” Basham did not testify, and none of the other
 witnesses testified as to whether Basham identified himself to
 the police as the driver, as opposed to the owner, of the car. 
Thus, it is questionable whether the prosecutor’s statement that
 
-36­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Basham must have lied to the police because he was the “only
 
source” of the information regarding the identity of the driver
 was a reasonable inference from the evidence.
 
Nevertheless, even assuming this was a reasonable
 
inference, the prosecutor’s allegation was not merely that Basham
 has previously lied. Cf. Domingo-Gomez v. People, 125 P.3d 1043,
 
1050 (Colo. 2005) (“The word ‘lie’ is such a strong expression
 that it necessarily reflects the personal opinion of the speaker. 
When spoken by the State’s representative in the courtroom, the
 word ‘lie’ has the dangerous potential of swaying the jury from
 their duty to determine the accused’s guilt or innocence on the
 evidence properly presented at trial.”). 
Rather, the specific allegation was that Basham lied to
 
the police, which is generally perceived by the public as
 particularly wrongful and may have also constituted the crime of
 false reporting to law-enforcement authorities.
 
Since Basham had not been charged with any misconduct
 
relating to the vehicle or the car collision, any evidence that
 he lied to the police, if the prosecutor had sought to introduce
 it during trial, would have been subject to HRE Rule 404(b) as
 
-37­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence of “other acts.”14 The rules provide several evidentiary
 
safeguards for the admission of such evidence during trial. 
Under Rule 404(b), the proponent of the evidence must
 
provide “reasonable notice” of the “date, location, and general
 
nature” of the evidence. In this case, the record does not
 indicate that the prosecutor gave any notice of Basham’s alleged
 misconduct of lying to the police. The failure to provide notice
 undermines the purpose of Rule 404(b), which is to “reduce
 surprise and promote early resolution on the issue of
 admissibility.” Federal Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b) Advisory
 Committee’s Note.
15
 
Assuming that the court would have excused pretrial
 
notice based on “good cause shown,” see HRE Rule 404(b), the
 prosecutor’s allegation that Basham lied to the police was not
 subject to the protections set forth in the HRE when “other acts”
 
14 HRE Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2011) provides:
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial. 
(Emphases added).
 
15
 The notice requirement in HRE Rule 404(b) was modeled after the
Federal Rules of Evidence. H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 567-94, in 1994 House
Journal, at 1088.
 
-38­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
are sought to be admitted. If such evidence had been introduced
 
during trial, the court would have been required to determine the
 admissibility of the evidence under HRE Rule 104(b),
16 which
 
requires a court to consider whether there was sufficient
 evidence that the alleged misconduct actually occurred. 
Even if the court had determined that there was
 
sufficient evidence supporting admission of Basham’s alleged lie
 to the police, the evidence would only have been admissible under
 Rule 404(b) if the alleged lie was probative of another fact “of
 consequence to the determination of the action.” Since the
 alleged lie would have occurred after the alleged assault by
 Driver, it does not appear under the circumstances of this case
 to have been of consequence to the determination of any issue. 
Additionally, pursuant to Rule 403, the court would
 
have been required to weigh the probative value of the evidence
 against its prejudicial effect.
17 If the evidence was not
 
excluded by any of the applicable rules, the court would still
 have been required at counsel’s request to provide a limiting
 
16
 HRE Rule 104 (1993), titled “Preliminary questions,” provides in
relevant part: “(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact. When the relevancy of
evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of fact, the court shall
admit it upon, or subject to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to
support a finding of the fulfillment of the condition.”
 
17
 HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides, “Although relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence.”
 
-39­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instruction under HRE Rule 105 regarding the proper purpose for
 
which the evidence was admitted.18
 
Rather than seeking to admit evidence that Basham lied
 
to the police during trial pursuant to the above rules, the
 prosecutor referenced the alleged lie during closing argument. 
Thus, Basham had no opportunity to rebut the allegation with
 evidence. It is apparent that the prosecutor is not permitted to
 bypass the evidentiary rules in this manner by asking the jury to
 infer conduct which, if it had been introduced during the trial,
 would have been subject to the limitations of Rule 404(b). 
Permitting such an inference to be made during closing argument
 would be contrary to the purpose of the evidentiary rules, which
 is to regulate the evidence the jury may use to reach a verdict. 
See American Bar Association Standards for Criminal Justice
 [hereinafter “ABA Standards”], at Standard 3-5.8(a) (“In closing
 argument to the jury, the prosecutor may argue all reasonable
 inferences from evidence in the record. The prosecutor should
 
not intentionally . . . mislead the jury as to the inferences it
 may draw.”) (emphases added). Cf. Donnelly v. DeChristoforo, 416
 
U.S. 637, 651 (1974) (“It is . . . quite ‘improper’ for a
 prosecutor to insinuate to the jury the existence of evidence not
 
18
 HRE Rule 105 (1993), titled “Limited admissibility,” provides:
“When evidence which is admissible as to one party or for one purpose but not
admissible as to another party or for another purpose is admitted, the court,
upon request, shall restrict the evidence to its proper scope and instruct the
jury accordingly.”
 
-40­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in the record and which could not be introduced without the
 
privilege of cross-examination.”) (Douglas, J., dissenting).
 
Accordingly, even assuming that the prosecutor made a 
reasonable inference from the evidence by arguing that Basham lied to the police, the allegation was not “legitimate” inasmuch as the wrongful conduct that was inferred may have been inadmissible under the applicable evidence rules. See Klebig
, 
600 F.3d at 721 (“the inference [should] be reasonable . . . to prevent a party from presenting to the jury in closing argument a fact that might have been ruled inadmissible at trial (or at least subject to a limiting instruction).”). Because “the prosecutor’s argument is likely to have significant persuasive force with the jury,” the “scope of argument must be consistent with the evidence and marked by the fairness that should characterize all of the prosecutor’s conduct.” State v. Klinge, 
92 Hawai' i 577, 592, 994 P.2d 509, 524 (2000) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 1231, 1239 
(1999)). 
In light of our determination that the case must be
 
remanded for a new trial, we need not decide whether the
 
prosecutor’s improper argument rose to the level of plain error. 
VI. 
It is well-established “under Hawai' i case law that 
prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing their personal
 views as to a defendant’s guilt or the credibility of witnesses.” 
-41­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Clark, 83 Hawai' i at 304, 926 P.2d at 209 (citations omitted). 
See State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986); 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 390, 424-25, 56 P.3d 692, 726-27 
(2002); Tuua, 125 Hawai' i at 14, 250 P.3d at 277. But see State 
v. Apilando, 79 Hawai' i 128, 142, 900 P.2d 135, 149 (1995) 
(prosecutor’s comment that defendant “had the greatest motive to 
lie” because he had the “highest stake in the outcome of the case” was permissible attack on defendant’s credibility). 
“The rationale for the rule is that ‘expressions of 
personal opinion by the prosecutor are a form of unsworn, unchecked testimony
 and tend to exploit the influence of the 
prosecutor’s office and undermine the objective detachment that should separate a lawyer from the cause being argued.’” Marsh, 68 Haw. at 660, 728 P.2d at 1302 (brackets omitted) (emphasis added) (quoting ABA Standards, Commentary, at Standard 3.89). 
The prosecutor in this case opened his closing argument 
by stating that the only critical issue in the case was that of witness credibility. The prosecutor continued, “On behalf of the prosecution, I adamantly state to you, that [Bloom] and [Chavez] have been completely credible witnesses, that they are worthy of your belief.” Immediately after communicating this unqualified endorsement of Bloom and Chavez, the prosecutor compared them to Aliikea. The prosecutor argued that “[w]hen a defendant
 testifies, his credibility is to be weighed as any other
 
-42­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
witness,” but “you need to keep . . . in mind” that Aliikea has
 
“no reason to tell you the truth.” 
The prosecutor’s statement was undoubtedly an
 
expression of a personal view on the credibility of the State’s
 witnesses and the guilt of the defendants.
19 See Marsh, 68 Haw.
 
at 660-61, 728 P.2d at 1302 (prosecutor improperly expressed
 personal opinion by stating, “I feel it is very clear and I hope
 you are convinced, too, that the person who committed this crime
 was none other than [defendant],” and referring to defense
 witness’s alibi testimony by stating, “I sincerely doubt if she
 [witness] had seen [defendant] there”); State v. Sanchez, 82
 
Hawai'i 517, 534, 923 P.2d 934, 951 (App. 1996) (prosecutor 
improperly asserted “personal evaluation of the credibility of 
certain witnesses in final argument” by using personal pronoun “I”). 
But more importantly, the implication of the
 
prosecutor’s argument, whether intended or not, was that Aliikea
 had no reason to tell the truth because he was a defendant in the
 case. At that point in the closing argument, the prosecutor had
 not discussed any of the testimony that had been presented during
 trial. The prosecutor also offered no reason, based on the
 evidence, that Aliikea would have no reason to tell the truth,
 other than Aliikea’s status as a defendant. 
19
 We do not agree with the Dissent that the prosecutor’s comment, “I
adamantly state to you,” is merely an introductory phrase or rhetorical
device. Dissent at 11.
 
-43­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defense counsel strongly objected to the prosecutor’s
 
statement, arguing in response that he took the prosecutor’s
 
comment to mean “you should not believe Aliikea because he’s a
 defendant in the case.”
20
 
A suggestion that defendants have no reason to tell the
 
truth impinges upon fundamental principles of our system of
 justice, including the presumption of innocence, the burden of
 proof upon the government, the right to testify without penalty,
 and the right to a fair trial with an unbiased jury. 
While defense counsel sought to neutralize the
 
prosecutor’s statement, the inherent limitations of such efforts
 have been widely recognized. “The Supreme Court has observed
 that a prosecuting attorney’s ‘improper suggestions,
 insinuations, and especially, assertions of personal knowledge
 are apt to carry much weight against the accused when they should
 properly carry none.’” Marsh, 68 Haw. at 661, 728 P.2d at 1302
 
(quoting Berger v. United States, 295 U.S. 78, 88 (1935)). 
In light of the “prestige associated with the
 
prosecutor’s office” and the “significant persuasive force” the
 prosecutor’s argument is likely to have on the jury, this court
 has repeatedly recognized that the prosecutor “has a duty to seek
 justice, to exercise the highest good faith in the interest of
 
20
 Although the propriety of the prosecutor’s statements was not
subsequently raised on appeal, due to the likelihood of retrial on remand, we
address this issue to prevent future error. State v. Gonzalez, 128 Hawai 'i 
314, 324, 288 P.3d 788, 798 (2012), State v. Apollonio, 130 Hawai 'i 353, 359, 
311 P.3d 676, 682 (2013). 
-44­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the public and to avoid even the appearance of unfair advantage
 
over the accused.”21 Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 412-13, 984 P.2d at 
1238-39.
 
While the prosecutor’s argument was specifically
 
directed at Aliikea, the statement clearly implicated Basham as
 
well. Aliikea testified that Basham did not hold Bloom down at
 any time during the incident. This statement was also consistent
 with Chavez’s first statement to Officer Barrett, which never
 mentioned that anyone held Bloom to the ground. Because Basham
 did not testify, his version of the events was essentially
 presented through Aliikea’s testimony. Basham was entitled to
 rely upon the fact, in deciding whether or not to testify, that
 Aliikea’s testimony would not be attacked as untruthful based
 upon the prosecutor’s generic argument. 
This court has held that it is “improper, under article
 
I, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution, for the prosecution to 
make generic accusations during closing argument that a defendant
 tailored his testimony based solely on the defendant’s exercise
 of his constitutional right to be present during the trial.” 
State v. Mattson, 122 Hawai' i 312, 326, 226 P.3d 482, 496 (2010). 
“[A] generic tailoring argument occurs when a prosecutor states
 
that the defendant was able to sit through the trial and hear the
 
21
 See Hawai' i Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 3.8 cmt. 1 (“A
prosecutor has the responsibility of a minister of justice and not simply that
of an advocate. This responsibility carries with it specific obligations tosee that the defendant is accorded procedural justice and that guilt isdecided upon the basis of sufficient evidence.” (Emphasis added)). 
-45­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testimony of other witnesses, thereby allowing the defendant the 
opportunity to shape his or her testimony to fit that of other witnesses, even when there is no evidence that defendant has actually done so.” State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai
'i 271, 282, 260 
P.3d 350, 361 (2011) (quoting Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 336, 226 
P.3d at 506 (Acoba, J., dissenting, with whom Duffy, J., joined)). 
In Walsh
, the court held that generic tailoring
 
arguments are subject to plain error review because they infringe
 on the defendant’s fundamental rights to confrontation, to a fair trial, to testify on his or her own behalf, and to be present at 
each criminal proceeding. 125 Hawai' i at 284-85, 260 P.3d at 
363-64. 
The prosecutor in Walsh argued during closing argument 
that the defendant “shaped his demeanor [during his testimony] to
 
appear truthful to the jury, based on statements made by
 potential jurors regarding” the credibility of a witness who
 maintained eye contact. Id. at 277-78, 291-92, 260 P.3d at 356­57, 370-71. The court held that inasmuch as “[a] defendant’s
 right to be present during voir dire is analogous to a
 defendant’s right to be present during testimony of
 witnesses, . . . a defendant’s mere presence during voir dire
 cannot be used against the defendant to attack his credibility.” 
Id. at 291, 260 P.3d at 370. The court explained, “It is . . .
 manifest that the prosecutor’s comments regarding Respondent’s
 manner of testifying transformed his presence at trial into an
 
-46­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
‘automatic burden on his credibility.’” Id. at 292, 260 P.3d at
 
371 (citation omitted). 
The court held that although the prosecutor may attack
 
the defendant’s credibility based on specific evidence of
 
tailoring, the prosecutor’s inference in that case was not drawn
 from the testimony but based solely on the defendant’s rightful
 presence during a stage of the trial:
 
The prosecutor may permissibly cast doubt about the
substance of a defendant's testimony by referring to
specific evidence suggesting that the defendant engaged in
tailoring. However, the prosecutor cannot ask the jury to
infer the defendant’s lack of credibility from the manner in
which he presented his testimony, because that inference,
related only to the defendant's presence in the courtroom,
burdens the constitutional rights of defendants,
specifically the right to be present at trial. Here, the
inference that Respondent was not credible was not drawn
from testimony, but from his rightful presence during voir
dire. 
Id. at 292, 260 P.3d at 371 (quotation marks, citations and
 
brackets omitted) (emphases added). The Walsh court’s holding
 did not “hamstring the prosecution’s ability to comment directly
 on the evidence presented,” as “the prosecution is free to refer
 to the specific inconsistencies and contradictions in a
 defendant’s testimony or with other evidence, without referring
 to his [or her] presence at trial.” Id. at 295, 260 P.3d at 374. 
In the same way that a prosecutor cannot ask the jury
 
to infer a defendant’s lack of credibility based on the
 defendant’s rightful presence at trial, a prosecutor cannot ask
 the jury to infer a defendant’s lack of credibility based solely
 on the fact that he or she is a defendant. In this case, the
 defendant was penalized for simply being the defendant; the
 
-47­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prosecutor’s generalized statement inferred that defendants are
 
untrustworthy whenever they choose to testify because they have
 “no reason to tell the truth.” The prosecutor effectively cast
 doubt on the entirety of Aliikea’s testimony as well as on
 Basham’s character by arguing that Bloom and Chavez were
 trustworthy, with no reason to lie, while Aliikea, as a
 defendant, had no reason to tell the truth.
 
Categorical comments informing the jury to treat the
 
defendant’s entire testimony as untruthful based on the
 defendant’s status as a defendant undermines the function of the
 jury as fact finder. As the Walsh
 court recognized, generic
 
arguments that the defendant has tailored his testimony or
 testified untruthfully, divert the jury from deciding the case
 
based on the evidence. 125 Hawai' i at 297, 260 P.3d at 376. 
This problem is exacerbated when such arguments are made during
 
closing argument, as the defense does not have any opportunity to
 respond by presenting evidence: 
Additionally, the statements diverted the jury from its duty
to decide the instant case on the evidence, by inviting the
jury to convict on the basis of conduct as consistent with
innocence as with guilt. Finally, the statements were also
made during closing argument, a crucial part of trial. The
 prosecutor argued that [the defendant] was not credible due
to the exercise of his right to be present at trial, without
referencing any specific evidence, at a time when [the
defendant] could not respond with any evidence.
 
Id. (citing Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 326, 226 P.3d at 496) 
(quotation marks, citations, brackets and footnote omitted)
 
(emphases added).
 
-48­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Generic arguments by the prosecutor that defendants, by
 
virtue of being defendants, have no reason to tell the truth or
 
have the greatest incentive to lie also transform a defendant’s
 decision to testify at trial into an “automatic burden on . . .
 
credibility.” See Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 292, 260 P.3d at 371. 
“[A]lthough . . . the prosecution [is allowed] wide latitude when 
making closing remarks, . . . a prosecutor’s comments may not infringe on a defendant’s constitutional rights.” Mattson
, 122 
Hawai'i at 325, 226 P.3d at 495. Generic arguments that a 
defendant is not a credible witness because of the defendant’s status, like generic accusations of tailoring, “discourage a defendant from exercising his [or her] constitutional right to 
testify on his [or her] own behalf.” See Walsh
, 125 Hawai' i at 
284-85, 260 P.3d at 363-64 (quotation marks and footnote omitted) (quoting Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 326, 226 P.3d at 496). 
“[C]losing argument affords the prosecution (as well as
 
the defense) the opportunity to persuade the jury that its theory
 
of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all
 reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.” Rogan, 91
 
Hawai'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (emphasis added) (citing State 
v. Quitog
, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). 
Permitting the prosecutor to make general arguments that the 
State’s key witnesses should be considered credible because they
 have “no reason to lie” while comparatively, the defendant should
 
-49­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be assumed to be lying because he has “no reason to tell you the
 
truth,” is not an argument based on the evidence or a reasonable
 inference drawn from the evidence.
 
“[T]his court has reiterated [the] view [that]: ‘The
 
prosecution has a duty to seek justice, to exercise the highest
 good faith in the interest of the public and to avoid even the
 appearance of unfair advantage over the accused.’” Maluia, 107
 
Hawai'i at 29, 108 P.3d at 983 (Acoba, J., concurring) (quoting 
State v. Moriwaki, 71 Haw. 347, 354, 791 P.2d 392, 396 (1990)). “[T]hat the prosecution must be held to a standard higher than ‘good faith’ is a proposition long established and fundamental to the prosecution’s role in the criminal law system. . . . When sight of this duty is lost, the level of prosecutorial advocacy is depressed. And, the dispensation of justice in our state suffers.” Id. at 28, 108 P.3d at 982 (citations omitted). “[T]he high regard in which the prosecutor is held rests on his or her position as the representative of the people.” Id. 
Accordingly, the prosecutor’s “interest . . . in a
 
criminal prosecution is not that [the sovereign] shall win a
 case, but that justice shall be done.” Id. (quoting Berger, 295
 
U.S. at 88) (quotation marks omitted). “It is as much [the
 prosecutor’s] duty to refrain from improper methods calculated to
 produce a wrongful conviction as it is to use every legitimate
 means to bring about a just one.” Id. 
-50­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Given the prosecutor’s important role in our justice
 
system and the danger that permitting generic accusations of a
 
defendant’s lack of credibility poses to the perceived fairness
 of the adversarial process, we hold that it is improper for a
 prosecutor in summation to make generic arguments regarding
 
credibility based solely upon the status of a defendant. Walsh,
 
125 Hawai' i at 285, 260 P.3d at 364 (“Because fundamental rights 
are infringed when generic tailoring arguments are made, generic 
tailoring arguments are subject to plain error review.”). Accordingly, a prosecutor may not argue during closing argument that defendants, because they are defendants, have no reason to tell the truth or have the “greatest motive to lie.” Apilando, 
79 Hawai' i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149. 
VII.
 
Finally, Basham maintains that the evidence was
 
insufficient to prove that he was an accomplice to an assault in
 
any degree. 
“‘In reviewing the legal sufficiency of the evidence on
 
appeal, the test is whether, viewing the evidence in the light
 most favorable to the State, substantial evidence exists to
 support the conclusion of the trier of fact.’” State v. Kaulia,
 
128 Hawai' i 479, 496, 291 P.3d 377, 394 (2013) (quoting State v. 
Lubong, 77 Hawai' i 429, 432, 886 P.2d 766, 769 (App. 1994) 
(ellipses omitted)). “‘Substantial evidence’ is evidence of ‘sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
-51­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable caution to reach a conclusion.’” Id. (quoting Lubong,
 
77 Hawai' i at 432, 886 P.2d at 769). 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
evidence was adduced that Basham pushed Bloom, causing Bloom to
 
fall to the ground, and Basham held Bloom on the ground before
 Driver jumped onto Bloom. A person of reasonable caution could
 have concluded based on this evidence that Basham had the
 intention of promoting or facilitating Driver’s commission of
 assault in the first degree (intentionally or knowingly causing
 serious bodily injury to another person, HRS § 707-710(1)), and
 aided, agreed, or attempted to aid Driver in planning or
 committing the assault. See HRS § 702-222(1). Thus, substantial
 
evidence supported the jury’s conclusion in this case. 
VIII. 
Accordingly, Basham’s conviction is vacated based on
 
the circuit court’s failure to correct the prosecutor’s
 misstatement of the law on accomplice liability. The case is
 remanded for a new trial consistent with this opinion.
 
Summer M.M. Kupau
for petitioner
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
-52­