*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
LaVONNE HARRISON, Trustee of LaVONNE’S FAMILY TRUST,  
a Revocable Living Trust Agreement dated September 28 , 1989, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellant, 
  
vs. 
 
CASA De EMDEKO, INCORPORATED, a Hawaii nonprofit corporation, 
Respondents/Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs/Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-15-0000744 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000744; CIV. NO. 13- 1-153K) 
 
APRIL 26, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I. Introduction 
 LaVonne Harrison, Trustee of LaVonne’s Family Trust, a 
Revocable Living Trust Agreement Dated September 28, 1989 
(“Harrison”), an owner of two commercial apartments within a 
mixed-use development project managed by Casa de Emdeko, 
Incorporated, a Hawai ʻi nonprofit corporation, also known as Casa 
De Emdeko Association of Apartment Owners (“Casa”), filed a Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000744
26-APR-2018
07:47 AM*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 
 complaint in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1 (“circuit 
court”) on March 4, 2013, alleging she was improperly assessed 
for expenses that should have been charged only to residential 
apartment owners.  Specifically, Harrison asserts she should not 
have been assessed for expenses related to elevators, lanai 
railings, drains, cable television, and pest control, because 
these expenses are attributable solely to residential 
apartments.   
In the circuit court, Harrison moved for summary judgment. 
In its memorandum in opposition, Casa asserted that based on 
case law allowing entry of summary judgment for a non- moving 
party where there are no genuine issues of material fact, the 
circuit court should grant summary judgment in its favor.  The 
circuit court treated Casa’s memorandum as a cross -motion for 
summary judgment and granted summary judgment in Casa’s favor.  
It concluded as a matter of law that the disputed assessments 
were not for limited common elements exclusive to the 
residential apartments, as argued by Harrison, but rather were 
for common elements, and were therefore expenses for which 
Harrison must pay her pro rata share.  The circuit court further 
concluded Harrison was estopped from disputing the expenses 
because she knew or should have known that Casa had been 
assessing her for the disputed items for quite some time. 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 
  In its June 20, 2017 Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”), the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) concluded t he circuit 
court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Casa with 
respect to the cable television and pest control expenses 
because it was unclear whether these assessments related to 
common elements or limited common elements.  The ICA also 
concluded that pursuant to the Restated Declaration of 
Horizontal Property Regime and Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”) 
Chapter 514A (2006), the elevators, lanai railings, drains, and 
cable television wires are common elements, expenses for which 
Harrison was required to contribute.  The ICA also concluded, 
however, that Harrison was not estopped from disputing the 
assessments for cable television services and pest control 
expenses. 
Harrison raises a single question in her Application for 
Writ of Certiorari (“Application”):  
Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals of the State of 
Hawaii (“ICA”) err in affirming the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit, Kona Division’s (“Circuit Court”) 
granting of Summary Judgment and Final Judgment; finding 
that the expenses and costs to maintain interior 
elevators, interior lanais and related interior 
improvements located solely within the residential 
buildings of the Casa  de Emdeko Condominium Project and 
which are reserved exclusively for residential purposes, 
are “common elements” fo r which the commercial units of 
Cas[a] de Emdeko Condominium Project, located entirely 
in a separate building without elevators, are subject to 
assessments?  
 
(Emphasis omitted.)     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 
  For the reasons explained below, we hold that the elevators 
and lanai railings of this project are limited common elements, 
expenses for which Harrison was not required to contribute as an 
owner of commercial apartments.  We also hold that genuine 
issues of material fact precluded summary judgment as a matter 
of law as to whether Harrison is liable for the challenged 
expenses relating to the drains and cable television wires.  We 
also hold that the circuit court erred in alternatively granting 
summary judgment based on estoppel by acquiescence as to all 
items, as genuine issues of material fact also exist as to that 
defense. 
 Therefore, we affirm the ICA’s SDO and its July 31, 2017 
Judgment on Appeal (“JOA”) as to its rulings regarding the cable 
television service and pest control services expenses and 
otherwise vacate the SDO and JOA.  The circuit court’s “Order 
Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed 4/17/14 
and Granting Defendant Casa de Em Deko, Incorporated’s Cross 
Motion for Summary Judgment,” filed on July 22, 2014, and the 
“Amended Final Judgment,” filed on O ctober 8, 2015, are vacated 
in their entireties, and this case is remanded to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 
 II. Background 
A. Facts     
 Casa is a Hawai ʻi nonprofit corporation organized and 
incorporated for the purpose of managing, maintaining, 
protecting, and preserving 106 residential condominium 
apartments and three commercial apartments located in North 
Kona, Hawaiʻ i (“the Project”).   There are five buildings in the 
Project -- two three-story buildings, designated as Wing A and 
Wing B, containing only r
esidential apartments, and three two-
story buildings, designated as Building C, Building D, and 
Building L, each containing and constituting one commercial 
apartment.  
 
 
The Project was first established pursuant to a Declaration 
of Horizontal Property Regime, with attached bylaws, dated 
February 19, 1969.2  Since 1995, the Project has been governed by 
a Restated Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime and By- Laws 
of Casa De Emdeko dated February 3, 1995 ( “Declaration” or “ Casa 
Declaration”).3    
                                                           
2  The original declaration  was filed in the Office of the Assistant 
Registrar of the Land Court of the State of Hawai ʻi as Document No. 502817, 
together with Condominium Map No. 101.  It was also recorded on March 12, 
1969 in the Bureau of Conveyances in Book 6439, Page 410, as amended, and/or 
as delineated and together with Condominium File Plan No. 128, and then duly 
noted on Transfer Certificate of Title No. 133,339.   
 
3  The Casa Declaration  was filed in the Office of the Assistant Registrar 
as Document No. 2253508, and also recorded on August 7, 1995 in the Bureau of 
Conveyances State of Hawai ʻi as Document No. 95 -101951.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 
 Since 1982, Harrison has been the owner of two commercial 
apartments, Apartments C and D, which are buildings C and D of 
the Project, and has a 6.726% ownership interest in the Project.4  
Harrison also served on Casa’s Board of D irectors  (“Board”)  from 
at least 2001 to 2011.  Her two commercial apartment unit 
buildings do not have elevators, cable television, or lanais, 
and they are physically separated from Wings A and B, the two 
three-story buildings that contain residential apartments
.    
 Pursuant to Section M of the Casa Declaration, a 
Maintenance Reserve Fund was created into which all apartment 
owners must pay to cover the ir respective obligations “to 
provide for utilities, insurance, maintenance, and repair of the 
common elements and other expenses of administration of the 
project, which shall be deemed conclusively to be a common 
expense of the project.”5  Pursuant to Section M, t he apartments 
                                                           
4  Harrison’s Apartment C has a 2.439% common interest and Apartment D has 
a 4.287% common interest, for the total 6.726% common interest.  In addition 
to Harrison’s commercial apartments C and D, there is an additional 
commercial apartment L, with  a 1.000% common interest.    
 
5  Section M of the Casa Declaration provides in relevant part:  
 
M. MAINTENANCE RESERVE FUND. The Board shall establish 
and maintain a Maintenance Reserve Fund by the assessment 
of any payment by all apartment owners in equal  monthly 
installments of their respective proportionate shares of 
such reasonable annual amount as the Board may estimate as 
adequate to cover each apartment owner’s obligations to 
provide for utilities, insurance, maintenance, and repair 
of the common elements and other expenses of administration 
of the project, which shall be deemed conclusively to be a 
common expense of the project.  The Board may include 
reserves for contingencies in such assessment, and such 
(continued. . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 
 are assessed dues that are deposited into Casa’s “maintenance” 
and “reserve” accounts for the purpose of maintenance, repair, 
and replacement of both “common elements” and “limited common 
elements” of the entire Project.   
B. Procedural History 
 1. Circuit Court Proceedings  
  a.  Complaint 
 On March 4, 2013, Harrison filed a civil complaint against 
Casa, seeking declaratory relief, damages, and attorneys’ fees 
and costs.  She alleged that between 2010 and 2013, she was 
improperly a ssessed for amounts paid into the “reserve” account” 
for residential elevators, lanai railings and drains, which were 
for “limited common elements” attributable solely to residential 
apartments.  She also asserted that between 2009 to 2013, she 
was improperly assessed for amounts paid into the “maintenance” 
account” for cable TV, pest control and elevator maintenance 
costs.  She alleged the se funds were actually for “limited 
common elements,” attributed solely to residential buildings and 
apartments, for which she was not responsible.  Harrison alleged 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(continued. . .) 
assessment may from time to time be increased or reduced in 
the discretion of the Board.  The proportionate interest of 
each apartment owner in said Fund cannot be withdrawn or 
separately assigned but shall be deemed to be transferred 
with such apartment even though not expressly mentioned or 
described in the conveyance thereof. . . .  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 
 that Casa therefore violated the Casa Declaration and applicable 
law.    
 On October 15, 2013, Casa filed its answer and a 
counterclaim seeking declaratory relief that (1) its assessments 
were lawful; and (2) Harrison had  an obligation to pay the 
assessments.    
b. Motions for Summary Judgment 
 On April 17, 2014, Harrison filed a motion for summary 
judgment.  Harrison and Casa repeat their various legal 
arguments in the circuit court, on appeal to the ICA, and on 
certiorari to this court.  Therefore, their arguments are 
discussed and analyzed in the Discussion section, Section IV 
below.  
 
To summarize, in her motion, Harrison argued she was 
improperly assessed for costs relating to elevators, stairways, 
walkways, lanais, lanai railings, drains, cable television, pest 
control, and elevator maintenance because they related to 
residential building limited common elements.   She attached 
Casa’s maintenance fee calculations from 2006 to 2013 
(“maintenance fee calculations”) and Casa’s “Reserve Expenses 
Per Financial Statements 10/01/03 -  09/30/2012” to her motion.    
 In its June 12, 2014, memorandum in opposition, in summary, 
Casa argued the disputed expenses related to common elements, 
not limited common elements.  In
 addition, Casa argued that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 
 Harrison’s claims were barred by estoppel by acquiescence and 
consent since she had been an owner of the commercial apartments 
for 30 years and had served on the Board from at least 2001 to 
2011, but had not objected to the disputed items until recently.  
Casa then argued that Flint v. MacKenzie , 53 Haw. 672, 673, 501 
P.2d 357, 357-58 (1972) (per curiam), authorized the circuit 
court to enter summary judgment in its favor as a non- moving 
party, based on a lack of genuine issues of material fact 
entitling it to summary judgment  as a matter of law.6    
Casa attached to its memorandum 
a declaration from Susan 
Gand (“Gand”), a director of Pacifica Realty Management, Inc., 
which was the property manager for Casa from 2003.  Gand’s 
declaration stated in relevant part that (1) Harrison served on 
the Board from at least 2001 until 2011, and during that time, 
she “approved the association’s operating budgets, maintenance 
fee calculation schedules, operating expenses, and reserves 
budgets, including all assessments and expenses for common 
elements and limited common elements”; (2) in 2005, Harrison did 
not object to a common reserve expense for elevator repairs and 
paid her proportionate share; (3) Harrison did not object to and 
voted to approve common reserve expenses regarding drains in 
2005 and fiscal year 2007- 2008; (4) at a Board meeting on August 
                                                           
6  It does not appear Harrison raised arguments opposing this procedure.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 
 3, 2010, Harrison did not object to and voted to approve 
elevator modernization as a common reserve expense of $82,500; 
and (5) Harrison did not notify Casa in writing of any 
complaints or objections regarding the drains, lanai railings, 
pest control or cable television expenses until October 24, 
2012.    
On June 26, 2014, Harrison filed a reply memorandum, 
raising various arguments as to why the disputed expenses 
constituted charges for limited common elements for which she 
was not responsible.  In response to Casa’s estoppel by 
acquiescence argument, Harrison argued she should not be 
estopped for simply being an apartment owner for thirty years 
and having served on the Board, because she objected after she 
was made aware of the Association’s method of characterizing 
expenses.  Harrison attached a declaration asserting that (1) 
after she determined how Casa was wrongfully assessing her 
expenses relating to residential units, she complained to Gand 
and the Board on multiple occasions; (2) after she complained to 
Gand, Gand “agreed” with her complaints and brought it to the 
attention of the Board; (3) thereafter, Casa’s budgets included 
line items for limited common elements and one of the line items 
was for elevator modernization; (4) in the approved Casa fiscal 
year 2011- 2012 Budget (“2011 -2012 Budget”), the elevator 
modernization expense of $82,500 was listed as a limited common *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 
 element under reserve expenses; (5) the approved 2011- 2012 
Budget also contained the statement “LCD CE = Limited Common 
Elements which are only appurtenant to the 106 residential 
units”; (6) she did not know of replacements of the drain lines 
in the residential apartments until after the renovations to the 
residential apartments in 2006 and that there are seventeen 
three-story stacks with drain lines appurtenant to and for the 
use of the residential apartments only; (7) the residential 
apartments each have a lanai exclusive to and appurtenant to 
their apartment and the lanais on the second and third floors of 
the residential apartments have lanai railings; and (8) the 
lanai railings were not an issue until their replacement on or 
about 2006.  She also attached the 2011- 2012 Budget and Casa’s 
2011-2012 maintenance fee calculations.    
c. Circuit Court Judgment 
 After a hearing on July 2, 2014, on July 22, 201 4, the 
circuit court entered an “Order Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for 
Summary Judgment, Filed 4/17/14 and Granting Defendant Casa De 
Emdeko, Incorporated’s Cross -Motion for Summary Judgment ” 
(“Order”), stating, in relevant part, the following:  
The Court concludes as a matter of law that the 
residential elevators, lanai railings, drains, and cable tv  
wires are common elements and the expenses relating to the 
residential elevators, lanai railings, drains, cable tv, 
and pest control are common expenses pursuant to Casa de 
Emdeko’s restated declaration and bylaws, and Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) Chapter 514A, except as  provided 
in HRS §514B -22 and HRS §514B- 23. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 
 Further, estoppel operates to bar the Plaintiff’s 
claims for damages during the time she knew or should have 
known that the Defendant was applying funds from the 
reserve account and maintenance account to alleged limited 
common elements or limited common expenses, but delayed in 
bringing an action.  
 
 On August 22, 2014, the circuit court entered its final 
judgment.  (On October 8, 2015, it entered its amended final 
judgment.)  Harrison timely appealed to the ICA on September 19, 
2014. 
  
 2. ICA P roceedings   
 On appeal to the ICA, Harrison asserted four points of 
error in the circuit court’s Order, three of which are relevant 
to this certiorari proceeding: (1) the circuit court erred in 
concluding the disputed items were common elements and therefore 
constituted common expenses; (2) estoppel by acquiescence was 
improperly applied as there were genuine issues of material 
fact; (3) the circuit court erred in concluding the disputed 
items were assessable to both residential and commercial 
apartments.7    
 The ICA vacated the circuit court’s decision in part . 
Harrison v. Casa de Emdeko , No. CAAP -15-0000744 (App. June 20, 
2017) (SDO).  The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s conclusion 
                                                           
7  Harrison also asserted that the circuit court had erred by failing to 
make findings of fact in its summary judgment ruling, an argument not 
repeated on certiorari and that, in any event, is devoid of merit.  Rule 
52(a) of the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure (2000) provides in relevant 
part, “[f]indings of fact . . . are unnecessary on decisions of motions under 
Rules 12 or 56 or any other motion . . . .”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 
 that the elevators were common elem ents, ruling that the 
elevators were not apartments or limited common elements.  Casa, 
SDO at 4.  The ICA further concluded that elevators were common 
elements under HRS § 514A-13(h) (2006) because they were not 
within the apartments themselves.
  Id. at 5.  It also concluded 
that the elevators were not entries, stairways, or walkways 
under Section A(3) of the Casa Declaration, and were therefore 
not limited common elements.   Id.      
The ICA also  ruled that lanai railings were  common 
elements. Id.  Because lanai railings were not specified as 
common elements or limited common elements in the Casa 
Declaration, the ICA looked to HRS Chapter 514A and concluded 
that under HRS § 514A- 3(8), as lanai railings were  necessary for 
the Project’s safe ty, they were common elements, regardless of 
whether or not they were exclusive to the residential 
apartments.  Id. 
 In addition , the ICA concluded that drains were common 
elements under Section A(2)(d) of the Casa Declaration because 
they were pipes that can be used for services such as water and 
sewer.  Id. at 6.  In its decision, the ICA referred to Merriam-
Webster’s definition of “drain” as “a means (as a pipe) by which 
usu. liquid matter is drained.”  Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate 
Dictionary at 378 (11th ed. 2003).  Casa, SDO at 6 n.3. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 
  Furthermore , the ICA concluded that cable television wires 
were common elements under the Casa Declaration because the Casa 
Declaration provides that “[a]ll . . . wiring . . . and other 
central and appurtenant transmission facilities and 
installations over, under and across the project for services 
such as . . . television signal distribution” were common 
elements.  Id. 
 The ICA therefore rejected Harrison’s claim that  she was 
not liable for expenses relating to the elevators, lanai 
railings, drains, and cable television wires, reasoning that 
since they were common elements, the expenses related to them 
were common expenses.  Id.  Based on its conclusion that these 
were common elements, the ICA did not address the circuit 
court’s alternative estoppel by acquiescence ruling regarding 
these expenses.  Id.  at 7.   
The ICA concluded, however, that the record was unclear as 
to whether cable television service and pest control expenses 
were common expenses for common elements.  It also ruled there 
were genuine issues of material fact as to the estoppel by 
acquiescence defense regarding these expenses, and vacated and 
remanded the circuit court’s amende d final judgment as to these 
expenses.  Id. 
 3. Certiorari proceedings 
 On September 20, 2017, Harrison timely filed her  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 
 Application, presenting the following question:  
Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals of the State of 
Hawaii (“ICA”) err in affirming the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit, Kona Division’s (“Circuit Court”) granting 
of Summary Judgment and Final Judgment; finding that the 
expenses and costs to maintain interior elevators, interior 
lanais and related interior improvements located solely 
within the residential buildings of the Casa  de Emdeko 
Condominium Project and which are reserved exclusively for 
residential purposes, are “common elements” for wh ich the 
commercial units of Cas[a]  de Emdeko Condominium Project, 
located entirely in a separate building without elevators, 
are subject to assessments?  
 
(Emphasis omitted.)     
 
 She argues the ICA erred in concluding the elevators, 
lanais, and “related interior improvements ” (the drains and 
cable television wires) were
 common elements  because her 
commercial apartments are in buildings separate from the 
residential apartment buildings and do not have these items.  
She also argues that if this court reverses the ICA’s holding, 
the issue of estoppel is no longer moot.  We accepted certiorari 
to address whether the circuit court and ICA erred by summarily 
ruling that elevators, lanai railings, drains, and cable 
television wires were common elements, expenses for which 
Harrison would be responsible.  If so, we must also address 
whether the circuit court erred by alternatively granting 
summary judgment in favor of Casa based on estoppel by 
acquiescence. 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 
 III. Standards of Review    
A. Summary Judgment 
 An appellate court reviews a grant of summary judgment de 
novo, applying the same standards as a trial court: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, 
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with 
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to 
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if proof of that 
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the 
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by 
the parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must view 
all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the 
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.   
 
Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co. , 116 Hawai ʻi 159, 164, 172 
P.3d 471, 476 (2007) (citations omitted).   
B. Interpretation of a Contract  
 
 In Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. 
P’ship, we stated: 
When reviewing the court’s  interpretation of a contract, 
the construction and legal effect to be given a contract is 
a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court.  
This court has determined that it is fundamental that terms 
of contract should be interpreted according to their plain, 
ordinary and accepted use in common speech, unless the 
contract indicates a different meaning.  Further, in 
construing a contract, a court ’s principal objective is to 
ascertain and effectuate the intention of the parties as 
manifested by the contract in its entirety.  If there is 
any doubt, the interpretation which most reasonably 
reflects the intent of the parties must be chosen.  
 
155 Hawaiʻ i 201, 213, 166 P.3d 961, 973 (2007) ( internal 
quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
C. Interpretation of a Statute 
 
 Statutory interpretation is guided by the following rules: *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 
 First, the fundamental starting point for statutory -
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.   
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
 
Panado v. Board of Trs., Emps.’ Ret. Sys. , 134 Hawai ʻi 1, 11, 332 
P.3d 144, 154 (2014) (citations omitted).  
IV. Discussion 
 
A. Preliminary Issues 
 1. Issues on Certiorari 
 The ICA vacated  the circuit court’s summary judgment 
ruling that cable television service and pest contro l service 
expenses were common expenses and that Harrison was 
alternatively estopped from arguing that they were not, 
concluding that there are genuine issues of material fact as to 
these issues.  Casa did not seek certiorari review of these 
rulings.  Therefore, we do not address these issues.  Based on 
the ICA’s rulings, this case must already  be remanded to the 
circuit court with respect to the cable television service and 
pest control service expenses.   
We must determine on certiorari whether the circuit court 
and ICA erred by summarily ruling that elevators, lanai 
railings, drains, and cable television wires were common *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 
 elements, for which Harrison was proportionately liable.  If we 
conclude summary judgment was improperly granted as to any of 
these items, then we must also address whether the circuit court 
erred by alternatively granting summary judgment in favor of 
Casa based on estoppel by acquiescence. 
 2. Condominium Law Generally and History of the Project 
 
 The starting point of determining whether part of a 
condominium is a common element or limited common element begins 
with a condominium’s declaration.  Generally, the declaration 
and bylaws of a condominium serve as a contract between the 
condominium owners and the association, establishing the rules 
governing the condominium.
  See Association of Apartment Owners
 
of Maalaea Kai, Inc. v. Stillson , 108 Hawai ʻi 2, 9, 116 P.3d 644, 
651 (2005) (citing Bradford Square Condo. Ass’n v. Miller , 258 
Ga.App. 240, 245, 573 S.E.2d 405, 409 (2002) (“The condominium 
instruments, including the bylaws and the sales agreement, are a 
contract that governs the legal rights between the [a]ssociation 
and unit owners.”)) .   
 The Casa Declaration was first established under the 
provisions of the “Horizontal Property Act,” 1961 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 180, which was codified as HRS Chapter 514.  The 
legislature then repealed Chapter 514 and passed Chapter 514A, 
governing Condominium Property Regimes, as Act 98 of 1977.  1977 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 98, § 3 at 181.  In 2004, 
the legislature *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 
 sought to “update, clarify, organize, deregulate, and provide 
for consistency and ease of use of the condominium property 
regimes law,” as directed by Act 213, Session Laws of Hawai ʻi 
2000.  2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 1 at 756.  The 
legislature recognized that Hawaii’s “ condominium property 
regimes law is unorganized, inconsistent, and obsolete in some 
areas, and micro-manages condominium associations.  The law is 
also overly regulatory, hinders development, and ignores 
technological changes and the present day development process.” 
2000 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 213  § 1 at 521.  As a result, the 
legislature recodified Hawai i’s condominium property regimes 
law, amending the HRS by adding HRS Chapter 514B.  2004 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 164 § 2 at 756. 
 HRS Chapter 514A was initially scheduled to be repealed on 
July 1, 2006, but before it could be repealed, the repeal 
provisions themselves were repealed.  2005 H aw. Sess. Laws Act 
93 § 6 at 237, 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 273 § 33 at 1145.  
Therefore, HRS Chapter 514A, except as provided in HRS §§ 514B-
22 (2006) and -23 (2006),8 governs existing condominiums created 
before July 1, 2006, such as the Project.9 
                                                           
8  HRS § 514A-1.5 (Supp. 2007) states in relevant part:  
(a) This chapter:  
(1) Shall not apply to condominiums created on or after 
July 1, 2006, or that are registered with the commission 
pursuant to part IV of chapter 514B; and  
(2) On and after July 1, 2006, shall apply only to:  
(continued. . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 
  Here, the Casa Declaration specifies the Project  was 
established pursuant to HRS Chapter 514A, as amended.   Thus, if 
the Casa Declaration is unclear, we must turn to HRS Chapter 
514A or sections of HRS Chapter 514B (2006) deemed applicable by 
Chapter 514A.10  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(continued. . .) 
(A) Condominiums created prior to July 1, 2006, except as 
provided in subsection (b) and  sections 514B -22 and 514B-
23; and 
(B) A developer’ s sale of condominiums in a project for 
which a notice of intention was filed with  the commission 
prior to July 1, 2006, pursuant to  section 514A- 31, except 
where the developer elects to register an existing project 
with the commission under part IV of chapter 514B, pursuant 
to section 9(b) of Act 93, Session Laws of Hawai ʻi 2005. 
 
9  Before its repeal, HRS §  514B-22 provided, in relevant part, the 
following: 
 
Applicability to preexisting condominiums.   Sections 
514B-4, 514B-5, 514B- 35, 514B- 41(c), 514B -46, 514B- 72, and 
part VI, and section 514B -3 to the extent definitions are 
necessary in construing any of those provisions, and all 
amendments thereto, apply to all condominiums created in 
this State before July 1, 2006; provided that those 
sections: 
      (1)  Shall apply only with respect to events and 
circumstances occurring on or after  July 1, 2006; and 
      (2)  Shall not invalidate existing provisions of the 
declaration, bylaws, condominium map, or other constituent 
documents of those condominiums if to do so would 
invalidate the reserved rights of a developer or be an 
unreasonable impairment of contract.  
 
     In our analysis, we use the terms “condominium property regime” and 
“horizontal property regime”  synonymously with “ condominium,” “apartment”  
with “unit,” “apartment owner”  with “unit owner ,” and “association of 
apartment owners” with “association.”   
 
10  See supra, ns.7 & 8.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 
 B. Analyses of the Disputed Items 
 
1. Common Expenses for Which a Commercial Apartment Owner 
of this Project is Liable   
  
 Section B of the Casa Declaration sets out t he “common 
interest” percentages for the various residential and commercial 
apartments.  Section H then defines the “common expenses” for 
which residential and commercial apartment owners are liable in 
proportion to their respective common interests, and p rovides in 
relevant part: 
H. COMMON EXPENSES.  All charges, costs and expenses 
whatsoever incurred by the Association for or in connection 
with the administration of the project, including without 
limitation the operation thereof, any maintenance, repair, 
replacement and restoration of the common elements  and any 
additions and alterations thereto, any labor, services, 
materials, supplies and equipment therefor, any liability 
whatsoever for loss or damage arising out of or in 
connection with the common elements  . . . shall constitute 
common expenses of the project for which all apartment 
owners shall be severally liable in proportion to the 
respective common interests.  . .  The Board of Directors of 
the Association (herein called “Board”) shall from time  to 
time assess the common expenses against all the apartments 
in their respective proportionate shares. . . . 
 
(Emphasis added.)  Thus, pursuant to the Casa Declaration, 
Harrison is liable for common expenses relating to common 
elements.  The Declaration does not, however, discuss who is 
responsible for expenses of limited common elements. 
 We therefore turn to statutory law.  HRS § 514A -3 (Supp. 
2007) defines “common expenses” to include: (1) expenses of 
operation of the property; and (2) all sums designated common 
expenses by or pursuant to this chapter, the declaration or the 
bylaws.  HRS § 514A- 15(a) (2006) then provides:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 
 (a) The common profits of the property shall be distributed 
among, and the common expenses shall be charged to, the 
apartment owners,  including the developer, in proportion to 
the common interest appurtenant to their respective 
apartments;  provided that in a mixed -use project containing 
apartments for both residential and commercial use , such 
charges and distributions may be apportioned  in a fair and 
equitable manner as set forth in the declaration; provided 
further that all limited common elements costs and 
expenses, including but not limited to, maintenance, 
repair, replacement, additions and  improvements shall be 
charged to the owner of the apartment to which the limited 
common element is appurtenant in an equitable manner as set  
forth in the declaration . 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Therefore, pursuant to HRS § 514A- 15(a), in a mixed- use 
project such as this, expenses related to limited common 
elements must be charged to the individual apartment owners to 
which the limited common element is appurtenant, in proportion 
to their common interests.  Accordingly, in order to determine 
whether Harrison is liable for expenses related to elevators, 
lanai railings, drains, and cable television wires, it becomes 
necessary to determine whether they are common elements for 
which she would be liable.  If they are limited common elements 
or are included within the residential apartments themselves, 
however, Harrison would not be liable for related expenses.  
 2. Apartments, Common Elements, and Limited Common  
  Elements of the Project 
  
Section A(1) of the Casa Declaration defines the 
residential and commercial “apartments” of the Project.  
Sections A(2) and (A)(3) then define the Project’s “common 
elements” and “limited common elements.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 
  Section A(1) of the Casa Declaration provides: 
A. DIVISION OF PROPERTY: The project is hereby divided 
into the following separate freehold estates:  
1. Apartment.  One hundred nine (109) freehold estates 
are hereby designated within the perimeter walls, floors 
and ceilings of each of the 109 apartment units  of the 
project contained in . . . Wing A, Wing B . . . which 
spaces called “apartments” are designated on said plans and 
described as follows : 
. . . . 
(b) . . . Each apartment contains the number of rooms and 
approximate floor area to these floor plans, as follows:  
(1)  TWO BEDROOM PLAN A  UNITS . . ., 
including a lanai  of 
approximately 168 sq. ft .  
(2)  ONE BEDROOM PLAN A UNITS. . ., including a lanai  of 
approximately 96 sq. ft.   
(3) Plan B Units: Seventy (70) apartments,  . . . being all 
of the remaining residential apartments of the project, . . 
. including a lanai  of approximately 98 sq. ft.  
. . . . 
(4) COMMERCIAL UNITS:  Apartments C, D, and L, 
respectively, constitute the entire contents of Building C, 
Building D and Building  L. . . .  
(d)   The respective apartments shall not be deemed to include  
the undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the perimeter walls  or 
interior load -bearing walls, the floors and ceiling surrounding 
each apartment or any pipes, wires, conduits, or other  utilities 
or service lines running through such apartments which are 
utilized for or serve more than one apartment, the same being 
deemed common elements as hereinafter provided .  Each apartment 
shall be deemed to include all the walls and partitions which are 
not load bearing within its perimeter walls, the inner decorated 
or finished surfaces of all walls, floors and ceilings, doors and 
door frames, windows and window frames and all fixtures 
originally installed, including stove , oven, refrigerator, 
washer, dryer, disposal and dishwasher.   
 
(Emphasis added.)    
The first sentence of Section A(1)(d) expressly provides 
that certain portions of all apartments are deemed common 
elements.  Section A(2) of the Casa Declaration further defines 
common elements as follows: 
2.  Common Elements.  One freehold estate is hereby
 
designated in all of the remaining portions of the project 
herein called the “common elements[,”] including 
specifically but not limited to : 
(a) Said land in fee simple;  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 
 (b) All foundations, floor slabs, columns, girders, beams, 
supports, unfinished perimeter and load -bearing walls, 
roofs, chases, entries, stairways and walkways of said 
buildings;  
(c) All yards, grounds, landscaping, the swimming pool and 
other recreational facilities, including cabanas and 
lockers; all refuse facilities; all roads, parking areas 
and driveways;  
(d) All breezeways, ducts, electrical equipment, wiring, 
pipes and other central and appurtenant transmission 
facilities and installations over, under and across the 
project for services such as power, light, water, gas, 
sewer, air conditioning, telephone and radio and television 
signal distribution.  
 
(Emphasis added.)    
 Therefore, according to the Casa Declaration, all remaining 
portions of the Project not included within the residential and 
commercial apartments are common elements.   
 HRS § 514A -3 defines “common elements” as follows : 
“Common elements”, unless otherwise provided in the  
declaration, means and includes : 
(1) The land included in the condominium property regime, 
whether leased or in fee simple;  
(2) The foundations, columns, girders, beams, supports, 
main walls, roofs, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairs, 
stairways, fire escapes, and entrances and exits of the 
building or buildings;  
(3) The basements, flat roofs, yards, gardens, recreational 
facilities, parking areas, and storage spaces;  
(4) The premises for the lodging or use of janitors and 
other persons employed for the operation of the property;  
(5) Central and appurtenant installations for services such 
as power, light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, 
refrigeration, air conditioning, and incinerators;  
(6) The elevators, escalators, tanks, pumps, motors, fans, 
compressors, ducts, and in general all apparatus and 
installations existing for common use;  
(7) Such facilities as may be designated as common elements 
in the declaration; and  
(8) All other parts of the property necessary or convenient 
to its existence, maintenance, and safety, or normally in 
common use.  
(Emphasis added.)  The underlined portion of the statute 
dictates that a condominium property regime’s declaration 
determines what constitutes common elements. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 
 Section A(3) of the Casa Declaration goes on to define 
certain common elements as limited common elements: 
3. Limited Common Elements. Certain parts of the common 
elements, herein called the “limited common elements[,”]  
are hereby designated and set aside for the exclusive use  
of certain apartments , and such apartments shall have 
appurtenant thereto easements for the use of such limited 
common elements as follows:  
(a) One parking space or more, designated on said plans by 
the designation corresponding to the designation of each 
apartment shall be appurtenant to and for the exclusive use 
of such apartment .  
(b) The entries, stairways, hallways and walkways in any 
residential building of the project shall be appurtenant to 
and for the exclusive use of the apartments of such 
building.  
  (c) The hallways and walkways on any floor of any    
  residential building of the project shall be appurtenant to  
  and for the exclusive use of the apartments on such floor . 
 
(Emphasis added.)    
As compared to its definition of common elements, HRS § 
514A-3 defines limited common elements as follows: 
“Limited common elements” means and includes those common  
elements designated in the declaration as reserved for the 
use of a certain apartment or certain apartments to the  
exclusion of the other apartments ; provided that no 
amendment of the declaration affecting any of the limited 
common elements shall be effective without the consent of 
the owner or owners of the apartment or apartments for the 
use of which such limited common elements are reserved.  
 
(Emphasis added.)   
 
As can be seen, in contrast with “common elements,” HRS § 
514A-3 does not allow a declaration to limit the definition 
“limited common elements” to how a declaration defines the term.  
HRS § 514A-3’s definition of common elements includes the phrase 
“unless otherwise provided in the declaration.”  The statute 
therefore expressly allows a declarat
ion to designate common 
elements that differ from the statutory definition.  HRS § 514A-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 
 3’s definition of limited common elements, however, does not 
contain that exception.  Rather, it expressly provides that 
although common elements designated as limited common elements 
in a declaration are included as limited common elements, 
“limited common elements” also means those common elements 
designated in a declaration “as reserved for the use of” certain 
apartments, whether or not they are characterized as “limi ted 
common elements” in a declaration.11 
 Therefore, although Section A(3) of the Casa Declaration 
seemingly restricts limited common elements to specifically 
enumerated items, as a matter of law, all common elements 
reserved for the use of certain apartments within the Project 
are limited common elements, whether or not they are so 
designated in the Casa Declaration.  
 Against this backdrop, we turn to address how the Project’s 
elevators, lanai railings, drains, and cable television wires 
must be categorized.  
 3. The Specific Items in Dispute  
  a.  Elevators 
As argued by Harrison, Section A(3) of the Casa Declaration 
specifically defines limited common elements to include 
                                                           
11  This definition would appear to prevent a developer from designating 
certain common elements for the exclusive use of certain apartments  while 
requiring all owners to share in the expenses for something they could not 
use or access. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 
 “entries, stairways, hallways and walkways in any residential 
building of the project . . . appurtenant to and for the 
exclusive use of the apartments of such building.”    
Although elevators are not expressly referenced, we agree 
with Harrison that they are an integral part of the system of 
“entries, stairways, hallways, and walkways ” exclusive to the 
residential buildings.  The  residents use the elevators as a 
means of access to their individual apartments on the upper 
floors.  For those who live on the upper floors and are unable 
to walk up the stairs, the elevators are the only means of 
“entry” into their respective apartments.  In addition, Section 
A(3)(c) of the Casa Declaration provides that “[t] he hallways 
and walkways on any floor of any residential building of the 
project shall be appurtenant to and for the exclusive use of the 
apartments on such floor. ”  Therefore, the hallways and walkways 
are not even available for Harrison to use, as she owns two 
commercial units in buildings separated from the three 
residential buildings. 
We therefore hold that, pursuant to the Casa Declaration, 
the elevators are “limited common elements.”   
As pointed out earlier, with respect to “limited common 
elements,” if the Casa Declaration’s definition conflicted with 
HRS § 514A- 3’s definition, conflicting statutory law would 
control.  In this case, however, our holding based on the Casa *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 
 Declaration is also supported by HRS Chapter 514A.  Pursuant to 
HRS § 514A-3, all common elements reserved for the use of (a) 
certain apartment(s) within the Project are limited common 
elements, whether or not they are so designated in the Casa 
Declaration.  Use of the elevators is limited to owners of 
residential apartments.   
In addition, contrary to Casa’s assertion, our holding is 
actually supported by HRS § 514A- 3(6) (Supp. 2007), which 
provides “elevators . . . existing for common use” are common 
elements.  As the phrase “existing for common use” modifies 
“elevators,” only elevators which “exist for common use” are 
common elements under this statute.  In this Project, the 
commercial buildings do not hav e elevators and the elevators are 
for the exclusive use of the residential apartments.   
 Also, contrary to Casa’s position, HRS § 514A-13(h) is not 
relevant under the circumstances.  This statute provides that 
“[l]obby areas, swimming pools, recreation areas, saunas, 
storage areas, hallways, trash chutes, laundry chutes, and other 
similar areas not located inside apartments intended for 
residential use or the conduct of a business shall constitute 
common elements unless designated as limited common elements by 
the declaration .”  (emphasis added)  For the reaso ns stated 
above, this Project’s elevators are limited common elements 
under the Casa Declaration.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 
 Therefore, pursuant to the Casa Declaration, and as 
supported by statutory law, the elevators, which are exclusive 
to the residential buildings, are limited common elements.  The 
circuit court and the ICA erred in ruling otherwise.    
 b. Lanai Railings  
 
 Harrison also argues that the lanai railings are  limited 
common elements.  According to Sections A(1)(b)(1), (2), and (3) 
of the Casa Declaration
 quoted in Section IV(B)(2) above, 
“lanais” are deemed to be included within the apartments.  
According to Section A(1)(d) of the Declaration, apartments do 
not include “ the undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the 
perimeter walls or interior load- bearing walls, [or] the floors 
and ceiling surrounding each apartment ,” which are common 
elements.  “Lanai railings” do not appear to constitute 
“perimeter walls” classified as common elements under this 
provision.  
The same provision provides that “[e] ach apartment shall be 
deemed to include all the walls and partitions which are not 
load bearing within its perimeter walls . . . .”   “Lanai railings” 
also do not appear to fall within this provision.  
Therefore, although the Declaration defines “lanais” to be 
included within the apartments, the Declaration is unclear 
whether “lanai railings” are part of the apartments or are 
common elements.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 
 Casa argues that “lanai railings” are common elements under 
the Declaration because they are “supports” under Section 
A(2)(b).  This provision includes “[a]ll foundations, floor 
slabs, columns, girders, beams, supports, unfinished perimeter 
and load- bearing walls, roofs, chases, entries, stairways and 
walkways of said buildings” within common elements.   
We need not address this argument, however, because Section 
A(2) controls.  As noted earlier, Section A(2)of the Declaration 
begins with the pronouncement that “all of the remaining 
portions of the project” not speci fically included within the 
apartments are “common elements.”  As “lanai railings” are not 
otherwise included within the definition of apartments they are, 
by default, common elements under Section A(2) of the 
Declaration.   
We then turn to Section A(3), which defines limited common 
elements under the Declaration.  This provision does not 
specifically classify lanai railings as limited common elements.  
However, as also previously noted, pursuant to HRS § 514A- 3, 
common elements reserved for the use of certain apartments 
within the Project are limited common elements, whether or not 
they are so designated in a declaration.  Therefore, we hold 
that the Project’s lanai railings are also limited common 
elements. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 
 Casa argues that the lanai railings are common elements 
based on HRS § 514A
-3, which provides that “[a]ll other parts of 
the property necessary or convenient to its  . . . safety” are 
common elements.  Lanai railings are clearly necessary to 
“safety” of the “property.”12  However, HRS § 514A-3 mandates 
classification of these common elements as limited common 
elements because they are for the use of (a) certain 
apartment(s) to the exclusion of the other apartments. 
  
c. Drains and Cable Television Wires  
 Harrison argues the ICA erred in characterizing the 
drains 
and cable television wires as common elements because they are 
located only in the residential buildings and are exclusively 
for residential use.13  To repeat, we must first examine the Casa 
Declaration.  Section A(1)(d) of the Declaration provides that 
“pipes, wires, conduits, or other utilities or service lines 
running through such apartments which are utilized for or serve 
more than one apartment ” are common elements.  Section A(2)(d) 
                                                           
12  “Property” is defined by HRS § 514A -3 in relevant part to “mean[] and 
include[] the land, . . . the building or buildings, all improvements and all 
structures thereon, . . . which have been or are intended to be submitted to 
the regime established by this chapter. ” 
 
13  In her question presented in her Application, Harrison refers to 
“related interior improvements” but not “drains” or “cable television wires.” 
However, besides the elevators and lanais, the only remaining issues from the 
ICA decision are the “drains,” which she argues in her Application, and 
“cable television wires,” which the ICA held were common elements.  
Therefore, we infer Harrison meant “drains” and “cable television wires” when 
she referred to “related interior improvements.”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 
 of the Casa Declaration also provides that “[a]ll . . . wiring, 
pipes and other central and appurtenant transmission facilities 
and installations over, under and across the project for 
services such as . . . water, . . . sewer, . . . telephone and 
radio and television signal distribution”  constitute common 
elements. 
 Thus, the Casa Declaration specifies that drains and cable 
television wires are common elements if they “are utilized for 
or serve more than one apartment” or they are “over, under and 
across the project.”  Reviewed de novo, the record does not 
reflect whether the drains and cable television wires for which 
expenses were incurred are parts of specific apartments or are 
common elements or limited common elements.  Therefore, based on 
the record before us, summary judgment was inappropriately 
granted.   
C. Estoppel by Acquiescence  
 In addition to ruling that all disputed items are for  
common elements, the circuit court alternatively ruled Harrison 
liable based on application of the doctrine of estoppel by 
acquiescence, because she had served as a Casa Board member and 
had apparently approved budgets that included the disputed 
expenses.  Because it ruled that the elevators, lanai railings, 
drains, and cable television wires were common elements, the ICA 
also set aside the circui t court’s estoppel by acquiescence *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 
 ruling only with respect to the pest control and cable 
television expenses for which it found genuine issues of 
material fact precluding summary judgment.  W e have now held 
that the elevators and lanai railings in the residential 
buildings are limited common elements.  We have also ruled that, 
based on the record, genuine issues of material fact preclude 
summary judgment as to the drains and cable television wires.   
 Because the ICA upheld the circuit court’s summary judg ment 
ruling that elevators, lanai railings, drains, and cable 
television wires were common elements, it did not address 
whether the circuit court erred by alternatively applying 
estoppel by acquiescence to these categories of disputed items.  
If the circuit court was correct in alternatively ruling in 
favor of Casa based on this defense as to the elevators, lanai 
railings, drains, and cable television wires, Harrison remains 
responsible and no remand becomes necessary as to the items we 
addressed on certiorari.  We must therefore also address whether 
the circuit court erred by alternatively granting summary 
judgment based on estoppel by acquiescence.   
 Under Hawai ʻi law, the statute of limitations for a breach 
of contract is six years.  HRS § 657 -1(1) (2016).  Claims can be 
barred earlier based on an estoppel defense.  In this case, Casa 
argues applicability of estoppel by acquiescence.  “Hawaiʻi 
recognizes the theory of quasi- estoppel, which is ‘a species of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 
 equitable estoppel which has its basis in election, waiver, 
acquiescence, or even acceptance of benefits and which precludes 
a party from asserting to another’ s disadvantage, a right 
inconsistent with a position previously taken by [ the party] .’”  
Cvitanovich–Dubie v. Dubie , 123 Hawai ʻi 266, 276, 231 P.3d 983, 
993 (App. 2010) (quoting Anderson v. Anderson , 59 Haw. 575, 589, 
585 P.2d 938, 947 (1978).  Furthermore, “[u]nlike equitable 
estoppel, an estoppel by acquiescence does not require a showing 
of detrimental reliance or prejudice.”  31 C.J.S. Estoppel and 
Waiver § 175 (2018).   
Estoppel by acquiescence does, however, require that the 
party being charged with estoppel have knowledge of relevant 
facts.  Anderson, 59 Haw. at 589, 585 P.2d at 946.  As we have 
stated, “Before one may be charged with knowledge it must appear 
that he possesses full knowledge of all the material particulars 
and circumstances and was fully apprised of the effect of the 
acts ratified and of his legal rights in the matter.” Id. 
(parentheses omitted). 
 Here, the circuit court erred in alternatively granting 
summary judgment in favor of Casa based on estoppel by 
acquiescence.  Casa did not meet its burden of producing 
evidence that no genuine issue of material facts exists with 
respect to the essential elements of this defense.  See Ralston 
v. Yim, 129 Hawai ʻi 46, 56- 57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286- 87 (2013).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 
 Casa produced Gand’s declaration and records to indicate 
Harrison served on the Board to establish estoppel by 
acquiescence.  Casa a sserts that Harrison “did not object and 
voted to” approve common expenses regarding the disputed items.  
Casa did not, however, establish that Harrison “possesse[d]  full 
knowledge of all the material particulars and circumstances and 
was fully apprised of the effect  of the acts ratified and of 
[her] legal rights in the matter. ”  The fact that Harrison was 
an owner of commercial apartments for thirty years and served on 
the Board is insufficient to establish this knowledge, which 
Harrison disputes.  Therefore, genuine issues of material fact 
also precluded summary judgment on the estoppel by acquiescence 
defense as to elevators, lanai railings, drains, and cable 
television wires.14 
V. Conclusion  
  
Based on the foregoing, we hold that the elevators and 
lanai railings are limited common elements.  We also hold that 
genuine issues of material fact exist, based on this record, as 
to whether the drains and cable television wires are common 
elements.  Pursuant to the Casa Declaration and HRS § 514A- 
 
 
                                                           
14  The ICA also so ruled with respect to the pest control and cable 
television expenses.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 
 15(a), Harrison is not responsible for expenses of limited  
common elements.  If, on remand, it is determined that the 
challenged drain and cable television wire expenses addressed on 
certiorari as well as the pest control and cable television 
expenses remanded by the ICA were common expenses for common 
elements, then Harrison will be liable for her pro rata share of 
those expenses.  If, on remand, expenses for drains, cable 
television wires, cable television services, and pest control 
services are determined not to be common expenses for common 
elements, however, it must still be determined whether Harrison 
is liable for those expenses as well as for the elevator and 
lanai railing expenses based on estoppel by acquiescence.  
 Accordingly, we affirm the ICA’s  SDO and JOA as to its 
rulings regarding the cable television service and pest control 
services expenses and otherwise vacate the SDO and JOA.  We also 
vacate the circuit court’s “Order Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for 
Summary Judgment, Filed 4/17/14 and Granting Defendant Casa de 
Emdeko, Incorporated’s Cross Motion for Summary Judgment,” filed 
on July 22, 2014, and the “Amended Final Judgment,” filed on 
October 8, 2015, in their entireties, and remand this case to  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 
 the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.  
Francis L. Jung 
for petitioner  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  
    /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Wesley H. H. Ching 
for respondent   
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
 
   
   /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
 
      / s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 
