 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0001114 04-MAY-2016 
08:46 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
LAST KONY,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-12-0001114 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0001114; CR. NO. 11-1-1294) 

MAY 4, 2016 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,
AND RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case involves the admissibility of expert 
testimony in child sexual abuse cases. 
Last Kony challenges his 
convictions of sexual assault of a minor on the grounds that 
expert testimony regarding child sexual abuse is no longer 
relevant, the statistical data presented during his trial was  
 
 
 
 
  
                     
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
misleading and highly prejudicial, and the evidence presented 
during his trial improperly profiled him as a sex offender. We affirm the trial court’s ruling as to the relevancy of the expert testimony in this case regarding the unique characteristics of child sexual abuse victims admitted to assist the jury “to comprehend something not commonly known or 
understood”--delayed reporting. State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 
557-58, 799 P.2d 48, 52-54 (1990). 
Additionally, although we 
conclude that Kony did not properly preserve for appeal his argument that the expert testimony presented in this case was unfairly prejudicial or misleading, we provide guidance in light of the Intermediate Court of Appeals’ analysis of this issue. 
I. Background 
Kony was charged in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court) with sexual assault of a minor. The charges consisted of three counts of sexual assault in the first degree and six counts of sexual assault in the third degree.
1 
1  Sexual assault in the first degree is a violation of HRS §  707-
730(1)(c) (2008), which states: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with a person who is at least fourteen years
old but less than sixteen years old; provided that: 
(continued . . .) 
- 2 -
 
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The complaining witness (Minor) lived in the same household with 
Kony, along with six family members and one other person. Kony was the boyfriend of Minor’s half-sister and father to two children in the home.
2 Minor was fifteen years of age at the 
time of the alleged sexual assaults. 
A. Pre-trial motion to exclude expert testimony 
Prior to the start of trial, Kony filed a motion in 
limine to exclude the expert testimony of Dr. Alexander Jay Bivens. Kony asserted that Dr. Bivens’ testimony would be irrelevant and that its probative value would be substantially 
(continued . . .) 
(i) The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and 
(ii) The person is not legally married to the minor
. . . . 
Sexual assault in the third degree is a violation of HRS
§ 707-732(1)(c) (2009), which provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if: . . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a person who is at least fourteen years old but
less than sixteen years old; provided that: 
(i) The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and 
(ii) The person is not legally married to the minor
. . . . 
2 Minor explained that the family considered Kony and her half-
sister married, although the two were not legally married. 
- 3 -
 
 
 
  
                     
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, specifically 
Kony’s propensity to commit the crime for which he was charged. 
At the hearing on the motion in limine,3 the State 
explained that the reporting of the abuse in this case was delayed and that Dr. Bivens would provide expert testimony on why delayed reporting commonly occurs in sexual abuse cases. 
The State expressed that its questioning of Dr. Bivens would be 
limited to what factors could hypothetically lead to delayed reporting. The defense expressed a concern that Dr. Bivens would testify about inaccuracies of a witness’ testimony; the Court responded that such testimony would not be allowed: 
THE COURT: . . . I’m not going to let the State get into
that. I mean, he won’t have heard the testimony. So, you
know, what’s his testimony on that going to be?
Hypothetically I’ve had cases before where they, you know,
they testified this way. I mean, I’m going to have to go
question by question on that one. I take this motion to be though basically to preclude him from taking the stand,preclude the State from putting him on. 
[Defense Counsel]: That’s correct, your honor. Just,
you know, basically he’s, you know, from my view, not
related to this case and therefore irrevelant [sic]. 
The circuit court ruled that it would allow Dr. Bivens to 
testify, but the court reiterated that if defense counsel thought any of the State’s questions were objectionable, 
3 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided over the motion and trial
proceedings in this case. 
- 4 -
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the court would rule “question by question” on any 
objections. 
I’m going to allow the State to call him on this issue of
delayed reporting. And obviously they’re going to have toqualify him as an expert and then -- but that’s the offer
of proof and that’s as far as I’m concerned what I’m going
to allow as far as the testimony, and aside from that,we’re just going to go question by question. [Prosecutor]will ask the question. If you think it’s objectionable,you go ahead and object, [Defense Counsel], and I’ll rule
question by question basically. 
B. Testimony adduced by State 
At trial, Minor testified that from May to August 
2011, Kony sexually assaulted her three times in her room at the 
shared home. The first incident occurred on the morning of her fifteenth birthday on May 6, 2011, just after midnight. Minor testified that she was asleep in her bedroom with her door locked but the lock could be picked with a fingernail. Minor 
knew it was Kony because he told her “Don’t worry, be quiet, it 
was just him,” and she also recognized his figure and voice. Minor testified that the second incident occurred approximately two weeks later. Kony came in her bedroom, and he told her that it was him again. During the second incident, Kony told her that there would be problems if her family found out about his “coming in her room.” The last incident occurred a few days before Minor reported the events to her mother on August 12, 
2011. 
- 5 -
 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Minor indicated that Kony was not in her room for more 
than five minutes during any of the incidents. Minor testified 
that she did not scream during the incidents because she “was shocked it happened,” but she told Kony to “get out.” She also testified that she was worried about her “family being messed up,” she felt bad for her sister, and she was scared. 
Minor testified that the first person she told about 
the incidents was her cousin who she told “[w]hile it was happening.” Cousin explained that she and Minor were “very close” and that Minor “didn’t know what to do and what to say to her family because [Minor] said that’s her sister’s boyfriend.” Cousin testified that Minor told her the rape happened a single time and that Kony “tried to do other things like touch her” several other times. 
Minor explained that she did not tell her parents 
or other family members because she was not “close” to any of them. Minor testified that she did not tell her mother until an argument occurred between them. At that time, Minor’s mother was accusing her of being “bad” and asked her why she could not be more like her sisters, at which point Minor told her mother about the incidents. 
Minor’s mother testified that she confronted 
Kony, who stated that he was “sorry and he didn’t know what 
- 6 -
 
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
got into him that made him do that.” Kony did not state 
what he did, but he did tell the mother that he went inside Minor’s room and “he was sorry he did it.” 
After the confrontation, Kony moved out of the home. 
Weeks later, Minor’s father was informed, and he reported Minor’s allegations to the police. Father also confronted Kony, 
and Father testified that during the confrontation, Kony 
apologized for being inside Minor’s room. 
C. Dr. Bivens’ testimony 
Dr. Bivens was qualified, without objection, as an 
expert for the State in clinical psychology with an emphasis on the dynamics of child sexual abuse. Dr. Bivens testified that he did not have any information about the case. Dr. Bivens explained that he understood he was testifying in order to provide information to the jury about the nature of child sexual abuse to assist the jury in making their own determination about the facts of the case. 
The State asked Dr. Bivens where child sexual abuse 
usually occurs. Dr. Bivens answered in terms of whether the offender was an “incest offender” or an offender outside the family: 
[Dr. Bivens:] [T]here have been a couple of -- a couple
of significant studies. And when I say “significant,” I
mean to say these are studies that are regarded as being
done very well on this topic. And what I found was that a hundred percent of incest offenders, offenders offending 
- 7 -
 
 
 
 When it’s outside the family, about 50 percent of --
about 50 percent, a little over 50 percent, 54 percent of
offenses occur in the molester’s home, and, um, a little
less than 50 percent, 46 percent say, occur in the child’s
home. So as strangers that may seem to the layperson a lotof times it’s happening either in the child’s home or inthe molester’s home. 
 Right. Well, eighty -- consistently across numerous
studies -- I don’t even know how many studies -- 85 percent
of sexual abuse victims have a pre-existing non-sexual ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
against family members, committed their -- committed
offenses in their own home. And what that means is that a 
hundred percent of incest victims experience sexual abuse
within their own home. 
[Prosecutor:] Well, a lot of times? It sounds like a 
hundred percent of the time it’s in one of those twoplaces. 
[Dr. Bivens:] Well, it sounds that way. Now I don’t 
mean to be misleading. It can also happen in a car or insome other isolated place. But what we are talking about
is that, um -- is that incest molesters virtually always
seem to commit some molestation in their own home, and theyalways seem -- and so in other words -- how can I put this-- it could happen elsewhere also, but in their own homeseems to come up virtually every time we look at it for the
victims and for the molesters as described. 
Dr. Bivens explained how percentages “work” and their 
relative reliability: 
Well, there are error rates associated with percentagesalways. And there are ways that researchers look at this.
Um, there are these statistics called “standard deviations”and things like that. The studies that I’ll be talkingabout today have enough individuals included in the studyso that the percentages are relatively reliable.
Percentages should only be used to be given a general idea
of, you know, how the phenomenon most often occurs.Something like that. 
Dr. Bivens then provided percentages as to the nature 
of preexisting relationships between a sexually abused child and 
their abuser, including percentages of cases in Hawai ʻi where the 
offender had a family relationship with the victim: 
- 8 -
 
 
 
 In Hawaii the cases that we get reported to us we’re
looking at about 50 per -- a little over 50 percent do have
a family relationship. Um, and if it’s not a familyrelationship, um, it -- it is a pre-existing relationshipof some kind between the child and the molester. 
 And beyond that a recent study showed that about 70
percent of molesters had a relationship with the child’sparents, so you get a sense of the significance that theperson -- the significant role that the individual plays inthe child’s life prior to any molestation happening. 
  Dr. Bivens then discussed reporting of the sexual 
abuse, opining that “delayed disclosure is the rule, not the 
exception.” He explained that large scale studies have found 
that two thirds of adults who say that they were sexually molested as children never told anyone before the age of eighteen. Dr. Bivens identified mothers and close friends as the persons sexually abused children most often tell and provided percentages to substantiate this assertion: ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relationship with their molester. Um, this doesn’t have to
be a family relationship. 
Dr. Bivens also explained that the relationship is considered 
incest as long as the offender is a family member living in the 
child’s home. The State inquired about the gender of abusers, and Dr. Bivens gave the following answer: 
Unfortunately over 95 percent of sexual crimes are
committed by males. And let me just be more specific. Sex crimes against children are committed by males. It’s a 
pretty rare phenomenon for females to do it. And when they
do it, their victims are usually older. So if you’retalking about younger victims, it’s even higher than 95percent. It just seems to be a male problem. Perpetratorsare typically male. 
[T]he most typical person that a child will tell is their
mother. 
Okay. The next most common -- so about 33 percent
of children who tell will tell their mother. About a same 
- 9 -
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
number of children, 32 percent or so, will tell a close
friend and usually in their teenage years when they start
feeling like they have more of a voice. So as their age
increases, their likelihood of telling increases becausethey feel like they’re able to talk better, they’re able tomake their points a little more forcefully. 
The State next asked whether the scientific literature 
that Dr. Bivens had been discussing offered any insights into 
what causes delayed reporting. The defense objected to Dr. Bivens’ response to this question on relevancy grounds, apparently because the answer related to children less than ten years old. Dr. Bivens was allowed to complete his answer to the question, but the court instructed defense counsel to “[k]eep 
objecting as to questions that come if you feel it’s 
appropriate.” Dr. Bivens continued his answer, referring to a study involving two groups of children--five-year-olds and seven-year-olds. Defense counsel again objected on relevancy grounds, and the court stated that if Dr. Bivens continued to discuss five to seven year-olds, it would “start sustaining objections.” The prosecutor then sought permission from the court to lead the witness toward certain age groups” to save 
time. The court declined to grant pre-permission for any 
particular question, again stating that if defense counsel objected, the court would rule. 
Dr. Bivens explained that older children, particularly 
teenage girls, appeared more reluctant to reveal information 
- 10 -
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
about sexual assaults. He then provided exact percentages as to 
the reasons given by women who reported being sexually abused as children for their delay in reporting: 
[A]bout 29 percent said they expected not to be
believed. About 25 percent said they were embarrassed. A 
similar number, 24 percent, said they didn’t want to upsetanyone or cause chaos in their family. 
Eighteen percent said they didn’t want to harm the
abuser because they had a relationship with the abuser andthey didn’t want to get the abuser in trouble. So that gives you kind of an interesting picture of what can go onfor sexually abused females. 
Dr. Bivens next discussed the dynamics of child sex 
abuse and how it relates to delayed reporting. The State asked 
whether multiple incidents of abuse over time affects delayed reporting. Dr. Bivens responded that multiple incidents of abuse “implies delayed reporting.” Dr. Bivens explained that children feel guilty for not reporting earlier and worry that they are going to be blamed for not reporting. 
Dr. Bivens also identified the type of circumstances 
where victims of abuse will finally report the molestation by 
the offender. He explained that “some of the classic ones are 
like an anger-inducing incident where the child is being held accountable for being negative or bad or hypocritical.” Dr. Bivens described how the victim might feel they have nothing to lose by telling the truth: 
There’s something that’s got them so upset that maybe
they’re already in so much trouble, they don’t feel likethey have anything else to lose by telling the truth, um,and so they’re not so afraid of the consequences. Um, 
- 11 -
 
 
 
 
                     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
sometimes the proximity of the offender. If the offender 
has left but then is now coming back or if the child --
yeah, so if the offender is then out of the house and is
then coming back, the child may disclose to tell in orderto protect themselves. 
The court, sua sponte, intervened striking from the record what 
Dr. Bivens said about the child telling the truth and instructed the jury to disregard it.
4    
D. Testimony adduced by Kony 
Kony’s girlfriend, Minor’s half-sister, testified that 
she and Kony lived with Kony’s sister at a separate home, they never lived at Minor’s home, and Kony never stayed the night at Minor’s home. Kony’s girlfriend also testified that Kony never apologized to Minor’s parents for anything he did to Minor, and she denied that Kony was confronted by Minor’s parents. 
A co-worker of Kony testified that Kony worked a 1:00 
AM to 8:00 AM shift at a cleaning company from May 31, 2011, to September, 2011. The co-worker testified that Kony arrived to work on the Honolulu city bus. Kony stipulated to the entry of his record cards into evidence, showing the hours and days he was working. Kony’s record cards indicate that Kony was not 
4 Dr. Bivens also described how sexual abuse affects memory. He 
discussed the effects of trauma on a victim’s memory citing a study involving
children in car accidents. Defense counsel objected to this testimony asirrelevant, and the court sustained the objection. 
- 12 -
 
 
 
  
 
                     
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
scheduled for work on nine days in June, seven days in July, and 
nine days in August, 2011. Kony did not testify. 
Kony was found guilty and sentenced to terms of 
incarceration of twenty years for three counts of sexual assault in the first degree and five years for three counts of sexual assault in the third degree, with the terms to run concurrently.
5 
Kony filed an appeal to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) from the November 28, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. 
E. ICA Proceedings 
Kony’s opening brief, raised a single point of error--
that the circuit court erred in allowing Dr. Bivens’ testimony. Kony argued that Dr. Bivens’ testimony was not of assistance to the jury because the commonness of delayed disclosure of child victims no longer constituted specialized knowledge outside the common experience of the jury. Kony also asserted that Dr. Bivens’ testimony relied on statistics in a manner that was misleading and highly prejudicial. Kony further contended that the statistical and profile evidence cited by Dr. Bivens vouched 
for Minor’s credibility. 
In its answering brief, the State argued that Dr. 
Bivens’ testimony was relevant to assist the jury in 
5 At the close of the prosecution’s case, the trial court granted
Kony’s motion for judgment of acquittal as to Counts 2, 5, and 8. 
- 13 -
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
understanding behaviors and phenomena associated with sexual 
abuse. The State contended Kony was not prejudiced by Dr. Bivens’ testimony and maintained that Kony did not object to the testimony on the grounds that it was profile evidence or that the doctor’s use of statistics was highly prejudicial. The State asserted that it did not misinterpret any statistics 
mentioned by Dr. Bivens or improperly suggest during closing 
argument that Kony was guilty because he matched a profile of individuals who sexually assault children. 
In reply to the State, Kony argued that he did not 
waive his challenge to Dr. Bivens’ testimony. Kony contended that he argued in his motion in limine that Dr. Bivens’ testimony was not relevant and that its minimal probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Kony maintained that 
he was not required to continuously object throughout the trial 
after the court had definitively ruled to allow Dr. Bivens’ testimony because the court’s invitation for the defense to object was only if defense counsel believed that the State was exceeding the scope of the court’s ruling. 
The ICA issued a Summary Disposition Order (SDO) 
affirming the circuit court’s judgment of conviction. The ICA rejected Kony’s argument that expert testimony regarding delayed 
reporting is no longer helpful to juries. The ICA also assumed 
- 14 -
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that Kony preserved his objections to Dr. Bivens’ testimony for 
improper bolstering of the complaining witnesses’ credibility and profiling of Kony as a sex offender and held that those arguments were meritless. The ICA noted that Dr. Bivens testified that error rates are always associated with percentages and that Kony acknowledged that Dr. Bivens did not 
have any information about the case. 
Judge Reifurth concurred in the result, but he wrote 
separately to clarify his understanding of the Hawai ʻi Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 403 analysis that would apply--had Kony 
properly raised his objections that elements of Dr. Bivens’ testimony were misleading and unduly prejudicial. Judge Reifurth explained that the potential prejudice of the evidence should be assessed against its probative value under HRE Rule 403. Judge Reifurth stated that he would have resolved the 
issue of prejudice, arising from expert testimony regarding the typical characteristics and behaviors of child sexual abusers, 
as waived because Kony failed to object at trial to any 
testimony of Dr. Bivens as prejudicial. 
II. Standards of Review 
We apply the right/wrong standard in reviewing 
challenges to a court’s relevancy decision under HRE Rules 703, 
401, and 402. State v. Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi 94, 107, 19 P.3d 42, 55 
- 15 -
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2001). “Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 403, which 
require a ‘judgment call’ on the part of the trial court, are reviewed for an abuse of discretion.” State v. Richie
, 88 
Hawaiʻi 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 1245 (1998) (footnote omitted) 
(quoting State v. Arceo,  84 Hawai ʻi 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 
(1996)). “An abuse of discretion occurs when the decisionmaker ‘exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party.’” 
Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 107, 19 P.3d at 55 (quoting In re Water Use 
Permit Applications, 94 Hawai ʻi 97, 183, 9 P.3d 409, 495 (2000)). 
III. Discussion 
Kony contends that the ICA gravely erred in holding 
that the circuit court did not err in allowing the testimony of 
Dr. Bivens as an expert in clinical psychology and the dynamics 
of child sexual abuse and permitting testimony on the issue of 
delayed reporting. 
Kony maintains that the testimony “was not 
relevant, not proper expert testimony, improperly profiled [Kony] as a sex offender and relied on statistical data that was misleading and highly prejudicial.” 
- 16 -
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A. Kony’s Relevancy Objection to Dr. Bivens’ Testimony 
The admission of expert testimony is initially 
governed by HRE Rule 702.6 Under HRE Rule 702, an expert witness 
may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise if 
“scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue.” HRE Rule 702 (1993). One of the “touchstones of admissibility for expert testimony under HRE 
Rule 702” is relevance.
7 Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 106, 19 P.3d at 
54; see also State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 562, 799 P.2d 48, 
54 (1990). 
“In determining the relevancy issue, the trial 
courts’ function is akin to the relevancy analysis adopted in applying HRE Rules 401 and 402.”
8 Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 106, 19 
6 HRE Rule 702 provides the following: 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion orotherwise. In determining the issue of assistance to thetrier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthinessand validity of the scientific technique or mode of
analysis employed by the proffered expert. 
HRE Rule 702 (1993). 
7 Another touchstone of admissibility under HRE Rule 702 is
reliability. Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 106, 19 P.3d at 54. We do not consider the 
reliability of the evidence as Kony only objects to the testimony as not
relevant. 
8 Under HRE Rule 401, “relevant evidence” “means evidence having
any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
(continued . . .) 
- 17 -
 
 
 
                                                                               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d at 54 (footnotes omitted). “The critical inquiry with 
respect to expert testimony is whether such testimony will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or determine 
a fact in issue.” State v. Fukusaku
, 85 Hawai ʻi 462, 472, 946 
P.2d 32, 42 (1997) (quoting State v. Maelega , 80 Hawai ʻi 172, 
181, 907 P.2d 758, 767 (1995)). In State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 
552, 799 P.2d 48 (1990), this court considered the admissibility of expert testimony under HRE Rule 702 regarding the patterns of behavior of child victims of sexual abuse. 71 Haw. at 555, 799 P.2d at 50. The court in Batangan found that sexual abuse of children “is a particularly mysterious phenomenon,” Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51 (quoting State v. Castro, 69 Haw. 633, 648, 756 
P.2d 1033, 1044 (1988)). The court also observed that the jury 
may lack an adequate foundation “for assessing the credibility of a young child who complains of sexual abuse” because “[n]ormally,” seemingly bizarre behavior such as delayed reporting might “be attributed to inaccuracy or prevarication.” Id. (quoting State v. Myers, 359 N.W.2d 604, 610 (Minn. 1984)). Expert testimony, therefore, explains to the jurors “the unique interpersonal dynamics involved in prosecutions for intrafamily 
(continued . . .)
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be

without the evidence.” HRE Rule 401 (1993). 
- 18 -
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
child sexual abuse” and corrects “widely held misconceptions,” 
in order that the jury “may evaluate the evidence free of the constraints of popular myths.” 
Id. at 557-58, 799 P.2d at 52 
(first quoting Wheat v. State, 527 A.2d 269, 275 (Del. Super. Ct. 1987); then quoting People v. Gray, 231 Cal. Rptr. 658, 660– 661 (Cal. Ct. App. 1986)). 
The
 Batangan  court found that expert testimony was 
necessary to address “patterns of behavior” of minor victims of sexual assault “which are seemingly inconsistent with behavioral norms of other victims of assault,” including delayed reporting. Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 5. The court noted that “it is helpful for the jury to know that many child victims of sexual abuse behave in the same manner.” 
Id.
 at 557, 799 P.2d at 52. While 
Batangan stands for the proposition that such testimony is 
helpful to the jury in cases involving “‘seemingly bizarre’ behavior of child sex abuse victims,” 
id.
 at 558, 799 P.2d at 
52, such testimony is not indiscriminately admissible under 
Batangan and instead must be evaluated under the requirements of 
HRE Rules 702, 401, 403, and other rules of evidence. 
In this case, Dr. Bivens discussed delayed reporting 
by children identified as victims of sexual abuse. 
Kony argued 
on appeal that expert opinion is no longer needed to explicate 
the phenomenon of delayed reporting. However, under Batangan 
- 19 -
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
expert testimony regarding “seemingly bizarre” behavior of 
victims, including the phenomenon of delayed reporting, has been held to be helpful to the jury where reporting by a child victim of sexual abuse is delayed. At the motion in limine hearing, Kony’s position was that Dr. Bivens’ testimony was not related to this case and therefore irrelevant. The testimony from Minor 
indicates that her reporting of the abuse, which first occurred 
in May 2011, was delayed until August 2011. Consequently, the record in this case supports a determination by the trial court that it would be helpful for the jury to hear expert testimony that delayed reporting is a common phenomenon in incidents of child sexual abuse. Thus, the circuit court did not err in determining that Dr. Bivens’ testimony regarding delayed reporting was relevant and admissible. 
B. Absence of Other Objections to Dr. Bivens’ Testimony 
1. 
Kony also contends that Dr. Bivens’ testimony 
improperly profiled him as a sex offender and that the 
statistical data referenced in his testimony was misleading and 
highly prejudicial. Kony argues that, under HRE Rule 103,
9 he 
9 HRE Rule 103(a) (2006) states: 
(continued . . .) 
- 20 -
 
 
 
  
                                                                               
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
maintained his objection to all of the evidence provided by Dr. 
Bivens by objecting to his entire testimony. However, under the circumstances of this case, we find that Kony did not preserve his objection for appellate review. 
The circuit court in its motion in limine ruling 
specifically indicated that it was allowing Dr. Bivens’ 
testimony only insofar as it addressed the issue of delayed 
reporting. During the motion in limine hearing, the court explained that it understood Kony’s motion as requesting the court to preclude Dr. Bivens from taking the stand at all. While the court allowed Dr. Bivens to testify, the court instructed defense counsel to raise objections as counsel 
(continued . . .)
Effect of erroneous ruling. 
Error may not be predicated
upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a
substantial right of the party is affected, and: 
(1) Objection. 
In case the ruling is one admitting
evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike appears
of record, stating the specific ground of objection, ifthe specific ground was not apparent from the context;
or 
(2) Offer of proof. In case the ruling is one
excluding evidence, the substance of the evidence was
made known to the court by offer or was apparent fromthe context within which questions were asked. 
Once the court makes a definitive ruling on the recordadmitting or excluding evidence, either at or before trial,a party need not renew an objection or offer of proof topreserve a claim of error for appeal. 
- 21 -
 
 
 
 
 
 Despite the court’s caveat regarding the limited 
nature of its in limine ruling, which permitted Dr. Bivens to 
testify on the limited issue of delayed reporting, Kony did not raise objections during trial on the grounds that Dr. Bivens’ testimony consisted of profile evidence or that the statistical evidence was misleading or prejudicial. In addition, the court reiterated during Dr. Bivens’ testimony that it would entertain objections. However, Kony’s only objections were based on 
relevancy grounds as Dr. Bivens was referencing studies related 
to younger children.
10   
                     
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determined appropriate, and the court would rule “question by question.” 
Yeah. Well, I understand. I understand your
position. And in these kinds of cases the defense as a 
matter of course tries to keep Dr. Bivens off the stand and
I understand why. 
I’m going to allow the State to call him on this
issue of delayed reporting.  
And obviously they’re going to
have to qualify him as an expert and then -- but that’s the
offer of proof and that’s as far as I’m concerned what I’m
going to allow as far as the testimony, and aside from
that, we’re just going to go question by question.[Prosecutor] will ask the question. 
If you think it’s
objectionable, you go ahead and object, [Defense Counsel],and I’ll rule question by question basically. 
(Emphases added). 
10 The defense objected twice during Dr. Bivens explanation of
delayed reporting, once concerning prepubescent children and once regarding
five and seven year-olds. The court overruled the objection to allow the
witness to finish the question but indicated that if Dr. Bivens continued totalk about five to seven-year-olds, the court would begin sustainingobjections. Similarly, Kony’s third objection was to Dr. Bivens’ testimony
(continued . . .) 
- 22 -
 
 
 
 
                                                                               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRE Rule 103(a)(1) requires a “specific” objection or 
a motion to strike if the ground is “not apparent from the 
context.” Vliet
, 91 Hawai ʻi at 298-99, 983 P.2d 189, 199-200 
(quoting Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co. , 85 Hawai ʻi 336, 379 n.29, 
944 P.2d 1279, 1322 n.29 (1997)); see also State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai ʻi 493, 505, 193 P.3d 409, 421 (2008) (holding that the 
defendant waived the right to challenge testimony regarding the 
chain of custody of a handgun due to his failure to object); 
State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai ʻi 442, 464, 60 P.3d 843, 864-865 
(2002) (noting that defendant has the burden under HRE Rule 103 
to create an adequate record in order to preserve an error for 
review). 
Under the specific circumstances of this case, where 
the defendant moved in limine to entirely exclude an expert from testifying but the evidence that the prosecution stated it intended to elicit was admissible, the defendant was specifically instructed by the court to object during the course of the trial to objectionable testimony, and the defendant did 
(continued . . .)
regarding seducing and testing of a younger child, in which sexual touching
by the molester is incorporated into the adult-child relationship. 
Kony’s
objection, which was overruled, was that the testimony was irrelevant. The defense’s final objection to Dr. Bivens’ testimony, which was sustained, wasin regard to the “tunnel memory” effect observed in young children involvedin car accidents. 
- 23 -
 
 
 
 
 
                     
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not properly object, the requirements of HRE Rule 103 were not 
fulfilled.11 Kony therefore did not preserve his right to raise 
the issues of whether Dr. Bivens’ testimony profiled him as a sex offender and whether the statistical evidence was unfairly prejudicial or misleading. Accordingly, we do not consider the merits of Kony’s arguments on these issues. However, because 
the ICA’s analysis assumed arguendo that Kony properly preserved 
his objections and concluded the objections were without merit, we provide guidance on the application of HRE Rule 403 to statistical evidence.
12 
2. 
The expert testimony presented to the jury in this 
case included statistics regarding child sexual abuse, such as the following: “over 95 percent of sexual crimes are committed 
by males”; “a recent study showed that about 70 percent of 
molesters had a relationship with the child’s parents”; “85 percent of sexual abuse victims have a pre-existing non-sexual relationship with their molester and “in Hawaii . . . a little 
11 Plain error was not raised in the appellate briefs or the
certiorari application. Given the circumstances of this case, including the
circuit court’s multiple invitations for defense counsel to object to thetestimony at issue and Kony’s proffered defense, plain error review is not
warranted. 
See State v. Fox , 70 Haw. 46, 56, 760 P.2d 670, 676 (1988)
(discussing the standard for plain error review). 
12 We do not discuss Kony’s contention that Dr. Bivens testimony
improperly profiled him as a sex offender. 
- 24 -
 
 
 
                     
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
over 50 percent do have a family relationship . . . between the 
child and the molester”; and “a hundred percent of incest victims experience sexual abuse within their own home.” 
Although the ICA majority ostensibly evaluated the 
merits of Kony’s argument that it was error for the trial court to admit the testimony because it was unduly prejudicial and 
misleading under HRE Rule 403, the ICA’s analysis included no 
discussion of the potential prejudice of this statistical data. Additionally, there was no weighing of the potential for unfair prejudice against the probative value of Dr. Bivens’ testimony. The ICA’s analysis instead seems to find that, because Dr. Bivens’ testimony is relevant and not categorically excluded, it must always be admitted when applying HRE Rule 403.
13 However, 
while expert testimony regarding child sexual abuse may be 
admissible to “assist the jury” under Batangan , it should only 
13 In its ruling, the ICA states that “Hawai ʻi courts have 
consistently held that Dr. Bivens’s generalized testimony ‘was helpful to the
jury and relevant to provide context to evaluate the behavior of the Childwhere normal indicia of reliability may not apply,’” and it cites to twounpublished dispositions of the ICA and 
Batangan  in support of this
proposition. 
The ICA also seems to have found it significant that Dr. Bivens
did not have any information about the case. 
While this appears relevant to
the question of whether Dr. Bivens’ testimony could be perceived as directlyopining on Minor’s credibility or Kony’s guilt, it is not clear how the
absence of such information by Dr. Bivens would address the potential
prejudice of statistical evidence, and, in fact, it seemingly may have hadthe effect of enhancing prejudice by the factual match between thepercentages and the circumstances presented at trial. 
- 25 -
 
 
 
 
  
                     
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
be admitted if it may be presented “without unduly prejudicing 
the defendant.” Batangan , 71 Haw. at 557-58, 799 P.2d at 51-52. 
Said another way, Batangan does not exempt expert testimony concerning child sexual abuse victims from the weighing required by HRE Rule 403. 
Under HRE Rule 403, relevant evidence may be excluded 
if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice or the danger of misleading the jury.
14 
Because expert evidence “can be both powerful and quite misleading,” “the judge in weighing possible prejudice against probative force under Rule 403 . . . exercises more control over 
experts than over lay witnesses.” 
Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 108, 19 
P.3d at 56 (quoting Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc., 509 
U.S.
 579, 596 (1993)); see also United States v. Chischilly , 30 
F.3d 1144, 1156 (9th Cir. 1994) (“[W]e take seriously the 
Court’s admonition in 
Daubert
 that scientific evidence must 
withstand close scrutiny under Rule 403.”), overruled on other 
14 HRE Rule 403 provides as follows: 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needlesspresentation of cumulative evidence. 
HRE Rule 403 (1993). 
- 26 -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
grounds by United States v. Preston , 751 F.3d 1008 (9th Cir. 
2014)). 
Thus, “the possibility that the jury may be unduly 
influenced by the expert’s opinion would mitigate against 
admission.” Batangan , 71 Haw. at 562, 799 P.2d at 54 (quoting 
State v. Kim, 64 Haw. 598, 606, 645 P.2d 1330, 1337 (1982)). 
Indeed, the Batangan court expressly recognized that, even when 
probative, “[s]cientific and expert testimony, with their ‘aura of special reliability and trustworthiness,’ courts the danger that the triers of fact will ‘abdicate [their] role of critical assessment,’ and ‘surrender [ ] their own common sense in weighing testimony.’” Batangan, 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51 
(second and third alterations in original) (first quoting United States v. Amaral, 488 F.2d 1148, 1152 (9th Cir. 1973); then 
quoting State v. Brown, 297 Or. 404, 439, 687 P.2d 751, 773 
(1984); and then quoting United States v. Azure, 801 F.2d 336, 341 (8th Cir. 1986)). The Batangan court recognized that expert testimony regarding the common behavior of child sexual abuse victims “carries the potential of bolstering the credibility of one witness and conversely refuting the credibility of another.” Id. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51. Accordingly, the “pertinent consideration is whether the expert testimony will assist the 
jury without unduly prejudicing the defendant.” 
Id. 
- 27 -
  
 
 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Expert testimony that employs the use of statistics 
presents further hazards that courts must be sensitive to when 
applying the HRE Rule 403 weighing of the probative value against the danger of unfair prejudice or misleading of the jury. 
See, e.g. , Chischilly, 30 F.3d at 1156 (“Numerous hazards 
attend the courtroom presentation of statistical evidence of any 
sort. Accordingly, Rule 403 requires judicial vigilance against 
the risk that such evidence will inordinately distract the jury from or skew its perception of other, potentially exculpatory evidence lacking not so much probative force as scientific gloss.” (footnotes omitted)). Commentators have also warned against “the use of probability evidence on crucial points in criminal prosecutions.” David McCord, Expert Psychological Testimony About Child Complainants in Sexual Abuse Prosecutions: 
A Foray into the Admissibility of Novel Psychological Evidence, 
77 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1, 55 (1986). Such evidence may overwhelm the jury “to the extent that it attributes more probative value to the evidence than it actually has” and leads to “unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.”
15 McCord, supra, at 58. 
15 Dr. Bivens began his testimony by emphasizing that his statistics
were trustworthy, stating that the studies he was citing were “significant”
because they were “regarded as being done very well on this topic.” AlthoughDr. Bivens did state that statistics have some margin of error, he also
(continued . . .) 
- 28 -
 
 
 
 
   
                    
(continued . . .)                                                           
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Additionally, statistical evidence regarding the 
behavior of offenders and victims may undermine the reasonable 
doubt standard to the extent that such data is used by the jury in making its ultimate determination regarding a defendant’s guilt.
16 Id. at 56-58. A fundamental problem of such testimony 
is that it “invites the jury to convict the defendant on the 
basis of a statistical probability rather than on the basis of 
the evidence in the case.” Id. at 55. However, the idea of 
reasonable doubt requires proof connecting the defendant to the crime and does not permit proof that a defendant is more likely to be guilty because he or she may share characteristics or traits with discrete populations of offenders.
17 
stated that “[t]he studies that I’ll be talking about today have enough
individuals included in the study so that the percentages are relativelyreliable.” 
He also stated, “Percentages should only be used to be given a
general idea of, you know, how the phenomenon most often occurs.” 
16 See Laurence H. Tribe, Trial by Mathematics: Precision and
Ritual in the Legal Process, 84 Harv. L. Rev. 1329, 1372-75 (1971). 
17 See State v. Transfiguracion , No. SCWC-11-0000048 2013 WL
1285112, at *6 (Haw. Mar. 28, 2013) (Order Rejecting Application for Writ of
Certiorari) (Acoba, J., dissenting); see also State v. Claflin, 690 P.2d
1186, 1190 (Wash. Ct. App. 1984) (“An opinion that the defendant
statistically is more likely to have committed the crime because of hismembership in a group--in this case, his paternalistic relationships to thevictims--is inadmissible.”); Hall v. State, 692 S.W.2d 769, 773 (Ark. App.
1985) (rejecting evidence that “in 75% to 80% of such cases the perpetrator
is known to the children involved” and “50% of child sexual abuse cases occur in either the home of the child or the perpetrator” because it “was not ofproper benefit to the jury,” “tended to focus the attention of the jury uponwhether the evidence against the defendant matched the evidence in the usual
case involving the sexual abuse of a young child,” and was “distractive and
prejudicial”). 
- 29 -
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A court should also consider the manner in which the 
statistical information is presented because statistical 
evidence has the potential to be misleading and given undue weight by the jury based on how it is adduced. For example, commentators have observed that statistics in sexual abuse cases may mislead the jury based on the manner in which the 
statistical information is presented. 
See Thomas D. Lyon and 
Jonathan J. Koehler, The Relevance Ratio: Evaluating the 
Probative Value of Expert Testimony in Child Sexual Abuse Cases, 82 Cornell L. Rev. 43, 47 (1996). Testimony that a percentage of offenders or victims have a particular characteristic may be misleading unless the percentage of all persons with the relevant characteristic that are offenders or victims is also stated. Thus, a statistic that 95 percent of burglaries are 
committed by persons within a certain economic group has the 
potential to be serious misleading without also stating the percentage of all persons within that economic group who commit burglaries. 
In this case, Dr. Bivens testified that “over 95 
percent of sexual crimes are committed by males.” 
However, 
testimony that 95 percent of a certain category of criminal offenders are male would not appear to assist the jury in 
comprehending something not commonly known or understood. See 
- 30 -
 
 
 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Batangan,  71 Haw. at 562, 799 P.2d at 54. And, even assuming 
admissibility, there appears to be little or no probative value 
that may be discerned by admission of this evidence. 
Further, 
the manner in which the statistic was presented had the potential to be misleading because the fact that 95 percent of sexual abusers are male does not indicate the probability that a 
person with the relevant characteristic--here, that of being 
male--is also an offender. The percentage of all men who sexually abuse children was not stated by Dr. Bivens, and without such context, the testimony appears significantly misleading. 
This is not to suggest that providing the jury with 
additional statistics is the appropriate approach to rectify problematic statistics. 
Instead, when statistics are 
potentially misleading, in posing a risk, for example, that the jury may consider that the defendant’s relationships or characteristics make it more likely that the defendant committed the offense, then the court must carefully weigh the danger of improper influence upon the jury in its HRE Rule 403 analysis of 
the proffered testimony.
18 See Vliet, 95 Hawai ʻi at 108, 19 P.3d 
18 See State v. Petrich,  683 P.2d 173, 180 (Wash. 1984) (precluding
on retrial expert’s testimony that in “eighty-five to ninety percent of our
cases, the child is molested by someone they already know,” as it “invitesthe jury to conclude that because of defendant’s particular relation
(continued . . .) 
- 31 -
 
 
 
                                                                               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 56 (“Expert evidence can be both powerful and quite 
misleading because of the difficulty in evaluating it. Because of this risk, the judge . . . under Rule 403 . . . exercises more control over experts than over lay witnesses.” (quoting 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc. , 509 U.S. 579, 596 (1993)). 
As stated, the testimony in this case included 
numerous statistical percentages: “70 percent of molesters had a relationship with the child’s parents”; “a hundred percent of incest victims experience sexual abuse in their home”; and that “85 percent of sexual abuse victims have a pre-existing[,] non-
sexual relationship with their abuser,” and in Hawai ʻi 
specifically, “50 percent do have a family relationship.” 
Because the ICA considered that an adequate objection was made to this evidence, the ICA should have taken into account the problematic nature of these statistics in considering whether their probative value was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice or whether the evidence was misleading. 
(continued . . .)
relationship to the victim, he is statistically more likely to have committed
the crime”), overruled in part on other grounds by State v. Kitchen, 756 P.2d
105 (Wash. 1988); Stephens v. State, 774 P.2d 60, 64 (Wyo. 1989) (observingthat it was “difficult [ ] to understand how statistical information wouldassist a trier of fact in reaching a determination as to guilt in an
individual case” in reviewing expert’s testimony that informed the jury “that
statistically eighty to eighty-five percent of child sexual abuse iscommitted by a relative close to the child”), overruled in part on other
grounds by Large v. State
, 177 P.3d 807, 816 (Wyo. 2008). 
- 32 -
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Judge Reifurth noted in his concurring opinion that the ICA 
majority’s approach seems to admit expert testimony “so long as it may be deemed contextually relevant.” We agree with Judge Reifurth that this “is not the right measure” and that “the potential prejudice of such evidence should be assessed against its probative value.” However, because Kony did not properly 
preserve his argument that the testimony was unduly prejudicial 
or misleading, we need not consider the extent of any unfair prejudice to Kony or the possibility of misleading of the jury under HRE Rule 403. 
IV. Conclusion 
Batangan
 instructs that “[c]ourts must proceed with 
caution in admitting expert testimony” in cases involving the sexual abuse of children. Batangan, 71 Haw. at 562, 799 P.2d at 
53. Such evidence is admissible if it will “assist the jury to comprehend something not commonly known or understood,”  such as 
“seemingly bizarre behavior of child sex abuse victims.” Id. at 
557-58, 799 P.2d at 52-54. If the evidence will assist the 
jury, then the court, upon objection, must determine the probity 
of the evidence in relation to the danger of unfair prejudice, any misleading aspects of the evidence, or potential for undue influence. See id. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51.   In making this 
determination, c ourts must recognize that “this type of expert 
- 33 -
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testimony carries the potential of bolstering the credibility of 
one witness and conversely refuting the credibility of another.” Id. at 558. Consequently, expert testimony of this nature should be carefully evaluated under HRE Rule 403 to ensure that proffered statistical evidence is not misleading or unfairly prejudicial. 
For the reasons discussed and in light of the record 
in this case, the November 28, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence and the ICA Judgment on Appeal are affirmed. 
John M. Tonaki and 
Jon N. Ikenaga
for petitioner /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson  Donn Fudo 
for respondent 
- 34 -
