 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I,
 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
ROBERT TETU,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-13-0003062 05-DEC-2016 10:24 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
ʻI 
---o0o---
SCWC-13-0003062 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13-0003062; CR. NO. 10-1-0833) 
DECEMBER 5, 2016 

McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., AND RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case presents the question of whether a defendant 
charged with committing a criminal offense on private property 
has a right to visit the crime scene. We hold that the constitutional provisions providing for effective assistance of 
counsel and a fair trial afford a defendant, subject to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
2 appropriate restrictions, with the right to access the scene of 
the alleged offense. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
  On March 25, 2010, at about 2:00 a.m., a surveillance camera filmed Robert Tetu, who was wearing a backpack, entering 
the uninhabited basement area of Maunaihi Terrace, a private 
condominium building in Honolulu.  The video footage recorded 
Tetu entering into two locked utility closets with an unknown tool and wiping the door knobs afterwards with his jacket.
1  Tetu 
is then seen leaving the closet with a backpack-type bag in one hand, a black plastic garbage bag in the other hand, and a “mini 
mag light type flash light” in his mouth.  The next day, after 
reviewing the video footage, the condominium manager inspected 
the storage closets and noticed that an electric grinder and 
several emergency lights and batteries were missing.   On May 24, 2010, Tetu was charged with burglary in the 
second degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 708-811 (1993).
2  As part of discovery, the defense 
                         
 1 “Storage closets” and “utility closets” are used interchangeably. 
 2 HRS § 708-811 provides in relevant part, 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the second 
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains 
unlawfully in a building with intent to commit therein a crime against a person or against property rights. 
(continued. . .)  
 
 
  
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
received the police reports, which included copies of the 
surveillance footage, eight photographs, and two diagrams of the 
basement where the utility closets were located. The 
photographs showed the fire-exit door through which Tetu 
entered, the short hallway where the surveillance camera was 
located, the exterior doors to the utility closets, and a few 
items on the shelves inside one of the storage closets. Tetu’s 
counsel went to Maunaihi Terrace on November 18, 2010 in order 
to inspect the premises, but he was denied access and told to “coordinate an inspection through the resident manager.” 
Thereafter, defense counsel sent an email to the condominium 
manager to arrange a visit. The email, which was copied to the 
prosecutor, informed the manager that the prosecutor was also 
interested in visiting the condominium. In response to the 
email, the manager told Tetu’s counsel that the request would be 
presented to the condominium homeowner’s association or board of directors. Counsel, however, did not receive a further 
response. 
Tetu filed a pretrial motion to compel discovery in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court)
3 
(. . .continued)
(2) Burglary in the second degree is a class C felony. 
HRS § 708- 811. 
3 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided. 
3 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
requesting access to the condominium premises, arguing that 
“location is everything” and that “[t]he defense must examine 
the area from its own perspective.” The motion provided four 
reasons why access to the condominium was necessary. First, 
“[t]he State’s diagrams, video[,] and photograph discovery d[id] 
not adequately orient [Tetu] and [his] counsel to the area in 
question for purposes of cogently presenting this case to a 
jury.” Second, the footage only included a “partial photo” of 
the interior of one of the utility closets. Third, noting that the diagrams were not drawn to scale, the defense requested 
access to “help counsel to intelligently question and cross-
examine witnesses, present visual evidence to the jury and to 
understand the account” of Tetu, who was in custody. Fourth, 
access was needed to “photograph areas which may be significant 
to the defense if they are not already depicted in the discovery 
already produced.” The motion requested that the court issue an order directing the prosecution “to make Maunaihi Terrace 
available for inspection, measurement, and photographs” or 
directing the complaining witness to make the premises available 
under reasonable conditions. 
The State opposed the motion, arguing that Rule 16 of 
the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) (2012) only required 
the prosecution to deliver material and information within the prosecutor’s possession or control or in the possession or 
4 
 
 
 
                         
   
 
 
  
    
 
  
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
control of other governmental personnel. The State also argued 
that because eight months had passed before defense counsel 
first attempted to access the condominium and fifteen months had 
elapsed since the incident, any inspection or photographs taken 
of the premises would not accurately depict the scene at the 
time of the offense and would not be relevant or admissible 
under Rule 4014 and Rule 4025 of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
(HRE). Alternatively, the State contended that, even if access to the premises was relevant, access should be barred under HRE Rule 403
6 because it would be cumulative of the materials already 
provided to Tetu by the prosecution. 
4 HRE Rule 401 states in pertinent part, 
“Relevant evidence” means evidence having any tendency to 
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to
the determination of the action more probable or less
probable than it would be without the evidence. 
HRE Rule 401 (1993). 
5 HRE Rule 402 provides, 
All relevant evidence is admissible, except as otherwise
provided by the Constitutions of the United States and the
State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by other
rules adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is not 
relevant is not admissible. 
HRE Rule 402 (1993). 
6 HRE Rule 403 states, 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste oftime, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. 
HRE Rule 403 (1993). 
5 
 
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A hearing was held on the motion to compel discovery. 
No representatives from Maunaihi Terrace were present. Defense 
counsel argued that Tetu’s constitutional rights to effective 
representation and to confront witnesses would override any 
privacy considerations. The circuit court concluded, however, 
that any evidence at the condominium would not be relevant under 
HRE Rule 401. The court also determined that because there was 
video surveillance, there was “no real plausible justification” 
for access to the crime scene. The court stated that Tetu’s request for access “appears to be speculative and conjecture 
with a hope to turn up something.” Additionally, the court 
noted that because time had passed since March 2010, access to 
the condominium might not have been helpful. Accordingly, the 
court held that HRPP Rule 16 did not apply to Tetu’s request for 
access and denied the motion to compel. 
Approximately two months later, the prosecution-­
without defense counsel’s knowledge--visited the crime scene with the condominium manager to inspect the basement and take 
additional photographs. When the defense was provided with 
these new photographs prior to trial, Tetu sought to exclude 
their admission into evidence. The defense argued that fairness 
demanded that the prosecution not be allowed to visit the crime 
scene and collect evidence for presentation at trial after the 
defense’s request to do the same was denied. The prosecutor 
6 
 
 
 
 
  
                         
  
 
  
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
stated that she went to the condominium to take additional 
photographs so that the jurors could have “a bigger or a better 
idea” of what the condominium building looked like. Tetu’s 
counsel argued that this was inconsistent with the State’s 
earlier position that there was “no need” to take additional 
photographs of the alleged crime scene.7 
In response to the court’s question regarding the two 
sets of photographs, defense counsel stated that while the new 
photographs showed differences in the closets’ contents, major differences were not apparent. The court concluded that because 
of the existence of the video footage and the facts of the case, 
it stood by its original ruling denying the motion to compel 
discovery.
8 The court also denied the defense’s motion to 
exclude admission of the prosecution’s newly obtained photographs. 
7 There was a change in the assigned prosecutor between the
defense’s motion to compel discovery and the hearing to exclude the
additional photographs. 
8 The circuit court noted, “I do recall the earlier motion [to
compel discovery] as well since the Court presided over it.” The court 
referenced Henshaw v. Commonwealth , 451 S.E.2d 415 (Va. Ct. App. 1994), a 
case in which the defense counsel requested access to the crime scene based
on reasons very similar to those Tetu’s counsel had articulated. There, the
Court of Appeals of Virginia held that although defense counsel should have
been granted access to the crime scene, the error was harmless. Id. at 420. 
The circuit court distinguished Henshaw  from Tetu’s request because, in 
Henshaw
, there was no video surveillance and one of the claims was self-
defense in which specifications of a room’s height, width, and length were
relevant. 
7 
 
 
 
  At trial, the State’s first witness was the 
condominium manager. Using a blueprint of the condominium, the 
prosecution asked the manager to orient the court to the 
location of the elevators and the utility closets in the 
basement of the building. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Manager]: Well, there’s elevator mauka and elevator makai, 
and it’s called electrical closet and it’s called 
stor[ag
e], but it’s another electrical closet. 
[Prosecutor]: Okay.  So they’re right across from each 
other, the two utility rooms?  
[Manager]: 
Yes, and that’s the little hallway there.   
The prosecution used the photographs that the defense had moved 
to exclude to identify several objects and rooms shown in the 
photographs. Next, the prosecution played the surveillance 
video for the jury and asked the manager to narrate what he saw 
and to place the events of the video in context with the building’s layout. 
[Prosecution]: And what part of the basement is that?
 
[Manager]: He just headed towards the laundromat, the
laundry room.

 
[Prosecution]: And is there a hallway that connects all
sides of the basement to the elevators? 
 
[Manager]: Sorry, yes. There’ s another hallway just like 
this right on that side where he just emerged from.
 
The manager described Tetu breaking into two of the closets with 
some kind of tool, wiping the door handles with his jacket, and 
leaving the closets with a bag of “stuff” and a flashlight in his mouth. The manager testified that the wood around the door 
8 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
knobs was damaged after the incident and that only those persons 
with keys had access to the storage closets, as he always kept 
the doors to the closets locked. 
Tetu’s counsel cross-examined the condominium manager 
and likewise attempted to establish the layout of the basement 
area where the utility closets were located. 
[Defense]:  When we went over the photographic evidence, you 
made reference to a makai utility room and a mauka utility
room, correct? 
[Manager]:  
Yes.
 
[Defense]: Okay. And when I saw some reports referenced to 
east and northeast utility closets, do you ever use those

distinctions?
 
[Manager]:  I don’t, no.
 
[Defense]: So if there’s a reference to an east closet, 
would  you be able to tell us if that’s the mauka or makai 
one? 
 
[Manager]:  I’ve never heard it referred to as the east or ­
-or what did you say?
 
[Defense]: Northeast. 
So your distinction is mauka-makai? 
[Manager]: Yes. 
. . . .  
[Defense]: Okay.  Sir, I’m going to show you Exhibits 23 
and 24 in evidence.  I’ll ask you -- this is 23.  Which -­ 
which utility closet is this one?
  
[Manager]:  This is the mauka utility closet.

 
[Defense]: And, okay, and 24 would be makai?
 
[Manager]: It’s the same -- no, it’s the same one.
 
[Defense]: It’s the same closet?
 
[Manager]: Yeah.
 
[Defense]: Oh, okay. Sorry. Oh, my mistake. Okay.
 
9 
 
 
 
  Tetu testified that he did what was shown on the 
video, but that he entered the building to retrieve his then­
wife’s clothing and not to steal anything. Tetu explained that 
he had been arguing with his former wife, with whom there was a 
substantial language barrier, when he dropped her off near 
Manauihi Terrace a few hours prior to the incident. He 
testified that she called him to pick her up and that when he 
arrived, she let him into the building. Tetu stated that he 
went in to help her pick up her bag, and she told him that it was in a closet by an elevator. Tetu explained that he used a 
piece of wire to open the closet, which is where he found his 
former wife’s bag. He related that he looked inside the bag to 
make sure it contained her clothes and left without taking 
anything else. Tetu testified that there were more valuable 
things in the closet, such as a computer, and that if he had 
intended to take anything, it would not have been a flashlight and some batteries. 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tetu’s former wife testified as a rebuttal witness for 
the State. She related that she never asked Tetu to pick up a 
bag of her clothes and that she had never been to Maunaihi 
Terrace or stored anything there. 
In its closing argument, the defense argued that 
because Tetu entered with the intent to retrieve his former 
wife’s clothing and not to steal anything, Tetu was a 
10 

 
 
 
 
  
                         
    
 
 
         
 
      
         
           
  
         
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
trespasser, not a burglar. The court instructed the jury on the 
elements of burglary in the second degree and criminal trespass 
in the first degree under HRS § 708-813 (Supp. 2000).9 The jury 
found Tetu guilty of burglary in the second degree, and he was sentenced to five years of imprisonment. 
B. Appellate Proceedings 
Tetu appealed the judgment of conviction to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), arguing that (1) the circuit court erred in denying his discovery request to access the crime scene and that (2) the verdict was not supported by 
the evidence adduced at trial. The State responded that the 
right to discovery in a felony case is the right to receive 
material and information possessed by the prosecution and its 
agents concerning the case. Because the State did not possess 
9 HRS § 708- 813 provides in relevant part, 
(1) A person commits the offense of criminal trespass
in the first degree if: 
(a) That person knowingly enters or remains
unlawfully: 
(i) In a dwelling; or 
(ii) In or upon the premises of a hotel or
apartment building. 
. . . . (2) Criminal trespass in the first degree is a
misdemeanor. 
HRS § 708- 813. 
11 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
or have control over Maunaihi Terrace, the State maintained that 
defense counsel did not have a right under HRPP Rule 16 to 
compel discovery of the condominium. Further, the State argued 
that the appearance and configuration of the condominium more 
than a year after the incident rendered Tetu’s reasons for 
requesting access irrelevant. In response, Tetu contended that 
the passage of time alone does not diminish the importance of 
accessing the crime scene and that inspecting areas of the 
property would have likely shown an exit-only door with no signs of forced entry, corroborating that his former wife let him into 
the condominium. 
The ICA issued a memorandum opinion affirming Tetu’s 
conviction. Citing case law from other states, the ICA observed 
that the court must balance the defendant’s need for access to 
the crime scene with the private party’s right to privacy. The 
ICA noted, “A speculative or conclusory showing, or the failure to explain how the proposed inspection would yield information 
different from that already disclosed in discovery, is 
insufficient to overcome the privacy rights of the private 
party.” The ICA held that a defendant must “make a prima facie 
showing of how the proposed inspection would be relevant and 
material to his or her defense” and “demonstrate sufficient 
‘plausible justification’ and ‘good cause’ for the intrusion.’” 
The ICA ruled that Tetu did not sufficiently explain to the 
12 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
circuit court how becoming familiar with the scene was relevant 
to his defense. Thus, it affirmed the circuit court’s order 
denying Tetu’s motion to compel discovery. The ICA also 
rejected Tetu’s claim that there was insufficient evidence to 
support his conviction. 
This court granted certiorari to address the following 
questions raised by Tetu: (1) whether the ICA erred in affirming 
the circuit court’s denial of the motion to compel discovery; 
and (2) whether the ICA erred in finding that Tetu’s conviction was supported by substantial evidence. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
This court reviews questions of constitutional law “by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case.” State v. Phua
, 135 Hawaiʻ i 504, 511-12, 
353 P.3d 1046, 1053-54 (2015); accord State v. Mundon , 121 
Hawaiʻi 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009).  Therefore, 
questions of constitutional law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard. Phua, 135 Hawaiʻ i at 512, 353 P.3d at 
1054; 
accord State v. Auld, 136 Hawaiʻ i 244, 250, 361 P.3d 471, 
477 (2015). 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  The issue of whether a defendant has a right to 
inspect the crime scene is one of first impression before this 
court. A defendant has a right under HRPP Rule 1610 to  discover 
“material and information within the prosecutor’s possession or 
control.” HRPP Rule 16 (2012). Because the State was not in possession of Maunaihi Terrace, HRPP Rule 16 does not expressly 
provide the defense with access to the crime scene.
11 However, 
                         
   
  
   
 
    
   (2) Disclosure of Matters Not Within Prosecution’s 
Possession. Upon written request of defense counsel and
specific designation by defense counsel of material or
information which would be discoverable if in the 
possession or control of the prosecutor and which is in thepossession or control of other governmental personnel, the
prosecutor shall use diligent good faith efforts to cause 
such material or information to be made available to 
defense counsel; and if the prosecutor’s efforts are
unsuccessful the court shall issue suitable subpoenas or
orders to cause such material or information  to be made 
available to defense counsel.  
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. Motion to Compel Discovery 
1. Right to Access the Crime Scene Under HRPP Rule 16 
10 HRPP Rule 16 provides in relevant part, 
(b) Disclosure by the Prosecution. 
(1) Disclosure of Matters Within Prosecution’s 
Possession. The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendantor the defendant’s attorney the following material and
information within the prosecutor’s possession or control: 
. . . . 
HRPP Rule 16 (2012). 
11 The State cited Honolulu Police Dep’t v. Town,  122 Hawaiʻ i 204,
225 P.3d 646 (2010), in which this court stated that “the discovery right isgoverned and limited by HRPP Rule 16.” Id. at 214, 225 P.3d at 656.  
However, the discovery right under HRPP Rule 16 cannot limit a constitutional
(continued. . .) 
14 
 
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
  
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the HRPP Rule 16 discovery right does not purport to set an 
outer limit on the court’s power to ensure a defendant’s 
constitutional rights. See United States v. Yoshimura , 831 F. 
Supp. 799, 805 (D. Haw. 1993) (“In criminal cases discovery is limited to that required by the due process clause of the 
Constitution, which requires that the Government make available 
evidence that is material to guilt or punishment.”); see also 
United States v. Richter, 488 F.2d 170, 173 (9th Cir. 1973) 
(stating that although discovery was not allowed under Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 16, “the rules themselves do 
not purport to set outer limits on the power of the court”). 
Accordingly, we consider whether there is a constitutional right 
to access a crime scene when the defendant is alleged to have 
committed the offense on private property.
12 
(. . .continued) 
right. See  State v. Pond, 118 Hawaiʻ i 452, 481, 193 P.3d 368, 397 (2008)
(“The impairment of a defendant’s constitutional rights must be considered
and weighed against the imposition of a rule excluding evidence. Failure to 
do so impermissibly relegates the defendant’s constitutional rights to that
of rule status.”); cf.  State v. Calbero, 71 Haw. 115, 124, 785 P.2d 157, 161 
(1989) (noting that an evidence rule “cannot override the constitutional
rights of the accused”). To the extent that 
Town indicated that the 
discovery right is “governed and limited” by HRPP Rule 16, it is overruled. 
12 Although it is not necessary to determine in this case, HRPP Rule
17 may allow a court to use its subpoena power to grant access to a crimescene. HRPP Rule 17(b) authorizes a court to issue a subpoena to “commandthe person to whom it is directed to produce the books, papers, documents or
other objects . . . prior to the time when they are to be offered in evidence 
and may upon their production permit . . . [the objects] to be inspected bythe parties and their attorneys.” HRPP Rule 17(b) (2007).  In Commonwealth 
v. Matis,
 915 N.E.2d 212 (Mass. 2006), the Supreme Judicial Court of
Massachusetts interpreted Massachusetts Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule17(a)(2), which is nearly identical to HRPP Rule 17(b), to authorize the
court to compel access to the complainant’s home where a sexual assault
(continued. . .) 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                                                                               
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. Constitutional Right to Access the Crime Scene 
a. Right to Effective Assistance of Counsel 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution 
guarantees a defendant in a criminal prosecution the right “to 
have the assistance of counsel for the accused’s defense.”13 
Haw. Const. art I, § 14. The constitutional right to the 
assistance of counsel is satisfied “only when such assistance is 
‘effective.’” State v. Kahalewai, 54 Haw. 28, 30, 501 P.2d 977, 
979 (1972) (internal citations omitted). A counsel’s effectiveness is not determined only by what happens at trial, 
and a court may find a counsel’s assistance is ineffective if 
(. . .continued) 
allegedly occurred. Id. at 634
-35.  “The fact that the object here cannot be
physically brought to court by the third party makes no difference. Its 
features can be introduced in evidence, and an order for pretrial access
under rule 17(a)(2) will expedite the use of such evidence at trial.” Id. at 
635. The Massachusetts court noted that requests under Rule 17(a)(2) must
be, inter alia, evidentiary and relevant. Id. 
While HRPP Rule 17 is “not a rule providing for an additional
means of discovery,” Town, 122 Hawaiʻ i at 214, 225 P.3d at 656 (quoting State 
v. Pacarro
, 61 Haw. 84, 86, 595 P.2d 295, 297 (1979)), the features of a
crime scene are routinely admissible into evidence. 
13 Article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides in
relevant part, 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy theright to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury ofthe district wherein the crime shall have been committed,
which district shall have been previously ascertained by
law, or of such other district to which the prosecution may
be removed with the consent of the accused; to be informed
of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confrontedwith the witnesses against the accused . . . and to have
the assistance of counsel for the accused’s defense. 
Haw. Const. art I, § 14. 
16 
 
 
 
 Kahalewai
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
counsel failed to conduct adequate pretrial investigations. 
State v. Aplaca , 74 Haw. 54, 67-71, 67 n.2, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305­
07, 1305 n.2 (1992) (noting that “under Hawaii’s Constitution, 
defendants are clearly afforded greater protection of their 
right to effective assistance of counsel” than under the United 
States Constitution). Additionally, this court observed in 
Aplaca that “[i]f counsel does not adequately investigate the 
underlying facts of a case[,] . . . counsel’s performance cannot 
fall within the ‘wide range of reasonable professional assistance.’ This is because a decision not to investigate 
cannot be considered a tactical decision.” 
Id.
 at 71, 837 P.2d 
at 1307 (quoting State v. Templin,  805 P.2d 182, 188 (Utah 
1990)). The standard for determining the adequacy of counsel’s 
representation is “whether, when viewed as a whole, the 
assistance provided is ‘within the range of competence demanded 
of attorneys in criminal cases.’” State v. Antone,  62 Haw. 346, 
348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (quoting , 54 Haw. at 30, 
501 P.2d at 979). Thus, a defendant in a criminal case is entitled to counsel who will represent him or her with the 
competence generally demanded of defense attorneys. 
See id. 
A review of several jurisdictions’ codes and 
performance standards for defense attorneys indicates that in 
order to assure competent representation, defense counsel should 
investigate the crime scene and consider seeking access as early 
17 

 
 
 
  
 
                         
  
  
  
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as possible, unless circumstances suggest it would be 
unnecessary in a given case. The American Bar Association’s ABA 
Standards for Criminal Justice: Prosecution and Defense Function 
(ABA Standards) states, “Many important rights of a criminal 
client can be protected and preserved only by prompt legal 
action.” Id. § 4-3.7(a) (4th ed. 2015). Thus, “[d]efense 
counsel should promptly seek to obtain and review all information relevant to the criminal matter, including but not 
limited to requesting materials from the prosecution.” Id.
 § 4­
3.7(b). In addition to seeking information from other sources 
aside from law enforcement, see also id. § 4-4.1(c), counsel for 
a defendant has a specific duty with regard to investigating a 
case. “Defense counsel’s investigative efforts should commence 
promptly and should explore appropriate avenues that reasonably might lead to information relevant to the merits of the matter . 
. . .” Id.
14 
14 “The duty to investigate is not terminated by factors such as the 
apparent force of the prosecution’s evidence, a client’s alleged admissions
to others of facts suggesting guilt, a client’s expressed desire to pleadguilty or that there should be no investigation, or statements to defense
counsel supporting guilt.” 
ABA Standards  § 4-4.1(b). 
“Counsel’s investigation should also include evaluation of the
prosecution’s evidence (including possible re
-testing or re- evaluation of 
physical, forensic, and expert evidence) and consideration of
inconsistencies, potential avenues of impeachment of prosecution witnesses,
and other possible suspects and alternative theories that the evidence may
raise.” Id. § 4-4.1(c).  
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The commentary to the ABA Standards emphasizes that 
“without adequate investigation[,] the lawyer is not in a 
position to make the best use of such mechanisms as cross-
examination or impeachment of adverse witnesses at trial.”15 Am. 
Bar Ass’n, ABA Standards for Criminal Justice: Prosecution Function and Defense Function
 § 4-4.1 Commentary, at 183 (3d ed. 
1993). 
The commentary further states that if there were 
eyewitnesses to the alleged crime, then “the lawyer needs to 
know conditions at the scene that may have affected their opportunity as well as their capacity for observation.” 
Id. 
The National Legal Aid and Defender Association’s 
(NLADA) Performance Guidelines for Criminal Defense 
Representations, which was adopted by the Defender Services Advisory Group in 2015, also recommends early inspection of the 
crime scene: 
Counsel should consider seeking access to the scene as soon 
as possible, accompanied by appropriate personnel to assist
in documenting conditions. Counsel should consider seeking 
access to the scene under circumstances as similar as 
possible to those existing at the time of the alleged
incident (e.g., weather, time of day, and lighting 
conditions), if different from the initial view of the
scene.  
Nat’l Legal Aid & Def. Ass’n, NLADA’s Performance Guidelines for 
Criminal Defense Representations § 4.1(b)(6), at 10 (1995). 
15 The commentary for the most recent fourth edition of the ABA
Standards, published in 2015, is not yet available. Thus, the prior
edition’s commentary for the predecessor standard is referenced. 
19 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Chapter 211D of the Massachusetts General Laws 
establishes the Committee for Public Counsel Services that is 
responsible for establishing standards and monitoring the 
performance of counsel “in order to insure competent 
representation of defendants.” Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 211D, §§ 1, 
10 (1990). In its Performance Standards Governing 
Representation of Indigents in Criminal Cases, the Committee states, “Counsel should go to the scene of the alleged crime in 
a timely manner--prior to the pre‐ trial hearing when necessary-­
or prior to an evidentiary hearing or trial. Counsel should 
consider obtaining fair and accurate photographs, fair and 
accurate maps of the area and, where relevant, measurements.” 
Comm. for Pub. Counsel Servs., 
Criminal: Performance Standards 
and Complaint Procedures, in Assigned Counsel Manual Policies 
and Procedures Ch. 4, Part I (IV)(A) (2011). 
Similarly, Louisiana Revised Statutes section 15:146 
(2014) establishes the Louisiana Public Defender Board that is charged with, inter alia, “[c]reating mandatory qualification 
standards for public defenders that ensure that the public 
defender services are provided by competent counsel.” 
La. Rev. 
Stat. § 15:148(B)(2) (2008). The Public Defender Board’s Trial 
Court Performance Standards provides, “Where appropriate, 
counsel should attempt to view the scene of the alleged offense 
as soon as possible after counsel is appointed. This should be 
20 

 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
done under circumstances as similar as possible to those 
existing at the time of the alleged incident.” La. Pub. Def. 
Bd., Louisiana Public Defender Board Trial Court Performance 
Standards  § 717(B)(6), at 14 (2010). 
Further, in its 
performance standards for representation in capital cases, the Public Defender Board states that “[c]ounsel should conduct a 
high quality, independent and exhaustive investigation of all 
available sources of information utilizing all available tools 
including live witness interviews, compulsory process, public records law, discovery, [and] scene visits[.]” La. Pub. Def. 
Bd., Performance Standards for Criminal Defense Representation 
in Indigent Capital Cases § 1907(B)(1) (2015). The Board 
elaborates that counsel should take full advantage of the direct 
observations of relevant locations, noting that 
[c]ounsel should attempt to view the scenes of the alleged
offense and other relevant events as soon as possible after
counsel is assigned [and] . . . should extensively, 
precisely, and accurately document the condition of any
relevant scene using the most appropriate and effectivemeans, including audio- visual recordings, diagrams, charts, 
measurements, and descriptive memoranda. The condition of the scenes should always be documented in a manner that
will permit counsel to identify and prove the condition of
the scenes without personally becoming a witness. 
Id. § 1907(B)(8)(f)(i). 
The State Bar of Texas in its 
Performance Guidelines 
for Non-Capital Criminal Defense Representation  likewise states 
that “[w]hen appropriate, counsel or an investigator should 
attempt to view the scene of the alleged offense as soon as 
21 

 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
possible after counsel is appointed or retained. . . . Counsel 
should consider the taking of photographs and the creation of 
diagrams or charts of the actual scene of the offense.” State 
Bar of Tex., Performance Guidelines for Non-Capital Criminal 
Defense Representation § 4.1(B)(8) (2011). 
Many other states 
have developed similar performance standards recommending that defense counsel visit the crime scene as appropriate. See, e.g, 
N.D. Comm’n on Legal Counsel for Indigents, Minimum Attorney Performance Standards: Criminal Matters § 7.1 (6) (“Where appropriate, counsel should attempt to view the scene of the 
alleged offense as soon as possible after counsel is appointed. 
. . . Counsel should consider the taking of photographs and 
creation of diagrams or charts of the actual scene of the 
offense.”); 
accord Va. Indigent Def. Comm’n, Commonwealth of 
Virginia Standards of Practice for Indigent Defense  § 4.1(b)(5) 
(2015); N.M. Pub. Def. Comm’n & the Law Offices of the Pub. Def., Performance Standards for Criminal Defense Representation 
§ 4.1(b)(7) (2014); S.C. Comm’n on Indigent Def., Performance 
Standards for Public Defenders and Assigned Counsel (Non-
Capital) § 4.1(b)(7) (2013); Ga. Pub. Def. Standards Council, 
State of Georgia Performance Standards for Criminal Defense 
Representation in Indigent Criminal Cases § 4.A(B)(f) (2004). 
Thus, defense counsel’s investigation of the crime scene has 
been widely recognized as an essential task in providing legal 
22 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
assistance within the range of competence demanded of attorneys 
in criminal cases. 
Some courts have concluded that defense counsel’s 
access to the crime scene implicates a defendant’s right to 
effective assistance of counsel. In affirming a family court’s 
discovery and inspection order, the New Jersey Supreme Court in 
State in Interest of A.B., 99 A.3d 782, 789, 794 (N.J. 2014), 
held that a defendant’s constitutional right to a fair trial 
allowed the defendant’s counsel to access the residence where a sexual assault had allegedly occurred. 
The court determined 
that “[t]he right to the effective assistance of counsel in a criminal proceeding includes the right to conduct a reasonable 
investigation to prepare a defense,” id. at 785, and that a 
“defense attorney’s visit to the scene of the crime . . . might 
constitute a professional obligation.” Id. at 793. 
The court 
further noted that “[v]isiting the scene of the crime can be 
critical in preparing a defense” and “the failure of a defense 
attorney ‘to conduct an investigation of the crime scene’ can 
constitute ineffective assistance of counsel.” Id. at 790 
(quoting Thomas v. Kuhlman, 255 F. Supp. 2d 99, 112 (E.D.N.Y. 2003)); 
see also Williams v. Washington, 59 F.3d 673, 680-82 
(7th Cir. 1995) (determining that failure to investigate and visit the scene rendered defense counsel’s performance deficient 
and violated the defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights); 
Thomas, 
23 

 
 
 
  
                         
  
  See   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
255 F. Supp. 2d at 109 (“[I]f properly armed with the easily 
discoverable facts concerning the layout of the victim’s 
apartment building, counsel would likely have chosen to 
highlight the implausibility of the prosecution’s theory of the 
crime.”). 
These standards show that visiting the crime scene is 
integral to providing an effective defense. Indeed, in this 
case, defense counsel’s reasons for requesting access to 
Maunaihi Terrace primarily concerned his ability to effectively represent Tetu.
16 Tetu’s counsel requested access to the crime 
scene so that he could cogently present the case to a jury, cross-examine witnesses, and understand Tetu’s account of the 
events. A review of the transcript at trial indicates a 
disparity between the prosecution’s direct examination and the 
defense counsel’s cross-examination of the condominium manager. 
During direct examination, the prosecutor--who had access to the premises--asked the manager to describe what he saw while the 
surveillance footage played before the jury. As the manager 
described the layout of the basement, the prosecutor added to 
the manager’s narrative, asking, “And is there a hallway that 
16 Although not mentioned in the motion to compel discovery, Tetu’s
counsel at oral argument to this court stated that he wanted access to the
crime scene “on a personal level” because he “tend[s] to be directionally
challenged” and struggles with telling where things are by looking at a mapor diagram. Oral Argument at 10:25- 50, 
State v. Tetu,  SCWC-13-0003062
(argued July 2, 2015), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/15/SCOA_070215_13_3062.mp3
. 
24 
 
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
connects all sides of the basement to the elevators?” The 
manager responded, “Sorry, yes. There’s another hallway just 
like this right on that side where he just emerged from.” 
In contrast, Tetu’s counsel spent the first part of 
his cross-examination asking the manager to help him understand 
the orientation of the utility closets. At one point, Tetu’s 
counsel confused the positioning of the storage closets and 
apologized to the manager, “It’s the same closet? . . . Oh, 
okay. Sorry. Oh, my mistake. Okay.” Thus, the trial record reflects that the specific reasons Tetu’s counsel asserted for 
requesting access to the condominium were substantiated. 
The circuit court’s reliance on HRE Rule 401 to deny 
Tetu’s motion to compel discovery was misplaced. This rule 
defines what evidence is relevant and consequently admissible. 
See HRE Rule 401. It does not contemplate a limit on the 
defense’s ability to discover potentially admissible evidence. See id. 
As stated by the ABA Standards, defense counsel’s 
investigative efforts “should explore appropriate avenues that reasonably might lead to information relevant to the merits of 
the matter.” 
ABA Standards  § 4-4.1(c). HRE Rule 401 is also 
inapplicable because several of the reasons Tetu’s counsel offered for obtaining access to the property did not indicate a 
desire to introduce evidence but were related to obtaining an 
25 

 
 
 
   
 
 In sum, under article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution, a defendant is entitled to the assistance of an 
attorney whose representation falls within the range of 
performance demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. There is a 
broad consensus across the United States that competent defense 
counsel should access the crime scene unless, after a careful 
investigation of the underlying facts of a case, counsel makes a 
reasonable determination that access is not necessary to provide 
effective assistance of counsel.18 Thus, a defendant’s ability 
to access the crime scene inheres within the right to effective 
assistance of counsel guaranteed by article I, section 14 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution.19    
                         
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
understanding of the building’s layout so that counsel could 
effectively present the case to the jury.17 
17 The State’s argument concerning HRE Rule 403, which allows a
court to exclude evidence that will cause “undue delay, waste of time or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence,” is also not germane. Tetu’s 
counsel moved to compel discovery, not to admit evidence. Arguing that the
evidence will cause “undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence” prior to the defense even requesting that the evidence
be admitted is inapposite. 
18 The decision not to investigate a crime scene can constitute an
error or omission that reflects counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or
diligence. See  Aplaca, 74 Haw. at 71, 837 P.2d at 1307 (electing not to 
investigate without adequate inquiry of the facts is not considered a
tactical decision); 
see also  Antone, 62 Haw. at 348- 49, 615 P.2d at 104- 05 
(stating the two- fold standard to establish ineffective assistance of 
counsel). 
19 Allowing defense counsel access to the crime scene may impinge on
the privacy rights of property owners. Accordingly, as discussed infra, a 
court may place appropriate time, place, and manner restrictions on the 
defendant’s access. 
26 
 
 
 
 
  
                         
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
b. Due Process Right 
Article I, section 5 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution 
provides, “No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or 
property without due process of law[.]”20 Haw. Const. 
art. I, § 5. A primary reason that a defendant is guaranteed effective assistance of counsel is to ensure that the defendant 
is not denied due process. State v. Reed, 135 Hawaiʻ i 381, 387, 
351 P.3d 1147, 1153 (2015) (“The Constitution guarantees a fair 
trial through the Due Process Clauses, but it defines the basic 
elements of a fair trial largely through the several provisions 
of the [s]ixth [a]mendment, including the [c]ounsel [c]lause.” 
(alterations in original) (quoting 
United States v. Gonzalez-
Lopez, 548 U.S. 140, 150 (2006))). Thus, while defense 
counsel’s ability to visit the crime scene is a component of a 
defendant’s right to effective assistance of counsel for the 
reasons stated above, due process provides a separate guarantee 
to a fair trial pursuant to which such access may be afforded. 
See State v. Kaulia, 128 Hawai
ʻi 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 
20 Article 1, section 5 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides, 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or
property without due process of law, nor be denied 
the equal protection of the laws, nor be denied the
enjoyment of the person’s civil rights or be 
discriminated against in the exercise thereof 
because of race, religion, sex or ancestry. 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. 
27 
 
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2013) (“The due process guarantee of the . . . Hawaii 
constitution [] serves to protect the right of an accused in a 
criminal case to a fundamentally fair trial.” (alterations in 
original) (quoting State v. Matafeo , 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 
671, 672 (1990))). 
On several occasions, this court has stated that 
“[c]entral to the protections of due process is the right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete 
defense.” 
Id. (quoting Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 185, 787 P.2d at 
672). These decisions are consistent with the well-established 
principle that “all defendants must be provided with the ‘basic 
tool[s] of an adequate defense.’” State v. Scott, 131 Hawaiʻ i 
333, 352, 319 P.3d 252, 271 (2013) (quoting Britt v. North 
Carolina, 404 U.S. 226, 227 (1971)); see also Washington v. 
Texas, 388 U.S. 14, 19 (1967) (determining that a “fundamental 
element of due process” is the right to “present the defendant’s 
version of the facts”). 
Discovery is at the very foundation of the fact finding
process. Faithful adherence to discovery obligations
serves the public interest: Discovery provides the basic
information which is necessary to expedite trials and pleadecisions in an already overburdened court system and
promotes fairness in the adversary system. 
State v. Valeros , 126 Hawaiʻ i 370,  379, 271 P.3d 665, 674 (2012) 
(quoting State v. Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 491, 498, 878 P.2d 739, 
743 (1994), overruled on other grounds by State v. Rogan, 91 
Hawaiʻi 405, 423 n.10, 984 P.2d 1231, 1249 n.10 (1999)); see also
 
28 

 
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Ake v. Oklahoma , 470 U.S. 68, 77 (1985) (“[A] criminal trial is 
fundamentally unfair if the State proceeds against an indigent 
defendant without making certain that [the defendant] has access 
to the raw materials integral to the building of an effective 
defense.”). 
Due process contemplates mutual obligations of the 
government and the defense as it relates to the discovery 
process. See State v. Davis
, 63 Haw. 191, 195-96, 624 P.2d 376, 
379-80 (1981) (stating that discovery under HRPP Rule 12.1 is a 
“two-way street”). “Although the Due Process Clause has little 
to say regarding the amount of discovery which the parties must 
be afforded, it does speak to the balance of forces between the 
accused and his accuser.” Wardius v. Oregon , 412 U.S. 470, 474 
(1973) (citation omitted). 
Other jurisdictions have concluded that a defendant 
has a right under the due process clause to investigate a crime 
scene. 
In Henshaw v. Commonwealth , 451 S.E.2d 415, 416 (Va. Ct. 
App. 1994), the appellant was denied access to the site of the crime scene located at a private residence, and he was 
subsequently convicted of voluntary manslaughter. The court 
concluded that the “due process rights of . . . the Virginia 
Constitution give a criminal defendant a right to view, 
29 

 
 
 
 
  
                         
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
photograph, and take measurements of the crime scene.”21 Id. at 
419. A similar conclusion was reached in State v. Gonsalves, 
661 So. 2d 1281 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1995), in which the court 
determined that a defendant charged with attempted burglary had 
a due process right to inspect the crime scene. Id. at 1282. 
Likewise, in State v. Brown, 293 S.E.2d 569 (N.C. 1982), the Supreme Court of North Carolina held that it was “a denial of 
fundamental fairness and due process for [a] defendant to be 
denied, under police prosecutorial supervision, a limited inspection of the premises of the crime scene” in a capital case 
in which the defendant’s counsel was denied access to a murder 
scene. Id. at 577-78. 
Review of the case law thus demonstrates that due 
process includes the right of the defendant to access the crime 
scene to obtain the raw materials integral to building an 
effective defense. Here, even though surveillance footage was available, it did not show the inside of the closets or how Tetu 
entered the building. Tetu’s counsel requested access to the 
property so that he could photograph areas not depicted in the 
discovery already produced. A defendant’s right to due process 
21 The Henshaw court held that the due process rights of article I, 
section 8 of the Virginia Constitution give a criminal defendant a right to
view, photograph, and take measurements of the crime scene, provided that the
defendant makes a showing that a substantial basis exists for claiming thatthe proposed inspection and observation will enable the defendant to obtain
evidence relevant and material to his defense or to be able to meaningfully
defend himself. 
Henshaw
, 451 S.E.2d at 419. 
30 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
is infringed when defense counsel is forced to rely on materials 
provided by the government based on what the police or the 
prosecution deems relevant at a crime scene--that is, what is 
photographed, what is included in diagrams, or what is depicted 
in a video and then disclosed in discovery. In an adversarial 
system, the right to a fair trial may be compromised when the 
defendant is required to build a defense based upon the State’s 
investigation. 
The performance standards and guidelines previously 
discussed emphasize that counsel should investigate or have adequately considered inspection of the crime scene. A visit to 
the crime scene may help counsel document and photograph 
relevant characteristics of the scene, explore avenues of 
possible defenses, determine if proceeding to trial would be 
appropriate, enable a cohesive presentation to the factfinder, 
and understand the defendant’s account of the events. The prosecution will generally have access to the crime scene via 
police investigation or independent prosecutorial inquiry. A 
defendant is therefore likely to be at a disadvantage to a 
prosecution that has more information about, and more 
familiarity with, the crime scene. See Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. at 
498, 878 P.2d at 743 (“The ends of justice will best be served by a system of liberal discovery which gives both parties the 
31 
 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
maximum possible amount of information with which to prepare 
their cases . . . .” (quoting Wardius, 412 U.S. at 473)). 
Here, Tetu’s due process right under the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution to access the materials vital to building an 
effective defense and to have an opportunity similar to the 
State to obtain information was impaired: first, by the denial 
of defense counsel’s initial request for access to the crime 
scene, and second, by the prosecutor’s visit to the scene 
despite opposing Tetu’s motion on the basis that the defense 
would not gain anything from an investigation of the scene. 
As 
this court has previously stated, “the growth of . . . discovery 
devices is a salutary development which, by increasing the 
evidence available to both parties, enhances the fairness of the 
adversary system.” State v. Pond , 118 Hawaiʻ i 452, 464, 193 P.3d 
368, 380 (2008) (quoting Wardius, 412 U.S. at 474). In this 
case, however, the circuit court’s decision to not utilize one 
such discovery device to allow Tetu access to the crime scene 
diminished the fairness of the adversary system. See id. 
In short, under article I, section 5 of the Hawai
ʻi 
Constitution, a defendant has a due process right to a fair 
trial. Due process requires that a defendant be given a 
meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense and that 
discovery procedures provide the maximum possible amount of 
information and a level-playing field in the adversarial 
32 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                         
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
process. Thus, the due process clause of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution provides a defendant with the right to access the 
crime scene in order to secure the promises that a fair trial 
affords. 
3. Privacy Concerns 
In Hawaiʻ i, the right to privacy is also a 
constitutionally protected right.22 Recognition of a defendant’s 
constitutional right to access the crime scene may intrude upon 
the privacy interests of those directly affected by a crime, 
property owners, or other occupants of the premises, and an 
inspection of the scene may be stressful to an alleged victim. 
The drafters of article I, section 6 of the Hawai
ʻi 
Constitution envisioned that the interests of the criminal 
justice system would, at times, be significant enough to justify intrusion on one’s right to privacy. 
See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
69 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaiʻ i 
of 1978, at 675 (1980) (“[A]t times the interests of national security, law enforcement, the interest of the State to protect the lives of citizens or other similar interests will be strong 
enough to override the right to privacy.”). The New Jersey 
Supreme Court similarly observed in State in Interest of A.B. 
22 Article I, section 6 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides, “The 
right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed
without the showing of a compelling state interest.” Haw. Const. art. I, §
6. 
33 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that despite the fact that “[p]articipation in the criminal 
justice process will undoubtedly be a source of inconvenience 
and anxiety, and will result in some incursion into privacy 
rights of witnesses[,]” these “adverse consequences are the 
inevitable price that must be paid to ensure the accused 
receives a fair trial.” 99 A.3d 782, 793 (N.J. 2014). Given 
these competing interests, a defendant’s constitutional right to 
access and investigate a crime scene is not unlimited and does 
not provide unfettered access to private property. Rather, the anxiety and inconvenience that governmental intrusion may cause 
can be largely reduced through the court’s application of time, 
place, and manner restrictions without jeopardizing the 
defendant’s right to effective assistance of counsel and right 
to a fair trial. 
Other jurisdictions that have recognized a defendant’s 
right to investigate the crime scene have employed such restrictions to minimize governmental intrusion on a property 
owner’s privacy rights. 
The Court of Appeals of Minnesota took 
this approach in State v. Lee , 461 N.W.2d 245 (Minn. Ct. App. 
1990), holding that the trial court abused its discretion in 
denying the defendant’s motion to compel access to a private 
residence, which was the scene of an alleged murder. Id.
 at 
247. The prosecution opposed the defense’s motion in Lee 
because it was no longer in “possession or control” of the crime 
34 

 
 
 
 
  
 
                         
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
scene and had already provided the defense with photographs, 
diagrams, and videotapes of the residence. Id. at 246. The 
appellate court held that “[a] brief inspection of the residence by defense investigators, regulated as to time, place and 
manner, could be less intrusive upon the victims’ family than a 
defense effort to obtain equivalent information by compulsory 
process.” Id. at 247 (citation omitted).
23 In Commonwealth v. 
Matis, 915 N.E.2d 212, 215 (Mass. 2006), a case involving the 
sexual assault of a minor, the court remanded the case to the trial court and specified that the trial court needed to 
consider the “privacy interests and logistical concerns of the 
homeowner” and could craft the terms of the order allowing 
access to the crime scene through time, place, and manner 
restrictions. 
The appellate court’s instructions on remand 
provided examples of restrictions that the trial court could apply to protect privacy rights. 
Id. The 
Matis court 
instructed as follows: 
The order [allowing access to the crime scene] should be
specific as to scope, and may include, among other things,
conditions as to who may have access on behalf of the 
defense, when that access may occur and for how long, and
whether additional persons should be permitted or required
to attend to ensure the peaceable nature of the inspection,the integrity of the evidence, and the privacy of matters
beyond the scope of the order. 
23 Restriction to a single visit will generally be sufficient to
address the defense’s request to investigate the premises. See State in 
Interest of A.B. , 99 A.3d at 794 (requiring the “giving [of] articulable
reasons why the initial inspection was not adequate for investigative
purposes”). 
35 
 
 
 
   
  In this case, the circuit court could have placed 
restrictions on defense counsel’s access to investigate and 
photograph the basement area in and around the utility closets.25   
Such appropriate time, place, and manner restrictions would have minimized any infringement on the condominium owners’ privacy 
rights without impairing Tetu’s constitutional rights to 
effective assistance of counsel and a fair trial.
26  
 
  The concurrence acknowledges that a defendant in 
Hawaiʻi has a constitutional due process right to access the 
crime scene, but it would make the right conditional. In order 
to exercise the right under the concurrence’s proposed test, the 
defendant would be required to “make a threshold showing” that 
                         
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Id.24 
4. Relevancy and Materiality Requirement 
24 The Matis court held that the defendant had a constitutional 
right to investigate the crime scene under the Sixth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution but required a showing that the crime scene was
“evidentiary and relevant” to authorize the use of the court’s subpoena
power.  Matis, 915 N.E.2d at 213- 14. 
25 Before moving to compel access to the crime scene, defense
counsel may seek access without the aid of the court, i.e., requestingpermission through the prosecution or directly from the property owner.
However, if access is denied, HRS § 603- 21.9 (1993) provides the circuit 
courts with the authority “[t]o make and award . . . orders . . . for the 
promotion of justice in matters pending before them,” and thus a court mayorder a complainant or third party to allow access to the crime scene with
appropriate restrictions. 
26 At the hearing on Tetu’s motion to compel access to the
condominium, no one from M aunaihi Terrace was present to represent the 
condominium’s privacy interests. It is assumed that in establishing time,
place, and manner restrictions, the property owner or persons with privacy
interests will be notified of the request for access. The court may then
consider such privacy interests in establishing appropriate restrictions. 
36 
 
 
 
  In jurisdictions that have required a defendant to 
satisfy a relevancy and materiality test (or some alternative 
standard) to justify access to the crime scene, a primary 
concern has been the right to privacy of complainants or third 
parties.27 This concern can be readily addressed by application 
of time, place, and manner restrictions imposed by a court to protect the privacy interests of property owners or occupants without the imposition of an evidentiary threshold test.
28 There 
                         
  
 
  
  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“inspection of the [crime] scene will lead to relevant evidence 
on a material issue.” Concurrence at 2, 8. 
27 See, e.g., Bullen v. Superior Court of Sacramento Cty.,  251 Cal. 
Rptr. 32, 35 (Cal. Ct. App. 1988) (“Resolution of this issue implicates
competing fundamental interests involving petitioner’s right to privacy in
her own home and defendant’s right to a fair trial and a defense informed by
all relevant and reasonably accessible information.”); State in Interest of
A.B., 99 A.3d 782, 789 (N.J. 2014) (“The issue presents a balancing of the 
right of the accused to a fair trial and the right of an alleged victim and
her family to privacy in their home.”);  People v. Nicholas , 599 N.Y.S.2d 779, 
782 (N.Y. App. Div. 1993) (“Unless defense counsel can make a 
prima facie 
showing how his proposed inspection and observation would be relevant and
material to his defense, the defendant’s right to prepare his defense cannot
outweigh the victim’s constitutional right to privacy.”); Henshaw v.
Commonwealth, 451 S.E.2d 415, 420 (Va. Ct. App. 1994) (“If an accused 
establishes that inspecting, photographing, or measuring the crime scene isrelevant and material, he is entitled to access, subject to such reasonable
limitations and restrictions as the trial judge may impose, unless due to
special circumstances the private citizen’s constitutional right to privacyoutweighs the accused’s right to view or inspect the premises.”); State v.
Muscari, 807 A.2d 407, 418 (Vt. 2002) (holding that an occupant’s right to 
privacy must be balanced with a defendant’s need to access the crime scene
“by requiring a defendant to make some showing that the requested intrusion
is relevant and material to the defense”). 
28 The need for a defense counsel to understand the crime scene’s 
layout and to explore all possible defenses does not vary based on whetherthe crime occurred on public or private property. Consequently, under a
relevancy and materiality test, the need to persuade a court to allow crime
scene access unfairly burdens defendants accused of a crime on private rather
than on public property. All defendants under the Hawaiʻ i and United States 
Constitutions are presumed to be innocent, and the ability to prepare a
(continued. . .) 
37 
 
 
 
  
                                                                               
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
may be rare cases where it is demonstrated that such 
restrictions are inadequate to protect an individual’s privacy 
rights and that an intrusion upon these privacy rights outweighs 
the defendant’s rights to due process and effective assistance 
of counsel. However, a court’s broad authority to circumscribe 
the scope of access--including, for example, prescribing the 
physical area of the inspection, setting the time frame and 
other conditions of the visit, and specifying the persons to be 
present--will provide the requisite protection of privacy rights in virtually all cases. 
Additionally, requiring a defendant to demonstrate 
that access to the crime scene “will lead” to relevant evidence 
on a material issue undermines the defendant’s constitutional 
rights to effective assistance of counsel and to a fair trial. 
The time necessary for defense counsel to obtain discovery in 
order to establish that accessing the crime scene would lead to relevant evidence on a material issue conflicts with the 
previously cited professional standards that defense counsel 
should access the scene without delay to inspect it, take 
(. . .continued) 
defense should not depend on the location of the offense charged. See 
In re 
Winship
, 397 U.S. 358, 363 (1970) (The reasonable- doubt standard “provides 
concrete substance for the presumption of innocence--that bedrock ‘axiomatic 
and elementary’ principle whose ‘enforcement lies at the foundation of the
administration of our criminal law’” (quoting Coffin v. United States, 156
U.S.
 432, 453 (1895))). 
38 
 
 
 
  Further, the reasons put forward by the defense to 
access the crime scene are likely to be challenged by the State 
as to whether they demonstrate that access “ will lead to 
relevant evidence on a material issue.” Concurrence at 2 (emphasis added). That is, counsel for the State, who will 
generally have ready access to the crime scene, may contend that 
opposing counsel should not be granted access because of 
                         
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
measurements, and record relevant conditions.29 The defendant’s 
inability to make a threshold showing of relevancy and materiality to justify inspecting the crime scene at an early 
point in the proceedings
30 may be the result of a delay in the 
State’s required disclosure of discovery under HRPP Rule 16 because of uncompleted investigative reports, pending test 
results, or even administrative backlog. 
29 Requiring the defense to show that investigation of the crime
scene will lead to relevant and material evidence may, in certain instances,
infringe on the attorney- client privilege.  The attorney- client privilege 
protects all “‘ confidential communication made for the purpose of 
facilitating the rendition of professional legal services’ between 
appropriate parties.” Save Sunset Beach Coalition v. City &  Cty. of 
Honolulu, 102 Hawaiʻ i 465, 484- 85, 78 P.3d 1, 20- 21 (2003) (quoting HRE Rule 
503(b)).  Satisfying a relevancy and materiality test may inferentially
reveal the contents of a privileged communication from the defendant. 
30 A relevancy and materiality requirement may also create an
anomalous result based on the timing of a defense counsel’s request to compel
discovery. If defense counsel moves to compel access when the police or the
State is in “possession or control” of a crime scene, a defendant wouldappear to have an automatic right under HRPP Rule 16 to investigate the crime
scene. 
See  State v. Townsend,  7 Haw. App. 560, 563, 784 P.2d 881, 883 
(1989). Requiring a defendant to satisfy a higher burden to exercise his orher constitutional right to access the crime scene solely because of the
timing of the request may “impermissibly relegate[] the defendant’s
constitutional rights to that of rule status.” State v. Pond, 118 Hawaiʻ i 
452, 481, 193 P.3d 368, 397 (2008). 
39 
 
 
 
   
  
                         
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relevance, passage of time, or cumulativeness of evidence--which 
were precisely the grounds of the State’s objections in this 
case. If a trial court is required to determine whether access 
to a crime scene would lead to relevant evidence not previously 
disclosed on a material issue, the court would need to be 
cognizant of the contents of all discovery previously provided 
by the State, any other materials obtained by the defense’s 
investigation, and the possible defenses to be asserted at 
trial.31 
Although the inherent difficulty of such a judicial 
calculation is plainly evident, the concurrence suggests that its proposed threshold burden is necessary in part to counter 
requests for access that have no “legitimate purpose.” 
Concurrence at 5. To the extent that the concurrence portends 
that counsel will submit frivolous or illegitimate requests for 
access to the scene with the intent to intimidate, harass, or abuse private citizens, such requests for access would require 
defense counsel to knowingly violate multiple provisions of the 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC).  See HRPC Rule 
31 Requiring counsel to definitively show that access “will” lead to
relevant evidence on a material issue would also make no accommodation for 
counsel to inspect the crime scene for general investigatory purposes or
because counsel believes the inspection itself may provide a basis for a
defense. In this likely scenario, the very information needed to make ashowing that access to the crime scene would yield relevant and material
evidence would remain undiscovered because it would only be accessible by
inspecting the crime scene in the first place. 
40 
 
 
 
  
                         
   
  
 
 
 
  
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3.4(f) (2014) (prohibiting a lawyer from “mak[ing] a frivolous 
discovery request”); HRPC Rule 3.1 (2014) (prohibiting a lawyer 
from “bring[ing] or defend[ing] a proceeding, or assert[ing] or 
controvert[ing] an issue therein, unless there is a basis for 
doing so that is not frivolous”). Further, the trial court has 
“inherent equity, supervisory, and administrative powers” to 
“curb abuses and promote a fair process.” Richardson v. Sport 
Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawaiʻ i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 
(1994); Kaina v. Gellman, 119 Hawaiʻ i 324, 330, 197 P.3d 776, 782 
(App. 2008) (noting that HRS §§ 603-21.9(1) and (6)32 are the 
“legislative restatement of the inherent powers doctrine”).33 
32	 HRS § 603- 21.9 reads in relevant part:  
The several circuit courts shall have power:  
 
(1)
 To make and issue all orders and writs necessary or
appropriate in aid of their original or appellate
jurisdiction; 
. . . . 
(6) To make and award such judgments, decrees, orders, and
mandates, issue such executions and other processes, and do
such other acts and take such other steps as may be
necessary to carry into full effect the powers which are orshall be given to them by law or for the promotion of 
justice in matters pending before them. 
HRS § 603-21.9(1), (6) (1993).   
33 See also State v. Mattson , 122 Hawaiʻ i 312, 342 n.6, 226 P.3d 482,
512 n.6 (2010) (noting that this court could invoke its inherent supervisory
authority to prohibit 
a broad category of impermissible prosecutorial 
comments even when not all subsets of such comments were raised on appeal);
State v. Jess , 117 Hawaiʻ i 381, 411, 184 P.3d 133, 163 (2008) (circuit court’s
inherent authority includes the power to reform sentencing statute to comport
with Hawaiʻ i Constitution and re- empanel jury to make factual findings for 
sentencing); State v. Pattioay, 78 Hawaiʻ i 445, 468 n.28, 896 P.2d 911, 924
(continued. . .) 
41 
 
 
 
  
  
                                                                               
 
 
 
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Therefore, trial courts are indeed empowered with the tools to 
curb the concurrence’s hypothetical requests of counsel for 
access that have no legitimate purpose, even assuming the 
unlikely fact that such requests would be submitted in direct 
violation of the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Professional Conduct.34 
Concurrence at 5. 
The concurrence also maintains that, under the 
proposed relevancy and materiality test, “in the vast majority 
of cases, a defendant should easily be able to” exercise his or 
her constitutional right to access the crime scene. Concurrence 
at 5. However, as described above, there are numerous reasons why this prediction is dubious. In fact, it is likely that 
defense counsel would frequently be denied the opportunity to 
investigate the scene of the crime and thus be prevented from 
fulfilling professional standards. This case is a prime 
example. Defense counsel provided the following reasons for 
seeking access to the condominium premises: (1) to make best use 
of cross-examination and impeachment of witnesses at trial; (2) 
(. . .continued)
n.28 (1995) (circuit court’s inherent authority includes power to excludeevidence obtained in violation of federal statute relating to military and 
civilian law enforcement because such action is “reasonably necessary to
vindicate the court’s authority”). 
34 The regulations imposed by the HRPC, the court’s inherent
authority to deny illegitimate requests for access, and the limitations 
imposed by use of time, place, and manner restrictions evince that, contrary
to the concurrence’s characterization, a defendant’s access to the crime 
scene is not “absolute.” Concurrence at 8. 
42 
 
 
 
 
                         
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to understand the account of his client; (3) to take photographs 
of areas not shown in the discovery that “may be significant to 
the defense”; and (4) to coherently present the case to a jury. 
The circuit court determined that Tetu’s counsel had presented 
“no real plausible justification” for access to the crime scene 
and that the request for access was speculative “with a hope to 
turn up something.” Similarly, the ICA concluded that Tetu’s 
reasons did not satisfy its requirement that counsel “make a 
prima facie showing of how the proposed inspection would be relevant and material to [his] defense.” These court rulings 
indicate that Tetu would not have satisfied the concurrence’s 
threshold test that “inspection of the crime scene would lead to 
relevant evidence on a material issue,”
35 despite the fact that 
the reasons provided by defense counsel coincide with numerous performance standards established by the American Bar 
Association, state jurisdictions, and other legal professional standards organizations.
36 
35 In concluding otherwise, the concurrence states that inspection
of the crime scene would have revealed that the fire- exit door, which was 
“exit only,” had no signs of forced entry and would have corroborated Tetu’s
account that he could have only entered the premises with his former wife’s 
aid. Concurrence at 6- 7. However, this argument was not made before the
circuit court as the ICA noted in its memorandum opinion. The other reasons 
relied upon by the concurrence are generally applicable in all criminal cases. 
36 See, e.g., Va. Indigent Def. Comm’n, Commonwealth of Virginia
Standards of Practice for Indigent Defense  § 7.1 (b)(5) (2015) (trial 
preparation should include consideration of 
“[o]btaining photographs and 
preparing charts, maps, diagrams, or other visual aids of all scenes,persons, objects, or information which may assist the fact finder in
(continued. . .) 
43 
 
 
 
  
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
     
   
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
While the reasons that Tetu’s counsel provided are 
inherent to providing effective assistance of counsel and apply 
in nearly all criminal cases, they did not demonstrate that 
access to the scene would satisfy the concurrence’s test that it 
“will lead to relevant evidence on a material issue.” This case 
thus manifests the fundamental point that the duties required of 
defense counsel by virtue of the obligation to render effective 
assistance are not limited to seeking relevant evidence on a 
material issue, and, in fact, encompass a range of litigation efforts that are fundamental to an effective defense--yet do not 
solely involve pursuing such evidence.
37 Rather, as established 
by the professional standards for defense counsel, a meaningful 
(. . .continued) 
understanding the defense . . . ”); id. at § 8.2(g) (“Counsel should attempt 
to view and photograph the scene of the alleged offense.”); Nat’l Legal Aid &Def. Ass’n, NLADA’s Performance Guidelines for Criminal Defense 
Representations  § 4.1(b)(6), at 10 (1995) (“Counsel should consider seeking 
access to the scene under circumstances as similar as possible to thoseexisting at the time of the alleged incident. ”); Am. Bar Ass’n, ABA Standards 
for Criminal Justice: Prosecution Function and Defense Function
 § 4-4.1(b) 
Commentary, at 183 (3d ed. 1993) (“Without adequate investigation[,] the
lawyer is not in a position to make the best use of such mechanisms as cross-examination or impeachment of adverse witnesses at trial,” and where there
are eyewitnesses, “[t]he lawyer needs to know conditions at the scene that
may have affected their opportunity as well as their capacity for
observation.”). 
37 For example, the record in this case demonstrates that defense 
counsel’s concerns regarding cross- examination of witnesses at trial was 
well-founded.  A review of the trial transcript indicates that defense
counsel, unlike the prosecution, struggled to cross- examine the condominium 
manager regarding the layout of the basement. As any seasoned litigator
knows, there is no substitute to viewing the crime scene in person. Had defense counsel been permitted to inspect and familiarize himself with the
condominium basement, counsel likely would have been able to make “be[tter] 
use” of cross- examination.  Am. Bar Ass’n, supra note 36, at 183. 
44 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opportunity to present a complete defense secures allowance for 
counsel to timely inspect and investigate the crime scene in 
order to provide effective assistance. See State v. Kaulia, 128 
Hawai
ʻi 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013) (“Central to the 
protections of due process is the right to be accorded a 
meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.” (quoting 
State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990)). 
Requiring counsel to satisfy a court that granting access to the 
crime scene will lead to relevant evidence on a material issue 
forces a defendant to justify the exercise of the rights given 
by our constitution to present an effective defense and to receive a fair trial. 
5. Harmless Error 
The circuit court erred in not allowing Tetu’s counsel 
to inspect and photograph the crime scene, a private condominium 
building, subject to appropriate restrictions that would have 
properly considered the condominium owners’ privacy rights. However, a violation of a constitutional right is subject to the 
harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard. See State v. 
Peseti
, 101 Hawaiʻ i 172, 178, 65 P
.3d 119, 125 (2003) (noting 
that a violation of the constitutional right to confront 
witnesses is subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard). This standard requires a court to “examine the 
record and determine whether there is a reasonable possibility 
45 

 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.” Id. (quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawaiʻ i 109, 
113-14, 924 P.2d 1215, 1219-20 (1996)); see also State v. 
Aplaca, 96 Hawaiʻ i 17, 25, 25 P.3d 792, 800 (2001) (“This court 
applies the harmless error doctrine to errors that . . . 
implicate an accused’s constitutional rights.”). In assessing whether an error is harmless, “[a] crucial if not determinative 
consideration . . . is the strength of the prosecution’s case on 
the defendant’s guilt.” State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawaiʻ i 462, 482­
83, 946 P.2d 32, 52-53 (1997) (quoting State v. Pokini, 55 Haw. 
640, 645, 526 P.2d 94, 101 (1974)). 
Here, the evidence presented against Tetu at trial was 
compelling. 
The jury observed surveillance footage that showed 
Tetu breaking into two storage closets with a tool and using his jacket to wipe the door knobs. Tetu testified that he used a 
piece of wire to open the locked closets. The jury also 
observed in the footage Tetu leaving the closets carrying a garbage bag of items with a flashlight in his mouth. The 
condominium manager testified that he had checked the utility 
closets a few days before the incident and that on the day after 
the incident, an electric grinder and several emergency lights 
and batteries were missing. The manager further testified that 
the closets were always locked and only individuals with keys 
had access to the closets. Finally, Tetu’s testimony that the 
46 
 
 
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
bag contained his former wife’s clothing, instead of stolen 
property, was wholly contradicted by the testimony of his former 
wife. 
In light of the evidence adduced at trial, the trial 
court’s error in denying access to the crime scene in this case 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
B. Sufficiency of the Evidence 
This court will “not overturn a conviction by a jury 
if ‘viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
[prosecution], there is substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact.’” State v. Matavale
, 115 
Hawaiʻi 149, 158, 166 P.3d 322, 331 (2007) (alteration in 
original) (quoting State v. Moniz , 92 Hawaiʻ i 472, 476, 992 P.2d 
741, 744 (App. 1999)). Substantial evidence is “credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable [a person] of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion.” Id. at 158, 166 P.3d at 331 (alteration in 
original) (quoting State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)). Further, when considering the legal 
sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction, such “evidence 
adduced in the trial court must be considered in the strongest 
light for the prosecution.” Id. at 157, 166 P.3d at 330. It is 
not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or 
47 

 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
resolve conflicting evidence. State v. Wallace, 80 Hawaiʻ i 382, 
418, 910 P.2d 695, 731 (1996). 
A person commits burglary in the second degree if the 
person “intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a building 
with intent to commit therein a crime against a person or 
against property rights.” HRS § 708-811(1). Because Tetu 
admitted that he was the person depicted in the surveillance 
footage, the question before the jury concerned Tetu’s intent 
when entering or while remaining at Maunaihi Terrace. Although 
Tetu argues that he lacked the intent to commit burglary, in 
viewing the evidence in the most favorable light to the State, the evidence demonstrating that the circuit court’s error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt also establishes substantial 
evidence to support Tetu’s conviction. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
A defendant’s right to due process under article I, 
section 5 and the right to effective assistance of counsel under 
article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution independently 
provide a defendant with the right to access a crime scene. 
When the crime scene is located on private property, the court 
should impose time, place, and manner restrictions to protect 
the privacy interests of those who may be affected by the intrusion. The court’s authority to employ such restrictions to 
address the specific circumstances in each case reflects a 
48 
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
careful balance between personal privacy, due process, and the 
effective assistance of counsel and assures protection of these 
constitutional rights. 
In this case, although Tetu was wrongly denied access 
to the crime scene, the error was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Therefore, the judgment on appeal of the ICA is affirmed 
for the reasons stated herein. 
Stuart N. Fujioka 
for petitioner /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
Donn Fudo for respondent /s/ Michael D. Wilson
49 
