*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
IN THE INTEREST OF AA  
 
 
SCWC-19-0000711 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19 -0000711; FC -S NO. 16-00249)  
 
DECEMBER 15, 2021  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.  
 
This case arises from a proceeding in the Family Court 
of the First Circuit (family court) under the Hawaiʻi Child 
Protective Act, Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 587A (CPA 
proceeding).  Petitioner -Appellant Father appeals from the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals’ (ICA) judgment affirming the 
family court’s determination  that (1) Father was properly serve d 
with summons to appear in the CPA proceeding by publication; 
(2) Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default should have been denied 
pursuant to Hawaiʻi Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rules 55(c) and Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000711
15-DEC-2021
08:58 AM
Dkt. 58 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
2 60(b); and (3)  Father was required to set aside both his default 
for failure to appear in the CPA proceeding  after proper service 
by publication  (default)  and the termination of his parental 
rights, which was entered while he was defaulted  (default 
judgment) , before he could move to intervene.  Both Father’s 
default and default judgment were entered while the identity of 
Child’s natural father was unknown.   On certiorari, Father and 
Respondent -Appellee Department of Human Services (DHS) argue 
that Father was not required to set aside the default and 
default judgment  before proceeding with his Motion to Intervene 
pursuant to HFCR Rules 24(a)(2) and (b)(1).  
Based on the plain and unambiguous language of HFCR 
Rule 24, w e agree that Father was not required to set aside the 
default and default judgment before proceeding with hi s Motion 
to Intervene .  However, Father’s remaining arguments lack merit.  
I. BACKGROUND  
A. Factual Background  
On November 30, 2016, Mother gave birth to Child in a 
Honolulu hospital.   Before Mother was discharged from the 
hospital, “DHS received a report of Phys ical Neglect, Threat of 
Abuse and Threat of Neglect of [Child .]”  On December 2, 2016,  a 
social worker from the Crisis Response Team  interviewed Mother 
at the hospital.  Then, on December 7, 2016, DHS issued an 
initial Safe Family Home Report.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
3 In the Safe Family Home Report, DHS noted that Mother 
told hospital staff that she did not feel safe going home due to 
domestic violence by  “John,” her live -in boyfriend.  However, 
DHS reported that  Mother stated  “John” was not Child’s father 
and did not know Mother w as pregnant.  With respect to Child’s 
unknown natural father,1 DHS reported that, according to Mother, 
he lived in Chuuk, Micronesia and, like Mother, wanted Child to 
be placed into foster care.   Child was taken into police 
protective custody on December 2 , 2016, and was placed with 
Respondents -Appellees -Resource Caregivers /Intervenors Craig and 
Jodilynn Cammack  (collectively, “the Cammacks”) .2   
B. Family Court Proceedings3 
1. The CPA Proceeding  
On December 7, 2016, DHS filed a Petition for 
Temporary Foster Cust ody of Child pursuant to HRS §§  571-11(9) 
                     
1  DHS reported Child’s father as “unknown” because Mother initially 
stated Chil d’s father was in Chuuk and did not provide further information 
about Child’s father.  Mother’s counsel later stated on the record that 
Mother did not know the identity of child’s father.  In addition, Mother 
testified she did not tell Father about Child w hen Child was born because, 
initially, Mother did not know if Father was Child’s natural father.  Thus, 
it appears that the identity of Child’s natural father was initially unknown 
to DHS, and Father claimed he was initially unaware he could be Child’s 
natural father.  
 
2  Although the Cammacks initially  did not plan to be Child’s permanent 
placement , they subsequently indicated their desire to adopt Child.  
 
3  The Honorable Bode A. Uale  (Judge Uale)  presided  over most of the 
family court proceedings.  The H onorable Peter C. K. Fong presided over a 
December 9, 2016 temporary foster custody hearing.  The Honorable Andrew  T. 
Park (Judge Park) presided over a pretrial conference on April 22, 2019.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
4 and 587A -5, initiating the CPA proceeding.  The Petition  for 
Temporary Foster Custody  named Mother, but listed Child’s father 
as “unknown” with an unknown address in Chuuk.  Based on the 
Safe Family Home Report, DH S requested that “Temporary Foster 
Custody of [Child] be ordered, matters concerning [Child] and 
other family members be adjudicated, and such other  orders as 
the [family court] deems appropriate be entered.”  
That same day , DHS also provided a Family Servi ce Plan 
between Mother and DHS, which was “designed to help the family 
address and resolve the safety issues as identified by DHS.”  To 
address the identified safety issues, the Family Service Plan 
provided tasks for Mother such as parenting education, 
psychological evaluation, and domestic violence services.  With 
respect to the unknown natural father, the Family Service Plan 
provided that “[w]hen identified and located, [the unknown 
natural father] will be assessed and recommended to services.”  
The final  goal of the Family Service Plan was to “[m]aintain a 
safe family home [for Child] without DHS intervention.”  
On December 9, 2016, after a Temporary Foster Custody 
Hearing, the family court entered Orders Concerning the Child 
Protective Act.  The family co urt found that  continued placement 
in emergency foster care was necessary to protect Child from 
imminent harm .  The family court also determined  that Mother 
knowingly and voluntarily stipulated to  adjudication of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
5 Petition for Temporary  Foster Custody a nd the Family Service 
Plan from December 7, 2016.  The family court awarded DHS foster 
custody over Child.  The identity of c hild’s father was not 
known at the time of this hearing.  A ll parties were ordered to 
appear at a periodic review hearing on March 2, 2017.  
On March 2, 2017, Mother failed to appear at the 
scheduled periodic review hearing in the family court.  Citing a 
February 16, 2017 report provided to the family court,4 DHS 
explained that it was unable to contact Mother and that she 
missed her sc heduled visits  with DHS .  DHS made an oral motion 
to serve the unknown natural father  by publication  to provide 
notice of the CPA proceeding , which the family court  granted.  
The family court  determined that Child should remain in foster 
custody and scheduled an additional periodic review hearing.  
Before the next scheduled periodic review hearing,  DHS 
served the unknown natural father  by publication in the Honolulu 
Star-Advertiser on April 10, 17, and 24, and May 1, 2017.  Then, 
on June 21, 2017, the  family court entered default against the  
                     
4 The February 16, 2017 report stated that (1)  as of December 9, 2016, 
Mother was living in a car parked in a park with her sister and sister’s 
children; (2)  Mother “no -showed” the visits scheduled on December 15, 2016 
and December 22, 2016 and had not contacted DHS; (3)  Mother’s telephone was 
disconnected; (4)  DHS mail ed a letter to Mother at the home of her maternal 
aunt asking Mother to contact DHS, but received no response; and (5)  on 
February 8, 2017, Mother’s maternal aunt reported to DHS that Mother was back 
with her boyfriend and had no working phone number.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
6 unknown natural father  for his failure to appear in the CPA 
proceeding  following proper service by publication.   
After additional  periodic review hearings with no 
resolution as to permanent custody of Child, DHS filed a Motion 
to Terminate Parental Rights  of Mother and the unknown natural 
father on February 21, 2018 .  The family court heard the motion 
on February 27, 2018 , and Mother did not appear at the hearing.  
The family court defaulted Mother and the unknown natural  father 
for nonappearance  and granted DHS’s motion to terminate  the 
parental rights of Mother and the unknown natural father , 
thereby entering default judgment as to the unknown natural 
father.  In addition, t he family court  revoked foster custody 
and awarded permanent custody of child to DHS.   The family court 
also ordered a permanent plan  for Child , which included the goal 
of placing Child for adoption by August 2018 , and scheduled a  
permanency hearing for August 14, 2018 .   
On August 14, 2018, the family  court conducted the 
permanency hearing and approved adoption as the proper 
permanency plan for Child.  In addition, the family court 
scheduled another permanency hearing for January 29, 2019.  
On October 9, 2018, Father informed DHS via email  of 
his possib le paternity  and that he recently learned Child was in 
foster care.  In the email, Father “inquired about how he could 
begin the process of legally bringing [Child] home.”  After *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
7  Father contacted DHS, DHS filed a motion for immediate review of 
Child’s case  and a hearing was set for December 6, 2018.  
2. Father’s Paternity Action and Motion to Intervene  
On November 5, 2018, Father filed a Petition for 
Paternity for Child.5  On January 28, 2019, Father filed a Motion 
to Intervene in the CPA proceeding under HFCR Rule 24.  The 
family court took Father’s Motion to Intervene under advisement 
and continued the hearing to March 25, 2019.6  On February 22, 
2019, Father was adjudicated to be the natural father of Child.  
The family court heard Father’s Motion to Intervene  at 
the permanency hearing on March 25, 2019.  At the hearing, DHS 
reported that Child had been living with the Cammacks for over 
two years and was doing well there.  Next, the family court 
addressed Father’s Motion to Intervene.   The family court 
explaine d to Father’s counsel that : 
this is . . .  going to be a difficult case for your client 
because of the fact of the passage of time and where the 
child has been placed almost three years and then your 
client appears.  So it’s not only about your client.  It’ s 
also about the safety, welfare, and well -being of the 
child.  So I cannot give you an automatic intervention in 
this case, but I am going to set it for trial.  
(Emphasis added .)  Father’s counsel asked for clarification 
about the status of Father’s Motion  to Intervene:  
                     
5  Father’s Petition for Paternity for Child was a separate action from 
the CPA proceeding.  
 
6 On February 11, 2019, Father filed a second Motion to Intervene, which 
was also scheduled to be heard on March 25, 2019.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
8 [FATHER’S COUNSEL]: Just for the -- so I’m clear, on 
the trial, is the court granti ng our motion to intervene 
so[.] 
 
 THE COURT: No.  
 
 [FATHER’S  COUNSEL]: -- we’re having a trial on -- on 
the -- 
 
 THE COURT: The trial is on whether I’ m going to allow 
[Father] to intervene in this case.  
 
 [FATHER’S  COUNSEL]: All right.  
 
 THE COURT: So your motion to intervene is the subject 
of the trial.  
 
 [FATHER’S  COUNSEL]: And I take it the issues are 
going to be the -- the objections raised in the short 
report from the [Court Appointed Special Advocates Program] 
and whatever that ’s in the permanency plan?  
 
 THE COURT: Well, the standard is always best interest 
of the child so -- 
 
 [FATHER’S  COUNSEL]: Yes.  
 
 THE COURT: -- you might want to go on that.  Based on 
all of th e things that have happened, it’ s almost three 
years this child has been in -- in care.  As far as why 
your client took so long, bring it up at trial.  I’m not 
going to hear anything today.  
The family court  entered a written order setting Fath er’s Motion 
to Intervene for trial on May  7, 2019, with a pretrial 
conference set for April 22, 2019.  
On April 22, 2019, Judge Park presided over the 
pretrial conference.  At the pretrial conference, both DHS and 
Respondent -Appellee Court Appointed Special  Advocates ( the CASA) 
stated that it did not object to Father’s Motion to Intervene 
and that a stipulation had been submitted to the family court on 
or around April 12, 2019.  DHS advised Judge Park that it was 
notified on April 15, 2019, that “the court d idn’t want to sign *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
9 [the stipulation]” because the court “had reservations about 
signing it[.]”  Notwithstanding Judge Uale’s reluctance to sign 
the stipulation allowing Father to intervene, Judge Park stated:  
Well, here ’s the thing, right.  The May 7th dat e, if 
no one’s going to put up a fight, then I don ’t see the need 
to keep a contested hearing on the calendar when it ’s going 
to just eat up a court slot.  So I guess if everyone ’s in 
agreement, [ Father] got his own counsel privately, then by  
stipulation, with no objection of the parties,  [Father’s] 
motion . . . to intervene in the proceedings will be  
granted.  He’ll be made a party to the case.  He shall be  
noticed through counsel on all matters and papers regarding  
this case.    
 And vacate the May 7th hea ring date [.] 
When the CASA asked for clarification as to when Father would be 
considered a party to the case, Judge Park stated that Father’s 
Motion to Intervene is granted and that Father is “ a party to 
the case prospectively ” and would be noticed on all matters 
going forward.   That same day, Judge Park entered an order 
granting Father’s  Motion to  Intervene.   
On May 14, 2019, the Cammacks filed a Motion to 
Intervene in the CPA proceeding , which Father opposed.  On 
May 22, 2019, Judge Uale heard the Cammac ks’ Motion to 
Intervene.  Judge Uale informed the parties:  
THE COURT: Okay, and I guess [Father] has been made a
party by stipulation.  So I’m going to make you a party  
because I don ’t believe that stipulation was appropriate  
because I -- you folks sent the stipulation to me, and I  
returned it because I told you folks I wouldn ’t sign it, 
and then when I was gone, I understand the per diem judge 
that was sitting signed off on the stipulation.  The 
problem is you have -- you have a termination of parental 
rights so you have to set that aside first in order for 
your client to  intervene.  So as far as I ’m concerned, that
stipulation is  void, because in order for you to come into 
the case, since you're saying that your client is the 
biological father, I think legally you have to set aside  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
10 the prior court order of termination of parental rights.   
So I don ’t know how you  want to deal with this.  I’m 
certainly happy to give you a  trial.  But I don ’t think 
that stipulation was appropriate  just . . . legally.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 So I’m ready to tell you first I’m setting aside the
stipulation to allow [Father] to intervene because I don’t
think that was appropriate.   It’s not the per diem judge ’s
fault.  I wasn ’t here.  I was on some kind of leave.  And 
do think that you have  a right, but I think you need to 
file an appropriate motion to set aside default citing the
appropriate law in order to have that.   So I’m going to  
allow you to do that, but I ’m also going to give you a  
pretrial and a trial date in order to have that come  
across.  
 
 
I 
 
(Emphasis added .)  Judge Uale then instructed Father’s counsel 
to file a written motion to set aside default  so that the family 
court could set pretrial and trial dates to hear the motion.  On 
May 29, 2019, Judge Uale entered a written order (1)  granting 
the Cammacks’ Motion to Intervene; (2)  setting aside the order 
granting Father’s intervention entered on April 22, 2019; 
(3) ordering Father to file a written motion to set aside 
default; and (4)  scheduling trial on Father’s motion to set 
aside def ault.  According to the family court, if Father set 
aside his default, the termination of his parental rights would 
be reversed by operation of law.  
3. Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default  
Father filed a written Motion to Set Aside Default on 
June 5, 2019 , which the Cammacks opposed.  In his Motion to Set 
Aside Default, Father pointed out that “[i]t is well settled 
that ‘defaults and default judgments are not favored *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
11 and . . . any doubt should be resolved in favor of the party 
seeking relief, so that, in the i nterests of justice, there can 
be a full trial on the merits.’”  Father contended that he 
satisfied the  following three requirements to set aside a 
default and default judgment: “(1)  that the nondefaulting party 
will not be prejudiced by the reopening, (2)  that the defaulting 
party has a meritorious defense, and (3)  that the default was 
not the result of inexcusable neglect or a willful act.”   
First, Father contended that no nondefaulting party 
would be prejudiced.  Father argued that “the only nondefaulti ng 
parties would be the State a nd Mother[]” because “[the Cammacks] 
were not parties at the time default was entered against 
Father[.]”  In addition, Father pointed out that “DHS and [the] 
CASA both previously stipulated to Father’s  [intervention ,]” and 
that Mother did not have rights that could be prejudiced.  
According to Father, even if prejudice to the Cammacks was 
considered, “any delay caused by further proceedings can only 
work to their advantage[]” because Child will have more time to 
bond with the Cammacks.  Father added that “the best interests 
of [Child] will be served if Father is allowed to make the case 
that [Child’s]  best chance for a safe and happy home is with his 
natural Father, his siblings, and his extended family[.]”  
Second, Father claim ed he had a meritorious defense.  
Father pointed out that termination of parental rights “can only *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
12 be ordered upon a showing, by clear and convincing evidence, 
that the parent cannot presently nor is it foreseeable, that a 
parent could provide a safe home for the child, even with the 
assistance of a service plan within a reasonable time.”  Father 
contended that he could demonstrate that he successfully raised 
three other children with Mother and could provide  a safe home 
for Child.  In addition, Father argu ed that Mother’s domestic 
violence allegations were false, and that Father had no history 
of domestic violence.  Thus, according to Father, his parental 
rights would be protected from termination by HRS § 587A-33(a).7   
                     
7  HRS § 587A-33(a) (Supp. 2017) provides i n relevant part:  
 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court 
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincing 
evidence that:  
(1) A child’s parent whose rights are subject to 
termination is not presently willing and able to 
provide the parent’s child with a safe family home, 
even with the assistance of a service plan;  
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child’s 
parent whose rights are subject to termination will 
become willing and able to provide the child with a 
safe famil y home, even with the assistance of a 
service plan, within a reasonable period of time, 
which shall not exceed two years from the child’s 
date of entry into foster care;  
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the best 
interests of the child.  In reaching th is 
determination, the court shall:  
(A) Presume that it is in the best interests of 
the child to be promptly and permanently placed 
with responsible and competent substitute 
parents and family in a safe and secure home; 
and 
(B) Give greater weight to the pr esumption that 
the permanent plan is in the child’s best 
interest, the younger the child is upon the 
child’s date of entry into foster care  . . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
13 Third, Father argued that his defaul t was not willful 
or the result of inexcusable negligence.  Father contended that  
“no effort was made to provide Father with notice of the first 
hearing in [the CPA proceeding]” because Mother initially 
thought Father was not Child’s natural father.  Fathe r claimed 
that even after he learned of Child two weeks after Child’s 
birth, Father believed Mother when she told him that Father was 
not Child’s natural father, and Father reasonably assumed that 
Child had been adopted.  Furthermore, Father claimed that t he 
service by publication in the Honolulu  Star-Advertiser was not 
proper because he did not, and had no reason to, read that 
newspaper and the legal notices section.  In addition, Father 
argued that  no effort was made to reach Child’s alleged father 
who resided in Chuuk, even though Mother stated she knew who and 
where Child’s father was.  
The family court heard Father’s M otion to Set Aside 
Default over a two -day period and received testimony from 
Father, Mother, and  DHS social worker  Lena Kakehi (Ms. Kakehi ). 
Ms. Kakehi testified that she had difficulty locating 
and meeting with Mother, who was living with unidentified 
relatives on the beach.  Mother told Ms. Kakehi that she was 
afraid to return home to live with “John” because of domestic 
abuse, but refused  to provide a last name for “John.”  Mother 
claimed that she did not know the identi ty of Child’s father.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
14 However, Mother also claimed that Child’s father was living in 
Chuuk but Mother did not provide Ms. Kakehi with any contact 
information for Child’s f ather.  Ms. Kakehi also testified that 
Mother was not interested in receiving any services from DHS, 
which presented a safety concern.  In Ms. Kakehi’s opinion, 
Mother and Father would not provide a safe home for Child, given 
that Mother would be the prima ry caretake r for Child if Father’s 
default were set aside.  
Mother testified both in Chuukese with the assistance 
of an interpreter and in English.  Mother testified that while 
visiting Chuuk on March 25, 2016, she met a man named “John” and 
had sexual rela tions with him.  Mother testified that she 
thought “John” was the only possible natural father of Child, 
but at other times Mother testified that she was not sure if 
Child’s natural father was “John” or Father.  Initially, Mother 
testified that she did not  tell anyone that she had been a 
victim of domestic violence and said that she gave up Child 
because she was fearful that Father would be upset about Child.  
However, Mother then admitted to telling DHS that she was a 
victim of domestic violence, claiming that she said that because 
Child needed a place to stay.  After giving birth to Child, 
Mother was transferred to a psychiatric ward at another hospital 
and spent four days there.  After her discharge from the 
psychiatric ward, Mother lived in her car befor e returning to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
15 live with Father.  Upon her return to live with Father in 
December 2016,8 Father found Mother’s medical discharge paperwork 
following Child’s birth and learned that Mother had given birth.  
Mother testified that she attended two hearings in the CPA 
proceeding but did not inform Father about the case.   
Father testified  that he had been in a relationship 
with Mother for eight years and that they had three children 
together before Child was born.  Father and Mother’s first three 
children lived in Chuuk with their maternal grandmother and 
Mother lived in Chuuk with them approximately half of each year.  
According to Father, Mother went to Chuuk shortly after Child 
was conceived and returned home one month prior to Child’s 
birth.  Father stated th at Mother’s pregnancy was not visible 
during the month prior to Child’s birth and that he did not see 
Mother unclothed.  Father also claimed that Mother did not tell 
him about any court proceedings, that he did not know anything 
about adoption proceedings,  and that he thought Child had been 
adopted by the time Father realized  he might be Child’s natural 
father.9 
                     
8  At the contested hearing, Mother testified that she was living with 
Father, and only lived out of a car f or one week after giving birth to Child.  
 
9  Although Father claimed that he thought Child had been adopted, Child’s 
adoption was never completed and remains pending.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
16 Father admitted that he learned that Mother gave birth 
to Child in December 2016, but stated that he did not perform 
any calculations to determine if he was Child’s natural father 
until April 2018, when Mother told Father that she noticed 
Child’s resemblance to Father and provided Father with a picture 
of Child.  Father testified that he immediately started to try 
and figure out how he could stop Chi ld’s adoption process , and 
claimed that he and Mother went to the DHS office where Ms. 
Kakehi worked every three weeks from May 2018 to October 2018 
without ever making contact with Ms. Kakehi .  Father began 
visiting Child starting on June 23, 2018, while Child was 
visiting with a maternal aunt, and Father began paying child 
support for Child in March 2019.  Father was able to meet with 
Ms. Kakehi on October 16, 2018, and was told to hire an 
attorney.  Father hired an attorney the following day.  
On Septembe r 20, 2019, the family court entered a 
decision and order denying Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default 
and Motion to Intervene.  The family court found “[M]other’s 
testimony not credible and that her reasons for not telling 
[F]ather of her pregnancy and he r subsequent hiding of her 
pregnancy and giving birth was very convoluted and not 
believable.”  The family court further found that “Father’s 
testimony was also not credible, in that he asserted that he did 
not know of [M]other’s pregnancy and subsequent c hild birth when *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
17 in fact according to [M]other’s testimony she returned to Hawaii 
and lived with him for a time before she gave birth.”  The 
family court determined  that “Father knew or should have known 
that [Child] was his child yet through his own inacti on did not 
file his motion to set aside default until June 5, 2019[,] ” and 
that “Father has not satisfied the requi rements of HFCR 55 or 
HFCR 60(b) in that his failure to file a motion to set aside his 
default was inexcusable.”  The family court  also observed that 
Child was placed with the Cammacks  almost three years earl ier 
and deserved permanency.  Furthermore, the family court found 
that “[e]ven if [F]ather and [M]other were given an opportunity 
to raise [Child], [Ms. Kakehi] testified that the home is n ot 
safe and it is unknown how long or if the parents would  in the 
reasonabl y near future would [sic] be able to provide a safe 
home for [Child].”  Thus, the family court concluded that it was 
not in “[Child’s] best interests that permanency be delayed any 
longer[,]” and denied Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default.  
The family court issued its corresponding Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law on November 19, 2019.  The family 
court found tha t “Mother informed DHS that [Child ]’s father was 
in Chuuk but did  not provide the name of the biological father 
to DHS or any contact information for the biological father[,]” 
and “Mother did not maintain contact with the DHS[]” during the 
CPA proceeding before termination of her parental rights.  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
18  
(. . . continued) family court deter mined that DHS was unaware of additional 
information regarding Child’s father in April and May of 2017 
when DHS published notice to the unknown natural father, and on 
June 21, 2017, when the unknown natural father was defaulted for 
failure to appear in the  CPA proceeding.  The family court also 
found that Father knew or should have known of the ongoing CPA 
proceeding between November 2 016 and April 2018 .  Thus, the 
family court concluded that Father was properly noticed and 
served by publication in the Hono lulu Star-Advertiser, “and the 
entry of default and subsequent termination of his parental 
rights upon his failure to appear based upon [that] notice was 
appropriate.”  
Then, the family court analyzed Father’s Motion to Set 
Aside Default under HFCR Rules 55 (c) and 60(b).   With respect to 
HFCR Rule 60(b),10 the family court determined that it lacked 
                     
10  HFCR Rule 60(b) (Supp. 2016) provides in relevant part:  
 
Rule 60. Relief from judgme nt or order.  
 
. . . . 
 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly 
discovered evidence; fraud.   On motion and upon such terms 
as are just, the court may relieve a party or a party’s 
legal representative from any or all of the provisions of a 
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following 
reasons:  
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable 
neglect;  
(2) newly discovered evidence whic h by due diligence 
could not have been discovered in time to move for a new *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
19 jurisdiction  to entertain Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default 
under HFCR Rules 60(b)(1), (2), or (3) because Father’s Motion 
to Set Aside Default was filed more t han one year after the 
default and default judgment were entered against Father.  The 
family court also found that HFCR Rules 60(b)(4) and (5) were 
not applicable to the facts of this CPA proceeding.   In 
addition, the family court determined that Father la cked a 
meaningful or substantial relationship with Child and that 
paternity  alone does not justify relief under HFCR Rule 
60(b)(6).   The family court also determined  that Father’s 
argument  that the Cammacks are Caucasian and Child is not did 
not justify re lief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(6).   Furthermore, the 
family court determined  that Father’s Motion to Set Aside 
Default was not brought within a reasonable time after his 
                                              
(continued . . .) 
                                  
trial under Rule 59(b) of th ese rules or to reconsider , 
alter, or amend under Rule 59(e) ; 
(3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic 
or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an 
adverse party;  
(4) the judgment is void;  
(5) the judgment has been satisfied, rele ased, or 
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has 
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer 
equitable that the judgment should have prospective 
application; or  
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the 
operation of the judgment.  
 The motion shall be made within a reasonable time, 
and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one year 
after the judgment, order, or proceedings was entered or 
taken. . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
20 default was entered or his parental rights were terminated, and 
that granting the motion w ould not be in Child’s best interests.  
Thus, the family court concluded that Father was not entitled to 
relief under HFCR Rule 60(b).  
With respect to HFCR 55(c),11 the family court noted 
that “a motion to set aside a default must show (1)  that the 
non-defaulting party will not be prejudiced by the reopening; 
(2) that the defaulting party has a meritorious defense; and 
(3) that the default was not the result of inexcusable neglect 
or a willful act on the part of the moving party.”  
The family court determined  that Child was a party to 
the CPA proceeding .  Furthermore, the family court found that  
[Child] would be prejudiced by reopening the case because 
(1) [Child] has been in foster care for approximately 3 
years and [Child] is entitled to permanency and closu re; 
(2) Mother and Father are not presently able to provide a 
safe family home for [Child], even with the assistance of 
services; (3)  there is no indication when, or if, Father 
would be able to provide a safe family home for [Child] if 
the default were to be set aside; (4)  [Child] is strongly 
bonded to [the Cammacks] just as they are to [Child]; 
(5) [Child] is not bonded to Mother or Father; (6)  [Child] 
is thriving in his current placement and (7)  there are no 
compelling reasons documented in the record tha t would 
justify preventing [Child] from permanency and closure.  
                     
11  HFCR Rule 55(c) (Supp. 2016) provides:  
 
Rule 55. Default.  
 
. . . . 
 
(c) Setting aside default.  For good cause shown the court 
may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment by 
default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in 
accordance with Rule 60(b) of these rules.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
21 The family court also determined  that “Father does not have a 
meritorious defense to the default[]” and that  “[t]he default 
and the subsequent termination of parental rights was the result 
of inexcusable neglect on the p art of Father.”   Thus, the family 
court concluded that  “Father has not shown good cause to set 
aside the default or the termination of his parental rights as 
required by [HFCR] Rule 55(c)  . . . .” 
  The family court accordingly denied Father’s Motion to 
Set Aside Default and his Motion to Intervene.  
C. ICA Proceedings  
On October 16, 2019, Father filed a notice of appeal.  
Father argued that the ICA should reverse the family court’s 
September 20, 2019 decision denying his Motion to S et Aside 
Default.  With respect “to the related Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law entered by the family court on November 19, 
2019[,]” Father argued that the ICA should “reverse the orders, 
judgments and decrees set forth therein that reiterate the 
[family] court’s denial of his Motion to Set Aside Default, and 
also deny his Motion to Intervene.”  In his opening brief, 
Father raised three points of error.  
First, Father argued that the family court mistakenly 
concluded that Father was duly noticed and served by 
publication, and that the family court had personal jurisdiction 
over him.  In particular, Father challenged the family court’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
22 findings of fact regarding  whether DHS  knew or should have known 
the identity or location of Child’s natural father wh en DHS 
served the unknown natural father by publication, and whether 
Father knew or should have known of the ongoing CPA proceeding 
from November 2016 to April 2018.  Father admitted  that service 
by publication is permissible pursuant to HRS § 587A -13(c)(2).12    
However, Father contended that the family court failed to 
inquire into DHS’s efforts to locate the unknown natural father  
or make any finding that personal service on Child’s father in 
Chuuk was impracticable.  Father maintained that if there was 
such an inquiry, the family court would have found that Mother 
                     
12  HRS § 587A-13 (Supp. 2016) sets forth the requirements for summons and 
service of summons in a CPA proceeding and provides in relevant part:  
 
(a) After a petition has been filed, the court shall issue 
a summons requiring the presence of the parents[.]  
 
. . . . 
 
(c) The sheriff or other authorized person shall serve the 
summons by personally delivering a certified copy to the 
person or legal entity being summoned.  . . . [P]rovided 
that: 
 
. . . . 
 
(2) If the court finds that it is impracticable  to 
personally serve the summons, the court may order service 
by . . . publication  . . . .  When publication is used, the 
summons shall be published once a week for four consecutive 
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county 
in which the party was last known to have resided .  In the 
order for publication of the summons, the court shall 
designate the publishing newspaper and shall set the date 
of the last publication at no less than twenty -one days 
before the return date.  Such publication shall have the 
same forc e and effect as personal service of the summons.  
(Emphasis added.)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
23 provided DHS with sufficient information to locate Child’s 
father.  In addition, Father claimed that, even if personal 
service was impracticable, service by publication was improper 
because the s ummons was published in the Honolulu Star -
Advertiser, rather than in a newspaper of general circulation in 
Chuuk, where Mother initially indicated that Child’s natural 
father resided.  Thus, Father contended that the service by 
publication was void and the  family court had no personal 
jurisdiction over the unknown natural father.  
Second, Father claimed that the family court erred in 
denying Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default pursuant to HFCR 
Rules 55(c) and 60(b).  Father argued that because the service 
by publication was void, the default and default judgment were 
also void , and thus compliance with H FCR Rule 55(c) was not 
required.  Furthermore, Father argued that even if compliance 
with HFCR Rule 55(c) was required, Father satisfied the 
requirements und er HFCR Rule 55(c) to set aside the default.  
Thus, Father challenged the family court’s findings of fact and 
conclusions of law  that applied HFCR Rule 55(c) to Father’s 
Motion to  Set Aside Default . 
Father also contended that the family court erred by 
concluding that Father was not entitled to relief under HFCR 
Rule 60(b) because that rule only applies to a motion seeking 
relief from a final judgment.  Father maintained that HFCR Rule *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
24 60(b) was inapplicable because no judgment was entered regarding 
the defa ult.  In the alternative, Father argued that the family 
court erred by concluding that HFCR Rule 60(b)(4)  was not 
applicable in this case, because Rule 60(b)(4) permits a court 
to relieve a party if the judgment is void, as it was in this 
case due to defec tive service.  Father also argued that HFCR 
Rule 60(b)(5) and (6) were applicable in this case, contrary to 
the family court’s conclusion.  Thus, Father challenged the 
family court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law that 
applied HFCR Rule 60(b) to Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default.  
Third, Father contended that the family court violated 
his constitutional right to due process by denying intervention .  
Specifically, Father challenged the family court’s FOF 33, which 
stated that  “on May 22, 2 019, a stipulation between the DHS and 
the CASA to permit Father’s intervention was determined to be 
inappropriate by the Court and was therefore set aside.”  
Father conceded that he “did not specify whether his 
requested intervention fell under HFCR 24(a) or 24(b) .”  
However, Father contended that intervention under both 
provisions  was proper based on the  rule’s language.  Father 
maintained that as Child’s natural father, he retained 
visitation rights and financial obligations in relation to 
Child, and thus was ent itled to intervene, especially given that 
both DHS and the CASA agreed to Father’s intervention.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
25 DHS agreed with Father in its answering brief that the 
family court erred by denying Father’s Motion to Intervene 
because Father satisfied the requirements for  both intervention 
of right and permissive intervention.  DHS argued Father has a 
constitutionally protected interest in the custody and 
visitation of Child and that Father’s Motion to Intervene should 
have been granted pursuant to HFCR Rule 24(a)(2).13  DHS argued 
that Father satisfied the requirements of H FCR Rule 24(a)(2) for 
intervention of right because Father ’s Motion to Intervene was 
timely, in that it was first filed on January 28, 2019, while 
his Petition for Paternity and the genetic test results w ere 
still pending.  DHS maintained that even if the unknown natural 
father’s  rights were terminated on February 27, 2018, Father 
still had an interest in Child’s custody and visitation once he 
was adjudicated as Child’s natural father.  
                     
13 HFCR Rule 24 (2015) provides in relevant part:  
 
 (a) Intervention of right.   Upon timely application 
anyone shall be permitted to intervene in an action:  
 
 . . . . 
 
 (2) when the applican t claims an interest relating to 
the property, transaction, or custody, visitation, or 
parental rights of a minor child which is the subject of 
the action and the applicant is so situated that the 
disposition of the action may as a practical matter impair 
or impede the applicant’s ability to protect that interest, 
unless the applicants [sic] interest is adequately 
represented by existing  parties.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
26 DHS also contended t hat Father satisfie d the 
requirements for permissive intervention under HFCR Rule 
24(b)(1), which permits intervention “when a statute confers a 
conditional right to intervene[.]”  According to DHS, HRS 
§ 587A-33(c) and (d) conferred a statutory right for a child’s 
family member to intervene post -termination of parental rights, 
“to have the continuing responsibility to support the child and 
the opportunity to visit the child at the  discretion of the 
permanent custodian .”14  DHS pointed out that “Father testi fied 
that he has continued to pay child support for [Child] and that 
[Father] has an interest in the custody and visitation of 
[Child].”  In support of this argument, DHS cited to Father’s 
testimony that he (1)  started paying child support for Child to 
the Child Support Enforcement Agency in March 2019 and 
(2) visited with Child on weekends while Child was visiting with 
a maternal aunt.  DHS asserted that permitting Father to 
                     
14 HRS § 587A -33 (Supp. 2014 ) provides in relevant part:  
 
 (c) Unless otherwise ordered by the court or until 
the child is adopted, the child’s family member shall 
retain, to the extent that the family member possessed the 
responsibility prior to the termination of parental rights, 
the continuing responsibility to support the child, 
including repaying the cost of any  and all care, treatment, 
or any other service provided by the permanent custodian, 
any subsequent permanent custodian, other authorized 
agency, or the court for the child’s benefit.  
(d) A family member may be permitted visitation with 
the child at the dis cretion of the permanent custodian.  
The court may review the exercise of such discretion and 
may order that a family member be permitted such visitation 
as is in the best interests of the child.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
27 intervene would not unduly delay or prejudice the “original 
parties” as DHS and Ch ild’s guardian ad litem had previously 
stipulated to Father’s intervention.   
The Cammacks conceded in a separate answering brief 
that Father’s parental rights are a constitutionally protected 
liberty interest .  However, the Cammacks  argued that under 
federal precedent, Father is entitled to a lesser degree of 
constitutional protection due to Father’s lack of an established 
substantial relationship with Child.15  According to the 
Cammacks, “[p]arental rights do not spring full -blown from the 
biological conne ction between parent and child.  They require 
relationships more enduring. ”  The Cammacks asserted that the 
family court correctly concluded that Father’s Motion to 
Intervene was untimely, as the record demonstrates that Father 
was aware of Child’s birth a nd that he might be Child’s father 
in December 2016, yet waited until January 2019 to file his 
first Motion to Intervene.   
The ICA issued a Memorandum Opinion on September 29, 
2020, affirming the family court’s September  20, 2019 decision 
                     
15  The CASA filed an answering brief that incorporated by re ference the 
Cammacks’ answering brief.  However, the CASA also wished to clarify that by 
stipulating to Father’s intervention, the CASA had “no intention to 
circumvent Judge Uale’s decision not to sign the stipulation” or “go around 
the direction of Judge Uale.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
28 and order denying Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default and 
Motion to Intervene.  
First, the ICA reviewed the family court’s conclusion 
that Father was properly served by publication.   The ICA noted 
that at the time DHS served Child’s unknown natural father by 
publication, the only information DHS had about Child’s father 
were Mother’s statements that (1)  the unknown natural father was 
in Chuuk and wanted Child to go into foster care; and (2)  Mother 
did not know who the unknown natural father was.  The ICA 
determined that  DHS did not know Child’s father’s name was 
“John” when DHS moved to serve the unknown natural father by 
publication.  The ICA cited this court’s test for whether 
service by publication is authorized:  
[R]esort to constructive service by publication is 
predicated upon necessity, and, if personal service could 
be effected by the exercise of reasonable diligence, 
substituted service is unauthorized.  . . . The test, 
however, is not whether it was in fact possible to effect 
personal service in a given case, but whe ther the 
complainant reasonably employed knowledge at [their] 
command, made diligent inquiry, and exerted an honest and 
conscientious effort appropriate to the circumstances, to 
acquire the information necessary to enable [them] to 
effect personal service on the defendant.  
Accordingly, the ICA determined that the family court correctly  
found that Father  was properly served  by publication .   
Furthermore,  the ICA determined that the service by 
publication was not defective because summons for Child’s father 
was published in the Honolulu Star -Advertiser for four 
consecutive weeks, with a return date more than 21 days after *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
29 the last publication date, in compliance with HRS § 587A -13.  
The ICA also rejected Father’s claim that publication in the 
Honolulu Star -Advertiser was defective because the notice was 
not published in Chuuk, where the unknown natural father 
allegedly lived, on the basis that Father was later determined 
to be Child’s natural father and lived in Honolulu.   
Second, the ICA considered whether th e family court 
erred by declining to set aside the entry of default and the 
termination of Father’s parental rights by default.  The ICA 
agreed with the family court that in order to set aside the 
default and default judgment, Father was required to satisf y 
both HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b):  
[Father]’s default was entered pursuant to HFCR Rule 
55.  [Father]’s parental rights were terminated while he 
was in default, making the termination of parental rights a 
default judgment.  See In re Doe , 77 Hawaiʻi 109, 114, 883 
P.2d 30, 35 (1994) (holding that “an infringement upon 
parental custody rights is an appealable decision even 
though the requisite finality normally required for appeals 
is lacking.”).  Accordingly, [Father] was required to 
obtain relief u nder both HFCR Rule 55 and HFCR Rule 60(b).  
[Father] had the burden of establishing that: (1)  Child 
will not be prejudiced by the reopening; (2)  [Father] has a 
meritorious defense; and (3)  [Father]’s default was not the 
result of inexcusable neglect or a willful act.   [Chen v. 
Mah, 146 Hawaiʻi 157, 173-74, 457 P.3d 796, 812-13 (2020)]. 
The ICA reviewed the family court’s findings of fact that 
Mother’s and Father’s testimony was not credible and that Ms. 
Kakehi’s testimony was credible.  The ICA also reviewed the 
family court’s findings of fac t regarding Father’s stated 
reasons for delay in seeking to set aside his default and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
30 whether Father knew or should have known that he was Child’s 
natural father in December 2016.  Furthermore, the ICA reviewed 
the family court’s findings of fact regarding  Child’s best 
interests.  The ICA concluded that the family court’s “findings 
of fact were supported by substantial evidence in the record.”  
In addition, the ICA noted that “[i]t is well -settled that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the 
province of the trier of fact.”   
  The ICA then considered the family court’s conclusions 
regarding  HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b), noting that the family 
court determined  that Father d id not satisfy the requirements to 
set aside his default and default judgment pursuant to HFCR 
Rules 55(c) or 60(b).  The ICA reviewed the family court’s  
reasoning for denying Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default 
pursuant to  HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b) and  held “that the family 
court’s conclusions of law were correct  . . . to the extent they 
presented mixed questions of fact and law, they were not 
‘clearly erroneous, ’ were supported by the trial court’s 
findings of fact, and reflected an application of the c orrect 
rule of law. ”   
  Third, the ICA considered  Father’s claim that the 
family court’s denial of his Motion to Intervene deprived Father 
of due process.  The ICA reasoned that before Father could *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
31 proceed with his motion  to intervene, he had to have both  his 
default and default judgment set aside.  Based on the ICA’s 
previous conclusion that the family court did not err in 
declining to set aside Father’s default and default judgment 
after a two -day evidentiary hearing, the ICA held that Father 
was not dep rived of due process.  The ICA also rejected Father’s 
claim that Judge Uale abused his discretion and violated the 
“law of the case” when he set aside Judge Park’s approval of the 
stipulation to allow Father to intervene .  The ICA concluded 
that Judge Uale  provided cogent reasons to set aside the 
stipulation because Father did not set aside his default and 
default judgment before moving to intervene.  
The ICA entered its Judgment on Appeal on October 27, 
2020.16  On November 2, 2020, Father filed a timely app lication 
for writ of certiorari.   
II. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
A. Family Court Decisions  
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be 
set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. 
Thus, we  will not disturb the family court ’s decisions on 
appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment 
of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason.  
                     
16  Father filed a Motion for Reconsideration on October 5, 2020, which the 
ICA denied because Father presented no “new evidence and/or arguments that 
could not have been presented during the earlier” proceedings.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
32 Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawaiʻi 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe , 95 Hawaiʻi 183, 189 -90, 20 P.3d 616, 622 -23 
(2001)).  
The family court’ s conclusions of law are reviewed de 
novo under the right/wrong standard.  In re Doe , 101 Hawaiʻi 220, 
227, 65 P.3d 167, 174 (2003 ), as amended  (Apr. 22, 2003) .  Thus, 
conclusions of law “are not binding upon an appellate court and 
are freely re viewable for their correctness.”   Id. (cleaned up ). 
B. Constitutional Law  
“We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own indep endent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case.  Thus, we review questions of 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.”  In re L.I. , 
149 Hawaiʻi 118, 121, 482 P.3d 1079, 1082 (2021) (quoting State 
v. Ui, 142 Hawaiʻi 287, 292, 418 P.3d 628, 633 (2018)).  
C. Interpretation of Court Rules and Statutory Interpretation  
“[W]hen interpreting rules promulgated by the court, 
principles of statutory construct ion apply.”  Gap v. Puna 
Geothermal Venture , 106 Hawaiʻi 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 
(2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).   
This court’s construction of statutes is guided by the 
following rules:  
 
First, the fundamental starting point for  statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its 
plain and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the 
task of statutory construction is our foremost 
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the 
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained 
primarily from the language contained in the statute 
itself.  Fourth, when there is doubt, doubleness of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
33 meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertai nty of an 
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists.  
State v. Choy Foo , 142 Hawaiʻi 65, 72, 414 P.3d 117, 124 (2018) 
(quoting State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻi 383, 390, 219 P.3d  1170, 
1177 (2009)) (internal citation omitted).  
III.  DISCUSSION  
In his applica tion for writ of certiorari, Father  
raises the following points of error:  
A.  Whether the default and default judgment are void for 
lack of due process and personal jurisdiction, given 
the family court’s failure to follow HRS § 587A -
13(c)(2)?  
 
B.  As to ap plication of [HFCR Rules] 55(c) and 60(b), 
whether the family court’s decision and the ICA’s 
Opinion represents grave errors of law or 
inconsistencies with decisions of the Hawaiʻi Supreme 
Court and the United States Supreme Court?  
 
C.  Whether [Father] was required to set aside default 
and the default judgment terminating his parental 
rights in order to intervene as the natural father of 
[Child]?  
With respect to his Motion to Int ervene, Father argues 
that “[n]o language in HFCR 24, which permits intervention, 
requires that a party set aside default before seeking to 
intervene.”  According to Father, “intervention of right and 
permissive intervention are available to ‘anyone’ who m eets” the 
requirements of HFCR Rule 24 (a) and (b), which do not require 
setting aside default.   
DHS agrees with Father’s arguments and contends that 
“[t]he ICA committed grave errors of law or fact when it 
affirmed the family’s [sic] court[’ s] decision de nying Father’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
34 Motion to Intervene without discussing HFCR Rule 24 or applying 
the right or wrong ( de novo) standard of review.”  DHS also 
contends “that the family court is empowered to enter further 
orders it deems to be in the best interest of the child ren, and 
such orders may recognize residual interests in the birth 
parents after the termination of their parental rights.”  
Furthermore, according to DHS,  
Neither the HFCR nor HRS Chapter 587A explicitly 
states that a party must successfully set aside a d efault 
prior to proceeding with a motion to intervene.  
Regardless, the decision made on either motion will affect 
the other.  If Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default is 
granted then he will regain full party status in the CPA 
case as the legal father of t he child and, by operation of 
law, the order terminating his parental rights will be 
reversed.  Father would then be given the opportunity to 
address safety concerns and reunify with [Child] and his 
interest in custody would be revisited, deeming his Motio n 
to Intervene moot.  
 
On the other hand, if this Court affirms the family 
court and ICA’s decisions denying Father’s Motion to Set 
Aside the Default, as it should, Father’s parental rights 
will remain terminated.  However, Father’s statutory 
interest in vi sitation with [Child] remains and it can only 
be reviewed judicially through his Motion to Intervene.  
For the following reasons, we agree that Father was 
not required to set aside the default and default judgment in 
order to intervene in the CPA proceeding , and that the family 
court should have analyzed Father’s Motion to Intervene under 
HFCR Rule 24.   However, we reject Father’s arguments that  the 
ICA erroneously concluded that service by publication  did not 
violate Father’s due process rights and that  the ICA erroneously *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
35 determined that the family court properly  denied Father’s Motion 
to Set Aside Default pursuant to HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b) . 
A. The ICA did not err when it concluded service by 
publication was proper and did not violate Father’s due 
process rights. 
On certiorari, Father contends that “[t]he [family] 
court’s failure to follow the requirements for service of 
process by publication violated HRS § 587A -13(c)(2) and the due 
process clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States 
Constitut ion and article I section 5 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution, 
which require proper service of process for a court to have 
jurisdiction to adjudicate the rights of a party.”  According to 
Father, “[b]ecause a parent has a fundamental right to the 
companionship, care, custody, and management of his or her 
child, a parent’s rights must be protected with fundamentally 
fair procedures when a permanent termination of parental rights 
is sought.”  In addition, Father maintains that “[p]arental 
rights cannot be denied without an opportunity for them to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.”  Thus, 
Father argues that “when termination is sought, due process 
requires that the parent be provided with adequate notice of the 
termination hearing and an opportunity to protect his or her 
interests a t the hearing itself.”   
Here, service by publication did not violate Father’s 
due process rights  because DHS did not have, and could not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
36 obtain, the information necessary to personally serve the 
unknown natural father.  This court has determined that 
“[r]esort to constructive service by publication is predicated 
upon necessity, and, if personal service could be effected by 
the exercise of reasonable diligence, substituted service is 
unauthorized.”  Murphy v. Murphy , 55 Haw. 34, 35, 514 P.2d 865, 
867 (1973).  Mother initially reported to DHS that Child’s 
biological father was in Chuuk, but Mother did not provide DHS 
with identifying information or any way to contact the potential 
father.  Then, at the December 9, 2016 temporary foster custody 
hearing, Mother ’s counsel reported that “[M]other does not know 
who [Child’s] father is.”  As the family court found, Mother did 
not maintain contact with DHS during the CPA proceeding before 
termination of her parental rights and “did not provide DHS with 
any further in formation about the identity or location of 
[Child’s] father[.]”  Thus,  DHS did not have reliable 
information regarding  the identity or location of Child’s 
unknown natural father when DHS moved to serve the unknown 
natural father by publication  on March 2,  2017. 
As a result, when DHS served Father by publication in 
April and May of 2017, and when Father was defaulted for his 
failure to appear after service by publication on June 21, 2017, 
“DHS remained unaware of any additional information regarding 
[Child’s] father.”  Without further information to identify *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
37 Child’s father and without the ability to consistently contact 
Mother, DHS was unable to determine the identity of , and 
personally serve,  Child’s father with the exercise of reasonable 
diligence.  See id.  Therefore, service by publication did not 
violate Father’s due process rights because service by 
publication was necessary given the circumstances of the CPA 
proceeding.  See id. 
B. The ICA correctly determined that the family court did not 
err by declinin g to set aside Father’s default and 
termination of Father’s parental rights by default  pursuant 
to HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b) . 
On certiorari,  Father contends that “since the order 
for publication of summons is void  . . . , the resulting default 
and default  judgment are also void.”  According to Father, “HFCR 
[Rule] 55(c) is not applicable because the default is improper.”  
However, as discussed above, Father was properly served by 
publication because DHS did not have, and could not reasonably 
obtain, the necessary information to identify Child’s then -
unknown natural father.   Therefore, the ICA correctly determined 
that Father’s default and default judgment were not void due to 
improper service by publication.  
Father also contends that the family court  erroneously 
denied his Motion to Set Aside Default because he satisfied all 
three requirements to set aside a default.  As the ICA pointed 
out, when Father filed his Motion to Set Aside Default, “parties *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
38 seeking to set aside an entry of default pursuant to HRCP Rule 
55(c) [had to] satisfy the three -prong test for HRCP Rule 60(b) 
motions.”17  Chen, 146 Hawaiʻi at 174, 457 P.3d at 813.  Under the 
three-prong test , Father “had the burden of establishing the 
following to prevail on [his] motion to set aside entry of 
default: (1)  the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by 
the reopening, (2)  the defaulting party has a meritorious 
defense, and (3)  the default was not the result of inexcusable 
neglect or a willful act.”  Id. 
The ICA properly affirmed the family cour t’s 
conclusion that Father did not satisfy the requirements to set 
aside the default and default judgment pursuant to HFCR Rules 
55(c) and 60(b).  Notably, the family court determined that 
Mother’s and Father’s testimony was not credible, and th us 
Father c ould not establish that the failure to file his Motion 
to Set Aside Default was not the result of inexcusable neglect.   
This court does not question the family court’s determination 
about Mother’s and Father’s credibility.  See Fisher, 111 Hawaiʻi 
at 46, 1 37 P.3d at 360.  Thus, for the reasons discussed in the 
ICA’s Memorandum Opinion, the family court  properly  concluded 
                     
17  This court’s holding also app lied “to the identical language of Rules 
55(c) in the District Court Rules of Civil Procedure as well as the Hawaiʻi 
Family Court Rules.”  Chen, 146 Hawaiʻi at 177 n.21, 457 P.3d at 816 n.21.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
39 that Father was not entitled to set aside his default and 
default judgment pursuant to HFCR Rules 55(c) and 60(b).  
C. The ICA erroneously con cluded that Father was required to 
set aside the default and default judgment before 
proceeding with intervention under HFCR Rule 24.  
1. The plain language of HFCR Rule 24(a)(2) demonstrates 
that Father was not required to set aside the default 
and default ju dgment before proceeding with his Motion 
to Intervene.  
With respect to HFCR Rule 24(a)(2), Father argues that 
he “is the adjudicated natural father of [Child,]” and that 
“[h]is purpose in intervening was to protect his interest 
relating ‘to the .  . . custody, visitation, or parental rights 
of [Child,]’ and he was ‘so situated that the disposition of the 
action may as a practical matter impair or impede the 
applicant’s ability to protect that interest .  . . .”18  In 
addition, Father contends that “[n]otwithst anding the paramount 
interest in the child, this Court has affirmed that parents have 
a cognizable and substantial interest in the child, which 
interest is constitutionally protected.”   
Based on the plain language of HFCR Rule 24(a)(2), 
Father was not req uired to set aside the default and default 
                     
18  In their response to DHS, the Cammacks point out that Father’ s Motion 
to Intervene was based not on any residual interest in visitation, but on 
Father’s stated interest in having Child placed in his home.  The Cammacks  
also assert “[Father’s] Motion to Intervene did not comply with [HFCR Rule 
10]” and “[t]he issue o f post-termination visitation was never raised, 
briefed, or argued during any of the proceedings below.”  However, despite 
these arguments, the plain language of HFCR Rule 24 required that Father’s 
Motion to Intervene be analyzed under HFCR Rule 24 before it was denied.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
40 judgment before proceeding with his Motion to Intervene.  HFCR 
Rule 24(a)(2) (2015) provides:  
(a) Intervention of Right.  Upon timely application 
anyone shall be permitted to intervene in an action:  
 
. . . . 
 
(2) when the applicant claims an interest relating to 
the property, transaction, or custody, visitation, or 
parental rights of a minor child which is the subject of 
the action and the applicant is so situated that the 
disposition of the action may as a practica l matter impair 
or impede the applicant’s ability to protect that interest, 
unless the applicants [sic] interest is adequately 
represented by existing parties.  
(Emphasis added.)  In addition, t his court has determined that  
HFCR Rule 24 is generally worded to mandate intervention 
when an applicant meets four elements, namely (1)  the 
application to intervene is timely, (2)  the applicant 
claims an interest relating to the property, transaction or 
custody or visitation of a minor child which is the subject 
of the action, (3)  the applicant is so situated that the 
disposition of the action may as a practical matter impair 
or impede the applicant’s ability to protect that interest, 
and (4) the applicant’s interest is represented 
inadequately by the existing parties  to the suit.  
In re Doe , 109 Hawaiʻi 399, 410, 126 P.3d 1086, 1097 (2006), as 
corrected  (Jan. 27, 2006).  
The plain language and elements of HFCR Rule 24(a)(2) 
do not require setting aside default and default judgment before 
proceeding with  consideration of  the motion to intervene .  The 
use of the word “shall” demonstrates that intervention is 
mandatory when HFCR Rule 24(a)(2)’s requirements are satisfied.   
See Jack Endo  Elec., Inc. v. Lear Siegler, Inc. , 59 Haw. 612, 
616, 585 P.2d 1265, 1269 (1978)  (citing Nat’l Transit Co. v. 
Boardman , 197 A. 239 , 241 (Pa. 1938)) (“[T]he word ‘shall’ [in a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
41  statute] is generally regarded as mandatory[.]”) .  None of th ese 
requirements includes  setting aside a default and default 
judgment.  The word “default” is not used anywh ere in the text 
of HFCR Rule 24(a)(2).  In other words, HFCR Rule 24(a)(2)  
requires family courts to  allow any “applicant” who satisfies 
the requirements to intervene, regardless of whether or not that  
person was previously defaulted for failure to appear or that 
person’s parental rights were terminated.  
In addition, HFCR Rule 24(a)(2) provides only one 
exception to mandatory intervention.  Under HFCR Rule 24(a)(2), 
intervention is mandatory if the rule’s requirements are 
satisfied, “unless the applicants [ sic] interest is adequately 
represented by existing parties.”  This is the only exception to 
mandatory intervention, and thus there is no exception if an 
applicant  was previously defaulted for failure to appear or if 
their parental rights have been termina ted. 
Because HFCR Rule 24(a)(2)’s language is “plain and 
unambiguous,” effect must be given to its “plain and obvious 
meaning,” which does not require Father to set aside the default 
and default judgment in order to intervene.  See Choy Foo , 142 
Hawaiʻi at 72, 414 P.3d at 124.  Therefore, the ICA erred in 
affirming the family court’s denial of Father’s Motion to 
Intervene without analyzing his motion under HFCR Rule 24(a)(2) . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
42 2. The plain language of HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) did not 
require Father to set aside  the default and default 
judgment before proceeding with his Motion to 
Intervene.  
Father argues that “[p]ermissive intervention under 
HFCR 24(b) was also available because sections of the Child 
Protective Act .  . . confer, in effect, a conditional right to  
intervene.”  According to Father, HRS §  587A-33(c) and (d) gives 
a child’s birth family the responsibility to financially support 
the child and the opportunity to visit the child, even after 
termination of parental rights.  We agree that permissive 
intervention may be available to Father, and his Motion to 
Intervene should be analyzed under HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) and HRS 
§ 587A-33(c) and (d).  
The plain language of HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) does not 
require setting aside default and default judgment before 
proceeding with consideration of the motion to intervene.  HFCR 
Rule 24(b)(1) (2015) provides:  
(b) Permissive Intervention.  Upon timely application 
anyone may be permitted to intervene in an action:  
 
(1) when a statute confers a conditional right to 
intervene[.]  
Thus, the plain language of HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) allows 
for permissive intervention if a statute provides for a 
conditional right to intervene.  Here, HRS § 587A-33(c) and (d) 
(Supp. 2014) can be read to confer a statutory right to 
intervene post -termination of parental rights:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
43  (c) Unless otherwise ordered by the court or until 
the child is adopted, the child’s family member shall 
retain, to the extent that the family member possessed the 
responsibility prior to the termination of parental rights, 
the continuin g responsibility to support the child , 
including repaying the cost of any and all care, treatment, 
or any other service provided by the permanent custodian, 
any subsequent permanent custodian, other authorized 
agency, or the court for the child’s benefit.  
 
 (d) A family member may be permitted visitation with 
the child at the discretion of the permanent custodian .  
The court may review the exercise of such discretion and 
may order that a family member be permitted such visitation 
as is in the best interests  of the child.  
(Emphasis added.)   
In the CPA proceeding, Father testified that he began 
paying child support for Child in March 2019 and made monthly 
payments .  Father also testified that he visited Child while 
Child was visiting with maternal aunt, there by demonstrating 
Father’s interest in visitation with Child.  Based on Father’s 
arguments and testimony, HRS § 587A-33(c) and (d)  could be read 
to provide Father with the necessary statutory right to 
intervene  for permissive intervention under HFCR Rule 24 (b)(1).  
Thus, the family court should have determined whether Father’s 
child support payments and interest in visiting Child satisfied 
the requirements for permissive intervention pursuant to HFCR 
Rule 24(b)(1) and HRS § 587A-33(c) and (d).  
Additionally, neither HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) nor HRS 
§ 587A-33(c) and (d) require setting aside a default and default 
judgment before proceeding with a motion to intervene.  As with 
HFCR Rule 24(a)(2), the word “default” is not used in HFCR Rule *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
44 24(b)(1) or HRS §  587A-33(c) and (d).  It follows that the 
“plain and obvious meaning” allows for permissive intervention 
without first setting aside default and default judgment.  See 
Choy Foo , 142 Hawaiʻi at 72, 414 P.3d at 124.  Therefore, the ICA 
erred in affirming the family cou rt’s denial of Father’s Motion 
to Intervene because Father’s Motion to Intervene should have 
been analyzed under HFCR Rule 24(b)(1) to determine whether HRS 
§ 587A-33(c) and (d) allowed for permissive intervention.19 
3. Requiring Father to set aside the defaul t and default 
judgment before proceeding with his Motion to 
Intervene was unreasonable.  
“[T]his court is bound to construe statutes so as to 
avoid absurd results.”  Amantiad v. Odum , 90 Hawaiʻi 152, 161, 
977 P.2d 160, 169 (1999) (citing Keliipuleole v. Wilson , 85 
Hawaiʻi 217, 222, 941 P.2d 300, 305 (1997)).  Furthermore, “[a] 
rational, sensible and practicable interpretation of a statute 
is preferred to one which is unreasonable[,] impracticab le . . . 
inconsisten[t], contradict[ory], and illogical[].”  Id. at 221-
                     
19  The ICA determined that Judge Uale had cogent reasons to set aside 
Judge Park’s ruling allowing Father’s intervention by stipulation because 
Father did not set aside his default and default judgment before moving to 
intervene.  However, b ecause this court concludes that Father was not 
required to set aside his default and default judgment before moving to 
intervene, Judge Uale lacked cogent reasons to set aside Judge Park’s ruling, 
which allowed Father’s intervention by stipulation.   See Wong v. City and 
Cty. of Honolulu , 66 Haw. 389, 396, 665 P.2d 157, 162 (1983) (“Unless cogent 
reasons support the second court’s action, any modification of a prior ruling 
of another court of equal and concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an abuse 
of discretion.”).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
45 22, 941 P.2d at 304 -05 (original brackets and citation omitted) 
(brackets added).  
Requiring Father to set aside the default and default 
judgment before proceeding with his Motion to In tervene creates 
an illogical and unreasonable result.  Here, as DHS points out, 
if Father’s Motion to Set Aside Default was granted, Father 
would regain full -party status in the CPA proceeding because the 
default judgment terminating his parental rights wo uld be 
reversed by operation of law.  In other words, if Father had 
succeeded in setting aside the default and default judgment, 
Father would not have needed to intervene because he would have 
regained his status as a party.  Alternatively, if Father’s 
Motion to Set Aside Default was denied, as was the case here, 
Father would not have an opportunity for judicial review of his 
statutorily provided visitation rights under HRS § 587A-33(d) 
without a motion to intervene.  Thus, requiring Father to set 
aside the  default and default judgment before proceeding with 
his Motion to Intervene would be unreasonable.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
Although Father was properly served by publication and 
could not establish that he was entitled to relief from the 
default and default judgment, the plain and unambiguous language 
of HFCR Rule 24 demonstrates that setting aside a default and 
default judgment are not required before proceeding with a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
46 
motion to intervene.  In addition, a reasonable and logical 
interpretation of HFCR Rule 24 demonstra tes that setting aside a 
default and default judgment are not required because if  the 
default and default judgment were set aside, a motion to 
intervene would be unnecessary.  Thus, the family court should 
have analyzed Father’s Motion to Intervene under H FCR Rule 24.  
Accordingly, we affirm in part and vacate in part the 
ICA’s October 27, 2020 Judgment on Appeal , which affirmed the 
family court’s September 20, 2019 “Decision and Order Regarding 
the Contested Case Hearing on [Father]’s Motion to Set Aside 
Default Filed June 5, 2019”  denying Father’s Motion to Set Aside 
Default and his Motion to Intervene without analyzing the Motion 
to Intervene under HFCR Rule 24.  We remand the case for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
 
Georgia K. McMillen 
for Petitioner/Father-Appellant  
 
Maria F. Casavilla, 
Julio C. Herrera, 
Erin K.S. Torres, and  
Patrick A. Pascual 
for Respondent-Appellee 
Department of Human Services  
 
Francis T. O’Brien 
for Respondents/Intervenors-
Appellees Resource Caregivers  
 
Shelby N. Ferrer 
for Respondent Court Appointed
Special Advocates Program  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
/s/ Todd W. Eddins  
 