***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29939 07-MAY-2012 
10:14 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
MICHAEL C. TIERNEY, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-29939
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29939; CR. NO. 1P108-6561)
 
May 7, 2012
 
ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.; WITH NAKAYAMA, J.,
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold that when a court orders an examination to 
determine whether a defendant is fit to proceed to trial pursuant 
to Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704-404(1), and the defendant 
refuses to cooperate with the examiner, the examiner must produce a report of the examination that expressly states whether “such unwillingness of the defendant was the result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect,” if possible. HRS § 704­404(5). If it is not possible for the examiner to make that determination, the examiner must expressly state in the report that it is not possible to determine whether the defendant’s unwillingness is the result of physical or mental disease,         
           
           
         
  
          
        
        
    
          
          
          
        
            
 
 
            
             
               
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
disorder, or defect. Because the examiner in this case did not
 
state in his report whether Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant
 Michael C. Tierney (Petitioner) was fit to proceed or state that
 it was impossible to make that determination, we hold that the
 
1
District Court of the First Circuit (the court)  abused its
discretion in proceeding to trial without the examiner’s opinion. 
We therefore vacate the September 9, 2011 judgment of the ICA
 filed pursuant to its August 25, 2011 Summary Disposition Order
2
 
(SDO) affirming the November 18, 2008 Notice of Entry of Judgment
 
3
and/or Order filed by the court  convicting Petitioner of
promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree, HRS § 712-1249
 
4
(1993) , and we remand to the court for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion. 
1 The Honorable Lono J. Lee (Judge Lee) presided over the August 19,
 
2008 competency hearing, at which time the court found Petitioner fit to
proceed and entered an Order Resuming Proceedings After Fitness Examination
Under Chapter 704.
 
2 The SDO was filed by Presiding Judge Katherine G. Leonard and
 
Associate Judges Lawrence M. Reifurth and Lisa M. Ginoza.
 
3 The Honorable Russell Nagata (Judge Nagata) presided over the
 
trial and sentencing.
 
4 HRS § 712-1249 Promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a detrimental
drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any
marijuana or any schedule v substance in any amount.
 
(2) Promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree is a
petty misdemeanor.
 
(Emphases added.)
 Punishment for a petty misdemeanor is “a fine not exceeding . . .
 
$1,000” and/or “imprisonment for a definite term to be fixed by the court and
not to exceed . . . thirty days” for each offense. HRS §§706-640(e) and 706­663 (1972).
 
2
         
           
               
       
     
  
         
           
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
I.
 
On April 28, 2008, Petitioner was observed by Honolulu
 
Police Officer Bronson Leana sitting on a bench in downtown
 
Honolulu smoking a marijuana cigarette. When Officer Leana asked
 Petitioner if he had any weapons, Petitioner responded, “no,” and
 proceeded to pull out a small bag of marijuana from one of his
 socks. Officer Leana seized the marijuana and arrested
 Petitioner.
 
On May 19, 2008, Petitioner made his first appearance 
in court
5. Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(Respondent) charged Petitioner with promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree. The court entered a not guilty plea on Petitioner’s behalf and referred him to the Office of the Public Defender. Petitioner informed the court that he wanted to waive counsel and represent himself. The court denied Petitioner’s request, stating, “Based on your replies to the court, the court feels that you would be inadequate to represent yourself.” The following was said during Petitioner’s appearance: 
[PETITIONER]: Well, one thing is Your Honor, you got drug court 
in Hawai 'i. I’d like to get a program, rehab. I’m trying to get ­
-
THE COURT: Okay. This is District Court.
 [PETITIONER]: -- treatment and recovery
 . . .
 [PETITIONER]: I’m citing federal law, the Georgetown Law School.
 THE COURT: From Georgetown Law School. Do you have a­[PETITIONER]: The Georgetown Law Journal. All states must
 
5
 Judge Lee presided.
 
3
         
       
  
             
       
             
            
       
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
implement the SRA to the Resentencing Reform Act.
 
. . .
 [THE COURT]: But what I am doing is I’m entering a not guilty
plea, refer you to the Public Defender’s Office.
 
[PETITIONER]: No. I waive counsel. I do not want an attorney.
 [THE COURT]: Based on your replies to the court, the court feels
that you would be inadequate to represent yourself.
 
On June 20, 2008, Petitioner appeared before the court6
 
and was present with Deputy Public Defender Melissa Lam as
 
counsel. Petitioner informed the court that he wanted to
 represent himself. The court told Petitioner that he had
 “counsel ready, willing, and able to represent [him,]” but
 Petitioner still wanted to continue pro se, saying, “I was in
 judge (inaudible) courtroom for felonies June 16, and a public
 defender threatened to kill me.” Petitioner asked for discovery
 and for a speedy trial. The court ruled, “The court is of the
 opinion that fitness may be an issue in this matter. The court
 is going to order a one [person] panel [to examine Petitioner].” 
Petitioner responded, “You cannot force counsel upon me, Your
 Honor. I will represent myself under Feretta [sic] versus
 California. I have the right under the Sixth Amendment.” 
The proceedings were suspended for one month. The
 
court’s June 20, 2008 Order Suspending Proceedings for
 Examination of [Petitioner] Under HRS Chapter 704 was couched in
 terms of the statute and stated, in part, that an opinion must be
 rendered as to Petitioner’s fitness to proceed and his capacity
 
6
 The Honorable Judge Paula Devens presided.
 
4
         
       
      
    
          
      
          
            
      
        
         
             
           
        
           
            
       
           
        
      
 
         
           
       
         
           
        
         
                
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for criminal responsibility at the time of the incident:
 
Contents of Report, HRS §§ 704-404(4),(5),(6),(7), 704-405, 704­
406:
 
The examiner(s) report shall include the following:
 
. . .
 
3. An opinion as to [Petitioner]’s fitness to proceed , i.e.,
[Petitioner]’s capacity to understand the proceedings against
[Petitioner] and to assist in [Petitioner]’s own defense. . . .
 
4. An opinion as to the extent, if any, to which the
cognitive and/or volitional capacity of [Petitioner] ; i.e.
the capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct
and/or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the
law, was impaired at the time of the conduct alleged . . . .
 
5. An opinion as to the capacity of [Petitioner] to have a
particular state of mind which [is] required to established
[sic] [an] element of the offense charged . . . .
 
7. If the examination cannot be conducted by reasons of the
 
unwillingness of [Petitioner] to participate therein, the report
shall so state and shall include, if possible, an opinion as to
whether [Petitioner]’s unwillingness was the result of physical or
mental disease, disorder or defect.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Olaf Gitter, Ph.D. (examiner), was appointed to prepare
 
the report. Examiner was unable to conduct a personal
 
examination of Petitioner because Petitioner refused to
 participate, invoking the fifth amendment.
7 The July 11, 2009
 
report of examiner stated: 
“After I had introduced myself to [Petitioner] as a psychologist
ordered by the court to perform a fitness to proceed and penal
responsibility evaluation, the [Petitioner] informed me that ‘he
 would like to invoke his [f]ifth [a]mendment rights and not
participate in the evaluation.’ He then left the interview room.”
 
Examiner’s clinical observations stated, in part, that he could
 
not determine Petitioner’s fitness to proceed or his criminal
 responsibility:
 
“Since [Petitioner] refused to participate in the court ordered
 
7
 In pertinent part, the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
 
states that, “No person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a
witness against himself[.]” U.S. Const. amend. V.
 
5
         
          
        
       
          
   
        
        
        
         
            
    
   
       
        
          
         
            
         
       
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
examination, I am unable to advise the court of my own
independently derived psychiatric diagnoses nor am I able to
answer the questions regarding [Petitioner]’s fitness to proceed,
criminal responsibility and state of mind at the time of the
alleged offenses. ”
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On July 18, 2008, Petitioner appeared without counsel
 
8
at a fitness hearing before the court. The court  noted that the
one-panel evaluation had not been completed and further suspended
 the proceedings to complete Petitioner’s fitness assessment. The
 court declared its “serious concerns” about Petitioner’s mental
 condition, stating:
 
“[T]he 704 evaluation [Petitioner] earlier refused needs to be
completed . The Court has serious concerns about this
 
[Petitioner]’s mental health and has issues regarding this , so
therefore the Court’s going to refer you for the in-patient
evaluation. It will be at O-Triple-C. The court will ask the
 state to draft the order.”
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Pursuant to the July 18, 2008 Order of Continued
 
Suspension of Proceedings for Examination of [Petitioner] Under
 
HRS Chapter 704, examiner submitted another report of his
 “attempt to reexamine [Petitioner].” As stated in his August 4,
 2008 report, examiner conducted a two minute conversation with
 Petitioner:
 
Forensic Database
 
The examination consisted of a 2-minute face-to-face conversation
 
with [Petitioner] at the Oahu Community Correctional Center on
August 4, 2008, and a review of (1) his correctional medical
record and (2) my own previous one-panel mental examination under
the same case numbers submitted to [the court], on July 11, 2008.
 
Due to the fact that [Petitioner] refused, once again, to
participate in the court ordered evaluation, no psychological
testing was done .
 
8
 Judge Lee presided.
 
6
         
  
  
          
              
            
         
           
          
           
           
           
    
  
 
        
          
        
       
          
          
           
         
          
   
        
          
        
       
          
    
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Structure of Interview
 
[Petitioner] recognized me from my contact with him at OCCC on
July 11, 2008. As soon as I explained to him the reason for my
visit, i.e. that I was supposed to evaluate him for a fitness to
proceed with his trial and penal responsibility, he informed me
that, ‘He would like to invoke his Fifth Amendment rights and not
participate in the evaluation.’ He then left the interview room.
 
I note that [Petitioner] has also refused to talk to the probation
officer assigned to this case as well as to the Department of
Public Safety’s social worker. In both cases, he also invoked his
 Fifth Amendment rights.
 
. . .
 Clinical Observations
 Since [Petitioner] refused to participate in the court ordered
examination, I am unable to advise the court of my own
independently derived psychiatric diagnoses nor am I able to
answer the questions regarding [Petitioner]’s fitness to proceed,
criminal responsibility and state of mind at the time of the
alleged offenses. It is of note, however, that [Petitioner] is
housed in Annex II with the general population, that he has no
psychiatric contacts at OCCC and that according to an adult
correctional officer whom I checked with, he is not any management
problem in Annex II .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
In his clinical observations, examiner noted a second
 
time that he could not render an opinion as to Petitioner’s
 
fitness to proceed or his criminal responsibility:
 
Since [Petitioner] refused to participate in the court ordered
examination, I am unable to advise the court of my own
independently derived psychiatric diagnoses nor am I able to
answer the questions regarding [Petitioner]’s fitness to proceed,
criminal responsibility and state of mind at the time of the
alleged instant offense.
 
The record does not reflect that Petitioner, at that
 
time pro se, was ever informed that statements given during the
 
examination, including admissions of guilt, are not admissible in
 any proceeding except on the issue of a person’s physical or
 mental condition.
9
  
9
 As stated in oral argument by Petitioner, HRS § 704-416 (1993)
 
provides:
 
(continued...)
 
7
         
         
       
            
           
          
         
         
         
         
          
          
         
           
         
           
      
       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
II.
 
On August 19, 2008, Petitioner was present at his
 
second fitness hearing with Deputy Public Defender Robert Olson
 
(Olson) as counsel. At the hearing, Olson stated for the record
 that Petitioner did not want the public defender’s assistance as
 standby counsel or otherwise. Petitioner then reiterated that he
 wanted to represent himself. The court
10 informed Petitioner that
 
it must determine through an in-court colloquy that Petitioner
 was knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waiving his right
 to counsel. Petitioner stated that he understood the charge, the
 maximum punishment, his right to have Respondent prove the case
 against him beyond a reasonable doubt by taking it to trial, his
 right to testify or to remain silent, and his right to
 representation by an attorney. In relevant part, the following
 transpired: 
MR. OLSON: Deputy Public Defender Robert Olson, Your Honor,
present along with Mr. Tierney who is present.
 
For the -- okay. For the record, Your Honor, I’ve attempted to
speak with Mr. Tierney concerning his case. He has refused to
 
cooperate and communicate with me. He doesn’t want the public
defender’s assistance in any form be it standby counsel or
otherwise. So I’m just stating that for the record.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Is that correct, Mr. Tierney?
 [PETITIONER]: Yes. I’d like to represent myself under
 
9(...continued)
A 
statement made by a person subjected to examination or treatment
pursuant to this chapter for the purposes of such examination or
treatment shall not be admissible in evidence against the person
in any penal proceeding on any issue other than that of the
person’s physical or mental condition, but it shall be admissible
upon that issue, whether or not it would otherwise be deemed a
privileged communication, unless such statement constitutes an
admission of guilt of the offense charged.
 
10
 Judge Lee presided.
 
8
         
  
  
              
           
       
          
            
             
      
  
            
          
           
          
        
 
      
  
          
           
        
         
      
           
          
       
         
  
          
        
    
          
        
 
         
            
       
              
      
              
 
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(inaudible) versus California.
 
. . .
 THE COURT: I have no -- I have no problem granting you that, but
you have to do so knowing, voluntary, and intelligently. Okay?
 SO let’s -- let’s try this.
 
I understand what you’ve told the public defender. And Mr.
 
Olson is an excellent attorney. And based on what you’ve told me,
I’m just going to grant his wish that he not represent you. But
 let’s go through this colloquy. Okay?
 
[PETITIONER]: Okay.
 THE COURT: All right. Okay. You’ve been charged with the
offense of Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third Degree, two
counts, on April 28, 2008. And both are petty misdemeanors.
Maximum punishment could be 30 days jail and/or a thousand dollar
fine for each. Okay? You understand that?
 
[
PETITIONER]: Uh,  no,  I  don’t.  I  filed  a  motion  for
consolidation. I feel - ­
(
Confers with Olson.)
 
[PETITIONER]: Uh, no, I don’t understand what that means. I
 thought it was possession. I mean, you know, I thought it
 was possession. That’s what they told me.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Mr. Tierney, um - ­[PETITIONER]: I don’t sell drugs.
 
THE COURT: Mr. Olson, you got to make a choice. Now either
you’re not going to represent or advise or stand by or
you’re going to stand by as counsel.
 
MR. McMaster [sic]: Okay. I’ll sit down, Your Honor.
 [PETITIONER]: Okay
 THE COURT: And if you don’t understand what the charges
are, how do you expect to represent yourself?
 [PETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
 THE COURT: Okay. Possession is included, if you read the
statute, in the promoting detrimental drug in the third
degree.
 
[PETITIONER]: Well, I haven’t been given discovery, so it’s
hard to really do any type of reading. This is the first
 time I’ve been able to see it.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Mr. Tierney, do you want to go through this or
you want to argue with the court?
 [PETITIONER]: I want to go through this. I want to be able to
 
represent myself.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Then you have to listen and answer the
 
9
         
             
 
    
    
      
  
             
           
               
              
       
   
    
          
   
            
    
    
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
questions. Okay? This is what you’re being charged with. Do you
 
understand that?
 
[PETITIONER]: Uh, yes, sir.
 THE  C
OURT:   Okay.   Do  you  understand  the  maximum  penalties  that  I
 
just  informed  you?
 
[P
ETITIONER]: Uh, yes, sir.
 
THE COURT: Do you understand -­. . .
 THE COURT: -- you have the right to have the State prove these
cases against you beyond a reasonable doubt by taking it to trial?
 
[PETITIONER]:  
  Yes,  sir.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand that . . . you have the right
to 
testify or remain silent . . . . That is your Fifth Amendment
 
right against self-incrimination. Do you understand that?
 
[PETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
 THE  C
OURT:   Because  these  offenses  have  30  days  jail  each,  you  are
entitled  to  an  attorney.   Do  you  want  to  be  represented  by  an
 
attorney?
 [P
ETITIONER]: Uh, no, sir.
 
(Emphases added.) 
Subsequently, in answer to questions, Petitioner
 
responded that his mind was clear, he was not under the influence
 
of any drugs or alcohol, he had a high school diploma and a
 college degree, no one was forcing him to give up his right to an
 attorney, and that he was making this decision on his own. The
 court found Petitioner knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently
 waived his right to counsel.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Is your mind clear this morning?
 
[PETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
 THE COURT: Are you under the influence of any drug or alcohol
that may affect your thinking?
 
[PETITIONER]: Uh, no, sir.
 THE COURT: Okay. How much education do you have?
 
10
         
            
      
   
         
   
            
           
        
         
             
      
       
             
            
             
    
             
           
      
              
        
         
        
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[PETITIONER]: I went to, uh, high school, college -- I mean a
 
high school diploma and a college degree.
 
THE  COURT:   Okay.   Is  anyone  forcing  to  you  give  up  your  right  to
 
an  attorney?
 
[PE
TITIONER]: No, sir.
 
THE COURT: You’re making this as your own decision?
 [PETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
 THE  COURT:   Okay.   The  court  will  find  [Petitioner]  is  knowingly,
voluntarily,  and  intelligently  waiving  his  right  to  counsel.
11
 
Thereafter, the court impliedly determined Petitioner
 
was fit to proceed, inasmuch as it concluded that the proceedings
 
would continue.
 
THE COURT: Well, I tell you what, Mr. Tierney, for these two
offenses, because of the way you have behaved in the court on
previous occasions, this court has referred you for a
psychological evaluation. In both attempts you have refused.
This morning is the first time the court has been able to have an
actual -- a colloquy discussion with you.
 
[PETITIONER]: Well, I think I’m getting’ better.
 THE  COURT:   Well,  what  have  you  been  doing  that  -- that  you’re
 
getting  better?   Are  you  taking  medication?
 
[PETITIONER]:   N
 o,  I  don’t  take  medication.
 
THE  COURT:   Okay.   What  -- what  have  you  been  doing?
 
[PETITIONER]:   Detoxing.
 
THE 
COURT: Okay. Because you’ve been in custody for -- at least
 
since May . These offenses maximum penalty of 30 days in jail if
you were found guilty. The most you could spend would be 60 days
 
in  j ail.   You  understand  that?
 
[P
ETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
 
. . .
 
THE COURT: [ T]he court’s going to ask the State to do the order
resuming the proceedings . Um, you might want to have Mr. Tierney
sign off on that before he leaves .
 
THE CLERK: You need him to sign something? Okay. Hold on, Mr.
 Tierney. There’s a document you have to sign.
 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: To clarify, Your Honor, is this
 
11
 Although raised on appeal, Petitioner does not argue his
 
competency to waive the right to counsel in his Application .
 
11
         
    
     
         
        
  
     
       
          
             
          
            
       
   
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
DC-6?
 THE COURT: Oh, um-­[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: Um -­THE COURT: DC-6, order resuming proceedings? Um -­THE CLERK: Order resuming proceedings after fitness examination
under Chapter 704 .
 
THE COURT: Okay. Yes.
 
THE CLERK: Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
On September 25, 2008, Respondent confirmed that the
 
court had found Petitioner fit to proceed:
 
DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY: Your Honor, at the outset the State
would like to clarify a few things. At the August 19, 2008 date
we resumed proceedings, there was no formal findings of fitness.
Just to clarify for the record, in light of the fact that we
resumed proceedings,-- the court made a finding that [Petitioner]
is fit to proceed ?”
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
(Emphases added).
 
As of August 19, 2008, Petitioner represented himself. 
12
 Trial began on October 30, 2008 before the court .  On the first
 
day of trial, Petitioner appeared to believe the evidence against
 
him had been excluded. During the testimony of Officer Leana,
 who was Respondent’s first witness, Petitioner objected to the
 admission of the marijuana cigarette into evidence because
 “[t]hat’s already been dismissed with prejudice.” The court
 asked for clarification. Respondent then explained that
 originally there were two charges, but one had been dropped 
12
 Judge Nagata presided.
 
12
         
            
        
           
           
        
         
 
    
             
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
because it was duplicative. The court overruled Petitioner’s
 
objection.
 
Petitioner also appeared not to understand that the
 
nature of the charged offense was marijuana possession. When it
 was Petitioner’s turn to cross-examine Officer Leana, Petitioner
 insisted that he had not “promoted” any drugs. 
[PETITIONER]: Um, on the, um -- the -- uh, was defendant in
a
ny way trying to promote any detrimental drugs?
 
[DEPUTY  PROSECUTING  ATTORNEY]:   Uh,  objection.  Vague  and
 
ambiguous  as  to  the  term  “promote.”
 
T
HE COURT: Nah, that’s a legal conclusion. So I’m not going
 
t
o -- I’m going to sustain the objection. . . .
 
[PETITIONER]:   He  was  not  promoting  in  any  way?   He  was  just
 
sitting  there  smokin’?
 
[
DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: Objection again as to the
 
u
se of the term “promoting” as vague and ambiguous.
 
THE  COURT:   And  the  question  you  had  about  promoting  I’m
going  to  sustain  the  objection.   But  the  second  part  of  your
question  I’m  going  to  allow  it,  about  smoking  - ­ 
Respondent attempted to call another witness, and
 
Petitioner asked for a recess. When the parties returned,
 Respondent requested a continuance of the trial because its
 witness was not present. At that point, Petitioner asked for
 medical attention regarding a rash.
13
 
13 The following exchange took place:
 
[
PETITIONER]: I wanted to bring an issue up to you that I have a
medical problem.
 
THE  COURT:   Oh,  yeah.  So  -­
[PETITIONER]:  I  have  a  rash  all  over  my  body.
  
THE  COURT:   Uh,  no,  you  don’t  have  to  show  me,  so.
 
[PETITIONER]:  It’s  right  here  -­ 
THE  COURT:   Well,  so  -­
(
continued...)
 
13
         
        
         
       
       
       
             
    
    
      
   
        
           
 
           
   
         
         
        
       
    
       
           
        
          
        
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On November 18, 2008, Respondent resumed its case-in­
chief. Petitioner again continued to object on the ground that
 
“the one evidence has been dismissed by the court.” The court
 then asked which “one.” Petitioner responded, “You know, the
 only evidence that you could admit would be the Case No.
 08158229. The other Case 081582230 has been dismissed by
 [Respondent]. It would be inadmissible evidence.” 
Respondent then again explained to the court: 
[T]his is an issue that was previously addressed . However,
in response [Respondent] will note that I believe that the
two charges were erroneously duplicated to reflect two
charges for this incident. However, [Respondent] is not
 
13(...continued)
[
PETITIONER]: --that they’re not doing anything there. I
brought it up to them. I was wondering if I could get to a
hospital to get -­
THE COURT: Well -­[PETITIONER]: -- the rash taken care of.
 . . .
 [PETITIONER]: But it’s all over. It’s open sores, Your
Honor. That’s all I’m asking for. Can you get me to a
hospital.
 
THE COURT: Well, I can’t. I can’t, I just -­. . .
 [PETITIONER]: I’m just asking for help, Your Honor. It
would be interfering with reporting an emergency. It is a
petty misdemeanor, Your Honor. Judicial (inaudible). I need
 medical treatment immediately. This is - ­
THE COURT: Okay.
 [PETITIONER]: -- driving me into extreme discomfort and
 
extreme pain. I’ve been to sick call seven times in O­Triple-C. They have failed to give me nothing.
 
THE COURT: Well, Mr. Tierney, when the bailiff takes you
back, he’ll tell them of your condition also.
 
[PETITIONER]: Okay. Thank you very much, Your Honor.
 
14
         
        
         
        
       
  
      
        
         
       
           
             
            
             
          
     
 
        
            
         
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
submitting that there was any particular evidence tied to
any particular police report but does just note that as
there were two, [Respondent] dismissed one in the interest
of efficiency and to reflect basically the charging.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The court denied the request “because the evidence
 
presented is one based on the case at trial today.” 
Nevertheless, Petitioner still insisted, “That would be my
 objection, that it’s inadmissible evidence. It shouldn’t be in
 evidence anymore. It should be destroyed.” The court stated,
 “Well, since this was dealt with before . . . and [Respondent]
 made the explanation in support of -- in opposition to your
 motion, and based on that I’m still gonna deny your motion.” 
Subsequently, Respondent rested. The court asked
 
Petitioner whether he wanted to present his case. Petitioner
 said he did not. Petitioner also did not want to testify.
 
Respondent then made its closing argument. When it was
 
Petitioner’s turn to make a closing argument, he asked the court
 to dismiss the case because he was not charged with possession
 but with “promotion”: 
[PETITIONER]: Yeah, but they’re charging me with
promotion of a detrimental drug. Is there a difference?
Because when I was first arrested, I was charged with
possessing. I’m just saying I’m not promoting drugs.
 
And when I came in to see [the court] May 19th, I
asked for help and told him I had a drug problem and to take
me into custody and off the streets. Drugs are not good.
 I’m not promoting drugs of any sort. I’m not a drug dealer.
They charged me under the wrong statute. It should be
 possessing marijuana, not promoting detrimental drugs.
 
The charges must be dismissed with prejudice. I’m not
promoting them. I never said -- you know what I mean? I was
not in possession. I’m just saying I’m not promoting the
drug. They charged me under the wrong statute. (Emphasis
 added.)
 
15
         
           
        
    
        
 
          
    
 
         
 
          
      
         
       
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court explained again to Petitioner that
 
“promoting” included “possession” of marijuana, although, as
 
noted before, the court had already explained this on August 19,
 2008, when it ruled that Petitioner knowingly, voluntarily, and
 intelligently waived his right to counsel. After explaining that
 “promotion” included “possession,” the court proceeded to
 sentence Petitioner, although he stated that he “didn’t know
 that[.]” 
THE COURT: That’s the title of the charge, but really the
real elements of the charge is to knowingly possess
marijuana, not promote it.
 
[PETITIONER]: So there is no possession in Hawai 'i of 
marijuana? 
THE COURT: There’s no -- there’s not a title called
 
“possession.” It’s called “promoting.”
 
[PETITIONER]: So if you get caught with marijuana, it’s
 
promoting?
 
THE COURT: It’s called -- yeah. Even though you’re
 
possessing it, it’s called “promoting.”
 
[PETITIONER]: Okay. I didn’t know that, Your Honor. I
couldn’t find any statutes really on the subject .
 
T
HE COURT: Okay. So as to sentencing, [Respondent] first
 
. . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Petitioner was found guilty of the charge and sentenced
 
to five days in jail with credit for time served, concurrent with
 
any other sentence Petitioner may have been serving. 
Petitioner’s Notice of Appeal was filed on November 24, 2008. 
III.
 
On appeal, Petitioner was represented by counsel. 
On
 
August 25, 2008, the ICA affirmed the court’s judgment. The ICA
 held that the court “did not abuse its discretion when it
 
16
         
  
           
            
             
              
           
            
             
          
           
               
            
            
           
               
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determined that [Petitioner] was fit to proceed with trial.” 
State v. Tierney, No. 29939, 2011 WL 3795271, at *1-2 (Haw. App.
 Aug. 25, 2011) (SDO). In doing so, the ICA relied on the
 following factors: Petitioner had an extended colloquy with the
 court at the August 19, 2008 hearing, in which Petitioner
 affirmed that he understood the charges against him, the maximum
 penalties associated with being found guilty, Respondent’s burden
 of proof, that he had the right to remain silent at trial and
 that the court could not infer guilt from his silence, and that
 he had a right to an attorney; his mind was clear; he was not
 under the influence of drugs; and he was making his decisions
 voluntarily. Id. 
The ICA also cited examiner’s observations that
 
Petitioner was being housed with the general prison population,
 that he had no psychiatric contacts in prison, and that according
 to an adult correctional officer with whom the psychologist
 communicated, Petitioner was not a management problem.
14
 
Further, the ICA apparently extracted from the record
 
other factors that were not mentioned in the court’s colloquy
 
14 The court did not mention the factors from the report listed by
 
the ICA. Although the court referred to examiner’s reports twice during the
August 19, 2008 hearing, the court did not make any reference to the contents
of the report. The court’s first reference to the reports was in response to
Petitioner’s claim that he wanted to represent himself. The court stated,
“Okay. [Petitioner], I think we’ve been through this before. And I’ve read
 the evaluation letters when you were referred for an evaluation. We need to
 get through the colloquy regarding you representing yourself.” The court’s
 other reference to the reports occurred when Petitioner asked the court to
order the jail to give him more envelopes and a paper and pen. The court
 said, “Well, I tell you what, [Petitioner], for these two offenses, because of
the way you’ve behaved in the court on previous occasions, this court had
referred you for a psychological evaluation. In both attempts you have
 refused. This morning is the first time the court has been able to have an
 actual -- a colloquy discussion with you.”
 
17
         
           
        
        
        
         
          
      
       
        
           
        
       
          
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
with Petitioner or listed in the psychologist’s report, such as
 
Petitioner’s age and experience with the judicial system and the
 relative lack of complexity associated with the case and the
 charge. However, there is nothing to indicate which of the
 factors in this third group were in the record or were considered
 by the court in exercising its discretion.
 
IV.
 
Petitioner lists the following question in his
 
Application:
 
Whether the ICA committed grave error of law when it affirmed the
district court’s finding Petitioner fit to proceed without a
psychological opinion as to whether it was possible/impossible to
render an opinion whether Petitioner’s assertion of 5th Amendment
rights when examined by a court ordered psychologist was the
result of a physical or mental health disease, disorder or defect,
and if possible what that opinion is.
 
(Emphases added).
 
It should be noted that the court orders for
 
examination requested a report on fitness and on penal
 
15
 at the time of the act charged.  Petitioner
 responsibility  
mentions penal responsibility in the conclusion in both his
 
Application and his opening brief. In the conclusion to his
 Application, Petitioner states that this court should vacate the
 court’s November 18, 2008 conviction and remand this case to the
 court for “[re]determination of Petitioner’s fitness and penal
 
15
 HRS § 704-402(4) (1993) provides in relevant part:
 
The report of the examination shall include the following:
 (d) An opinion as to the extent, if any, to which the
capacity of the defendant to appreciate the wrongfulness of
the defendant’s conduct or to conform the defendant’s
 conduct to the requirements of law was impaired at the time
of the conduct alleged.
 
18
         
         
          
       
          
            
            
          
           
          
          
 
         
        
           
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
responsibility.” Inasmuch as the examination did not proceed
 
past the fitness phase to an examination on penal responsibility,
 Petitioner argued the fitness to proceed issue in his
 Application. Correspondingly, the ICA determined the question of
 fitness to proceed. Tierney, 2011 WL 3795271, at *1-2
 
(“[Petitioner] contends that the district court erred in (1)
 finding him fit to proceed to trial. . . .”). 
Respondent did not file a Response to the Application. 
V.
 A.
 
In his Application, Petitioner refers to the statutory
 
provisions that follow. HRS § 704-405 (1993) states in part:
 
[W]hen [Petitioner]’s fitness to proceed is drawn in question, the
issue shall be determined by the court. If neither the
 prosecuting attorney nor counsel for [Petitioner] contests the
finding of the report filed pursuant to section 704-404, the court
may make the determination on the basis of such report. If the
 finding is contested, the court shall hold a hearing on the issue.
When the report is received in evidence upon such hearing, the
party who contests the finding there of shall have the right to
summon and to cross-examine the persons who joined in the report
or assisted in the examination and to offer evidence upon the
issue.
 
Further, HRS § 704-404(5) directs: 
“If the examination cannot be conducted by reason of the
unwillingness of the defendant to participate therein, the report
shall so state and shall include if possible, an opinion as to
whether such willingness of the defendant was the result of
physical or mental disease, disorder or defect.”
 
B.
 
Petitioner maintains that “there was no medical opinion
 
provided on whether it was possible Petitioner’s refusal to be
 
examined was the result of a mental or physical disease, disorder
 or defect.” He contends (1) HRS § 704-405 calls for a medical
 
19
         
 
         
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opinion as to whether it is possible or impossible to opine in 
the examiner’s report whether an unwilling defendant taking the fifth amendment is doing so as a consequence of physical or mental disorder, disease, or defect; (2) this issue requires special knowledge and a technical background in psychology; (3) a mistake will cause the loss of freedom of a mentally disabled citizen which is a due process violation, citing Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162 (1975); State v. Castro, 93 Hawai' i 454, 5 
P.3d 444 (2000); and (4) where special knowledge and a technical background are needed medical testimony is considered mandatory, citing Craft v. Peebles, M.D., 78 Hawai' i 287, 298, 893 P.2d 138, 
149 (1995) (holding that the plaintiff in a medical malpractice action carries the burden of proving negligence by reference to expert medical testimony). Thus, he argues, “[w]hether it’s possible or not to identify the cause of a Petitioner’s unwillingness to participate in a mental evaluation this fact/opinion must be reported in the doctor’s report and yet for Petitioner this was not the case[.]” According to Petitioner, “[a] doctor’s opinion on whether it [is] possible this conduct [is] the consequence of a mental or physical disease, disorder or defect . . . is clearly required by H.R.S. § 704-404(5).”
16 
VI.
 
In its Answering Brief, Respondent initially contended
 
(1) “[Petitioner] is judicially estopped from complaining about
 
16
 Petitioner argues that the judgment should be vacated, the case
 
remanded, and that Petitioner should be re-examined.
 
20
         
           
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the [court’s] findings that [Petitioner] was fit to proceed as
 
17
 and (2) “assuming,
 [Petitioner] did not contest this finding”  
arguendo, that [Petitioner] is able to obtain plain-error review
 
of the court’s finding of fitness, it was within the [court’s]
 discretion to find Petitioner fit to proceed on August 19, 2008.” 
Neither Petitioner in his Application nor the ICA in its decision
 refer to plain error review. 
Instead, the ICA decided the merits
 
of the questions raised on appeal. Accordingly, it must be
 concluded that, assuming its relevance, the ICA impliedly granted
 plain error review. 
On the merits, Respondent argues the court did not
 
abuse its discretion when it determined that Petitioner was fit
 to proceed with trial. 
Respondent asserts that although
 
Petitioner refused to cooperate and thus prevented the court-
appointed psychologist from completing the evaluations,
 Petitioner had an extended colloquy with the court at the August
 19, 2008 hearing, which provided a reasonable basis for the
 court’s conclusion that Petitioner was fit to proceed to trial.
 
According to Respondent, the inability of the 
psychologist to complete the examination due to Petitioner’s unwillingness to cooperate does not prevent the court from reaching its own conclusion. Respondent contends that the ultimate determination of a defendant’s fitness is reserved for the trial court, citing State v. Madden, 97 Hawai' i 53, 68, 33 
17
 However, it should be noted that Petitioner appeared pro se and it
 
was two different district court judges who called for Petitioner’s mental
examination.
 
21
         
         
             
           
            
          
          
             
            
             
         
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d 549, 564 (App. 2001) (holding that the ultimate
 
determination of a defendant’s fitness to proceed is reserved to
 the trial court), and that inferences could be drawn from
 examiner’s report and from Petitioner’s conduct that Petitioner
 was not suffering from a physical or mental disease.
18
 
VII.
 
A review of the July 11, 2008 report indicates that
 
there is no opinion offered by examiner in response to the
 directive in the June 20, 2008 Order that the report “shall
 include, if possible, an opinion as to whether [Petitioner]’s
 unwillingness was the result of physical or mental disease,
 disorder or defect.” Likewise, there is no opinion rendered by
 examiner in response to the July 18, 2008 Order that, as provided
 in the already filed Order for Examination and Appointing
 Examiner(s), the report “shall include, if possible, an opinion
 as to whether [Petitioner]’s unwillingness was the result of
 physical or mental disease, disorder or defect.” Here, no
 opinion was rendered on whether Petitioner’s unwillingness was
 due to a mental impediment, or on whether it was possible to
 render such an opinion.
 
18
 Respondent also notes that the United States Supreme Court also
 
leaves it to the trial court to decide whether a defendant is competent to
conduct trial proceedings by him or herself, citing Indiana v. Edwards , 554
U.S. 164, 177-78 (2008). However, Edwards does not aid Respondent because the
 
Court simply held that “the Constitution permits States to insist upon
representation by counsel for those competent enough to stand trial under
[Dusky v. United States , 362 U.S. 402 (1960)] but who still suffer from severe
mental illness to the point where they are not competent to conduct trial
proceedings by themselves.” Id. Edwards does not bear on the question at
issue here--whether the court abused its discretion in determining that
Petitioner was competent to proceed to trial without the benefit of an expert
opinion regarding fitness as required by HRS § 704-404.
 
22
         
         
       
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VIII.
 
In Castro, 93 Hawai' i 454, 459, 5 P.3d 444, 449 (2000) 
(Acoba, J., concurring) [Castro I], in a concurrence subsequently 
approved and adopted by State v. Castro, 93 Hawai' i 424, 428, 5 
P.3d 414, 418 (2000) [Castro II], “the statutory criteria for determining whether a criminal defendant is legally competent to proceed to trial” were explained as follows: 
Pursuant to HRS § 704-403, the trial court must determine
whether the defendant either (1) lacks capacity to
understand the proceedings against him or her; or (2) lacks
capacity to assist in his or her defense.
 
When Petitioner first appeared in court, the two judges 
fulfilled “the duty of the trial court to order [s]ua sponte a 
hearing on competency when what is before it sufficiently indicates that the defendant may be incompetent to stand trial.” State v. Tyrell, 60 Haw. 17, 22, 586 P.2d 1028, 1032 (1978). In that regard, “the question [of] whether a defendant lacks capacity either to understand the proceedings against him or her or, alternatively, to assist in his or her defense ‘is primarily a matter for the professional determination of the examiners appointed by the trial court[.]’” Castro II, 93 Hawai' i at 426, 5 
P.3d at 416 (emphasis added) (citation omitted). Further, “inasmuch as a trial court’s ruling on competency entails its assessment of the reports and testimony of the panel of examiners, as well as its observational assessment of the defendant in court, its ruling [is] reviewable on appeal for an abuse of discretion.” Id. (citing State v. Janto, 92 Hawai' i 19, 
29, 986 P.2d 306, 316 (1999)); see also Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 
23
         
       
   
         
         
             
          
       
         
        
      
        
        
        
          
        
         
        
      
       
         
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
460, 5 P.3d at 450 (“The standard for determining competence is
 
statutorily mandated by HRS Chapter 704 and primarily a matter
 for the professional determination of the examiners appointed by
 the trial court in accordance with HRS Chapter 704. An abuse of
 discretion standard is appropriate because the determination
 relies upon the trial court’s assessment of the testimony of
 expert witnesses and its observational assessment of the
 defendant.”) (Emphases added.)
 
In State v. Wilkerson, 330 S.W.3d 851, 854-55 (Mo. App.
 
19
 the appellate
 2011), involving a similar competence statute,  court held in like circumstances that a trial court errs if it
 proceeds to trial without the report of a psychiatric expert. 
In
 
Missouri, once the trial court is presented with sufficient facts
 to form reasonable cause to believe that the accused lacks the
 
19 Vernon’s Annotated Missouri Statutes (V.A.M.S.) § 552.020 provides
 
in relevant part:
 
2. Whenever any judge has reasonable cause to believe that
the accused lacks mental fitness to proceed, he shall, upon
his own motion or upon motion filed by the state or by or on
behalf of the accused, by order of record, appoint one or
more private psychiatrists or psychologists, as defined in
section 632.005, or physicians with a minimum of one year
training or experience in providing treatment or services to
persons with an intellectual disability or developmental
disability or mental illness, who are neither employees nor
contractors of the department of mental health for purposes
of performing the examination in question, to examine the
accused; or shall direct the director to have the accused so
examined by one or more psychiatrists or psychologists, as
defined in section 632.005, or physicians with a minimum of
one year training or experience in providing treatment or
services to persons with an intellectual disability,
developmental disability, or mental illness. The order shall
direct that a written report or reports of such examination
be filed with the clerk of the court . . . .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
24
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
mental fitness to proceed, the court is mandated to order a
 
mental exam. By statute, court ordered examinations “shall” be
 accompanied by a report or the examination. See id. (citing
 
V.A.M.S. § 552.020). When the defendant in Wilkerson refused to
 cooperate with the psychiatric expert appointed to evaluate his
 competency, the trial court took no further action regarding the
 mental examination of the defendant and instead proceeded to
 trial. Id. at 853. Wilkerson held that the trial court erred in
 
proceeding to trial because it was “bound by the dictates of the
 statute and could not proceed to a determination of competency
 until a . . . mental health report was provided to and considered
 by the trial court upon completion of the mental examination.” 
Id. at 856. 
IX.
 
Here, similarly, HRS § 704-404 provides that “[i]f the
 
examination cannot be conducted by reason of the unwillingness of
 the defendant to participate therein, the report shall so state,
 and shall include, if possible, an opinion as to whether such
 unwillingness of the defendant was the result of physical or
 mental disease, disorder, or defect.” (Emphases added.) The
 language of the statute is mandatory (“shall”) with regard to the
 nature of the report when the defendant is unwilling to
 cooperate. 
Although HRS § 704-404 is mandatory and the mandate is
 
set forth in the court’s orders, the statute and the orders were
 not followed. In his July 11, 2008 report, examiner did not
 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opine as to whether Petitioner’s refusal to participate was a
 
result of a mental defect, nor did he explain whether providing
 such an opinion was possible. This did not comply with HRS §
 704-404(5) or with the court’s June 20, 2008 order. In his
 August 4, 2008 report, examiner again did not explain whether or
 not Petitioner’s refusal to cooperate was due to his
 incompetency, and again did not state whether providing such an
 opinion was possible, contrary to HRS § 704-404(5) and the
 court’s June 20, 2008 and July 18, 2008 orders. 
As noted, the purpose of requiring an expert examiner’s 
report on the question of competency is to “remov[e] from trial the concern that incapacity which is not readily apparent to lay observation will surface during trial proceedings or, much worse, after trial has ended.” Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 462, 5 P.3d at 
452. Here, the risk that Petitioner was incompetent or that his
 
incompetency would surface during trial was significant since, as
 early as May 2008, three months before the court found that
 Petitioner could proceed to trial unrepresented, two judges had
 expressed serious concerns about Petitioner’s mental health. 
Although Petitioner twice refused to cooperate with
 
examiner, the court apparently chose to rely on its own
 observations of Petitioner on August 19, 2008 in determining that
 Petitioner could proceed to trial, instead of requiring examiner
 to complete the report and render an opinion as to whether
 Petitioner’s refusal to cooperate was due to incompetency or as
 to whether it was possible to render such an opinion. 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respectfully, in proceeding without an expert’s opinion, the
 
court did not comply with HRS § 704-404(5) and did not enforce
 its own previous orders. 
X.
 
Arguably, the trial proceedings implicated Petitioner’s 
fitness to understand the proceedings and to mount a defense. Castro II, 93 Hawai' i at 428, 5 P.3d at 418, citing HRS § 707-403. 
From the trial transcript it is apparent that Petitioner failed to understand fundamental matters. As noted above, on the first day of trial on October 30, 2008, Petitioner objected to the introduction of evidence on the ground that one of the charges against him had been dropped. Respondent indicated that it had initially charged Petitioner with two counts, but subsequently dropped one of the counts as duplicative. 
However, when the court reconvened on November 18,
 
2008, Petitioner continued to object during the prosecution’s
 case-in-chief on the ground that one of the charges against him
 had been dismissed. Petitioner told the court, “[T]he one
 evidence has been dismissed by the court, I don’t think it should
 be entered now in evidence at all. . . . You know the only
 evidence that you could admit would be the Case No. 08158229. 
The other Case 081582230 has been dismissed by the prosecution. 
It would be inadmissible evidence.” Respondent again explained
 that two charges had been erroneously duplicated, but that it was
 not submitting that there was any evidence tied to any particular
 charge. The court then denied the objection “because the
 
27
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
evidence presented is one based on the case at trial today.” 
However, after the court denied Petitioner’s objection,
 Petitioner again objected, stating that Respondent’s evidence was
 inadmissible. The court again denied the objection. 
Petitioner also appeared not to understand the charge
 
against him. During the August 19, 2008 hearing before the
 court, Petitioner told the court that he did not understand the
 charge. The court explained to Petitioner, “Possession is
 included, if you read the statute, in the promoting detrimental
 drug in the third degree.” Then, during the first day of trial,
 when Petitioner was cross-examining Officer Leana, Petitioner
 insisted that he had not “promoted” any drugs. The prosecution
 objected to Petitioner’s use of the word “promoted,” and the
 court sustained the objection. After the court sustained the
 objection, Petitioner again asked Officer Leana whether
 Petitioner had been “promoting [marijuana] in any way.” 
Respondent objected and the court sustained the objection. 
Later, when trial resumed on November 18, 2008, during the
 testimony of another of Respondent’s witnesses, Petitioner
 renewed his objection that he had not “promoted” any drugs. The
 court denied the objection. 
Respondent then made its closing argument. When it was
 
Petitioner’s turn to make his closing argument, the first thing
 Petitioner said was, “Yeah, but they’re charging me with
 promotion of a detrimental drug. Is there a difference? Because
 when I was first arrested, I was charged with possessing. . . .” 
28
         
      
           
        
           
          
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court then explained to Petitioner that “promoting” is only
 
the title of the chapter with which he was charged, but that the
 substance of the charged offense was marijuana possession. It is
 apparent from this sequence of events that Petitioner went
 through the trial proceedings without understanding the charges
 against him and believing that he was innocent of the charges. 
The foregoing underscores the need for an expert
 
opinion in assessing whether Petitioner was fit to proceed and
 criminally responsible at the time of the incident. Whether
 Petitioner “lacked the capacity to understand the proceedings” or
 
20
 , is “lacked capacity to assist in his defense,” HRS § 704-403 
“primarily a matter for the professional determination of the 
examiners.” Castro I
, 93 Hawai' i at 460, 5 P.3d at 450. As noted 
the purpose of the expert’s report is to “remov[e] from trial the concern that incapacity” that is not “readily apparent to lay observation” may “surface during trial.” Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 
462, 5 P.3d at 452. 
XI. 
Therefore, while it is true, as Respondent contends,
 
that the duty of determining Petitioner’s fitness to proceed
 ultimately lies with the trial court, HRS § 704-404(2) requires
 the trial court to make that determination with the aid of expert
 
20
 HRS § 704-403 (1993) provides:
 
No person who as a result of a physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect lacks capacity to understand the proceedings
against the person or to assist in the person’s own defense shall
be tried, convicted, or sentenced for the commission of an offense
so long as such incapacity endures.
 
29
         
         
 
          
          
           
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opinion. See Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 461, 5 P.3d at 451. 
However, examiner’s reports did not address whether Petitioner 
was fit to proceed to trial, whether Petitioner could appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct at the time of the alleged conduct, or whether it was possible to render an opinion regarding Petitioner’s competency. Consequently, the court did not have the expert opinion it ordered as to these matters when deciding that Petitioner should proceed to trial. The court was required under HRS §§ 704-404(4) and (5) to obtain the expert’s opinion as to fitness. Petitioner’s refusal to cooperate did not relieve the court of that burden. Otherwise, the reports would not be “adequate for the purpose for which the examination and report[s] were ordered.” Commentary to HRS §§ 704-404(4) and (5).
21 Respectfully, the court’s decision to nevertheless proceed 
to trial under the circumstances was an abuse of discretion. 
XII.
 
In the absence of an express statement by an examiner
 
that the examinee’s refusal to cooperate is or is not the product
 of a physical or mental defect or that it is not possible to
 render an opinion one way or the other, a trial court cannot
 reasonably be assured that an evaluation under HRS 704-404(5) has
 
21
 The commentary to HRS §§ 704-404(4) and 704-404(5) states, in
 
relevant part:
 
Subsections (4) and (5) state explicitly what the report of the
examining physicians shall contain. . . . These subsections are
 
intended to assure the court and the parties ‘that the report will
be adequate for the purpose for which the examinations and report
were ordered.’
 
(Emphasis added).
 
30
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been undertaken by the examiner. Correlatively, an appellate
 
court cannot reasonably infer that the trial court has considered
 whether the examiner has made such a determination if the report
 is silent on this issue. 
Physical and mental competence at the time of trial are 
central to the due process of law. Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 461, 5 
P.3d at 452. The due process guarantee would have little meaning if the trial court were to assume that an examiner performed the requisite evaluation in the absence of an opinion on that issue. Likewise, we cannot assume from the lack of any inquiry by the court that the court must have decided examiner performed the requisite evaluation and concluded that it was impossible to arrive at an opinion concerning the reason for Petitioner’s recalcitrance, in the absence of a statement to that effect in the report. Nothing in the record indicates that examiner arrived at an opinion on that matter, or that, if he did, that that opinion was communicated to the court. The court must be fully informed of the scope of the examiner’s opinion, inasmuch as the court may exercise other options in obtaining a further opinion. 
If a defendant persists in refusing to participate in a
 
personal examination and the examiner states that he or she
 cannot determine whether the defendant’s lack of cooperation is
 due to a mental illness, then the court should order that the
 examiner render an opinion based on the “medical, mental health,
 social, police, and juvenile records, including those expunged,
 
31
         
         
       
         
      
         
         
       
        
         
        
   
        
 
       
      
      
       
       
      
   
          
              
             
           
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and other pertinent records in the custody of public agencies,”
 
22
 the court ordinarily obtains and
 which, under HRS § 704-404(8),  
makes available for inspection to an examiner. As stated in
 Wilkerson
,
 
In the instant case, if Wilkerson had persisted in his
refusal to cooperate with the mental health examining
expert, the expert could have utilized the transcript of the
pretrial matters, police reports, interviews of witnesses,
and any other documentation deemed relevant to the expert to
form an opinion on the competency of Wilkerson . Failing to
make any additional effort to complete Wilkerson's mental
competency evaluation and provide the trial court a section
552.020 report prior to trial, however, does not comply with
the statutory mandate of section 552.020 and results in
reversible plain error.
 
(Emphasis added.) This alterative method would appear
 
appropriate for determining fitness and penal responsibility.23
 
XIII.
 
It may be noted that Petitioner was sentenced to five
 
days in jail. Accordingly, it would appear Petitioner has served
 his sentence. The parties did not raise, and the ICA did not
 decide, whether this moots the case. 
A case is not moot if the question presented is likely
 
to recur but escape full review. Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v.
 
22 HRS § 704-404(8) provides in relevant part as follows:
 
(8) The court shall obtain all existing medical,
mental health, social, police, and juvenile records,
including those expunged, and other pertinent records
in the custody of public agencies, notwithstanding any
other statutes, and make such records available for
inspection by the examiners . . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
23
 In the situation where the examiner does not render any opinion,
 
at least two alternatives are open to the trial courts. The trial court may
appoint a different examiner, or, as set forth above, the court may order that
the examiner attempt to render an opinion from matters obtained pursuant to
HRS § 704-404(8).
 
32
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Board of Water Supply, 99 Hawai' i 191, 196, 53 P.3d 799, 804 
(2002) (recognizing exception to mootness doctrine “where a 
challenged governmental action would evade full review because the passage of time would prevent any single plaintiff from remaining subject to the restriction complained of for the period necessary to complete the lawsuit”) (internal citation omitted). A case is also not moot if there is a reasonable probability that 
there will be prejudicial collateral consequences for the 
parties. In re Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai' i 1, 
193 P.3d 839 (2008). 
The question raised by Petitioner could recur but
 
escape review. Whether the court abused its discretion in
 finding Petitioner fit to proceed is practicably susceptible to
 review only after conviction and sentencing. Thus, the exception
 to mootness for questions that could recur but escape review
 applies in this case. 
Further, unless reviewed, Petitioner’s conviction is
 
reasonably likely to result in collateral consequences. Criminal
 convictions have collateral consequences even after sentences
 have been served. See Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 55-56
 
(1968) (“Although [a defendant’s prison] term has been served,
 the results of the conviction may persist. Subsequent
 convictions may carry heavier penalties; civil rights may be
 affected. As the power to remedy an invalid sentence exists, a
 defendant is entitled to an opportunity to attempt to show that
 his conviction was invalid.”) (internal citation omitted) (cited
 
33
         
 
    
        
       
       
       
     
         
          
         
         
     
         
       
        
           
             
              
            
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
approvingly in Spencer v. Kemna, 523 U.S. 1, 55 (1998)). Here,
 
Petitioner could have been acquitted by reason of physical or
 mental disease, disorder, or defect, see HRS § 704-402 (1993),
24
 
rather than found guilty, or, conceivably, the charge could have
 been dismissed if Petitioner remained unfit to proceed.
25
 
Petitioner’s conviction adds to his criminal record, and could
 result in lengthier future criminal penalties. These collateral
 consequences prevent Petitioner’s case from becoming moot. Cf.
 
Lethem, 119 Hawai' i at 8, 193 P.3d at 846 (holding case was not 
moot although domestic violence temporary restraining order had
 expired because there was a reasonable probability that the order
 could affect defendant’s reputation). 
XIV.
 
Petitioner is not foreclosed on remand from relying on
 
24 HRS § 704-402 provides:
 
§ 704-402. Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect
excluding responsibility is an affirmative defense; form of
verdict and judgment when finding of irresponsibility is
made
 
(1) Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect
excluding responsibility is an affirmative defense.
 (2) When the defense provided for by subsection (1) is
submitted to a jury, the court shall, if requested by the
defendant, instruct the jury as to the consequences to the
defendant of an acquittal on the ground of physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
responsibility.
 
(3) When the defendant is acquitted on the ground of
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
responsibility, the verdict and the judgment shall so state.
 
25
 Pursuant to HRS § 704-406(3) (Supp. 2011), if a defendant who has
 
been found unfit to proceed regains his or her fitness to proceed, the court
may, “if [it] is of the view that so much time has elapsed since the
commitment or release on conditions of the defendant that it would be unjust
to resume the proceeding, [dismiss] the charge . . . .”
 
34
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRS § 704-402(1), which affords an affirmative defense for 
“physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding responsibility.” As noted, although the court twice asked examiner to opine on whether Petitioner was able to appreciate the wrongfulness of his actions at the time of the charged offense, examiner did not proceed past the fitness issue. Because there was no expert opinion rendered concerning whether Petitioner could appreciate the wrongfulness of his actions at the time of the offense, Petitioner may still rely on HRS § 704­402(1) on remand. See Castro I, 93 Hawai' i at 464, 5 P.3d at 454 
(explaining that “[the d]efendant [was not] foreclosed on remand from relying on the HRS § 704-402 defense” because the expert panel did not perform a responsibility examination). 
XV. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s September
 
9, 2011 judgment and the court’s November 18, 2008 judgment, and
 remand the case to the court for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion. 
Jack Schweigert, 
for petitioner/
defendant-appellant. /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
/s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 Brian Vincent, Deputy 
Prosecuting Attorney,
for respondent/
plaintiff-appellee.
 
35
 