________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-30589 18-JUL-2013 
08:47 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
--—o0o--­
HEATHER R. WINFREY, Individually and As Personal Representative
for the Estate of JASMINE ROSE ANNE FRY, and SAMUEL J. FRY, JR.,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
GGP ALA MOANA LLC dba ALA MOANA CENTER,
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee.
 
SCWC-30589
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(ICA NO. 30589; CIV. NO. 06-1-0017)
 
JULY 18, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND MCKENNA, JJ., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE TRADER, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY;
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCKENNA, J.
 
I.
 Introduction
 
Jasmine Rose Anne Fry (“Fry”) somehow accessed the
 
rooftop of Ala Moana Center (“Center”), entered into and became
 
trapped in an exhaust duct above the Makai Market Food Court
 (“Food Court”), then died from hyperthermia and respiratory
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
compromise. Her parents, Heather R. Winfrey and Samuel J. Fry,
 
Jr. (collectively, “Plaintiffs”), sued GGP Ala Moana LLC dba Ala
 Moana Center (“Ala Moana”). Before a trial date had been set,
 Ala Moana moved for summary judgment on the grounds that (1) it
 did not owe Fry a duty of care because she was a trespasser; and
 (2) it could not be held liable for its affirmative attempts to
 render aid. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit
 court”) granted summary judgment in favor of Ala Moana on all of
 Plaintiffs’ claims.
1 The Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”)
 
affirmed on appeal, concluding that Ala Moana did not owe Fry a
 legal duty under any theory of liability.
 
We hold that summary judgment was properly granted on
 
Plaintiffs’ general premises liability claims against Ala Moana
 as a possessor of land because: (1) Ala Moana owed no duty to a
 person not reasonably anticipated to be on the rooftop and, based
 on the admissible evidence, Fry could not have reasonably been
 anticipated to be on the rooftop; (2) even if Ala Moana should
 have reasonably anticipated Fry’s presence on the rooftop, it
 still could not be held liable because Fry’s entry into the
 exhaust vent was not reasonably foreseeable; therefore, any
 breach of its general duty as a possessor of land was not a
 substantial factor in causing Fry’s injuries and/or death; (3)
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
2
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether or not Fry had the mental capacity to voluntarily enter
 
the exhaust duct is irrelevant to Ala Moana’s general premises
 
liability duty; (4) the doctrine of res ipsa loquitor is
 inapplicable; and (5) Plaintiffs’ other theories as to how Fry
 
ended up on the rooftop are speculative and constitute
 intentional torts for which Ala Moana cannot be held vicariously
 liable.
 
We also hold, however, that pursuant to section 338 of
 
the Restatement (Second) of Torts, adopted by this court in
 Farrior v. Payton, 57 Haw. 620, 562 P.2d 779 (1977), as a
 possessor of land in immediate control of the heat, smoke, and
 gasses emanating from stoves in the Food Court into the exhaust
 duct, and knowing of Fry’s presence in dangerous proximity to
 those forces, Ala Moana had a duty to exercise reasonable care to
 control those forces to prevent them from doing harm to Fry, even
 if she was a trespasser. Genuine issues of material fact exist
 as to (1) whether Ala Moana breached its duty under section 338;
 and (2) if so, whether such breach was a substantial factor in
 causing Fry’s injuries and/or death.
 
In addition, we hold that, pursuant to section 314A(3)
 
of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, as a possessor of land who
 held its land open to the public, Ala Moana had a duty to members
 of the public who entered the Center in response to its
 
3
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
invitation to take reasonable action to give first aid after it
 
knew or had reason to know that such persons were ill or injured,
 and to care for such persons until they could be cared for by
 others. Genuine issues of material fact exist to (1) whether Fry
 was a member of the public who entered the Center in response to
 Ala Moana’s invitation; (2) if so, whether Ala Moana breached its
 duties under section 314A(3); and (3) if so, whether such breach
 was a substantial factor in causing Fry’s injuries and/or death.
 
Therefore, we vacate in part and affirm in part the
 
ICA’s judgment in favor of Ala Moana, and remand the case to the
 circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
II. Background
 
A. Factual Background
 
Reviewing the law de novo and the facts and in the
 
light most favorable to Plaintiffs, pursuant to the standards
 
2
governing appellate review of summary judgment motions,  the
following factual background can be gleaned from the evidence in
 the record.
3
 
2
 See Section III, infra.
 
3
 Ala Moana’s former counsel had initially filed a motion for
summary judgment. Substitute counsel withdrew this motion without prejudice,
then later filed a revised motion. Portions of this factual background are
contained in submissions from the withdrawn motion for summary judgment.
 
4
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On Saturday, September 3, 2005, at around five or ten
 
minutes after 2:00 p.m., Cary Oshiro (“Oshiro”), a maintenance
 
worker employed by Ala Moana, responded to a call from the Poi
 Bowl restaurant at the Food Court indicating its exhaust fan was
 not working. Oshiro was at Poi Bowl for less than a minute. 
While there, security officers were also responding to a smoke
 alarm at Little Café Siam, next door. Because the two
 restaurants shared the same exhaust vent, Oshiro proceeded to the
 rooftop to determine whether the exhaust fan was functioning.
 
Before proceeding to the Bally rooftop, where these
 
ducts eventually ended, Oshiro called the security control center
 to explain that he would be accessing a secured gate to the
 stairwell.
4 He then used an electronic swipe card to open the
 
gate and proceeded upstairs.5 Normally, the magnetic lock on the
 
gate was wired to a silent alarm system that would signal whether
 the gate was open or closed, and the lock was monitored in the
 security control center. That afternoon, however, the alarm for
 
4 According to Ala Moana’s unwritten policies and procedures,
employees were required to call the control center before accessing any of the
rooftops or other secured areas of the Center. On one occasion, over ten
years ago, an employee forgot to call security before accessing one of the
magnetic locks and the alarm went off.
 
5
 The metal gate leading to the stairwell could be opened by either
a Matco security key or a swipe card, both of which were individually numbered
or coded so that the owner could be identified if a key were lost. If a swipe
card were used, certain data would be recorded including the identity of the
card holder and time of access. If a traditional key were used, no data would
be recorded.
 
5
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the gate was not functioning properly, and there was no video
 
surveillance of the area. Ala Moana’s security and maintenance
 
personnel were the only people with access to these areas and,
 
during the relevant time period, no keys or access cards had been
 reported lost or stolen.
6
 
Oshiro proceeded to unlock a padlock on the hatch that
 
opened onto the rooftop. When he reached the rooftop, he checked
 the exhaust fan and determined that it was not running. A young
 woman, later identified as Fry, appeared from behind the fan. 
Fry was barefoot, dressed in shorts and a tank top, and had
 grease smeared on her feet, hands, hair and face. She did not
 appear to have any noticeable injuries.
 
Oshiro asked Fry what she was doing on the rooftop, and
 
she responded that she was a contractor hired to clean grease
 from the fan. When Oshiro asked whether security knew she was
 working on the rooftop, she said, “Yes.” When he asked who had
 contracted her to do the work, Fry responded, “A guy named Joe.” 
These answers struck Oshiro as odd because that type of work
 typically was not done during business hours, when the
 restaurants needed the exhaust fans. Oshiro then asked how she
 had gotten onto the rooftop, but Fry did not answer. He repeated
 
6
 When Ala Moana personnel or contractors accessed the rooftop, they
would leave the gate slightly ajar until they completed their work, and they
would again call security once they left the area and closed the gate.
Additionally, the padlock on the hatch would be left open when contractors or
personnel were working on the roof.
 
6
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the question two or three times, and she responded, “No, it
 
doesn’t matter.” Oshiro noticed that Fry was jumpy and seemed
 nervous. 
One to three minutes after first encountering Fry on
 
the rooftop, Oshiro called security to verify her story. As he
 did, Fry climbed on top of the exhaust duct and began jumping up
 and down. Oshiro asked her what she was doing, but she did not
 respond. He then asked her to come down, and she climbed off the
 duct.
 
Charles (or Kazu) Yokoyama (“Yokoyama”), a senior
 
maintenance mechanic, joined Oshiro on the rooftop, and Oshiro
 explained the situation to him. In the meantime, Fry had climbed
 back onto and started jumping forcefully on the duct. Yokoyama
 asked her to come down and talk to them, but Fry did not respond. 
As Fry continued jumping, Yokoyama stepped away to call security.
 
Fry then told Oshiro that there was a baby in the duct. 
Oshiro asked her what she was talking about, and Fry responded,
 “No, nothing. You know, it doesn’t matter.” At this point, two
 to five minutes had passed since Oshiro first encountered Fry. 
Eventually, the force of Fry’s jumping caused the sheet metal to
 collapse inward, creating a hole about six to eight inches high
 and two feet wide. Fry slid her feet inside the opening and
 squeezed into the duct as the metal bent under her weight. Upon
 witnessing this, Oshiro again called security, and asked that a
 
7
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
security officer be sent to the roof.
 
In the meantime, Derek Hangai (“Hangai”), in the
 
security control center, checked Ala Moana’s records to determine
 
whether any contractors had been scheduled to work on the
 rooftop. As he confirmed with the Poi Bowl and Little Café Siam
 that neither restaurant was aware of any work scheduled that day,
 Oshiro called to report that Fry had climbed into the exhaust
 
duct.  Hangai stated he did not remember whether he asked
 
Lieutenant Henry Tancayo (“Tancayo”) or dispatcher Brian Babauta
 
(“Babauta”) if he should call emergency services upon learning
 that Fry had climbed into the duct.
 
Ala Moana security officer Lukela Bagood (“Bagood”)
 
arrived on the rooftop just as Fry was entering the exhaust duct. 
Bagood had been instructed by his supervisor, Tancayo, to arrest
 or detain Fry if possible. Bagood relayed to Tancayo that Fry
 was inside the duct, but he did not recall whether anyone asked
 
if they should call emergency services.   Security officer Jowana
 
Lobendahn (“Lobendahn”) responded later, at approximately 2:35
 
p.m. Lobendahn stuck her head into an opening in the duct and
 
attempted to locate Fry.   Lobendahn asked Fry if she was injured,
 
and Fry responded “No.” Lobendahn then continued to communicate
 
with Fry and told her to stay where she was, but Fry stopped
 responding. After two or three minutes, however, Oshiro and
 Yokoyama heard a loud banging from inside the duct, followed by
8
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
silence.
 
In an attempt to locate Fry, Lobendahn, Yokoyama, and
 
Oshiro followed the route of the ventilation duct inside the
 
building. Lobendahn went one level down to the Gucci corridor,
 where she kicked and banged on the duct to see if Fry could hear
 her. She then returned to the rooftop to see if Bagood could get
 
Fry to respond.  Yokoyama ran downstairs to the parking lot
 
level. Oshiro ran to the Food Court where the duct eventually
 
ended. Bagood and Lobendahn remained on the Bally rooftop for
 around twenty minutes until the control center directed them to
 Little Café Siam.
 
When Oshiro arrived at Little Café Siam, the employees
 
reported that the exhaust duct above the stove was moving. 
Oshiro saw that someone was pushing at the sheet metal from the
 inside. After unscrewing the access panel to the duct and
 opening up the sheet metal, Oshiro noticed that Fry was trapped
 in a small space in the stove hood, on the other side of a narrow
 metal bar. Fry was responsive and said something, but Oshiro
 could not recall what she said. Oshiro could not recall what
 time he arrived at the restaurant.
 
Although Oshiro and Yokoyama said that the stoves were
 
off when they arrived at Little Café Siam, Lobendahn, who arrived
 later, stated:
 
One stove ewa of where the female was located had [four]
 
9
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
pots with hot water. [Second] stove directly under the
female had [two] large cooking woks that had nothing in it.
We had the employees of Café Siam remove cooking items out
of the way and turned off all stoves and gasses. 
In addition, according to Bagood, the stoves and ovens at Poi
 
Bowl were still on when he arrived downstairs.
 
After restaurant employees were directed to turn off
 
the stoves, Lobendahn pulled down a metal panel underneath Fry so
 she could get some air, and held her hand in an attempt to
 reassure her and keep her conscious. Lobendahn asked Fry for her
 name, age, where she was from, and why she was on the rooftop. 
Fry responded that her name was Dallas, she was twenty-two years
 old, and she was from Kona. She said that she had been on the
 rooftop because she wanted to be free. She also said that she
 had a miscarriage, but did not want to talk about it because it
 made her cry. Fry later said that she was sorry, she did not
 want to die, and please get her out. Lobendahn reassured her
 that everything was going to be okay and they would get her out.
 
When patrons were injured, Ala Moana’s procedure was to
 
have security call emergency services, which would arrive on
 scene within a few minutes. Bagood was therefore surprised that
 when he arrived at the Food Court, emergency service personnel
 were not already there. In fact, no one from Ala Moana called
 emergency services until 2:54 p.m.; and when the call was made,
 it was to inform the Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) that a
 woman had broken into a duct at Ala Moana Center and was crawling
 
10
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
through the duct without authorization.  HPD was asked to send an
 
officer to the rooftop in case the woman decided to climb out of
 
the duct. Moments later, however, HPD was informed that the
 woman was attempting to crawl down the duct into the Food Court,
 
and Ala Moana asked that the officer report to Little Café Siam.
  
At approximately 2:57 p.m., security personnel called
 
Emergency Medical Services (“EMS”) to request an ambulance, and
 
to report that an unknown female had gotten into the exhaust fans
 on the rooftop and had either slipped or fallen down the duct. 
Security reported that maintenance was attempting to remove the
 woman from the exhaust duct. 
EMS called the Honolulu Fire
 
Department (“HFD”) to request assistance in extricating Fry from
 the duct. As EMS was explaining the situation to HFD, an Ala
 Moana security officer said, “Oh, looks like we got her out,” and
 then, “You know what ambulance would be good for now. It looks
 like she’s okay, but –....” According to the transcript of this
 call, Ala Moana security could hear what EMS was relaying to HFD. 
When EMS told HFD that it was no longer needed because Fry had
 been removed from the exhaust duct, the security officer did not
 correct EMS to request that HFD or EMS respond to the scene
 
immediately.
 
At approximately 3:00 p.m., another call was placed
 
from Ala Moana security, this time directly to HFD, requesting
 
assistance in extricating Fry from the duct. Paramedics arrived
 
11
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
on the scene at 3:06 p.m., and HFD arrived at 3:10 p.m. Once
 
EMS, HPD, and HFD arrived, Oshiro, Yokoyama, and Lobendahn
 stepped away as rescue services personnel attempted to extricate
 Fry from the duct. Fry was finally removed from the exhaust duct
 at approximately 4:53 p.m. Upon removal from the duct, she
 immediately became unresponsive, and was transported to The
 Queen’s Medical Center in critical condition at 5:09 p.m. Fry
 
was asystolic during transport to the hospital, and resuscitation
 
efforts failed. She arrived at the hospital at 5:28 p.m., and
 
was pronounced dead at 5:33 p.m.
 
An autopsy performed on Fry indicated that the cause of
 
death was the combined effects of hyperthermia and respiratory
 
compromise. Fry was twenty-two years old at the time of her
 
death, and was approximately six to eight weeks pregnant. The
 
autopsy indicated that no internal injuries caused or contributed
 to Fry’s death, although the extrication process left various
 scrapes and bruises on her skin. In addition, blisters on her
 skin were consistent with superficial burns from contact with a
 
hot surface. The medical examiner concluded that information
 
regarding the circumstances leading to and surrounding her death
 
suggested an acute psychotic episode of unknown etiology. No
 stimulant drugs known to cause an acute psychotic episode were
 detected in Fry’s blood or vitreous fluid.
 
A subsequent investigation by HPD and Ala Moana could
12
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not conclusively determine the means by which Fry accessed the
 
Bally rooftop. Upon further examination of the rooftop that
 
afternoon, Fry’s belongings, including her ID, toiletries,
 
clothes, perfume, day planner, and purse, were found scattered in
 three drains on the rooftop. Among the items found was a
 screwdriver.
 
Ala Moana personnel did not know of any unauthorized
 
entry or trespass to the rooftop or the ventilation system before
 
this incident. They also did not know how Fry could have gotten
 
to the rooftop other than through the secured gate and hatch. 
Other evidence indicated, however, that it was possible to access
 the Bally rooftop from an adjacent building. In response to an
 interrogatory asking how Fry got to the rooftop, Ala Moana
 surmised that Fry likely entered areas that were marked for
 authorized personnel only and climbed on the Center’s rooftop
 until she reached the Bally rooftop by (a) entering a fourth
 floor hallway near the Godiva store that led to a rooftop door,
 which was propped open by air conditioning contractors, then
 traversing the rooftops to the Bally rooftop, or (b) entering a
 fourth floor hallway that led to a ledge that allowed her to
 access the rooftop directly across from the Bally rooftop, then
 climbing across the Neiman Marcus tiled rooftop over to the Bally
 rooftop.
 
13
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Plaintiffs Heather R. Winfrey, individually and as
 
personal representative for Fry’s estate, and Samuel J. Fry, Jr.
 
filed suit against Ala Moana in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit. Plaintiffs asserted claims against Ala Moana for:
 wrongful death (Count I); negligent failure to provide a safe
 premises (Count II); negligent failure (a) to properly train or
 supervise employees, and (b) to care for Fry and her unborn child
 during the incident (Count III); intentional/negligent infliction
 of emotional distress (Count IV); and punitive damages (Count V).
 
Before discovery had been completed and before a trial
 
date had been set, Ala Moana filed the subject motion for summary
 judgment, arguing, in general, that (1) it did not owe Fry a
 legal duty because she was a trespasser not reasonably
 anticipated to be on the Bally rooftop, and (2) it could not be
 held liable for its attempts to aid Fry after she became stuck in
 the exhaust duct. Specifically, Ala Moana asserted that there
 could be no liability arising from its ownership of the property
 because Fry had been a trespasser, she was not reasonably
 anticipated to be in a secure area to which only authorized
 personnel had access, the limited duty owed to trespassers did
 not apply where there had been no prior history of trespass to
 the area, and it did not create or maintain the condition that
 
harmed Fry.  Ala Moana further argued that it did not have an
 
14
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
affirmative duty to intervene to protect Fry from her own 
actions. Finally, it argued that it could not be held liable for any attempts to aid Fry because the duty to assist an injured person was limited and any attempts to render aid were protected by a Good Samaritan statute, Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 
663-1.5. 
In opposition, Plaintiffs argued that Ala Moana had
 
implicitly taken custody of Fry because Ala Moana personnel had
 
exclusive control over and access to the rooftop. They claimed
 
that Fry was induced to the rooftop and locked outside by an Ala
 
Moana employee, and that she was suffering from the effects of
 heat stroke when maintenance and security personnel found her. 
Plaintiffs argued that Ala Moana had a duty to use reasonable
 care for the safety of all persons reasonably anticipated on the
 premises. In addition, they contended that Ala Moana voluntarily
 undertook to ensure the safety of its customers, and the
 reasonableness of its actions in rendering aid was a question of
 
fact. They also argued that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitor
 applied because Fry could not have been locked on the rooftop but
 
for Ala Moana’s negligence. Finally, they argued that the
 circuit court had erred in denying their request for a
 continuance to conduct additional discovery, including various
 
15
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7In opposing Ala Moana’s motion for summary judgment, Plaintiffs
explained that they had been unable to depose all of the relevant individuals
involved in the incident—including security officers who responded to theincident or dispatched emergency services from the control center, the rankingadministrator who answered Plaintiffs’ interrogatories, and Ala Moana’s Chief
of Security.  Before the ICA, Plaintiffs again raised the issue of incompletediscovery.  Plaintiffs do not specifically raise this issue in their
application for writ of certiorari; based on the analysis below, incompletediscovery is relevant to some but not other issues arising from Plaintiffs’theories of liability.
16depositions.7
Ala Moana replied, inter alia, that the evidence
established that Fry was a trespasser, and that any allegation
that she was locked on the rooftop by an Ala Moana employee
relied on pure conjecture rather than reasonable inferences.  It
claimed that Plaintiffs’ characterization of the facts distorted
the evidence in the record.  It reiterated that Ala Moana did not
owe a duty based on premises liability because Fry was not
reasonably anticipated to be on the rooftop, and that Plaintiffs’
other theories of liability were without merit where there was no
evidence Ala Moana allowed Fry to access the rooftop and Fry
voluntarily broke into the exhaust duct. 
After a hearing on this motion, the circuit court
orally granted summary judgment in favor of Ala Moana on all
claims based on premises liability and intentional conduct.  The
court declined to grant summary judgment on any remaining claims
based on a duty to render aid.  It noted that, pursuant to Lundy
v. Adamar of New Jersey,  34 F.3d 1173 (3d Cir. 1994), a landowner
has a duty to render aid once it becomes aware of a person***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
injured on its property. The court stated that this duty might
 
have required Ala Moana to take affirmative action upon learning
 of Fry’s presence on the rooftop, and it declined to shield Ala
 Moana from liability through HRS § 663-1.5, a Good Samaritan
 statute which generally precludes civil liability against a
 person rendering first aid.
 
The circuit court entered an order granting summary
 
judgment in favor of Ala Moana on Count II (negligence in failing
 to provide a safe premises) and part of Count IV (intentional
 infliction of emotional distress). However, it denied summary
 judgment on Count I (wrongful death), Count III (negligence in
 failing to properly train/supervise employees or otherwise care
 for Fry), part of Count IV (negligent infliction of emotional
 distress), and Count V (punitive damages).
 
In the meantime, Ala Moana filed a motion for 
reconsideration, arguing that Plaintiffs’ remaining claims should be dismissed pursuant to Moyle v. Y&Y Hyup Shin Corp., 118 Hawai
'i 385, 191 P.3d 1062 (2008). Ala Moana argued that, based 
on Moyle, it could not be held liable for its affirmative attempts to render aid absent a showing of gross negligence or wanton acts or omissions. Plaintiffs, however, argued that Moyle was distinguishable because it involved an incident occurring outside the defendant’s premises, a criminal act by a third 
party, and a failure to act by defendant’s employees. 
17
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Upon considering these arguments, the circuit court
 
entered an order granting summary judgment in favor of Ala Moana
 
on the remaining counts pursuant to Moyle. The court then
 entered final judgment in favor of Ala Moana on all of
 Plaintiffs’ claims.
 
C. The ICA Decision
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs and Ala Moana essentially
 
repeated their arguments to the circuit court. In a summary
 
disposition order (“SDO”), the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s
 final judgment in favor of Ala Moana. The ICA concluded, in
 relevant part, that Ala Moana did not take Fry into custody based
 on Plaintiffs’ unsupported allegations that Ala Moana employees
 were responsible for bringing Fry to the rooftop; Ala Moana did
 not owe a duty of care under a general premises liability theory
 because the rooftop was secured by a set of locked doors, Fry was
 not authorized to be on the rooftop, and Plaintiffs produced no
 evidence that Ala Moana should have reasonably anticipated her
 presence on the rooftop; Ala Moana did not voluntarily assume a
 duty of care for Fry’s safety; there was no duty to render aid
 because there was no special relationship between Ala Moana and
 
Fry; and the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur was inapplicable where
 Fry’s death was caused by her own voluntarily actions in entering
 
the exhaust duct against the warnings of Ala Moana employees. In
 
18
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
addition, the ICA concluded that the parties’ arguments regarding 
Moyle were moot because summary judgment could be affirmed based on the absence of a duty to render aid under Lee v. Corregedore, 83 Hawai
'i 154, 925 P.2d 324 (1996). 
D. Issues on Certiorari
 
Plaintiffs argue to this court that, viewing the facts
 
in the light most favorable to them, the ICA gravely erred in
 affirming summary judgment because there were genuine issues of
 material fact as to whether Fry acted voluntarily when she
 entered the exhaust duct and whether she was reasonably
 anticipated to be on the rooftop. They argue that the ICA erred
 
in dismissing their theory of res ipsa loquitur because the facts
 supported an inference that Fry would not have been on the
 
rooftop but for Ala Moana’s negligence.  Finally, Plaintiffs
 
argue that the ICA erred in concluding that Ala Moana did not owe
 
Fry a special-relationship duty to protect or warn against
 dangers, which it knew or should have known posed a substantial
 risk of harm and over which it exercised immediate control.
 
Ala Moana, on the other hand, contends that Plaintiffs’
 
legal theories are grounded in baseless assumptions rather than
 admissible facts. It argues that the ICA properly concluded that
 Fry was not authorized to be on the rooftop, that she voluntarily
 entered the exhaust duct, and that her presence could not have
19
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been reasonably anticipated by Ala Moana. Ala Moana also
 
maintains that it did not owe a duty of care under a theory of
 general premises liability; there was no special relationship
 which would trigger a duty to render aid; and the duty to protect
 against forces over which a possessor of land is in immediate
 control was inapplicable.
 
III. Standard of Review
 
A motion for summary judgment is reviewed de novo, 
under the same standard applied by the trial court. State v. 
Tradewinds Elec. Serv. & Contracting, 80 Hawai
'i 218, 222, 908 
P.2d 1204, 1208 (1995). See Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(“HRCP”) Rule 56. “Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Pacific Int’l Serv. Corp. v. Hurip, 76 Hawai
'i 209, 213, 873 P.2d 
88, 92 (1994) (citation omitted). A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting an essential element of a cause of action asserted by one of the parties. Guajardo v. AIG Hawai
'i Ins. Co., 118 Hawai 'i 196, 201, 
187 P.3d 580, 585 (2008). 
On a motion for summary judgment, the court must view
 
20
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. 
First Ins. Co. of Hawai 'i v. Sariaslani, 80 Hawai 'i 491, 494, 911 
P.2d 126, 129 (1996). “[T]he court is permitted to draw only those inferences of which the evidence is reasonably susceptible and it may not resort to speculation.” Pioneer Mill Co. v. Dow, 
90 Hawai
'i 289, 295, 978 P.2d 727, 733 (1999) (citation omitted). 
The burden lies upon the moving party to show that no 
genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim and that, based on the undisputed facts, he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Sariaslani, 80 Hawai
'i at 493, 911 P.2d at 128. Only once the 
moving party has satisfied its initial burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to show specific facts that present a genuine issue for trial. Id. 
When a summary judgment motion is filed before the 
discovery deadline, a HRCP Rule 56(f) continuance provides the means by which a non-moving party can assure that she has had adequate time to conduct discovery before the motion is decided. Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai
'i 46, 63, 292 P.3d 1276, 1293 (2013). 
IV. Discussion
 A negligence action lies only where there is a duty
 
owed by the defendant to the plaintiff. Birmingham v. Fodor’s
 
Travel Publ’ns, 73 Haw. 359, 366, 833 P.2d 70, 74 (1992). The
 
21
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
existence of a duty is a question of law, which this court
 
reviews de novo. Id.
 
In recognizing the existence of a duty, this court is
 
guided by several basic principles:
 
First, the existence of a duty, that is, whether such a relation
exists between the parties that the community will impose a legal
obligation upon one for the benefit of the other—or, more simply,
whether the interest of a plaintiff who has suffered invasion is
entitled to legal protection at the expense of a defendant—is
entirely a question of law. Second, whether a duty exists is a
question of fairness that involves a weighing of the nature of the
risk, and the public interest in the proposed solution. Third, we
will not impose a new duty upon members of our society without any
logical, sound, and compelling reasons taking into consideration
the social and human relationships of our society.
 
Hao v. Campbell Estate, 76 Hawai 'i 77, 80, 869 P.2d 216, 219 
(1994) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets 
omitted). 
A. General Premises Liability Claim
 
An occupier of land has a duty to use reasonable care
 
for the safety of all persons reasonably anticipated to be on the
 
premises, regardless of the status of the individual as invitee,
 licensee, or trespasser. Pickard v. City & Cnty of Honolulu, 51
 
Haw. 134, 135, 452 P.2d 445, 446 (1969) (remanding for new trial
 based on duty owed to visitor to courthouse, who used restroom
 with broken light switch and fell through a hole in the floor). 
See also Gibo v. City & Cnty of Honolulu, 51 Haw. 299, 301, 459
 P.2d 198, 200 (1969) (holding that hospital had a duty to
 maintain premises in a reasonably safe condition for plaintiff
 
22
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
who entered through ambulance garage rather than main entrance).8
 
For the following reasons, Ala Moana was entitled to
 
summary judgment on Plaintiffs’ general premises liability claim.
 
First, based on the evidence adduced, Fry could not
 
have been reasonably anticipated to be on the rooftop. Even if
 
Ala Moana’s interrogatory answer as to how Fry reached the
 rooftop is considered, there had been no other unauthorized
 entries onto the rooftop; therefore, Fry’s presence on the Bally
 rooftop could not have been reasonably anticipated. 
Second, even if there were factual issues as to whether
 
Ala Moana should have reasonably anticipated Fry’s presence on
 the rooftop, Plaintiffs would not be able to prevail on a general
 premises liability claim because the requisite causation would
 not exist. In this regard, it is well-established that the
 elements of a negligence claim are:
 
8 Other jurisdictions have similarly recognized that landowners owe
a duty to exercise care for the safety of persons reasonably anticipated on
their premises. See, e.g., Stewart v. DuPlessis, 191 N.E.2d 622, 625-26 (Ill.
Ct. App. 1963) (holding that contractor had duty to exercise ordinary care to
avoid injury where the facts indicated that children were reasonably
anticipated on construction site); Duxworth v. Pat Caffey Contractor, 209
So.2d 497, 500 (La. Ct. App. 1968) (holding that contractor could be held
liable for negligence where he left heavy trailer unsecured in street even
though foreman knew that children played on the trailer); L.A.C. v. Ward
Parkway Shopping Ctr. Co., 75 S.W.3d 247, 257-58 (Mo. 2002) (en banc) (holding
that owners and managers of mall had a duty to take reasonable care to protect
business invitees where reports of prior incidents against female victims
indicated that criminal activity alleged by plaintiff was foreseeable). But
 
see Craig v. Bailey Bros. Realty, 697 S.E.2d 888, 893-94 (Ga. Ct. App. 2010)
(holding that child was not anticipated trespasser on owner’s property,
railroad crossties did not constitute attractive nuisance, and owners
therefore were not liable on premises liability claim); Pride v. Cleveland
State Univ., 657 N.E.2d 878, 881 (Ohio Ct. Cl. 1995) (holding that university,
which did not know of hazardous condition in ventilation shaft until after
 plaintiff was injured, did not breach duty of reasonable care).
23
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1. A duty, or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct,
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks;
 
2. A failure on the defendant's part to conform to the
standard required: a breach of the duty;
 3. A reasonably close causal connection between the conduct
and the resulting injury[;] and
 4. Actual loss or damage resulting to the interests of
another.
 
Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, 69 Haw. 376, 384-85, 742 P.2d
 
377, 383 (1987) (quoting W.P. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the
 Law of Torts § 30, at 164-65 (5th ed. 1984)) (brackets and
 ellipses omitted). In other words, even if (1) and (2) were
 established, there would be no “reasonably close causal
 connection between” Ala Moana’s alleged breach of duty in
 creating a condition that allowed Fry access to the rooftop and
 her subsequent injuries and/or death, because the existence of
 the exhaust duct on the rooftop did not create a unreasonable
 risk of harm, and because Fry’s forced entry therein was not
 reasonably foreseeable. Therefore, the requisite causation
 element could not be met as a matter of law.
 
Third, although Plaintiffs argue that questions of fact
 
exist as to whether Fry “voluntarily” entered the exhaust duct in
 light of her mental capacity at the time of the incident, any
 such questions of fact are irrelevant to whether Ala Moana
 breached its general duty as an occupier of land. Again, even if
 Ala Moana could have reasonably anticipated Fry’s entry into the
 rooftop area, it could not have “reasonably” anticipated Fry’s
24
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
entry into the exhaust duct. 
Fourth, contrary to Plaintiffs’ assertion, the doctrine
 
of res ipsa loquitur does not create an inference of negligence
 
under the circumstances of this case. Res ipsa loquitur permits
 
an inference of negligence when the thing that produced a
 
person’s injury is under the control and management of the
 defendant, and the injury could not have occurred in the ordinary
 course of events but for the defendant’s failure to exercise due
 care. Carlos v. MTL, 77 Hawai
'i 269, 277, 883 P.2d 691, 699 
(App. 1994) (citing Turner v. Willis, 59 Haw. 319, 324-25, 582
 P.2d 710, 714 (1978)).
9 Where an accident could have occurred in
 
the normal course without negligence, or where two equally
 plausible inferences can be drawn as to whether the accident was
 caused by negligence, the doctrine is not applicable. Id. at
 
278, 883 P.2d at 700. To invoke the doctrine of res ipsa
 
loquitur, the plaintiff must present substantial evidence that
 
9	 This court has explained the rationale of the doctrine as follows:
[T]he doctrine of res ipsa loquitur asserts that whenever a
 
thing that produced an injury is shown to have been under
the control and management of the defendant and the
occurrence is such as in the ordinary course of events does
not happen if due care has been exercised, the fact of the
injury itself will be deemed to afford sufficient evidence
to support a recovery in the absence of any explanation by
the defendant tending to show that the injury was not due to
his want of care. *** The presumption of negligence herein
considered is of course a rebuttable presumption. It
 imports merely that the plaintiff has made out a prima facie
case which entitled him to a favorable finding unless the
defendant introduces evidence to meet and offset its effect.
 
Ciacci v. Woolley, 33 Haw. 247, 257-58 (Haw. Terr. 1934) (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
25
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(1) the injury was of the kind that ordinarily does not occur in
 
the absence of negligence, (2) the injury was caused by an agency
 or instrumentality in the exclusive control of the defendant, and
 (3) the injury was not due to any voluntary action or
 contribution by the plaintiff. Medina v. Figuered, 3 Haw. App.
 186, 188, 647 P.2d 292, 294 (1982) (citing Prosser, Law of Torts
 § 39 at 214 (1978)). Without even addressing the second two
 elements, Fry’s injury was one that could have occurred without
 
Ala Moana’s negligence. Res ipsa loquitur is simply
 
inapplicable.
 
Finally, Plaintiffs argue that Ala Moana could be 
negligent under a claim of general premises liability because 
genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Fry was induced to the rooftop and locked outside by an employee or agent of Ala Moana. Initially, such a theory is entirely speculative; a court is permitted to draw only those inferences of which the evidence is reasonably susceptible, and may not resort to speculation. Pioneer Mill Co., 90 Hawai
'i at 295, 978 P.2d at 
733. In addition, however, even if admissible evidence supported
 
such a theory, Ala Moana could not be held liable for such
 intentional torts. “Under the theory of respondeat superior, an
 employer may be liable for the negligent acts of its employees
 that occur within the scope of their employment.” Wong-Leong v.
 
26
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawaiian Indep. Refinery, 76 Hawai 'i 433, 438, 879 P.2d 538, 543 
(1994) (citations omitted). Contrary to Plaintiffs contentions, 
vicarious liability would not extend to intentional torts committed by Ala Moana’s employees or agents. 
For all of the reasons above, Ala Moana was entitled to
 
summary judgment on Plaintiffs’ general premises liability claim.
 
B. Special Duties Owed by Ala Moana
 
Even if Ala Moana could not be held liable on
 
Plaintiffs’ claim of general premises liability, genuine issues
 
of material fact exist as to whether Ala Moana breached two
 distinct duties based on (1) its immediate control over a force
 to which Fry was in dangerous proximity, and (2) Fry’s entry onto
 the property in response to Ala Moana’s invitation to the public.
 
1. Duty to Control Force To Prevent Harm
 
The first of these duties was addressed in Farrior v.
 
Payton, 57 Haw. 620, 562 P.2d 779. In Farrior, plaintiffs
 
brought a civil action against dog owners for injuries sustained
 when, in an attempt to avoid a perceived attack by defendants’
 German shepherd dog, they fell ten feet off a natural rock wall. 
57 Haw. at 625, 562 P.2d at 783-84. Citing section 338 of the
 Restatement (Second) of Torts, this court held that defendants
 
27
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
owed a duty to control the dog to prevent harm to individuals on
 
their property even if, as in the plaintiffs’ case, those
 individuals were trespassers.
10 Id. at 629, 562 P.2d at 785-86.
 
The Restatement (Second) of Torts § 338 provides :
 
§ 338. Controllable Forces Dangerous to Known Trespassers
 
A possessor of land who is in immediate control of a force,
and knows or has reason to know of the presence of
trespassers in dangerous proximity to it, is subject to
liability for physical harm thereby caused to them by his
failure to exercise reasonable care
 
(a) so to control the force as to prevent it from doing harm
to them, or
 
(b) to give a warning which is reasonably adequate to enable
them to protect themselves.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Ala Moana argues that Farrior is distinguishable
 
because the injury in that case was caused by a moving force
 
(i.e., a charging German shepherd dog), and this court declined
 to distinguish between the defendants’ duty as landowners and
 their duty as the persons in immediate control of the animal. 57
 Haw. at 633, 562 P.2d at 787. See Restatement (Second) of Torts
 
§ 338, comment b (“The rule stated in this Section applies to any
 moving force over which the possessor is in immediate control, in
 so far as the force is connected with a condition created or
 maintained by him. This is so irrespective of whether the
 
We noted, however, “[t]he nature and extent of the [plaintiffs’]
duty as landowners, as distinct from [the son= s] duty as the person in charge
of the dog, to persons who might intrude upon the makai portion of their
property under the circumstances of this case, was not briefed or argued andwe will not anticipate the question.” 57 Haw. at 633, 562 P.2d at 787. 
28
 10 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
particular force is actually set in motion by him, by a force of
 
nature, or by a third party with or without his consent.”).
 
We conclude, however, that the heat, smoke and gasses
 
emanating from the stoves and through the ventilation system
 constituted moving forces to which Fry was in dangerous proximity
 and over which Ala Moana exercised immediate control. Further,
 as in Farrior, Fry’s status as a trespasser on the rooftop and in
 the exhaust duct is irrelevant. Ala Moana employees knew of
 Fry’s presence inside the exhaust duct, which was connected to
 the stoves in the Food Court, and they were in immediate control
 of those forces. The admissible evidence in the record creates
 genuine issues of material fact as to whether Ala Moana exercised
 reasonable care to turn off the stoves to prevent harm to Fry
 while she was trapped inside the duct, and whether the failure to
 do so was a substantial factor in causing her injuries and/or
 death.
 
Therefore, we hold that, pursuant to section 338 of the
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts, adopted by this court in Farrior,
 as a possessor of land in immediate control of the heat, smoke,
 and gasses emanating from stoves in the Food Court into the
 exhaust duct, and knowing of Fry’s presence in dangerous
 proximity to those forces, Ala Moana had a duty to exercise
 reasonable care to control those forces to prevent them from
 
29
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
doing harm to Fry. Genuine issues of material fact exist as to:
 
(1) whether Ala Moana breached this duty; and (2) if so, whether
 such breach was a substantial factor in causing Fry’s injuries
 and/or death.
 
2. Duty to Aid Based on Special Relationship
 
The second duty is one which arises out of the
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A, which provides:
 
§ 314A. Special Relations Giving Rise To Duty To Aid Or Protect.
 
(1) A common carrier is under a duty to its passengers to
take reasonable action
 
(a) to protect them against unreasonable risk of
physical harm, and
 
(b) to give them first aid after it knows or has
reason to know that they are ill or injured, and to
care for them until they can be cared for by others.
 
(2) An innkeeper is under a similar duty to his guests.
 
(3) A possessor of land who holds it open to the public is
under a similar duty to members of the public who enter in
response to his invitation.
 
(4) One who is required by law to take or who voluntarily
takes the custody of another under circumstances such as to
deprive the other of his normal opportunities for protection
is under a similar duty to the other.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Generally, the law does not recognize an affirmative 
duty to intervene and protect another person from harm. Lee, 83 
Hawai'i at 159, 925 P.2d at 329. Section 314A, however, 
recognizes a duty to aid or protect in certain circumstances. In 
this regard, Plaintiffs assert possible liability based on 
30
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
subsection (4). Ala Moana did not, however, owe Fry a duty of 
care based on subsection (4) because Ala Moana did not voluntarily take custody of Fry. Compare Lee, 83 Hawai
'i at 160­
65, 925 P.2d at 330-35 (declining to impose duty to prevent suicide of veteran who received counseling from defendant but was not in defendant’s actual custody), with Hayworth v. State, 60 Haw. 557, 563, 592 P.2d 820, 824 (1979) (recognizing that the state owes a duty to protect a prisoner in its custody from unreasonable risk of physical harm), and Figueroa v. State, 61 Haw. 369, 376, 604 P.2d 1198, 1202 (1979) (recognizing that the state owes a duty to exercise reasonable care in its supervision of a juvenile committed to a detention home). 
Ala Moana is, however, a possessor of land held open to
 
the public, triggering subsection (3). If Fry entered the Center
 in response to Ala Moana’s invitation, then Ala Moana had a duty
 under subsection (3) to take reasonable action to give Fry first
 aid after it knew that she was ill or injured, and to care for
 her until she could be cared for by others.
 
In this regard, the Third Circuit’s decision in Lundy
 
v. Adamar of New Jersey, 34 F.3d 1173, is instructive. In Lundy,
 the plaintiff suffered a heart attack while he was at a casino
 and claimed that the casino owed a duty to provide medical care. 
34 F.3d at 1178-79. The Third Circuit concluded that the casino
 
31
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
owed patrons a duty to take reasonable action to give first aid
 
during a medical emergency. Id. at 1178 (“[T]he existence of a
 
relationship between the victim and one in a position to render
 aid may create a duty to render assistance.”). Citing commentary
 to section 314A, the court explained that this duty required a
 landowner to procure appropriate medical care as soon as the need
 for such care became apparent and to provide such first aid as
 the landowner’s employees were reasonably capable of giving. Id.
 
at 1179.
 
Considering the relationship between the owner of a 
shopping center and members of the public who enter the property pursuant to invitation, there are “logical, sound, and compelling reasons” for imposing a duty under these circumstances. Hao, 76 Hawai
'i at 80, 869 P.2d at 219. It is not difficult to imagine 
situations in which a member of the public, invited to a shopping center, becomes ill or injured in an area not otherwise open to the public. For example, a young child could wander into the kitchen of a restaurant, and accidentally injure himself on a hot stove. A mentally impaired individual could wander into a construction site at a hotel, and fall through a rickety floorboard. A patron could, while having a heart attack, stagger into a restricted area. The law should not automatically absolve a shopping center owner from taking reasonable action to aid 
32
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
possible or actual customers based on entry into restricted
 
areas.
 
As this court articulated in Pickard, “the common law
 
distinctions between classes of persons have no logical
 relationship to the exercise of reasonable care for the safety of
 others.” 51 Haw. at 135, 452 P.2d at 446. In elaborating on the
 reason for abolishing such distinctions, we explained:
 
A man’s life or limb does not become less worthy of
protection by the law nor a loss less worthy of
compensation under the law because he has come upon
the land of another without permission or with
permission but without business purpose. Reasonable
 people do not ordinarily vary their conduct depending
upon such matters, and to focus upon the status of the
injured party as a trespasser, licensee, or invitee in
order to determine the question whether the landowner
has a duty of care, is contrary to our modern social
mores and humanitarian values. The common law rules
 obscure rather than illuminate the proper
considerations which should govern determination of
the question of duty.
 
51 Haw. at 136, 452 P.2d at 446 (citation and internal quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
Despite Ala Moana’s contentions that Fry was a
 
trespasser, we hereby recognize the duty to aid under section
 314A(3). We note that this duty to aid is distinct from the duty
 under Pickard toward those reasonably anticipated to be on the
 premises. Thus, although Fry was found in a restricted area of
 the Center, Ala Moana was not absolved from its duty to aid if
 Fry entered the Center in response to Ala Moana’s invitation to
 the public and subsequently became injured or ill on the
 
33
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
property.
 
Accordingly, we hold that, pursuant to section 314A of
 
the Restatement (Second) of Torts, as a possessor of land who
 
held its land open to the public, Ala Moana owed members of the
 public who entered the Center in response to its invitation a
 duty to take reasonable action to give first aid after it knew or
 had reason to know that such persons were ill or injured, and to
 care for such persons until they could be cared for by others. 
Genuine issues of material fact exist to: (1) whether Fry was a
 member of the public who entered the Center in response to Ala
 Moana’s invitation; (2) if so, whether Ala Moana breached its
 duties under section 314A(3); and (3) if so, whether such breach
 was a substantial factor in causing Fry’s injuries and/or death.
 
C. Good Samaritan Statutes and Moyle are Inapplicable
 
Finally, we address Ala Moana’s reliance upon Good
 
Samaritan statutes and Moyle to argue that it is not subject to
 
liability based on any attempts to render aid.
 
First, HRS § 663-1.5(a) provides:
 
(a) Any person who in good faith renders emergency care,
without remuneration or expectation of remuneration, at the
scene of an accident or emergency to a victim of the
accident or emergency shall not be liable for any civil
damages resulting from the person’s acts or omissions,
except for such damages as may result from the person’s
gross negligence or wanton acts or omissions.
 ....
 
34
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Next, HRS § 663-1.6 provides:
 
(a) Any person at the scene of a crime who knows that a
victim of the crime is suffering from serious physical harm
shall obtain or attempt to obtain aid from law enforcement
or medical personnel if the person can do so without danger
or peril to any person. Any person who violates this
subsection is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
 
(b) Any person who provides reasonable assistance in
compliance with subsection (a) shall not be liable in civil
damages unless the person’s acts constitute gross negligence
or wanton acts or omissions, or unless the person receives
or expects to receive remuneration. Nothing contained in
this subsection shall alter existing law with respect to
tort liability of a physician licensed to practice under the
laws of this State committed in the ordinary course of the
physician’s practice.
 
(c) Any person who fails to provide reasonable assistance in
compliance with subsection (a) shall not be liable for any
civil damages.
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment, in part,
 
based on Moyle, 118 Hawai 'i 385, 191 P.3d 1062, which addressed 
these statutes. The ICA declared the circuit court’s ruling on
 
this issue moot, based on its conclusion that Ala Moana did not
 owe Fry a duty to aid. We conclude, however, that Ala Moana is
 not shielded by these Good Samaritan statutes or by Moyle.
 
In Moyle, a patron filed suit against the owners of a
 
night club after being assaulted and robbed by another patron in
 front of the club. 118 Hawai
'i at 388, 191 P.3d at 1066. Citing 
HRS § 663-1.6, the club owners argued that they did not have an
 affirmative duty to aid the patron. 118 Hawai
'i at 394, 191 P.3d 
at 1072. This court held that, pursuant to HRS § 663-1.6, the
 club owners could not be held liable for allegedly failing to
 
35
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
call the police or provide medical aid upon learning of an
 
ongoing assault.11 Id. at 394, 191 P.3d at 1072. Other
 
decisions of this court have similarly held that an individual
 cannot be held liable for failure to aid or protect against the
 criminal acts of a third party. See, e.g., Wolsk v. State, 68
 
Haw. 299, 301, 711 P.2d 1300, 1302 (1986) (citing Restatement
 (Second) of Torts §§ 314A and 315, and holding that State did not
 have duty to warn or protect campers in state park from criminal
 conduct of third persons not under its control); Kau v. City &
 Cnty. of Honolulu, 6 Haw. App. 370, 374, 722 P.2d 1043, 1047
 (1986) (holding that City had no duty to protect patrons of golf
 course from criminal acts of third parties), Doe v. Grosvenor
 Props., 73 Haw. 158, 162-63, 839 P.2d 512, 515 (1992) (explaining
 that “status distinctions remain important in the decision to
 create exceptions to the general rule that it is unreasonable to
 impose a duty to anticipate and control the actions of third
 persons”).
 
The present case, however, did not involve criminal
 
actions by a third party. Thus, HRS § 663-1.6 and Moyle do not
 
11
 In Moyle, we recognized that owners of a night club had a special-
relationship duty to protect patrons (i.e., business invitees) from reasonably
foreseeable criminal acts by a third party. 118 Hawai' i at 392, 191 P.3d at
1069. However, we distinguished this from a claim based upon the owners’failure to render aid and concluded that, pursuant to HRS § 663-1.6, a personwho failed to provide reasonable assistance to the victim of a crime could notbe held liable for civil damages. Id. at 394-95, 191 P.3d at 1072. 
36
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
apply. Further, HRS § 663-1.5(a) absolves bystanders providing
 
first aid from liability, and does not address this situation, in
 which Ala Moana had an affirmative duty to act.
 
Therefore, the Good Samaritan statutes and Moyle do not
 
absolve Ala Moana of its duties.
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing analysis, we affirm in part and
 
vacate in part the ICA’s judgment in favor of Ala Moana, and
 remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 
Michael J. Green, 
Glenn H. Uesugi,
and Myles S. Breiner for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Rom A. Trader
Patricia M. Napier,
Thomas Benedict, and Kimberly A. Vossman
for respondent
 
37
 