 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-22-0000740 15-JUL-2026 10:17 AM Dkt. 29 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I  
 
 ---o0o---
DANIEL R. GRANILLO,  
Petitioner/Petitioner-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
STATE OF HAWAI
ʻI,  
Respondent/Respondent-Appellee.  
SCWC-22-0000740  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-22-0000740; CASE NO. 2PR191000004)  
 
JULY 15, 2026  
 
DEVENS, C.J., McKENNA, AND EDDINS, JJ.; WITH   
GINOZA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY, AND WITH WHOM  
CIRCUIT JUDGE KUBOTA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY, JOINS  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J.  
The Hawaiʻi Constitution protects people from convictions 
based on false evidence. That protection does not fade with 
time. False evidence is false evidence. Time does not sideline the constitutional violation. The harm happens at conviction,  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 not discovery. And that harm is complete when materially false 
evidence contributes to conviction. 
We hold that when scientific developments invalidate 
evidence presented at trial, the false evidence standard 
applies. 
Here, the prosecution used hair and fiber evidence to 
convict a man. Because science has since proven that evidence 
false, his right to a fair trial was violated. 
I. 
In May 1989, Daniel Granillo (Granillo) allegedly kidnapped 
and sexually assaulted Laura Price (Price). (We use a pseudonym 
for the complainant.) Price said that Granillo grabbed her, 
forced her into his car, drove her to the Kahului breakwater, 
and sexually assaulted her.  A second circuit grand jury 
indicted Granillo on one count of kidnapping, two counts of 
sexual assault in the first degree, and one count of attempted 
sexual assault in the first degree. 
Trial was held in July 1990. Price testified. The 
prosecution presented circumstantial evidence to corroborate her account. To boost Price’s credibility and further support its 
theory of the case, the State qualified Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) agent Wayne Oakes (Oakes) as an “expert 
witness in the area of hair and fiber analysis.” 
2  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
 
 
 
 Oakes opined that a hair sample found in Granillo’s car had 
the same microscopic characteristics as a sample taken from 
Price’s head. He also stated that the hair was “consistent 
with” originating from Price. Oakes further testified that 
fiber samples found in Price’s underwear and on her pants were 
“consistent with” coming from Granillo’s car seat cover. He 
added that carpet fibers found on Price’s pants were “consistent 
with” coming from the floor of Granillo’s car. When asked by the prosecution on direct examination whether the samples showed 
“[Price] was in the car with her pants off and her panties 
exposed,” Oakes answered affirmatively. 
The defense highlighted inconsistencies in Price’s 
narrative. However, it failed to present a focused theory of 
the case. Granillo did not testify and called no witnesses. 
During closing argument, the prosecution acknowledged that 
the elements of the offenses were primarily established by 
Price’s testimony. But the State stressed that it had more than just Price’s word - it had physical evidence. The 
“uncontroverted physical evidence,” the prosecution said, paired 
with Price’s testimony, showed that Price was in the car with 
her pants on, then with her pants off, because Granillo 
undressed and sexually assaulted her. 
The jury convicted Granillo as charged. The circuit court 
sentenced Granillo to forty years. It ran the sexual assault in 
3  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   
 
 
 
 the first degree offense concurrently with the kidnapping 
offense (twenty years), and ran the other sexual assault in the 
first degree offense concurrently with the attempted sexual 
assault in the first degree offense (another twenty years). It 
then ran those two sets of concurrent counts consecutively, for 
a total of forty years. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed Granillo’s 
conviction. Granillo did not appeal the ICA’s judgment. 
In October 2017, nearly thirty years after Granillo’s 
conviction, the County of Maui Department of the Prosecuting Attorney received a letter from the United States Department of 
Justice (DOJ). The letter explained that the FBI had determined 
that Agent Oakes’ testimony – his expert opinion that the hair 
sample tested was consistent with originating from Price - was 
“inappropriate” because it overstated the statistical weight 
that can be assigned to microscopic hair comparisons. Oakes’ 
testimony had “exceed[ed] the limits of the science.” 
The letter also related that the Innocence Project and the 
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL) had found that Oakes’ claim that he could microscopically 
differentiate between hairs from two different individuals was 
wrong because he “stated or implied that the evidentiary hair 
could be associated with a specific individual to the exclusion 
of all others.” That statement also exceeded the science. 
4  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 In February 2018, the State notified Granillo, then serving 
time in Arizona at Saguaro Correctional Center, of the letter. 
In January 2019, Granillo filed a Hawai
ʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 post-conviction relief petition. 
The circuit court appointed counsel and held a non-
evidentiary hearing. 
At the hearing, the State conceded that the trial court 
improperly admitted Oakes’ hair analysis testimony. 
Granillo went further. He argued that the Rule 40 court 
should rule that the trial court improperly admitted not only 
the hair analysis testimony, but also Oakes’ expert opinion on 
fiber. He explained that a 2009 congressional study conducted by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) found that neither 
hair nor fiber analysis techniques can conclusively establish 
the exact source of a hair or a fiber. Thus, both Oakes’ hair 
and fiber opinions exceeded the science. 
The State responded that substantial evidence supported 
Granillo’s conviction. It claimed that the DOJ, the Innocence 
Project, and NACDL analyzed transcripts in Granillo’s case, but “did not find error with respect to the testimony of the fiber 
evidence[.]” And in light of the other compelling evidence, the 
State claimed, the error in admitting the hair evidence was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
5  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 The Rule 40 court concluded that Oakes’ hair analysis 
testimony “was erroneously admitted because it exceeded the 
bounds of science.” Based on compelling evidence of physical 
injury and other corroborative testimony, however, the court 
deemed the error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The court did not rule on the admissibility of the fiber 
analysis. It denied Granillo’s petition. 
The ICA upheld the circuit court’s denial of Granillo’s 
HRPP Rule 40 petition, but for different reasons. 
First, the ICA held that the lower court should have 
applied the McNulty test for newly discovered evidence instead of the harmless error standard. Per State v. McNulty, the ICA 
explained, new evidence warrants a new trial when “(1) the 
evidence has been discovered after trial; (2) such evidence 
could not have been discovered before or at trial through the 
exercise of due diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the 
issues and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as would 
probably change the result of a later trial.” 60 Haw. 259, 267-
68, 588 P.2d 438, 445 (1978) (citation omitted). 
The ICA held that Granillo satisfied the first two McNulty 
elements. The DOJ letter regarding Granillo’s trial was 
“discovered” after trial and could not have been found before or 
at trial. 
6  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 But the ICA held that Granillo failed to establish the 
third McNulty element - that the evidence was not cumulative. 
The ICA concluded that nothing in the DOJ letter or the record 
impeached Oakes’ fiber opinion. Oakes’ fiber opinion, the ICA 
said, showed that Price was in Granillo’s car with her pants 
off, and that her underwear touched the car seat cover.  The ICA 
therefore concluded that the hair evidence merely duplicated 
other evidence placing Price in Granillo’s car. 
Because it considered Oakes’ fiber opinion cumulative of 
his hair opinion, the ICA declined to reach the fourth element, whether the evidence would “probably change the result of a 
later trial.” See id. at 268, 588 P.2d at 445. It affirmed the 
circuit court’s denial of Granillo’s post-conviction petition.  
The ICA applied the wrong standard. We hold that the false 
evidence standard governs this unique category of invalidated scientific evidence. The newly discovered evidence standard has 
no application in this context. 
Newly-discredited scientific evidence is not “newly 
discovered evidence.” It more closely resembles “false 
evidence.” See Birano v. State, 143 Hawaiʻ i 163, 181-82, 426 
P.3d 387, 405-06 (2018); State v. Stone, 147 Hawaiʻ i 255, 271-72, 
465 P.3d 702, 718-19 (2020); United States v. Butler, 955 F.3d 
1052, 1057 (D.C. Cir. 2020). If scientific advancements reveal the unreliability of forensic evidence used to convict, then the 
7  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
 evidence the jury heard was untrue - not new. We apply the 
false evidence standard to post-conviction proceedings 
challenging expert testimony that scientific developments later 
invalidate. 
We take judicial notice of two landmark studies to the 
extent that they describe the limits of the microscopic analysis 
discipline. 
This court may “take judicial notice . . . of the validity 
of underlying scientific principles and the reliability of 
scientific techniques.” See State v. Vliet, 95 Hawaiʻ i 94, 112, 
19 P.3d 42, 60 (2001). 
This court may also take judicial notice 
of adjudicative facts if they are “capable of accurate and ready 
determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot 
reasonably be questioned.” Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
201(b). 
We take judicial notice of the National Research Council of 
the National Academies’ (NRC) 2009 report to the extent it 
applies to microscopic hair and fiber analysis. Comm. on 
Identifying the Needs of the Forensic Sciences Cmty., Nat’l 
Rsch. Council, 
Strengthening Forensic Science in the United 
States: A Path Forward (The National Academies Press) (2009) (2009 NRC Report). We also take judicial notice of the 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science & Technology’s (PCAST) 2016 follow-up report to the extent it discusses the 
8  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
   limits of the microscopic comparison discipline, generally. 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science & Tech., Forensic 
Science in Criminal Courts: Ensuring Scientific Validity of 
Feature-Comparison Methods (2016) (2016 PCAST Report). 
These two studies demonstrate that (1) consensus regarding 
the scientific basis for and limits of microscopic comparison 
science has evolved over time, and (2) there are limits to what 
experts may assert regarding the statistical significance of findings using this science.  Both facts are readily 
ascertainable. See HRE Rule 201(b). 
The 2009 NRC Report and the 2016 PCAST Report support the 
DOJ’s 2017 letter finding that Oakes’ statements regarding the 
source of the hair in Granillo’s case exceeded the science. 
These reports likewise establish that similar statistical 
assertions regarding the source of fibers found on Price’s 
clothing exceeded the science underpinning microscopic analysis. 
Based on these studies, we conclude that Oakes’ fiber 
opinion was invalid. The evidence was false. 
There is a reasonable possibility that the false fiber 
evidence contributed to Granillo’s conviction. See Stone, 147 
Hawaiʻi at 272, 465 P.3d at 719.  “[I]t just takes one 
unconvinced juror to hang a jury. The reasonable possibility standard, then, is satisfied if there’s a showing that it’s 
reasonably possible that[] . . . a single juror would have voted 
9  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
 
  
 
 differently.” State v. Hirata, 152 Hawaiʻ i 27, 33, 520 P.3d 225, 
231 (2022). 
Oakes’ hair and fiber opinion powered the prosecution’s 
case. From opening to closing, the prosecution hammered the 
persuasive value and evidentiary import of the hair and fiber 
evidence. It served as the centerpiece of the State’s case. 
The defense exposed multiple inconsistencies in Price’s 
testimony and repeatedly challenged her account.  Beyond some 
circumstantial corroboration of Price’s story, the conviction 
turned on her credibility. Thus, scientific evidence placing 
her in Granillo’s car bolstered that credibility. 
The fiber evidence carried particular weight with the jury 
because Oakes’ fiber testimony did more than simply place Price in Granillo’s car. The hair evidence already placed Price in 
the car. But the fiber evidence, as FBI expert Oakes opined, 
went further. It reinforced the prosecution’s central theory 
that Price was in Granillo’s car with her pants on, then off, 
and that Granillo undressed and sexually assaulted her. That 
testimony alone would have erased any lingering juror doubts about her testimony. 
Oakes’ testimony also projected scientific certainty that 
the hair found in Granillo’s car came from Price, and that the 
fibers found on Price’s clothing came from Granillo’s car. The 
State’s expert witness delivered his opinions as if they were 
10  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 rooted in settled science. An expert opinion from a federal 
agent - one who has performed thousands of forensic tests -
commands great evidentiary weight. See State v. David, 149 
Hawaiʻi 469, 478, 494 P.3d 1202, 1211 (2021) (experts have an 
“aura of special reliability and trustworthiness”). 
We hold that there is a reasonable possibility that Oakes’ 
expert opinions contributed to Granillo’s conviction. His due 
process rights were violated. We remand for a new trial. 
II. 
A. Factual and Procedural Background 
1. Trial Testimony 
In the early morning hours on May 27, 1989, Granillo 
allegedly abducted Price from a shopping center parking lot, drove her to a nearby beach, and sexually assaulted her. 
A second circuit grand jury indicted Granillo on one count 
of kidnapping, Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720(1)(d) 
(Supp. 1986); two counts of sexual assault in the first degree, HRS § 707-730(1)(a) (Supp. 1987); and one count of attempted 
sexual assault in the first degree, HRS §§ 705-500 (1985) and 
707-730(1)(a). 
Granillo’s trial was held from July 9, 1990 through July 
11, 1990. Price and other witnesses recounted the events as 
follows. 
11  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  
  
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 Before the incident, Price spent the evening drinking and 
dancing with her boyfriend, Floyd Kemfort, and friends. At some 
point, Price and Kemfort quarreled. They left together and 
drove her car to the Ah Fook’s Shopping Center. Kemfort grabbed 
Price’s car keys and abandoned her in the parking lot. 
Price called her friend Robert Adams to pick her up. He 
called the police. 
Granillo’s friend Terry Tester, who was with Granillo in 
the shopping center parking lot, noticed Price crying for help and called the police. 
The police arrived. The first officer to arrive, Glen 
Goto, testified that he responded to Tester’s call regarding a 
woman crying for help. Another officer, Anthony Poplardo, 
testified that he also responded to a report of a female 
screaming in the shopping center parking lot. 
Officer Goto testified that he observed Granillo and Tester 
together in the parking lot. As Goto spoke with Tester, Price 
lashed out at both men for calling the police. Officer Goto 
told the two men to leave and refocused his attention on Price. 
Price showed no visible signs of physical assault, Officer Goto 
said. Price refused further assistance and told police she planned to wait for a friend to come get her. 
Following Price’s outburst, Tester testified that he and 
Granillo left the parking lot in their separate cars. 
12  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  After the police officers left to respond to another call, 
a car pulled up next to Price. According to Price, the man 
driving told her that “the police couldn’t help [her] but that 
he could help [her].” Price said that the man got out of his 
car, hit her, forced her into his car, and drove off. He then 
held a knife to her neck and chest and threatened to kill her if 
she didn’t stop crying. 
Price described the man who grabbed her as having “kind of 
a husky build” and a “scar” on the left side of his face that “looked like almost a cleft lip or maybe a knife cut.” At 
trial, Price pointed to Granillo sitting next to defense counsel 
and identified him as the man who sexually assaulted her. The 
record contains no evidence of any out-of-court identification 
by Price. No mugshot of Granillo, no photo array, no lineup. 
Price, it appears, identified Granillo for the first time at 
trial. 
Price said Granillo took her to Kahului breakwater on Lower 
Beach Road. There, she testified, he parked the car, took out a knife, and said he wanted to “fuck” her. He “pulled his penis 
out and he shoved [Price’s] face down between his legs.” 
Without Price’s consent, Granillo forced his penis into her 
mouth. She testified that Granillo then pulled down her pants, 
and put his hand inside of her vagina. Price testified that 
Granillo failed to penetrate her with his penis because he did 
13  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
    
  not have an erection, but he persisted in kissing and forcing himself against her. As she struggled and cried, Granillo told 
her to shut up, and “everytime [she] wouldn’t shut up he would 
grab [her] hair and bang [her] head against the passenger 
window.” 
Price related that Granillo then threatened to penetrate 
her “from behind.” She interpreted this as a threat to have 
anal sex with her. Out of fear, she put her pants on, unlocked the door, grabbed her purse, jumped out of the car, and hid. 
When Granillo could not find her, he drove away. 
Price ran to the highway and flagged down a jeep. Price 
told the jeep’s driver, Allen Auwae, that she had just been 
beaten up and raped. She asked to be driven back to her car at 
the shopping center. Upon their arrival, the police and Price’s 
friend Adams were there. Auwae described Price as “hysterical,” 
screaming, and crying on the drive. She said “something about 
the guy’s face.” Auwae also noticed that Price looked dirty with messy hair. 
Officer Poplardo testified that he returned to the shopping 
center to find Price “really high strung,” “excited,” and 
“running around the parking lot.” Price blamed the police. 
“She pointed at [Officer Poplardo] and said it was [his] fault 
or [the] police[’s] fault that she got raped.” 
14  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 Price produced items from her purse and gave them to 
Officer Poplardo, believing they belonged to her assailant. She 
could not account for how a can of WD-40, white t-shirt, and 
empty peanut wrapper wound up in her purse. Price told Officer 
Poplardo that “she could identify the guy if she sees him 
again.” 
Around 4:00 a.m. Price arrived at Maui Memorial Hospital 
for an examination. Emergency room physician Dr. John Mills examined Price, performing both a general physical exam and a 
“somewhat detailed pelvic examination” to “look for any signs of 
trauma, [infection, or intercourse].” Price told Dr. Mills that 
“she had been forced to perform vaginal intercourse.” She 
“denied any fellatio or any sodomy.” 
Days after the incident, friends visited Price. They 
testified that they saw bruising on Price’s face, left thigh, 
and right arm. 
During the investigation, police recovered evidence from 
Price, Granillo, and Granillo’s car. Maui Police Department officer Lucille Briel testified that she recovered a tank top, 
underwear, pants, and pubic hair from Price. Maui Police 
Department Detective Charles Rojas testified that he recovered 
two knives, strands of hair, and debris from Granillo’s car. He 
also recovered body hairs from Granillo. 
15  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  Then Maui Police Department Detective Ivan Takitani 
testified that he sent hair samples collected from Price, and 
fiber samples taken from Granillo’s car seat covers and floor 
carpet to the FBI for analysis and examination. 
2. Oakes’ Expert Testimony 
The State called FBI agent Wayne Oakes to testify as an 
expert witness in hair and fiber analysis. Oakes testified that he was a “supervisory special agent with the FBI” and had served with the bureau for approximately twelve-and-a-half years. For 
nine-and-a-half of those years, he worked in the FBI’s hair and 
fiber division, where he examined hair and fiber samples 
submitted by local, state, and other federal law enforcement 
agencies. Oakes related that he had conducted around two to 
three thousand hair sample analyses. 
Based on his examination of the hair samples in this case, 
Oakes testified that (1) the hair sample found in Granillo’s 
vehicle had been “forcibly removed” because it was broken at the root end; (2) the two hair samples, one from Granillo’s car and 
the other from Price’s head, had the same microscopic 
characteristics; and (3) the hair sample from Granillo’s car was 
consistent with originating from Price. 
Oakes also testified that he could distinguish one person’s 
hair from another’s through microscopic comparison alone. He 
told the jury, “I would be able to differentiate that person’s 
16  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
 hair from Mr. Kim’s [the deputy prosecuting attorney] hair by 
looking at the microscopic characteristics.” 
As for his fiber analysis, Oakes testified that (1) the 
fibers found on Price’s underwear were “consistent with coming 
from [the seat cover of Granillo’s vehicle],” (2) the marine 
acrylic fibers found on Price’s pants were “consistent with 
coming from the seat cover of [Granillo’s] vehicle,” and (3) 
“the carpet fibers . . . from [Price’s] pants were consistent with coming from the floor of [Granillo’s] vehicle.” All sets 
of compared fibers, Oakes testified, were “microscopically the 
same.” 
Granillo did not present any witnesses, nor did he testify. 3. Closing Arguments and Verdict 
During closing argument, the prosecution recapped Price’s 
“uncontroverted” testimony regarding the kidnapping and assault. 
Counsel highlighted that Detective Takitani found Price’s 
belongings at the alleged scene, corroborating her testimony that she had been kidnapped to that area. The prosecution 
parried purported inconsistencies in Price’s testimony regarding 
whether the car was moving when she escaped. He explained that 
the car likely rolled on a slight incline because it was a 
“stick shift.” The prosecution further argued that the alleged 
physical force used by Granillo was corroborated by Price’s 
friends, who saw her bruises after the incident. 
17  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
  
  
  
  
 
  The prosecution then countered anticipated attacks on 
Price’s credibility with the weight of the forensic evidence 
against Granillo. “We have physical evidence,” the State said. 
“Physical evidence shows that [Price] was in the car from the 
FBI agent who testified this morning.” 
The prosecutor explained to the jury that (1) the carpet 
samples “matched,” (2) the hair found by Detective Rojas 
“matched the hair of [Price],” and (3) that Oakes could tell the hair was forcibly removed by physically examining it. Counsel 
also argued that the green fibers from Granillo’s car were found 
in Price’s pants and underwear, and that “each one of these 
fibers are identical to each other. They were found to have 
matched the seat cover of the driver’s seat of [Granillo’s] 
car.” Thus, the prosecution claimed, the physical evidence, 
paired with Price’s testimony, showed that (1) she was abducted, 
(2) she was in the car with her pants on, then off, and (3) that 
the person who undressed Price was Granillo. 
The defense’s closing argument focused on inconsistencies 
in Price’s testimony. For instance, why was only one strand of hair found if her head was allegedly slammed against the window 
over twenty times? How did items like a WD-40 can end up in 
Price’s purse if she was so frightened during the kidnapping and 
assault? And why did Dr. Mills not see bruises on Price’s 
18  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  thighs when he examined her after the incident? The defense, 
though, did not attempt to undermine Oakes’ testimony. 
In rebuttal, the prosecution countered the defense’s 
arguments regarding inconsistencies in Price’s testimony. It 
explained that Price testified well after the investigation. 
She had moved back to California and tried to put the incident 
“out of her mind.”  Other testimony established that Granillo 
had motive and opportunity to “take advantage” of Price, who was crying, screaming, and had already refused help from the police. 
Thus, the State concluded, it had proved all elements of each 
charge beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The jury found Granillo guilty as charged of all four 
counts: kidnapping, HRS § 707-720(1)(d); two counts of sexual 
assault in the first degree, HRS § 707-730(1)(a); and attempted 
sexual assault in the first degree, HRS §§ 705-500 and 707-
730(1)(a). 
4. Post-Conviction Proceedings 
Nearly thirty years after Granillo’s conviction, on October 
2, 2017, the Maui prosecutors received a letter from the 
Department of Justice. The DOJ letter explained that the FBI 
had determined that Agent Oakes’ expert testimony - opining that 
the hair sample was consistent with originating from Price - was 
“inappropriate” because it overstated the statistical weight 
that can be assigned to microscopic hair association. The 
19  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   
  
 
  
      
 
  
  letter also referenced the Innocence Project and NACDL’s finding 
that Agent Oakes’ testimony that he could differentiate a 
person’s hair from that of the prosecutor in this case was 
erroneous. 
The State notified Granillo of the letter. At the time, he 
was incarcerated in Arizona. A year later, Granillo filed a 
HRPP Rule 40 petition. 
On January 24, 2019, Granillo filed a Rule 40 petition. 
Relevant to this appeal, Granillo argued that the trial court erred in admitting Oakes’ opinion testimony because (1) the 
State did not lay a sufficient foundation regarding the testing 
methods and instruments used for the hair and fiber analysis, 
and (2) the DOJ letter proves that Oakes’ evidence was erroneous 
because his opinion “went beyond the bounds of science.” 
The circuit court held a non-evidentiary hearing on 
Granillo’s Rule 40 petition. At the hearing, Granillo asked the 
court to take judicial notice of the 2009 NRC Report. He argued that “there was a study by the National Academy of 
Sciences . . . that showed that hair and fiber evidence . . . 
cannot conclusively match. At most, it can say it could have 
come from there, it could have come from anywhere else.” Thus, 
he argued, the fiber evidence should also have been deemed 
inadmissible. 
20  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
  The State did not respond to this argument regarding the 
2009 NRC Report. (Later, before the ICA, the State only argued 
that the DOJ letter “did not render the fiber analysis 
inadmissible.”) 
The circuit court denied Granillo’s petition. The court concluded that Oakes’ hair analysis testimony 
“was erroneously admitted because it exceeded the bounds of science.” But that error, the court concluded, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. It held there was “overwhelming and 
compelling evidence of physical injury, along with other 
corroborative testimony, that demonstrate[d] the defendant’s 
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt despite the erroneously-admitted 
evidence.” See State v. Veikoso, 126 Hawaiʻ i 267, 276, 280, 270 
P.3d 997, 1006, 1010 (2011) (improperly admitted evidence 
requires a new trial unless it is harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt). 
The court did not rule on the admissibility of Oakes’ fiber 
opinion. 
The court denied Granillo’s Rule 40 petition. 
5. Appellate Proceedings 
The ICA affirmed. It held that that the Rule 40 court 
should have applied the McNulty newly discovered evidence test 
instead of the harmless error standard. Even so, the ICA 
21  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 concluded that Granillo would not have satisfied the McNulty 
test. The circuit court had properly denied the petition. 
First, because Granillo’s petition was based on newly 
discovered evidence, the ICA determined that the circuit court 
should have applied the McNulty test. The McNulty test, the ICA 
explained, is used to determine whether new evidence warrants a 
new trial: 
(1) the evidence has been discovered after trial; (2) such 
evidence could not have been discovered before or at trial 
through the exercise of due diligence; (3) the evidence is 
material to the issues and not cumulative or offered solely 
for purposes of impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of 
such a nature as would probably change the result of a later trial. 
See Haw. Police Dep’t, Cnty. of Haw. v. Kubota, 155 Hawaiʻ i 136, 
145, 557 P.3d 865, 874 (2024). 
Second, the ICA determined that Granillo did not meet 
McNulty’s test. The ICA reasoned that Granillo satisfied the 
first two elements. However, he failed to show that the 
evidence was not cumulative. As the DOJ letter established, 
Oakes’ opinion on the hair evidence was “invalid.” The ICA also 
determined that the evidence could not have been discovered at 
trial because, as the circuit court concluded, “[the DOJ’s] 
determination was made decades after the trial and subsequent 
appeal.” 
As for part three of the McNulty test, the ICA held that 
while the new evidence was material to whether Price had been in 
22  
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Granillo’s car, Oakes’ hair analysis testimony was cumulative of 
his fiber opinions. Granillo, the ICA said, misrepresented the 
DOJ letter when he referred to “bogus and inadmissible hair and 
fiber evidence[.]” The ICA concluded that nothing in the DOJ 
letter or the record impeached Oakes’ fiber opinion, which in 
the ICA’s view, showed that Price was in Granillo’s car with her 
pants off and her underwear touching the car seat cover. The 
discredited hair evidence was cumulative of the purportedly valid fiber evidence. The new evidence failed to satisfy the 
third part of the McNulty test, the ICA ruled. And thus, the 
ICA held, it was unnecessary to address the fourth part of the 
test. It never reached whether the evidence would probably 
change the result of a later trial. 
Granillo appealed. We accepted cert on Granillo’s first 
point of error challenging the admissibility of Oakes’ fiber 
opinion. 
Ahead of oral argument, we ordered supplemental briefing as 
to (1) whether this court should take judicial notice of the 2009 NRC Report, (2) “the impact of erroneously admitted 
scientific evidence on the right to a fair trial in this case,” 
and (3) “the appropriate standard for reviewing post-conviction 
claims that evidence presented at trial has been scientifically 
discredited.” 
23  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. 
A. Judicial Notice of the 2009 NRC Report and the 2016 PCAST 
Report 
For decades, FBI agents testified that microscopic hair and 
fiber analysis could match samples to specific sources. Courts 
admitted the evidence. Juries relied on it. Convictions 
followed. 
The evidence was false. 
The 2009 National Research Council Report and 2016 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Report exposed forensic techniques that the scientific community had 
never validated. Microscopic hair and fiber comparison cannot 
isolate a sample’s source.  These methods provide only class 
evidence, and lack an empirical basis. 
Congress commissioned the NRC Report in 2006. The National 
Academy of Sciences assembled a committee of leading scientists, legal practitioners, and scholars. They heard hundreds of hours 
of testimony and conducted years of independent research. 
The 2009 NRC Report dismantled forensic science that courts 
had trusted for generations. Courts had routinely admitted 
unscientific evidence and prosecutors used that evidence to 
convict. Turns out, microscopic hair and fiber comparison and 
other pattern-matching techniques were unsound. 
The “evidence” was never evidence. 
24  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Seven years later, the PCAST Report confirmed the systemic 
failures in forensic practices identified by the NRC Report. 
Expert testimony accepted in courtrooms across the nation had 
lacked scientific validity. Testimony like federal agent Oakes’ 
on Maui exceeded the limits of science. Science doesn’t lie. 
Or so jurors were led to believe. 
We take judicial notice of the 2009 NRC Report and the 2016 
PCAST Report, but only as to their findings on the scientific limitations of hair and fiber comparison and expert testimony 
based on feature-comparison methods.  Both reports establish 
what microscopic hair and fiber comparison can and cannot prove. 
We notice only the reports’ findings on these specific forensic 
techniques. 
1. The Judicial Notice Standard 
Taking judicial notice of scientific principles and 
techniques is nothing new for this court. See Vliet, 95 Hawaiʻ i 
at 112, 19 P.3d at 60 (“[O]ur appellate courts have ‘not 
hesitated in the past to take judicial notice [on appeal] of the 
validity of underlying scientific principles and the reliability 
of scientific techniques.’”) (quoting State v. Ito, 90 Hawaiʻ i 
225, 243, 978 P.2d 191, 209 (App. 1999)).  Courts “may consider 
persuasive authorities and[] . . . case law from other 
jurisdictions to determine the reliability of a particular scientific test.” Id. (citations omitted). 
25  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Vliet took judicial notice of Widmark’s formula, accepted 
by the United States National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration as “the basic formula for estimating a person’s 
blood alcohol concentration.” Id. at 112-13, 19 P.3d at 60-61 
(citing United States Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Office of Program 
Development and Evaluation, Computing a BAC Estimate, at 2–3 
(1994)). Montalbo took the same approach, judicially noticing 
“that the DNA paradigm is not controversial and is widely 
accepted in the relevant scientific community.” State v. 
Montalbo, 73 Haw. 130, 141, 828 P.2d 1274, 1281 (1992). 
Then there’s Fukusaku. In 1997, this court observed that 
“scientific principles and procedures underlying hair and fiber evidence are well-established and of proven reliability.”  State 
v. Fukusaku, 85 
Hawaiʻi 462, 474,  946 P.2d 32, 44 (1997); see  
Ito, 90 Hawaiʻ i a t 236, 978 P.2d at 202 (“[Fukusaku] essentially 
took judicial notice of the reliability of the underlying 
scientific principles and the methodology employed in hair and 
fiber analysis”).  
Fukusaku 
reflected the scientific consensus of its era. 
That consensus no longer holds. The 2009 NRC Report and 2016 
PCAST Reports revealed what Fukusaku could not have known. Hair 
and fiber comparison methods lacked scientific validity. These authoritative findings compel us to reverse course. 
26  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence Rule 201 permits judicial notice 
of adjudicative facts that are “capable of accurate and ready 
determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned.” HRE Rule 201(b). Judicial notice is 
discretionary. HRE Rule 201(c). Courts may take judicial 
notice at any time. HRE Rule 201(f). Further, “an appellate 
court may take judicial notice of facts despite the failure of 
the trial court to do so, provided that the facts are ‘capable 
of immediate and accurate demonstration by resort to easily 
accessible sources of indisputable accuracy.’” State v. Puaoi, 
78 Hawaiʻ i 185, 190, 891 P.2d 272, 277 (1995) (citation omitted). 
This court has also taken judicial notice of governmental 
reports under this rule. See Off. of Hawaiian Affs. v. State
, 
96 Hawaiʻi 388, 396 n.13, 31 P.3d 901, 909 n.13 (2001) (noticing 
a Federal Aviation Administration letter and “other relevant federal memoranda, regulations, and legislation”). 
Judicial notice here serves a specific purpose. 
We notice 
not the validity and reliability of microscopic comparison methods themselves, but rather two adjudicative facts that the 
NRC and PCAST Reports establish: (1) scientific consensus about 
the basis and limits of microscopic comparison techniques has 
decisively changed over time, and (2) science imposes definite 
constraints on the permissible scope of expert testimony 
concerning microscopic hair and fiber analysis. 
27  
   
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRE Rule 201(b) allows judicial notice of facts readily 
determinable from unquestionably accurate sources. The 2009 NRC 
Report and the 2016 PCAST Report qualify. Both are government-
commissioned, authoritative studies by the nation’s leading 
scientific institutions. 
The NRC and PCAST Reports define microscopic hair and fiber 
analysis’s capabilities and the limits of expert testimony based 
on such analysis. We hold that judicial notice of these reports is appropriate to assess whether Oakes’ hair and fiber opinions 
exceeded scientific limits.  
We begin with the 2009 NRC Report’s findings. 2. The 2009 NRC Report 
In 2006, Congress passed the Science, State, Justice, 
Commerce, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act. This 
“unprecedented congressional charge” required the National 
Academy of Sciences to “conduct a comprehensive examination of 
the entire field of forensic science across all disciplines.”  Jennifer E. Laurin, Remapping the Path Forward: Toward a 
Systemic View of Forensic Science Reform and Oversight, 91 Tex. 
L. Rev. 1051, 1058 (2013) (citing H.R. Rep. No. 109-272, at 121 
(2005) (Conf. Rep.)).  
The NAS formed a sixteen-member committee of leading 
research scientists, forensic scientists, legal practitioners, 
and legal academics. 
2009 NRC Report, supra, at 287-99.  The 
28  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
commission was co-chaired by Judge Harry Edwards, former chief 
judge of the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals. Id. 
at 287-88. 
The committee “heard hundreds of hours of testimony from 
stakeholders in the field — practicing forensic scientists, social scientists, academics, prosecutors and defense attorneys, 
and federal, state, and local law enforcement officials — and 
‘engaged in independent research.’” Laurin, supra, at 1067 (footnotes omitted). 
The report responded “to growing concerns from the legal 
system and the public regarding the effectiveness and scientific 
foundation of the forensic disciplines being applied by law 
enforcement agencies and crime laboratories.” Sharon L. Plotkin 
& Jan S. Kelly, Chapter 1: Crime Scene Investigations Response 
to the NAS Report of 2009, in Methodological and Technological 
Advances in Death Investigations: Application and Case Studies 
13, 14 (Ross, A.H., & Byrd J.H. eds. 2023). Its findings “largely confirm[ed] the most pessimistic accounts of the 
forensic sciences that ha[d] been circulating in academic and, 
to some extent, professional quarters.” Laurin, supra, at 1067. 
“Techniques long relied on by law enforcement and accepted by 
courts - pattern identification analysis ranging from 
fingerprints to shoe prints to ballistics, hair and fiber 
analysis, and questioned document analysis, among other 
29  
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disciplines – [were] called out as never having been 
systematically and scientifically validated.” Id. (emphases 
added). 
The NRC Report unraveled forensic science techniques that 
courts and juries had trusted for decades to determine guilt or innocence. See id. 
The NRC Report’s hair analysis findings are unequivocal. 
The report found that “[t]he results of analyses from hair comparisons typically are accepted as class associations; that 
is, a conclusion of a ‘match’ means only that the hair could 
have come from any person whose hair exhibited - within some 
levels of measurement uncertainties - the same microscopic 
characteristics, but it cannot uniquely identify one person.” 
2009 NRC Report, supra, at 156 (emphasis added). This 
information is mostly useful to “‘narrow the pool’ by excluding 
certain persons as sources of the hair.” Id. 
The report revealed there is no standardized number of 
similar features an examiner must find to call a “match.” Id. 
at 160. Further, because there was “no scientific support for 
the use of hair comparisons for individualization in the absence 
of nuclear DNA,” these microscopic comparisons alone are “of 
limited probative value.” Id. at 161. Microscopic comparison 
of physical features today is mostly used to exclude suspects 
30  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and decide whether hairs are similar enough to pursue DNA 
testing. Id. at 160. 
The same limitations apply to microscopic fiber analysis. 
The 2009 NRC Report found that “[f]ibers associated with a crime 
—  including synthetic fibers such as nylon, polyester and 
acrylic as well as botanical fibers such as ramie or jute, which are common in ropes or twines - can be examined microscopically 
in the same way as hairs, and with the same limitations.” Id.  
at 161 (emphasis added). Where there are “relatively 
distinctive environmental conditions (e.g., sunlight exposure or 
laundering agents),” analysis can “distinguish particular items 
from others from the same manufacturing lot.” Id.   “Fiber 
examiners agree, however, that none of these characteristics is suitable for individualizing fibers (associating a fiber from a 
crime scene with one, and only one, source) and that fiber 
evidence can be used only to associate a given fiber with a 
class of fibers.” Id.  (emphasis added). Thus, “[i]t can never 
be stated with certainty that a fiber originated from a 
particular textile because other textiles are produced using the 
same fiber types and color.” Id.  at 161-62 n.90 (citing U.S. 
Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation, Scientific Working Group on Materials Analysis, Introduction to 
Forensic Fiber Examination, 1 Forensic Science Communications, 
Section 5.4 (1999), available at 
31  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/218830.pdf [https://perma.cc/TS4P-
BM2M]. 
The report also explained that, like hair analysis, there 
are “no set standards[] for the number and quality of 
characteristics that must correspond in order to conclude that 
two fibers came from the same manufacturing batch.” Id.  at 162-
63. There haven’t been any studies on fibers to make this assessment regarding same manufacturing source. Id.   
“Similarly,” the study related, there have been no studies 
exploring “whether environmentally related changes discerned in 
particular fibers are distinctive enough to reliably 
individualize their source, and there have been no studies that 
characterize either reliability or error rates in the 
procedures.” Id.  at 163. “Thus, a ‘match’ means only that the 
fibers could have come from the same type of garment, carpet, or furniture; it can provide only class evidence.” Id.   
The committee ultimately concluded that many of the 
feature-comparison disciplines, like hair and fiber analysis, “lacked well-defined systems for determining error rates and had 
not done studies to establish the uniqueness or relative rarity 
or commonality of the particular marks or features examined.”  
2016 PCAST Report, supra, at 4 (describing the 2009 NRC Report), 
20. “Much forensic evidence — including, for example, bite  
marks and firearm and toolmark identifications — is introduced  
32  
  
 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in criminal trials without any meaningful scientific validation, 
determination of error rates, or reliability testing to explain 
the limits of the discipline.” 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 107-
08 (footnotes omitted). 
For sure, we do not take judicial notice of every 
scientific study raised in post-conviction cases.  The 2009 NRC 
Report is different though. It transformed forensic science 
practice, prompted nationwide conviction reviews (like here), forced the FBI to abandon techniques and revise practices, and 
reset judicial standards for evaluating forensic testimony. 
Courts now treat the report as the authoritative reference 
for evaluating forensic methods previously accepted without 
question. See, e.g., More v. State, 880 N.W.2d 487, 509 (Iowa 
2016) (“[T]he NRC report is not just another article destined to be piled high on researchers’ desks before being discarded in 
academic dustbins. The NRC is a blockbuster report . . . with 
new statistical data previously unavailable to scientists. . . . While each marginal advance in science cannot form the basis of 
a new trial, watershed developments are a different story.”); 
State v. Brackett, No. WAS-24-231, 2026 WL 304999, *13 (Me. Feb. 
5, 2026); Paul C. Giannelli, The NRC Report and its Implications 
for Criminal Litigation, 50 Jurimetrics J. 53 (2009) (describing 
the report’s “profound impact on crime laboratories and the 
judicial system”); Plotkin & Kelly, supra, at 16 (“The impact of 
33  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the 2009 NAS Report has and will continue to be far-reaching.”); 
Laurin, supra, at 1054-55 (“The NAS Report has been widely 
heralded as a watershed, and its analysis and recommendations 
look to be setting the terms of academic and policy debates 
concerning forensic science for the foreseeable future.”). 
We take judicial notice of the 2009 NRC Report’s 
conclusions regarding microscopic hair and fiber comparison, 
including those disciplines’ basis and scientific limitations, and the permissible scope of expert testimony on such evidence. 
3. 2016 PCAST Report 
The President’s Council of Advisors on Science and 
Technology’s 2016 report affirmed the NRC Report’s conclusions on the limits of microscopic hair and fiber comparison 
techniques. See 2016 PCAST Report, supra, at 54-55, 44-66, 120-
21, 136-39. 
We take judicial notice of the PCAST Report’s requirements 
for scientifically valid expert testimony on feature-comparison methods. 2016 PCAST Report, supra, at 54-55.  We also take 
judicial notice of the 2016 PCAST Report to the extent it evaluates microscopic hair comparison uniform expert guidelines 
relied on by the Department of Justice. Id. at 139-40. 
What PCAST discovered was unconscionable. Seven years 
after the NRC Report exposed false expert testimony about 
microscopic comparison techniques, federal experts were still 
34  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
doing it. The 2016 PCAST Report concluded that federal 
government experts continued to untruthfully testify about the 
probability that a sample came from a specific source: 
Troublingly, expert witnesses sometimes go beyond the 
empirical evidence about the frequency of features — even 
to the extent of claiming or implying that a sample came 
from a specific source with near- certainty or even absolute 
certainty, despite having no scientific basis for such opinions. From the standpoint of scientific validity, 
experts should never be permitted to state or imply in court that they can draw conclusions with certainty or 
near-certainty (such as “zero,” “vanishingly small,” 
“essentially zero,” “negligible,” “minimal,” or “microscopic” error rates; “100 percent certainty” or “to a 
reasonable degree of scientific certainty;” or 
identification “to the exclusion of all other sources[)].” 
See 2016 PCAST Report, supra, at 54 (emphases added) (footnote 
omitted). 
The report demolished a familiar refuge for unreliable 
expert testimony – the appeal to experience. Doing something 
for a long time does not make it scientifically valid. 
“‘[E]xperience’ or ‘judgment’ cannot be used to establish the scientific validity and reliability of a metrological method, 
such as a forensic feature-comparison method.  The frequency 
with which a particular pattern or set of features will be 
observed in different samples, which is an essential element in 
drawing conclusions, is not a matter of ‘judgment.’”  Id. at 55. 
The council did not undertake a full review of hair or 
fiber comparison. Id. at 118. But it did probe the DOJ’s July 
2016 Proposed Uniform Language for Testimony and Reports for the Forensic Hair Examination Discipline and supporting 
35  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
documentation. Id. at 118, 136, 139. PCAST found that “[t]he 
guidelines appropriately state that examiners may not claim that 
they can individualize the source of a hair nor that they have a 
zero error rate.” Id. at 139. 
PCAST noted that the DOJ guidelines properly permitted 
examiners to “state or imply that the questioned human hair is 
microscopically consistent with the known hair sample and 
accordingly, the source of the known hair sample can be included as a possible source of the questioned hair.”  Id. (quoting 
Proposed Uniform Language for Testimony and Reports for the 
Forensic Hair Examination Discipline, supra, at 2). But PCAST 
imposed a critical limitation to those types of statements. 
PCAST explained that examiners are “barred from providing 
accurate information about the reliability of such conclusions.” 
Id. (emphasis added). PCAST condemned such reliability 
testimony as “contrary to the scientific requirement that 
forensic feature-comparison methods must be supported by and accompanied by appropriate empirical estimates of reliability.” 
Id. (emphasis added). 
The PCAST Report also found that the studies cited by the 
DOJ in its supporting documentation “do not provide a scientific 
basis for concluding that microscopic hair examination is a 
valid and reliable process”: 
According to the [DOJ] supporting document, it is not an 
“error” but simply a “limitation of the science” when an 
36  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
examiner associates a hair with an individual who was not 
actually the source of the hair. This is disingenuous. 
When an expert witness tells a jury that a hair found at 
the scene of a crime is microscopically indistinguishable 
from a defendant’s hair, the expert and the prosecution 
intend the statement to carry weight. Yet, the document goes on to say that no information is available about the 
proportion of individuals with similar characteristics. As 
Chapter 4 makes clear, this is scientifically unacceptable. 
Without appropriate estimates of accuracy, an examiner’s 
statement that two samples are similar — or even 
indistinguishable — is scientifically meaningless: it has 
no probative value, and considerable potential for 
prejudicial impact. 
Id. at 120-21 (emphases added).  
In other words, experts may not opine on the accuracy of 
microscopic hair comparisons to imply that two samples are from 
the same source. See id.    “In short,” PCAST concluded, “if 
scientific hair analysis is to mean something, there must be actual empirical evidence about its meaning.” Id.  at 121.  
We take judicial notice of the PCAST Report’s analysis of 
DOJ microscopic hair comparison methods. PCAST confirmed what 
the NRC had concluded – without empirical validation, claims  
that samples are similar or match lack scientific basis. See  
id.  at 120-21.  We also take judicial notice of PCAST’s analysis 
addressing the limits associated with expert testimony on 
feature-comparison methods.  Id.  at 54-55.  
4. The DOJ Letter’s Focus on Hair Does Not Dictate Our 
Analysis 
The DOJ letter reviewed Oakes’ hair testimony. The State 
relies heavily on that limited focus. The ICA agreed, 
concluding that because the DOJ letter did not discuss fiber 
37  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
analysis, the unreliable fiber evidence escapes scrutiny. We 
reject that logic. 
The DOJ’s decision not to review Oakes’ fiber testimony 
says nothing about its reliability. Silence is not endorsement. 
The federal agency review sprung from DNA exonerations that 
revealed errors in microscopic hair analysis. Hair drove the 
effort. Fiber was never part of it. 
Microscopic hair analysis was the “second most common type 
of flawed forensic evidence” identified in DNA exonerations. Vanessa Meterko, Strengths and Limitations of Forensic Science: 
What DNA Exonerations Have Taught Us and Where to Go From Here 
119 W. Va. L. Rev. 639, 642 (2016). After exonerations 
involving flawed FBI hair examiner testimony came to light, the 
FBI, DOJ, NACDL, and the Innocence Project launched an 
“unprecedented collaboration” to independently review “thousands 
of cases in which the FBI conducted microscopic hair analysis of 
crime scene evidence.” Norman L. Reimer, Microscopic Hair Comparison Analysis Review Project: A Milestone in the Quest for 
Forensic Science, NACDL, https://www.nacdl.org/Article/May2015-
TheMicroscopicHairComparisonAn [https://perma.cc/A5GJ-YGPS]; 
Meterko, supra, at 642-43 (citing FBI Testimony on Microscopic 
Hair Analysis Contained Errors in at Least 90 Percent of Cases 
in Ongoing Review, Fed. Bureau of Investigation (Apr. 20, 2015), 
https://www.fbi.gov/news/press-releases/fbi-testimony-on-
38  
  
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
microscopic-hair-analysis-contained-errors-in-at-least-90-
percent-of-cases-in-ongoing-review [https://perma.cc/DDM6-
U9UB]). The 2009 NRC Report inspired that review. Meterko, 
supra, at 640-41; Reimer, supra. And that review generated the 
letter flagging Oakes’ misstatements in his hair analysis 
testimony. 
The review’s scope was limited to microscopic hair 
analysis. That’s not because fiber science is reliable. Hair exonerations prompted the review. Only ten DNA exoneration 
cases nationwide “involved incorrect testimony about ‘other’ 
less-common disciplines like shoe print and fiber analysis.”  
Meterko, supra, at 643. 
Nor is the DOJ’s omission a quarrel with the NRC report. 
The NRC Report is explicit. Fibers “can be examined 
microscopically in the same way as hairs, and with the same 
limitations.” 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 161. We analyze 
Oakes’ fiber testimony based on those limitations. 
B. Oakes’ Fiber Opinions Exceeded the Science The circuit court and the ICA correctly ruled that Oakes’ 
hair comparison testimony exceeded scientific limits. But the ICA erred in ruling that Oakes’ fiber opinions were admissible. 
His fiber testimony equally exceeded the science. 
The 2009 NRC Report and 2016 PCAST Report establish clear 
boundaries for what microscopic fiber analysis can and cannot 
39  
  
  
 
  
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
support. Oakes’ testimony exceeded the limits of science in 
many ways. 
1. Oakes’ Fiber Testimony 
We first recap Oakes’ fiber analysis testimony. The FBI 
agent’s expert opinion involved three fiber comparisons and a climactic statement that purported to corroborate the 
prosecution’s theory of the case. 
Oakes told the jury that “green acrylic textile fibers” 
found on Price’s underwear were “microscopically identical” to a seat sample from Granillo’s car. He said these “fibers” were 
“consistent with coming from that item.” (Emphasis added.) 
Then Oakes opined that “marine acrylic fibers” found on Price’s 
pants were “consistent with coming from the seat cover of 
[Granillo’s] vehicle.” (Emphasis added.) As for the “brown and 
grey carpet fibers” found on Price’s pants, they were 
“microscopically the same” as carpet fibers from the “front left 
floor portion of [Granillo’s] vehicle,” Oakes testified. 
The prosecution linked the evidence to its theory of the 
case. It ended Oakes’ direct examination by asking whether his fiber findings were “consistent with the allegation that [Price] 
was in the car with her pants off and panties exposed[.]” Oakes 
answered, “Yes. The fact that I found seat cover fibers in the 
debris from the victim’s panties would be consistent with that, 
yes.” Oakes offered no qualifying statements. 
40  
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross-examination, the defense questioned Oakes about 
the number of fiber samples collected, and where in the car they 
were found. Little else. At the time, no one had reason to 
question the FBI’s methodology. 
Oakes told the jury that the fibers were “microscopically 
identical,” “microscopically the same,” and “consistent with” 
coming from Granillo’s car. 
These are precisely the types of overstatements the DOJ 
deemed inappropriate. Yet the DOJ’s letter to Granillo reached only Oakes’ hair opinion. 
The 2017 DOJ letter provides the framework for analyzing 
Oakes’ testimony. While the letter addressed hair analysis, its 
conclusions apply equally to fiber analysis. The NRC Report 
says so. Fiber analysis has “the same limitations” as hair 
analysis. 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 161. 
The DOJ determined that Oakes’ hair testimony was 
“inappropriate” because it overstated the statistical weight that can be assigned to a positive microscopic hair association. 
Oakes misstated the science when he testified that the hair 
found in Granillo’s car was “consistent with originating from 
[Price].” The DOJ concluded that Oakes had misled the jury by 
“assign[ing] to the positive association a statistical weight or 
probability . . . that the questioned hair originated from a 
particular source, or an opinion as to the likelihood or 
41  
  
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rareness of the positive association that could lead the jury to 
believe that valid statistical weight can be assigned to a 
microscopic hair association.” 
The DOJ declared, “This type of testimony exceeds the 
limits of the science.” 
2. Oakes’ Fiber Testimony Exceeded Scientific Limits 
We now look at how Oakes’ fiber testimony exceeded 
science’s limits. The testimony defied scientific principles in five respects: it improperly individualized the evidence, 
assigned unwarranted statistical weight, concealed the limitation to class evidence, ignored the absence of validation 
studies, and failed to acknowledge that no unique environmental 
characteristics distinguished these fibers. 
First, Oakes identified a specific source, when the science 
permits only class identification. The 2009 NRC Report could 
not be clearer. “Fiber examiners, agree, however, that none of 
these characteristics is suitable for individualizing fibers 
(associating a fiber from a crime scene with one, and only one, 
source) and that fiber evidence can be used only to associate a given fiber with a class of fibers.” 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 
161 (emphasis added). The FBI’s Scientific Working Group on 
Material Analysis acknowledges, “[i]t can never be stated with 
certainty that a fiber originated from a particular textile 
because other textiles are produced using the same fiber types 
42  
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and color.” Id. at 161-62 n.90 (citing Scientific Working Group 
on Materials Analysis, supra) (emphasis added). 
Here’s what Oakes testified. The “green acrylic textile 
fibers” found on Price’s underwear were “microscopically 
identical” to a seat sample from Granillo’s car, and were 
“consistent with coming from that item” (the seat cover in 
Granillo’s car). (Emphasis added.) He also identified “marine 
acrylic fibers” found on Price’s pants as “consistent with coming from the seat cover of [Granillo’s] vehicle.” (Emphasis 
added.) And he opined that the carpet fibers from Price’s pants 
were “microscopically the same” as those from the “front left 
floor portion of [Granillo’s] vehicle.” 
By using language like “that item,” “the seat cover” and 
“the front left floor portion,” Oakes identified specific 
sources – not a class of fibers. He told the jury the fibers 
came from Granillo’s car, not from a type of seat cover or 
carpet, or a class of marine acrylic fibers used in automotive seat covers. This was not class association. It was source 
attribution. It had no scientific basis. 
Second, Oakes assigned improper statistical weight to his 
fiber comparison. Contrary to science, Oakes opined that the 
fibers were “microscopically identical” and “microscopically the 
same.” He also testified they were “consistent with” coming 
from specific items in Granillo’s car. 
43  
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
He conveyed certainty where none existed. The 2016 PCAST 
Report is straightforward. PCAST concludes that it was wrong to 
“claim[] or imply[] that a sample came from a specific source 
with near-certainty or even absolute certainty, despite having 
no scientific basis for such opinions.”  2016 PCAST Report, 
supra, at 54. Thus, PCAST stresses, “Without appropriate 
estimates of accuracy, an examiner’s statement that two samples 
are similar – or even indistinguishable – is scientifically meaningless: it has no probative value, and considerable 
potential for prejudicial impact.”  Id. at 143; 2009 NRC Report, 
supra, at 161 (“In cases where there seems to be a morphological 
[hair] match (based on microscopic examination), it must be 
confirmed using mtDNA analysis; microscopic studies alone are of 
limited probative value.”) (emphasis added). 
“Consistent with” also sounds scientific. To a jury, it 
means the fibers matched. When an FBI expert tells the jury 
that fibers found on a victim’s underwear are “consistent with” coming from the defendant’s car seat, the jury hears a source-
to-sample-match.  “Microscopically identical” and 
“microscopically the same” conjure a similarly illusory aura of 
science-backed accuracy.  These phrases inform a jury that the 
expert examined the fibers under a microscope and they were the 
same. They match. 
44  
  
    
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
But science established no such thing. No scientific 
studies have characterized reliability or error rates in fiber 
comparison techniques. There are no set standards for how many 
characteristics must correspond to conclude that fibers came 
from the same manufacturing batch. 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 
162-63.  Without error rate studies, validation research, and 
verified standards, Oakes had no foundation for the certainty 
his testimony conveyed. See id. Yet convey it he did. 
Third, Oakes never told the jury that fiber comparison, as 
a discipline, can only produce class-level associations.  The NRC Report concludes that “a ‘match’ means only that the fibers 
could have come from the same type of garment, carpet, or 
furniture; it can provide only class evidence.” 2009 NRC 
Report, supra, at 163. Reliable fiber testimony must 
communicate this fundamental limitation. The expert testifying 
to a “match” must clarify that “matching” fibers means only that 
the questioned fibers and the known sample share class characteristics – they could have come from any number of items.  
And experts cannot rule out any of them. 
Perhaps with the right guardrails, Oakes’ testimony could 
have been admissible. But statements that fibers are 
“consistent with” another item must be crystal clear that the 
consistency is solely class-based, and does not establish a 
source match. “Consistency” walks a fine line with “match.” 
45  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Context is everything. Here, absent any qualifying 
language explaining the scientific limits of the class evidence 
as to source, Oakes’ “consistency” language skirted the class 
qualifiers and conveyed a “match” that exceeded the science. 
Without understanding that fiber evidence is limited to class 
evidence, the jury had every reason to conclude that Oakes 
matched the fibers to Granillo’s car. And only Granillo’s car. 
Fourth, there was no testimony about validation studies. 
The NRC Report found, “There have been no studies of fibers (e.g., the variability of their characteristics during and after 
manufacturing) on which to base . . . a threshold [for 
concluding that two fibers came from the same manufacturing 
batch.]” Id. at 163 (emphasis added). The report continued, 
“Similarly, there have been no studies to inform judgments about whether environmentally related changes discerned in particular 
fibers are distinctive enough to reliably individualize their 
source, and there have been no studies that characterize either reliability or error rates in the procedures.” Id. (emphases 
added). 
The research does not exist. The scientific community has 
conducted no validation research determining that fiber comparison works for the purposes of ruling out or specifically 
identifying sources. No studies exist showing that when an 
46  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
examiner says two fibers “match,” they actually come from the 
same source with any measurable frequency. 
Oakes’ expert testimony relied on his training and 
experience. PCAST confronted this analytical flaw head-on.  
“‘[E]xperience’ or ‘judgment’ cannot be used to establish the 
scientific validity and reliability of a metrological method, 
such as a forensic feature-comparison method.  The frequency 
with which a particular pattern or set of features will be observed in different samples, which is an essential element in 
drawing conclusions, is not a matter of ‘judgment.’” 2016 PCAST 
Report, supra, at 55 (emphasis added). 
Experience doesn’t validate a technique. Oakes’ testimony 
hinged entirely on his nearly ten years in the FBI’s hair and 
fiber division. But time on the job is not a substitute for 
empirical validation. No amount of experience transforms 
assertion into science. 
Fifth, no unique environmental characteristics were 
identified. The NRC Report recognizes one narrow exception to fiber analysis’ limitations. “In some cases, clothing and 
carpets have been subjected to relatively distinctive 
environmental conditions (e.g., sunlight exposure or laundering 
agents) that impart characteristics that can distinguish 
particular items from others from the same manufacturing lot.” 
2009 NRC Report, supra, at 161. Even then, the Report cautions, 
47  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“none of these characteristics is suitable for individualizing 
fibers.” Id. 
Oakes simply said the fibers were “microscopically 
identical” and “consistent with” coming from Granillo’s car. He 
identified no unique environmental characteristics separating 
these fibers from others in the same manufacturing lot. Yet 
Oakes testified as if they could belong to only one car. 
We now turn to Oakes’ climactic opinion: the fibers were 
“consistent with” Price being in Granillo’s car “with her pants off and panties exposed.” This culmination compounded all that 
came before. 
The prosecution asked, “[A]re [your findings] consistent 
with the allegation that [Price] was in the car with her pants 
off and panties exposed?” “Yes,” Oakes answered. “The fact 
that I found seat cover fibers in the debris from the victim’s 
panties would be consistent with that, yes.” 
Oakes’ testimony exceeded the science. 
First, his opinion assumes the predicate – the fibers came 
from Granillo’s seat cover. The science did not support that premise. Second, Oakes validated the prosecution’s theory. 
“Consistent with” gave the State’s narrative the shine of 
scientific confirmation.  That is not what a neutral expert 
does. That’s what an advocate does. Third, the opinion 
converted class-level fiber evidence into proof of guilt.  The 
48  
  
 
   
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jury, in effect, heard: “The FBI’s fiber analysis confirms that 
[Price] was in Granillo’s car with her underwear exposed.” 
That’s precisely what the DOJ letter condemned in Oakes’ hair 
testimony. Oakes’ expert opinion did what the DOJ letter said 
was inappropriate for hair opinions.  It assigned “statistical 
weight or probability . . . that the questioned [evidence] 
originated from a particular source” in a manner that “could 
lead the jury to believe that valid statistical weight can be assigned” to the association. 
Thus, Oakes’ culminating opinion didn’t just exceed the  
science. It was the predictable result of all that preceded it 
–  assumed conclusions, unearned certainty, and concealed 
limitations.  
We repeat. The 2009 NRC Report could not be clearer. Hair 
and fiber analysis have “the same limitations.” Fibers “can be examined microscopically in the same way as hairs, and with the 
same limitations.” 2009 NRC Report, supra, at 161 (emphasis added). 
This parallel structure is not something we can sidestep. 
It controls our analysis. The DOJ found Oakes’ hair testimony 
exceeded scientific limits. The circuit court and the ICA 
agreed. Hair and fiber comparison analysis share “the same 
limitations.” See id. What’s true for one is true for the 
other. 
49  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Here’s the side-by-side comparison.  For hair, Oakes 
testified that the sample was “consistent with originating from 
[Price].” The DOJ concluded this improperly “assigned to the 
positive association a statistical weight or probability” and 
“exceed[ed] the limits of the science.” For fiber, Oakes 
testified that the samples were “consistent with coming from 
[Granillo’s car seat].” The science does not distinguish 
between the two. Neither do we. 
The ICA erred in deeming the hair testimony invalid while 
treating the fiber testimony as valid. Both disciplines have “the same limitations.” What invalidated the hair testimony, 
invalidated the fiber testimony. To hold otherwise would be 
analytically erratic and scientifically indefensible. 
Last, Oakes’ fiber testimony cannot withstand current 
scientific understanding or evidentiary standards. No credible 
expert would testify that way today. No court would admit it. 
See HRE Rule 702; State v. Spies
, 157 Hawaiʻi 75, 88, 575 P.3d 
708, 721 (2025) (“[an] expert’s analysis must meet a threshold 
level of reliability and trustworthiness”) (citation omitted). Testimony that would be inadmissible now was false when admitted 
in 1990. 
C. The False Evidence Standard Applies to Discredited 
Scientific Testimony 
The ICA applied the wrong standard. McNulty
’s newly 
50  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
discovered evidence standard does not govern post-conviction 
relief petitions concerning discredited scientific testimony. 
Newly-discredited scientific evidence is not new evidence. The 
expert testimony was never properly-admitted evidence to begin 
with. The testimony was always false. 
The presentation of materially false evidence violates due 
process. McNulty’s “newly discovered evidence” standard does 
not align with never-true evidence.  The false evidence 
standard, rooted in constitutional due process, controls. 
We hold that when scientific developments invalidate 
testimony presented at trial, the false evidence standard 
applies. 
Beyond due process, the false evidence standard promotes 
accurate convictions, aligns legal standards with scientific 
reality, and creates appropriate incentives for the responsible 
use of forensic science. Within the HRPP Rule 40 post-
conviction framework, the false evidence standard governs claims based on scientifically invalidated testimony. 
Apply that standard here. The result follows. An FBI 
agent’s scientific testimony powered the prosecution’s case and 
boxed in Granillo’s defense. 
Because that testimony was materially false, Granillo’s 
article I, section 5 right to a fair trial was violated. He is 
entitled to a new trial. 
51  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We start with the false evidence standard. 
1. The False Evidence Standard 
Under the Hawaiʻi Constitution, due process protects the 
right to a fair trial. Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. This court has 
held that the right to a fair trial is violated when there is a 
“reasonable possibility” that false evidence contributed to the 
conviction. Stone
, 147 Hawaiʻi at 271, 465 P.3d at 718; 
Birano
, 
143 Hawaiʻi at 181-82, 426 P.3d at 405-06. 
The principle is not unique to Hawaiʻ i. The United States 
Supreme Court long ago established that a conviction obtained 
through false evidence violates due process. See Mooney v.  
Holohan, 294 U.S. 103, 112 (1935) (conviction obtained through perjured testimony violates due process); Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 269 (1959) (the State may not knowingly use false   
evidence to obtain a conviction); Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 153 (1972) (knowingly using false evidence is 
“incompatible with ‘rudimentary demands of justice’”).  The D.C. 
Circuit applied this principle to the same type of forensic 
evidence at issue here. See Butler  , 955 F.3d at 1057.  
The false evidence must be material. Stone
, 147 Hawaiʻi at 
270, 465 P.3d at 717; 
State v. Teves, 5 Haw. App. 90, 96, 679 
P.2d 136, 141 (App. 1984) (a new trial under HRPP Rule 33 requires false testimony of a “material prosecution witness”); 
Butler, 955 F.3d at 1057-58.  The standard recognizes that false 
52  
  
 
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence cases “involve a corruption of the truth-seeking 
function of the trial process.” See United States v. Agurs  , 427 
U.S. 97, 104 (1976); see also Butler  , 955 F.3d at 1058 (same).  
The false evidence standard protects a fundamental 
constitutional right: the right to a fair trial untainted by materially false testimony. 
We begin with the standard the ICA applied, and then 
explain why the false evidence standard is better suited to discredited scientific evidence. 
2. McNulty’s Newly Discovered Evidence Mismatch 
McNulty doesn’t fit. Unlike the false evidence standard, 
the newly discovered evidence standard does not align with later-discredited scientific testimony.  The two standards serve 
different purposes and address different situations. 
Per McNulty, newly discovered evidence warrants a new trial  
when the evidence (1) is discovered after trial; (2) could not 
have been discovered before or at trial through due diligence; (3) is material and not cumulative; and (4) would probably 
change the outcome of a retrial. 60 Haw. at 267-68, 588 P.2d at 
445.  
This standard contemplates evidence. That is, facts about 
what happened. The “new” evidence provides information about 
historical facts. For instance, a new alibi witness, documents 
that existed at trial but weren’t found despite diligent search, 
53  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a post-trial confession by another person, or DNA test results 
that technological advances made available. The evidence was 
either present at trial but undiscovered, or new facts arose 
afterward. 
Under the McNulty “newly discovered evidence” standard, the 
court adds new evidence and weighs its impact. But in 
Granillo’s case, the court must subtract powerful forensic 
evidence that has been proven false. McNulty is ill-suited for 
cases involving later-discredited science.  A different, less 
demanding standard applies. 
Scientific propositions are true or false based on 
empirical reality, not contemporary belief. When the FBI agent 
shared his expert opinions with Maui County jurors, the 
testimony was either scientifically valid or not. 
McNulty works for the type of evidence it covers – evidence 
that was not around at trial. But what about evidence that was 
never true, always false? What standard applies when forensic science testimony is later revealed to lack scientific validity? 
The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals’ analysis in Butler is 
instructive. Butler confronted the same question we face, on 
nearly identical facts. 955 F.3d at 1053. The D.C. Circuit reversed a person’s murder conviction based on improperly 
admitted hair microscopy evidence. Id. At trial, the 
prosecution’s expert testified that hairs recovered from the 
54  
  
   
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
victim’s clothing were “microscopically the same” as Butler’s 
hair, “alike in all identifiable microscopic characteristics” to 
Butler’s hair, and “matched [Butler’s hair] in all microscopic 
characteristics.” Id. at 1055-56.  When asked how likely it was 
for two hairs to be microscopically alike yet come from different people, the expert said that in approximately 10,000 
examinations, this happened “four or five times,” something the 
prosecutor highlighted in closing.  Id. at 1056. 
In 2015, over forty years after Butler’s conviction, the 
DOJ determined that the testimony against him “exceeded the limits of science.” Id. at 1057. Based on the government’s 
disclosure, the evidence was “invalid.” Id. Butler sought 
post-conviction relief.  Id. 
The D.C. Circuit Court held that the hair evidence 
constituted “false evidence.” Id. The government conceded the 
testimony “was false and exceeded the limits of science.” Id. 
It also acknowledged that it “knew or should have known of hair microscopy evidence’s inadequacies at the time of trial.” Id. 
With falsity established, Butler turned to the dispositive question - materiality. “[T]he sole question for us is whether 
the prosecution’s use of the false hair testimony against Butler 
was material.” Id. 
Butler’s materiality analysis aligns with our own. False 
evidence is material, the D.C. Circuit held, if it “could in any 
55  
   
 
     
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable likelihood have affected the judgment of the jury.” 
Id. at 1058 (citation omitted). Because false evidence corrupts 
truth-detecting and undermines constitutional guarantees, the 
standard must be “quite easily satisfied.” Id. 
Stone’s reasonable possibility standard serves the same 
function. Both Stone and Butler place the constitutional focus 
on the integrity of the conviction. Neither asks whether the 
remaining evidence is strong enough to save the verdict. The newly discovered evidence standard does. 
The difference in burden matters. Per Stone
, the defendant 
need only show a “reasonable possibility that the false 
testimony could have contributed to . . . conviction.” 147 
Hawaiʻi at 271, 465 P.3d at 718 (applying the false evidence 
standard to a motion for a new trial under HRPP Rule 33). Per 
McNulty
, the defendant must show that the “evidence is of such a 
nature as would probably change the result of a later trial.” 
Kubota
, 155 Hawaiʻi at 145, 557 P.3d at 874 (emphasis added). 
Newly discovered evidence’s forward-looking standard 
focuses on speculation about what a hypothetical jury might do 
at a retrial. 
This is an inherently uncertain inquiry that may 
fail to register the false evidence’s full impact. 
Because convictions obtained by false evidence disrupt the 
accuracy of factfinding and have a constitutional dimension, the 
comparatively lighter false evidence standard fits. When a jury 
56  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hears false testimony – particularly false scientific testimony 
cloaked in the FBI’s aura of authority - there can be little 
confidence in the verdict. A reasonable possibility standard 
better assesses false scientific evidence’s actual effect on the 
jury. 
This lesser burden makes sense both practically and from 
fairness perspectives. If defendants had to show that they 
would “probably” have been acquitted without the false testimony, most would fail. As in Granillo’s case, prosecutions 
rarely turn on forensic evidence alone.  Under a “probability” 
standard, the government’s use of invalid science would go 
largely unchecked. So long as other evidence makes acquittal 
improbable, junk science expert testimony would be permissible. 
The degree of backwards-looking certainty required to find 
“probability” glosses over the harm wrought by false scientific 
evidence. 
In contrast, the “reasonable possibility” standard asks the 
correct constitutional question. Did the false evidence undermine confidence in the actual verdict? This backward-
looking inquiry understands that when a conviction relies even 
partially on false evidence, the verdict’s reliability is 
compromised. Despite how confident reviewing courts reading 
transcripts years later might feel about a verdict based on 
other evidence. 
57  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As Agurs  reasoned, the harm is “a corruption of the truth-
seeking function of the trial process.” 427 U.S. at 104. That 
corruption occurs the moment false evidence is presented. Not 
years later when an appellate court speculates it would 
“probably” have changed the outcome.   
3. The Updated Science in This Case is Not Newly 
Discovered Evidence 
Neither the 2009 NRC Report’s nor the 2016 PCAST Report’s 
findings qualify as “newly discovered evidence.” 
Those reports 
reveal no new facts about what happened, identify no new 
witnesses, and do not uncover previously hidden documents. See 
State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw. 106, 112, 807 P.2d 1264, 1268 (1991); State v. Caraballo, 62 Haw. 309, 316-18, 615 P.2d 91, 97 (1980). 
Rather, these two groundbreaking reports supply 
authoritative scientific analysis showing that expert testimony used to secure convictions across the country lacked validity. 
Federal agents, like Oakes, assured jurors in courtrooms like 
Maui’s that they had scientifically determined with certainty 
exactly where hair and fiber samples originated. That assurance 
was untrue. 
Reports documenting scientific advances operate differently 
than newly discovered evidence. The 2009 and 2016 reports evaluated the scientific validity of expert opinions used to 
58  
  
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
convict. They changed the view of pre-existing evidence.  They 
did not discover new evidence. 
The distinction matters. Justice Sotomayor recently 
explained that “newly-discredited forensic evidence is different 
from other newly-discovered facts.”  McCrory v. Alabama, 144 S. 
Ct. 2483, 2487 (Mem) (2024) (Sotomayor, J., statement 
“respecting the denial of certiorari”). “Evidence that an 
entire mode of forensic analysis has no scientific basis[] . . . is of a different category from evidence that might call into 
question a witness’s credibility or motive to testify.”  Id. A 
jury convicted McCrory of murder “based on forensic bitemark testimony that has now been roundly condemned by the scientific 
community[.]” Id. at 2483. That evidence wasn’t new evidence, 
Justice Sotomayor explained. See id. “Unlike a new witness to 
a murder or a new analysis of DNA evidence, the new evidence is 
simply a scientific consensus that the old evidence was 
unreliable. In McCrory’s case, for example, it is not that the dental mold was not of McCrory’s teeth or that the victim had no 
marks on her arm. It is simply that a modern scientist would be 
unable to testify that the two had anything to do with each 
other.” Id. at 2487. 
The “new evidence” here is not a witness Granillo failed to 
call or a document he failed to produce. It is scientific 
59  
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consensus that the expert’s testimony exceeded the limits of 
science. 
Oakes’ hair and fiber testimony is discredited not by the 
discovery of new evidence. It is discredited by a fundamental 
shift in the scientific understanding of the evidence that was 
presented at trial. We now know that back then the State used 
unsound scientific methods to convict. 
Newly discovered facts are a different type of evidence. 
See Mabuti, 72 Haw. at 112, 807 P.2d at 1268. Mabuti’s motion for a new trial was “based on the late development of 
the discovery of a previously unknown witness, whose purported 
testimony contested the credibility of one of the State’s 
witnesses.” Id. Because newly discovered evidence – an actual 
new witness - was at issue, McNulty applied. Id.; see also 
Caraballo, 62 Haw. at 316-18, 615 P.2d at 97. 
The 2009 NRC Report did not make Oakes’ testimony false. 
It revealed that his testimony was always false. From the start, his testimony about the significance of his fiber 
analysis lacked scientific support. So there was no newly 
discovered fact about microscopic hair and fiber comparison.  
The Report revealed that the empirical foundation for Oakes’ 
expert opinions never existed. What changed was the criminal 
justice system’s awareness of that reality. 
60  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As one scholar put it, “[t]he fact that a consensus of 
scientific experts in a particular field once agreed on a 
principle but, based on new scientific data, no longer does is 
not the type of newly discovered evidence that most fresh-
evidence doctrines contemplate.  There was no misconduct by the 
prosecutors in presenting the evidence prior to the change in 
consensus precisely because, at the time of trial, the testimony 
represented the consensus of the field.” Carrie Leonetti, The Innocence Checklist, 58 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 97, 121 (2021). 
Granillo’s case concerns false evidence, not newly 
discovered evidence. The appeal centers not on the belated 
discovery of new facts, but on the original admission of 
unreliable scientific evidence presented by an FBI agent. 
4. Constitutional Rights Override Prudential Concerns 
Under Rule 40 
There’s another reason that McNulty does not apply. 
Constitutional rights eclipse prudential rules. Due process 
does not yield to finality interests or judicial efficiency 
concerns. See State v. Cruz, 486 P.3d 1, 3 (N.M. 2021) 
(“[F]undamental constitutional rights cannot be jettisoned for the sake of judicial efficiency.”). 
The false evidence standard descends from due process. 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 5; see Napue, 360 U.S. at 269 (“[A] 
61  
    
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conviction obtained through use of false evidence[] . . . must 
fall under the Fourteenth Amendment”). 
In contrast, court rules create the new evidence standard. 
HRPP Rule 40 reflects prudential concerns about when post-
conviction relief is appropriate. The due diligence requirement 
and probability-of-different-outcome standard promote finality 
and deter “sandbagging,” the strategic withholding of evidence 
at trial only to raise it later. See McNulty, 60 Haw. at 268, 
588 P.2d at 445 (“the composite knowledge of both the accused 
and his counsel will be considered” to determine whether the 
defendant diligently tried to locate the evidence); Eason v. 
State
, 157 Hawaiʻi 252, 267, 576 P.3d 765, 780 (2025) (Rule 40’s 
limitations on post-conviction relief “provid[e] a balanced 
approach to post-convictions proceedings that maintain the 
integrity of criminal convictions while also comporting with 
constitutional due process requirements.”) (quoting Judiciary, 
Testimony to House Committee on Judiciary on S.B. 2, Proposed 
H.D.
 1, 30th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Mar. 27, 2019)). 
But these are not constitutional commands. They are judge-
made rules that address prudential concerns appropriate only for 
discrete circumstances. 
Newly discovered evidence is a prudential doctrine. False 
evidence is a constitutional violation . When the government 
obtains a conviction using false evidence, the conviction 
62  
  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
offends due process. Stone, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 465 P.3d at 718. 
Constitutional protections require applying the false evidence 
standard rather than McNulty’s prudential rule. 
We pause to note that historically, due process was 
violated when the prosecution knew or should have known at trial 
that the evidence was false. Stone, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 465 P.3d 
at 718; Napue, 360 U.S. at 269 (“[A] State may not knowingly use 
false evidence, including false testimony, to obtain a tainted 
conviction[.]”). 
Later-discredited science though presents an unanswered 
question. The testimony was false when given. The falsity had 
not yet been recognized. The constitutional harm flows from 
using false evidence to convict, not from the prosecutor’s 
awareness of falsity. 
We hold that for cases involving discredited science, 
whether the State knew or should have known the testimony was false at trial is inconsequential. Convictions secured through 
false evidence violate due process, even if scientific advances 
revealed the falsity only after trial. See Stone
, 147 Hawaiʻi at 
272, 465 P.3d at 719. 
The concurrence would require the prosecution to have known 
the scientific evidence was false before the false evidence standard applies. 
The Hawaiʻi Constitution requires no such 
thing. 
63  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We acknowledge the federal lineage. In Napue, the 
prosecutor let a witness deny a deal the prosecutor knew 
existed. 360 U.S. at 267. In Giglio, one prosecutor made a 
deal with a witness that the trial prosecutor never knew about.  
The witness denied any agreement on the stand. No one corrected 
him. But the Court held the office responsible. 405 U.S. at 
154. Knowledge mattered in Napue  and Giglio  because the 
constitutional wrong was the prosecution’s deliberate corruption 
of the trial. The remedy matched the wrong.  
Napue 
and Giglio did not hold that knowledge is a 
constitutional precondition for relief. They held that the 
knowing use of false evidence violates due process. Neither 
case confronted whether the unknowing use of false evidence also 
violates due process. The issue never came up. 
The suggestion that knowledge is necessary traces to 
dictum. In Agurs, the Court characterized the Mooney  line of 
cases as involving “the knowing use of perjured testimony.” 427 
U.S. at 103. But knowing use already stretches beyond actual 
knowledge.   
In Giglio, the trial prosecutor never personally knew the 
testimony was false. 405 U.S. at 154. The Court imputed 
knowledge from another attorney in the office. If the doctrine 
expanded once from actual knowledge to imputed knowledge, there 
is no principled reason it cannot expand again to reach cases 
64  
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
where no one knew because the scientific community itself had 
not yet recognized the falsity. See Anne Bowen Poulin, 
Convictions Based on Lies: Defining Due Process Protection, 116 Penn St. L. Rev. 331, 340 (2011). 
Still, even with that expansion, every case in the Mooney 
line involved some form of knowledge. No United States Supreme 
Court case has held that its absence bars relief. Id. at 393; 
see also Evenstad v. Carlson, 470 F.3d 777, 783 (8th Cir. 2006) 
(observing that the Supreme Court has not resolved whether the 
unknowing use of false evidence violates due process). 
One case points in the opposite direction. In Mesarosh v. 
United States, the Court ordered a new trial after learning that 
a key prosecution witness had testified falsely, even though the 
prosecution had presented the testimony unknowingly. 352 U.S. 
1, 9 (1956). “The dignity of the United States Government will 
not permit the conviction of any person on tainted testimony.”  
Id. Mesarosh focused on the integrity of the conviction, not the prosecutor’s state of mind. 
This court’s precedent goes further. In Stone
, the deputy 
prosecuting attorney did not know the officer’s testimony was 
false until after trial. 147 Hawaiʻi at 272, 465 P.3d at 719.  
We held that this did not matter. “[T]he good faith of the 
prosecutor in failing to correct false testimony regarding 
impeachment material has no bearing on whether a defendant 
65  
  
  
 
  
 
    
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
received a fair trial as required by due process.” Id. (quoting 
Birano, 143 Hawaiʻ i at 189, 426 P.3d at 413).  If the 
prosecutor’s good faith is irrelevant when a witness testifies 
falsely at trial, it cannot become relevant when an entire 
forensic field is later debunked. 
The principle is the same. 
What matters is whether the trial was fair. Not whether the prosecutor knew it wasn’t. 
The concurring opinion reads Stone 
for more than that. It 
traces Stone through its adoption of the Teves four-factor test 
for new-trial motions, points to the fourth factor (harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt), and concludes that Stone forecloses 
the false evidence standard’s materiality inquiry.  
Stone did apply harmless error. But what Stone applied 
does not control the question before us.  
Start with procedure. Stone  arrived on a motion for new 
trial under HRPP Rule 33. 147 Hawaiʻi at 265, 465 P.3d at 712.  
The Teves  test exists for Rule 33 motions. 5 Haw. App. at 96, 
679 P.2d at 141.  Its four factors are tailored to that posture: (1) the testimony of a material  prosecution witness was false, 
(2) the defendant did not discover the falseness until after trial, (3) the late discovery was not due to lack of diligence, 
and (4) the false testimony was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt because there was a reasonable possibility it contributed 
to the conviction. Stone, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 270, 465 P.3d at 717 
66  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(citing Teves, 5 Haw. App. at 96, 679 P.2d at 141).  Stone  
applied Teves  because Teves  was the test for the case before it. 
A Rule 33 motion based on a single officer’s lie discovered 
shortly after trial. Id.  at 270-71, 465 P.3d at 717-18.  
Granillo is different. 
Granillo is a Rule 40 petition 
involving expert testimony that the scientific community, NRC, 
PCAST, and the DOJ have all since repudiated. The first three 
Teves factors do not fit. Factor two asks whether the defendant discovered the falsity after trial. In a discredited-science 
case, no one discovered any falsity at the time because no one 
yet thought the science was wrong. Factor three asks about due 
diligence. No diligence in 1990 could have revealed what the 
2009 NRC Report would later announce. Those Teves factors were 
not built for this kind of claim. 
Yet the concurring opinion borrows only the fourth Teves 
factor and drops it into Granillo’s case. It treats one prong 
of a Rule 33 framework as the freestanding constitutional standard for a Rule 40 petition. The harmless-error language 
gets carried over, severed from the framework that gave it 
meaning. That conflates two standards into one. 
One more point about what Stone actually held. The Teves 
test Stone applied requires, as factor one, that the false 
testimony be that of a “material prosecution witness.” 5 Haw. 
App. at 96, 679 P.2d at 141.  The test begins with materiality. 
67  
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A material prosecution witness is one whose false evidence would 
influence the verdict.  See Stone, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 269, 465 P.3d 
at 716 (the officer was the only witness to the defendant’s 
alleged possession of methamphetamine). 
Factor four operates only once materiality clears.  Stone 
applied both, in sequence, as a single test. Materiality and 
harmless error are part of one Teves test, not opposing 
standards. 
Stone has work to do here.  Stone 
tells us prosecutorial 
knowledge is not required for a false evidence claim under 
article I, section 5. 147 Hawaiʻi at 272, 465 P.3d at 719. That 
is the principle we draw from it. We do not draw a Rule 40 
discredited science standard from a Rule 33 newly discovered 
evidence case. Stone 
did not face this posture. Stone did not 
confront this kind of evidence. Stone did not announce a 
standard for cases it had not seen. 
The right doctrinal frame here is the one the D.C. Circuit 
applied in Butler. Butler addressed this exact problem. A 
conviction built on FBI hair and fiber testimony the DOJ has 
disavowed, decades after trial, in a post-conviction posture.  
Butler applied materiality. 955 F.3d at 1058. Article I, 
section 5 calls for the same protective standard when the same 
kind of injury comes through our courts. We do not transplant the Teves framework into the Rule 40 context. We adopt the 
68  
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
materiality standard that Butler applied to the same kind of 
conviction. 
The concurrence hinges on the prosecution’s concession of 
knowledge in Butler. That admission, though, does not excuse 
what the State failed to know.  It did not drive the court’s 
analysis. Instead, Butler framed the dispositive question as 
“whether the prosecution’s use of the false hair testimony 
against Butler was material.” Id. at 1057. Not whether the 
prosecution knew. The D.C. Circuit’s holding hinged on 
materiality, not mental state. False evidence is material if it 
“could in any reasonable likelihood have affected the judgment 
of the jury.” Id. at 1058. 
The government’s admission in Butler resolved a preliminary 
question: whether the testimony was false. Once that was 
established, the court moved to harm. Knowledge was not a 
doctrinal requirement of the holding. It was a reason the court 
did not need to linger on the threshold question of falsity.  The government agreed the evidence was false and that it knew or 
should have known. That shortcut made the path to materiality 
shorter. It did not make knowledge a condition of relief. 
Discredited science proves the point. No one lied. No one 
concealed. The prosecution, the defense, and the court all 
relied on a scientific consensus that turned out to be wrong. 
The constitutional injury is not prosecutorial bad faith. It’s 
69  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the use of false evidence to convict. The song remains the 
same. Only the source of the falsity changed. 
The concurrence leans on Fukusaku 
for this exact point. In 
1997, this court called the “principles and procedures 
underlying hair and fiber evidence . . . well-established and of 
proven reliability.” 85 Hawaiʻi at 474, 946 P.2d at 44.  
Granillo’s trial was in 1990. No prosecutor, no defense lawyer, 
no judge could have known what the 2009 NRC Report would later 
reveal. 
Granted -
no one could have known.  
Granillo is not less wrongly convicted because everyone in 
1990 acted in good faith. He sits in prison on testimony the 
science no longer supports. Good faith describes the lawyers. 
It does not describe the defendant’s plight.  A standard that 
requires fault before relief leaves them without a remedy. 
Article I, section 5 exists for cases like this one.  
Conditioning relief on knowledge would shield an entire 
category of constitutional violations. Convictions obtained 
through evidence that no one yet knew was false would fall outside the false evidence standard. The defendant’s 
constitutional injury would be the same.  The verdict would be 
equally unreliable. The trial would be equally unfair. But the 
defendant could only seek relief under the newly discovered 
evidence standard, a far heavier burden.  Knowledge does not 
70  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
make the evidence more or less false. And its absence does not 
salvage the verdict. 
A knowledge requirement would also create perverse 
incentives. “If the prosecution is able to defeat the 
defendant’s argument that false testimony violated due process 
simply by insulating itself from knowledge of information 
pertinent to the case, the constitutional protection of the 
right to a fair trial is compromised.”  Poulin, supra, at 349. Prosecutors would have less reason to rigorously vet forensic 
testimony before trial. The government would benefit by staying 
behind the science as forensic methodologies progress. Racing 
to convict before scientific consensus catches up would go 
unchecked. Constitutional protections do not depend on whether 
the legal system recognizes current scientific reality. 
The concurring opinion looks outside Hawaiʻ i for support.  
To a concurrence in Ex Parte Warner cautioning against side-
stepping prosecutorial knowledge. 721 S.W.3d 436, 445 (Tex. 
Crim. App. 2025) (Finley, J., concurring). Warner is one 
judge’s separate writing on a denied habeas petition. It binds 
no one. Not even in Texas. And the federal due process 
doctrine that animates it cannot tell this court how to read 
article I, section 5. 
We are not side-stepping anything.  We are doing what state 
constitutionalism asks us to do. Stand our ground. 
71  
  
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The concurrence seizes on the federal precedent the Texas 
court’s concurring judge cited.  The United States Supreme Court 
has “never held that an unknowing use of false evidence violates 
due process,” that judge wrote. Warner, 721 S.W.3d at 443 
(Finley, J., concurring). The concurrence also cites Glossip v. Oklahoma, 604 U.S. 226 (2025), as confirming a knowledge 
requirement. But Glossip addressed a knowing-use case.  It 
involved a prosecutor who knew. Id. at 228. It did not 
confront what shakes out when an entire branch of forensic 
science collapses. 
That statement is not a boundary. Glossip described the 
precedent as it stood. It did not shut the door on cases like 
this one. 
The concurrence’s insistence that the prosecution’s 
knowledge concession in Butler counsels adoption of Stone in 
this context, like its reliance on Glossip, ultimately depends 
on the premise that federal constitutional doctrine controls this court’s interpretation of article I, section 5. It does 
not. 
We interpret the Hawaiʻi Constitution on its own terms.  The 
United State Supreme Court’s construction of the federal Due 
Process Clause does not define the protections of our state’s 
due process clause. This court “reason[s] independently, 
untethered from the Supreme Court’s analysis of the United 
72  
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
States Constitution.” State v. Wilson, 154 Hawaiʻ i 8, 14, 543 
P.3d 440, 446 (2024). 
The Court that now defines federal due process does not 
honor the work of 1954. It revives the work of 1857. The work 
of 1896. The Constitution must be interpreted “according to its 
true intent and meaning when it was adopted.” Dred Scott v.
Sandford, 60 U.S. 393, 405 (1857). 
Today’s hubristic originalists use the same method to 
control modern life. See City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Sunoco LP, 
153 Hawaiʻ i 326, 361, 537 P.3d 1173, 1208 (2023) (Eddins, J., 
concurring) (“A justice’s personal values and ideas about the very old days suddenly control the lives of present and future 
generations.”). 
The Court overrides what Congress passed. It overrides 
what the people chose. All to serve its own ends. 
What this Court has done to constitutional rights, 
democratic institutions, and the rule of law explains why 
Hawaiʻi’s Constitution takes no instruction from it. 
Article I, section 5 provides versatile and sovereign 
protection. 
This court does not anchor Hawaiʻi’s due process 
rights to the federal floor. Especially one that keeps sinking. 
We take no guidance on the meaning of due process from a 
court that gutted due process protections in 
Dobbs v. Jackson 
Women’s Health Org., 597 U.S. 215 (2022). Zuffante called it 
73  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
straight. Dobbs erased a “generations-long constitutional 
right, stripping autonomy from half the population, and 
empowering states to force birth.” State v. Zuffante
, 157 
Hawaiʻi 194, 200, 576 P.3d 243, 249 (2025). 
Article I, section 5 does not import that results-driven 
approach to due process. 
We follow principles, not agendas. 
The Supreme Court’s imperious ideology does not stop at due 
process. The same jurisprudence has cratered democracy itself. Start with the Voting Rights Act. 
The Roberts Court did what Congress never would. It 
rewrote the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a cornerstone of American 
civil rights, democratically enacted and repeatedly reauthorized. Shelby County v. Holder, 570 U.S. 529 (2013), 
began the judicial demolition, inventing a textually unsupported equal-sovereignty fiction and striking down preclearance on a 
hunch that the law worked too well. Brnovich v. Democratic 
National Committee, 594 U.S. 647 (2021), fabricated “guideposts” nowhere in Section 2 to greenlight racial discrimination in 
voting. Louisiana v. Callais, 608 U.S. ___, 146 S. Ct. 1131 
(Apr. 29, 2026), buried what remained of the crown jewel of the 
civil rights movement. Pretend law for a real statute. 
The Court then ditched its own thirty-two day default for 
releasing decisions and hustled out its judgment mid-primary, a 
favor granted over objection only twice in twenty-five years. 
74  
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
    
  
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Callais v. Louisiana, 608 U.S. __ , 146 S. Ct. 1111, 1113 (May 
4, 2026) (Jackson, J., dissenting). Weeks later, on its shadow 
docket, the Court tossed an eleven-day trial record built on 
fifty-one witnesses, 790 exhibits, 2,600 pages of testimony, and 
a 270-page opinion by a three-judge court.  See Singleton v. 
Allen, 782 F. Supp. 3d 1092, 1115, 1355 (N.D. Ala. 2025).  It 
resurrected a tainted congressional map the three-judge 
factfinders found deliberately entrenched racial bias against Black voters. Allen v. Milligan, 608 U.S. ___, 146 S. Ct. 1377 
(June 2, 2026); see also Hilo Bay Marina, LLC v. State
, 156 
Hawaiʻi 478, 516, 575 P.3d 568, 606 (2025) (The “Court’s frequent 
misrepresentation of the factual record and its throw-judges
-
under-the-bus disdain for district courts, the fact-finders of 
the federal judiciary, harm the justice system.”). 
The Roberts Court sees only white. It refuses to 
acknowledge who the Equal Protection Clause was written to 
protect. The freed people, their descendants, and all others 
denied equal citizenship. U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. It 
turns its back on what is in plain sight. The Fourteenth Amendment is not colorblind. It never was. 
The Court calls the Constitution colorblind while 
engineering the dilution of Black votes, the unraveling of hard-
fought civil rights remedies, and the erasure of Black 
75  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
history. That is not blindness. That is white sight, by 
design. 
A Constitution interpreted this way is not colorblind. It 
is whatever the Court needs it to be. A way to advance its 
partisan project. The damage to democracy extends beyond the 
Voting Rights Act. 
In Citizens United v. Fed. Election Comm’n, 558 U.S. 310 
(2010), the Court claimed fidelity to text, history, and tradition while invalidating yet another democratically vetted 
law, handing corporations the same speech rights as flesh-and-
blood Americans and letting dollars talk louder than voters. 
See Sunoco, 153 Hawaiʻ i at 362, 537 P.3d at 1209 (Eddins, J., 
concurring) (originalism applies selectively and vanishes 
inconveniently); Leo E. Strine, Jr. & Nicholas Walter, 
Originalist or Original: The Difficulties of Reconciling 
Citizens United with Corporate Law History, 91 Notre Dame L. 
Rev. 877 (2016) (Citizens United cannot be reconciled with 
corporate law history). 
Other decisions followed. The Court abandoned partisan 
gerrymandering to the gerrymanderers, refusing for the first time to remedy a constitutional violation because it believed 
the task beyond judicial competence. Rucho v. Common Cause, 588 
U.S. 684 (2019); see id. at 721 (Kagan, J., dissenting). It 
76  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
placed a president above the law. Trump v. United States, 603 
U.S. 593 (2024). 
Last month, Nat’l Republican Senatorial Comm. v. Fed. 
Election Comm’n, 609 U.S. ___ (June 30, 2026), made Citizens
United look quaint, shredding coordinated spending limits 
Congress had enacted, and ensuring that those who bankroll 
elections drown out the ordinary person. Billionaires spend to 
be repaid. Everyone else just votes. The Roberts Court has made sure one’s wealth counts more than another’s vote. 
Rulings run in one direction, time after time. 
Weakening 
protections for those with less power. Fortifying those with 
more. The pattern speaks for itself. A court that 
systematically dismantles democratic safeguards, steamrolls 
constitutional liberties, and tramples human dignity does not 
chart the course for the Hawaiʻi Constitution. 
Our constitutional system was designed for times like 
these. 
Federalism is not a formality. It is the architecture. 
The framers built dual sovereignty into the structure of 
American government as an independent check against concentrated federal power. A Supreme Court driven by agenda and intent on 
swiping power that belongs to the people is exactly what that 
check was built for. 
77  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
When six justices walk away from those they are supposed to 
protect, state constitutions hold the line. That is not 
defiance. That is the design. 
State constitutionalism makes it easy to consider Roberts 
Court jurisprudence “white noise.” See Hilo Bay Marina, 156 
Hawaiʻi at 518, 575 P.3d at 608.  
Add it all up. Draining due process. Rolling back voting 
rights. Flooding elections with money. Rubber-stamping gerrymandering. Crowning a president. Blessing discrimination 
in the name of the Constitution. Fulton v. City of
Philadelphia, Pa., 593 U.S. 522 (2021); 303 Creative LLC v.Elenis, 600 U.S. 570 (2023). Looking at naked racism and seeing none of it. Mullin v. Doe, 609 U.S. ___ (June 25, 2026) (racist 
words not “overtly racial”). Making the country more dangerous with a Second Amendment unmoored from text or history and 
unrecognizable to the framers who wrote it. New York State
Rifle & Pistol Ass’n, Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (2022); Wilson, 
154 Hawaiʻ i at 22, 543 P.3d at 454 (“disabl[ing] the states’ 
responsibility to protect public safety, reduce gun violence, 
and safeguard peaceful public movement” with its deadly 
jurisprudence). 
Then striking down a careful law and showing 
disdain for Hawaiʻ i’s constitutional traditions.  Wolford v.
Lopez
, 609 U.S. ___ (June 25, 2026). 
78  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Subverting congressional choices with a homemade “major 
questions” power grab that plays “get-out-of-text-free cards” to 
block agencies from doing what Congress told them to do. West
Virginia v. Env’t Prot. Agency, 597 U.S. 697, 779 (2022) (Kagan, J., dissenting). Then commandeering the interpretive authority 
Congress gave federal agencies, overruling Chevron after forty 
years because, to this particular Court, precedent is advisory. 
Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369 (2024). 
This term, transmuting federal spending programs into 
private contracts, the Court forged the Spending Clause to “reduce[] some of Congress’s greatest legislative achievements.” 
Landor v. Louisiana Dep’t of Corr. & Pub. Safety, 609 U.S. ___ 
(June 23, 2026) (Jackson, J., dissenting). Days later, it freed 
the President to fire at will the very commissioners a law 
shielded from removal, discarding a unanimous opinion, 
Humphrey’s Executor, on a cherry-picked slice of history - a 
century of settled practice recast as a mistake, competent governance sacrificed to the partisan cause. Trump v.
Slaughter, 609 U.S. ___ (June 29, 2026). The next morning, fair-weather textualists – living constitution originalists, 
really - deserted the text and our nation’s history the moment 
it promised citizenship, one vote from writing that right out of 
the Constitution. Trump v. Barbara, 609 U.S. ___ (June 30, 
2026). 
79  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
That’s not all life tenure and zero accountability have 
produced lately. But it’s enough. 
Article I, section 5 needs no part of this. 
The Hawaiʻi 
Constitution was built to stand on its own. And so it does. 
We hold that prosecution knowledge is not required to 
invoke the false evidence standard under article I, section 5. 
The concurrence pushes harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
because, in its view, materiality is too generous. 
That 
criticism mistakes the function each standard serves. 
Harmless beyond a reasonable doubt asks how strong the 
State’s other evidence looks once the constitutional error is 
set aside. Could the conviction stand without the tainted testimony? If yes, the error is harmless. The inquiry centers 
on the strength of what remains. 
Materiality asks a different question. Could the false 
testimony have affected the jury’s judgment? The focus is not 
on what remains in the State’s case. It is on what the false 
evidence may have done to the verdict the jury actually 
returned. 
The constitutional violation under article I, section 5 is 
a verdict built on false evidence, not weakness of the State’s case. That is why materiality is the better fit. It asks the 
constitutional question. Harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
asks a sufficiency question. The two are not the same. 
80  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Stone did not equate them.  Stone applied Teves because 
Teves fit a Rule 33 motion. Granillo asks a different question 
in a different posture. Each standard does protective work in 
the doctrinal context for which it was designed. 
The false evidence standard provides a doctrinal framework 
for an emerging category of post-conviction claims: convictions 
built on forensic evidence that science later discredits. 
Harmless error provides no such framework. 
Scientific evidence carries outsized persuasive force. 
False scientific evidence fundamentally compromises the fairness of a trial. The constitutional violation is complete when false 
scientific evidence contributes to conviction. Not when the 
prosecution belatedly learns of the falsity. 
The concurrence points to Butler’s own description, that 
materiality is “a veritable hair trigger for setting aside the 
conviction.” 955 F.3d at 1058. It warns that, in another case, 
the standard could “mandate a wholly unjust result.” 
That worry misreads the standard. The trigger is sensitive 
by constitutional design. False evidence twists the trial’s truth-seeking function.  The standard must register the 
distortion.  That’s not a defect. That’s the protection at 
work. 
Materiality is not automatic reversal. It asks whether 
false evidence could in reasonable likelihood have affected the 
81  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jury’s judgment. Id. Slight-weight testimony fails it.  
Overwhelming independent proof may defeat it. The standard is 
no rubber stamp. 
The concurring opinion also arrives at the same result here 
under the harmless-error standard. Granillo gets a new trial 
either way. The “wholly unjust result” lives only in a 
hypothetical case the opinion imagines but does not describe. 
On this record, the answer does not change. 
We hold that the false evidence standard governs when 
scientific testimony is later revealed as invalid. Constitutionally, convictions obtained with false evidence 
violate due process regardless of when the falsity becomes 
apparent. Doctrinally, Butler applies this standard to forensic 
science discredited by the 2009 NRC Report. As a matter of 
policy, the standard promotes accurate convictions, responds to 
scientific advances, and incentivizes careful vetting of expert 
testimony. 
This standard requires neither due diligence nor a showing 
that acquittal was probable. A defendant need only show a reasonable possibility that the false evidence contributed to 
the conviction. 
We now apply the false evidence standard to Granillo’s 
case. 
82  
   
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
5. The Fiber Evidence is Material 
We hold that there is a reasonable possibility that Oakes’ 
expert opinions contributed to Granillo’s conviction. See 
Hirata
, 152 Hawaiʻi at 33, 520 P.3d at 231. His hair and fiber 
testimony was material. 
From opening statement to closing argument, the State made 
Oakes’ testimony the centerpiece of its case. 
The hair and 
fiber evidence did not just corroborate Price’s account, it gave 
contested witness testimony the veneer of scientific certainty. 
The message to the jury was clear.  Even if it doubted Price’s 
testimony, the science could not be doubted. The FBI said the 
hair matched. It said the fiber matched. And scientific evidence doesn’t lie. 
In opening, the prosecution told the jury that “physical 
evidence adduced through hair and fiber analysis [placed Price] 
in [Granillo’s] car that evening.” This was no passing 
reference. The prosecution started its case by telling the jury 
that the hair and fiber would corroborate Price’s account. It 
framed its theory of the case around a promise to the jury: that scientific analysis would prove Price was in Granillo’s car with 
her pants off. 
The State bookended its theme during closing. It devoted 
substantial attention to the fiber evidence and preempted 
challenges to Price’s credibility. The hair and fiber evidence, 
83  
   
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
paired with Price’s testimony, proved three things, the State 
urged. The scientific evidence showed that (1) she was 
abducted, (2) she was in Granillo’s car with her pants on, then 
off, and (3) the person who undressed and sexually assaulted 
Price was Granillo. 
The State’s second point relied entirely on Oakes’ fiber 
testimony. The fiber evidence proved its theory. The 
prosecutor explained that the “green fibers” from Granillo’s car were found in Price’s pants and underwear, “[a]nd each one of 
these fibers are identical to each other. They were found to 
have matched the seat cover of the driver’s seat of [Granillo’s] 
car.” (Emphases added.) 
Without the fiber evidence “proof” that Price’s underwear 
had contacted Granillo’s seat cover, the prosecution had no 
scientific evidence that Price’s clothing had been removed in 
Granillo’s car. The evidence “establishing” that Price was in 
Granillo’s car with her pants down could have affected the jury’s verdict. Thus, the evidence was material. 
Expert testimony carries great weight in jury 
deliberations. This court has observed that when it comes to 
“experts’ ‘aura of special reliability and trustworthiness,’ 
there is a danger that jurors will ‘abdicate their role of 
critical assessment’ or ‘surrender their own common sense in 
weighing testimony.’” David
, 149 Hawaiʻi at 478, 494 P.3d at 
84  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1211 (quoting State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 
51 (1990)). Experts opining on physical evidence connecting 
defendants to a crime hold significant sway. 
Here, Oakes touted his expert credentials and knowledge. 
He wasn’t just any expert. He was a “supervisory special agent 
with the FBI.” He had worked there for twelve-and-a-half years.  
For nine-and-a-half years, he performed hair and fiber 
examinations in the FBI’s specialized hair and fiber forensic division. Local, state, and other federal law enforcement 
agencies across the nation relied on him to analyze hair and 
fiber samples. Oakes estimated that he had conducted two to 
three thousand hair sample analyses. 
Given his credentials, the jury had every reason to trust 
Oakes. 
Oakes delivered his conclusions with scientific certainty. 
The hair came from Price. The fibers came from Granillo’s car
. 
When a well-credentialed expert says “microscopically 
identical” and “match,” the testimony conveys hard, objective, empirical fact. The microscope doesn’t lie. The fibers match 
or they don’t. Oakes’ perceived objectivity gave his scientific 
conclusions unearned credibility. As the PCAST Report 
recognized, when experts testify about forensic comparisons, 
“the expert and the prosecution intend the statement to carry 
weight.” 2016 PCAST Report, supra, at 121. 
85  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
That weight only increases when an expert stops just short 
of certainty. Oakes did not say that the fibers “might” have 
come from Granillo’s car or “could” have come from his car. He 
told the jury they were “consistent with” coming from specific 
items in Granillo’s car. To a jury, that language was 
indistinguishable from certainty. 
The defense didn’t question Oakes’ methodology. It asked 
about the number of samples and collection locations. But it did not challenge the scientific validity of fiber comparison 
analysis itself. No one did. Courts nationwide had accepted 
fiber comparison evidence, and the FBI had used it for decades. 
Granillo did not present any witnesses or offer a coherent 
alternative theory of the case. The defense, in both its 
opening and closing, focused entirely on inconsistencies in 
Price’s testimony. 
False evidence forces the defendant’s hand. After the 
State presented Oakes’ fiber evidence linking Price to Granillo’s car, there was no way Granillo’s defense could have 
credibly argued Price was never in his car. 
Naturally, the defense focused on undermining Price’s 
credibility as to the events that took place in the car. And it 
avoided drawing attention to the evidence purportedly placing 
Price there with her pants and underwear off. 
86  
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
False government agency-backed evidence that effectively 
forecloses other evidence compromises the defendant’s ability to 
present a complete defense at trial. That is a due process 
violation. See David
, 149 Hawaiʻi at 481, 494 P.3d at 1214 (“A 
defendant’s right to present a complete defense is vital to due 
process.”) (citation omitted). 
As a result, the trial was not fair. The prosecution’s case relied on Price’s account. 
The 
defense attacked her credibility. Without the false forensic evidence to bolster Price’s testimony, the prosecution’s case 
weakened. 
First, Price inconsistently testified about the nature of 
the alleged sexual assault. She told the emergency room physician that “she had been forced to perform vaginal 
intercourse.” And according to the emergency room doctor, she 
“denied any fellatio or any sodomy.” Yet at trial, Price 
testified that Granillo forced her to perform oral sex and that 
there was no vaginal intercourse. She said Granillo “made [her] 
perform or attempt to perform fellatio upon him.” She also testified that Granillo did not enter her with his penis because 
he did not have an erection and that Granillo put his hand in 
her vagina. 
Second, Price gave contradictory accounts of her escape
. At 
first, she testified she was wearing slippers when she was 
87  
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
grabbed from her car. However, she later testified that when 
she escaped at the breakwater, she was barefoot because she had 
left her shoes in her car. On direct, Price testified that she 
jumped out of the car, and then the car started up. On cross, 
she said the car was moving when she jumped from it. 
Third, Price testified that Granillo repeatedly grabbed her 
hair and banged her head against the passenger window. Before 
the grand jury, she said this happened “approximately twenty times.” Yet the emergency room physician recounted that Price 
reported no head pain. When confronted with her prior “twenty 
times” statement, Price responded, “it wasn’t the twenty times.” 
The defense argued in closing that had her head truly been 
slammed against the window twenty times, more than a single 
strand of hair would have been found in the car. 
Fourth, the responding officer testified that his report 
omitted “any details of what type of sexual assault or what went 
on in this sexual assault” because Price continually changed the details about how she was taken from her car and sexually 
assaulted. Due to these inconsistencies, the officer, on his 
supervisor’s advice, reported only the “basic story,” leaving 
the “detective who would be taking the case” to “get the details 
of the story out of her.” 
Fifth, Price testified that she had never seen Granillo 
before the assault. The first time she saw him was when he 
88  
   
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pulled up “and told [her] that the police were of no use to 
[her.]” Officer Goto, though, testified that when he initially 
responded to the report of a woman crying for help, he had 
directed Tester and Granillo to leave the parking lot while 
Price was still there. He further testified that Price, Tester, 
and Granillo at one point yelled at one another. This testimony 
suggested that Price had seen Granillo before he allegedly 
returned to kidnap her. Further, Granillo himself acknowledged to a detective that he was present at the shopping center at the 
same time as Price. 
The Rule 40 court found “overwhelming and compelling” 
evidence of guilt. We disagree. 
A careful examination of the record shows that only the 
hair and fiber evidence conclusively established that both Price 
and Granillo had been in his car together. And only the fiber 
evidence placed Price in the car with her pants off. 
The non-forensic evidence demonstrated that Price was 
stranded at the shopping center when police first arrived, officers directed Granillo to leave, something happened to 
Price, she ended up at the breakwater, and she suffered 
injuries. The evidence also showed that a hat with a 
carpenter’s union decal and Price’s cosmetics were found at the 
breakwater, Granillo was a carpenter, a WD-40 can and white t-
89  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shirt ended up in Price’s purse, and two knives were later found 
in Granillo’s car. 
This evidence did not establish that after leaving the 
parking lot, Granillo returned and approached Price, forced her 
into his car, caused her injuries, and sexually assaulted her.  
Nor did it establish that she was in his car at the breakwater. 
The hair and fiber evidence filled this gap. 
The hair and fiber evidence was consequential. Oakes’ 
testimony provided the only direct evidence that (1) Price had been in Granillo’s car (hair “matched” Price); (2) Price’s 
underwear had contacted his car’s seat cover (fibers on her 
underwear); and (3) Price’s pants had contacted his car’s carpet 
(carpet fibers on her pants). The fiber evidence corroborated 
the prosecution’s central theory that Price was in Granillo’s 
car with her pants on, then off. 
Granillo’s conviction depended on Price’s word. No other 
evidence placed her in his car. The hair and fiber evidence provided that connection. And the fiber evidence was the only 
non-testimonial proof that Price had been in Granillo’s car with 
her pants removed and underwear exposed. Without this evidence, 
the prosecution’s theory relied entirely on disputed testimony. 
We hold that the presentation of materially false evidence 
violated Granillo’s article I, section 5 right to a fair trial. 
90  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. 
We vacate the ICA’s July 30, 2025 Judgment on Appeal, the 
circuit court’s December 16, 2022 order denying petitioner’s 
Rule 40 petition, and final judgment. We remand for a new 
trial. 
Earle A. Partington  
for petitioner  
 
Gerald K. Enriques  
for respondent  /s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins  
91 