***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-30692 
12-OCT-2012 
02:30 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,

vs.

MARCO RODRIGUES, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee.

NO. SCWC-30692

CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

(ICA NO. 30692; CR. NO. 08-1-0293)

October 12, 2012

RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE TO' OTO'O, ASSIGNED DUE TO VACANCY

OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.

We hold that the circuit court of the fifth circuit 
(the court) properly suppressed the evidence obtained by 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai
'i (Respondent) 
during the unlawful search of Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee Marco Rodrigues (Petitioner) because Respondent failed to “present clear and convincing evidence that [the] evidence obtained in         
 
         
          
      
         
        
       
           
      
           
            
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
violation of article I, section 7 [of the Hawai' i Constitution],1 
would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means[,]” State 
v. Lopez, 78 Hawai' i 433, 451, 896 P.2d 889, 907 (1995). Hence 
the evidence was not admissible under the inevitable discovery exception to Hawai' i’s exclusionary rule. We therefore vacate 
the April 3, 2012 judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) to the contrary, filed pursuant to its March 19, 2012 
2
Amended Memorandum Opinion (mem. op.),  vacating and remanding
 
the August 5, 2010 Findings of Facts, Conclusions of Law and

Order Granting Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Evidence filed by

the court, and we remand to the court for further proceedings

consistent with this opinion. 
 
I.

A.

On November 23, 2008, Officer Scott Williamson

(Officer Williamson or the officer) was at Hanamaulu Beach Park

and saw Petitioner sleeping in a vehicle that had an expired

safety sticker. 
Officer Williamson approached the vehicle and
 
requested that Petitioner furnish his license and registration. 
 
1 Article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides as 
follows: 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches,
seizures and invasions of privacy shall not be violated; and
no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, supported
by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the
place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized
or the communications sought to be intercepted.
 
2

The opinion was filed by Chief Judge Craig H. Nakamura, joined by
 
the Honorable Alexa D.M. Fujise. The Honorable Lawrence M. Reifurth filed a
 
dissenting opinion.
 
2

        
        
          
           
        
       
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner was unable to produce any identification but verbally

identified himself. The officer learned from dispatch that

Petitioner had three outstanding bench warrants for contempt of

court so he placed Petitioner under arrest.

Officer Williamson apparently handcuffed petitioner, 
although it is not clear whether his hands were in front of or behind him.
3 The officer then searched Petitioner “from top to 
bottom” and “pulled [out Petitioner’s] pockets from the outside looking for any weapons or means of escape, needles, razor blades, strong fishing line, . . . [or] matches.” When Officer Williamson pulled out Petitioner’s left pocket, he discovered a plastic baggie containing methamphetamine (hereinafter, methamphetamine). Officer Williamson placed Petitioner under arrest and transported him to the cellblock at a Kaua' i Police 
Department (KPD) station. Prior to placing Petitioner in the cellblock, Officer Williamson conducted an inventory search of Petitioner.
4 
3 Although the court found that Petitioner was arrested and
 
handcuffed, there was no testimony presented in this case supporting the
court’s finding in this respect. However, in the declaration attached to
Petitioner’s Motion to Suppress, Petitioner’s counsel declared that Officer
Williamson placed handcuffs on Petitioner after arresting him.
 
4

This court has described the parameters of an inventory search as
 
follows:
 
[T]he  police  have  full  authority  to  prohibit  the  entry  of
weapons,  drugs  or  other  potentially  harmful  items  into  jail.
To  this  end,  they  may  require  internees  to  surrender  any
possible  repositories  for  such  items  prior  to  incarceration.
However,  a  concomitant  of  this  wide  authority  to  prohibit
the  entry  of  personal  belongings  which  may  harbor  forbidden
contents  is  a  complete  absence  of  authority  to  conduct  a
general  exploratory  search  of  the  belongings  themselves.
(continued...)
 
3

        
         
        
         
        
        
            
          
              
  
        
          
      
         
        
       
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B.

1.

On November 25, 2008, Petitioner was charged by

5
complaint  with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree,
 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243.6 Prior to trial, 
Petitioner filed a motion to suppress seeking to preclude

Respondent from introducing the methamphetamine recovered from

him into evidence. Petitioner argued that the methamphetamine

could not be introduced because it was obtained during a

warrantless search of his pockets, in violation of Article 1,

7
section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution and the Fourth  and 
4(...continued)
T
his absence of authority derives from the lack of any
justification for such a further search inherent in the
exception itself. Once the internee has turned over his [or
her] possessions for safekeeping it is no longer possible
that he [or she] may take them into jail.
 
State v. Kaluna , 55 Haw. 361, 373-74, 520 P.2d 51, 61 (1974) (footnote
omitted).
 
5 The complaint was originally filed in the District Court of the
 
Fifth Circuit. The case was committed from the district court to the court on
 
December 1, 2008.
 
6 HRS  §  712-1243  (Supp.  2008)  provides  as  follows:
 
§  712-1243.  Promoting  a  dangerous  drug  in  the  third
degree.   (1)  A  person  commits  the  offense  of  promoting  a
dangerous  drug  in  the  third  degree  if  the  person  knowingly
possesses  any  dangerous  drug  in  any  amount.
(2)  Promoting  a  dangerous  drug  in  the  third  degree  is
a  class  C  felony.
 
7

The Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides:
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches
and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall
issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be
searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
 
4

        
           
          
          
             
         
         
              
            
             
            
             
              
             
            
           
           
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution.8

 
Petitioner argued that the warrantless search and

seizure was not justified as a search incident to lawful arrest

because such a search “‘is limited in scope to a situation where

it is reasonably necessary to discover the fruit or

instrumentalities of the crime for which the defendant is

arrested, or to protect the officer from attack, or to prevent

the offender from escaping.’” (Quoting State v. Enos, 68 Haw.
 
509, 720 P.2d 1012 (1986).) (Emphasis omitted.) In addition,
 
Petitioner maintained that the search was not necessary to

protect Officer Williamson because the search occurred after he

was handcuffed and the officer did not conduct a pat-down search

of Petitioner’s person. Thus, Petitioner urged that Officer
 
Williamson would have had no reason to believe Petitioner was

concealing any contraband. 
 
In its memorandum in opposition to Petitioner’s motion

to suppress, Respondent asserted that regardless of the nature of

8

This court has held that a search and seizure incident to lawful 
arrest is an exception to the warrant requirement under the Hawai 'i 
Constitution. With respect to Petitioner’s challenge to the search and
seizure in this case, it must be noted that “state courts are absolutely freeto interpret state constitutional provisions to accord greater protection toindividual rights than do similar provisions of the United StatesConstitution.” Arizona v. Evans , 514 U.S. 1, 8 (1995). Thus, “[i]f a state
court chooses merely to rely on federal precedents as it would on theprecedents of all other jurisdictions, then it need only make clear by a plainstatement in its judgment or opinion that the federal cases are being usedonly for the purpose of guidance, and do not themselves compel the result thatthe court has reached.” Michigan v. Long , 463 U.S. 1032, 1041 (1983). The 
federal cases herein are used only to provide guidance as to the issues raisedby Petitioner. Therefore, this case is not decided under the Fourth andFourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. Article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution as opposed to federal law compels the result
reached herein. 
5

        
         
            
             
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the crime, “it is per se reasonable for the arresting officer to

conduct a warrantless pat-down search of a limited nature prior

[to] or after arrest and before transport.” (Citing State v.

Reed, 70 Haw. 107, 762 P.2d 803 (1988).) Such searches incident

to lawful arrest, Respondent maintained, are intended to afford

an arresting officer the opportunity to recover weapons or other

means of escape, or other evidence that might be lost as a result

of concealment or destruction. (Citing State v. Paahana, 66 Haw.

499, 666 P.2d 592 (1983).) Thus, Respondent urges that Officer
 
Williamson’s practice constituted a valid search incident to

arrest.
9

Alternatively, Respondent argued that the search was 
justified under the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule which provides that evidence recovered from an otherwise illegal search need not be suppressed “if the evidence would have been ‘inevitably discovered’ by the police via lawful means.” (Citing Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 433, 896 P.2d at 889.) 
Respondent maintained that because all arrestees are subjected to a pre-incarceration custodial search during which their pockets are checked for drugs and weapons, Petitioner’s pockets would have been searched and the evidence discovered prior to Petitioner being placed in the cellblock. 
9

As discussed herein, the ICA decided this argument in Petitioner’s 
favor in Respondent’s first appeal. See State v. Rodrigues , 122 Hawai 'i 229, 
233, 236, 225 P.3d 671, 675, 678 (App. 2010) ( Rodrigues I ). Respondent did
not file an application for writ of certiorari contesting this ruling. 
6

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2.

The court held a hearing on Petitioner’s motion to

suppress on March 3, 2009. At the hearing, Officer Williamson
 
testified that he pulled Petitioner’s pockets out from the

outside “rather than just patting the outside of the pockets[,]”

because “[i]f there [was] any kind of needle or sharp object in

there, [he would] run the risk of cutting [his] hand through the

clothing.” He also related that prior to placing Petitioner in
 
the cellblock, he conducted an inventory search which he

explained “insure[s] that there is no contraband taken into [the]

cell block, no weapons or dangerous instruments [are] taken in,

for the safety of all the cell block personnel, as well as the

safety of the suspect.” He further stated that during this
 
process the arrestee’s pockets are searched.

Sergeant Eric Kaui (Sergeant Kaui) also testified on

Respondent’s behalf regarding the policies and procedures for

conducting an inventory search. Sergeant Kaui explained that as
 
part of the inventory search, the officer conducts a thorough

search of the arrestee, including all of the arrestee’s clothing.

On March 17, 2009, the court entered its Finding of

Facts, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Petitioner’s Motion

to Suppress (First Suppression Order). 
 
B.

Respondent appealed to the ICA arguing that the court

erred in: 
(1) concluding based on 
Enos that the inevitable
 
7

        
          
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
discovery rule was inapplicable; (2) rejecting application of the 
rule without entering any findings upon which its rejection was based; and (3) concluding that Respondent failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the methamphetamine was admissible pursuant to the rule. Rodrigues I, 122 Hawai' i at 
233, 225 P.3d at 675. 
10
 
As to (1), the ICA  stated that although, under Enos,
 
Officer Williamson’s search of Petitioner’s pockets was not a

valid search incident to lawful arrest, the court failed to

consider whether the inevitable discovery rule established in

Lopez
 applied. Id. at 236, 225 P.3d at 678. 
 
As to (2), the ICA agreed that the court failed to 
enter any findings regarding Respondent’s inevitable discovery argument. Id. The ICA determined that the court’s failure 
constituted error in light of Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 12(e), which requires the court to “state its essential findings on the record” “[w]here factual issues are involved in determining a motion[.]” 
As to (3), the ICA noted that although Respondent

presented the testimony of Officer Williamson and Sergeant Kaui

to support its inevitable discovery argument, the court made no

findings regarding the credibility of the officers or the weight 
 
10

The opinion in Petitioner’s first appeal was filed by Chief Judge
 
Craig H. Nakamura, the Honorable Katherine G. Leonard, and the Honorable Alexa
D.M. Fujise.
 
8

        
       
       
     
       
      
            
                
       
      
      
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to be given to their testimony in light of the other evidence

presented. Id. at 238, 225 P.3d at 680. 
 
The ICA thus vacated the First Suppression Order and

remanded to the court for entry of findings and conclusions

regarding whether Respondent met its burden of establishing by

clear and convincing evidence that the methamphetamine would have

been inevitably discovered. Id.

II.

A.

Following remand, the court held hearings on June 15,

2010, June 29, 2010, and July 6, 2010. On July 26, 2010,
 
Respondent filed a supplemental memorandum in support of applying

the inevitable discovery rule (supplemental memo).

On August 5, 2010, the court filed its Findings of

Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Petitioner’s Motion

to Suppress Evidence (Second Suppression Order). The court

entered essentially the same findings that were set forth in the

First Suppression Order, except for finding 9. The court’s

findings were as follows:

1. On November 28, 2008 at approximately 7:54 a.m.,
[Officer Williamson] saw [Petitioner] sleeping in a silver
two-door Hyundai at Hanamalu Beach Park.
2. Officer Williamson noticed that the safety check and
vehicle registration stickers were expired on the vehicle.
3. Officer Williamson woke [Petitioner] and asked him for
identification.
 
4. [Petitioner] could not provide Officer Williamson any
identification or information pertaining to the vehicle.
5. Officer Williamson called police dispatch to request
 
any information on [Petitioner].
 6. Officer Williamson discovered that [Petitioner] had
three outstanding bench warrants and handcuffed him .
 
7. Officer Williamson conducted a pat-down search on
[Petitioner’s] torso but when he got to [Petitioner’s]
 
9

        
       
          
         
     
        
      
  
     
         
      
  
      
      
      
         
   
        
        
       
        
        
        
          
        
          
        
         
       
      
          
        
         
         
      
        
       
         
        
       
          
        
        
           
     
      
       
      
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shorts, Officer Williamson turned the pockets inside out.
8. Officer Williamson testified that for his safety it
was his practice that when he conducts a search of an
arrestee he pulls out the arrestee’s pockets from the top
rather than doing a pat-down search.
9. Officer Williamson testified that he had no reason to
 
believe that [Petitioner] was concealing weapons, drugs,
contraband, or needles .
10. As Officer Williamson turned [Petitioner’s] left
shorts’ pocket inside out, he found a clear [plastic] baggie
that contained a crystal-like substance in [Petitioner’s]
left front pocket.
11. Officer Williamson placed [Petitioner] in his police
vehicle and transported him to [a cellblock. ]

(Emphases added.) The court’s conclusions 1 through 4 were also
 
essentially the same as the conclusions set forth in the First

Suppression Order. The court entered new conclusions 5 through
 
11:

1. [The] Fourth Amendment to the United States
Constitution protects the rights of citizens to be free from
unreasonable searches and seizures.
 
2. Article I, Section 7 of the Hawaii Constitution is
identical to the Fourth Amendment to the United States
 
Constitution.
 
3. Officer Williamson was entitled to a pat-down search
but he was not authorized to remove the [methamphetamine]
from [Petitioner’s] pocket unless he had reason to believe
that the items felt [were] fruits or instrumentalities of
the crime for which [he was] arrested, or to protect the
officer from attack, or to prevent the offender fr4om
escaping. [ Enos, 68 Haw. at 511, 720 at 1014].
 
4. Any warrantless search or seizure is presumed to be
illegal and the burden always rests with the government to
prove that such actions fall within a specifically
established and well-delineated exception to the warrant
requirement. [ Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 181, 683 P.2d at 822].
 
5. One [] exception [to the warrant requirement] is the
inevitable discovery rule adopted by the Hawaii Supreme Court in
1995 in [ Lopez, 78 Haw. at 433, 896 P.2d 889] .

6. Regarding the inevitable discovery rule, the Hawaii
Supreme Court “requires the prosecution to present clear and
convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violationof article I, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution would 
inevitably have been discovered by lawful means before suchevidence may be admitted under the inevitable discovery
rule.” [ Lopez, 78 Haw. at 451, 896 P.2d at 889]. 
7. The Hawaii Supreme Court further noted that “clear and
 
convincing evidence means evidence that will produce in the
mind of a reasonable person a firm belief as to the facts
sought to be established.” Id.
 
8. The inevitable discovery rule is not applicable
because [Respondent] failed to produce clear and convincing
evidence which would demonstrate that [Petitioner] was
incapable of retrieving and discarding the contraband from
 
10

        
         
    
      
           
        
         
       
 
       
     
      
      
       
         
        
           
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
his person without an officer’s notice between the time of
his arrest and the inventory search and that the evidence
would have been inevitably discovered.
9. Officer Williamson failed to testify that [Petitioner]
was retrained in such as way as to make him incapable of
discarding the [plastic] baggie from his pocket between the
time of his arrest and the inventory search had the
[plastic] baggie not been obtained via Officer Williamson’s
illegal search.
10. [Respondent] did not present any evidence that Officer
Williamson or another officer continuously observed
[Petitioner] after being handcuffed or that Officer
Williamson [n]ever left [Petitioner] unattended.
11. Additionally, unlike the defendant in [ Silva, 91 Haw.
at 111, 979 P.2d at 1137, Petitioner] never testified or
acknowledged that he was unable to retrieve the contraband
after being handcuffed.
 
(Internal quotation marks and brackets omitted.) (Emphases
 
added.) The court again ordered the methamphetamine suppressed
 
and precluded its use at Petitioner’s trial. 
 
III.

A.

Respondent appealed once again. 
In the second appeal,
 
Respondent argued to the ICA that the court erred in (1) failing

to make findings regarding the events that occurred after

Petitioner was placed in the police transport vehicle and

relevant to the inevitable discovery doctrine; (2) finding that

Petitioner could have discarded the methamphetamine before the

inventory search, although no evidence to that effect was

adduced, and there was testimony that the methamphetamine would

have been discovered during a routine inventory search; (3)

concluding that the instant case is distinguishable from Silva

because Petitioner did not testify that he was unable to retrieve

the methamphetamine from his pocket after being handcuffed,

although Petitioner’s whereabouts were unknown at the time of

11

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
remand; (4) concluding Respondent failed to present clear and

convincing evidence that the methamphetamine would not have been

inevitably discovered during the inventory search. State v.

Rodrigues, No. 30692, 2012 WL 917514, at *3 (App. Mar. 19, 2012)
 
(Rodrigues II).
 
The ICA majority stated that the court “did not make

factual findings regarding the events relevant to the issue of

inevitable discovery” and instead, “appeared to require, as a

matter of law, that evidence excluding other possible scenarios

be presented by the prosecution (i.e., requiring the prosecution

to negate any possibility that the defendant could discard the

contraband without detection) in order to carry its burden of

proof.” Id. at *5. The ICA majority “decline[d] to endorse such

a requirement, absent any evidence that those alternative

scenarios could reasonably have occurred.” Id. 
 
In the view of the ICA majority, Respondent presented

clear and convincing evidence that the methamphetamine would have

been discovered during the inventory. Id. The ICA majority

ordered the Second Suppression Order vacated and the case

remanded for trial. Id.

B.

A dissenting opinion was filed by Judge Reifurth

(hereinafter, “ICA dissent”). First, the dissent disagreed that
 
the court did not make factual findings relating to the issue of

inevitable discovery. Id. According to the dissent, the court

12

        
  
 
        
             
              
           
          
   
           
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
added finding 9, and conclusions 9, 10, and 11,11 all of which

related to its conclusion that the inevitable discovery did not

apply in this case.

Next, the ICA dissent pointed out that, “as it must in 
an inevitable-discovery case,” Respondent “relied . . . on a hypothetical[,]” i.e., that the methamphetamine would have been 
discovered during the inventory search. Id. at *7. But, because 
“[u]nder the inevitable discovery exception, ‘the privacy rights 
of the citizens of the State of Hawai' i may turn upon the outcome 
of the hypothetical[,]” the ICA dissent maintained “it is ‘incumbent upon [the appellate court] to assure that [its] speculation is as close to correct as possible.’” Id. at *11 
(quoting Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 451, 896 P.2d at 907). 
The ICA dissent noted that, although Lopez did not 
explicitly discuss the possibility that the defendant could have discarded or destroyed the evidence, Lopez’s ruling was “premised specifically on the fact that “‘the record lack[ed] the clear and convincing evidence necessary to show that the evidence recovered . . . as a result of the illegal search, would have still been there.’”
12 Id. (quoting Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 452, 896 P.2d at 908 
11

The ICA dissent declared that although mislabeled, conclusions 9, 
10, and 11 constituted findings that should be treated as such. Id. (quoting 
Crosby v. State Dep’t. of Budget & Fin. , 76 Hawai 'i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300,
1308 (1994) (“A determination that embraces an ultimate fact is a factual
finding subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review even thoughclassified as a COL.”)). 
12

As stated by the ICA dissent, clear and convincing evidence is “an
 
intermediate standard of proof greater than a preponderance of the evidence,
(continued...)
 
13

        
           
             
                 
               
            
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(brackets omitted) (emphasis in original). According to the ICA
 
dissent, Respondent failed to adduce evidence addressing the

likelihood that the methamphetamine would have remained in

Petitioner’s possession during his transport to the KPD

cellblock. Id. 
 
The dissent explained that “[a]rrestees have been known

to discard evidence, and it is the State’s burden, once the

underlying search has been determined to be illegal, to establish

by clear and convincing evidence that an arrestee would not be

able to discard the evidence that the State contends would

inevitably have been discovered.” Id. For example, in Williams
 
v. State, 784 S.W. 2d 428 (Tex. Crim. App. 1990), the police
 
found cocaine beneath the patrol car’s backseat where the

handcuffed defendant was seated. In State v. Jimenez, 808 A.2d
 
1190 (Conn. App. Ct. 2002), the police officer found cocaine in

backseat of police car after transporting defendant who had been

handcuffed and frisked for weapons. In Simmons v. State, 681
 
S.E.2d 712 (Ga. Ct. App. 2009), an officer discovered cocaine

wedged in backseat of police car even though defendant had been

searched and handcuffed. 
 
12(...continued)
b
ut less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt required in criminal cases.”
Rodrigues II , 2012 WL 917514, at *6 n.1 (citing Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp. ,
71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 566, 574 (1989)). It is a “degree of proof which
will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as
to the allegations sought to be established, and requires the existence of a
fact be highly probable.” Id. (citing Masaki, 71 Haw. at 15, 780 P.2d at
 
574).
 
14

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Moreover, in the ICA’s dissent’s view, Respondent’s own

evidence and arguments “tended to suggest that [Petitioner] might

have been able to access his pocket after his arrest.” Id. at
 
*9. For example, Officer Williamson testified that although “he

had no reason to believe that Rodrigues was concealing any type

of contraband, was armed, or had needles, he pulled out

[Petitioner]’s pocket to look for a means of escape.” Id. 
 
According to the ICA dissent, “[i]f an officer searches for a

handcuff key or lock pick in an arrestee’s pocket even though the

arrestee is to be handcuffed and transported to a cellblock for

an inventory search, it at least suggests that the officer

believes that the arrestee may be able to access his pocket while

handcuffed.” Id.

Finally, the dissent took issue with what it viewed as 
the imposition upon Petitioner of the “a novel obligation to first introduce evidence that an alternative scenario could reasonably have occurred[,]” id. at *6, although a defendant “is not required to present evidence or argument to disprove the State’s claim of inevitable discovery.” Id. at *9. The ICA 
dissent stated, “If we are to ‘safeguard the privacy rights of our citizens against unlawful government intrusions,’” [Lopez, 78 Hawai'i] at 451 n.29, 896 P.2d at 907 n.29, and “if the 
heightened standard is meaningful,” the prosecution’s burden cannot be “conditioned upon the defendant . . . explaining first 
15

        
          
        
         
         
          
         
       
        
       
   
        
       
    
           
           
          
        
   
         
        
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the logical failings in the State’s own hypothetical.” Rodrigues

II, 2012 WL 917514, at *11 (brackets omitted).
 
IV.

Petitioner lists the following questions in his

Application filed on May 29, 2012:

1) Whether the ICA gravely erred in failing to disregard
[Respondent’s] points of error raised in its opening brief
because the alleged errors were not brought to the attention
to [sic] the [court] as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
13

2) Whether the ICA majority gravely erred in holding that
the [court] erred in concluding that the State failed to
meet its burden that the packet containing methamphetamine
would have been inevitably been [sic] discovered when the
police conducted their inventory search prior to admitting
[Petitioner] into the cellblock.
 
Respondent did not file a Response to the Application.

V.

A.

1.

In connection with Petitioner’s first question,

Petitioner asserts that Respondent alleged certain findings were

erroneous but “filed a notice of appeal” instead of “bringing its

objection to the attention of the [] court.” Hence, Petitioner
 
maintains Respondent cannot point to where in the record the

alleged errors were brought to the attention of the court, as

13

HRAP Rule 28(b) provides in relevant part as follows:
 
[T]he appellant shall file an opening brief, containing
 
. . .
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error . . .
stat[ing] . . . where in the record the alleged error was
objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was
brought to the attention of the court or agency.
 
. . . .
 
Points not presented in accordance with this section will be
disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option,
may notice a plain error not presented.
 
16

        
  
         
           
          
             
             
             
           
           
           
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). As stated, HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)
 
requires in relevant part that an appellant’s opening brief

include “a concise statement of the points of error set forth in

separately numbered paragraphs, and each error must state “where

in the record the alleged error occurred[.]” “Points not

presented in accordance with [HRAP Rule 28(b)] will be

disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may

notice a plain error not presented.” Relying on State v. Anh
 
Cong Bui, No. 28454, 2008 WL 2916355, at *1 (App. July 30, 2008),
 
Petitioner contends Respondent’s points of error should have been

disregarded, and were not noticeable for plain error.
14
 
In its Reply Brief to Petitioner’s Answering Brief

filed in the ICA, Respondent maintained that after remand, and at

the final hearing, the court invited Respondent to file proposed

findings and conclusions or a post-hearing memorandum. 
 Respondent asserted that in contrast to Bui where the defendant
 
did not ask the court to enter any specific findings, Respondent

did urge the court in its supplemental memo to adopt findings

regarding the inventory search and the relevant KPD policy, and 
 
14

In Bui, the circuit court denied the defendant’s motion to
 
suppress and issued written findings and conclusions. The defendant argued on
appeal that several findings were clearly erroneous because the circuit court
failed to make findings as to the time the events referenced in the findings
took place. However, the ICA responded that the defendant did not state in
his opening brief where in the record the alleged errors were brought to the
attention of the circuit court. The ICA reviewed the defendant’s challenges
under the plain error standard of review, and determined that the circuit
court’s failure to include findings regarding the specific time of the events
was not plain error.
 
17

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to conclude that there was clear and convincing evidence of

inevitable discovery. 
 
Although Petitioner suggested that Respondent should

have objected to the court’s alleged error after the Second
 
Suppression Order was filed instead of filing a notice of appeal,

Respondent stated the only way to do that would be to file a

motion for reconsideration of the court’s Second Suppression

Order. But, according to Respondent, “neither the HRAP nor the

HRS require [an appellant] to file a motion for reconsideration

as a pre-condition of filing a notice of appeal.”

2.

On appeal, the ICA did not address Petitioner’s

argument that Respondent’s points of error failed to comply with

HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) and therefore must be disregarded. 
 In the absence of a ruling by the ICA, this court must resolve

the issue. 
 
It appears Respondent’s points of error did not violate

HRAP Rule 28. First, in its supplemental memo, Respondent did

urge the court to adopt findings that an inventory search was

conducted pursuant to KPD procedures, that it presented clear and

convincing evidence that the methamphetamine would have been

inevitably discovered, and that Silva was controlling. 
 Accordingly, Respondent did call the errors raised on appeal to

the attention of the court.

18

        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Furthermore, Bui, 2008 WL 2916355, at *1, which
 
Petitioner relies upon, is distinguishable. Unlike in Bui, here,
 
Respondent did urge the court to adopt the findings it alleged

were erroneously omitted from the Second Suppression Order, and

raised arguments supporting the inevitable discovery exception in

its memorandum in opposition to Petitioner’s motion to suppress,

and in its supplemental memo.

Finally, although Petitioner cites to several cases for

the proposition that the appellate courts have been reluctant to

notice plain error where the defendant has failed to bring
 
alleged error to the trial court’s attention, those cases

involved the waiver of an evidentiary objection at trial. This

case does not involve the waiver of an evidentiary objection. 
 Nor does this case involve a situation in which the court was

never apprised of the position Respondent asserted on appeal.

Hence, Respondent preserved its points of error in its filings

with the court.

VI.

As to his second question, Petitioner essentially

adopts the position of the ICA dissent, that argued (1) the ICA

majority erred in concluding the court failed to make the

necessary findings relevant to inevitable discovery and (2) the

ICA majority erred in concluding Respondent met its burden of

proving the methamphetamine would have been inevitably

discovered.

19

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A. 
 
With respect to the first argument, Petitioner is

correct that the court did enter findings to support its

conclusion that the inevitable discovery exception did not apply.

Petitioner maintains that finding 9 and conclusions 8, 9, 10, and

11 constitute the findings necessary to justify the court’s

ultimate conclusion. However, all of the court’s findings relate
 
to its conclusion. The court’s findings were based on the

evidence presented by Respondent concerning Petitioner’s arrest,

the unlawful search of Petitioner during which the

methamphetamine was discovered, the matters that transpired up

until the point Petitioner was placed in a cellblock, and the

inventory search. Based on this evidence, the court determined
 
Respondent had failed to prove inevitable discovery.

B.

Respondent argued on appeal to the ICA that the court

erred by failing to make findings regarding the events that

occurred after Petitioner was placed in the police transport

vehicle, and that the court erred in failing to make findings

regarding Officer Williamson’s credibility and the weight that

should be given to his testimony.

First, any absence of findings regarding the events

that occurred during the transport of Petitioner may be

attributed to Respondent. To reiterate, it is Respondent that
 
had the burden of producing clear and convincing evidence that

20

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the methamphetamine would have been discovered during the

inventory search. Consequently, as Petitioner asserts,
 
Respondent failed to adduce relevant evidence regarding, for

example, how Petitioner was restrained, whether Petitioner was

able to access his pockets, whether Petitioner was being observed

up until the point the inventory search was conducted or whether

the back of the police vehicle was searched for contraband

immediately prior to and after transport of Petitioner. Indeed,
 
the court stated that Respondent “did not present any evidence

that Officer Williamson or another officer continuously observed

[Petitioner] after being handcuffed or that Officer Williamson

[n]ever left [Petitioner] unattended.” Conclusion 10.

Next, as related, Respondent argued on appeal to the

ICA that the court erred by not making findings relating to the

inventory search of Petitioner, including his pockets, and KPD’s

procedures for such searches. Respondent urged that the case
 
should be remanded to the court with instructions for the court

to enter a finding that Officer Williamson transported Petitioner

to a KPD cellblock, and subjected him to a routine inventory

search, including a search of his pockets. But, it is apparent
 
from the court’s conclusions that the court found the inventory

search did take place. 
 
For example, in conclusion 8, the court states that

there was no evidence that Petitioner was incapable of retrieving

and discarding the methamphetamine “from his person without an

21

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
officer’s notice between the time of his arrest and the inventory
 
search[.]” (Emphasis added.) Likewise, conclusion 9
 
incorporates the court’s finding that there was no evidence that

Petitioner could not discard the methamphetamine “between the
 
time of his arrest and the inventory search[.]” (Emphasis
 
added.) There was no reason to remand the case to the court for

an express finding that Officer Williamson conducted a routine

inventory search on Petitioner’s person inasmuch as Petitioner

never disputed such inventory search took place, and it is

obvious that the court accepted Officer Williamson’s testimony

that the inventory search had been conducted.

Additionally, notwithstanding the ICA majority’s 
suggestion that the court was required to make express findings regarding credibility and weight, a court is not required to make express findings regarding credibility and weight. See State v. 
Patterson, 58 Haw. 462, 468, 571 P.2d 745, 749 (1977) (“The power to judge credibility of witnesses, resolve conflicts in testimony, weigh evidence and draw factual inferences, is vested in the trial court[,]” and “[o]n appeal all presumptions favor proper exercise of that power, and the trial court’s findings whether express or implied
 must be upheld if supported by 
substantial evidence.”) (Emphasis added.);  see also State v. 
Ganal
, 81 Hawai' i 358, 370, 917 P.2d 370, 382 (1996) (noting that 
“[i]n making its finding and order, the circuit court was required to weigh the testimony of the witnesses and judge their 
22

        
 
       
            
          
          
          
            
          
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
credibility[,]” and “‘the trial court’s findings whether express 
or implied must be upheld if supported by substantial evidence’” (quoting State v. Ganal, 81 Hawai' i 358, 370, 917 P.2d 370, 382 
(1996))) (emphasis added). 
Moreover, the court’s ultimate conclusion in this case

did not hinge on the weight that was given to Officer

Williamson’s testimony. Indeed, the court accepted Officer
 
Williamson’s testimony as true. None of the parties disputed his
 
testimony. The court concluded based on Respondent’s evidence,
 
and particularly Officer Williamson’s testimony, that Respondent

had not established by clear and convincing evidence that the

methamphetamine would have been inevitably discovered in the

inventory search had it “not [otherwise] been obtained via

Officer Williamson’s illegal search.” Conclusion 9. Because

Respondent “failed to produce evidence which would demonstrate

that [Petitioner] was incapable of retrieving and discarding the

contraband from his person without an officer’s notice between

the time of his arrest and the inventory search[,]” and,

therefore, that the methamphetamine “would have been inevitably

discovered[,]” the court concluded that the “inevitable discovery

rule [was] not applicable” in this case. Conclusion 8.
15
 
15

Although Petitioner maintains conclusions 8 through 11 are
 
findings, first, conclusions 8, 9, 10, and 11, may also be viewed as
“inference[s] on a question of law, [i.e., whether Respondent had established
by clear and convincing evidence that the methamphetamine would have been
inevitably discovered,] made as a result of [the] factual showing” by
 
Respondent. Black’s Law Dictionary at 329. In other words, conclusions 8-11
 
reflect an “application of [the clear and convincing] legal standard” relating
 
to the inevitable discovery exception. Lundgren v. Freeman , 307 F.2d 104, 115
(continued...)
 
23

        
  
      
           
         
              
           
              
          
           
           
            
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hence, the court included in its order sufficient facts

from which this court can ascertain the steps by which the court

reached its ultimate conclusion regarding the inevitable

discovery issue, and the findings were thus sufficient. See Nani
 
Koolau Co. v. K & M Const., Inc., 5 Haw. App. 137, 140, 681 P.2d
 
580, 584 (App. 1984) (“If [the] findings include sufficient

subsidiary facts to disclose to the reviewing court the steps by

which the lower court reached its ultimate conclusion on each

factual issue, then the findings are adequate.”). Plainly, the
 
ICA erred in concluding that the court did not make sufficient

findings relating to the inevitable discovery issue.

VII.

Respondent maintains that, in Silva, 91 Hawai' i at 121, 
979 P.2d at 1145, the ICA held under similar facts that the State presented clear and convincing evidence that contraband obtained during a search incident to arrest would inevitably have been discovered during a pre-incarceration search. In Silva, the defendant moved to suppress items recovered from his pocket following his arrest. 91 Hawai' i at 113-14, 979 P.2d at 1139-40. 
15(...continued)
(
9th Cir. 1962).
However, as Petitioner notes, the foregoing conclusions
incorporate findings. For example, conclusion 8 was based on the court’s
apparent finding that Respondent failed to present evidence that Petitioner’s
was retrained in such a manner so as to make him incapable of retrieving items
from his pockets or discarding the methamphetamine between the time of his
arrest and the inventory search. Conclusions 8, 9, and 10 were based upon the
court’s finding that Respondent did not present any evidence that Petitioner
was incapable of discarding the methamphetamine between the time of his arrest
and the inventory search. Finally, conclusion 11 reflects the court’s finding
that Respondent did not present evidence such as that in Silva that Petitioner
was unable to reach the contraband while cuffed.
 
24

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The officer testified at the hearing on the motion to suppress

that the pipe recovered from the defendant’s pocket was sticking

out from his pocket and in plain view. Id. The defendant on the

other hand testified that the pipe was not in plain view. Id. at
 
114, 979 P.2d at 1140. According to the Silva majority, the
 
circuit court did not enter any findings as to the validity of

the search of the defendant’s pockets and “therefore did not

resolve the credibility issue presented by the conflicting

testimonies . . . regarding whether the seized evidence was in

plain view.” Id. at 120, 979 P.2d at 1146. “Instead, the
 
circuit court concluded that the evidence would have inevitably

been discovered during an inventory search of Defendant conducted

upon his arrival and booking at the police station.” Id. 
 
On appeal, the Silva majority determined that the
 
prosecution had “met its burden of proof.” Id. However, the

grounds upon which the evidence was admissible in Silva is
 
ambiguous. See id. at 122, 979 P.2d at 1147-48 (Acoba J.,
 
concurring) (“The contraband was recovered following the arrest

on the warrants, and validly so, as incident to arrest under the

police version of the events, or pursuant to the inevitable

discovery rule under [the d]efendant’s recounting of the

episode.”) Hence, we do not find Silva to be controlling in this
 
case.

Distinguishing Silva, the ICA dissent acknowledged that
 
Silva involved a similar post-arrest transport to the cellblock
 
25

        
        
        
          
           
      
         
          
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
where an inventory search would be conducted. (Citing Silva, 91 
Hawai'i at 121, 979 P.2d at 1147). However, as the ICA dissent 
correctly observed, Silva, did not need to discuss whether the defendant could have discarded or destroyed the evidence because the defendant testified that he was unable to access his pockets while his hands were handcuffed. Id. (citing 91 Hawai' i at 114, 
979 P.2d at 1140). In the instant case, Respondent’s own evidence suggested that Petitioner might have been able to access his pockets even after he was handcuffed: 
Officer Williamson testified that despite the fact that he
had no reason to believe that [Petitioner] was concealing
any type of contraband, was armed, or had needles, he pulled
out [Petitioner]’s pocket to look for a means of escape. In
 
[Respondent’s] opposition to the Motion to Suppress,
[Respondent] posited that an officer needed to pull out an
arrestee's pocket to look for a “means of escape like a
 
handcuff key or lock pick.”
 
Rodrigues II , 2012 WL 917514, at *9 (Reifurth J., dissenting).
 
VIII.

A.

With respect to Petitioner’s second argument, it must 
be observed that Hawai
'i’s inevitable discovery exception to the 
exclusionary rule is unlike the federal exception. The 
inevitable discovery exception was first adopted by the United States Supreme Court in Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431 (1984) (Willaims II). In Williams II, a 10-year-old girl disappeared from a YMCA. Id. at 434. Shortly after she disappeared, 
Williams was seen leaving the YMCA carrying a large bundle wrapped in a blanket. Id. 
26

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Police suspected that Williams had left the girl or her

body somewhere between Des Moines and a rest stop where the

girl’s clothing and a blanket similar to the one Williams was

seen carrying were discovered. Id. at 435. Two hundred

volunteers divided into teams and searched that area. Meanwhile,

Williams turned himself in to the local police in Davenport, and

contacted an attorney in Des Moines. Id. Des Moines police

informed Williams’ counsel that they would bring Williams back to

Des Moines without questioning him. Id. However, during

Williams’ transport, one of the detectives suggested that

Williams should help them locate the young girl’s body before it

became covered by the snow so that she could have a “Christian

burial.” Id. at 435-36. At some point thereafter, Williams

agreed to direct the officers to the girl’s body. Id. At the

time her body was discovered, one search team was two and a half

miles away. Id.

In Williams’ first trial, his counsel moved to suppress

evidence of the girl’s body and all related evidence on the

ground that such evidence was the “fruit” of an illegally

obtained statement. Id. at 437. The trial court denied

Williams’ motion. Id. The Supreme Court held in Brewer v.
 
Williams, 430 U.S. 387, 404-06 (1977) (Williams I), that the
 
incriminating statements should have been suppressed because they

were obtained in violation of Williams’ right to counsel, and

remanded for a new trial. Williams I noted, however, that the
 
27

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
evidence “‘might well be admissible on the theory that the body

would have been discovered in any event, even had incriminating

statements not been elicited from Williams.’” Id. at 406 n.12.
 
In Williams’ second trial, the trial court admitted

evidence relating to the girl’s body, on the ground that even if

Williams had not led the police to the girl’s body, it would have

been discovered within a short time. Williams II, 467 U.S. at
 
436. In Williams II, the Supreme Court was urged to adopt and
 
apply an inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule. 
 Id. at 440.
 
Williams II explained that the independent source
 
doctrine allows admission of unlawfully obtained evidence when

such evidence is also discovered by means wholly independent of

any constitutional violation. Although inapplicable to the case
 
before it, Williams II concluded that the independent source
 
doctrine was “wholly consistent with and justifie[d] adoption of

the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule.” 
 Id. at 432. In light of this principle, the Supreme Court

announced the following rule: “If the prosecution can establish
 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the information

ultimately or inevitably would have been discovered by lawful

means[,] . . . then the deterrence rationale has so little basis

that the evidence should be received.” Id. at 444. Williams II

ultimately determined the girl’s body inevitably would have been

found. Id. at 449-50.
 
28

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In dissent to the Williams II majority, Justice Brennan
 
stated that “unconstitutionally obtained evidence may be admitted

at trial if it inevitably would have been discovered in the same

condition by an independent line of investigation that was

already being pursued when the constitutional violation

occurred.” Id. at 459 (Brennan, J., dissenting). He believed

the majority overlooked “the crucial difference between the

‘inevitable discovery’ doctrine and the ‘independent source’

exception from which it is derived.” Id. Justice Brennan

pointed out that, when properly applied, the independent source

exception “allows the prosecution to use evidence only if it was,

in fact, obtained by fully lawful means[,]” and thus, the

doctrine “does no violence to the constitutional protections that

the exclusionary rule is meant to enforce.” Id. 
 
On the other hand, under the inevitable discovery

exception, “evidence sought to be introduced at trial has not

actually been obtained from an independent source, but rather

would have been discovered as a matter of course if independent
 
investigations were allowed to proceed.” Id. (emphasis added). 
 
In other words, according to Justice Brennan, “[t]he inevitable

discovery exception necessarily implicates a hypothetical finding

that differs in kind from the factual finding that precedes

application of the independent source rule.” Id. In Justice

Brennan’s view, in order to ensure that the hypothetical “is as

narrowly confined to circumstances that are functionally

29

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
equivalent to an independent source, and to protect fully the 
fundamental rights served by the exclusionary rule, the government should “satisfy a heightened burden of proof before it is allowed to use such evidence[,]” i.e., clear and convincing evidence. In State v. Lopez, 78 Hawai' i 433, 451, 896 P.2d 889, 
907 (1995), this court adopted Justice Brennan’s view. 
B.

In Lopez, Sergeant Stephen Magnani (Sergeant Magnani), 
who was conducting an investigation of a drug-related conspiracy, determined that a substantial amount of cocaine had been delivered to a house on Kala street in Puna, Hawai' i. 78 Hawai' i 
at 437, 896 P.2d at 893. Unrelated to the Sergeant’s investigation, three armed marked men broke into the house of Kelly and Daniel Hauanio, located on Kala street, and robbed them. Id. An investigating officer suspected that the robbery 
was drug-related. Id. While the Hauanios were staying in a 
hotel following the robbery, Kelly’s mother, without the Hauanios’ permission, volunteered to take Detective Steven Guillermo (Detective Guillermo) to the Hauanios’ home to continue the robbery investigation. Id. at 438, 896 P.2d at 894. 
After entering the home, the detective confiscated a

cellophane container filled with cocaine that he found in the

master bedroom. Id. Based on information relating to the

robbery and the discovery of the cocaine in the master bedroom,

officers were able to obtain a search warrant for the Hauanio

30

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
home. Id. Upon execution of the search warrant, the officers

discovered evidence linking the Hauanios to the drug delivery on

Kala street and evidence connecting them to the drug-conspiracy

that was being investigated. Id.

Prior to the Hauanios’ trial for several drug offenses,

the Hauanios moved to suppress the evidence obtained from their

home. Id. at 440, 896 P.2d at 896. This court held that the

initial search of the Hauanio’s home was unconstitutional. Id.

at 447, 896 P.2d at 903. Lopez determined that the evidence was
 
not obtained from an independent source, i.e., execution of the

search warrant, because there was no information independent of

Detective Guillermo’s illegal entry of the Hauanio’s home to

support the warrant. Id. at 448, 896 P.2d at 904. 
 
Next, this court considered the prosecution’s argument 
that, although the entry into the Hauanio’s home was unlawful, the evidence should not be suppressed because it would have been inevitably discovered by lawful execution of Detective Guillermo’s search warrant or by the investigation conducted by Sergeant Magnani. Id. at 447, 896 P.2d at 903. In response, 
this court adopted the inevitable discovery exception announced in Willaims II. However, unlike “the United States Supreme Court [majority which] has unequivocally stated that the primary purpose of the exclusionary rule on the federal level is to deter illegal police conduct,” this court has said that “an equally valuable purpose of the exclusionary rule under [the Hawai' i 
31

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Constitution] is to protect the privacy rights of our

[residents].” Id. at 446. In other words, our constitution has

“[t]he added protection against governmental ‘invasions of

privacy[.]’” Id. at 451, 896 P.2d at 907.
 
Lopez agreed with Justice Brennan that “the inevitable 
discovery exception necessarily requires speculation as to the outcome of hypothetical circumstances.” Id. In order “to ensure 
that the added protection in the Hawai' i Constitution [of 
protecting individual privacy] is not vitiated by a ‘bad guess,’” this court held that “evidence may be admitted under the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule” only if the prosecution “present[s] clear and convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violation of article I, section 7, would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means[.]” Id. Lopez 
noted that this “higher burden of proof would assist in serving one of the main purposes of the exclusionary rule . . . i.e., safeguarding the privacy rights of our [residents] against unlawful governmental intrusions.” Id. n.29. 
Applying the foregoing to the case before it, this

court first rejected the prosecution’s argument that the evidence

would have been inevitably discovered by lawful execution of

Detective Guillermo’s warrant because the information in support

of the warrant was based on observations made when entry was made

without the Hauanios’ consent. Id. at 448, 896 P.2d at 904. 
 
Second, this court rejected the argument that the contraband

32

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
would have been discovered pursuant to Sergeant Magnani’s drug-
conspiracy investigation on Kala street. Id. at 452, 896 P.2d at
 
908. This court reasoned that although Sergeant Magnani was

“suspicious” that cocaine had been delivered to one of the homes

on Kala street, he had not determined who occupied the houses,

and there was no evidence that Sergeant Magnani possessed

information necessary to obtain a search warrant to search the

Haaunio home. Id. In addition, even if Sergeant Magnani might

have eventually obtained a search warrant, “the record lack[ed]

the clear and convincing evidence necessary to show that the

evidence recovered from the [defendants’] home as a result of

[the] illegal search, would have still been there.” Id.

(emphasis added).

VIII.

A.

As Lopez declared, our exclusionary rule differs from 
its federal counterpart insofar as it protects individual privacy rights. 78 Hawai' i at 446, 896 P.2d at 902; accord State v. 
Kahoonei, 83 Hawai' i 124, 131, 925 P.2d 294, 301 (1996); see also 
State v. Dixon, 83 Hawai' i 13, 23, 924 P.2d 181, 191 (1996) 
(stating that “article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides broader protection than the [F]ourth [A]mendment to the United States Constitution because it also protects against unreasonable invasions of privacy”); State v. Navas, 81 Hawai' i 
113, 123, 913 P.2d 39, 49 (1996) (stating that “article I, 
33

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution” provides a “more extensive 
right of privacy . . . than that of the United States 
Constitution”); State v. Tanaka, 67 Haw. 658, 662, 701 P.2d 1274, 1276 (1985) (“In our view, article I, § 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution recognizes an expectation of privacy beyond the parallel provisions in the Federal Bill of Rights.”). This “added protection against governmental invasions of privacy” demands that speculation regarding whether evidence obtained in violation of one’s individual privacy would have been inevitably discovery be “as close to correct as possible.” Id. at 451, 896 
P.2d at 907. In other words, “to ensure that the added protection in the Hawai' i Constitution is not vitiated by a ‘bad 
guess,’” Respondent was required “to present clear and convincing evidence that [the methamphetamine] obtained in violation of [Petitioner’s constitutional rights] would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means before such evidence may be admitted under the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule.” Id. 
Here, the “hypothetical[,]” id., posited by Respondent
 
was that, although the methamphetamine was unlawfully seized, it

would have been inevitably discovered during the inventory search

prior to placing Petitioner in the KPD cellblock. However,
 
without evidence establishing that the methamphetamine would have

remained in Petitioner’s pocket until the inventory search was

conducted, or that any effort by him to discard it would have

34

         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been detected, there was no clear and convincing evidence that

the methamphetamine would have been otherwise inevitably

discovered during the inventory search. In other words, the
 
court could not be sure that Respondent’s asserted hypothetical

was “as close to correct as possible.” Id.

B.

Furthermore, unlike in Williams II and Lopez, there 
were no “independent line[s] of investigation that w[ere] already being pursued when the constitutional violation occurred[,]” and nothing establishing that the evidence would have been “discovered as a matter of course if independent investigations were allowed to proceed.” Williams II, 467 U.S. at 459 (Brennan, 
J., dissenting). Here, Officer Williamson agreed on cross-examination that he emptied Petitioner’s pockets after his arrest for contempt of court, without first patting them down, and without any “reason to believe . . . [Petitioner] was concealing any type of contraband[,]” thus precipitating the event that produced the contraband. It was this search that the ICA determined in Rodrigues I, 122 Hawai' i at 233-234, 225 P.3d at 
675-76, violated the Hawai' i Constitution. Recovery of the 
methamphetamine was not the subject of any other lawful investigation. No facts indicate another investigation was being conducted that would have lawfully resulted in the recovery of the methamphetamine from Petitioner. See Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 
452, 896 P.2d at 908. 
35

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Under the ICA’s majority conclusion that the 
methamphetamine would have been inevitably discovered in an 
inventory search, virtually every unconstitutional search incident to arrest, or any unconstitutional search of a defendant after his or her arrest, but prior to his or her arriving at the cellblock, would be validated upon a showing by the State that, after the search, the defendant was transported to the cellblock and an inventory search conducted. This would defeat discrete exceptions to the general searches and seizures that are prohibited in Article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Moreover, this would place the courts in the position of engaging in speculative analysis of hypothetical scenarios in virtually every instance where established and well-delineated bases for exceptions to the warrant requirement would otherwise apply. See 
Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 184, 683 P.2d at 825 (stating that “warrantless searches are presumptively unreasonable unless they fall within a specifically-established and well-delineated exception to the warrant requirement”). 
The evidence presented in this case does not meet the 
heightened burden of proof established in Lopez. Without evidence other than that of Petitioner’s arrest and transport to the cellblock, there can be no assurance that the methamphetamine “would have still been there” at the time of the lawful inventory search, Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 452, 896 P.2d at 908, and 
consequently, no way for the court to ensure that our 
36

        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
constitution’s protection of the privacy rights would not be

“vitiated by a ‘bad guess[.]’” Id. at 452, 896 P.2d at 908. The

evidence was obtained by the unilateral act of Officer Williamson

and was not the product of an “independent line of

investigation,” Williams II, 467 U.S. at 459 (Brennan, J.

dissenting), that would have culminated in discovery of the

contraband. Under these circumstances, it cannot be concluded

that the court was wrong in holding that Respondent failed to

present clear and convincing evidence that the methamphetamine

would have been discovered during the inventory search, and the

ICA majority gravely erred in concluding otherwise.

IX.

In accordance with the foregoing, we vacate the April

3, 2012 judgment of the ICA, which vacated and remanded the

August 5, 2010 Findings of Facts, Conclusions of Law and Order

Granting Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Evidence filed by the

court, affirm said order, and remand to the court for further

proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
Craig W. Jerome,
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Fa'auuga L. To' oto'o Charles A. Foster,
for respondent
37

