***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29937 15-MAY-2012 
09:15 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs.
 
GLENN KEOHOKAPU, JR., Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-29937
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29937; CR NO. 08-1-0905)
 
May 15, 2012
 
ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.; WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold in this case that the process by which a jury
 
was selected for the trial of Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant
 
Glenn Keohokapu, Jr. (Petitioner) did not result in substantial
 prejudice to Petitioner notwithstanding the pretrial publicity to
 which some jurors were exposed, and we therefore affirm the June
 22, 2009 judgment of conviction for manslaughter entered by the
         
     
           
         
           
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (the court),  and, to the same
extent, the October 6, 2011 judgment of the Intermediate Court of
 Appeals (ICA) filed pursuant to its September 22, 2011 summary
 
2
disposition order (SDO),  see State v. Keohokapu, No. 29937, 2011
WL 4426889 (Haw. App. Sept. 22, 2011). However, we vacate
 Petitioner’s extended term sentence and remand for disposition of
 the case consistent with this opinion inasmuch as we hold that as
 to the extended sentencing proceedings (1) where the jury must
 determine whether an extended term of imprisonment is necessary
 for the protection of the public it is error to instruct the jury
 that the extended term sentence includes the possibility of
 parole; (2) and, additionally, that in this case it was error to
 admit the statement of one of the witnesses during the sentencing
 phase as past recollection recorded; and (3) these errors were
 not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
I.
 
The following essential matters are from the record and
 
the submissions of the parties. 
A.
 
On the night of June 7, 2008, Petitioner, Petitioner’s
 
3
wife, Kauilani Keohokapu (Kauilani),  and Petitioner’s brother
1
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 
2
 The SDO was filed by the Presiding Judge Daniel R. Foley, the
 
Honorable Alexa D.M. Fujise, and the Honorable Lisa M. Ginoza.
 
3
 Kauilani Keohokapu is referred to by her first name in order to
 
distinguish her from Petitioner.
 
2
         
     
         
         
         
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
went to club “Komo Mai.” Decedent Steven Wilcox and his friend
 
Robin Gregory also were at the club. At some point, Petitioner
 became upset because Gregory was allegedly staring at Kauilani. 
Petitioner left the club and went outside to his car. Kauilani
 followed Petitioner, and the two allegedly began to argue. 
Later, Petitioner’s brother came out of the club to the car, and
 it appears that the three argued.
 
During the argument, Petitioner’s brother grabbed
 
Kauilani’s arm and pushed her away from the car. At that moment,
 Wilcox came out of the club, approached the car, and said
 something to the effect of, “That’s one female.” Petitioner, who
 was sitting in the car, got out and said, “[T]hat’s my wife.” 
Petitioner and Wilcox then began to fight. At one point,
 witnesses stated that they saw Petitioner with a metal object or
 a knife in his hand. Sometime during the fight, Petitioner and
 Wilcox collided, and Petitioner stabbed Wilcox in the chest. 
Petitioner then went back to his car and drove away. On June 8,
 2008, Wilcox died as a result of the stab wound. 
B. 
On June 12, 2008, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawai' i (Respondent) charged Petitioner with murder in the 
second degree, Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5 (1993)
4 
4
 HRS § 707-701.5 (1993) provides:
 
§ 707-701.5. Murder in the second degree (1) Except as
provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offense of
murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person.
 
(continued...)
 
3
         
           
        
 
     
         
        
        
       
   
          
        
        
         
        
       
       
        
      
       
        
       
       
       
        
    
         
        
         
        
         
          
       
        
    
          
          
          
         
        
        
  
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and 706-656 (1996).5 On June 23, 2008, Respondent gave Petitioner
 
notice that he was eligible to be sentenced to an extended term
 
of imprisonment as a persistent offender pursuant to HRS §§ 706­
6 7
661 (Supp. 2008)  & 706-662(1) (Supp. 2008) . 
4(...continued)
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which the
defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in
section 706-656.
 
5 HRS § 706-656 (1996) provides:
 
§ 706-656. Terms of imprisonment for first and second degree
murder and attempted first and second degree murder (1)
Persons convicted of first degree murder or first degreeattempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonmentwithout possibility of parole.As part of such sentence the court shall order the directorof public safety and the Hawai 'i paroling authority to
prepare an application for the governor to commute thesentence to life imprisonment with parole at the end oftwenty years of imprisonment; provided that persons who arerepeat offenders under section 706-606.5 shall serve atleast the applicable mandatory minimum term of imprisonment.(2) Except as provided in section 706-657, pertaining to
enhanced sentence for second degree murder, personsconvicted of second degree murder and attempted seconddegree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment withthe possibility of parole. The minimum length ofimprisonment shall be determined by the Hawai 'i paroling
authority; provided that persons who are repeat offendersunder section 706-606.5 shall serve at least the applicablemandatory minimum term of imprisonment.If the court imposes a sentence of life imprisonment withoutpossibility of parole pursuant to section 706-657, as partof that sentence, the court shall order the director ofpublic safety and the Hawai 'i paroling authority to prepare
an application for the governor to commute the sentence tolife imprisonment with parole at the end of twenty years ofimprisonment; provided that persons who are repeat offendersunder section 706-606.5 shall serve at least the applicablemandatory minimum term of imprisonment. 
6
 HRS § 706-661 (Supp. 2008), referenced in § 706-662, provides:
 
§ 706-661. Extended terms of imprisonment. The court may
sentence a person who satisfies the criteria for any of the
categories set forth in section 706-662 to an extended term
of imprisonment, which shall have a maximum length as
follows:
 
(1) For murder in the second degree-life without the
possibility of parole;
(2) For a class A felony-indeterminate life term of
i
mprisonment;
 
(continued...)
 
4
         
      
   
       
 
       
        
        
         
      
 
         
         
          
         
          
        
        
    
         
        
      
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The July 23, 2008 minutes of the court reflect that the
 
subject of pretrial publicity was discussed on that date, but
 
there is no record of the proceedings. On March 12, 2009, the
 court held a hearing to resolve several pending motions. At the
 conclusion of the hearing, Petitioner’s counsel reminded the
 court that there had been news reports about Wilcox’s peaceable
 nature, which Petitioner’s counsel claimed were simply “not
 true.”
 
Jury selection began on March 17, 2009, and lasted six
 
days. On the first day of jury selection, the court informed the
 first panel of prospective jurors that “[t]here was some
 publicity with respect to this case[,] and made the following
 
6(...continued)
(3) For a class B felony-indeterminate twenty-year
term of imprisonment; and
(4) For a class C felony-indeterminate ten-year term
of imprisonment.
When ordering an extended term sentence, the court
shall impose the maximum length of imprisonment. The minimumlength of imprisonment for an extended term sentence under
paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) shall be determined by the
Hawai'i paroling authority in accordance with section
706-669. 
(Emphases added.)
 
7 HRS § 706-662 (Supp. 2008) provides in relevant part:
 § 706-662. Criteria for extended terms of imprisonment. A
 
defendant who has been convicted of a felony may be subject
to an extended term of imprisonment under section 706-661 if
it is proven beyond a reasonable doubt that an extended term
of imprisonment is necessary for the protection of the
public and that the convicted defendant satisfies one or
more of the following criteria:
(1) The defendant is a persistent offender in that the
defendant has previously been convicted of two or more
felonies committed at different times when the
 defendant was eighteen years of age or older ;
 
(Emphases added.)
 
5
         
            
        
      
       
         
            
  
         
         
           
        
           
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
statement (publicity statement): 
It was reported that on June 8, 2008, in the parking lot of
Club Komo Mai in Kaneohe [Petitioner] Glenn Keohokapu, Jr.,
allegedly fatally stabbed 19-year-old Steven Wilcox after
Wilcox intervened in an argument between [Petitioner] and
his wife. Both [Petitioner] and Wilcox had consumed alcohol
in Club Komo Kai. Wilcox was described in the media as a
 
good samaritan.
Would you please raise your hand if you believed you
have read, hear, or know anything about this case.
For those of you who have raised your hand, thank you.
We’ll be discussing what you’ve read or heard individually
with each of you, and the others of you will be--who have
not read or heard anything will be returning on next week
Tuesday.
 
(Emphasis added.) The prospective jurors in the second, third,
 
and fourth panels were given the same apprisal. Petitioner
 claims that “there is no record as to the discussion or
 formulation of this statement [and that] there is no record of
 whether the defense objected or not.” The record reflects,
 however, that Petitioner did not object when the court read the
 statement to the jury panels. 
The court conducted individualized voir dire of those
 
jurors who indicated they had been exposed to pretrial publicity. 
Jurors who stated that they could not be fair and impartial due
 to media exposure were excused for cause. 
Petitioner challenged for cause the remaining jurors
 
who had heard of the case in the media, arguing that it would be
 difficult to ascertain whether the jurors could be fair and
 impartial, and, thus, it would be prudent to dismiss them all. 
The court rejected Petitioner’s challenge for cause. 
During the first day of the regular jury selection,
 
Petitioner reiterated his challenge to those jurors seated in the
 
6
         
      
         
 
        
 
        
          
         
      
        
         
       
       
         
        
   
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jury box who had been exposed to pretrial publicity. The court
 
again denied Petitioner’s challenge. Nine out of the twelve
 jurors ultimately selected indicated that they had heard about
 the case through the television news, the newspapers, or both,
 and five stated that they recalled Wilcox had been referred to as
 a “Good Samaritan” or had helped by intervening in the dispute. 
C.
 Petitioner’s trial commenced on April 6, 2009. 
Petitioner argued that Wilcox, who was carrying brass knuckles on
 the night in question, was the first aggressor, and that
 Petitioner acted in self-defense. 
On April 20, 2009, the jury
 
found Petitioner guilty of the included offense of manslaughter,
 HRS § 707-702.
8 On May 8, 2009, following the jury verdict,
 
Respondent gave Petitioner notice that it intended to introduce
 evidence of Petitioner’s past crimes during the sentencing phase
 of trial.
 
8 HRS § 707-702 (Supp. 2006) provides:
 
§ 707-702. Manslaughter (1) A person commits the offense of
 
manslaughter if:
(a) The person recklessly causes the death of another
person; or
(b) The person intentionally causes another person to commit
suicide.
 (2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the
first and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which
reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time the
defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for
 which there is a reasonable explanation. The reasonableness
of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of
a reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendant
believed them to be.
 (3) Manslaughter is a class A felony.
 
7
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D. 
On May 27, 2009, the sentencing phase of Petitioner’s
 
trial began. Respondent introduced evidence that Petitioner had
 
engaged in domestic violence against his wife on October 20,
 1994, April 3, 1996, July 13, 1996, and on two other occasions,
 one sometime in January 2008 and the other on March 9, 2008. 
Respondent also introduced evidence that Petitioner had allegedly
 attacked a man named Gregory Balga on October 23, 1993. The jury
 also heard that Petitioner had committed four other felonies, one
 of which involved violence toward another person, and that
 Petitioner had numerous misdemeanors on his criminal record. 
1. 
Respondent first called Petitioner’s wife, Kauilani, as
 
a witness. Kauilani testified that on April 3, 1996, while she
 and Petitioner were still dating, she attempted to leave the
 apartment she and Petitioner shared. Respondent asked Kauilani
 whether Petitioner was holding her back from leaving, to which
 Kauilani answered that she did not remember because the incident
 had occurred “back in ‘96.” Respondent inquired whether Kauilani
 had filed a police report the day after the incident, and
 Kauilani responded that she had. 
Respondent then showed the report to Kauilani. 
Kauilani indicated that she had filed the report, that she
 recognized the handwriting as hers, and that her signature was on
 the bottom of the report. Respondent asked the court for
 
8
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
permission to approach Kauilani, which was granted. It is not
 
clear from the record whether Respondent retrieved the report. 
Respondent asked Kauilani whether the report “refresh[ed] her
 recollection,” to which Kauilani answered in the affirmative. 
Respondent asked Kauilani whether Petitioner had
 
grabbed her because he did not want her to leave. Kauilani
 responded, “It says that he slapped me. . . . On the paper it
 says he slapped me.” Respondent questioned, “This is your
 statement, right?” and Kauilani agreed. Respondent asked, “And
 you wrote it when this incident occurred? You wrote it the day
 after the incident occurred; is that right?” Kauilani responded
 that she did not want to “dig back up” that part of her life, but
 agreed that she had written the statement. Kauilani then
 testified that she and Respondent had argued, and that Petitioner
 had slapped her on the face several times, grabbed her neck,
 threatened to kill her, and locked her in the apartment for about
 an hour. Petitioner claims that the record does not reflect that
 Respondent ever retrieved the police report from Kauilani when
 she was testifying.
 
2. 
Kauilani also testified about another incident of
 
domestic abuse that occurred on July 13, 1996. On that occasion,
 Petitioner pulled Kauilani’s hair, head-butted her, and bit her
 in the eye. As a result of the incident, Kauilani suffered a
 black eye, scratches, and injuries to her ears.
 
9
         
           
         
        
            
           
            
        
          
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3. 
Respondent questioned Kauilani about a third incident
 
that allegedly occurred on October 20, 1994, during which
  
Petitioner bit Kauilani and pulled her by the stomach. During
 
Kauilani’s testimony, Petitioner’s counsel asked whether Kauilani
 was reading from her police report. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: If she has it at the stand and she’s
 
testifying from it, I’m going to object because there’s a
refreshed recollection, and I don’t think the foundation has
been laid for that. Other than for the first police report.
It seemed like she’s testifying from that. So I missed it
 as to the second police report. And this one. I don’t
 
think there was a request that her recollection be
refreshed. And if she is testifying from her statement, I
would object to that.
 
(Emphases added.) When Respondent asked Kauilani to clarify
 
whether she was testifying from memory, she responded, “I told
 you this is a part of my life that I tried to forget. And yes,
 I’m reading it from the paper.” Respondent later conceded that
 Kauilani’s testimony concerning the October 1994 incident was
 erroneously admitted into evidence. Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889,
 
at *5.
 
4. 
Respondent then requested Kauilani to review a police
 
report from July 13, 1996 involving another incident of domestic
 violence. Kauilani related that she had written the report the
 day after the incident, and that her signature was on both pages
 of the report. Respondent inquired whether the report helped
 Kauilani remember the events of July 13, 1996. Petitioner’s
 counsel objected, arguing that foundation was lacking for
 
10
         
 
          
          
           
  
          
           
             
            
           
             
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
admitting the statement in evidence. The court overruled the
 
objection. Respondent asked Kauilani whether she remembered
 Petitioner head-butting and pulling her hair on July 13, 1996. 
Kauilani replied she did not because “this is 2009.” 
Respondent then attempted to move the entire report
 
into evidence, and the court asked both counsel to approach the
 bench. Petitioner’s counsel objected, contending that the entire
 document should not be admitted into evidence and that Respondent
 had not laid a proper foundation for Kauilani’s testimony. The
 court overruled the objection, concluding that Respondent “laid
 sufficient foundation for past recollection recorded. And under
 the rule you read it into evidence.” 
Respondent then sought to read Kauilani’s entire
 
statement into evidence, but the court only allowed Respondent to
 read those paragraphs on which Kauilani had been questioned. 
Petitioner’s counsel renewed his objection. The court permitted
 Respondent to read the following statement into evidence, over
 Petitioner’s objection: 
As to number 4, what happened, pulled my hair, hit me,
head butt, bite, tear marks, he did this all because someone
told him that I was seeing someone else and that I have
someone’s jacket.
Number 5, why did it happen, because he told me that
I’m driving -- I’m sorry. I’m driving him crazy, only last
night he found out my number. I have a black and blue right
eye, hardly here [sic] out of my right ear. A bit shoulder,
and tear marks on my chest from [Petitioner], who is my ex-
boyfriend, who I used to live with for one and a half years.
I’m willing to prosecute.
 
Respondent then started to ask Kauilani about the
 
October 20, 1994 report that had been discussed earlier but then
 
withdrew the question.
 
11
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5.
 
Additionally, Respondent introduced evidence that on
 
March 11, 2008, Kauilani obtained a temporary restraining order
 
(TRO) against Petitioner because sometime in January 2008, and
 again on March 9, 2008, Petitioner allegedly abused Kauilani by
 cutting her eye, striking her, pulling her hair, choking her, and
 head-butting her. The TRO was granted and remained in effect
 until June 9, 2008. In April 2008, Kauilani filed a report
 claiming Petitioner violated the TRO. Kauilani later testified
 that she sought the TRO because Petitioner was “run[ning] around
 with girls” and she wanted to get her car back from Petitioner,
 and not because she needed protection. Kauilani also reported
 that she had written a letter to the court asking for the TRO to
 be “dropped,” and that she believed in April that the TRO was no
 longer in force.
 
6.
 
Respondent also called Gregory Balga to testify about
 
an incident that took place on October 23, 1993. Balga testified
 that he had a drinking problem, was drinking heavily on the night
 in question, and, thus, could not remember whether Petitioner had
 visited his home on the night in question. Respondent showed
 Balga the police report he filed. Balga identified his writing,
 signature, and the date and time on the document, but indicated
 he still could not recall what had happened. Petitioner objected
 when Respondent attempted to “move [the report] for
 
12
         
        
            
           
           
           
          
         
              
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
identification.” Respondent answered that it was attempting to
 
refresh Balga’s recollection, but, since Balga could not remember
 the incident, it would attempt to lay the foundation for “past
 recollection recorded.” 
Respondent inquired of Balga again whether his
 
handwriting was on the report. Balga replied, “I don’t remember
 writing it. I don’t remember an officer there. I don’t remember
 that. Like I said, I could have been drinking.” Balga admitted
 that his name, address, social security number, age, date of
 birth, and phone number were on the report. Petitioner renewed
 his objection to Balga’s testimony, but the court overruled it
 and allowed Respondent to read the following to the jury from the
 report: 
Number 4, what happened. [Petitioner] was accusing me
for fooling around with his chick . . . . We both were
talking downstairs and he kicked me in the face and I ran
upstairs and he forced [sic] way -- his way into the house
and hit my sister trying to get into the house.
After hitting my sister I tried to force him out and
close the door, but [Petitioner] kept trying to push the
door open . . . . At no time did I give Glenn permission to
enter my house . . . .
 
7.
 In addition to this testimony, Respondent called
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Jon Yoshida. Officer
 
Yoshida testified that on December 17, 1994, he arrested
 Petitioner for Robbery in the Second Degree, and that Petitioner
 had injured the complaining witness’s mouth, jaw area, and chin
 
area, and had bitten the witness’s right triceps.
 
13
         
         
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8.
 
HPD Officer Michael Wong testified for Respondent that
 
on June 9, 2008, he had been assigned to arrest Petitioner in
 
connection with a homicide case.9 When he reached Petitioner’s
 
home, Officer Wong saw a female exiting the house, entering a
 car, and attempting to reverse the vehicle. Officer Wong related
 that he saw Petitioner “jump on to the front hood of the car[,]”
 break off one of the car’s windshield wipers, and attempt to
 break the windshield with his fist.
 
9.
 
Respondent called Norma Ueno, supervisor of the 
criminal history records unit of the Hawai' i Criminal Justice Data 
Center. Ueno identified Respondent’s Exhibit 10 as Petitioner’s criminal history record. A redacted copy of the exhibit, Exhibit 10A, showing Petitioner’s twenty convictions was admitted into evidence over Petitioner’s objection. Petitioner does not appear to make any arguments in his Application concerning the admission of his criminal history. 
10.
 
Respondent also introduced the testimony of police
 
fingerprint examiner Judy Tamashiro, who compared Petitioner’s
 fingerprints in this case against cases involving Burglary in the
 First Degree, Robbery in the Second Degree, Promoting a Dangerous
 Drug in the Third Degree, and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia,
 
9
 It appears from Officer Wong’s testimony that the homicide case
 
referred to was this case.
 
14
         
        
            
            
             
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and determined that the fingerprints in all of those cases
 
belonged to Petitioner. The court took judicial notice that all
 four offenses were felonies. 
11. 
Respondent called HPD Sergeant Stuart Yano, who
 
testified that on December 6, 2002, he executed a search warrant
 of Petitioner’s home and found a pipe used for ingesting crystal
 methamphetamine and six bags of a crystalline substance
 resembling crystal methamphetamine.
 
12.
 
Following Respondent’s evidence, Petitioner moved for a
 
judgment of acquittal on the ground that Respondent did not prove 
Petitioner was a persistent offender whose extended incarceration
 was necessary for the protection of the public. The court denied
 the motion. Petitioner then offered testimony from his mother,
 sister, and father. Over Respondent’s objection,
10 Petitioner’s
 
parents and sister testified that Petitioner’s father physically
 abused Petitioner from ages six to seventeen. Petitioner’s
 sister related that Petitioner’s father also abused Petitioner’s
 mother. Petitioner’s mother reported that Petitioner had
 expressed regret. 
10
 Respondent objected that the testimony was not relevant because
 
the question before the jury was whether Petitioner needed to be subjected to
an extended sentence. Petitioner responded that it was important for the jury
“to understand the source of any of the criminal . . . problems [Petitioner]
face[d].” The court overruled the objection.
 
15
         
    
          
        
          
          
          
         
       
    
         
    
          
       
         
         
         
         
          
         
            
      
          
      
        
      
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
E. 
During the settlement of jury instructions, Petitioner
 
objected to two instructions, Court’s Jury Instruction Nos. 2 and
 
4, concerning parole.11 Petitioner also objected to Exhibit 6,
 
which contained minutes generated by the Hawai' i Paroling 
Authority and Exhibit 10A which showed parole violations and
 criminal convictions.
12 The court overruled the objections. 
The court instructed the jury that for the offense of
 
Manslaughter, Petitioner could be “sentenced to a maximum
 indeterminate term of imprisonment of [twenty] years.”
13 The
 
court also explained to the jury that it was to answer special
 
11 Jury instruction no. 2 stated:
 
When a person has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment,
the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority shall, as soon as practicable
but no later than six months after commitment to the custodyof the Director of the Department of Public Safety hold ahearing, and on the basis of the hearing make an orderfixing the minimum term of imprisonment to be served beforethe prisoner shall become eligible for parole. 
Jury instruction no. 4 stated:
 The following provision of law relate [sic] to “parole”, as 
defined in these instructions: No parole shall be granted unless it appears to the Hawai 'i 
Paroling Authority that there is a reasonable probabilitythat the prisoner concerned will live and remain at libertywithout violating the law and that the prisoner’s release isnot incompatible with the welfare and safety of society. 
12 The minutes in Exhibit 6 contained short summaries of previous 
actions by the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority with respect to Petitioner’s parole 
violations. Exhibit 10A showed Petitioner had committed several paroleviolations and that the disposition of the cases was revocation of parole.Exhibit 10A also showed Petitioner’s criminal convictions. 
13
 The jury was also charged in jury instruction No. 7 that
 
[f]or the offense of Manslaughter, Defendant Glenn
Keohokapu, Jr., may be subject to a maximum indeterminate
term of imprisonment of twenty years.
 
Petitioner did not object to this instruction.
 
16
         
         
        
          
       
  
         
        
         
         
           
         
         
        
         
         
         
 
       
         
    
        
           
          
                 
     
         
          
 
     
          
          
         
     
        
        
          
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interrogatories regarding an extended term of imprisonment, which
 
would “extend the maximum length of [Petitioner’s] imprisonment
 for the offense of Manslaughter from twenty years of
 incarceration to life with the possibility of parole.” Over
 Petitioner’s prior objection, the court orally gave the following
 
14
 instructions : 
THE COURT: An indeterminate term of imprisonment is a
sentence to imprisonment for the maximum period defined by
law subject to termination at any time after service of the
minimum term of imprisonment determined by the Hawai 'i 
Paroling Authority .
When a person has been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment, the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority shall as soon as
practicable but no later than six months after commitment tothe custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety hold a hearing and on the basis of the hearing makean order fixing the minimum term of imprisonment to beserved before the prisoner shall become eligible for parole .
The Paroling Authority in its discretion may in any
particular case and at any time impose a special condition
that the prisoner will not be considered for parole unless
and until the prisoner has a record of continuance [sic]
exemplary behavior.
After sixty days[’] notice to the prosecuting attorney
the Authority in its discretion may reduce the minimum term
fixed by the order.
Parole means a conditional release of a prisoner who
has served part of the term for which he was sentenced to
 
14 The oral charge incorporated jury instructions Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5,
 
and 6. Petitioner did not object to jury instructions Nos. 3, 5, or 6.
 
Jury instruction no. 3 provided:
 
Parole means a conditional release of a prisoner who has
served part of the term for which he was sentenced to
prison.
 
Jury instruction no. 5 provided:
 
You must not discuss or consider the subject of any actionthat the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority may or may not take in
your deliberations of the facts at issue in this hearing. 
Jury instruction no. 6 provided:
 
An “indeterminate term of imprisonment” is a sentence to imprisonment for the maximum period defined by law subjectto termination at any time after service of the minimum termof imprisonment determined by the Hawai 'i Paroling 
Authority. 
17
         
 
        
    
         
       
        
         
         
 
         
         
          
 
        
        
        
          
        
          
       
         
          
        
        
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prison.
The following provision of law relates to parole as
defined in these instructions.
 
No parole shall be granted unless it appears to the 
Hawai'i Paroling Authority that there is a reasonable
probability that the prisoner concerned will live and remain
at liberty without violating the law and that the prisoner’srelease is not incompatible with the welfare and safety ofsociety.
You must not discuss or consider the subject of any
action that the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority may or may not
take in your deliberations of the facts at issue in thishearing. 
(Emphases added.)
 
The jury found, pursuant to special interrogatory no.
 
1, that Respondent proved beyond a reasonable doubt that
 
Petitioner was a persistent offender in that he had committed two
 or more felonies at different times when he was [eighteen] years
 of age or older.
15 The jury also determined in response to
 
special interrogatory no. 2 that Respondent proved beyond a
 reasonable doubt that it was “necessary for the protection of the
 public to subject [Petitioner] to an extended term of
 imprisonment, which would extend the maximum length of his
 imprisonment for the offense of Manslaughter from twenty years of
 incarceration to life with the possibility of parole[].”
16
 
15 Special interrogatory no. 1 stated as follows:
 
Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
the Defendant GLENN KEOHOKAPU, JR., is a persistent offender
in that he has previously been convicted of two or more
felonies committed at different times when he was eighteen
years of age or older? (Your answer must be unanimous).
 
16
 Special interrogatory no. 2 stated as follows:
 
Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that it
is necessary for the protection of the public to subject the
Defendant, GLENN KEOHOKAPU, JR., to an extended term of
imprisonment, which would extend the maximum length of his
imprisonment for the offense of Manslaughter from twenty
(continued...)
 
18
         
 
 
        
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
II.
 
Petitioner appealed, and relevant here, argued to the
 
ICA that the court erred (1) during jury selection (a) in failing
 
to strike the jurors who had become acquainted with the case
 through the media because prejudice could be presumed from the
 
pretrial saturation of publicity about the crime; (b) in reading
 
to the entire venire the publicity statement which stated that
 
the media had referred to Wilcox as a “Good Samaritan”; and (c)
 
in formulating the publicity statement in Petitioner’s absence,
 in violation of his right to be present during all stages at
 trial; and (2) during the sentencing phase (a) in admitting into
 evidence testimony under the “present recollection refreshed” and
 “past recollection recorded” exceptions to the hearsay rule; and
 (b) in instructing the jury on parole and the role of the Hawai' i 
Paroling Authority. Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889 at *1. 
III. 
Regarding Petitioner’s jury selection argument, the ICA
 
held that nothing in the record suggested that media reports
 “saturated” the public to an extent warranting a presumption of
 prejudice. Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889 at *2. The ICA also
 
disagreed with Petitioner’s contention that the entire jury pool
 was tainted by the court’s reading of the pretrial publicity
 
16(...continued)
years of incarceration to life with the possibility of
parole? (Your answer to this question must be unanimous.)
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
19
         
 
         
          
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
statement. Id. at *3. As to Petitioner’s contention that the
 
formulation of the publicity statement violated his right to be
 
present during all stages of trial, the ICA concluded that
 Petitioner had waived the argument by not raising it before the
 court. Id. 
With respect to Petitioner’s contention that the court
 
erred during the sentencing hearing in admitting Kauilani’s
 statements from April 3, 1996, July 13, 1996, and October 1994,
 the ICA concluded that Kauilani’s “testimony regarding the 1996
 statements to police were admissible” but that the October 1994
 statement should have been excluded.
17 Id. at *3-4. The ICA also
 
agreed with Petitioner that Balga’s statement should not have
 been admitted. Id. Nevertheless, the ICA concluded that
 
reversal was not warranted because the errors were harmless. Id.
 
at *6. 
Finally, with respect to Petitioner’s argument that the
 
court erred in giving jury instructions nos. 2 and 4 about
 
parole, the ICA reasoned that the “instructions accurately state
 
the procedures for determining the minimum term of imprisonment.” 
Id. at *7. Further the ICA stated that jury instruction no. 2
 did not tell the jury how much time Petitioner had to serve
 before becoming eligible for parole. Id. Lastly, the ICA noted
 
that the court had instructed the jury in jury instruction no. 5
 
17
 The ICA accepted Respondent’s confession of error with respect to
 
the October 1994 statement. Neither party disputes that Kauilani’s October
1994 statement was inadmissible, and, thus, we will not disturb the ICA’s
conclusion.
 
20
         
         
            
       
          
        
    
         
       
        
         
         
          
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that it could not discuss or consider in its deliberations the 
subject of any action that the Hawai' i Paroling Authority might or 
might not take. Id. 
IV.
 
Petitioner lists the following questions in his
 
Application:
 
1. Whether the ICA gravely erred by holding that [Petitioner]
received a fair trial by an impartial jury where at least five of
the seated jurors recalled pretrial publicity describing the
decedent as a “Good Samaritan” and the trial court read a
 publicity statement indicating that the media had described the
decedent as a “Good Samaritan”?
 
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred by determining that either
no evidentiary errors occurred during the sentencing phase
or that the errors which occurred were harmless?
 
3. Whether the ICA gravely erred by determining that no
error occurred when the trial court instructed the jury on
the irrelevant issues of parole and the role of the Hawai 'i 
Paroling Authority during the extended term phase of trial? 
Respondent did not file a Response to the Application
 
(Response). 
V. 
Before this court, as to the jury selection process,
 
Petitioner argues that (1) the ICA erred when it held that
 
Petitioner had waived his right to be present during the
 formulation of the publicity statement because (a) defendants
 have a constitutional right to be present at any stage of a trial
 where their substantial rights are affected; (b) Petitioner’s
 substantial rights were affected, meaning that the issue could be
 raised on appeal; (c) it would appear disingenuous to require
 Petitioner to object when he was not present during the
 formulation of the statement and when the court did not make a
 
21
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
record of the formulation or discussion of the statement; and (d)
 
Petitioner was actually prejudiced by the statement that Wilcox
 had been portrayed as a Good Samaritan because Petitioner’s
 defense was self-defense, and because the Good Samaritan
 statement would not have been admissible at trial; and (2) the
 ICA erred in concluding that the court was able to identify and
 dismiss biased jurors by conducting a thorough voir dire. 
As to the evidence admitted during the sentencing
 
phase, Petitioner argues that the ICA erred in (1) holding that
 since the defense did not object when Kauilani stated that her
 memory of the April 1996 incident was refreshed, the admission of
 her testimony was not a ground for reversal; (2) in deciding that
 Kauilani’s July 13, 1996 statement was admissible as a past
 recollection recorded; (3) in concluding that the admissions of
 Kauilani’s October 1994 statement and Balga’s October 1993
 statement were harmless. Petitioner maintains that these were
 “aggravating factors,” and that, during the sentencing phase, the
 erroneous admission of such factors cannot be harmless. 
Lastly, Petitioner argues that the ICA erred when it
 
held that it was not error for the court to instruct the jury
 concerning parole in jury instructions nos. 2 and 4. Petitioner
 contends that (1) the ICA never addressed the issue of whether
 the jury instructions were irrelevant; (2) even if the
 instructions accurately stated the law, irrelevant instructions
 could only have misled and confused the jury; (3) cases from
 
22
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
other jurisdictions hold that it is reversible error to instruct
 
the jury concerning parole. 
VI. 
Both the Hawai' i and the federal constitutions guarantee 
a criminal defendant the right to a trial by a jury “substantially free from the biasing effects of inflammatory pre-trial publicity.” Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 366, 60 P.3d 306, 
316 (2002) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). Once the accused claims that his or her right to a fair trial has been jeopardized by external influences, such as publicity, on the jury, the court must determine whether the influences rise to the level of being substantially prejudicial. State v. Okumura, 78 
Hawai'i 383, 394, 894 P.2d 80, 91 (1995). “If it does not rise to 
such a level, the trial court is under no duty to interrogate the jury . . . . And whether it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice . . . is ordinarily a question ‘committed to the trial court’s discretion . . . .’” State v. Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 
102, 807 P.2d 593, 596 (1991) (quoting State v. Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. 356, 359, 569 P.2d 891, 895 (1977)). 
Where, however, the court determines that outside
 
influences are of a nature which could substantially prejudice
 the defendant’s right to a fair trial, a rebuttable presumption
 of prejudice arises. Williamson, 72 Haw. at 102, 807 P.2d at
 
596. The trial judge is then duty-bound to investigate the 
23
         
         
          
            
            
          
            
             
            
           
            
              
            
          
            
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
totality of circumstances to determine the impact of the outside
 
influence on the jury. Id.
 
A. 
As to Petitioner’s first argument, the court apparently 
used the publicity statement in conjunction with questions of the jurors concerning media accounts of the incident and the jurors’ ability to be fair.
18 Petitioner is correct that “‘[i]t is well 
settled that an accused has a fundamental right to be present at each critical stage of the criminal proceeding.’” State v. 
Walsh, 125 Hawai' i 271, 285, 260 P.3d 350, 364 (2011) (citation 
omitted). But there is no authority for the proposition, as Petitioner suggests, that a defendant has a right to be present during the “formulation” of the court’s questions. 
Further, Petitioner was present when the court read the
 
publicity statement to the prospective jurors. Petitioner’s
 alleged injury (the tainting of the jury) stems from the court’s
 reading of the publicity statement to the jurors. Thus,
 Petitioner was present during the “stage of trial” in which his
 
18 Because the court conducted further inquiry, the ICA inferred that
 
the court had concluded that the media reports were substantially prejudicial,
but not so saturating to warrant a presumption of prejudice. Keohokapu , 2011
 
WL 4426889, at *2. This inference, however, is not necessarily valid.
Williamson provides that if the court concludes that outside influences are
not substantially prejudicial, it is under no duty to interrogate the jury.
72 Haw. at 102, 807 P.2d at 596. Similarly, if the court finds substantial
prejudice, then it must interrogate the jury. Id. However, Williamson does
not prohibit a court from deciding, as a precautionary measure, to question
the jurors, even if the court has not concluded that there is substantial
prejudice to the defendant. Absent a ruling from the court on the question of
prejudice, it would seem incorrect for the ICA to infer that the court
implicitly determined that there was substantial prejudice to the Petitioner.
In any event, Petitioner does not appear to rely on the court’s “implicit”
 finding of substantial prejudice in his Application.
 
24
         
         
         
        
         
      
       
      
      
       
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“substantial rights” could have been “adversely affected.” See 
Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 285, 260 P.3d at 364. 
When the court read the publicity statement to the
 
prospective jurors Petitioner could have objected. He did not. 
It was therefore not “disingenuous,” as Petitioner claims, for
 the ICA to conclude that Petitioner failed to object to the
 court’s use of the publicity statement. For the same reason, it
 was not error for the ICA to conclude that Petitioner forfeited
 his objection concerning the publicity statement. 
B. 
Assuming arguendo that Petitioner did not forfeit his
 
objection to the publicity statement, Petitioner was not
 substantially prejudiced by the statement. In Pauline, this
 court distinguished between presumed and actual prejudice: 
A defendant need only demonstrate one of two different types
of prejudice in support of a motion to transfer venue:
presumed or actual. Prejudice is presumed when the record
demonstrates that the community where the trial was held was
saturated with prejudicial and inflammatory media publicity
about the crime. Prejudice is rarely presumed because
“saturation” defines conditions found only in extreme
situations. To establish actual prejudice, the defendant
must demonstrate that the jurors exhibited actual partiality
or hostility that could not be laid aside.
 
100 Hawai' i at 315-16, 60 P.3d at 365-66 (quoting Ainsworth v. 
Calderon, 138 F.3d 787, 795 (9th Cir. 1998)) (emphasis added). 
Although Petitioner does not distinguish between the two forms of prejudice, he appears to be arguing that both “presumed” and “actual” prejudice are satisfied. 
1. 
With respect to presumed prejudice, this court has
 
25
         
         
        
          
          
        
        
        
      
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
explained that there are three factors to consider in determining
 
whether prejudice should be presumed: 
Among the factors to be considered in a presumed prejudice
argument is whether there was a barrage of inflammatory
publicity immediately prior to trial amounting to a huge . .
 . wave of public passion. An additional factor is whether
the media accounts were primarily factual, as such accounts
tend to be less prejudicial than inflammatory editorials or
cartoons . A final factor is whether the media accounts
 
contained inflammatory, prejudicial information that was not
admissible at trial .
 
Pauline, 100 Hawai' i at 316, 60 P.3d at 366 (quoting Ainsworth, 
138 F.3d at 795 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)) 
(emphases added). In addition to the three Ainsworth factors, this court examines the jury selection process to determine whether “the trial judge took sufficient steps to shield the proceedings from the prejudicial effect of the publicity.” Pauline, 100 Hawai' i at 317, 60 P.3d at 367. 
Petitioner is correct that it would have been better 
for the court to not give the publicity statement. By reading the statement to the venires, the court alerted even those jurors who were not aware of the publicity or who might have forgotten about it that the incident had been in the news and that some accounts portrayed Wilcox in a positive light. See Okumura, 78 
Hawai'i at 394, 894 P.2d at 91 (explaining that questioning of 
juror about media accounts in front of other potential jurors risked tainting the jury pool). However, this does not mean that there was presumed or actual prejudice to Petitioner. 
Pauline explained that trial courts should presume 
prejudice “only in ‘extreme situations.’” 100 Hawai' i at 316, 60 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d at 366 (quoting State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai' i 195, 200, 948 P.2d 
1036, 1041 (1997)). This court clarified that “extensive 
knowledge in the community of either the crimes or the putative criminal is not sufficient by itself to render a trial constitutionally unfair.” Id. (quoting State v. Graham, 70 Haw. 
627, 636, 780 P.2d 1103, 1109 (1989) (quoting Dobbert v. Florida, 432 U.S. 282, 303, (1977))). For, “[i]f the mere opportunity for prejudice or corruption is to raise a presumption that they exist, it will be hard to maintain [a] jury trial under the conditions of the present day.” Id. (internal citation and 
quotation marks omitted). 
Here, the court’s reading of the publicity statement is
 
not an “extreme” situation that warrants concluding that
 prejudice should be presumed. As to the first Ainsworth factor,
 the court’s publicity statement does not amount to or suggest
 that there was a “huge wave of public passion” regarding Wilcox’s
 death. Nor, as Petitioner suggests, did the court put its
 imprimatur on the characterization of Wilcox as a Good Samaritan. 
The court’s statement was descriptive, stating only that it had
 been reported in the media that Wilcox had intervened in an
 argument between Petitioner and his wife and that Wilcox had been
 “described” as a Good Samaritan. These statements do not evince
 strong public passion. 
With regard to the second Ainsworth factor (whether the
 
accounts were primarily factual), the court’s single-paragraph
 
27
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
publicity statement was primarily factual. The court mentioned
 
the date and location of the alleged offense, that Petitioner
 allegedly stabbed Wilcox after he intervened in an argument
 between Petitioner and his wife, and that both Petitioner and
 Wilcox had consumed alcohol. The only “non-factual” statement
 made by the court was that Wilcox had been described as a Good
 Samaritan. Thus, it is unlikely that the publicity statement
 prejudiced Petitioner.
 
As to the third Ainsworth factor (whether media
 
accounts contained inflammatory information inadmissible at
 trial), again, the only statement that would not have been
 admissible at trial was that Wilcox had been described as a Good
 Samaritan. A single statement to that effect, however, does not
 appear to be the kind of inflammatory statement that would render
 it impossible for jurors to keep an open mind. 
In Okumura, this court considered whether the 
questioning of one juror before the rest of the jurors regarding certain news reports substantially prejudiced the defendants. 78 Hawai'i at 390, 394-96, 894 P.2d at 87, 91-93. The defendants in 
the case had been accused of two burglaries, and the juror had seen a newscast that included an interview of a person who alleged that he had been burglarized by the defendants. Id. The 
burglary in the newscast had not been charged in the case. Id. 
When the trial court questioned the juror about the
 
newscast, the juror stated that she might not be able to remain
 
28
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
impartial because the uncharged burglary had taken place recently
 
and its occurrence suggested to her that the defendants had
 committed the charged burglaries. Id. at 394-96, 894 P.2d at 91­
93. This court concluded that the defendants had not been
 
substantially prejudiced on account of the other jurors having
 heard this exchange because “no facts of the other alleged
 burglary were given, how [defendants] were implicated was not
 stated, and [the juror’s] opinion . . . was entirely equivocal.” 
Id. at 396, 894 P.2d at 93. Moreover, the record of the voir
 dire indicated that the jury selected could consider the case
 impartially. Id.
 
Here, similarly, although the court risked tainting the
 
jury by reading the publicity statement to all of the prospective
 jurors, it does not appear that Petitioner was prejudiced. In
 fact, the suggestion in Okumura that the defendants had committed
 the same crime on a previous occasion as the crime that was being
 charged had a greater potential for prejudice than the court’s
 statement here, which was by and large a factual description of
 the offense charged. The court also expressed no opinion as to
 the correctness of the media reports. Finally, as discussed
 below, the court conducted extensive voir dire of those jurors
 who indicated a familiarity with media reports about the incident
 and struck those jurors who said that they could not be
 impartial. Consequently, Petitioner was not substantially
 prejudiced by the publicity statement. 
29
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. 
Petitioner also argues that although the court engaged 
in a thorough voir dire, “[this] does not mean that the jury was 
fair and impartial.” In order to show actual prejudice, Petitioner “must demonstrate that the jurors exhibited actual partiality or hostility that could not be laid aside.” Pauline, 
100 Hawai' i at 315, 60 P.3d at 365. Petitioner, however, does not 
point to anything in the proceedings that would suggest that any of the jurors who sat on the jury exhibited any partiality or hostility that could not be set aside. Petitioner’s only contention appears to be that the court’s publicity statement was prejudicial because five of the “eight or nine” jurors who remembered the media reports also recalled that the decedent had been described as a Good Samaritan. Petitioner does not explain, however, how the fact that those jurors remembered the press statements resulted in an inability to keep an open mind. 
In fact, the five jurors referenced by Petitioner all
 
stated in response to questioning by the court and by Petitioner
 that they could keep an open mind. Thus, in answer to the
 question whether he remembered “the good samaritan feature [of
 the news cast],” Juror 16 responded that he recalled that aspect
 of the story but that he did not react strongly to it, and that
 he would be able to set all of the publicity aside and make his
 decision based on what he heard in court. The other four jurors 
30
         
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testified similarly. Petitioner does not refer to anything in
 
the record that would suggest that any jurors who exhibited bias
 were retained on the jury.  Thus, the ICA did not err in
 
concluding that the court identified and dismissed those jurors
 
who exhibited bias by conducting a thorough voir dire.
 
VII. 
Petitioner also contends that evidence was erroneously
 
admitted during the sentencing phase of the trial. 
A. 
Petitioner argues that the ICA erred in holding that he
 
forfeited his contention that Kauilani’s testimony concerning the
 April 3, 1996 domestic violence incident was inadmissible. 
According to Petitioner, Kauilani indicated that she was reading
 from the police report, and since there is no indication that the
 
prosecution retrieved the police report, the testimony was
 
inadmissible. 
1. 
Although Petitioner suggests that the ICA erred in
 
concluding that the defense did not object, the record does not
 reveal any objections on the part of the defense with respect to
 Kauilani’s testimony concerning the April 1996 incident. Thus,
 Petitioner is wrong to imply that he objected or that his failure
 to object had no effect. Petitioner’s failure to object matters
 to the extent that this court will only notice the alleged error 
31
         
         
           
            
            
              
           
           
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
if it is plain and if it affected Petitioner’s substantial 
rights. Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 284, 260 P.3d at 363. 
2.
 
In any event, even assuming there was no forfeiture, 
the ICA correctly concluded that Kauilani’s testimony was admissible. “When used to refresh [a] witness’s present recollection, a writing is solely employed to jog the memory of the testifying witness.” State v. Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai' i 138, 
144, 906 P.2d 624, 630 (App. 1995). If the writing does not refresh the witness’s memory, the witness may not testify about or read the contents of the writing into evidence unless the writing is admitted under another rule of evidence. State v. 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i 127, 137, 176 P.3d 885, 895 (2008). 
Kauilani first testified that she could not remember
 
the April 1996 incident because it had taken place many years
 earlier. However, when Respondent asked her whether her memory
 was refreshed by the police report, Kauilani answered in the
 affirmative.
19 Respondent continued to ask questions of Kauilani,
 
and she testified that she and Respondent had argued on April 3,
 1996, that Petitioner had slapped her on the face several times, 
19
 Subsequently, Kauilani stated, “On the paper it says he slapped
 
me[,]” in response to the question whether Petitioner had grabbed her to
prevent her from leaving the apartment. Thus, the record might suggest, at
least with respect to this question, that Kauilani was reading from the police
report. On the other hand, it is possible that Kauilani was just stating that
the report (which she had read previously when her recollection was being
refreshed) stated that Petitioner slapped her. In any event, Petitioner, did
 not object.
 
32
         
 
  
         
        
       
         
          
         
         
          
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
grabbed her neck, threatened to kill her, and locked her in the
 
apartment for about an hour. Petitioner implies that Kauilani
 could not remember these incidents by noting that the record does
 not reflect that Respondent ever took the police reports from
 her. However, there is nothing in the record to indicate that
 
Kauilani’s memory was not refreshed with respect to these
 
allegations. As such, it was not improper for this testimony to
 come in under the “past recollection refreshed” exception. 
B. 
Petitioner also maintains that the ICA erred in holding 
that Kauilani’s July 13, 1996 statement was admissible as past recollection recorded because Kauilani testified that her memory was not awakened by the report and the report should therefore not have been admitted as past recollection recorded. Hawai' i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 802.1(4) defines past recollection recorded as follows: 
(4) Past recollection recorded. A memorandum or record
 
concerning a matter about which the witness once had
knowledge but now has insufficient recollection to enable
the witness to testify fully and accurately, shown to have
been made or adopted by the witness when the matter was
fresh in the witness’ memory and to reflect that knowledge
 correctly. If admitted, the memorandum or record may be
read into evidence but may not itself be received as an
exhibit unless offered by an adverse party.
 
The commentary to HRE Rule 802.1 provides in pertinent part,
 
“Paragraph (4): This paragraph is identical with Fed. R. Evid.
 803(5), and it restates the common-law hearsay exception for
 recorded recollection, see State v. Altergott, 57 H. 492, 559
 P.2d 728 (1977).”
 
33
         
          
          
         
          
        
 The
 
           
             
                
            
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As the ICA correctly reasoned, “[t]he commentary to
 
20
 Rule 803(5) of the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE)  acknowledges
that ‘[n]o attempt is made in the exception to spell out the
 method of establishing . . . accuracy of the record, leaving them
 to be dealt with as the circumstances of the particular case
 might indicate.’” Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889 at *4. (footnote,
 
brackets, and ellipsis in original). Commenting on FRE 803(5),
 M. Graham, Federal Practice and Procedure: Evidence § 7046 at
 486-91 (interim ed. 2006) states the following as to establishing
 the accuracy of the record: 
A record or memorandum is admissible as an exception to the
hearsay rule if the proponent can show that the witness once
had personal knowledge of the matter , that the record or
memorandum was prepared or adopted by him when it was fresh
in his memory , that it accurately reflected his knowledge
,
a
nd  that  the  witness  currently  has  insufficient  recollection
to  enable  him  to  testify  fully  and  accurately[.]  
witness  may  testify  either  that  he  remembers  making  an
accurate  recording  of  the  event  in  question  which  he  now  no
longer  sufficiently  remembers,  that  he  routinely  makes
accurate  records  of  this  kind,  or,  if  the  witness  has
entirely  forgotten  the  exact  situation  in  which  the
recording  was  made,  that  he  is  confident  from  the
circumstances  that  he  would  not  have  written  or  adopted  such
description  of  the  facts  unless  that  description  truly
described  his  observations  at  the  time.
   
(Footnotes omitted.) (Emphases added.) 
In State v. Sua, 92 Hawai' i 61, 75, 987 P.2d 959, 973 
(1999), this court upheld the admission of a witness’s statement
 
as past recollection recorded where the witness, “wrote the
 statement himself, indicating that he ‘once had knowledge’ of the
 
20
 FRE Rule 803(5) is identical to HRE Rule 802.1(4). State v.
 
Bloss, 3 Haw. App. 274, 278, 649 P.2d 1176, 1179 (1982); see also commentary
to HRE Rule 802.1(4). When the HRE rule is identical to a FRE rule, “we may
 
refer to federal case law for assistance in construing our Rule.” State v.
 
Jhun, 83 Hawai 'i 472, 478, 927 P.2d 1355, 1361 (1996) (brackets omitted). 
34
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
information contained therein[;] . . . signed the statement,
 
thereby adopting it as his own[;] . . . the statement was made
 less than a month after the incident, [and] we may fairly infer
 that it was given when the events were still ‘fresh [in the
 witness’s] memory[]’[;] [and where the witness] testified at
 trial that he was unable to remember writing the statement.” See
 
also Bloss, 3 Haw. App. at 278, 649 P.2d at 1179 (concluding that
 past recollection was satisfied with respect to a traffic
 citation where the witness “[made the citation] when the matter
 was fresh in his memory, in fact contemporaneously, and [where
 the citation’s contents] accurately reflected [the witness’s]
 knowledge of the matter”).
 
In this case, as the ICA correctly concluded, although
 
Kauilani did not sign her July 13, 1996 statement under penalty
 of perjury, the statement satisfies the criteria for the past
 recollection recorded exception. Kauilani testified that she
 remembered the incident on July 13, or at least “the part with
 me,” but that she could not remember the specific allegations of
 abuse that were described in the statement. She also testified
 that the statement was in her writing, contained her signature,
 and that she wrote the report the day following the incident. 
Thus, Respondent established that Kauilani had personal knowledge
 of the July 13 incident, that her statement was prepared when it
 was fresh in her memory (the day after the incident), that it
 accurately reflected her knowledge, and that she currently had
 
35
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
insufficient recollection to testify fully and accurately. See 
Sua, 92 Hawai' i at 75, 987 P.2d at 973. The ICA was therefore 
correct that the July 13 statement was admissible as past 
recollection recorded. 
Petitioner is wrong that Kauilani’s testimony 
concerning her July 13 statement was not admissible because Kauilani testified that her memory was not awakened by the report. To the contrary, to satisfy the past recollection recorded exception, the witness must have “once had knowledge,” but must “now ha[ve] insufficient recollection to enable the witness to testify fully and accurately.” HRE Rule 802.1(4). Had Kauilani testified that she could recall the incidents in her statement, as Petitioner contends was necessary, her statement would not have been admissible under the exception of past recollection recorded. Therefore, the ICA did not err on account of the statement’s failure to reawaken Kauilani’s memory. Cf. 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 136, 176 P.3d at 894 (concluding that 
police report did not qualify under past recollection recorded because the report was not shown to have been made by the witness when the matter was fresh in the witness’s memory). 
VIII. 
The ICA also concluded that it was error for the court
 
to admit Balga’s testimony because Respondent failed to establish
 the foundation that Balga made his statement when the matter was
 fresh in his memory and reflected his knowledge correctly. See
 
36
         
     
        
              
            
          
           
           
          
             
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889, at *5. Petitioner does not quarrel
 
with that conclusion and Respondent did not file a writ
 application or a response to Petitioner’s Application.
21
 
Although Balga acknowledged that the signature and
 
handwriting on the report were his, and it appears that the
 statement was made shortly after the incident, Balga also stated
 that he did not remember making the report because he had “been
 involved in alcohol and drugs for a long time . . . [and] just
 got sober not even a year ago.” He also testified that he could
 not remember an officer being in his apartment on the night of
 the incident. Because of his drinking problem, Balga could not
 recall making an accurate recording of the event and did not
 express any confidence in the accuracy of the statement
 attributed to him. As the ICA correctly found, Balga’s alcohol
 and drug use cast doubt on the reliability of his statement, and
 there was no other evidence that buttressed Balga’s account. See
 
Keohokapu, 2011 WL 4426889, at *5. As such, Respondent did not
 establish that Balga once had personal knowledge of the matter
 described in the statement or that the statement accurately
 reflected Balga’s knowledge at the time. 
21
 Consequently, the correctness of the ICA’s ruling is not
 
implicated in the instant writ. See State v. Eid , --- P.3d ---, No. SCWC­
29587, 2012 WL 503231, at *19 (Haw. Jan. 26, 2012) (Acoba, J., concurring)
(noting that because Respondent neither filed an application for writ of
certiorari from the judgment of the ICA nor a response to Petitioner’s
application the issues raised on appeal by Respondent were not implicated in
the writ). However, because at oral argument Respondent contested the ICA’s
ruling on this issue, it is considered here in order to confirm and clarify
the ICA’s conclusion.
 
37
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent nevertheless maintains that United States v.
 
Porter, 986 F.2d 1014, 1016 (6th Cir. 1993), supports its
 
position. In Porter, the defendant’s girlfriend made a written
 statement to the police claiming the defendant ordered her to
 dispose of cocaine and cash, but, at the defendant’s trial,
 recanted, claiming that she could not remember making the
 statement because she was confused and on drugs at the time the
 statement was made. Id. The statement was read into evidence as
 
past recollection recorded. Id. The Sixth Circuit Court of
 
Appeals held that it was not error to admit the statement. 
Porter is distinguishable from this case. The Sixth
 
Circuit explained that the district court made a “very careful”
 analysis of the statements and found sufficient indicia of
 trustworthiness. Id. at 1017. As in this case, the statement of
 
the witness in Porter contained the witness’s signature and was
 apparently made shortly after the incident. Id. However, in
 
Porter, unlike in this case, there were additional factors that
 established the trustworthiness of the statement. Id. The
 
witness in Porter (1) admitted to making the statement; (2)
 signed the statement on each of its five pages; (3) changed the
 wording and initialed the changes eleven times; and, (4) made the
 statement under penalty of perjury. Id. The statement also
 
contained considerable detail that was internally consistent, and
 it was consistent with other uncontradicted evidence that had
 already been admitted. Id. Further, the district court
 
38
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determined that the defendant’s girlfriend was being evasive at
 
trial and was recanting out of her recently professed desire to
 
marry the defendant or out of fear of the defendant. Id. No
 
analogous factors were found by the court in this case. Porter,
 
therefore, does not assist Respondent. The ICA was thus correct
 in concluding that Balga’s statement was admitted in error.
 
IX. 
Petitioner also maintains that the ICA was wrong in
 
holding that there was no error in the court’s jury instructions
 referencing parole. Relying on precedent from other
 jurisdictions, Petitioner asserts that the court’s instruction to
 the jury during the sentencing phase concerning the possibility
 that Petitioner might be paroled was likely to mislead and
 confuse the jury by inviting it to consider irrelevant matters,
 even if the instruction was technically correct. 
A. 
Under Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), and 
its progeny, the trier of fact must find beyond a reasonable doubt any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum. State v. Maugaotega, 115 Hawai' i 
432, 442, 168 P.3d 562, 572 (2007) (reversing prior case law that adopted the then-majority view and explaining that any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to the jury and proved beyond a 
39
         
        
      
       
        
     
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonable doubt); State v. Jess, 117 Hawai' i 381, 394, 184 P.3d 
133, 146 (2008) (“[I]n light of Cunningham, except for prior 
convictions, multiple convictions, and admissions, ‘any fact, however labeled, that serves as a basis for an extended term sentence must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt to the trier of fact.’”) (citation omitted) (emphasis in original). The “statutory maximum” discussed in Apprendi is the maximum sentence a judge could impose based solely on the facts reflected in the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant. Blakely v. 
Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 303-04 (2004). 
Since Apprendi only requires that juries find the facts
 
that increase a defendant’s sentence beyond the statutory
 maximum, in general, instructions about the length of the ensuing
 sentence or about the possibility that a defendant’s sentence
 might be reduced through parole or commutation would be
 irrelevant. Thus, for example, under HRS § 706-656(2), the
 sentence for a person convicted of murder in the second degree is
 life with the possibility of parole: 
(2) Except as provided in section 706-657 , pertaining to
enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with
possibility of parole . . . .
 
HRS § 706-656(2) (Emphasis added.) However, the court may
 
increase the sentence of a person convicted of murder in the
 second degree to life without the possibility of parole under HRS
 
40
         
   
        
          
        
        
        
       
         
           
       
         
           
      
     
      
        
         
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
§ 706-657,22 whereby life without the possibility of parole may be
 
imposed if the jury finds as facts that the murder was especially
 
heinous, atrocious, or cruel. This statute has been construed in
 a series of cases, the latest of which was State v. Peralto, 95
 Hawai'i 1, 6, 18 P.3d 204, 208 (2001), in which this court held 
that the phrase “especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel,
 manifesting exceptional depravity” provided adequate notice of
 the conduct prohibited. Peralto did not say that the jury should
 
be told that finding that the murder was especially heinous,
 atrocious, or cruel would result in an enhanced sentence. 
Peralto, however, stated that the sentencing jury should be
 “instructed according to Young.” Peralto, 95 Hawai' i at 6, 18 
P.3d at 208. State v. Young, 93 Hawai' i 224, 235, 999 P.2d 230, 
241 (2000), in turn refers to State v. Janto, 92 Hawai' i 19, 986 
P.2d 306 (1999). Janto described the bifurcated proceedings that
 
22 HRS § 706-657 provides:
 
§ 706-657. Enhanced sentence for second degree murder
 The court may sentence a person who has been convicted of
murder in the second degree to life imprisonment without
possibility of parole under section 706-656 if the court
finds that the murder was especially heinous, atrocious, or
cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity or that the person
was previously convicted of the offense of murder in the
first degree or murder in the second degree in this State or
was previously convicted in another jurisdiction of an
offense that would constitute murder in the first degree or
murder in the second degree in this State. As used in this
section, the phrase “especially heinous, atrocious, or
cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity” means a
 conscienceless or pitiless crime which is unnecessarily
torturous to a victim and “previously convicted” means a
 sentence imposed at the same time or a sentence previously
imposed which has not been set aside, reversed, or vacated.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
41
         
         
       
       
          
         
        
         
          
       
        
          
         
       
        
  
 
 
          
           
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
should be used for guilt and sentencing: 
[T]he court shall instruct the jury that it must determine
whether the prosecution has proved, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that the murder was “especially heinous, atrocious,
 or cruel.” The jury’s finding must be unanimous in order for
the court, in the exercise of its sound discretion, to
consider an enhanced sentence. The jury shall then conduct
its deliberations and submit its findings in response to a
special verdict form. If the jury does not come to a
unanimous decision that the murder was “especially heinous,
 atrocious, or cruel” beyond a reasonable doubt, no enhanced
sentence shall be imposed. Pursuant to the language of HRS §
706–657, if the jury does find unanimously that the murder
was “especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel” beyond a
reasonable doubt, the court may, in its discretion, impose
an enhanced sentence.
 
Id. at 35, 986 P.2d at 322 (emphases added). 
There is no suggestion in Janto that the jury should be
 
instructed that if it finds that a murder was committed in an
 
especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel manner, the maximum
 length of the defendant’s sentence will increase from life with
 the possibility of parole to life without the possibility of
 parole. Likewise, there is no reason to so instruct the jury in
 
the instant case. Apprendi is satisfied as long as the jury
 
finds the relevant facts. Under HRS § 706-661, the jury does not
 determine the sentence--that is the province of the court, which
 
may choose, in its discretion, not to impose an extended term. 
X. 
In general, instructions that apprise the jury of the
 
possibility of post-conviction actions of other government
 agencies are unnecessary, and should be avoided.
23 The California
 
23
 The United States Supreme Court in Simmons v. South Carolina , 512
 
U.S. 154, 168-69 (1994) (plurality), held that a capital defendant has a
federal constitutional right to inform the sentencing jury about his or her
parole ineligibility “if the State rests its case for imposing the death
(continued...)
 
42
         
             
            
         
           
          
             
           
             
          
           
            
           
           
              
            
   
            
           
           
           
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Supreme Court in People v. Ramos, 689 P.2d 430, 441-44 (Cal.
 
24
 1984) , considered whether it was proper to instruct the jury on
the governor’s commutation power. In Ramos, the instruction at
 issue informed the jury that the governor could commute a
 sentence of life without parole, but did not inform the jury that
 the governor could also commute a sentence of death. Id. at 438­
44. In addition to holding that the instruction was inaccurate,
 
the Ramos court held that even if the instruction were accurate,
 it was inconsistent with the California Constitution. Id. 
Ramos explained that instructions that permit a
 
sentencing jury to consider a variety of postconviction actions
 by other governmental entities--parole, commutation, trial court
 review--were improper. Id. Consideration of postconviction
 
actions was “inconsistent with the jury’s proper decision-making 
23(...continued)
penalty at least in part on the premise that the defendant will be dangerous
in the future, [because] the fact that the alternative sentence to death islife without parole will necessarily undercut the State’s argument regardingthe threat the defendant poses to society.” Justice O’Connor, concurring in the judgment, agreed that “[w]here the prosecution specifically relies on aprediction of future dangerousness in asking for the death penalty, . . . theelemental due process requirement that a defendant not be sentenced to death‘on the basis of information which he had no opportunity to deny or explain’[requires that the defendant be afforded an opportunity to introduce evidenceon this point].” Id. at 175 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (citation omitted)
(brackets and ellipsis in original). Justice O’Connor also stated that in a state in which parole is available, “the Constitution does not require (orpreclude) jury consideration of that fact.” Id. at 176 (O’Connor, J., 
concurring). Simmons is not at issue here since this is not a capital case 
(and Hawai 'i has no death penalty) and this case does not involve Petitioner’s
ineligibility for parole. 
24
 Ramos is still the law in California. See People v. Beames , 153
 
P.3d 955, 972 (Cal. 2007) (“Generally, reference to the commutation power is
improper because it ‘invites the jury to consider matters that are both
totally speculative and that should not, in any event, influence the jury’s
determination.’”) (citing Ramos, 689 P.2d 430).
 
43
         
 
         
              
               
             
            
            
             
             
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
role,” given the speculative nature of the inquiry the
 
instruction engenders, especially in light of the difficulty
 involved in attempting to predict what a particular defendant
 would be like in the future when parole or commutation may be
 
considered. Id. The Ramos court cited twenty-five other
 
jurisdictions that had reached similar conclusions, while
 
acknowledging that three jurisdictions had reached the opposite
 result. Id. at 442 n.10. 
Ramos provided two reasons for concluding that it is
 
improper to invite the jury to consider post-conviction actions. 
First, an instruction on the possibility of commutation (or
 parole) invites the jury to go beyond its proper role and attempt
 to “preempt” the executive’s authority by imposing a sentence
 that will at least minimize the opportunity for commutation (or
 parole). Id. at 443. Second, such an instruction “may tend to
 
diminish the jury’s sense of responsibility for its action”
 because “[k]nowledge on the part of the jury . . . may imply to a
 jury that if it mistakenly convicts an innocent man, or
 mistakenly fails to recommend mercy, the error may be corrected
 by others.”
25 Id.
 
25
 On the other hand, other jurisdictions have held that instructions
 
on the meaning of parole are proper. One rationale is that a sentencing jury
(or a jury that recommends a sentence to the judge) ought to be fully aware of
the consequences of a sentence in order to make a determination as to which
sentence is appropriate. See Brewer v. State , 417 N.E.2d 889, 908-09 (Ind.
1981); State v. Grisby , 647 P.2d 6, 10 (Wash. 1982) (holding that although
juries should not be told about parole in general, when a statute requires the
jury to decide between a sentence that includes parole and one that does not,
the jury should be told about parole so that it can make an informed
decision). However, as explained infra, since the jury here does not
(continued...)
 
44
         
           
            
          
          
        
         
         
       
       
           
       
       
           
        
         
        
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
XI.
 
In this case, HRS § 706-662 sets forth the facts the
 
jury must find in order to authorize the court to increase the
 
defendant’s sentence beyond the statutory maximum for the offense
 of manslaughter. HRS § 706-662 was amended in 2007 “to ensure
 that the procedures used to impose extended terms of imprisonment
 comply with the requirements set forth by the United States
 Supreme Court and Hawa[i' i] [S]upreme [C]ourt.”
26 Commentary to 
HRS § 706-662. The legislature intended “that these amendments
 apply to any case that requires resentencing because of the
 decisions in the Apprendi, Blakely, Booker, Cunningham, and
 Maugaotega cases.” Id.
 
The statutory scheme contemplates that the court and
 
the jury will have distinct roles. The procedure for imposing
 extended terms of imprisonment, located in HRS § 706-664 (Supp.
 
25(...continued)
determine or recommend the length of the sentence, but “finds the facts
 
necessary for the imposition of an extended term of imprisonment,” HRS §
 706-604, the Brewer rationale would not apply in this case.
 
26 The commentary to HRS § 706-662 states in relevant part:
 
After further consideration in light of the Cunningham case,
the Hawaii supreme court issued an opinion in State v.
Maugaotega , ___P.3d ___, 2007 WL 2823760, Oct. 1, 2007 (No.
26657), which held that statutes governing Hawaii's extended
term sentencing are unconstitutional because they require a
judge rather than a jury to find facts, other than those of
prior or concurrent convictions, necessary to enhance a
defendant's sentence beyond the ordinary or standard term
authorized by the jury’s verdict. . . . The purpose of this
Act is to amend Hawaii’s extended term sentencing statutes
to ensure that the procedures used to impose extended terms
of imprisonment comply with the requirements set forth by
the United States Supreme Court and Hawaii supreme court.
 
45
         
        
        
       
        
           
         
         
         
          
         
        
       
           
         
        
        
        
      
 
         
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27
 2008), provides that if the jury (the trier of fact) finds the
facts that are necessary for the imposition of an extended term
 
sentence under HRS § 706-662, the court 
may impose an
 
indeterminate term of imprisonment as provided in HRS § 706-661. 
HRS § 706-662 provides that a defendant “who has been convicted
 of a felony may be subject to an extended term of imprisonment
 under section 706-661 if it is proven beyond a reasonable doubt
 that an extended term of imprisonment is necessary for the
 protection of the public[,]” and if the defendant satisfies one
 or more of the other criteria listed therein. The sentencing
 terms or ranges are located in HRS § 706-661, which provides that
 “the court may sentence a person who satisfies the criteria for
 any of the categories set forth in section 706-662,” to an
 extended term of imprisonment.
28 (Emphasis added.) 
27 HRS § 706-664 (Supp. 2008), which provides as follows:
 
§ 706-664. Procedure for imposing extended terms of
imprisonment. (1) Hearings to determine the grounds for
imposing extended terms of imprisonment may be initiated by
the prosecutor or by the court on its own motion. The court
shall not impose an extended term unless the ground therefor
has been established at a hearing after the conviction of
the defendant and written notice of the ground proposed was
given to the defendant pursuant to subsection (2). . . .
(2) 
N
otice of intention to seek an extended term of
imprisonment under section 706-662 shall be given to the
defendant within thirty days of the defendant’s arraignment.
 
. . .
  
(
3) If the jury, or the court if the defendant has waived
the right to a jury determination, finds that the facts
necessary for the imposition of an extended term of
imprisonment under section 706-662 have been proven beyond a
reasonable doubt, the court may impose an indeterminate term
of imprisonment as provided in section 706-661.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
28
 Although the court may sentence a person who satisfies the
 
criteria set forth in HRS § 706-661 to an extended term, “[w]hen ordering an
(continued...)
 
46
         
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The language of these statutes makes clear that jury is 
responsible only for determining whether the prosecution has 
proven beyond a reasonable doubt the facts necessary for the imposition of an extended term of imprisonment. HRS § 706-664; HRS § 706-662. The jury is not responsible for sentencing. That responsibility lies with the court, which “may,” in its discretion, then sentence the defendant to an extended term of imprisonment as set forth in HRS § 706-661. In other words, even if the jury finds the facts that would warrant an extended term sentence, because HRS § 706-664 and HRS § 706-661 utilize the word “may,” the court retains the discretion to not impose an extended term sentence. See Gray v. Admin. Dir. of the Court, 84 
Hawai'i 138, 149, 931 P.2d 580, 591 (1997) (“[T]he close proximity 
of the contrasting verbs ‘may’ and ‘shall’ requires a non-mandatory, i.e., a discretionary, construction of the term ‘may.’” ) (emphasis in original). 
Nevertheless, for an extended term sentence to be
 
imposed under HRS § 706-662, the jury must find that a longer
 term than the statutory maximum is necessary for the protection
 of the public. Under the statute the jury in effect must
 consider whether it is necessary, in order to protect the public,
 to incarcerate the defendant for a longer term than that which
 the defendant would otherwise serve. To make that determination,
 
28(...continued)
extended term sentence, the court shall impose the maximum length of
imprisonment.” HRS § 706-661 (emphasis added).
 
47
         
 
          
               
           
       
           
          
         
           
      
           
              
            
           
           
               
              
            
             
          
              
              
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the jury must consider the maximum length of the two potential
 
terms in an appropriate manner.29
 
Manslaughter is a class A felony, see HRS § 707-702,
 
and is punishable by an “indeterminate term of imprisonment of
 twenty years without the possibility of suspension of sentence or
 probation.”
30 HRS § 706-659. If, however, the criteria for any
 
of the categories set forth in HRS § 706-662 are satisfied, then
 the court may impose an indeterminate term of life imprisonment
 for a class A felony. HRS § 706-661. To determine whether an
 extended term of imprisonment is necessary for the protection of
 the public, however, the jury should not be instructed about the
 procedures of the Hawai' i Paroling Authority, or that the sentence 
includes the possibility of parole, for the reasons discussed
 supra and infra.
31 The jury can make an intelligent determination
 
29 The other factor Petitioner’s jury had to find was that Petitioner
 
had committed two or more felonies when he was eighteen years of age or older.
Petitioner does not contest that this factor was satisfied.
 
30 Parole, however, is allowed because the sentence is
 
“indeterminate.” See Commentary on HRS § 706-659 (“This bill effects this
purpose by denying suspension of sentence and probation as sentencing options
in class A convictions, but retains, through indeterminate sentence, the
option of parole by the paroling authority in order that unusual extenuating
circumstances can be given due consideration.”).
 
31 Thus, it was also improper to include references to parole and to
 
the indeterminate nature of the terms in jury instructions nos. 3, 5, 6 and 7
and in special interrogatory no. 2. Although Petitioner did not object to
these in his Application, he recognized during oral argument that he should
have objected. It would be inconsistent to conclude that jury instructions
nos. 2 and 4 were admitted in error, but to hold that references to parole in
jury instructions nos. 3, 5, 6, and 7 and in special interrogatory no. 2 were
proper. As discussed, infra, the error in admitting jury instructions no. 2
and 4 was not harmless. Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) 
defines plain error as, “Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights
may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.”
We may “employ our HRPP Rule 52(b) discretion to correct errors that are not
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and to disregard those errors that are
(continued...)
 
48
         
            
              
              
                
            
            
              
            
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as to whether it is necessary to incarcerate the defendant for an 
extended term to protect the public if instructed that the term will involve maximums of twenty years and life. Whether the defendant will ever be paroled is pure speculation since parole is dependent on circumstances in the future and is discretionary with the Hawai' i Paroling Authority. 
Since the jury is only responsible for finding the 
facts that may result in an extended term sentence, there was no basis for asking the jury whether the prosecution had proven that it was necessary for the protection of the public to subject Petitioner to an “extended term of imprisonment, which could extend the maximum length of [Petitioner’s] imprisonment for the offense of Manslaughter from twenty years of incarceration to life with the possibility of parole.” Nor was it necessary to give the jury instructions on how the Hawai' i Paroling Authority 
sets the minimum prison term. The jury should instead have been instructed and asked whether it was necessary to extend Petitioner’s sentence from a possible twenty year sentence to a possible life sentence for the protection of the public. Also, an interrogatory phrased in this manner would have been accurate 
31(...continued)
h
armless beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Nichols , 111 Hawai 'i 327, 335, 
141 P.3d 974, 982 (2006). “[T]he same standard of review is to be applied
both in cases in which a timely objection to a jury instruction was made andthose in which no timely objection was made.” Id. In this case, in order to
provide guidance to the court and to correct errors in the jury instructionsthat were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, we employ our discretion andnotice that references to parole in jury instructions nos. 3, 5, 6, and 7 andin special interrogatory no. 2 were as improper as jury instructions nos. 2and 4. 
49
         
 
         
          
         
           
         
             
             
            
          
            
               
               
             
            
             
               
           
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and at the same time would not direct the jury’s attention to the
 
potential issues of parole.32 This would be the appropriate way
 
for the jury to consider the maximum length of the two potential
 terms.
33
 
XII. 
As expressed by the Ramos court and other courts, a
 
jury whose attention is drawn to the issue of parole might choose
 the harsher sentence for fear that the defendant will not serve
 the complete term of the more lenient sentence, or may not take
 its task seriously because it believes mistakes in sentencing can
 be corrected by the paroling agency. This would be improper and
 would frustrate the statutory scheme. In Ramos, the court
 explained that speculation as to parole was inappropriate, given
 the difficulty involved in attempting to predict what a
 particular defendant may be like in the future when parole or
 commutation may be considered. 689 P.2d at 441-44. Here, the
 
32 The jury also heard references to parole because Exhibit 10A 
showed that Petitioner had several parole violations, and Exhibit 6 contained
the parole minutes of the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority regarding those 
violations. Exhibit 6 and Exhibit 10A were admitted into evidence over Petitioner’s objections. However, Petitioner has not appealed the proprietyof the admission of those records into evidence. In any event, this matterneed not be addressed inasmuch as we remand the case with respect to admissionof Balga’s statement in the police report and the extended sentencing hearing. 
33
 This case does not involve a choice between life with the
 
possibility of parole and life without the possibility of parole, such as in
the case of a motion for extended term for the offense of murder in the second
 degree pursuant to HRS § 706-661(1). See n.6. supra. The court may impose an
extended term of life without parole under HRS § 706-661(1) if the jury finds
pursuant to HRS § 706-662 that an extended term is necessary for the
protection of the public, as well as one or more of the factors specified
under HRS § 706-662. A like instruction in such a case would be to instruct
 the jury to consider whether the defendant’s sentence should be extended from
possible life imprisonment to a definite (or fixed) sentence of life
imprisonment.
 
50
         
 
          
            
              
             
              
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
risk of jury speculation that arises from instructing the jury
 
about the sentence range and parole would engender even more
 
questionable results because the court retains discretion to not
 impose an extended term sentence. HRS § 602-664; HRS § 602-661. 
In fact, the court itself recognized that the possibility of
 parole was not a proper factor for the jury to consider inasmuch
 as the court instructed the jury in instruction no. 5 that it
 should not consider the possibility of parole in reaching a
 verdict. 
The ICA, however, concluded that jury instructions no.
 
2 and 4 were appropriate because they were accurate. But, as
 noted supra, courts have determined that even accurate
 instructions concerning parole can be injurious. Those courts
 have reasoned that the instruction still allows the jury to
 speculate regarding the future conduct of the defendant and
 actions of the parole board. See, e.g., Ramos, 689 P.2d at 441­
44. 
The ICA also found no error in this case because the 
court explicitly instructed the jurors not to discuss or consider the subject of any action that the Hawai' i Paroling Authority may 
or may not take, and juries are generally presumed to follow the instructions of the court.
34 See State v. Smith, 91 Hawai' i 450, 
34
 As noted, supra, jury instruction no. 5 instructed the jury to
 
“not discuss or consider the subject of any action that the Hawai 'i Paroling
Authority may or may not take in your deliberations of the facts at issue in
this hearing.” This would be an appropriate instruction to give if the jury
were to inquire about parole. See Beames , 153 P.3d at 972 (“[W]hen the jury
makes a specific inquiry about how a postconviction proceeding such as
(continued...)
 
51
         
         
             
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
461, 984 P.2d 1276, 1287 (App. 1999). But the presumption that
 
juries follow the instructions is not absolute. Thus, in Smith,
 although the ICA recognized the presumption that juries adhere to
 court instructions, it held that the prejudice to the defendant
 caused by improper comments on the part of the prosecution were
 not cured by court instructions advising the jury that remarks
 made by counsel were not evidence. Id. Similarly, in State v.
 
Kahinu, 53 Haw. 536, 548, 498 P.2d 635, 643 (1972), this court
 held that a cautionary instruction may be insufficient to cure
 prejudice when the prosecution deliberately introduces irrelevant
 evidence resulting in an “evidential harpoon.” Kahinu
 
establishes that, in certain circumstances, a curative
 instruction may be insufficient to overcome the prejudice caused
 by an error. Id.
 
Here, a presumption that the jury followed the
 
instruction of the court to not consider the actions of the
 parole board is not compelling because, by also instructing the
 jury regarding the actions of the parole board, the court 
effectively invited the jury to consider these actions in
 deciding whether the facts warranted an extended sentence. That
 is, the court informed the jury of the effect the parole board’s
 decision would have on both an indeterminate twenty-year sentence
 
34(...continued)
c
ommutation might affect defendant’s sentence, we have suggested that trial
courts issue a short statement emphasizing that it would be a violation of the
jury’s duty to consider the possibility of commutation in determining the
appropriate sentence.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
52
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
subject to parole, and a sentence of life with the possibility of
 
parole. If the jury was not to consider the actions of the
 parole board, the effect the parole board’s actions might have
 with respect to the jury’s decision should not have been set
 forth in the instructions. As one court put it, “[a] voluntary
 statement on the part of the trial court referring to the power
 of the Board of Pardons . . . might make the jury believe that
 the statement has been made for the express purpose of calling
 such power to their attention and thus might have a tendency to
 influence them in their verdict.” State v. Carroll, 69 P.2d 542,
 
563 (Wyo. 1937).
 
Discussing parole with the jury also carried the risk
 
that the jury would not appreciate the gravity of its duty,
 believing that its mistakes might be corrected by some other
 entity. See Ramos, 689 P.2d at 443. Even assuming the jury had
 
a “right to be informed regarding the available choices,” as
 those jurisdictions that allow instructions regarding parole
 appear to hold, the instruction here would unnecessarily court
 error because, as the court recognized, the potential actions of
 the parole board should not enter into the jury’s deliberations. 
Further, instructing the jury concerning parole and the role of
 the paroling authority while at the same time admonishing the
 jury not to consider parole and the role of the paroling
 authority is inconsistent and likely to confuse the jury. 
Finally, the matter of parole was simply a matter outside the
 
53
         
It  should  be  noted  that  dissent’s  reasoning  in  Rivera  that 
Haw
ai'i’s  intrinsic-extrinsic  sentencing  paradigm  was  inconsistent  with
Blakely  was  later  sustained  by  Maugaotega.   Compare  Rivera,  106  Hawai'i  at 
173,  102  P.3d  at  1071  (Acoba,  J.,  dissenting,  joined  by  Duffy,  J.)
(disagreeing  with  “the  majority’s  rationale  for  distinguishing  [the]
‘intrinsic-extrinsic’  paradigm  from  the  implication’s  of  Blakely ”),  with
Garcia  v.  State,  125  Hawai'i  429,  263  P.3d  709  (2010)  (explaining  that,  in
Rivera,  a  majority  of  this  court  held  that,  under  the  intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction,  facts  which  exposed  a  defendant  to  an  extended  prison  term
sentence  were  not  required  to  be  submitted  to  the  jury,  but  that,  in
Maugaotega,  a  majority  of  this  court  acknowledged  that,  in  light  of  Cunningham
v.  California,  549  U.S.  270  (2007),  except  for  prior  convictions,  multiple
convictions,  and  admissions,  any  fact  that  serves  as  a  basis  for  an  extended
term  sentence  must  be  proved  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt  to  the  trier  of  fact)
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
scope of the jury’s function, which is limited to finding the two
 
operative facts under HRS § 706-662. See State v. Prosser, 186
 
S.W.3d 330, 331-33 (Mo. App. 2005) (“issues such as parole . . .
 are considered extraneous to the jury’s determination of guilt
 and punishment”) (emphasis in original). As such, it was error
 for the court to instruct the jury on parole. 
XIII. 
The next question is whether the errors in the
 
admission of Kauilani’s and Balga’s testimony and in the jury
 instructions were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
35 See State
 
35 Petitioner  argues  that  the  harmless  error  doctrine  does  not  apply 
to  errors  that  take  place  during  the  sentencing  phase.  However,  the  harmless
error  doctrine  does  apply  to  errors  implicating  sentencing.   See  State  v. 
Rivera,  106  Hawai'i  146,  165-66,  102  P.3d  1044,  1063-1064  (2004),  overruled  on
other  grounds  by  Maugaotega,  115  Hawai'i  at  442-43,  168  P.3d  at  572-73;  State 
v.  Alpaca,  96  Hawai'i  17,  25,  25  P.3d  792,  800  (2001)  (“The  fact  that  the
error,  in  this  case,  implicates  [defendant’s]  sentence  and  not  his  conviction
does  not  render  the  harmless  error  doctrine  inapplicable.”);  Washington  v.
Recuenco,  548  U.S.  212,  222  (2006)  (holding  that  error  involving  Blakely  v.
Washington ,  542  U.S.  at  303-04,  and  the  failure  to  submit  a  sentencing  factor
to  a  jury,  like  the  failure  to  submit  an  element  on  an  offense  to  the  jury,  is
not  structural  error  and  is  therefore  subject  to  harmless  error  review);  see
also  United  States  v.  Montgomery,  635  F.3d  1074,  1092  (8th  Cir.  2011)(“Even  if
we  conclude  that  the  district  court  erred  [in  allowing  jury  to  hear  certain
evidence  during  the  penalty  phase  of  a  capital  trial],  we  cannot  reverse  or
vacate  a  federal  death  sentence  on  account  of  an  error  that  is  harmless  beyond
a  reasonable  doubt.”).   Petitioner’s  argument  that  the  ICA  could  not  consider
whether  the  court’s  errors  during  sentence  were  harmless  therefore  is
incorrect. 
54
         
          
           
           
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
v. Veikoso, 126 Hawai' i 267, 276, 270 P.3d 997, 1006 (2011) 
(“Regarding the erroneous admission of evidence by a trial court, 
this court has said that[, e]ven if the trial court erred in admitting evidence, a defendant’s conviction will not be overturned if the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt[.]”) (citation omitted) (internal brackets in original). When assessing whether an error is harmless, the question is whether, in light of the entire proceedings, there is “a reasonable possibility that [the] error might have contributed” to the verdict. 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted). 
The jury’s first finding was that Petitioner committed 
two or more felonies since he turned 18. The court took judicial notice that Petitioner had committed four felonies. The felonies 
were unrelated to the testimony that was erroneously admitted or to the erroneous jury instructions concerning parole.
36 As such, 
it is unlikely that the erroneous testimony and jury instructions had any effect on the jury’s determination that Respondent had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Petitioner committed two or more felonies. However, there is a reasonably possibility that the erroneously admitted testimony and the jury instructions had an effect on the jury’s consideration of whether an extended term of imprisonment was necessary for the protection of the public. 
36
 Again, the felonies were burglary in the first degree, robbery in
 
the second degree, promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree, and
unlawful use of drug paraphernalia. It appears that Kauilani’s and Balga’s
testimony had nothing to do with these offenses.
 
55
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
The improperly admitted testimony consisted of
 
Kauilani’s testimony concerning the incident of domestic abuse on
 
October 1994, and Balga’s testimony concerning the incident in
 October 1993. In addition to that testimony, the jury heard
 (properly admitted) testimony regarding incidents of domestic
 abuse on April 3, 1996, during which Petitioner injured and
 threatened to kill Kauilani; on July 13, 1996, during which
 Petitioner bit and head-butted Kauilani; on March 11, 2008, when
 Kauilani obtained a TRO because of incidents of domestic abuse in
 January 2008 and March 2008; and an incident on June 9, 2008, in
 which Officer Wong said he saw Petitioner hit the windshield of
 Kauilani’s car with his fist and break the windshield wiper of
 the car as Kauilani attempted to leave. In light of this
 testimony, it is unlikely that the October 1994 incident had much
 of an impact on whether the jury believed that Petitioner had
 engaged in domestic abuse toward Kauilani on multiple occasions
 in the past. 
The erroneous admission of Balga’s testimony, however,
 
is much more troubling. Other than the incident with which
 Petitioner was charged and the domestic violence incidents,
 Respondent’s witnesses testified to only two incidents in which
 Petitioner was aggressive toward someone other than Kauilani--the
 Balga incident, and a second incident in which Petitioner injured
 a man during the commission of a robbery in 1994. It is
 
56
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonably possible that a jury could have concluded that the
 
incidents involving Kauilani alone were not enough to find that
 an extended term of imprisonment was necessary to protect the
 public. It is also reasonably possible that, without Balga’s
 testimony, testimony alluding to only one other incident, dating
 back to 1994, eleven to twelve years before Petitioner allegedly
 committed the charged offense, would not have been enough to
 cause the jury to find that the extended term was necessary. 
Thus, the admission of Balga’s testimony was not harmless beyond
 a reasonable doubt. 
B. 
As to the erroneous inclusion of parole in the jury 
instructions and interrogatories nos. 2 and 4, erroneous jury instructions are presumed to be harmful and will result in reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial. 
State v. Mark, 123 
Hawai
'i 205, 219, 231 P.3d 478, 492 (2010). It does not 
“affirmatively” appear from the record that the instructions were harmless. The jury may have decided that it was necessary to incarcerate Petitioner for a longer term because it sought to prevent Petitioner from being paroled for as long as possible. The jury may also have believed that any errors with respect to the extended term sentence would be corrected by the Hawai' i 
Paroling Authority. This would be improper because it would undermine the statutory scheme that entrusts decisions concerning 
57
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parole to the executive branch. Whether Petitioner could be 
paroled in the future was plainly not relevant to the jury’s consideration of whether an extended term sentence was necessary for the protection of the public. If parole is highlighted in the jury instructions, as it was here, it is reasonable to infer that the jury might consider it. As noted, the instruction to disregard parole was rendered confusing and inconsistent with the other five instructions given by the court with respect to parole. Under the circumstances, then, it does not affirmatively appear from the record that the jury might not have considered the potential actions of the Hawai' i Paroling Authority in its 
deliberations. Thus, it is reasonably possible that the effect of the jury instruction errors contributed to the jury verdict on the extended term motion and was therefore not harmless. Further, given that there were both evidentiary errors and jury instruction errors, it is also reasonably possible that the cumulative effect of these errors contributed to the jury verdict. See State v. Pemberton, 
71 Haw. 466, 473, 796 P.2d 80, 
84 (1990) (holding that the cumulative weight of errors was harmful); State v. Amorin, 58 Haw. 623, 626, 574 P.2d 895, 900 (1997) (same). 
XIV. 
Accordingly, we vacate the October 6, 2011 judgment of
 
the ICA in part as to the harmlessness of the evidentiary error
 involving the admission of Balga’s police report statement and as
 
58
         
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to Petitioner’s extended term sentence, and affirm the ICA’s
 
judgment in all other respects. We vacate the June 22, 2009
 judgment of conviction and sentence of the court in part as to
 the same matters, affirm the said judgment in all other respects,
 and remand to the court for proceedings consistent with this
 opinion. 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada,
for petitioner
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
James M. Anderson, deputy
prosecuting attorney,for respondent
  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
59
 