 ---o0o--- 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-20-0000084 30-DEC-2025 12:03 PM Dkt. 52 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
ROXANNE K. LANE, 
Petitioner/Claimant-Appellant-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
AVIS BUDGET GROUP, INC., 
Respondent/Employer-Appellee-Appellee, 
 
and 
 
GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES, INC., 
Respondent/Insurance Adjuster-Appellee-Appellee. 
SCWC-20-0000084 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-20-0000084; CASE NO. AB 2017-006; DCD NO. 2-14-48809) 
 
DECEMBER 30, 2025 
 
McKENNA, ACTING, C.J., EDDINS, GINOZA, AND DEVENS, JJ., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE NICHOLS, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY DEVENS, J.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 I. INTRODUCTION 
This appeal arises from a workers’ compensation claim filed 
by Roxanne Lane (Lane) with her employer Avis Budget Group Inc. 
(Avis or Employer). The dispositive question in this 
controversy is whether Lane sustained a nasal fracture as a 
result of a vehicle collision that occurred at work. The 
Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations 
(DLIR Director) determined that Lane’s nasal injury was a 
compensable work-related injury.1 On appeal to the Labor and 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB), the LIRAB reversed 
the DLIR Director’s determination as to the nasal fracture, 
concluding that the injury did not result from the collision. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the LIRAB. 
We hold that the Employer did not meet its initial burden 
of production in adducing substantial evidence to rebut the 
legal presumption of compensability for Lane’s nasal injury. 
Lane was at work operating an Avis van when another vehicle 
reversed into the front of the van while Lane was at a full stop. The evidence indicated that during the collision, Lane’s 
body “went forward and backward, and her nose hit the steering 
wheel.” 
As a consequence of the collision, Lane sustained several 
The DLIR Director denied compensability for Lane’s claimed left ankle 
injury. 
2 1   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  injuries and pursued a claim for workers’ compensation benefits. 
In the Employer’s WC-1 “Employer’s Report of Industrial Injury” 
(WC-1 report), the Employer identified Lane’s neck, low back, 
and right shoulder as injuries sustained in the collision. The 
Employer accepted liability for those injuries under Hawai‘ i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 386. 
By accepting compensability 
for those injuries, the Employer implicitly conceded that the 
subject collision was of sufficient force to have caused Lane 
bodily injuries. 
The only injury at issue in this appeal is a right
-sided 
non-displaced nasal fracture, which Lane contends resulted from the collision, but was omitted from the Employer’s WC-1 report. 
The Employer argues there was substantial evidence that Lane’s 
nasal fracture was not caused by the collision, including a 
doctor’s opinion that the force of the collision was 
insufficient to have caused Lane to strike her nose against the 
steering wheel, thus rebutting the statutory presumption of 
compensability. In opposition, Lane points to the medical 
records documenting her complaints and symptoms affecting the 
“right side of [her] face,” “[p]ain along right side of nose,” “sinus pain,” “nasal congestion,” and “facial pressure” that she 
reported to her doctors within hours and days after the 
collision, and which the LIRAB did not discredit. X-ray imaging 
taken seven days after the collision confirmed that Lane had 
3   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  sustained a “[n]ondisplaced right-sided nasal bone fracture.” 
In support of its decision, the LIRAB relied on a 
biomechanics opinion provided by the Employer’s medical doctor, 
who opined that the “force involved in the accident” was low and 
could not have caused Lane to hit her nose on the steering 
wheel. However, there was no evidence in the record that this 
doctor was qualified to offer such an opinion in that field of 
expertise. 
We hold that the LIRAB’s decision was, in part, clearly 
erroneous, and vacate the ICA’s September 27, 2024 Judgment on Appeal, vacate in part the LIRAB’s November 26, 2019 Order and 
January 22, 2020 Order Denying Reconsideration as they relate to 
the finding that Lane did not sustain a compensable work-related 
injury to her nose, affirm the DLIR Director’s December 30, 2016 
decision finding Lane’s nasal injury was compensable, and remand 
the case to the LIRAB for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Lane’s Injuries 
Lane was employed with Avis as a transporter who delivered 
cars between the airport and hotels on Oʻ ahu. On October 26, 
2014, Lane was operating an Avis van when she was involved in a 
motor vehicle collision in the airport parking lot. 
Lane was at 
a complete stop when a customer from another car rental agency 
4   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 reversed their vehicle into the front of her van. Lane 
testified that at the time of the impact, she was restrained by 
a seat belt and was “popping [her] horn.” She further testified 
that when the car hit the van’s front bumper, her nose hit the 
steering wheel “hard.” Lane described the situation as a 
“commotion,” as the other driver blamed her for causing the 
collision. 
Later that same day, Lane was seen at the emergency room at 
Pali Momi Medical Center, which charted Lane’s injuries and complaints, including “discomfort to the right side of [her] 
face” and “pain to [her] right neck[.]” (Emphasis added.) 
Tenderness to her cervical back and right trapezius muscle was 
also entered in the emergency room records. The records noted 
that Lane “[d]enie[d] head injury.” X-rays were taken of Lane’s 
spine but not her nose. 
The following day, on October 27, 2014, Lane was examined 
by Dr. Darwin Chan at Concentra Medical Centers. Lane’s ear, nose, and throat were “[r]eviewed and found to be negative.” 
However, Dr. Chan reported that Lane was experiencing “facial 
pressure,” lightheadedness, headache, and dizziness, along with 
neck and back pain. Dr. Chan also indicated no “erythema or 
edema of the external ears or nose.” 
Two days after the collision, on October 28, 2014, Lane was 
seen by Dr. Rae Teramoto who noted in the medical records that 
5   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 Lane was complaining of “[s]inus congestion and headache since 
yesterday[.]” Significantly, Dr. Teramoto reported that Lane 
was experiencing “[p]ain along right side of [her] nose.” 
(Emphasis added.) 
The same day, Lane also saw Dr. Ronald Kienitz at Concentra 
Medical Centers. Lane complained of sinus pain and congestion, 
joint pain, muscle pain, right shoulder pain, back pain, neck 
pain, joint stiffness, night pain, and headache. Notably, 
Dr. Kienitz wrote in his records that Lane “[f]eels that the impact in [the motor vehicle accident] caused [sinus pain and 
congestion] to flare up.” Dr. Kienitz prescribed nasal sprays, 
and with respect to Lane’s ear, nose, and throat exam, he 
reported “nasal congestion, sinus pain w/ percussion, sl large 
SM nodes[.]” 
Lane was referred to physical therapy. The October 29, 
2014 therapy records documented continuing complaints of sinus pain and congestion along with neck pain. 
That same day, Lane was seen by Dr. Jack Hsieh. 
Dr. Hsieh’s records noted a frontal headache as well as neck 
pain, right shoulder pain, and low back pain. The doctor’s exam 
and assessment indicated that Lane was experiencing a cervical 
strain, right shoulder strain, lumbar spine strain, myofascial 
pain, and headaches with pain levels reaching 10/10 in 
intensity, with ten indicating the worst pain. Dr. Hsieh’s 
6   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 “external inspection” of Lane’s nose and ears was reported as 
“normal.”2 
Lane’s therapy records from October 30, 2014 documented 
ongoing complaints of neck and mid-to-low back pain. 
On November 2, 2014, seven days after the work accident, 
Lane went to the emergency room at Kapiʻ olani Medical Center for 
Women and Children (
Kapi‘olani Medical Center).  Lane initially 
went to the emergency room because her daughter was sick. While 
at the hospital, Lane “registered to see why [she] was getting 
these headaches non stop and couldn’t focus, couldn’t 
concentrate on anything.” She was seen by Dr. Jaimie Tom, who 
recorded in the clinical notes that Lane’s primary complaint was 
“persistent nasal pain that has been ongoing now for the past 
week.” Dr. Tom ordered x-ray imaging of Lane’s nose which 
“show[ed] a nasal bone fracture.” Consistent with Lane’s earlier complaints of pain along the right
 side of her nose, 
documented by Dr. Teramoto two days after the collision, the x-rays revealed a “[n]ondisplaced right-sided nasal bone 
fracture.” (Emphasis added.) Dr. Tom diagnosed Lane with a 
nasal fracture, but also noted that there was no significant 
swelling, obvious deformity, septal hematoma, or septal 
deviation, with only “faint ecchymosis over the nasal bridge.” 
Dr. Hsieh’s examination of Lane’s ears, nose and throat noted “no 
hearing loss and no sore throat,” but mentioned nothing about her nose other 
than the “external” inspection was normal. 
7 2   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   Dr. Tom’s records further reflected that Lane experienced facial 
pain after the collision and had “quite a bit of epistaxis, but 
that has resolved.”3 
On November 7, 2014, Lane was seen by Dr. Hsieh whose 
diagnosis included cervical spine strain, right shoulder strain, 
lumbar spine strain, lumbar radiculitis, headache, nasal 
fracture, and myofascial pain. 
On November 24, 2014, Lane returned to Kapiʻ olani Medical 
Center where she saw Dr. Anthony Dumpit, who diagnosed Lane with 
blurred vision, chest pain, nausea, dizziness, and headaches, 
and documented that Lane was experiencing tenderness in the sinuses but no nosebleeds. 
The Employer’s WC-1 report noted that Lane had sustained 
cervical, lumbar, and right shoulder injuries related to the 
subject motor vehicle collision. The Employer accepted 
compensability for those injuries. Lane later filed a WC-5 
“Employee’s Claim for Workers’ Compensation Benefits” (WC-5 
claim) seeking coverage for the additional injuries to her 
“head, brain, face, blurred vision, nose (fracture), neck, right 
shoulder, back, ribs [and] left ankle, [c]oncussion, [h]eadaches and dizziness,” and dysphagia along with psychological injuries 
including depression, anxiety, and mental distress, which the 
3“Epistaxis” refers to nasal bleeding. 
8    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  Employer denied. (Emphasis added.) 
B. Employer’s Medical Examiner Reports 
Pursuant to HRS § 386-79 (2015) (Medical examination by 
employer’s physician), Lane was examined by two medical doctors designated by the Employer. 
1. Dr. Leonard Cupo 
The first doctor, Dr. Leonard Cupo, examined Lane on 
January 13, 2015, over two months after the collision. Lane’s chief complaint at the time of the exam was nasal pain and pain to her cervical spine, right shoulder, and lumbosacral spine. 
a. No Acute Symptoms 
Dr. Cupo concluded that Lane’s nasal fracture was not 
caused by the collision. 
Dr. Cupo opined that Lane’s nasal 
fracture “bears no relationship to and was not caused, 
aggravated, or accelerated by the motor vehicle accident[.]” 
Dr. Cupo based his opinion on Lane’s medical visits from October 26, 2014 to November 2, 2014, explaining that Lane did 
not complain of nasal pain or demonstrate an “abnormality” 
during the physical examination on October 26, 2014 such as 
“edema, ecchymosis, or tenderness.” That is to say, Dr. Cupo’s 
opinion rested in part on the purported absence of acute 
physical symptoms. Dr. Cupo explained that if Lane sustained a 
nasal fracture during the collision, she “would have been 
acutely and markedly symptomatic” when she was evaluated at the 
9   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 emergency room on October 26, 2014. 
Dr. Cupo wrote that Lane’s first clinical notes relating to 
nasal pain were reported to Dr. Teramoto on October 28, 2014, 
but that Dr. Teramoto’s report did not document that the nasal 
pain was related to the collision. Further, Dr. Cupo stated 
that the medical records from the day of the collision did not 
indicate any nasal bleeding despite Lane later reporting that 
she experienced nasal pain associated with epistaxis at the time 
of the collision. Dr. Cupo did not opine as to an alternative cause of Lane’s nasal fracture. 
b. Opinion on Biomechanics 
Of particular significance, Dr. Cupo opined that the 
“intensity of force” from the impact was “low and thus could not have caused [Lane] to strike her nasal bridge on the steering 
wheel,” especially if she was restrained by her seatbelt and 
beeping the horn with her right hand. 
After viewing the video of the collision, Dr. Cupo 
supplemented his initial report stating that there was “no indication that the employee was in pain on the surveillance 
videotape of 10/26/14” and that the “intensity of the force” 
noted in his earlier report was confirmed by his review of the 
video. 
Dr. Cupo did not quantify or otherwise explain the level of 
force required for Lane to strike the steering wheel and sustain 
10   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 a nasal fracture, nor did he cite to any biomechanical, accident 
reconstruction, or engineering findings or calculations made in 
support of his opinion that the force generated by the impact 
was insufficient for Lane to have sustained a nasal injury. 
Dr. Cupo’s report also did not reflect that he had any relevant 
qualifications, training, or expertise in these fields. 
2. Dr. Vern Sasaki 
Over two-and-a-half years after the collision, the Employer 
had Lane examined by a second medical doctor, Dr. Vern Sasaki, 
on July 6, 2017. 
Dr. Sasaki concluded that Lane’s nasal 
fracture did not result from the impact. Dr. Sasaki opined that Lane’s nasal fracture was first apparent on November 2, 2014, 
and that the prior medical examinations on October 26, 2014, 
October 27, 2014, and October 29, 2014 “did not reveal any 
findings of a nasal fracture or complaints of nose pain or 
swelling,” including Dr. Hsieh’s examination on October 29, 2014, which “revealed a normal nose examination.” Dr. Sasaki 
advanced that Lane’s nasal fracture occurred “sometime after 
10/29/14 and before 11/02/14 when her nasal fracture was 
diagnosed in the Emergency Room,” but provided no opinion as to 
an alternative cause of Lane’s nose injury. Dr. Sasaki 
acknowledged that Lane reported facial pain on the right side of 
her face along with neck and back pain at the emergency room on 
the day of the collision, as well as sinus pain and headaches 
11   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 during her follow-up visits at Concentra Medical Centers. 
Dr. Sasaki stated that with a nasal fracture, he would expect 
acute clinical symptoms to appear “almost immediately,” and that 
the “amount of force” required to cause a nasal fracture would 
have to be “significant.” 
Dr. Sasaki also cited Dr. Cupo’s review of the video 
footage of the collision, noting that Dr. Cupo’s observations 
“validated that the collision was a low-speed collision[.]” 
Dr. Sasaki did not indicate that he personally reviewed the video. 
C. Injuries Accepted by Employer 
The Employer accepted Lane’s neck, back, and right shoulder 
injuries as compensable workers’ compensation injuries but denied liability for Lane’s nasal injury. 
D. DLIR Director’s Decision 
The DLIR Director reviewed the Employer’s denial of Lane’s 
nasal injury and the additional injuries claimed in Lane’s WC-5 
claim. HRS § 386-73 (2015). 
In a decision issued on December 30, 2016, the DLIR 
Director credited various medical reports, including the reports 
from the Pali Momi emergency room, Dr. Teramoto, Dr. Kienitz, 
and Dr. Hsieh, and noted that the Employer did not present an 
alternate explanation for Lane’s nasal injury. The DLIR 
Director reviewed the surveillance video of the collision from 
12   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 two angles and observed an “obstruction from both angles in the 
form of tinted windows of the claimant’s vehicle and a large 
umbrella.” 
The DLIR Director determined that Lane’s nasal injury and 
the injuries to her neck, back, right shoulder, head, ribs, and 
vision were compensable work-related injuries caused by the 
collision, but did not find that Lane’s left ankle injury was a 
compensable consequence of the collision.4 
E. LIRAB’s Decision 
Lane appealed the DLIR Director’s decision on her left 
ankle to the LIRAB. HRS §§ 386-73, -87 (2015). As is relevant to this appeal, one of the issues raised before the LIRAB was 
whether Lane’s nasal injury was caused by the subject collision. 
At the LIRAB trial, Lane testified and described how the 
collision occurred: “So I reversed back, stopped completely. 
They’re reversing back. Popped my horn. He just completely hit me by the right side of the bumper.” In describing the impact, 
she testified, “It was like a [sic] impact. It was like 
[everything] just hit,” with the impact causing a “dent in the 
rear of [their] car.” Lane further testified that she hit her 
nose “hard” on the steering wheel, and explained that when it 
4 On December 1, 2015, Lane suffered a left ankle injury while exiting a 
bus after a doctor’s appointment. Lane was diagnosed with a left ankle 
“sprain.” Lane sought workers’ compensation for the ankle injury as the 
result and consequence of her compensable work- connected injuries related to 
the vehicle collision. 
13   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  happened, it was “like a flash at the moment the car hit[.]” 
Lane also testified that she was “complaining the next day every 
day” about her nose to her doctors, who told her it was a sinus 
infection and only gave her nose spray and prescription 
medication that “wasn’t working.” As a result of hitting the 
steering wheel, Lane testified that she “[f]elt pain to [her] 
whole face,” but did not tell the doctor at the emergency room 
that she hit her head on the steering wheel “because I just felt 
funny like I wanted to pass out after . . . the whole commotion. After I had to take the car back . . . just felt like fainting.” 
The Employer did not call Dr. Cupo or Dr. Sasaki, or any 
other witness to testify at the trial. 
Following the trial, the LIRAB issued its decision 
affirming in part and reversing in part the DLIR Director’s 
decision. Relevant to this appeal, the LIRAB affirmed the 
compensability of Lane’s injuries to her head, ribs, and vision after determining that the Employer had not met its burden of 
producing substantial evidence to rebut the presumption of 
compensability. However, the LIRAB reversed the DLIR Director’s 
decision as to Lane’s nasal fracture, determining that it was 
not a work-related injury. As to Lane’s nasal injury, the LIRAB 
concluded that the Employer: (1) “met its burden of producing 
substantial evidence to rebut the presumption for 
compensability”; and (2) “met its burden of persuasion to rebut 
14   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 the presumption of compensability.” The LIRAB’s determination 
was based primarily on the reports from Dr. Cupo and Dr. Sasaki. 
The LIRAB issued the following pertinent findings of fact 
(FOFs): 
7. With regard to Claimant’s nose, Dr. Cupo opined that 
Claimant’s nose fracture was not caused, aggravated, or 
accelerated by the October 26, 2014 accident. He explained 
that Claimant did not complain of nasal pain or abnormality 
when seen at the emergency room and that the force involved 
in the accident could not have caused her to strike her nasal bridge on the steering wheel, specially [sic] if she 
had her right hand on the steering wheel to beep her horn. 
8. To Dr. Sasaki, Claimant reported that her head and 
face hit the steering wheel in the October 26, 2014 
accident, but she did not have a bloody nose. Dr. Sasaki
opined that Claimant’s nasal fracture occurred between October 29, 2014 and before November 2, 2014. 
9. The foregoing is substantial evidence that, if true, 
would be sufficient to rebut the presumption of 
compensability with regard to Claimant’s nose. 
10. Employer met its burden of production to initially 
present substantial evidence that if true, could rebut the 
presumption that Claimant’s nose fracture was not related 
to the October 26, 2014 accident. 
11. The October 26, 2014 collision was not “ extreme,” as 
stated by PA Acree. 
12. Dr. Cupo’s description that the collision did not 
even move the van, is more accurate, in that the video 
showed that it only caused a slight quiver. 
13. Upon exiting the vehicle a short time after the 
collision, Claimant did not attend to her face or nose. 
14. Claimant did not complain of any issues with regard 
to her nose when she visited the emergency room on 
October 26, 2014. 
15. The Board credits Dr. Chan’s October 27, 2014 
examination of Claimant’s nose to have no erythema or edema 
present. 
16. The Board credits Dr. Hsieh’s October 29, 2014 
examination of Claimant’s nose to be normal. 17. The Board does not credit Claimant’s November 2, 2014 
representation to emergency personnel that she had “quite a 
15   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 bit of epistaxis.” 
18. The Board credits her representation to Dr. Sasaki 
that she did not have a bloody nose. 
19. The Board also credits Dr. Cupo’s opinion that the 
force of the collision was low and could not have caused 
Claimant to strike her nasal bridge on the steering wheel, 
particularly because she was beeping her horn. 
20. Weighing the evidence elicited by Employer against 
the evidence elicited by Claimant, Employer met its burden 
of persuasion to rebut the presumption of compensability. 
(Emphases added.) 
The LIRAB also issued conclusions of law (COLs). Relevant 
here, COL 4 provided, “Claimant did not sustain a personal 
injury to her nose on October 26, 2014, arising out of and in 
the course of employment.” 
Lane’s motion for reconsideration was denied by the LIRAB. 
F. ICA Proceedings 
1. Parties’ Arguments to the ICA 
Lane appealed to the ICA contending that the Employer did 
not present substantial evidence to overcome the presumption of compensability and, thus, the LIRAB erred in determining that 
her nasal injury was not a work-related injury. 
Lane challenged the LIRAB’s FOFs 7-12, 14-17, 19 and 20 and 
COL 4 relating to her nasal fracture. Lane argued that the 
LIRAB erred because there was no substantial, reliable, and consistent evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability, 
including substantial evidence to meet the Employer’s initial 
burden of production. Specifically, Lane pointed to the post-
16   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 collision examinations by Dr. Chan and Dr. Hsieh, which did not 
establish the absence of a fracture because no x-ray imaging was 
administered. 
Lane also argued that the LIRAB erred in crediting 
Dr. Cupo’s opinion “regarding the force of the collision” 
because: (1) the LIRAB ignored Dr. Cupo’s bias; (2) Dr. Cupo’s 
conclusion that the van did not move after the collision was 
inconsistent with the LIRAB’s finding that the van “quivered”; 
and (3) Dr. Cupo was not qualified as a biomechanics expert or accident reconstruction expert. 
Lane further asserted that Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s 
reports contained general medical conclusions and failed to 
identify the cause of Lane’s nasal fracture. Additionally, Lane 
argued that neither Dr. Cupo nor Dr. Sasaki were qualified to 
opine on the video of the collision. 
Lane also contended that because the Employer had conceded 
that the collision caused injuries to her neck, back, head, ribs, and vision, the Employer could not at the same time claim 
that the collision was too minimal for Lane to have injured her 
nose. Lane asserted that any reasonable doubt as to whether an 
injury is work-connected should be resolved in her favor, and 
that the Employer failed to provide an alternative explanation 
as to the cause of her nasal fracture other than the collision. 
Lane further argued that the LIRAB erred in denying her 
17   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  motion for reconsideration. 
The Employer countered that there was substantial evidence 
to overcome the presumption of compensability. The Employer 
noted that: Lane’s testimony about her experiencing nasal 
bleeding was not credited; Dr. Chan and Dr. Hsieh reported that 
Lane’s nose was normal; the collision did not move the van and 
only caused a “slight quiver”; upon exiting her vehicle Lane did 
not “attend to her face or nose,” or complain about her nose 
when she went to the emergency room on the day of the collision; and Dr. Cupo determined that the force during the collision 
could not have caused Lane to strike her face on the steering 
wheel while beeping the horn and restrained by a seatbelt. The 
Employer emphasized that the LIRAB’s credibility determinations 
should not be disturbed on appeal. 
The Employer also asserted that the LIRAB did not abuse its 
discretion in denying Lane’s motion for reconsideration because no new evidence or arguments were presented. 
2. Summary Disposition Order 
The ICA affirmed the LIRAB’s decision, concluding that 
substantial evidence supported the LIRAB’s findings and that the Employer met the “high burden” of rebutting the presumption of 
compensability for Lane’s nasal injury. The ICA cited 
Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s opinions that Lane would have been 
symptomatic had she sustained a nasal fracture in the collision, 
18   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   and that she did not report a nasal injury nor were there 
clinical symptoms of bruising, swelling, or nose bleeding on the 
day of the collision and the few days thereafter. The doctors’ 
reports, the ICA found, supported the Employer’s position that 
the nasal fracture was not caused by the collision. 
The ICA concluded: 
[T]he LIRAB did not clearly err in crediting the doctors’ 
opinions, which specifically, directly, and expressly 
address the presumption that Lane injured her nose in the 
October 26, 2014 workplace accident. Accordingly, we further conclude that the LIRAB did not err or abuse its 
discretion in entering the November 26, 2019 Order. 
The ICA also concluded that the LIRAB did not abuse its 
discretion in denying Lane’s motion for reconsideration because 
Lane did not make any argument in support of this point of 
error. 
G. Supreme Court Proceedings 
1. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
We accepted Lane’s application for writ of certiorari.5 
Lane’s primary contention is that the ICA erred in affirming the LIRAB’s decision because the Employer did not meet its heavy 
burden of producing substantial evidence to overcome the 
presumption of compensability for her nasal injury, i.e., the 
Employer failed to disprove that the injury is work-connected. 
Lane notes that the medical records reflected that she 
5Lane timely filed an amended application for writ of certiorari. 
19    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  complained of discomfort to the right side of her face during 
the initial Pali Momi emergency room visit and complained of 
nasal pain and congestion to Dr. Teramoto and Dr. Kienitz, which 
neither Dr. Cupo nor Dr. Sasaki addressed. 
Lane also contends that the ICA decision is inconsistent 
with this court’s prior decisions regarding the evidence 
necessary to overcome the presumption of compensability, citing 
primarily to our decision in Cadiz v. QSI, Inc., 148 Hawaiʻ i 96, 
468 P.3d 110 (2020). 
2. Employer’s Response 
The Employer counters that the LIRAB properly credited 
Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s medical opinions rather than Lane’s 
testimony. The Employer asserts that it carried its burden of 
rebutting compensability because both Dr. Cupo and Dr. Sasaki 
concluded that the collision was low-impact and that if Lane had 
sustained her nasal fracture during the collision, she would 
have immediately experienced symptoms. The Employer further 
contends that Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s opinions were properly 
credited by the LIRAB, the ICA correctly upheld the LIRAB’s 
weighing of the evidence, and the LIRAB was not required to resolve any conflicts in the evidence in Lane’s favor. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
“Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by HRS § 
20   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 6 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
91-14(g).”  Skahan v. Stutts Constr. Co., Inc., 148 Hawaiʻ i 460, 
466, 478 P.3d 285, 291 (2021) (citations and brackets omitted). 6
Under those provisions, the reviewing court “may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings.” The reviewing court also “may 
reverse or modify the decision and order if the substantial 
rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or 
orders” (1) violate provisions of the constitution or a 
statute, (2) are beyond the agency’s statutory authority or 
jurisdiction, (3) used “unlawful procedure,” (4) were 
“[a]ffected by other error of law,” (5) were clearly erroneous, or (6) were arbitrary or capricious “or 
characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion.” 
Ihara v. State Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res., 141 Hawaiʻ i 36, 41, 404 
P.3d 302, 307 (2017) (citing HRS § 91-14(g)(1)-(6)) (cleaned 
up). 
The LIRAB’s conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, under 
the right/wrong standard. Its findings of fact are 
HRS § 91- 14(g) (Supp. 2016 ) provides: 
(g) Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with 
instructions for further proceedings; or it may 
reverse or modify the decision and order if the 
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been 
prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the 
whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion. 
21   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard to 
determine if the agency decision was clearly erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on 
the whole record. Like any agency findings, the LIRAB’s 
findings should be sufficient to allow the reviewing court 
to track the steps by which the agency reached its 
decision. 
Cadiz, 148 Hawaiʻ i at 107, 468 P.3d at 121 (cleaned up). 
A finding of fact “is clearly erroneous when (1) the record 
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made.” Est. of Klink ex rel.
Klink v. State, 113 Hawaiʻ i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007) 
(citation omitted). 
“In the workers’ compensation context, substantial evidence 
means a high quantum of evidence which, at the minimum, must be 
relevant and credible evidence of a quality and quantity 
sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable person that 
an injury or death is not work connected.” Borrson v. Weeks, 
155 Hawaiʻ i 490, 496, 567 P.3d 195, 201 (2025) (citing Panoke v. 
Reef Dev. of Hawaii, Inc., 136 Hawai‘ i 448, 462, 363 P.3d 296, 
310 (2015)) (quotations and brackets omitted). 
Substantial 
evidence “must be evidence such as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a claim.” Acoustic, Insulation &
Drywall, Inc. v. Labor & Indus. Relations Appeal Bd., 51 Haw. 
312, 314, 459 P.2d 541, 543 (1969). 
22   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
  IV. DISCUSSION 
The crux of Lane’s contention is that the Employer failed 
to produce substantial evidence to overcome the statutory 
presumption that her nasal fracture was a work-related injury.7 
Even with full regard and due deference to the LIRAB, we hold that the Employer did not adduce substantial evidence to meet 
its initial burden of production to rebut the presumption of 
compensability. The evidence relied upon by the LIRAB, 
particularly the biomechanics opinion from Dr. Cupo, lacked foundation to be considered and thus lacked probative value. 
“Hawaii’s workers’ compensation statute is to be accorded 
beneficent and liberal construction in favor of the employee, to 
fulfill the humanitarian purposes for which it was enacted.” 
Respicio v. Waialua Sugar Co., 67 Haw. 16, 18, 675 P.2d 770, 772 
(1984). HRS Chapter 386 entitles employees injured in the 
course of employment to compensation. HRS § 386-3 (2015). 
HRS § 386-85 creates a rebuttable presumption that an 
employee’s claim is compensable. A claim for compensation is presumed to be a work-related injury in the absence of 
substantial evidence to the contrary. HRS § 386-85 (2015). The 
presumption is that the claimed injury is causally related to 
In her points of error, Lane appears to argue that the ICA applied the 
incorrect standard of review; however, Lane does not present any argument to 
support this assertion and, further, the ICA correctly applied the clearly 
erroneous standard of review to the LIRAB’s FOFs and right/wrong standard to 
the LIRAB’s COLs. See Skahan
, 148 Hawai‘i at 468 n.7, 478 P.3d at 293 n.7. 
23 7   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  the employment activity. Korsak v. Hawaii Permanente Med. Grp., 
94 Hawai‘ i 297, 307, 12 P.3d 1238, 1248 (2000); Cadiz, 148 
Hawai‘i at 107, 468 P.3d at 121 (citing HRS § 386-85) (“The 
workers’ compensation statute rests on the presumption that a 
claimed injury is work-connected and therefore compensable.”). 
This presumption is one of the “keystone principles” of our 
workers’ compensation system. Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawaiʻ i 70, 
79, 9 P.3d 382, 391 (2000) (citation omitted). “That 
presumption is paramount, in part, because the workers’ 
compensation statute provides an injured employee’s exclusive remedy for an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment.” Cadiz
, 148 Hawaiʻ i at 99, 468 P.3d at 113 (cleaned 
up). 
The presumption of compensability places a “heavy burden on 
the employer to disprove that an injury is work-related.” Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 307, 12 P.3d at 1248. This presumption “is 
not a mere procedural device that disappears upon the 
introduction of contrary evidence.” Id. (citing 
Akamine v.
Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408, 495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972)). To rebut the presumption of compensability, the 
employer has the burden of going forward with the evidence, 
which is the burden of production; and once the burden of 
production is met, the employer then has to meet the burden of 
24   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  persuasion. Cadiz, 148 Hawai‘ i at 99–100, 468 P.3d at 113–14 
(citation omitted). 
The burden of production requires the employer to initially 
introduce substantial evidence that rebuts the presumption that 
the injury is work-related. Id. (citation omitted). “After the 
trier of the facts first makes the determination as to whether the evidence adduced by the employer is substantial[,] then 
[they are] to weigh and consider the evidence offered by the 
employer against the evidence offered by claimants supportive of 
the claim.” Acoustic, Insulation & Drywall, Inc., 51 Haw. at 
316, 459 P.2d at 544. 
“Substantial evidence” signifies a high quantum of 
evidence that is, at a minimum, relevant and credible of a 
quality and quantity sufficient to justify a conclusion by a 
reasonable person that the injury is not work connected. 
Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 307, 12 P.3d at 1248 (citation omitted). 
“In evaluating whether the burden of producing substantial 
evidence has been met, ‘the slightest aggravation or 
acceleration of an injury by the employment activity mandates 
compensation.’” Cadiz, 148 Hawai‘ i at 108, 468 P.3d at 122 
(quoting Panoke, 136 Hawai‘ i at 461, 363 P.3d at 309).  If 
substantial evidence is not adduced, the “claimant must 
prevail.” Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc., 63 Haw. 642, 650, 636 
P.2d 721, 726–27 (1981). If substantial evidence is adduced, 
25   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 the LIRAB must then weigh and consider the evidence offered by 
the parties with any reasonable doubts as to whether an injury 
is work-related resolved in favor of the claimant. Akamine, 53 
Haw. at 409, 495 P.2d at 1166. 
Here, the Employer did not meet its initial burden of 
producing substantial evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability. Therefore, we need not reach the burden of 
persuasion. See id. at 413, 495 P.2d at 1169. 
A. Employer did not meet its burden of producing substantial 
evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability. 
The LIRAB found, and the ICA affirmed, that the Employer 
met its initial burden of producing substantial evidence to 
rebut the presumption of compensability with respect to Lane’s nasal injury. The LIRAB’s determination was premised on two 
FOFs. The first finding, FOF 7, relied on Dr. Cupo’s opinions 
that: (1) the nasal fracture was not caused by the impact; (2) 
Lane did not complain of nasal pain or abnormality at the 
emergency room; and (3) the “force involved in the accident 
could not have caused her to strike her nasal bridge on the 
steering wheel, specially [sic] if she had her right hand on the 
steering wheel to beep her horn.” The second finding, FOF 8, 
was based on Dr. Sasaki’s opinion that Lane did not have a bloody nose and that “Claimant’s nasal fracture occurred between 
October 29, 2014 and before November 2, 2014.” 
26   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Standing on these two FOFs, the LIRAB concluded that these 
FOFs constituted “substantial evidence” to rebut the presumption 
of compensability with respect to Lane’s nose injury, and that 
the “Employer met its burden of production[.]” 
The LIRAB then weighed Lane’s medical records generated 
from October 26, 2014 through October 29, 2014 together with 
Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s reports, concluding that the 
Employer met its burden of persuasion to overcome the 
presumption of compensability. Lane cites Cadiz for the contention that the Employer did not meet its initial burden of 
production. We agree with Lane. 
1. The record lacks foundation for Dr. Cupo’s opinion 
pertaining to biomechanics. 
This case rests on whether Lane struck her nose on the 
steering wheel. And if Lane struck her nose on the steering 
wheel, the pertinent question is whether that could have, in any 
way, caused her nose injury. See Korsak
, 94 Hawai‘i at 308, 12 
P.3d at 1249. 
As noted, in FOF 7, the LIRAB relied on Dr. Cupo’s opinion 
in concluding that the “force involved in the accident” could 
not have caused Lane to strike her nose on the steering wheel. 
The LIRAB clearly erred because there is nothing in the 
record to indicate Dr. Cupo was qualified to render such an opinion. 
Dr. Cupo did not cite to any credentials that 
27   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 qualified him as a biomechanics or accident reconstruction 
expert. Also, he only offered a “generalized” opinion as to the 
force of the impact. See id. at 308, 12 P.3d at 1249 (affirming 
that “generalized medical opinions do not constitute substantial evidence”). 
In concluding that the Employer met its burden of 
production, the LIRAB relied on Dr. Cupo’s opinion that the 
force involved in the collision was “low and could not have 
caused [Lane] to strike her nasal bridge on the steering wheel,” especially if she had her right hand on the steering wheel to 
beep the horn.
8 This opinion was offered without any calculation 
of the force generated by the collision or the amount of force transmitted to Lane’s body; any determination as to whether Lane 
was sitting completely back in the driver’s seat or leaning 
forward at impact placing her body and face in closer proximity 
to the steering wheel; or any discussion of whether Lane’s right arm was bent at the elbow or fully extended as she was beeping 
the horn. 
This technical and complex subject matter is typically 
reserved for experts in biomechanics, accident reconstruction, 
Dr. Cupo opined that Lane’s right shoulder injury was not caused by the 
collision, specifically stating, “T he right shoulder was not a body part 
injured at the time of the motor vehicle accident of 10/26/14.” However, not 
even the Employer deemed Dr. Cupo’s opinion to be credible, as the Employer 
“accepted liability” for Lane’s right shoulder as a compensable body part 
injured in the collision. 
28 8   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 engineering, and other disciplines who have the requisite 
training and experience in these specialized fields. See Loren 
Peck, How Sound Is the Science? Applying Daubert to 
Biomechanical Experts’ Injury Causation Opinions, 73 Wash. & Lee 
L. Rev. 1063, 1090-1110 (2016). Biomechanics experts analyze 
motor vehicle collisions utilizing physics and engineering 
principles, along with vehicle manufacturing information, to 
assess the forces generated in a collision. The analysis 
involves accident reconstruction, which examines factors such as vehicle weights, impact velocities, impact angles, damage 
patterns, vehicle crashworthiness, occupant dynamics, injury 
tolerance thresholds, and environmental factors, along with 
other relevant data to analyze the forces and energy transfers 
involved in a collision. Cf. Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 
Hawai‘i 
143, 150, n.8, 214 P.3d 1133, 1140, n.8 (Ct. App. 2009) (Expert 
Dr. Banks, who had a medical degree and engineering degree, and 
taught courses in biomechanics and injury causation analysis, 
“testified that he followed five steps in conducting his injury 
causation analysis: (1) vehicle motion or vehicle dynamics, (2) 
occupant motion or occupant kinematics, (3) biomechanics, (4) injury potential/injury analysis, and (5) review of medical 
records. Dr. Banks testified that ‘[b]iomechanics is the 
application of the science of mechanics to biological 
29   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 systems.’”). 
Thoens v. Safeco Insurance Co. of Oregon involved an expert 
opinion on the biomechanics of a motor vehicle collision. 356 
P.3d 91 (Or. App. 2015). There, the biomechanics expert opined 
as to whether the forces associated with the collision were 
sufficient to cause injury to the vehicle occupant. Id. at 101. 
The expert testified to his education and training, which included a bachelor’s degree in engineering, a master’s degree 
in biomedical engineering, and a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering. Id.He also described his significant work and 
research background in biomechanics. Id. at 101. 
The Court of Appeals of Oregon found the biomechanics 
expert’s opinion scientifically valid. Id. at 110. The court 
considered, inter alia, the expert’s calculation of the 
collision force applied to the driver’s vehicle and “how that 
force was transmitted to the driver’s seat, using principles of physics and taking into account the construction of the car and 
its components”; analysis of “how plaintiff's body would have 
been affected by that force, given her ‘body habitus, her 
height, weight, how she was seated inside the vehicle, [and] 
what type of restraint’ was used”; and comparison of the forces 
that plaintiff’s body had “experienced in the collision” to a 
“‘known level of human tolerance’ based on studies of vehicle 
collisions and crash tests as well as his own study of human 
30   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 9 tissues and how they respond to various stresses.”9 Id. at 102. 
Here, there was no showing through testimony, curricula 
vitae, or other relevant evidence that Dr. Cupo or Dr. Sasaki, 
neither of whom testified at the LIRAB trial, possessed the 
requisite expertise or were otherwise qualified to render 
forensic biomechanics, vehicular accident reconstruction, or 
engineering opinions relating to the collision. See State ex
rel. Jones v. Recht, 655 S.E.2d 126, 132 (W. Va. 2007) (A medical doctor’s testimony “must be strictly restricted to medical testimony” and “[i]ssues regarding the force of impact 
must be redirected to experts qualified in accident 
reconstruction or biomechanics.”). Nor was there any evidence 
of scientific methods, studies, or analysis performed in 
furtherance of Dr. Cupo’s opinion that it was “impossible” for 
Lane to have struck her nose on the steering wheel based on the 
See also Maines v. Fox, 190 So.3d 1135, 1142 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2016) 
(holding that a medical doctor with expertise in biomechanical engineering 
should have been able to testify to forces involved in a motor vehicle collision and whether those forces were enough to cause claimant’s injuries); 
Johnston- Forbes v. Matsunaga, 333 P.3d 388, 391 (Wash. 2014) (biomechanics 
expert allowed to testify where the expert reviewed engineering data on both vehicles, bumper crash test information, and performed impact tests on both 
bumpers); Wilson v. Rivers, 593 S.E.2d 603, 604- 06 (S.C. 2004) (finding that 
a medical expert with a degree in physiology and training in biomechanics who 
“conducted over 800 impact and injury causation analyses” and had been qualified as an expert in biomechanics in other states, was qualified to 
testify to forces involved in a motor vehicle collision). 
31   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
    
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 force involved in the collision.10 
In light of the foregoing, we find that the LIRAB erred in 
relying on Dr. Cupo’s opinion on biomechanics, which lacks 
foundation and does not justify a conclusion by a reasonable 
person that Lane’s nasal injury was not work-related. See
Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 308, 12 P.3d at 1249. 
Moreover, Dr. Cupo’s report represents the kind of 
generalized opinion this court has previously warned against and 
summarily rejected in Korsak and Akamine. 
Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 
308, 12 P.3d at 1249 (“[P]ursuant to Akamine, generalized 
medical opinions do not constitute substantial evidence.”); see 
Akamine, 53 Haw. at 410, 495 P.2d at 1167–68. 
Thus, Dr. Cupo’s 
opinions on biomechanics, which Dr. Sasaki relied on for his opinions, cannot be sustained as substantial evidence.
  11
Given the deficiency of the LIRAB’s findings, the critical 
10 Although Dr. Cupo opined that it was “impossible” that Lane struck the 
steering wheel during the impact, the LIRAB found that the collision caused 
her a head injury. Upon review of the surveillance video, the LIRAB 
acknowledged that t he video had “no clear visual of Claimant’s position or 
movement within the van[,]” yet that same video purportedly supported 
Dr. Cupo’s opinion that the collision did not cause Lane’s nasal fracture. 
And although the LIRAB found that the collision caused a “slight quiver,” it 
nevertheless credited Dr. Cupo’s opinion that the van did not move. 
11 Lane also argues in conclusory fashion that Dr. Cupo is inherently 
biased because the Employer retained him to examine Lane. In support, Lane 
filed Dr. Cupo’s 1099 tax form and his testimony from an unrelated workers’ 
compensation case, in which Dr. Cupo testified that his average fee was “approximately $800 per [independent medical examination (IME)].”  Dr. Cupo 
was retained by the Employer pursuant to HRS § 386- 79 which allows an 
employer to designate a physician of their choice to examine a claimant at 
the expense of the employer. This is the employer’s statutory right. 
Neither the LIRAB nor the ICA addresses the argument regarding Dr. Cupo’s 
 (continued . . .) 
32   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 question is whether striking the steering wheel could have, in 
any way, fractured Lane’s nose with respect to medical 
causation. Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 308, 12 P.3d at 1249 
(concluding that IME reports failed to directly address whether 
claimant’s physical therapy session could have exacerbated 
claimant’s condition and were thus insufficient as substantial 
evidence). Neither Dr. Cupo nor Dr. Sasaki answered that 
question, nor did either doctor point to an alternative cause of 
Lane’s injury. 
2. Lane’s medical records documented clear and undisputed 
evidence of facial and nasal complaints from 
October 26, 2014 through October 29, 2014. 
In FOFs 7 and 8, the LIRAB credited Dr. Sasaki’s opinion 
that the nasal fracture occurred in the compressed window 
between October 29, 2014 and November 2, 2014, and Dr. Cupo’s 
opinion that Lane did not complain of any nasal related symptoms 
at the emergency room.12 Dr. Sasaki based his medical causation 
opinion on the medical records generated between October 26, 2014 and October 29, 2014 in concluding that the records did not reveal any “complaints of nose pain or swelling.” 
Dr. Sasaki’s opinion misstates the undisputed evidence. 
The medical records from Drs. Kienitz and Teramoto clearly 
bias; however, on this record, we do not find this argument persuasive. 
12Dr. Sasaki stated that the nasal fracture occurred “after” October 29, 
2014. 
33    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
   
   
   
 
  
    
  
  documented Lane’s nasal symptoms, including persistent nasal 
“pain,” before October 29, 2014, which Dr. Sasaki’s report 
acknowledged but failed to address. Neither Dr. Sasaki nor 
Dr. Cupo specifically explained or accounted for Lane’s right-
sided facial complaints in the emergency room13 or the other 
documented complaints Lane was experiencing before October 29, 2014, which included “facial pressure,” persistent “sinus pain 
and congestion” since the collision, and “[p]ain along right 
side of nose” that Lane attributed to the “impact in [motor vehicle accident][.]” 
The x-ray imaging taken on November 2, 2014 confirmed that 
Lane sustained a right-sided non-displaced nasal fracture, the 
same side she had been complaining about before October 29, 
2014. While the medical records reflect that her neck pain had 
improved from the date of the collision leading up to 
November 2, 2014, the same records also document that “she continues to have facial pain.” There was no evidence that Lane 
was experiencing any ongoing or frequent nasal or facial 
13 The record reflects that the collision occurred at approximately 
1:52 p.m. on October 26, 2014, and that Lane was seen in the emergency room 
at 5:46 p.m., or within four hours of the incident. There is no indication 
in the emergency room report that Lane’s nose was ever examined on October 
26, 2014, with the records showing that Lane seemed more preoccupied with her 
neck pain, which apparently prompted the doctors to order cervical x- ray 
imaging. The report references a physical examination of her head, ears, 
eyes, neck, cardiovascular system, pulmonary/chest, abdominal, 
musculoskeletal, neurological, and skin. However, the section pertaining to 
“HENT” (head, ears, nose, and throat) does not provide any information, as 
that section was left blank. No x-rays were taken of Lane’s face or nose. 
34   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 symptoms before the collision.14 And although it is not required 
that an employer provide evidence that definitively establishes 
the cause of a claimant’s injury, neither Dr. Cupo nor 
Dr. Sasaki explained why Lane would have started suffering 
right-sided facial and nasal symptoms following the collision if 
the impact had not caused the right-sided nasal fracture. 
The Employer argued that the absence of acute external 
physical symptoms, or what Dr. Cupo referred to as an 
“abnormality,” in the medical records before October 29, 2014 ruled out the possibility that Lane sustained the nasal fracture 
from the collision. But Lane did not exhibit such symptoms on 
November 2, 2014 when x-rays revealed her nasal fracture.
15 
Indeed, the Kapiʻ olani Medical Center records from that date 
indicated that Lane was not “acutely and markedly symptomatic” 
any more than she was during the preceding days when she was 
complaining of right-sided facial symptoms and pain along the 
right side of her nose.16 Dr. Cupo himself interpreted those 
same records as documenting “no edema or deformity of the nasal bridge” or “septal deviation or hematoma[,]” yet there is no 
14 Both Dr. Cupo and Dr. Sasaki engaged in an extensive review of Lane’s 
prior medical records and history. Neither report alluded to any entries or 
doctor visits relating to nasal or sinus complaints predating the collision. 
15 On October 29, 2014, Dr. Hsieh reported doing an “external inspection” 
of Lane’s ears and nose, which he indicated was “normal.” 
16 Kapiʻolani Medical Center’s medical records from November 2, 2014--seven 
days after the collision--confirmed the absence of any “significant 
swelling,” “obvious deformity,” “septal hematoma,” or “septal deviation.” 
35   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   question that Lane’s nose was fractured. 
As to Dr. Sasaki’s opinion that Lane did not have a bloody 
nose, which the LIRAB relied on in FOF 8, the Employer did not 
present any evidence suggesting that a person with a non-
displaced nasal fracture will necessarily experience bleeding. 
Significantly, the medical records from Kapiʻ olani Medical Center 
advised Lane that with a “minor fracture,” “[s]ometimes, there 
is also bleeding from the nose” and that it “may” cause 
swelling. (Emphasis added.) That is to say, there may or may 
not be any bleeding or swelling with a minor non-displaced nasal 
fracture and, therefore, the absence of such symptoms is not a definitive indicator to rule out that a person has suffered a 
fracture. 
In Panoke v. Reef Development of Hawaii, Inc.
, this court 
held that two medical reports submitted by the employers’ 
doctors and the expert testimony of a third employer doctor did 
not rebut the presumption of compensability because the doctors 
did not address how Panoke, a construction worker injured while 
maneuvering equipment on a worksite, was “asymptomatic” for a 
shoulder injury prior to the workplace incident, “but then started suffering from shoulder problems shortly afterwards.” 
136 
Hawaiʻi at 461, 363 P.3d at 309.  The claimant in 
Panoke did 
not exhibit “immediate symptoms” following the incident and did 
not begin to complain of symptoms until “approximately two weeks 
36   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 after the work accident.” Id. at 463-64, 363 P.3d at 311-12. 
This court concluded that the absence of symptoms following 
a work accident was insufficient to overcome the presumption of 
a covered work-related injury. Id. We held that an IME 
doctor’s testimony that Panoke’s injury was not aggravated by 
the accident because “[h]e would expect immediate symptoms given 
the amount of tears” was “not sufficient to constitute 
substantial evidence.” Id. at 463, 363 P.3d at 312 (quotations 
omitted). We specifically noted, “[T]here is nothing in the record to explain why Panoke would have started experiencing 
serious shoulder pain approximately two weeks after the work 
accident if the work accident had not caused the injury or 
aggravated some pre-existing injury.” Id. at 464, 363 P.3d at 
312. “As a result, the LIRAB erred in concluding that [the 
employer] had adduced substantial evidence to overcome the 
presumption that Panoke’s shoulder injuries were related to the . . . work accident as he alleged.” Id.
Similar to the employer’s doctors in Panoke, neither 
Dr. Cupo nor Dr. Sasaki explained why Lane was asymptomatic 
prior to October 26, 2014 but then started experiencing right-
sided nasal and facial symptoms shortly after the collision 
occurred and continuing through October 29, 2014. Panoke, 136 
Hawaiʻi at 461, 464, 363 P.3d at 309, 312.  Here, the LIRAB also 
relied on Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s opinions that Lane would 
37   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 have experienced immediate symptoms if the fracture were caused 
by the collision. In contrast to the claimant in Panoke, who 
began complaining of symptoms two weeks after the workplace 
incident, Lane was diagnosed with a nasal fracture within a week 
of the incident, after x-ray imaging revealed a fracture. 
Contrary to Dr. Sasaki’s conclusions, the record reflects that 
Lane did experience immediate and continuing right-sided facial 
and nasal symptoms from the date of the collision, October 26, 
2014, through October 29, 2014, as well as on November 2, 2014, the date x-ray imaging revealed the fracture. 
Dr. Cupo’s and Dr. Sasaki’s opinions that Lane could not 
have sustained the nasal fracture before October 29, 2014 due to 
the absence of immediate symptoms do not align with the 
uncontroverted evidence, do not address the undisputed findings 
charted in Lane’s medical records from October 26, 2014 through 
November 2, 2014, and do not provide a sufficient degree of specificity to constitute substantial evidence to rebut the 
presumption that Lane’s nasal injury was work-related. 
Accordingly, the Employer did not satisfy its initial burden of 
production in rebutting the statutory presumption of 
compensability. 
B. Employer did not meet its burden of persuasion. 
Assuming, arguendo, the Employer had met its burden of 
production, the remaining evidence in support of the Employer’s 
38   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  burden of persuasion was, at best, conflicting. Any such doubts 
would be resolved in Lane’s favor. Borrson, 155 Hawai‘ i at 497, 
567 P.3d at 202 (citing Akamine, 53 Haw. at 409, 495 P.2d at 
1166); Chung, 63 Haw. at 652, 636 P.2d at 727 (Where the evidence conflicts, “the legislature has decided that the 
conflict should be resolved in the claimant’s favor.”). In 
Cadiz, we held that “[i]n evaluating whether the burden of 
persuasion has been met, the ‘broad humanitarian purpose of the 
workers’ compensation statute read as a whole requires that all 
reasonable doubts be resolved in favor of the claimant.’” 148 
Hawai‘i at 108, 468 P.3d at 122 (citing Ihara, 141 Hawaiʻ i at 41, 
404 P.3d at 307). 
Here, since the Employer failed to produce 
substantial evidence that expressly, directly, and specifically 
rebutted the presumption that Lane’s nasal injury was work-
related, the LIRAB erred in concluding Lane’s nasal injury was 
not a compensable injury. See Korsak, 94 Hawai‘ i at 308, 12 P.3d 
at 1249 (noting the ICA applied the correct analysis of whether 
doctors’ reports expressly, directly and specifically rebutted 
the presumption that an injury was causally related to the work 
accident). 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the LIRAB’s FOFs 
7-10, 12, and 19-20 and COL 4 are clearly erroneous. 
Accordingly, they are vacated. 
39   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
   
   
   
              V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, we vacate the ICA’s September 27, 2024 
Judgment on Appeal; vacate in part the LIRAB’s November 26, 2019 Decision and Order and January 22, 2020 Order Denying 
Reconsideration as they relate to the LIRAB’s FOFs and COL that 
Lane did not sustain a compensable work-related injury to her 
nose; affirm the DLIR Director’s December 30, 2016 decision 
finding Lane’s nasal injury was compensable; and remand the case 
to the LIRAB for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Michael J.Y. Wong 
for petitioner 
     
Brian G.S. Choy andKeith M. Yonamine 
for respondents /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
/s/ Steven R. Nichols  
40 