***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
   
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
CARI SALAVEA also known as CARI CARVEIRO, 
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant . 
 
 
SCWC-16-0000386 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16 -0000386; CR. NO. 15 -1-0608) 
 
JUNE 19, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. , WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM  RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  Under article I, section 14 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution 
and the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution, 
defendants in criminal cases are provided with the right to the 
effective assistance of counsel at trial.  The defendant in this 
case contends that she was denied this right because her trial 
counsel failed to adduce critical evidence impeaching the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000386
19-JUN-2020
02:37 PM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  2 
 credibility of the State’s key witness.  Because we conclude 
that the failure to adduce this  evidence had no obvious tactical 
benefit to the defendant’s case and that the adequacy of 
counsel’s representation, when viewed as a whole, was not within 
the range of competence required  of attorneys in criminal cases, 
we conclude that the defendant was denied the right to the 
effective assistance of counsel.  We also consider the 
defendant’s contention that prosecutorial misconduct was 
committed during closing argument to address the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals’ interpretation of applicable  precedent and 
because consideration of this issue further evidences that the 
assistance of defense counsel was ineffective.   
I. BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
  On April 17, 2015, Cari Salavea was charged by felony 
information with burglary in the first degree, in violation of 
Hawai
‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-810(1)(c).1  The felony 
                     
 1 HRS § 708-810(1)(c) (2014) provides as follows:  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the first 
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains 
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a 
crime against a person or against property rights, and:  
 . . . . 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the 
building is the dwelling of another, and the building 
is such a dwelling.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  3 
 information alleged that on or about March 27, 2015, Salavea 
unlawfully entered the residence of the complaining witness (CW) 
with the intent to commit a crime therein, thereby violating HRS 
§ 708-810(1)(c).  Salavea entered a plea of not guilty, and a 
jury trial was scheduled for the week of June 22, 2015.2   
  
On June 22, 2015, Salavea filed a notice of intent to 
use evidence (Salavea’s Notice) stating that she intended to 
adduce evidence that the CW was in the process of using 
methamphetamine in her residence at the time of the alleged 
burglary.  Salavea stated that the CW’s drug use undermined the 
reliability of the CW’s perception and memory o f the alleged 
offense.  On June 29, 2015, the State moved for a continuance, 
citing the unavailability of a witness.  The court granted the 
motion over defense objection, and trial was rescheduled for the 
week of September 8, 2015.   
  On August 13, 2015, Salavea’s counsel, the Office of 
the Public Defender, moved to withdraw as counsel due to a 
conflict of interest arising from its ongoing representation of 
the CW in a separate matter.  In a declaration attached to the 
motion, counsel averred the ethical obligation to raise the CW’s 
substance abuse as a relevant factor in Salavea’s case.  Counsel 
                     
 2 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided over pretrial proceedings, 
the jury trial, and sentencing.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  4 
 stated that continued representation of Salavea would compromise 
the attorney- client relationship between the Office of the 
Public Defender and the CW.  The court granted the motion on 
August 25, 2015, ordering the appointment of substitute counsel.  
At a hearing on September 4, 2015, substitute counsel requested 
a continuance so that counsel could prepare for trial.  The 
State did not object, and trial was rescheduled for the week of 
November 16, 2015.   
  On November 13, 2015, the State filed a notice of 
intent to use evidence of other acts (State’s Notice), asserting 
that the State intended to present evidence of Salavea’s 
admitted gambling problem, her drug use in 2014 and 2015, and 
the circumstances of a prior theft conviction.  The State 
contended that this evidence was probative of Salavea’s motive, 
opportunity, intent, and lack of mistake, as well as relevant 
for impeachment purposes.   
  The State argued that Salavea’s gambling was relevant 
because Salavea and the CW had gambled together in the past, 
Salavea had asked the CW to lend her money at some time prior to 
the alleged burglary, and the CW had refused to do so.  The 
State maintained that these facts demonstrated Salavea’s motive 
to commit the burglary.  Additionally, the State contended 
Salavea’s prior drug use was relevant because the CW was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  5 
 expected to testify that she had distanced herself from Salavea 
because the CW felt she was at risk of relapsing while in 
Salavea’s company based on Salavea’s drug use an d their history 
of using drugs together, which in turn upset Salavea and 
provided a motive for the current offense.   
  The State also moved in limine to exclude, inter alia, 
evidence of the CW’s history of drug use.  If Salavea was 
allowed to inquire abou t the CW’s history of drug use, the State 
maintained, Salavea would be opening the door to the CW’s 
explanation that she distanced herself from Salavea to avoid 
relapsing.  In response, Salavea filed a motion in limine 
seeking preclusion of the evidence that was the subject of the 
State’s Notice.  Salavea maintained that her gambling and 
history of drug use during 2014 and 2015 should not be admitted 
because they were irrelevant.   
  The hearing on the parties’ motions in limine and 
notices of intent was held on the day trial commenced.  The 
deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) contended that evidence of 
prior drug use by either the CW or Salavea was not relevant and 
should be excluded at trial.  The following was stated in regard 
to the State’s motion in limin e:  
[DPA]: Judge, if I may elaborate, the reason I put it in 
here, my position is actually pretty clear -cut.  I think 
any kind of prior  drug use or being on [HOPE Probation] or 
anything like that by either a Complainant or Defendant 
should not be coming in.  The only issue is whether--I ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  6 
 understand they’re making allegation whether Complainant 
was using drugs at the time of the incident, and that’s a 
separate issue.  This is not what’s in this .  
 
THE COURT: Okay.  Use of drugs by anybody, whether it be 
the Defendant or any witness, other witness, I think is 
legitimate under the case law because it goes to your 
ability to perceive and recall .  It’s up to the jury to 
decide whether there was an effect or not.  
. . . . 
THE COURT: And drug use on other occasions is irrelevant.  
[DPA]: It’s irrelevant, yes.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yeah, but I mean, when [Salavea] saw–-I 
mean, there were drugs at the scene and activity involving 
those drugs, so –- 
. . . . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: [I]t ties in with drug use at the 
occasion, and it  ties in beyond just, you know, was her 
perception failing due to drug use.   
THE COURT: Okay.  That will not come up until your case.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Right.  
. . . . 
THE COURT: It may have to do with the state of mind, right?  
[DPA]: Right, memory, perception, state of mind, but not 
any kind of other drug use  or she’s known her as a person 
who used drugs before or this is what she does all the 
time.  That’s what I’m objecting to because it’s not 
relevant.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No, and I agree with the State.  I mean, 
there’s certainly not going to be any attempt to expand 
beyond what [Salavea] perceived the situation to be in that 
room, not just, you know, how good [the CW]’s perception 
was but in terms of were there drugs there, was that girl 
getting into trouble with drugs, you know, that sort of 
thing.   
. . . . 
THE COURT: In Cross, I would think we’re limited to the 
event, the event at issue.  
[DPA]: Exactly.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  7 
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, based upon what she says--   
[DPA]: She canno t--“Were you using the drugs on March 
27th?” and the answer is going to be no, and they have to 
live with that.   
THE COURT: Yeah, until something else comes up, and that 
would be in the Defense’s case.   
[DPA]: Defense’s side, and when Defense’s side come s up, 
they can rebut the testimony with the perception of what 
happened in the room, if she had blurry eyes or slurred 
speech or if she was acting funny, whatever, but they 
cannot go into past drug use, history of drug use, or any 
kind of “I know she was u sing drugs even though she looked 
normal because she always uses drugs,” you know, so I want 
to make sure that the rebuttal is also limited to 
perception of what happened in this room.  
. . . . 
I’d also like to point out . . . there’s a portion of why I 
filed Notice of Intent.  If it does come out and it’s 
pretty much irreparable and the jury here hears Defendant’s 
testimony about any kind of allegations of prior drug use 
or whatever that goes beyond the scope of that event, State 
should be allowed to question Defendant and bring it up 
that they were doing it together over that period of time.   
THE COURT: Oh, yeah, it’s fair Cross.  Both of you have a 
right to fair Cross, and credibility is always, obviously, 
an issue in addition to what happened that night or that 
day.   
[DPA]: I’m sorry.  Not just that day, but if the history of 
drug use--   
THE COURT: I understand what you’re saying.  No, you have 
the right to fair Cross, and [Defense Counsel] has a right 
to fair Cross.   
[DPA]: And this goes to her state of mind.   
THE COURT: Okay, I think we’ve talked about No. 1.  I think 
we understand where we are.  
(Emphases added.) 
  After ruling on the State’s remaining motions in 
limine, the court considered Salavea’s motion to exclude the 
evidence that was the subje ct of the State’s Notice.  The ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  8 
 following exchange took place with regard to Salavea’s history 
of drug use in 2014 and 2015:  
THE COURT: Okay.  Defendant’s drug use in 2014 and 2015, is 
that something you still want at this point?   
[DPA]: Well, yes.  If they open the door through bringing 
up the whole history  and everything else[.]  
(Emphasis added.)   
  The court then considered Salavea’s Notice.  The court 
stated that “[Salavea]’s Notice of Intent will be granted, 
assuming the evidence is that [ the CW] . . . was using ice at 
about 1:30, and that’s when this incident occurred, and I’m 
hearing that from the lawyers.  I guess that comes in to show 
perception and recall.”3   
  At trial, the CW testified that she was living with 
her parents and her six
-year-old daughter in a secured apartment 
building at the time of the incident.  An electronic fob was 
needed in order to access the building.  She had lost her 
original fob in June 2014 but did not know where she lost it.  
According to the CW, she reported her fob as lost and had it 
replaced but did not deactivate the misplaced fob because she 
thought she might find it at some point.   
                     
 3 Crystal methamphetamine is “commonly known as ice” in Hawai ‘i.  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 495 –04, in 2004 House Journal, at 1603.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  9 
   The CW also testified that she and Salavea had been 
close friends and had known  each other for six years.  The CW 
was godmother to one of Salavea’s children and had been the maid 
of honor at her wedding.  She and Salavea would meet every once 
in a while and do family activities together such as taking 
their kids to the pool.  They were very close but did not always 
spend time together, and she had started spending less time with 
Salavea at the beginning of 2015.  The CW acknowledged that she 
let Salavea borrow possessions from her in the past, but she 
stated that Salavea borrowed more from her than she did from 
Salavea.  Prior to March 27, 2015, the last time she had seen 
Salavea was earlier that month on March 6, when they went 
gambling together, and they had been out all night.   
  The CW testified that on the afternoon of March 27, 
she was at home recovering from a workplace injury to her foot.  
The CW stated that she was at her residence that day with her 
parents until they left sometime between 1:15 and 1:30 p.m.  She 
received a call from Salavea around that time but did not answer 
the phone.  She then fell asleep for a while; whe n she woke up, 
her phone was missing as were some other possessions, including 
a tablet and a backpack containing her wallet.  The CW called 
her mother on the landline to see if she had seen her phone, but ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  10 
 her mother said she had not.4  She went downstairs to building 
security and reviewed surveillance footage of the elevators 
going up to her floor.  The footage showed Salavea entering the 
building and making her way to the floor on which the CW 
resided.  It then showed Salavea reentering the elevator and 
exiting the building carrying the missing backpack.  The CW 
testified that she had not given Salavea permission to enter her 
home or to take her backpack.   
  Ray Pavao, a security guard at the CW’s apartment 
complex, testified that aro
und 7:00 p.m. on March 27, 2015, the 
CW reported that someone had possibly come into her unit and 
taken some of her belongings.  He and the CW reviewed the 
security footage together.  Michael Bryant, a security 
supervisor at the CW’s apartment complex testified that he 
reviewed the record of fob usage between March 1 and March 31, 
2015 on the apartment computer system, and one fob registered to 
the CW was used only three times, all on the afternoon of March 
27, 2015.  Additionally, Bryant stated that the record of fob 
purchases by residents showed that the CW had purchased another 
                     
 4 The CW’s mother corroborated this statement in her testimony.  
The CW’s mother also testified that when she returned to the apartment the CW 
was “speak[ing] okay.”   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  11 
 fob on June 27, 2014, but there was no record that a fob 
assigned to the CW was deactivated. 
  Salavea testified that she went to the CW’s residence 
on the afternoon of March 27, 2015, because she was returning 
the CW’s house key to her, which she said the CW had left in 
Salavea’s car earlier that month on March 6.  Salavea stated 
that she called the CW around noon on March 27 to tell her that 
she was in town and was going to stop b y to drop off the CW’s 
house key.  The CW told her to park in the CW’s designated 
parking stall and come upstairs.  Salavea testified that she 
then went to the CW’s apartment where she met and spoke with the 
CW.  After speaking with the CW, she borrowed a pair of slippers 
and a backpack from her and left the apartment.  Salavea 
identified the backpack that she borrowed as the same backpack 
shown in the surveillance footage.  The following exchange then 
took place:  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Did anything else occur  between the two 
of you while you were there?   
SALAVEA: Can you--what do you mean?  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Let me ask you this.  How long did you 
stay there?   
SALAVEA: Not long ‘cause my friend was in the car waiting.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: So did anything else  occur before you 
left?  You borrowed her sneakers, her backpack.   
SALAVEA: Well, she told me not to take her bag ‘cause she 
was going to use it, so I told her that I wanted to use it ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  12 
 and she can come to my house and get it when she’s not out 
of it.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And did she seem alert on that occasion 
when you said “when she’s not out of it”?   
[DPA]: Objection, Your Honor.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I’ll rephrase.   
[DPA]: And I’m also objecting to the last answer.   
THE COURT: To the last answer?  There was no answer.   
[DPA]: The basis is hearsay.   
THE COURT: Oh, to the last answer.  All right.  Well, it is 
hearsay.  I’ll strike that last answer by the witness, and 
the jury will disregard it.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I’m sorry.  The portion that her friend 
said to her?  
THE COURT: This thing about “she didn’t want me to use it.”  
[DPA]: No, the last portion, the last portion of the 
answer, what Defendant is saying she told her.  It’s 
basically self -serving hearsay that is adduced by 
Defendant-- 
THE COURT: And I’m striking it as hearsay, the whole 
answer.   
[DPA]: No, only starting with “I told her,” so when she was 
not given permission to use the bag, I’m not asking to 
strike that.   
THE COURT: “She told me,” everything after that in the last 
answer is stricken.  Jury will disregard it.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Very well.  So on that occasion, did you 
leave with her backpack?  
SALAVEA: Yes.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And you left with her footwear?  
SALAVEA: Her slippers.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Where did you go from there?  
SALAVEA: We went to Popeye’s so my friend could use the 
bathroom and grab something to eat, and then we went back 
to the west side, my house.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  13 
 Defense counsel did not attempt to rephrase the question that 
drew the State’s hearsay objection.  At no point d id defense 
counsel inquire, nor did Salavea testify, about whether the CW 
was using or under the influence of methamphetamine while 
Salavea was there.  
  Salavea also testified that she had borrowed backpacks 
and shoes from the CW in the past.  On cross- examination, the 
DPA questioned Salavea about her intent to return the bag to the 
CW.  Salavea explained that she had asked her husband to return 
the bag, but he had been unable to contact the CW.5  The 
prosecutor then questioned Salavea about her statement that the 
CW had told her not to borrow the bag because the CW wanted to 
use it.  Specifically, the prosecutor asked if Salavea thought 
it was “okay” for her to borrow the bag, even though the CW told 
her not to take it, because she had borrowed items from the CW 
previously without express permission.  Salavea responded that 
the CW “was there” but acknowledged that it was not okay to take 
the bag without express permission.  After this acknowledgement, 
the DPA asked Salavea, “So it wasn’t okay to take it?” a nd 
Salavea responded, “No, it wasn’t.”  The DPA then stated , “So it 
was a theft?” and Salavea said,  “Yeah.” 
                     
 5 Salavea also testified that she had been unable to return the 
CW’s backpack herself because she was incarcerated, but she had told the 
police where the CW’s backpack was located after she was arrested.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  14 
   At the conclusion of the evidence, the court 
instructed the jury on the elements of burglary in the first 
degree and the included offenses of criminal trespass in the 
first degree and theft in the fourth degree.   
  During closing arguments, the DPA made the following 
statements:  
[DPA]: The Defendant in this case, Cari Salavea, is guilty 
of Burglary in the First Degree, not just of Trespass or 
Theft but of Burglary in the First Degree, and the reason 
why is because she entered unlawfully into [the CW’s] house 
with intent to commit a crime, with intent to steal.  [The 
CW] told you the truth.  [The CW]’s testimony was credible .   
THE COURT: Well, the State submits.  
[DPA]: Thank you.  The State submits that [the CW]’s 
testimony is credible because it is corroborated by other 
evidence, because it makes sense, and because you, as the 
judges of everybody’s demeanor and looking at those factors 
that are given to you in the jury instructions, can assess 
for yourself whether it makes sense or not.   
. . . . 
Defendant’s story that she had permission to go in and she 
had somehow thought it was okay and that [the CW] 
cooperated with her and [the CW] let her do all of that is 
not credible.  It’s not credible, it’s a lie , because it 
doesn’t make any sense.   
[W]hat you need to focus on and this is how the State 
submits to you that it’s proven that Defendant’s story 
doesn’t add up --is the whole story by Defendant that the 
fob was lost by [the CW] on March 6th does not hold, does 
not hold up.  That’s a lie, and from there, it follows that 
she was concealing the fob, she was deliberately holding on 
to that fob secretly so she could go in her own time at her 
own convenience and take from [the CW].   
[The CW] told you and she was very frank with you, she 
explained in details what happened to her fob.  She told 
you she lost that fob as far as almost a year prior to this 
incident in March, and that testimony was corroborated  by 
Ray Pavao.  That testimony was corroborated by the records 
that she got an additional fob, she got the second fob.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  
 15 . . . . 
What does that mean?  That shows you that [the CW] told you 
the truth.  She told you she lost the fob and she got one 
on June 27th.  The records show that she got her 
replacement fob on June 27th.  That directly contradicts 
Defendant’s story that [the CW] lost it in the car, and 
from there, everything crumbles, everything the Defendant 
tells you is not true . 
. . . . 
So, ladies and  gentlemen, for these reasons, State submits 
to you that Defendant is guilty as charged of Burglary in 
the First Degree, not just of Trespass or Theft.  It’s a 
Burglary in the First Degree because Defendant, by lying 
about how the fob situation went up, she concealed that 
fob, she went there specifically with an intent to commit 
the crime because she have both motive and opportunity.  
(Emphases added.) 
  During the defense’s closing argument, defense counsel 
made the following statements:  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  If I may leave you with a suggestion of 
evaluating the evidence in this case, it would be this.  
You recall that just before our lunch break, [Salavea] went 
on the witness stand, and the Deputy Prosecutor asked her 
whether she didn’t take the Roxy bag wit hout permission and 
whether that wasn’t indeed theft, and [Salavea] broke down, 
she was in tears, and that’s, I suggest -–   
 
[DPA]: Objection, Your Honor.  This is not in evidence, and 
it’s personal statement.   
 
THE COURT: Overruled.   
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  And that’s because it probably didn’t 
even occur to her that that playful little act might be 
viewed by the law as a theft.  Now, the Government would 
have you believe that [Salavea], being that type of person, 
would take all of her friend’s valuables, and it’s just not 
borne out by the evidence.  Something occurred between 
these two women, but it wasn’t a burglary.   
  Then, during rebuttal, the State made the following 
statements:  
[DPA]: Ladies and gentlemen, what Defense Counsel was just 
doing was trying to appeal to your sense of pity or some ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  16 
 kind of sense, you know, for Defendant, and that’s 
improper.  You are given an instruction that you should not 
be influenced by that.   
. . . . 
Now, if you look at who is more likely to cook up a story, 
that was a good suggestion, and State submits to you that 
one of the guiding, multiple guiding factors are on page 8 
of your jury instructions where Judge Ahn did read to you 
the multiple factors that you may consider in determining 
whether a person is telling the truth or not. 
One of them is the witness’ manner of testifying.  That is 
significant.  You saw how [the CW] testified.  I don’t know 
if calling her sophisticated is kind of an overstatement.  
That’s your judgment entirely.  She may not have looked as 
sophisticated as [Defense Counsel] is claiming, but she was 
very forthright, she was very forthright about how she 
felt. 
And she also told you frankly that they were close friends.  
She was disappointed with how their relationship went, but 
she also did express no bias or no reason or no negativity 
towards Defendant even though I asked her hard questions.  
I was kind of asking her, you know, like, how did you feel, 
what was your, you know, what was your feeling towards 
relapsing, gambling every time you met with Defendant.  She 
was very, she was very mild as far as when--  
THE COURT: The State submits.  The State submits.   
[DPA]: State submits her testimony was not in any way 
showing any animosity.  If anything, she felt betrayed and 
disappointed.  She had nothing  against Cari.  Even after 
this incident, she did not--she has no claim that there was 
some kind of reason for her to feel specific animosity 
towards her friend.  She was also very frank and forthright 
how she described what happened to her when she discovered 
things were missing.  She told you in details how she was 
trying to call her phone, and it went to ringing first, 
then voicemail.  
. . . . 
But why would she go to Ray and look at that video to try 
to figure it out if in fact it happened the way Cari says 
it happened?  Cari Salavea is not a truthful witness.   
Another factor is interest, if any, in the result of this 
case.  Of course, every Defendant has a lot of interest in 
the result of the case, and that’s natural, but you cannot 
disregard it.  It’s s till there.  There is interest and 
bias.  Defendant has a lot of interest what’s at stake , 
while [the CW], why would [the CW] go through all of this ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  17 
 and why would [the CW] go and make up a story if it was not 
what happened?  There was no evidence by Defendant why is 
it that [the CW] would do it, and there was no evidence 
from [the CW], even though we pushed her, both of us, that 
she had any reason to tell this story.  She told you the 
truth.   
THE COURT: Well, the State submits.   
[DPA]: State submits she told you the truth.  
THE COURT: Strike that “She told you the truth.”  What is 
your argument?  Jury will disregard that part of the 
argument.  
[DPA]: Okay.  
(Emphases added.) 
  The jury found Salavea guilty of burglary in the first 
degree.  On April 19, 2016, the circuit court sentenced Salavea 
to ten years of imprisonment, with a mandatory minimum term of 
four years and six months (amended judgment).  Salavea timely 
appealed from the amended judgment to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA).6   
  
On appeal, Salavea contended that her conviction 
should be vacated or reversed because (1) defense  counsel was 
ineffective for failing to adduce the evidence of the CW’s drug 
use at the time of the incident; (2) the DPA committed 
prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument; and (3) the 
State’s evidence was insufficient to support her conviction.  In 
regard to her second point of error, Salavea argued that the DPA  
                     
 6 Salavea’s counsel on appeal was not counsel at trial.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  18 
 committed misconduct by offering a personal opinion about 
Salavea’s credibility and the credibility of the State’s 
witnesses, personally attacking defense counsel and accusing 
counsel of misconduct, and implying that Salavea was obligated 
to adduce evidence undermining the CW’s credibility, thereby 
improperly shifting the burden of proof to the defense. 
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  The ICA first considered Salavea’s contention that the 
assistance of counsel at trial was ineffective.7  The ICA found 
that defense counsel’s failure to adduce evidence of the CW’s 
use of methamphetamine at the time of the alleged crime was a 
deliberate tactical decision.  Citing the motions in limine 
hearing, the ICA determined that any allegations about t he CW’s 
prior drug use would have opened the door to evidence about 
Salavea’s history of drug use.   On this basis, the ICA concluded 
defense counsel chose not to adduce the evidence of the CW’s 
drug use at the time of the incident in order to avoid the 
introduction of evidence of Salavea’s history of drug use.   
  The ICA then considered Salavea’s contention that 
several statements made by the 
DPA during closing argument 
                     
 7 The ICA’s memorandum opinion can be found at State v. Salavea, 
No. CAAP- 16-0000386, 2019 WL 763475 (App. Feb. 4, 2019) (mem.).  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  19 
 constituted prosecutorial misconduct.8  Although the DPA had 
characterized the CW’s testimony as the truth and Salavea’s 
testimony as a lie, the ICA observed that the DPA described in 
detail how the evidence adduced at trial made the CW’s testimony 
more credible than that of Salavea.  In addition, the ICA stated 
that the “Circuit Court gave numerous prompt curative 
instructions (‘the State submits ’), struck the DPA’s stateme nt 
that ‘She told you the truth’ and instructed the jury to 
‘disregard that part of the argument.’”  The ICA also noted that 
the jury instructions informed the jury that t he lawyers’ 
statements or arguments were not evidence.  Finally, the ICA 
concluded that the use of the word “lie” by the DPA during 
closing argument was not misconduct at the time of trial,  as 
State v. Austin, 143 Hawai ‘i 18, 422 P.3d 18 (2018),  was decided 
after the trial in this case and had created a new rule, and 
therefore it should be given only prospective application.9 
  Second, the ICA reviewed Salavea’s contention that the 
DPA improperly shifted the burden of proof by arguing there “was 
                     
 8 Although Salavea’s counsel failed to object to the DPA’s 
statements at trial, the ICA reviewed the allegations of prosecutorial 
misconduct under the plain error doctrine.  
 9 In Austin, this court held that prosecutors were prohibited from 
using the word “lie” or it s derivatives when discussing the credibility of a 
defendant or witness’s testimony during closing argument.  Austin, 143 Hawai‘ i 
at 56, 422 P.3d at 56.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  20 
 no evidence by Defendant why is it that [the CW] would [tell 
this story].”  The ICA concluded that the DPA had not improperly 
shifted the burden of proof but merely argued that the CW’s 
credibility had not been impeached by any evidence of bias or 
motive for untruthfulness.  Further, the ICA stated, the jury 
instructions informed the jury that Salavea had no duty or 
obligation to call any witnesses or produce any evidence.   
  Third, the ICA considered whether it was improper for 
the DPA to argue that Salavea had lied simply because she was 
the defendant in a criminal case.  The ICA acknowledged that 
this court, in State v. Basham, had found that it is improper 
for a prosecutor in summation to make generic arguments 
regarding credibility based solely upon the status of a 
defendant. (Citing State v. Basham , 132 Hawai ‘i 97,
 319 P.3d 1105 
(2014)).  The ICA found that the DPA in this case did not 
violate the  holding in Basham because the DPA “did not make a 
generic tailoring argument” and the comments were harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt because the DPA also described how the 
evidence adduced at trial made the CW’s testimony more credible 
than that of Salavea.   
  Lastly , the ICA addressed Salavea’s contention that 
the DPA committed misconduct by accusing defense counsel of 
improperly influencing the jury during closing argument.  The ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  21 
 ICA concluded that the DPA was merely remind ing the jury about 
the court’s instruction that it should not al low pity for the 
defendant or prejudice against the defendant to influence its 
determination in response to what could reasonably have been 
interpreted as defense counsel’s attempt to have the jury take 
pity on Salavea.  Thus, the ICA held that the DPA’s comments 
about defense counsel’s conduct were proper.10 
  
The ICA accordingly affirmed the circuit court ’s 
judgment. 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
  When a defendant first raises the issue of ineffective 
assistance of counsel on direct appeal, the appellate court may 
consider the merits of the appeal de novo if the record is 
“sufficiently developed to determine whether there has been 
ineffective assistance of counsel[.]”  State v. Silva , 75 Haw. 
419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592 (1993).  
B. Prosecutorial Misconduct 
  A defendant’s contention on direct appeal that 
prosecutorial misconduct resulted in the denial of the 
defendant’s right to a fair trial is a question of 
                     
 10 The ICA also considered and rejected Salavea’s contention that 
the evidence adduced at trial was insufficient to support her conviction.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  22 
 constitutional law, which we review de novo.  State v. 
Underwood, 142 Hawai ‘i 317, 325, 418 P.3d 658, 666 (2018). 
C. Sufficiency of the Evidence 
  In reviewing a challenge to the sufficiency of the 
evidence, evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered 
in the strongest light for the prosecution.  State v. Kalaola, 
124 Hawai ‘i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010).  “The test on 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable 
doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact.”  Id. (quoting State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai‘ i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227 , 1241 (1997)).  
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Assistance of Salavea’s Trial Counsel Was Ineffective.  
 
 Article I, section 14 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution and 
the Sixth Amendment to  the United States Constitution provide 
defendants in a criminal proceeding with the right to the 
effective assistance of counsel at every critical stage of the 
prosecution.  State v. Pitts, 131 Hawai‘i 537, 541, 319 P.3d 456, 
460 (2014).  Violation of an accused ’s constitutional right to 
effective assistance of counsel warrants the irrebuttable 
presumption of prejudice.  State v. Antone , 62 Haw. 346, 349, 
615 P.2d 101, 10 5 (1980).  A conviction will be vacated, 
therefore, if the defendant was denied effective assistance of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  23 
 counsel at trial.  State v. Aplaca , 74 Haw. 54, 73, 837 P.2d 
1298, 1308 (1992).   
  The standard for determining the adequacy of counsel ’s 
representation is whether, when viewed as a whole, the 
assistance provided is “within the range of competence demanded 
of attorneys in criminal cases .”  State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai ‘i 
390, 405, 56 P.3d 692, 707 (2002).  First, a defendant must show 
that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting 
counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or diligence.  Antone, 62 
Haw. at 348, 615 P.2d at 104.  Second, the defendant must 
establish that these errors or omissions resulted in either the 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  Id . at 348-49, 615 P.2d at 104 ; State v. 
DeLeon, 131 Hawai‘ i 463, 478- 79, 319 P.3d 382, 397-98  (2014).   
  The second prong of this test is satisfied if the 
defendant shows a possible impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  DeLeon , 131 Hawai ‘i at 479, 3
19 P.3d at 
398.  The defendant does not need to show the impairment was 
probable nor prove that the defendant suffered actual prejudice.  
Id.; Briones v. State,  74 Haw. 442, 465, 848 P.2d 966, 977 
(1993).  Specific actions or omissions that are alleged to be 
erroneous but that had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting 
the defendant’s case will not be subject to further scr utiny.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  24 
 State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai‘ i 83, 93, 26 P.3d 572, 582 (2001) .11  
If, however, the alleged error or omission had no obvious basis 
for benefitting the case and resulted in the withdrawal or 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense, then the 
assistance of defendant’s counsel was constitutionally 
inadequate.  State v. Smith, 68 Haw. 304, 309- 11, 712 P.2d 496, 
500-01 (1986). 
  Salavea alleges that the assistance of her appointed 
trial counsel was ineffective because counsel failed to adduce 
evidence of the CW’s drug use at the time of the alleged crime.  
Before trial, Salavea’s counsel had filed a notice of i ntent 
stating that the defense would adduce evidence at trial that the 
CW was in the process of using methamphetamine at the time of 
the alleged offense.  Salavea’s Notice indicated that the CW’s 
drug use was relevant because it undermined the reliability of 
her perception and memory of the event.  Additionally, at the 
pretrial hearing held on the day trial commenced, defense 
counsel indicated an intention to adduce evidence of the CW’s 
drug use at the time of the incident.
   
                     
 11 It is noted, however, that where “ trial counsel makes a critical 
tactical decision which would not be made by diligent, ordinarily prudent 
lawyers in criminal cases, the right to effective assistance of counsel m ay 
be denied.”  Antone, 62 Haw. at 352, 615 P.2d at 106.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  25 
   At trial, during her direct examination, Salavea 
testified to her account of what transpired at the CW’s 
residence on the day of the incident.  As she finished 
explaining what occurred in the CW’s apartment, defense counsel 
asked Salavea whet her “anything else occurr[ed] before you 
left?”  Salavea responded that “she told me not to take her bag 
‘cause she was going to use it, so I told her that I wanted to 
use it and she can come to my house and get it when she’s not 
out of it.”  (Emphasis add ed.)  Defense counsel then asked 
Salavea “did she seem alert on that occasion when you said ‘when 
she’s not out of it?’”  
  This question drew an objection from the DPA, who 
stated the objection was based on hearsay and was directed to 
both the question and Salavea’s last answer.  The court 
sustained the State’s objection and struck everything after “she 
told me” in Salavea’s previous answer.12  Defense counsel did not 
repeat the question about whether the CW seemed alert on that 
occasion or ask Salavea to ex plain what she meant by “when she’s 
not out of it,” nor did counsel make any other attempts to 
                     
 12 The full stricken statement was as follows: “Well, she told me 
not to take her bag ‘cause she was going to use it, so I told her that I 
wanted to use it and she can come to my house and get it wh en she’s not out 
of it.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  26  
(continued. . .)  
 elicit evidence that the CW was using or under the influence of 
methamphetamine at the time of the incident.   
  It is clear that defense counsel was pursuing 
elicitation of the CW’s use of methamphetamine during the 
incident but appears to have been confounded by the State’s 
hearsay objection.  Defense counsel did not then rephrase the  
question in a way that would not elicit hearsay and entirely 
dropped this line of inquiry.  The evidence of the CW’s use of 
methamphetamine at the time of the incident
, however,  clearly 
could have been elicited without the use of hearsay by simply 
asking Salavea to state  what she saw in the immediate area of 
the CW, to describe the CW’s appearance  and physical actions, 
and to recount whether the CW was able to converse or think 
coherently.  None of these questions were asked.  The ability to 
ask basic questions of this nature is obviously “within the 
range of competence demanded of a ttorneys in criminal cases.”13  
Cordeiro, 99 Hawai ‘i at 405, 56 P.3d at 707.  
                     
 13 We also note that although the court sustained the DPA’s 
objection on the basis of hearsay, the statements made by the CW and Salavea 
regarding the taking of the bag were not hearsay because they had independent 
legal significance.  State v. Villena, 140 Hawai ‘i 370, 378,  400 P.3d 571, 579 
(2017) (“It is well- settled that statements of independent legal significance 
are not hearsay.”).  The statements were directly relevant to whether Salavea 
believed that she had permission to take the bag, and therefore they had 
legal significance independent from the truth of the matter asserted.  See 
Island Directory Co. v. Iva’s Kinimaka Enters. , Inc., 10 Haw. App. 15, 21 -22, 
859 P.2d 935, 939 (1993) (holding that statements that constitute the offer, 
acceptance, or terms of a contract are not hearsay because the making of such ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  27  
(continued. . .)  
   In its review of Salavea’s contention that h er counsel 
provided ineffective assistance, the ICA concluded that defense 
counsel made a strategic decision not to inquire about the CW’s 
drug use at the time of the incident to avoid opening the door 
to evidence of Salavea’s past drug use.   The dissent similarly 
concludes that evidence of the CW’s drug use at the time of the 
incident would have opened the door to Salavea’s history of d rug 
use.  Dissent at 26.  The “opening the door” doctrine , which has 
never been adopted in this jurisdiction, provides that when one 
party introduces inadmissible evidence, the opposing party may 
respond by introducing inadmissible evidence on the same issue.   
State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai ‘i 409, 422- 24, 453 P.3d 229, 242-44  
(2019).  Here, the circuit court had ruled that evidence of drug 
use at the time of the incident, by either party, was 
admissible.  Thus, evidence of drug use at the time of the 
incident could not have opened the door to evidence of either 
party’s history of drug use.14  See State v. Fukusaku , 85 Hawai‘i 
                                                                               
(. . .continued)  
 
statements are in themselves relevant).  Counsel’s failure to appropriat ely 
respond to the DPA’s objection regarding this critical verbal exchange 
between the CW and Salavea further demonstrates that the legal assistance 
provided by defense counsel was not within the range of competence required 
of attorneys in criminal cases.   
 
 14 Because evidence of drug use at the time of the incident was 
admissible, like the evidence discussed in Lavoie  and Fukusaku, the “opening 
the door” doctrine was never applicable to this case.  Accordingly, for the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  28 
 462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 ( 1997) (“[E]ven if we were to adopt 
the doctrine of curative admissibility, it would not be 
applicable to the present case. ”).  As the State maintained at 
the pretrial hearing, “whether [the CW] was using drugs at the 
time of the incident [is] a separate issue” from the CW’s and 
Salavea’s past drug use .15 
  The dissent also theorizes that counsel made a 
tactical decision to terminate the inquiry into the CW’s drug 
use at the time of the incident because counsel determined that 
the evidence had “negligible value” and was “not worth the 
risk.”  Dissent at 2 7.  This is refuted by Salavea’s  Notice, 
defense counsel’s representation on the day of trial that 
counsel would adduce the evidence of drug use at the time of the 
incident, counsel’s actual attempt to adduce the evidence that 
drew the State’s hearsay objection, and the universal 
recognition of the importance of such evidence.  See Addison M. 
                                                                               
(. . .continued)  
 
same reasons stated in Lavoie, this case does not require us to consider 
whether the doctrine should be adopted in this jurisdiction.  Lavoie, 145 
Hawai‘i at 424 n. 29, 453 P.3d at 244 n.29.  
 15 The dissent describes the State’s Notice as being a response to 
Salavea’s Notice, implying the notices were filed contemporaneously.  Dissent 
at 25 (“When Salavea noticed her intention . . . the State filed a 
Notice[.]”).  Salavea’s Notice was filed on June 22, 2015, and the State’s 
Notice was filed over four months later on November 13, 2015.  Indeed, the 
DPA stated that the issue of drug use at the time of the incident was “a 
separate issue” from the evidence identified in the State’s Notice and 
represented to the court that drug use at the time of the incident was not 
the subject of the State’s Noti ce.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  29 
 Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 611-2[4][B], at 6-75 
(2018-2019 ed.)  (“Ability to perceive and remember a relevant 
event are the ingredients of a witness’ personal knowledge, 
which is the basic condition of testimonial competency. ”).  
Indeed, Salavea’s prior counsel , the Office of the Public 
Defender, considered the CW’s substance abuse so significant to 
Salavea’s defense that counsel’s declaration to the court stated 
that counsel was ethically obligated to raise the evidence 
during the trial.  This  ethical obligation required the public 
defender’s office to withdraw as Salavea’s counsel because of 
its ongoing representation of the CW in another matter.  
  Moreover, Salavea was entitled to cross- examine the CW 
as to her use of drugs at or near the time of the incident to 
the extent that it affected her ability to accurately perce ive 
or recall what had occurred .  State v. Calara, 132 Haw
ai‘i 391, 
402, 322 P.3d 931, 942 (2014) (“[A] defendant is entitled to 
cross-examine a wi tness concerning the witness’s drug use and 
addiction at or near the time of the incident to the extent that 
it affected [the witness ’s] perception or recollection of the 
alleged event[. ]” (second alteration in original) (internal 
quotation mark s omitted)); State v. Sabog, 108 Hawai‘i 102, 111, 
117 P.3d 834, 843 (App. 2005 ) (“For purposes of discrediting a 
witness, drug-use evidence is admissible to the extent it shows ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  30  
(continued. . .)  
 the witness was under the influence of drugs at the time of the 
occurrence as to which the witness testifies[ .]” (quoting State 
v. Osby, 793 P.2d 243, 247 (Kan. 1990))).   
  The dissent further argues that defense counsel made a 
tactical decision to terminate the inquiry because counsel was 
unable to complete it without eliciting testimony about prior 
drug use.  Dissent at 27 -28.  This inability is precisely what 
illustrates the ineffectiveness of Salavea’s trial counsel.  As 
with the elicited “hearsay,” counsel could have asked s imple 
questions about what Salavea observed in the CW’s immediate 
area, the CW’s appearance and physical actions, and whether the 
CW was able to converse or think coherently.  Such testimony 
would not have opened the door to Salavea’s prior drug use.   It 
is self-evident that the ability to ask basic questions of this 
nature is “within the range of competence demanded of attorneys 
in criminal cases.”  Cordeiro , 99 Hawai ‘i at 405, 56 P.3d at 707.  
Thus, contrary to the conclusions  of the ICA and the dissent, 
counsel’s failure to adduce the evidence of drug use was not a 
strategic decision because it did not have any  tactical basis 
for benefitting Salavea’s case.16  Smith, 68 Haw. at 309-11, 712 
                     
 16 The dissent makes the strained and incongruous contention that 
defense counsel’s failure to adduce evidence of drug use at the time of the 
incident in fact benefitted Salavea’s defense because Salavea’s testimony 
would have been “in complete contr adiction to the testimony of several ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  31 
 P.2d at 500-01 (concluding that defense counsel ’s questioning 
did not have an obvious ba sis for benefitting the defendant’s 
case).   
  In order for the assistance of counsel to be 
constitutionally inadequate, the omission or error must result 
in the substantial impairment or withdrawal of a potentially 
meritorious defense.  Aplaca, 74 Haw. at 67, 837 P.2d at  1305.  
In Aplaca, we  considered whether defense counsel’s failure to 
investigate potential witnesses was an omission that reflected 
counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or diligence  and whether the 
omission substantially impaired a potentially meritorious 
defense.  Id.  at 66-68, 837 P.2d at 1305- 06.  In concluding that 
counsel’s omission did  have this result, we highlighted the fact 
that the outcome of the case depended on the credibility of the 
defendant and the complaining witness.  Id.  at 72, 837 P.2d at 
                                                                               
(. . .continued)  
 
witnesses.”  Dissent at 26.  The dissent points to the CW’s mother’s 
statement that the CW was “speak[ing] okay” when she returned to the 
apartment and Pavao’s statement that the CW “looked normal” when the CW 
reported the incident around 7:00 p.m. that evening.  Dissent at 2 6-27.  
Apparently, according to the dissent, a single statement that someone is 
“speaking okay” refutes methamphetamine use or being under its influence 
during the incident, as does Pavao’s observation that the CW “looked normal” 
several hours later.  The dissent’s pure speculation provides no basis to 
conclude that defense counsel’s failure to adduce this evidence provided any 
tactical benefit to the defense, let alone a benefit that is so obvious that 
it precludes our review of this alleged error, which is what our law 
requires.  Briones, 74 Haw. at 462 -63, 848 P.2d at 976 (“[A]ctions or 
omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis  for 
benefitting the defendant’s case will not be subject to further scrutiny.” 
(emphasis added and omitted)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  32 
 1308.  We noted that “if trial counsel had reviewed the 
subpoenaed materials and interview
ed witnesses . . . he could 
have produced testimony that would have indicated that [the 
complaining witness] was not a truthful person.”  Id. at 73, 837 
P.2d at 1308.  Although the exact effect of the prospective 
witnesses 
on the trial court’s assessment of the complaining 
witness and the defendant’s credibility could not be predicted, 
this court stated 
in its decision that “we firmly believe that 
such testimony could have had a direct bearing on the ultimate 
outcome of the case. ”  Id.  The Aplaca court thus concluded that 
trial counsel’s error resulted in the substantial impairment of 
a potentially meritorious defense and the denial of the 
defendant’s right to the effective assistance of counsel.17  Id.; 
accord State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 442- 43, 864 P.2d 583, 594 
(1993) (holding that the failure to subpoena a witness that 
“could have significantly bolstered Silva ’s version of the 
incident” resulted in substantial impairment of defense) ; State 
v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai‘ i 504, 517, 78 P.3d 317, 330 (2003) 
                     
 17 The dissent argues that the holding in Aplaca is inapposite 
because other evidence adduced at trial corroborated components of the C W’s 
testimony.  Dissent at 30 -31.  However, none of the  other evidence went to 
the critical issues in this case: what transpired in the apartment and 
Salavea’s subjective intent with regard to the backpack.  Indeed, the dissent 
acknowledges that the primary issue was “Salavea’s own subjective intent.”  
Dissent at 29-30.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  33 
 (determining that defense counsel ’s line of questioning would 
not have benefitted the defense and that it reflected a lack of 
skill or judgment).   
  I n this case, Salavea’s defense depended on the 
credibility of Salavea and the CW.  Only Salavea and the CW 
testified to what occurred in the CW’s apartment.  The testimony 
of the other witnesses called by the State was primarily used to 
corroborate other aspects of the CW’s testimony.  Additionally, 
defense counsel’s error was a failure to adduce evidence that 
the CW was using methamphetamine at the time when the offense 
allegedly occurred, which  certainly may  have significantly 
affected the reliability of the CW’s account.   Calara, 132 
Hawai‘i at 402, 322 P.3d at  942 (holding that drug use and 
addiction at or near the time of the incident is admissible to 
impeach the witness’s perception or recollection of events); see 
also Sabog , 108 Hawai ‘i at 111, 117 P.3d at  843. 
  The dissent contends that  the CW’s credibility was  
immaterial to the jury’s verdict  because Salavea’s  own evidence 
“incriminated her.”   Dissent at 3 1.  This is incorrect.  Salavea 
testified that she only intended to borrow the CW’s property, 
and although she knew the CW had told her not to take the 
backpack, she believed that it was permissible for her to borrow ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  34 
 it because this type of borrowing was within the norms of their 
friendship.   
  I n support of the assertion that the CW’s testimony 
was immaterial to the jury’s determination, the dissent 
misconstrues Salavea’s testimony at trial to reach the 
conclusion that Salavea effectively confessed to the crime on 
the stand.  Dissent at 29.  The dissent cites the exchange 
during Salavea’s cross -examination in which the prosecutor 
questioned Salavea about her intent to return the bag.  Dissent 
at 29 n.7.  During that exchange, the DPA asked  Salavea about 
her statement that the CW had told her not to take the bag, and 
Salavea explained that they were mutual friends and had 
exchanged items in the past.  The DPA asked Salavea whether she 
thought it was okay to take the bag, even though the CW had told 
her not to, because Salavea had taken items from the CW without 
permission in the past.18  Salavea responded that the CW was 
there at her apartment when she borrowed the bag,  clearly 
implying that the CW would have spoken up if Salavea’s borrowing 
of the backpack were not permitted.  The DPA then asked Salavea 
whether it was okay to take the bag without permission, and 
                     
 18 The DPA’s question misstated Salavea’s prior testimony.  Salavea 
had testified on direct examination that she had once borrowed a backpack 
from the CW’s residence after she called the CW and received permission.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  35 
 Salavea acknowledged that it was not okay to take the bag after 
the CW told her that she wanted to use it.  The DPA asked 
Salavea, “ So it was a theft? ” and Salavea said, “Yeah.”   
  Salavea’s agreement  on cross- examination with the 
prosecutor’s formulation of “theft” is plainly not a confession 
to the felony offense of burglary in the first degree or the 
crime of theft.  Salavea’s acknowledgement during cross -
examination that it was wrong to ta ke the CW’s backpack without 
express permission is consistent with her testimony that she 
believed it was permissible at the time of the incident.19  
Moreover, the dissent’s contention disregards Salavea’s 
testimony that she intended only to borrow the bag.   See State 
v. Kahinu, 53 Haw. 646, 648, 500 P.2d 747, 750 (1972) (vacating 
the defendant’s burglary conviction because the evidence did not 
establish “the requisite element of intent to commit larceny or 
any felony” as a matter of law  (emphasis added)).   
  Salavea and the CW had been close friends for six 
years to the extent the CW was the godmother to one of Salavea’s 
                     
 19 The dissent’s conclusion that the CW’s testimony was immaterial 
relies on the assertion that Salavea testified that she knew “on the day of 
the incident” that it was wrong to take the bag and that it “am ounted to 
theft.”  Dissent at 29 .  As discussed, in light of the entirety of Salavea’s 
testimony, the jury could have found that a reasonable doubt existed as to 
whether Salavea had the subjective intent to steal the CW’s property at the 
time it was taken, despite Salavea’s response to the DPA’s formulation.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  36 
 children and she had been the maid of honor at Salavea’s 
wedding.  Both the CW and Salavea testified that they 
occasionally exchanged items or borrowed from one another.  
Salavea’s adoption of the DPA’s formulation of “theft” did not 
prevent the jury from concluding that there was reasonable doubt 
as to whether Salavea subjectively intended to steal the CW’s 
property, even though she admitted that she took the backpack 
without express permission.20  There was substantial evidence 
before the jury about the nature of their relationship and their 
history of exchanging personal possessions.  The evidence before 
the jury permitted the inference that Salavea did not intend to 
steal the backpack at the time she took it and that she intended 
to return it.  The dissent’s assertion that Salavea’s own 
testimony incriminated her to such a degree that the 
CW’s 
                     
 20 The dissent’s contention demonstrates why attorneys are 
prohibited from eliciting legal conclusions from witnesses.  See  Samson v. 
Nahulu, 136 Hawai‘ i 415, 429, 363 P.3d 263, 277 (2015) (citing HRE Rule 704 
and stating that a witness may not give opinions on questions of law as that 
would amount to legal conclusions).  It is incorrect for the dissent to 
assert that Salavea admitted that she had the subjective intent requisite to 
theft, a legal conclusion, solely because Salavea, a layperson, accepted the 
DPA’s assertion that taking property without express permission is “theft.”  
Dissent at 43.  Salavea’s acceptance of the DPA’s proffered definition of 
“theft” was not an admission that she had the subjective intent requisite to 
the actual crime of theft.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  37 
 testimony was immaterial to the jury’s determination is without 
merit.21 
  Unquestionably, the most critical evidence in this 
case contradicting Salavea’s account of the incident was the 
testimony of the CW.  If defense counsel had adduced evidence 
that caused the jury doubt or hesitancy regarding the CW’s 
perception or recollection of the incident, the jury may have 
discredited the CW’s account.  This evidence went to the heart 
of Salavea’s defense, which turned on the credibility of the 
CW’s or Salavea’s version of the events.   Ultimately, as in 
Aplaca, “the outcome of the case depended on the credibility” of 
the CW and Salavea.  74 Haw . at 72, 8 37 P.2d at 1308; accord  
Silva, 75 Haw. at 442-43, 864 P.2d at 594.   
  Because the CW’s testimony was critical to the State’s 
case, we are left with the firm belief that the failure of 
Salavea’s counsel to elicit testimony that 
the CW was using or 
under the influence of methamphetamine at the time of the 
alleged offense resulted in the possible impairment or 
withdrawal of a potentially meritorious defense
.  Wakisaka, 102 
Hawai‘i at 516, 78 P.3d at  329 (“[Defendant] need only show a 
possible impairment of a potentially meritorious defense, not 
                     
 21 It is also noted that the State’s closing argument focused on the 
credibility of the competing narratives of the incident, and the DPA 
repeatedly argued that the CW’s testimony was more credible than Salavea’s.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  38 
 probable impairment or actual prejudice.”).   Defense counsel’s 
failure to adduce the evidence of the CW’s drug use at the time 
of the incident did not have an obvious tactical basis for 
benefitting Salavea’s case .  This error demonstra ted counsel’s 
lack of skill and judgment,  and it resulted in the possible 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.   Counsel’s  
representation, when viewed as a whole, was not within the range 
of competence “demanded of attorneys in criminal cases,” and 
thus Salavea was denied her right to the effective assistance of 
counsel.22  Cordeiro, 99 Hawai‘i at 405, 56 P.3d at 707.   
                     
 22 The dissent appears to contend that a single “failure to adduce 
testimony at trial” can never render counsel’s assistance ineffective.  
Dissent at 37.  The relevant inquiry is not the number of errors defense 
counsel makes, but whether counsel’s error possibly impaired a potentially 
meritorious defense.  This court held in Aplaca  that counsel’s failure to 
investigate potential witnesses and review discovery materials prevented 
relevant impeachment testimony from being adduced at trial, which possibly 
impaired a potentially meritorious defense, and we therefore concluded that 
counsel’s assistance was ineffective.  74 Haw. at 72 -73, 837 P.2d at 1307 -08.  
This court further held that defense counsel made an error that reflected 
counsel’s lack of skill and judgment specifically because of a failure to 
overcome an objection to testimony at trial.  Id.  at 71-72, 837 P.2d at 1307 
(“[W]hen Aplaca’s trial counsel called Captain Watkins as a witness, the 
State objected and requested an offer of proof.  Trial counsel’s failure to 
make an offer of proof further demonstrated his lack of skill and judgment .” 
(emphasis added)). 
  Here, defense counsel’s failure to adduce the evidence impeaching 
the CW’s credibility had no tactical basis for benefitting Salavea’s defense, 
let alone an obvious one.  Just as the defense attorney’s failure in Aplaca 
to make an offer of proof had no tactical basis, here defense counsel’s 
failure to overcome the hearsay objection was obviously not a tactical 
decision, it provided no tactical benefit to Salavea’s defense, and it 
possibly impaired a potentially meritorious defense.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  39 
 B. Salavea’s Allegations of Prosecutorial Misconduct.  
  Salavea also contends that the prosecutor made 
multiple statements during closing argument that constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct.  None of these statements were 
objected to by the defense, although the circuit court sua 
sponte interjected in several instances.  In State v. Smith, 
after concluding that there were errors reflecting defense 
counsel’s lack of skill or judgment and that the errors 
substantially impaired a potential meritorious defense, we 
stated “there [was] more in the record to support the  claim that 
counsel’s performance at trial was not within the range of 
competence expected of Hawaii lawyers in criminal cases.”  68 
Haw. at 312-13, 712 P.2d at 502.  Similarly, our review in this 
case of the contentions of prosecutorial misconduct, which were 
not subject to objection, bolsters the conclusion
 that the 
assistance provided by Salavea’s trial counsel, when viewed as a 
whole, was not within the range of competence demanded of 
attorneys in criminal cases.  Cordeiro, 99 Hawai ‘i 
at 405, 56 
P.3d at 707.   Additionally, we consider the assertions of 
prosecutorial misconduct to address the ICA’s interpretation of 
applicable precedent and to provide guidance in the event these 
matters arise during subsequent proceedings.  State v. Basham, 
132 Hawai‘ i 97, 112, 319 P.3d 1105, 1120 (2014) (“In order to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  40 
 provide guidance to the circuit court and the parties on remand, 
we address Basham’ s remaining claims of prosecutorial 
misconduct.”); Wakisaka, 102 Hawai‘ i at 518, 78 P.3d at 331 
(“Although the [determination of prosecutorial misconduct and 
ineffective assistance of counsel] are dispositive of this case, 
we address the court’ s exclusion of much of [the expert’s] 
proffered testimony in order to provide some guidance on 
retrial.”).   
  When reviewing allegations of prosecutorial 
misconduct, the following factors are considered: (1) the nature 
of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; 
and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the 
defendant.  State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai ‘i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 
1238 (1999).  Salavea submits that there are four separate bases 
to conclude that the State committed prosecutorial misconduct 
during closing argument.  
 
1. Expression of Personal Opinion 
 
 Salavea contends that the prosecuting attorney 
improperly offered a personal opinion that the CW was a credible 
witness and that Salavea was not credible.  During closing 
argument, a prosecutor is permitted to draw reasonable 
inferences from the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in 
discussing the evidence.  State v. Underwood, 142 Hawai ‘i 317, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  41 
 326, 418 P.3d 658, 667 (2018).  But it is  “well-established 
under Hawai‘ i
 case law that prosecutors are bound to refrain from 
expressing their p ersonal views as to a defendant’ s guilt or the 
credibility of witnesses. ”  Basham, 132 Hawai‘i at 115, 319 P.3d 
at 1123 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Cordeiro, 
99 Hawai‘ i at 424-25, 56 P.3d at 726-27; State v. Clark, 83 
Hawai‘i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 ( 1996); State v. Marsh, 68 
Haw. 659, 60-61, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 ( 1986).  Prosecutors may, 
however, cite to specific facts or evidence indicating the lack 
of trustworthiness of the witness or defendant when discussing a 
witness or defendant’s testimony during summation .  State v. 
Walsh, 125 Hawai‘ i 271, 295, 260 P.3d 350, 374 (2011)  (stating  
that the “prosecution is free to  refer to the specific 
inconsistencies and contradictions in a defendant’s testimony or 
with other evidence”) .  A statement about a witness’s 
credibility that is made without reference to the evidence or 
facts supporting the assertion amounts to an expression of 
personal opinion.23  Basham, 132 Hawai ‘i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126 
(noting that the prosecutor’s argument that the defendant had 
                     
 23 It is noted, however, that a statement may improperly imply a 
personal opinion or special knowledge even if specific facts or evidence are 
invoked.  See Am. Bar Ass ’n, Criminal Justice Standards for the Prosecution 
Function,  Standard 3- 6.8(b) (4th ed. 2017) (“The prosecutor should not argue 
in terms of counsel’s personal opinion, and should not imply special or 
secret knowledge of the truth or of witness credibility.”).  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  42 
 “no reason to tell you the truth”  was improper because it was 
not based on the evidence or a reasonable inference drawn from 
the evidence).  
  
This principle is based on the rationale that 
expressions of personal opinion by the prosecutor are a form of 
unsworn, unchecked testimony and tend to exploit the influence 
of the prosecutor’s office and undermine the objective 
detachment that should separate an attorney from the cause being 
argued.  Basham, 132 Hawai ‘i at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123.  Further, 
a personal opinion as to the veracity of a w itness’s testimony 
impermissibly usurps the jury’s role as the assessor of witness 
credibility.  State v. Austin, 143 Hawai ‘i 18, 52, 422 P.3d 18, 
52 (2018).  Conclusory opinions regarding a witness’s 
credibility are inadmissible because the jury is fully capable 
of making the connections to the facts of the particular case 
before them and drawing inferences and conclusions therefrom.  
Id.   
  Salavea identifies the following statements as 
improper expressions of personal opinion as to the credibility 
of the CW:  
1) “[The CW] told you the truth.”  
2) “[The CW]’s testimony was credible.”  
3) “[The CW] told you and she was very frank with 
you[.]” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  43 
 4) “[The CW] was very forthright, she was very 
forthright about how she felt.  And she also told you 
frankly that they were clo se friends.” 
5) “She was also very frank and forthright how she 
described what happened to her when she discovered 
things were missing.”  
6) “[The CW] told you the truth.”   
Additionally, Salavea contends that statements such as the 
following were improper expressions of personal opinion as to 
Salavea’s credibility:  
1) “Defendant’s story that she had permission to go in 
and she had somehow thought it was okay and that [the 
CW] cooperated with her and [the CW] let her do all 
of that is not credible.  It’s not credible, it’s a 
lie because it doesn’t make any sense.” 
2) “[T]he whole story by Defendant that the fob was lost 
by [the CW] on March 6th does not hold, does not hold 
up.  That’s a lie, and from there, it follows that 
she was concealing the fob, she was deliberately 
holding on to that fob secretly so she could go in 
her own time at her own convenience and take from 
[the CW].”  
3) “The records show that [the CW] got her replacement 
fob on June 27th.  That directly contradicts 
Defendant’s story that [the CW] lost it in the car, 
and from there, everything crumbles, everything the 
Defendant tells you is not true .” 
4) “It’s a Burglary in the First Degree because 
Defendant, by lying  about how  the fob situation went 
up . . . went there specifically with an intent to 
commit the crime[.]”  
5) “Cari Salavea is not a truthful witness .”  
(Emphases added.) 
  Our review of the DPA’s closing argument discloses 
that at least two of these statements bolstere d the CW’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  44 
 credibility without any reference to the evidence supporting the 
assertion.24  Similarly, the DPA attacked Salavea’s credibility 
at least twice without prior reference to the evidence.25  The 
DPA also repeatedly asserted that Salavea had lied, a statement 
this court has found to be such a strong expression that it 
necessarily reflects the personal opinion of the speaker.  
Austin, 143 Hawai‘ i at 56, 422 P.3d at 56; see also Basham, 132 
Hawai‘i at 113, 319 P.3d at 1121 (citing Domingo -Gomez v. People, 
125 P.3d 1043, 1050 (Colo. 2005)).  These assertions about the 
credibility of Salavea and the CW were not directly linked to 
                     
 24 The first two statements, in which the DPA stated that the CW 
told the truth and her testimony was credible, were made at the beginning of 
closing argument before the DPA referenced any of the evidence adduced at 
trial.  Similarly, near the end of rebuttal, the DPA again asserted that the 
CW told the jury the truth without reference to the evidence.  This caused 
the court, for the fourth time, to sua sponte interject, “Well, the State 
submits.”  The prosecutor then revised the statement: “The State submits she 
told you the truth.”  The court then struck the statement and instructed the 
jury to disregard it.  These statements were clear expressions of the DPA’s 
personal opinion because they did not reference the evidence supporting the 
assertion.  We do not address the propriety of the other statements Salavea 
identifies.  The dissent does not contest that the DPA failed to reference 
the evidence supporting these assertions but argues nonetheless that they 
were appropriate because they were “rooted in the context of evidence.”  
Dissent at 43.  This explanation does not address the underlying  misconduct 
of the DPA expressing an improper personal opinion.  Basham, 132 Hawai‘i at 
115-16, 319 P.3d at 1123 -24. 
 
 25 The first statement that Salavea’s version of the events was not 
credible and was a lie was made prior to any reference to the evidence from 
which this inference could be drawn.  Likewise in the fourth statement, the 
DPA asserted that Salavea had lied abou t how she got the CW’s fob before 
referencing the relevant evidence.  In total, the DPA, without objection, 
stated Salavea lied or was lying three times during closing argument.  As 
with the statements regarding the CW, the DPA’s statements about Salavea’s  
credibility that were made without reference to the evidence amounted to 
expressions of the DPA’s personal opinion.  We do not consider whether the 
DPA’s other assertions about Salavea’s credibility were appropriate.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  45 
 the evidence and therefore amounted to expressions of personal 
opinion.26  Basham, 132 Hawai‘i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126; Walsh, 
125 Hawai‘ i at 295, 260 P.3d at 374 .   
  With respect to the DPA’s use of the word “lie” during 
closing argument, the ICA observed this court’s proscription in 
Austin of the use of the term “lie” and its derivatives during 
closing argument created a new rule that applied only on a 
prospective basis.  And therefore, the ICA concluded that it was 
not misconduct for the DPA to use the term “lie” at the time of 
Salavea’s trial.  The dissent also appears to conclude that the 
DPA could not have committed misconduct by asserting that 
Salavea lied because Salavea’s trial took place before our 
decision in Austin.  Dissent at 42.  
While it is correct that 
our proscription of the word “lie” was prospective, it does not 
follow that it was appropriate to use the word “lie” at the time 
of Austin or Salavea’s trial.  Indeed, in Austin, this court 
found that the prosecutor’s use of the term “lie” during 
Austin’s trial was improper under applicable precedent.  Austin, 
143 Hawai ‘i at 51, 422 P.3d at 51 (citing Basham , 132 Hawai‘i at 
113, 319 P.3d at 1121; State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai ‘i 83, 95, 26 
P.3d 572, 584 (2001)) . 
                     
 26 The impropriety of the DPA’s sta tements is underscored by the 
circuit court’s multiple interjections during the DPA’s closing argument.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  46 
   Further, this court recognized that such assertions 
could amount to an expression of a prosecutor’s personal opinion 
long before we proscribed the use of the word “lie” during 
closing argument.  Marsh , 68 Haw. at 660-61, 728 P.2d at 1302-
03.  In Marsh , this court held that the prosecutor committed 
misconduct (1) by making the following assertions about the 
defendant’s testimony : “Use your common sense, ladies and 
gentlemen.  That is not true.  It’s another lie.  It’s a lie, 
ladies and gentlemen, an out -and-out lie”; and (2) by arguing as 
to the alibi witnesses ’ credibility : “You should entirely 
disregard their testimony because, if you will remember, every 
one of them lied on the stand[ .]”  Id. at 660, 728 P.2d at 1302 .  
Although there was no objection to these assertions, the Marsh  
court, in light of these and similar statements, noticed plain 
error and vacated the conviction.  Id. 
  In this case,  the manner in which the DPA used the 
word “lie” implicitly expressed a personal opinion as to the 
veracity of Salavea’s testimony , which has always been improper.  
Id. at 660-61, 728 P.2d at 1302-03.  The mere fact that the DPA 
was not prohibited from using the term “lie” during closing 
argument does not mean that misconduct was not committed.  The 
underlying impropriety of expressing a belief that a witness has 
lied clearly predates our decision in Austin .  See Basham, 132 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  47 
 Hawai‘i at 113, 319 P.3d at  1121; Clark, 83 Hawai‘i at 304, 926 
P.2d at 209; Marsh, 68 Haw. at  660-61, 728 P.2d at 1302-03.  
Thus, the ICA erred in concluding that it was not misconduct for 
the DPA to use the term “lie” during closing argument at the 
time of trial in this case, and the dissent similarly errs in 
reaching the same conclusion
.  Austin, 143 Hawai‘i at 51, 422 
P.3d at 5 1; Basham, 132 Hawai‘ i at 113, 319 P.3d at 1121.    
  The ICA also concluded that the circuit court “gave 
numerous prompt curative instructions (‘the State submits’).”  
First, only some of the improper statements received an 
interjection from the court.  Second, the mere statement by the 
court that “the State  submits,” and then the DPA repeating that 
phrase as a preface is insufficient to rectify the improper 
credibility opinion as  the jury is not informed that the initial 
statement is improper or that it should be disregarded.  Cf.  
State v. Souza, 142 Hawai ‘i 390, 403 –04, 420 P.3d 321, 334 –35 
(2018) (“A jury instruction must be specific to the harm 
resulting from the error to function as a curative, and a 
general, boilerplate instruction will not serve to eliminate the 
prejudice.” (citing Basham, 132 Hawai‘i at 111, 319 P.3d at  
1119)); State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai‘i 127, 143, 176 P.3d 885, 
901 (2008) ( stating that while the court did properly instruct 
the jury on the elements of the defense, the instruction could ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  48 
 not cure the prosecutor’s misstatement  of the l aw “where no 
specific curative instruction relating to the misstatements was 
given”).  Here, the only satisfactory curative instruction given 
during closing argument was the single instance that the court 
told the jury to disregard the DPA’s stricken state ment that the 
CW told the jury the truth.  Thus, the ICA incorrectly concluded 
that numerous, prompt curative instructions remedied the DPA’s 
improper statements.  The dissent’s conclusion is flawed for the 
same reasons.27  See Dissent at 4 2.   
2. Generic Attack on Credibility 
  Salavea also contends that the DPA  committed 
misconduct during summation by implying that Salavea had lied 
during her testimony purely because she, as the defendant, had 
an interest in the outcome.  Specifically, the DPA  stated that 
“every Defendant has a lot of interest in the result of the 
case, and that’s natural, but you cannot disregard it.  It ’s 
                     
 27 Additionally, the ICA and the dissent reference the general 
instruction given to the jury that the statements or arguments made by 
lawyers are not evidence.  Dissent at 43.  However, this general instruction 
plainly did not rectify the improper statements of the DPA.  As we have 
stated in a similar context, because “the instruction did not address the 
problematic nature of the prosecutor’s statements” and it was “general in 
nature and was delivered to the jury along with a large number of other 
standard instructions before closing arguments began,” it failed to serve as 
a curative measure for the misconduct.  Underwood, 142 Hawai‘ i at 327 -28, 418 
P.3d at 668-69; see also  Smith, 68 Haw. at 312, 712 P.2d at 501 (“Where .  . . 
the success of the asserted defense hinged on defendant’s credibility, we 
would be hard put to say instructions from the court probably had the desired 
curative effect[.]”); Walsh, 125 Hawai‘ i at 294, 260 P.3d at 373.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  49 
 still there.  There is interest and bias.  Defendant has a lot 
of interest [in] what ’s at stake .”   
  In Basham, this court held that “a prosecutor may not 
argue during closing argument that defendants, because they are 
defendants, have no reason to tell the truth or have the 
greatest motive to lie. ”  132 Hawai ‘i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  In its review
 of the 
alleged misconduct in this case, the ICA held that  Basham was 
not controlling because the Basham  court cited to, but did not 
expressly overrule, State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai‘i 128, 900 P.2d 
135 (1995).28  In support of this  conclusion, the ICA cited to 
State v. Magbulos, 141 Hawai ‘i 483, 413 P.3d 387 (App. 2018), 
stating that it had “recently attempted to reconcile this 
apparent inconsistency” and concluded that Basham did not 
overrule Apilando and should therefore be read narrowly. 
  However, in Austin , which predated the ICA decision in 
this case, this court had already addressed the “apparent 
inconsistency” between Basham and Apilando and declared our 
disapproval of the ICA’s interpretation in Magbulos .  Austin , 43 
Hawai‘i at 56 n. 12, 422 P.3d 
at 56 n. 12.  T his court 
                     
 28 In Apilando, this court held that it was not improper for the 
prosecutor to argue during closing argument that the defendant had the 
highest stake in the outcome of the case and therefore had the greatest 
motive to lie.  79 Hawai ‘i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  50 
 specifically stated that our decision in Basham “overrules any 
prior precedents to the extent they are in conflict, and we 
express our disapproval of those portions of the Intermediate 
Court of Appeal’s recent opinion in State v. Magbulos that 
misapprehend and mischaracterize our holding in Basham. ”  Id.  
Thus, the ICA’s reliance on Magbulos in its analysis of this 
allegation of prosecutorial misconduct did not  follow our 
precedent.  We therefore again reaffirm that it is improper for 
prosecutors to make “ generic arguments regarding a defendant ’s 
credibility” during summation.29  Id.   
  Looking to the “nature of the alleged misconduct,” 
Rogan, 91 Hawai‘ i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238, it is clear that the 
DPA’s statement was improper.  The DPA specifically referred to 
the interest that “ every Defendant  has . . . in the result of 
the case.”  (Emphasis added.)  By generically referring to every 
defendant’s interest in the outcome, the DPA attacked Salavea’s 
                     
 29 In this case, the ICA also cited its conclusion in Magbulos  that 
our holding in Basham  was inconsistent with the Hawai ‘i Standard Jury 
Instructions Criminal (HAWJIC), which provide that the jury may consider a 
witness’s interest in the result of the case when evaluating the weight and 
credibility of the witness’s testimony.  Our holding in Basham, however, does 
not preclude the prosecution from arguing that the evidence adduced at trial 
shows the defendant has a particularized, non -generic interest in the outcome 
that affects the credibility of the defendant’s testimony.  Basham simply 
prohibits the prosecution from making “generic arguments regarding a 
defendant’s credibility,” i.e., arguments that are uncoupled from evidence 
showing the defendant has a particular interest in the outcome separate from 
the generic interest shared by all defendants in criminal cases.  Thus, 
contrary to the ICA’s conclusion in this case and in Magbulos, Basham  is not 
inconsistent with the standard HAWJIC.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 51 credibility solely because of her status as a defendant.30
Basham, 132 Hawai‘ i at 117, 319 P.3d at  1125 (“[A] prosecutor 
cannot ask the jury to infer a defendant ’s lack of credibility 
based solely on the fact that he or she is a defendant. ”).  
Further, the DPA did not reference any evidence adduced at trial 
that could support an inference that Salavea had a 
particularized, non- generic interest in the outcome that 
affected her credibility.  Walsh , 125 Hawai ‘i at 295, 260 P.3d at  
374 (noting that a prosecutor may refer to specific 
inconsistencies an d contradictions in a defendant’ s testimony or 
with other evidence).  Thus, the ICA erred in concluding that it 
was not misconduct for the 
DPA to imply that Salavea lied simply 
because she was the defendant.  
3. Denigratio n of Defense Counsel
Salavea also contends that the 
DPA committed 
misconduct during closing argument by personally attacking 
defense counsel and accusing counsel of attempting to manipulate 
the jury.  We again look to the nature of the alleged misconduct 
to determine whether it was improper.  Rogan , 91 Hawai ‘i at 412, 
984 P.2d at 1238.  
We note that in analyzing the generic nature of the DPA’s closing 
argument, the dissent addresses only the problematic comment that Salavea had 
“a lot of interest [in] what’s at stake” and not the entirety of the DPA’s 
improper statement.  Dissent at 45.  30***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  52 
   A prosecutor engages in misconduct by making comments 
during closing argument that impermissibly attack the integrity 
of defense counsel or that denigrate the legal profession in 
general.  State v. Pasene, 144 Hawai ‘i 339, 370, 439 P.3d 864, 
895 (2019); State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai ‘i 577, 595, 9 94 P.2d 509, 
527 (2000).  This court recently discussed the particular 
dangers posed by a prosecutor’s attacks on defense counsel 
during closing argument in Underwood
.  142 Hawai‘i at 325 –27, 418 
P.3d at 666–68.  We observed that such attacks are extremely 
problematic because “ a jury is apt to attach undue weight to a 
prosecutor’s disparagement of defense counsel .”  Id. at 327, 418 
P.3d at 668.  We further stated that accusations of this nature 
implicate the defendant’s right to a fair trial “because it is a 
‘strik[e] at the appellant over the shoulders of his counsel in 
an attempt to prejudice the jury against the appellant. ’”31  Id. 
(alteration in original) (quoting Bell v. State, 614 S.W.2d 122, 
123 (Tex. Crim. App. 1981)) .  Further, attacks on the personal 
character of defense counsel are improper because they denigrate 
                     
 31 Similarly, a disparagement of the defendant that cannot be 
inferred from the evidence adduced may improperly prejudice the jury and 
implicate the defendant’s right to a fair trial.  Basham, 132 Hawai ‘i at 113, 
319 P.3d at 1121 (noting that it was misconduct to argue that the defendant 
had lied to the police about being the driver of a vehicle because the 
defendant had not been charged with any misconduct regarding the vehicle and 
any evidence that he lied to the police would have been subject to Hawai ‘i 
Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b) as evidence of “other acts”).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  53 
 the legal profession-- insinuating  that defense counsel’s zealous 
representation of a client amounts to unethical behavior-- and 
undermine the adversarial system.  Id.  As such, disparagement 
of defense counsel during closing argument clearly constitutes 
prosecutorial misconduct.  Id. ; Klinge, 92 Hawai ‘i at 595, 994 
P.2d at 527. 
  During the defense’s closing argument  in this case, 
the DPA objected to defense counsel’s statement that Salavea was 
in tears at one point during her testimony, contending it was 
not in evidence and it was a personal statement.32  The court 
overruled the objection.  Nonetheless, the DPA in rebuttal 
                     
 32 The relevant portion of the defense’s closing argument is as 
follows:  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: If I may leave you with a suggestion of 
evaluating the evidence in this case, it would be this.  
You recall that just before our lunch break, [Salavea] went 
on the witness stand, and the Deputy Prosecutor asked her 
whether she didn’t take the Roxy bag without permission and 
whether that wasn’t indeed theft, and [Salavea] broke down, 
she was in tears, and that’s, I suggest -–   
 
[DPA]: Objection, Your Honor.  This is not in evidence, and 
it’s personal statement.   
 
THE COURT: Overruled.   
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And that’s because it probably didn’t 
even occur to her that that playful  little act might be 
viewed by the law as a theft.  Now, the Government would 
have you believe that [Salavea], being that type of person, 
would take all of her friend’s valuables, and it’s just not 
borne out by the evidence.  Something occurred between 
these two women, but it wasn’t a burglary.  
(Emphasis added.) 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  54 
 stated that defense counsel had made an improper argument, 
asserting to the jury that “Defense Counsel was just .  . . 
trying to appeal to your sense of pity . . . for De fendant, and 
that’s improper.”  The DPA’s insinuation that defense counsel 
was trying to mislead the jury by making an improper appeal to 
the jury’s sense of pity was clearly wrong a s a lawyer may 
comment on a witness’s appearance and demeanor during their 
testimony.33  The ICA concluded that this statement was proper 
because the DPA “simply reminded the jury about the Circuit 
Court’s instruction in response to what could reasonably ha ve 
been interpreted as defense counsel’s attempt to have the jury 
take pity on Salavea.”  The dissent agrees .  Dissent at 49.  
This conclusion does not recognize that the DPA  did much more 
                     
 33 The dissent asserts that defense counsel in fact did commit 
misconduct by drawing the jury’s attention to Salavea’s demeanor, and thus it 
was perfectly appropriate for the DPA to accuse defense counsel of misconduct 
during rebuttal.  Dissent at 48 -49.  The dissent also intimates that the 
circuit court erred in overruling the DP A’s objection.  Dissent at 47 -48.  
HAWJIC 3.09 (2014) provides in relevant part as follows: “In evaluating the 
weight and credibility of a witness’s testimony, you may consider the 
witness’s appearance and demeanor[ and] the witness’s manner of 
testifying[.]” (Emphases added.)  Thus, defense counsel’s comment on Salavea 
crying during her testimony clearly was not an improper appeal to the 
emotions of the jury.  Therefore, the court properly overruled the DPA’s 
objection.   
  More importantly, we reject the dissent’s contention that 
misconduct by an attorney during closing argument grants opposing counsel 
license to accuse the attorney of misconduct on rebuttal.  Dissent at 48 -49.  
The appropriate response to improper argument is an objection, and the 
disposition of an objection is within the discretion of the trial court, not 
counsel.  The DPA was not permitted to accuse defense counsel of misconduct 
simply because the DPA disagreed with the court’s overruling of the 
objection, and the dissent’s disagreement cannot retroactively sanction th e 
DPA’s improper conduct.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  55 
 than remind the jury that its decision should not be influenced 
by pity for the defendant; the DPA  told the jury that defense 
counsel had improperly attempted to influence the jury’s 
decision by appealing to its sense of pity.  This accusation was 
clearly incorrect, as the circuit court recognized when it 
properly overruled the prosecutor’s objection.34  We reaffirm 
that attacks on defense counsel, both express and implied, 
constitute prosecutorial misconduct.35  Underwood , 142 Hawai‘i at 
327, 418 P.3d at 668 ; Klinge, 92 Hawai ‘i at 595, 994 P.2d at 527. 
                     
 34 The dissent suggests that the DPA’s accusation of misconduct was 
justified because the attack aimed to undermine defense counsel’s argument on 
“the primary issue at trial.”  Dissent at 48.  Defense counsel’s comment 
during closing argument was proper as ruled by the trial court.  See supra 
note 33.  Additionally, neither the DPA’s tactical goals nor the criticality 
of the subject matter provides acceptable justification for the DPA’s 
improper accusation that defense counsel committed misconduct, as our law 
makes plainly clear.  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘ i at 370, 439 P.3d at 895; Underwood, 
142 Hawai‘ i at 327, 418 P.3d at 668; Klinge, 92 Hawai‘ i at 595, 994 P.2d at 
527.   
 
 35 Salavea also contends that the following statement was an 
improper attempt by the prosecutor to shift the burden of proof to the 
defense:  
[W]hy would [the CW] go through all of this and why would 
[the CW] go  and make up a story if it was not what 
happened?  There was no evidence by Defendant why is it 
that [the CW] would do it, and there was no evidence from 
[the CW], even though we pushed her, both of us, that she 
had any reason to tell this story.  
Read in isolation, the statement that there “was no evidence by 
Defendant why is it that [the CW] would do it” suggests that Salavea 
was obligated to adduce evidence that the CW’s account was not 
credible.  While the preceding and subsequent statements appear to 
indicate that the prosecutor was attempting to argue that nothing in 
Salavea’s or the CW’s testimony suggested that the CW’s account was 
untruthful, the challenged statement improperly suggested that Salavea 
had the burden of showing why the CW’s testimony w as not credible.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  56 
   In summary, we conclude that the DPA  made several 
statements during closing argument that were improper.  Because 
we have already determined that Salavea’s conviction must be 
vacated, we need not consider whether the prosecutorial 
misconduct in this case would also warrant vacatur of the 
conviction.  However, the multiple clear instances of 
prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument bolster our 
conclusion that the assistance of Salavea’s trial counsel , when 
viewed as a whole, was ineffective.  Defense counsel did not 
make a single objection to any of the DPA’s improper statements 
during closing argument, which any competent defense attorney 
should have done.  Smith, 68 Haw. at 312- 13, 712 P.2d at 502 
(noting that other instances of inadequate performance in the 
record bolstered the court’s conclusion that trial counsel’s 
assistance was ineffective).  Additionally, despite several 
interjections by the court, the defense attorney still did not 
apprehend the improprieties in the DPA’s closing argument and 
made no objections at all .36  Clearly, counsel’s failure to make 
objections and move to strike the various instances of 
                     
 36 This court has observed that in order to fulfill their duties as 
advocates and provide effective assistance, lawyers must ensure that their 
knowledge of relevant case law is up -to-date.  Batalona v. State, 142 Hawai‘ i 
84, 96, 414 P.3d 136, 148 (2018).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
  57 
 misconduct was not within the range of competence demanded of 
attorneys in criminal cases.37   
V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s Judgment 
on Appeal entered on July 9, 2019, and the circuit court ’s 
amended judgment.  The case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
 
                     
 37 Salavea also contends that the evidence adduced at trial was 
insufficient to support her conviction for burglary in the first degree.  
Specifically, Salavea argues there was not substantial evidence that she 
entered the CW’s apartmen t unlawfully or that she had the intent to commit a 
crime therein at the time of her entry.  Although our conclusion that the 
ineffective assistance of defense counsel requires that Salavea’s conviction 
be vacated, challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence must always be 
considered on appeal as “the [d]ouble [j]eopardy [c]lause bars retrial of a 
defendant once a reviewing court has found the evidence at trial to be 
legally insufficient to support a conviction.”  State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai‘ i 
43, 59, 237 P.3d 1109, 1125 (2010) (alterations in original) (quoting State 
v. Malufau, 80 Hawai‘ i 126, 132, 906 P.2d 612, 618 (1995)).  In considering 
Salavea’s contention, the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to 
the prosecution.  Id.  at 46 n.2, 237 P.3d at 1112 n.2.  Upon review, we 
conclude that there was substantial evidence that Salavea intended to use the 
CW’s misplaced fob to enter her apartment and take her property without 
permission.  Thus, there was sufficient evidence to support every material 
element of the offense that underlies Salavea’s conviction.  Randall H. Hironaka 
for petitioner 
 
Sonja P. McCullen 
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
