***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI,  
Respondent/ Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
JOHN LESLIE GALLAGHER,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.   
 
 
SCWC-14-0001300 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14- 0001300; C R. NO. 13- 1-0972(3)) 
 
MAY 15, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
DISSENTING, AND WITH NAKAYAMA, J., D
ISSENTING  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.   
  Under Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence Rule 403, relevant 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is, inter alia,  
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.  In 
this case, the defendant was charged with criminal property Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0001300
15-MAY-2020
10:32 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 damage in the second degree for damaging the complainants’ 
vehicle.  Over the defense’s objections, t he circuit court 
allowed the  State to present evidence during trial of four prior 
incidents of aggressive and erratic behavior by the defendant 
directed at the complaining witnesses and their home.  The 
circuit court also permitted the State to adduce evidence of the 
fear the complaining witnesses experienced as a result of the 
prior incidents and the various countermeasures they undertook 
in response to these incidents.   The defendant was convicted as 
charged, and the conviction was affirmed on appeal.   
  On review, we conclude that the risk of unfair 
prejudice posed by the introduction of the four prior incidents 
substantially outweighed their limited probative value.  We 
therefore vacate the Intermediate C ourt of A ppeals’ judgment on 
appeal and  the circuit court’s  judgment of conviction and 
sentence, and the case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent w ith this opinion.  
I. BACKGROUND & TRIAL 
 
 On December 30, 2013, John Leslie Gallagher  was 
charged in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit 
court) with criminal property
 damage in the second degree in 
violation of Hawai ʻi Revised Statu
tes (HRS)  § 708-821(1)(b) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 (Supp. 2012)1 based on an incident that occurred on September 15, 
2013.  Gallagher  pleaded not guilty to the charge.   
  Prior to trial, Gallagher moved  for “an order 
excluding from use at trial testimonial or documentary evidence 
relating to any other ‘acts’ , bad or otherwise ” involving him  as 
irrelevant and unfairly prejudicial under Hawai ʻi Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rules 404 and 403.  Specifically, Gallagher 
sought to preclude “ any testimonial or documentary evidence 
regarding alleged inc idents” on four specified dates between May 
and September 2013 involving the two
 complaining witnesses or 
other persons.    
Thereafter, the State filed 
two notices of intent 
pursuant to HRE Rules 404(b) and 608(b) stating it would r ely on 
evidence of four prior incidents of “Harassment ,” one incident 
of “Harassment B y Stalking,” and one incident of “Harassment By 
Stalking, Simple Trespass, Criminal Tampering and Disorderly 
Conduct” that occurred between March 24 and September  19, 2013.2  
                     
 1 HRS § 708 -821(1)(b) provides in relevant part as follows: “A 
person commits the offense of criminal property damage in the second degree 
if by means other than fire: . . . . The person intentionally or knowingly 
damages the property of another, without the  other’s consent, in an amount 
exceeding $1,500[.] ”   
 2 The notices collectively indicated that the State intended to 
rely upon six incidents, including one that occurred several days after the 
events giving rise to the case.  During the hearing on the motions in limine, 
however, the State informed the court that it did not intend to introduce any 
evidence of the last incident at trial.  Ultimately, the State elicited 
testimony regarding four of the prior incidents.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 The State contended evidence of the prior incidents was relevant 
and admissible to demonstrate Gallagher’s “motive, opportunity, 
intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, 
and/or absence of mistake or accident[,] as well as attacking 
his credibility as probative of untruthfulness.”    
  
At a hearing on the pretrial motions,3 the State 
contended the sole issue at trial was going to be Gallagher’s 
state of mind and his intent to cause the amount of damage to 
the complainants’ vehicle that resulted from his actions on the 
night in question.  The State asserted that evidence of the five 
prior incidents would show the conduct underlying the charged 
offense was not an isolated event, accident, or mistake and that 
the prior incidents culminated 
in the incident that resulted in 
the criminal property damage charge.  The court asked the State 
to elaborate, and the State responded as follows:  
[B]asically what happened over the course of about six or 
seven months, this individual, from out of the blue, just 
started appearing at our complaining witness ’s house, 
essentially taking them to the point where they had to get 
a protective order against him, installed a video 
surveillance system on their house, basically because he 
had come around so many t
imes threatening them  . . . .  
According to the State, it was important for the jury to hear 
about the prior incidents to understand Gallagher’s state of 
mind when he damaged the complainants’ vehicle .   
                     
 3 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided over the circuit court 
proceedings in this case.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5   In addition to his written motions in limine, 
Gallagher orally objected to the introduction of the prior 
incidents stated in the State’s notices of intent , arguing that 
they were not relevant and were more prejudicial than probative 
because there would be no  question as to his identity or whether 
his actions were the result of an accident or mistake.  Evidence 
of the prior incidents, Gallagher maintained, did not go to the 
elements that the State needed to prove or to any defenses, and 
it did not fall within an exception to the rule against 
character evidence.  Additionally , Gallagher argued that the 
prior incidents were dissimilar to the charged offense because 
they did not involve property damage.  At the conclusion of the 
hearing, the circuit court denied  the defense ’s motion to 
exclude the incidents , holding without any elaboration that the 
five prior incidents fell within the exceptions to HRE Rule 
404(b).  The court did not exclude any evidence  regarding the 
prior incidents.  The only matters  excluded were opinions 
expressed by a complaining witness to the police regarding 
Gallagher’s mental instability and statements that Gallagher had 
made that raised concerns about his mental health, both of which 
the State had no objection to excluding.   
  A j ury trial commenced i n August 2014.  In its opening 
statement, the State informed the jury that the evidence would 
show that on September 15, 2013, Gallagher charged up the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 complainants’ driveway and kicked their vehicle multiple times 
on the passenger’s side and then on the driver’s side .  The 
State related that the jury would hear and see that Gallagher’s 
kicks left numerous dents on the complainants’ vehicle.   The 
State indicated that the jury was “probably going to hear the 
defense agree with pretty much 99 percent of what I just told 
you.”  
The State also told the jury that the night of the 
incident was not the first time the complainants had seen 
Gallagher.  The defense ’s objection to this statement was 
overruled.  The State proceeded to inform the jury that 
Gallagher had become an issue in the co mplainants’ lives over 
the course of the six months preceding the incident, requiring 
the complainants to call the police numerous times, file 
numerous police reports, tint the windows of  their home, and 
install an alarm system and a video surveillance system because 
of their fear.  The prosecutor then told the jury that the 
Normans had actually sought a protective order against 
Gallagher.  Defense counsel’s objection to this statement was 
sustained,  and the statement was stricken.    
  In the defense’s opening statement, counsel  stated 
that it was not disputed that Gallagher went to the 
complainants’ residence  on September 15, 2013,  and kicked their  
vehicle.  Defense counsel told the jury that the only issue in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 dispute was the amount of damage that Gallagher intended to 
cause.  The defense s ubmitted that the evidence would show that 
Gallagher did not intend to cause more than $1,500 in damage and 
that he was not aware and did not believe that he would damage 
the vehicle to that extent. 
  Following opening statements, the State presented the 
testimony of one of the complainants, Jessica Norman 
(Ms. Norman).  Ms. Norman testified that Gallagher first came 
into her life on March 24, 2013, which prompted Gallagher to  
renew his objection on HRE Rule s 404(b) and 403 grounds.   A 
bench conference ensued, and Gallagher argued that even if the 
prior incidents were relevant, the court was required to 
determine whether the probative value of the evidence was 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.  
Gallagher maintained that identification was not at  issue in the 
case, the prior incidents did not relate to Gallagher’s state of 
mind as to knowing the amount of the damages , the prior 
incidents involved different facts, their  introduction would 
confuse the issues and mislead the jury, and there was other 
evidence regarding the damages.   
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Judge, I would just object.  I know this 
issue was raised at motions in limine, but I would just 
make an objection under 404(b).  Your Honor, even assuming 
that these prior incidents are relevant, I believe the 
Court still has to determine whether there ’s unfair 
prejudice to my client and . . . whether the need for it 
substantially outweighs any danger of unfair prejudice.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8  I would submit, you know, in this case, 
identification is not an issue.   The prior incidents do not 
go to state of mind as far as knowing the amount of the 
damage.  The facts are different, and . . . it would 
confuse the issue, mislead the jury.  
 And . . . there’ s other evidence that can go towards 
the damages[.] 
Gallagher indicated that he would like to register a running 
objection under HRE Rule 404(b) regarding any prior incidents.  
In response, the State contend ed that the “escalating series of 
events” were  “highly probative” of Gallagher’s mindset and his 
intent on the night of the incident .  
  The court overruled Gallagher’s  objection s.  The court 
reasoned  that without evidence of the prior incidents, there was 
no context or explanation for the charged conduct because the 
parties were not otherwise acquaintances.  Further, stated the 
court, the prior incidents were highly probative of Gallagher’s  
intent to cause the kind of damage that occurred, and in  any 
event the State had the burden of proving each element of the 
offense beyond a reasonable doubt regardless of whether some of 
them were conceded in the defense’s opening statement .  The 
court concluded that based on these reasons and the “entire 401, 
403, 404 analysis”  it would allow in the evidence of the prior 
incidents.  The court did not indicate that it would not allow 
defense counsel’s request for a continuing objection.  
  Following the bench conference, the circuit court 
issued a cautionary instruction to the jury regarding  the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 evidence of the prior incidents.  The court instructed the jury 
that the evidence could be considered only on the issue of the 
defendant’s motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, or plan to 
commit the charged offense,  and as to the identity of the person 
who may have committed the charged offense.  The court further 
instructed the jury not to consider the evidence for any other 
purpose or to conclude that the defendant was a person of bad 
character and therefore must have committed the charged offense. 
  Ms. Norman then testified in detail about four of her 
prior interactions with Gallagher.  Ms. Norman described her 
first encounter with Gallagher on March 24, 2013,  when she saw 
him walking toward her home .  When she opened the front door and 
asked if he needed help with anything, Gallagher started 
screaming at her, saying:  “You’re not going to have your job by 
next week.  You hear me.  You’re not going to have your job.”  
Ms. Norman testified that she immediately closed the door, 
explaining that she was “incredibly confused and scared ,” and 
that she thereafter filed a police report.   
  Ms. Norman then described an incident that occurred on 
May 9, 2013,  testifying that she looked out her window after she 
heard yelling fr om the street.  She witnessed Gallagher in a 
confrontation with one of her neighbors, and when Gallagher saw 
her through the window, he started screaming obscenities at her ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 and ran toward the house.  Ms. Norman explained  that she called 
the police,  but Gallagher was gone by the time they  showed up.   
  Ms. Norman testified that she next saw Gallagher when 
she was again looking out her window on August 16, 2013.  She 
stated that Gallagher was parked in his car in front of her 
driveway,  and she witnessed him shake his fist at the house and 
give it “the finger” before speeding off.   
  Ms. Norman lastly  recounted an incident that took 
place on September 4, 2013.  She again saw Gallagher parked 
blocking her driveway,  and this time she witnessed him ma ke 
erratic movements as if he were going to ram his vehicle into 
the cars parked on the property.  Gallagher again sped off, 
Ms. Norman testified, and he was gone by the time she called the 
police.   
  Ms. Norman stated  that, in total,  she filed six police 
reports against Gallagher from March 24 through September 15, 
2013.  These prior incidents terrified her because  Gallagher 
appeared to show up more frequently and become more aggressive 
as time progressed.  Ms. Norman testified that she did not know 
what Gallagher was capable of,  and that she and her husband were 
scared for their lives.  As a result of Gallagher’s conduct , 
they tinted the windows on the ground floor of their home and 
installed an alarm system and a surveillance system with seven 
different cameras around  the house.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11   As to the incident underlying the charge, Ms. Norman 
testified that  on September 15, 2013, she went out on her l
ānai 
after she heard a car nearby and her dog began to bark.  She saw 
Gallagher running at full speed toward the house screaming 
obscenities at her.
  He then started “wailing on the car ,” 
kicking and punching it approximately fourteen to sixteen times.  
Ms. Norman described the dents in the car as “massive,”  about 
four or five inches deep,  and stated that Gallag her’s kicks and 
punches were so loud that she thought he was using a baseball 
bat.  Gallagher had also knocked the top of the back of the 
truck bed using his fist.  Ms. Norman explained that, after he 
finished striking the car, Gallagher walked away, “flipped the 
house the bird,” and  then got in his car and left.  During 
Ms. Norman’s testimony,  two CDs containing video surveillance 
footage of the incident were admitted into evidence  and 
published to the jury;  Ms. Norman provided a narration of the 
events shown in the footage while the video was played for the 
jury.   
 
 The State then called as a witness Garron Norman (Mr. 
Norman), Ms. Norman’s husband , who testified that he came to 
know Gallagher “[f]rom a series of escalating events that were 
taking place at [their] residence .”  Because of these events 
that were happening throughout the summer and early spring, he 
and Ms. Norman were in a heightened state of alert on September ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 15, 2013.  Mr. Norman recounted the events of that evening, 
which coincided with
 the testimony that had been given by 
Ms. Norman.   
 
 Mr. Norman testified  that after the incident,  he saw 
multiple dents all along the front quarter panels to  the rear of 
the vehicle around the tailgate and up the driver’s side of the 
vehicle.  A series of photographs  were admitted into evidence 
depicting the damage to the pickup,  and Mr. Norman  pointed out 
and described the dents , relating that there were probably about 
seven to eight “significant dents ,” approximately two to four 
inches deep, that were c aused by Gallagher.    
  
Gordon Yoshizawa, the owner of an auto repair shop,  
testified that he personally inspected the  Normans’ vehicle the 
day after the incident and  estimate d the cost of repairs to be 
$4,583.04.  Additionally, Matthew Little, an automotive damage 
specialist for the Normans ’ insurance company,  testified that 
based upon his inspection the estimated repair cost for the 
damage done to the vehicle was  $3,036.26.4   
  
After the State rested, Gallagher testified that in 
the early evening of September 15, 2013,  he was at the house of 
a friend who lived next door to the Normans.  H e walked to the 
                     
 4 Mr. Norman stated that the Normans received an insurance payment 
of $2,536.26 for the damage, which reflected a $500 deductible.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 Normans’  house, lost his composure, kicked the passenger side of 
the Normans’  truck three times , and then kicked between the rear 
wheel and the door on the other side of the truck a few times.   
According to Gallagher, he was 5 feet 9 inches tall, weighed 160 
pounds, and wore a pair of cross- trainers on the night of the 
incident.  He stated he used the inside of his foot and 
described the kicks  as “more like a soccer kick.”  He said that 
the incident lasted for a total of ten seconds and that he only 
“put a couple scuff marks on the truck. ”  Gallagher  testified 
that he had a degree in automotive technology,  the damage he 
caused amounted to only about $300 or $400, and a “detail job to 
buff it out” or a “wax job” would have taken care of the damage  
to the vehicle.   Gallagher further stated that he did not intend 
to do extensive damage and disputed that his kicks left dents in 
the truck that amounted to $1,500 worth of damage. 
  During the reading of the jury instructions, the 
circuit court provided a general  instruction on the use of 
evidence admitted for a limited purpose.   The court then 
instructed the jury that  the evidence of Gallagher’s prior 
crimes or bad acts was to  be considered only on the issue of his  
motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, or identity and not to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 conclude that he was a person of bad character and therefore 
must have committed the charged offense.5   
  
In its closing argu ment, the State indicated that the  
case boiled down to whether Gallagher intentionally or knowingly 
caused $1,500 worth of damage to the Normans’ vehicle.  The 
State argued that the evidence against Gallagher, including the 
prior acts Gallagher committed, was “very overwhelming.”  The 
evidence of the prior incidents,  the State explained, was 
presented to show Gallagher’s intent and the Normans’ perception 
of Gallagher’s state of min d.  The State asserted that what 
occurred was not an isolated incident but instead was an 
escalating series of events that took place over six months.  
The jury was reminded by the State that it had heard from the 
Normans about the number of times Gallagher came into their 
lives, and from the Normans’ perspective he was becoming more 
dangerous each time he showed up.  The State highlighted the 
several countermeasures the Normans had taken such as installing 
a surveillance system and an alarm system and tinting the 
windows of their house.  This was not an isolated incident, the 
State reiterated, and Gallagher  was demonstrating increasing 
levels of anger and hostility.  Gallagher intended to do as much 
                     
 5 The court also instructed the jury on the elements of the 
included offenses of criminal property damage in the third and fourth 
degrees.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 damage as he physically could on the night in question, the 
State argued, and his actions were “premeditated,” “cold,” and 
“calculated.”   
  D efense counsel argued in closing argument  that the 
only disputed issue in the case concerned Gallagher’s  intent 
regarding  the amount of the damage  he caused to the Normans’ 
truck.  While Gallagher admitt ed to kicking the Normans’ 
vehicle, counsel  maintained,  it was not enough that Gallagher 
kicked the vehicle.   The State also had to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Gallagher  acted with the intent or 
knowledge  that he would cause over $1,500 in damage .  Counsel  
argued that the truck already had scratches and dents and that 
Gallagher could not have intended to cause over $1,500 worth of 
damage, adding  that the damage he did cause  was only cosmetic in 
nature.   
  T he jury convicted Gallagher as charged.   Gallagher 
was sentenced to a five-year term of imprisonment consecutive to 
a term he was currently serving.  Gallagher appealed  from the 
circuit court’s October 31, 2014 judgment of conviction and 
sentence.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  On appeal
, Gallagher asserted that  the evidence of the 
four prior incidents of his mis conduct introduced at trial was 
irrelevant and far more prejudicial than probative.6  Gallagher 
contended that the circuit court ’s reasoning that the prior 
incidents would provide context was not one of the exceptions 
for introducing character evidence and that the evidence of the 
prior incidents was not relevant to any disputed issue.  
Gallagher submitted that the video footage and his own testimony 
eliminated any dispute as to his general intent to damage the 
property and there was no question as to identity, motive, 
opportunity, intent, plan, or preparation.   
  Additionally, 
Gallagher argued that the potential for 
unfair prejudice from the admission of the prior incidents 
substantially outweighed any limited probative value they may 
have had.  Gallagher contended that the need for such evidence 
was minimal because the State presented the testimony of the two 
complaining witnesses, p
hotographs of the damage to the vehicle, 
and video footage that  showed the incident from beginning to 
end.  The evidence of the prior incidents “probably roused the 
jury to hostility” against him and most likely elicited sympathy 
                     
 6 Gallagher raised other issues to the ICA, but these issues are 
not raised on certiorari review.  They are therefore not addressed.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 for the Normans based on their prior experiences with him,  
Gallagher asserted, and thus such evidence was highly 
prejudicial.   
  T he State responded  that evidence of the prior 
incidents was relevant under HRE  Rule 401 to provide context for 
the incident underlying the charge, which made it more probable 
that Gallagher intentionally or knowingly caused more than 
$1,500 worth of damage to the Normans’ vehicle.   The State 
submitted that the evidence was also properly admitted under HRE 
Rule 404(b) to prove that Gallagher intended to cause the amount 
of damage required for criminal property damage in the second 
degree and that his conduct was not an accident or mistake.  
And, the State asserted that the evidence of the prior incidents 
was admissible under the relevant factors of HRE  Rule 403, 
including that there was a substantial need for the evidence, 
there was no alternative means of showing context, and the 
evidence was not likely to rouse the jury to hostility against 
Gallagher.   
  On December 20
, 2017, the ICA issued a summary 
disposition order.7  Citing HRE Rule 401, the ICA determined that 
Gallagher was incorrect to assume that evidence is only relevant 
                     
 7 The ICA’s summary disposition order can  be found at State v. 
Gallagher, No . CAAP-14-0001300, 2017 WL 6507180 (App. Dec. 20, 2017) (SDO).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 to prove matters in dispute.  The State has the burden to prove 
beyond a reasonable doubt each element of the offense, the ICA 
stated, and Gallagher did not offer a stipulation as to any of 
the elements of the charged offense.  In any event, the ICA 
added, Gallagher’s intent was in dispute.  Based on its review 
of the record, which included the giving of 
limiting 
instructions to the jury regarding the evidence of the prior 
incidents, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in admitting such evidence.  
 
  Gallagher challenges the ICA’s holding on certiorari 
review, arguing that the unfair prejudice caused by the 
introduction of the four prior incidents substantially 
outweighed its minimal probative value and had a tendency to 
suggest a decision based on an improper basis.  
III.  STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
  “[A] trial court’ s balancing of the probative value of 
prior bad act evidence against the prejudicial effect of such 
evidence under HRE Rule 403 (1993) is reviewed for abuse of 
discretion.”  State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawaiʻi 390, 404, 56 P.3d 
692, 706 (2002) (quoting State v. Torres, 85 Hawaiʻ i 417, 421, 
945 P.2d 849, 853 (App. 1997)).  When such an abuse of 
discretion is identified, it is grounds to vacate a conviction 
unless it is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  State v. 
Kazanas, 138 Hawai ʻi 23, 43, 375 P .3d 1261, 1281 (2016). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court Abused Its Discretion i n Its Application of  
HRE Rule 403.  
  Over strong objections by the defense, the circuit 
court allowed the admission of four prior incidents that 
involved aggressive, obscenity- laden, and angry mis conduct by 
Gallagher toward the Normans.  The State and its witnesses 
repeatedly characterized the conduct as escalating.  The 
testimony included the specific details of each incident in 
which Gallagher had harassed the family.   Ms. Norman  testified  
that Gallagher’s actions during the previous incidents terrified 
her and prompted the family to take a range of protective 
countermeasures, including filing six different police reports, 
tinting the windows in the garage and on the ground floor of 
their home, and installing  an alarm and surveillance system.   
  Under HRE Rule 403, relevant evidence “ may be excluded 
if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence .”  In weighing the 
probative value versus the prejudicial effect of prior bad acts 
admitted for one of the purposes authorized under HRE Rule ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 404(b) (Supp. 2012),8 we have stated that a number of factors 
must be considered, including  
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the 
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the 
interval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, the 
need for the evidence, the efficacy of  alternative proof, 
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse 
the jury to overmastering hostility.   
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawaiʻi 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172 
(2010) (quoting State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266, 
1273 (1992)).   
  While these factors provide guidance as to the 
elements to consider, the court’s underlying HRE Rule 403 
evaluation remains whether the probative value of the evidence 
of prior acts is substantially outweighed by its potential for 
unfair prejudice.  Each factor must therefore be considered in 
light of the purpose for which the evidence was offered-- here, 
                     
 8 HRE Rule 404(b) provides as follows:  
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the 
character of a person in order to show action in conformity 
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such 
evidence is probative of another fact that is of 
consequence to the determination of the action,  such as 
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, 
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake 
or accident.  In criminal cases, the proponent of evidence 
to be offered under this subsection shall provide 
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if 
the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of 
the date, location, and general nature of any such evidence 
it intends to introduce at trial.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 (continued . . .)  to prove Gallagher’s state of mind with respect to the extent of 
the damage caused to the Normans’ vehicle . 
  As to the first factor, the strength of the evidence 
as to the commission of the other conduct, Ms. Norman testified 
that she witnessed firsthand Gallagher’s  behavior on the prior 
occasions, and Mr. Norman confirmed that there  had been a 
“series of escalating events ” involving Gallagher.   Because 
Gallagher does not deny that the prior incidents occurred and 
submitted no contrary evidence, the first factor does not weigh 
against admittance. 
  With regard to the second and third factors--the 
similarities and interval of time between the crimes--Gallagh er 
acknowledges the time that elapsed between the prior incidents 
and the one underlying the criminal charge in this case was 
arguably not long.  But he argues that the prior incidents were 
not similar to the underlying incident, as they did not involve 
property damage.  
  Here, Gallagher’s identity, actions, and general 
intent to do damage were  not disputed.9  The prior incidents were 
                     
 9 Justice Nakayama’s dissent argues that “every element of the 
charged offense was ‘at issue’ for the purposes of” adm itting the evidence of 
prior incidents under HRE Rules 404(b) and 403.  Nakayama, J., Dissenting at 
12 [hereinafter Dissent].  While it is true that the State must prove all 
elements of an offense, other bad acts are not admissible to prove an element 
when the element is not disputed in the evidence in the case.  See, e.g., 
State v. Calara, 132 Hawai ʻi 391, 402- 04, 322 P.3d 931, 942- 44 (2014) (holding 
that two prior incidents of misconduct should have been excluded under HRE 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 therefore relevant only to  demonstrate the degree of Gallagher’s 
hostility toward the Normans and thereby increase the likelihood 
that he intended to do significant damage to their property.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Rule 404(b) because intent and lack of consent were not disputed); State v. 
Veikoso, 126 Hawaiʻ i 267, 276 -77, 270 P.3d 997, 1006 -07 (2011) (concluding 
that evidence involving another complaining witness would not be admissible 
to prove identity because identity was not disputed); State v. Castro, 69 
Haw. 633, 645, 756 P.2d 1033, 1042 (1988) (holding that, whe n “the identity 
of the perpetrator of the crimes was not denied, [] the admission of the 
other crimes evidence as proof of modus operandi,” including plan and 
preparation, “cannot be justified”).  Here, the element of identity and 
Gallagher’s conduct were not only conceded by the defense in its opening 
statement and acknowledged by the State ’s opening statement, but the evidence 
of the conduct was recorded in a video and testified to by two eyewitnesses.   
  The dissent’s contention that an unstipulated element “like 
identity” in this case renders the element in dispute for purposes of HRE 
Rule 404(b) analysis, dissent at 13 n.5, is contrary to both our caselaw, 
Calara, 132 Hawaiʻ i at 402 -04, 322 P.3d at 942 -44; Veikoso, 126 Hawai ʻi at 
276-77, 270 P.3d at 1006 -07; Castro, 69 Haw. at 645, 756 P.2d at 1042, and to 
Professor Addison Bowman’s evidence treatise, which we have cited for 
guidance in this area.  Calara, 132 Hawaiʻ i at 403, 322 P.3d at 943.  As 
stated by Professor Bowman, “Assessment of the dispute factor thus requires 
consideration of the precise defensive claims being made in the case.”  
Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual  § 404-3[3][E], at 4 -62 
(2018-2019 ed.).  Here, Gallagher did not dispute he was the person causing 
the property damage and, in fact, admitted that he was.   
  Nevertheless , the dissent maintains that  the prosecutor cannot 
know what a defendant will say, and Gallagher may have taken the stand and 
denied being the person who kicked the car.  Dissent at 13-14 n.5.  This type 
of justification would lead to the wholesale admission of propensity 
evidence.  As Professor Bowman has aptly observed:  
 
Identity is always a “fact of consequence” in a criminal 
case because  it characterizes the elemental proposition 
that the accused (not someone else) committed the crime.  
That being so, a proponent ’s assertion that evidence of 
another crime proves identity is not meaningful unless 
accompanied by some other theory that heigh tens probative 
value and takes the matter beyond mere propensity.   This is 
because the direct inferential link between prior crime and 
identity, without an intermediate inference such as motive, 
plan, or signature, can only be understood in terms of 
“action in conformity therewith” on the present occasion.  
In other words, “identity,” without more, is  likely 
propensity  in sheep’s clothing.  
 
Bowman, supra, § 404–3[2][F], at 4-55.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 However, the closeness in time and alleged similarity between 
the prior acts and the incident giving rise to this case is at 
most only marginally probative
 of this point.  
  Ms. Norman testified that the prior incidents 
occurred 
at her residence over a six-month period starting on March 24, 
2013, with the final incident occurring eleven days before the 
incident in this case.  She further stated that the incidents 
involved Gallagher yelling obscenities at her, gesturing angrily 
toward her and her house, and making erratic movements using his 
car.  The incidents shared some similarities in that they
 all 
occurred at the Normans’ residence and involved hostile actions 
by Gallagher towards the Normans, but none of the prior 
incidents involved destruction of property.  By contrast, the 
underlying incident in this case involved Gallagher causing 
property damage to the Normans’ vehicle.  Accordingly, the prior 
incidents, having not involved physical damage, had no relation 
to Gallagher’s awareness or knowledge of the extent of damage 
his actions would cause in the underlying incident, and they 
were therefore not probative of this issue.10 
                     
 10 The state of mind requirement for criminal property damage may 
alternately be established by demonstrating that Gallagher had knowledge or 
awareness that his actions would cause damage in excess of $1,500.  See HRS 
§ 708-821(1)(b).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24   Further, when prior misconduct is similar to the 
current offense and is offered to confirm identity or 
voluntariness by establishing a common methodology or scheme, a 
close connection in time and nature is highly probative only 
because it increases the likelihood that the same actor 
committed both instances of misconduct.  See, e.g. , State v. 
Acker, 133 Hawaiʻ i 253, 277, 327 P.3d 931, 955 (2014) (stating 
that prior incidents where defendants also robbed lone men, left 
them at remote locations, and escaped in their victims’  vehicles  
were admissible to show common plan and lack of coercion); State 
v. Austin, 70 Haw. 300, 307, 769 P.2d 1098, 1102 (1989) (holding 
that the similarity between a defendant ’s earlier drug dealing 
and the drug dealing offense with which t he defendant was 
charged was extremely relevant to prove both a plan and a common 
scheme).  However, a close proximity in time and nature between 
the prior misconduct and the charged offense may also increase 
the likelihood that a jury will consider the previous conduct to 
conclude that the defendant has a propensity for committing such 
acts, which is a prohibited inference.  See  HRE Rule 404(b) 
(“Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is no t admissible to 
prove the character of a person in order to show action in 
conformity therewith.”); State v. Murray, 116 Hawaiʻ i 3, 20, 169 
P.3d 955, 972 (2007) (holding that “the risk of tainting the 
jury verdict with evidence of prior [misconduct] is of especial ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 concern when the current charge is for the same  crime of which 
the defendant was previously” implicated).   
  Thus, when the evidence is not offered for a purpose 
for which similarity in time and nature is probative, a close 
unity between the acts potentially weighs against admitting the 
evidence when it increases the chances of unfair prejudice.  See  
State v. Castro, 69 Haw. 633, 645, 756 P.2d 1033, 1042 (1988) 
(holding that because “the identity of the perpetrator of the 
crimes was not denied, []  the admission of the other crimes 
evidence as proof of modus operandi cannot be justified”).  In 
this case, similarity as to location of all the prior incidents 
and as involving the same complainants, and the closeness in 
time of the prior incidents to the underlying offense, 
exacerbated the unfair prejudice as it increased the likelihood 
that the jury would conclude that Gallagher had a propensity for 
committing such acts while adding virtually no probative value 
as to the issue of Gallagher’s intent to c ause the amount of 
damage caused.  Accordingly, because of the lack of probative 
value of the prior misconduct evidence and its accompanying risk 
of unfair prejudice, these factors--similarities of crimes and 
interval of time between them --do not weigh in favor of 
admission of the prior acts of misconduct.   
  The final three factors in our  evaluation concern the 
need for the evidence and, relatedly, the availability of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 alternative evidence on the same point, as well as the 
likelihood that the evidence will inspire ill- will in the jury 
toward the defendant.  Castro , 69 Haw. at 644, 756 P.2d at 1041.  
  As discussed, the only disputed issue at trial to 
which the prior incidents were relevant was the extent of the 
damage Gallagher intended to cause or of his awareness of 
causing such damage.  The occurrence of the prior incidents and  
their escalating nature were only marginally probative insofar 
as they demonstrated the extent of Gallagher’s ongoing hostility 
toward the Normans and his general intention to cause damage to 
their property during the underlying incident.  However, 
extensive surrounding details of the incidents had no bearing on 
this issue.  Ms. Norman’s testimony included a range of highly 
prejudicial information that was lacking in probative value as 
to Gallagher’s state of mind, including the Normans’  repeated 
calling of police regarding the incidents; their filing of six 
police reports involving harassment; the numerous protective 
measures installed in their home, including the tinting of 
windows and the installation of a surveillance system with seven  
video cameras and an alarm system; and-- perhaps most 
prejudicial-- the recounting of the Normans ’ ongoing fear of 
Gallagher and Ms. Norman ’s statement that the prior incidents 
terrorized her.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27   The circuit court concluded that “ practically 
speaking, there aren’t any other means or al ternatives that 
would permit the explanation or background to what was going on, 
on the evening in question.”   However, even assuming that there 
was minimal probative value in admission of the prior 
misconduct, the State could have elicited a much less elaborate 
recounting of the prior incidents, greatly limiting testimony to 
the aspects of the incidents that ostensibly bore on Gallagher’s 
state of mind.  Mr. Norman, for example, testified that he came 
to know Gallagher “[f]rom a series of escalating events  that 
were taking place at our residence.”   This testimony essentially 
encapsulated the relevant aspects of the previous incidents in 
that it demonstrated that Gallagher had repeated, escalating, 
hostile interactions with the Normans.   
  It is noted that t he explanation concerning the prior 
interactions between the Normans and Gallagher did not require 
specific wording.  The incidents could have been characterized 
by the prosecutor’s  question s as unwanted encounters,  unprompted 
altercations,  or any number of other terms.  Regardless of the  
phrasing, testimony significantly more narrow could have been 
elicited to capture the contended relevance of the prior 
incidents while carrying  none of the unfair prejudice that arose ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 from the specific descriptions of Gal lagher’s behavior and the 
fear and countermeasures described by the Normans.11   
  Further, again assuming some probativeness of the 
prior misconduct, the number of prior incidents  should have been 
limited to the minimum sufficient to obtain the asserted 
probative value the conduct offered.  Instead, four prior 
incidents were admitted, despite the lack of probative value of 
the multiple instances of prior misconduct.  See State v. 
Kazanas, 138 Hawai ʻi 23, 43, 375 P.3d 1261, 1281 (2016) (holding 
it was an abuse of discretion to admit evidence of past abuse of 
household member when “[a]lternative evidence of [a prior]  
assault incident, which the State was allowed to present, was 
                     
 11 The dissenting opinion of Justice Nakayama notes the obvious 
proposition that “neither the trial court nor the appellate court should 
dictate the exact wording of a complaining witness’s testimony or reframe how 
the State presents its case.”  Dissent at 1 8 n.7.  However, as the dissent 
acknowledges, “it is the trial court’s duty to exclude unduly prejudicial 
testimony[.]”  Id.  Thus, in comporting with the court’s mandate, the 
prosecutor should have elicited the evidence in a manner that would not have 
resulted in the admission of unduly prejudicial evidence.  We recently 
observed in State v. Williams, a case in which the trial court had excluded 
evidence of the involvement of Child Welfare Services (CWS), that when the 
State chose to call a detective and social  worker to testify, “the State 
should have been careful not to elicit evidence” regarding involvement of CWS 
and “should not have asked [the doctor] whether she had alerted authorities 
to elicit her response that [CWS] had been contacted.”  146 Hawai ʻi 62, 73, 
456 P.3d 135, 146 (2020); 
cf. State v. Miyasaki, 62 Haw. 269, 284 n.15, 614 
P.2d 915, 924 n.15 (1980) (“ The prosecutor is obviously in a position to 
tailor his questions, consciously or otherwise, on the basis of his knowledge 
of the defendant’s prior  testimony and can do so without any overt reference 
to the testimony given under immunity.”); Am. Bar Ass’n, Criminal Justice 
Standards for the Prosecution Function  § 3-6.6(d) (4th ed. 2017) (“The 
prosecutor should not bring to the attention of the trier of fact matters 
that the prosecutor knows to be inadmissible, whether by offering or 
displaying inadmissible evidence, asking legally objectionable questions, or 
making impermissible comments or arguments.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 (continued . . .)  more efficacious on the issue”  and the evidence likely “ rouse[d] 
the jury to overmastering hostility against ” the defendant).   As 
our decision in Kazanas recognizes, when there is a demonstrable 
need to introduce evidence of prior bad acts, admission of such 
evidence is limited 
and circumscribed by that necessity.  138 
Hawaiʻi at 43, 37
5 P.3d at 1281.    
  I n this case, any  need to provide context as to 
Gallagher’s intent did not make it  necessary to introduce 
evidence of the details of each of the four prior incidents, the 
Normans’ extreme fear, or the extensive countermeasures taken .  
Nor was the admission of such evidence needed to establish that 
the charged incident was not a “random”  event or to show intent 
as to the monetary amount of the damage caused, as the 
dissenting opinions maintain.  See Dissent at 17-18, 22; 
Recktenwald, C.J., Dissenting at 4 [hereinafter C.J. Dissent].   
  The dissenting opinions  also argue that the need for 
the evidence demonstrates the probative value of the prior 
incidents because it was the only  evidence available to show 
Gallagher’s intent  to seriously damage the vehicle.  Dissent at 
20; C.J. Dissent at 2.12  The evidence at trial refutes this 
                     
 12 Professor Bowman has aptly observed in his evidence treatise that 
the intent inferences of HRE Rule 404(b) require critical examination:   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 (continued . . .)  contention.  Ms. Norman testified at trial that Gallagher hit 
the car approximately fourteen to sixteen times, described the 
dents in the car as “massive,” and stated Gallagher’s kicks and 
punches were so loud she thought he was using a baseball bat.  
Also presented were Mr. Norman’s observations of the damage, 
video evidence showing Gallagher as he caused the damage with an 
accompanying narrative by Ms
. Norman, photographs depicting the 
damage, and the testimonies of Yoshizawa and Little, who 
assessed the value of the damage to the truck.  All of this 
evidence was not only used to show Gallagher’s intent, but it 
was significantly more probative of his intent on the night he 
caused the damage than Ms. Norman’s observations of Gallagher’s 
prior conduct in the preceding weeks and months that did not 
involve property damage.13   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Because mens rea is an element of the prosecution’s case -in-chief in 
most criminal cases, the intent inferences of rule 404(b) require 
analytical rigor. . . .   
 Analytical rigor is required because nearly all crimes contain a 
mens rea element and the intent inference, arguably applicable whenever 
the prior crime is of the same type, could easily swallow the character 
exclusion.  The key to analysis of criminal in tent is a careful 
application of the need factor[.]  
 
Bowman, supra, § 404- 3[2][G], at 4- 56 (emphases added).   
 
 13 Justice Nakayama’s dissent argues that the extensive evidence in 
this case was ineffective to show Gallagher’s intent because he denied 
kicking the vehicle hard or many times and intending to cause more than 
$1,500 worth of damage.  Dissent at 2 2.  To reach this conclusion, the 
dissent summarily discounts the Normans’ eyewitness testimony of Gallagher’s 
actions during the incident, their subsequent observation of the damage to 
the vehicle, the video recording of the incident introduced into evidence and 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31   Th us, the evidence adduced at trial in this case 
demonstrates there was little need, and even less probativeness, 
for the detailed testimony about each of 
the prior incidents, 
the safety measures taken by the Normans, and the  fearful 
reactions by the Normans to Gallagher’s conduct because 
alternative methods of proof were equally efficacious and less 
unfairly prejudicial.  These factors, the need for the evidence 
and the availability of alternative evidence on the same point 
thus weigh strongly against the testimony’s admissibility. 
  As to the final HRE Rule 403 factor, the likelihood 
that the evidence will inspire ill- will in the jury toward the 
defendant, the number of prior incidents and the involved 
circumstances had a high potential to “rouse the jury to 
overmastering hostility” against Gallagher.  Behrendt , 124 
Hawaiʻi at 106, 237 P.3d at 1172 (quoting Renon , 73 Haw. at 38, 
828 P.2d at 1273).  The jury heard detailed testimony from 
Ms. Norman regarding Gallagher’s erratic behavior on prior 
occasions, which consisted of angry gestures and profane 
language toward her.  Ms. Norman also testified that the prior 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
observed by the jury, and the testimony of the State’s two expert witnesses 
as to the damage.  If the alternative evidence in this case was held  to be 
insufficient to address the purported need to show an intent inference, then 
the effect of such a precedent would be to “swallow the character exclusion.”  
Bowman, supra, § 404- 3[2][G], at 4- 56.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 incidents terrified her, that she filed six police reports 
against Gallagher, and that she and Mr. Norman took measures--
such as tinting windows of their home and installing 
surveillance and alarm system
s--in response to Gallagher’s prior 
harassment.  The testimony was virtually certain to elicit from 
the jury strong sympathy for the Normans and animus toward 
Gallagher for the fear and unwarranted disruption Gallagher’s 
ongoing behavior had caused in the Normans’ li ves--and 
Ms. Norman in particular.14  
  This extremely prejudicial effect was likely 
exacerbated by the State’s focus on the past incidents in its 
opening statement and closing argument.  The State repeatedly 
                     
 14 Justice Nakayama’s dissent dismisses the unfairly prejudicial 
effect of this evidence by drawing an inapt comparison to our decision in 
Behrendt.  See Dissent at 24 -25.  In that case, we concluded the prior bad 
acts involved conduct that “was of the same g eneral type” as the alleged 
crime and therefore unlikely to rouse the jury to overmastering hostility.  
Behrendt, 124 Hawaiʻ i at 107, 237 P.3d at 1173.  In contrast, none  of the 
previous incidents here involved property damage--the crime for which 
Gallagher was charged in this case--but rather obscene language and gestures, 
which communicated to the jury, as the dissent describes, “an escalating 
pattern of extreme aggressi on toward a specific couple.”  Dissent at 17.  The 
dissimilar prior misconduct in this case plainly “carried with it the 
potential to rouse the jury to overmastering hostility against” Gallagher and 
thus violated HRE Rule 403.  Kazanas, 138 Hawai ʻi at 43, 375 P.3d at 1281 
(concluding that evidence of the defendant’s prior physical acts were not 
similar to the acts alleged in that case and created the potential of 
overmastering hostility towards the defendant, and thus the trial court 
abused its discretion in performing the HRE 403 balancing test).    
  Additionally, the prior misconduct in Behrendt was admitted to 
show the defendant’s development of “a relationship of trust and control” 
over the minor, and to explain both the delayed reporting of the sexual abuse 
and when the abuse began.  Behrendt, 124 Hawai ʻi at 107- 08, 237 P.3d at 1173-
74.  The dissent thus draws an incongruous comparison of the circumstances in 
Behrendt to those in this case and does not properly consider the 
availability of alternative evidence to prove the matter for which the 
misconduct evidence was offered in the two cases.  See Dissent at 2 4-25. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 emphasized that “[t]his was not an isolated incident” and 
focused on the extensive countermeasures the Normans had taken 
in response to the prior events, expressly  stating that it had 
introduced this evidence to show the Normans ’ perception of 
Gallagher.  The State argued that Gallagher “was becoming mo re 
dangerous each time he showed up,” seeming to  encourage the jury 
to consider whether convicting Gallagher would  prevent him from 
causing more harm.  The possible future threat Gallagher posed 
was also irrelevant to whether the elements of criminal property 
damage in the second degree were met by Gallagher’s conduct.   
This factor therefore 
also weighs heavily against admittance of 
the prior incidents.   
  Justice Nakayama’s dissent places  much reliance on the 
ability of the limiting instructions given by the court to cure 
the potential for the jury’s improper use of the evidence of 
prior bad acts because “it will be presumed that the jury 
adhered to the circuit court’s instruction .”  See Dissent at 19  
(quoting State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai ʻi 493, 519,  193 P.3d 409, 
435 (2008)).  However, the ability to cure potential misuse of 
the evidence with a limiting instruction presupposes that the 
court correctly instructed the jury as to the evidence’s proper 
use.  
  T he requirement to issue a legally correct  limiting 
instruction derives from “the trial courts . . . duty and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 ultimate responsibility to insure that juries are properly 
instructed on issues of criminal liability.”   State v. Ad viento, 
132 Hawaiʻ i 123, 137, 319 P.3d 1131, 1145 (2014) (citation 
omitted).  This responsibility is of such importance that it 
rests upon the court even when a misstatement of law is the 
result of an improper argument of counsel to the jury.  State v. 
Espiritu, 117 Hawai ʻi 127, 143, 176 P.3d 885, 901 (2008) (“[T]he 
failure to correct misstatements of law by a prosecutor may 
result in reversal of a defendant ’s conviction. ”); State v. 
Basham, 132 Hawaiʻ i 97, 111, 319 P.3d 1105, 1119 (2014) (holding 
that a prosecutor’s misstatement of the law was not cured where 
no specific curative instruction was given relating to the 
misstatement that was given).  Similarly, a court’s limiting 
instruction to the jury is also ineffective when it incorrectly 
instructs the jury about the limited use of admitted evidence.  
As provided by HRE Rule 105 (1993),  “When evidence which is 
admissible . . . for one purpose but not admissible . . . for 
another purpose is admitted, the court, upon request, shall 
restrict the evidence to its proper scope and instruct the jury 
accordingly.”  (Emphasis added. )   
This court recently addressed the importance of 
providing a proper limiting instruction to the jury.  In State 
v. Lavoie, t he trial court ruled that prior acts of abuse were 
admissible to rebut the defendant’s penal responsibility and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 extreme mental or emotional disturbance defenses, but the 
court’s limiting instruction informed the jury that the evidence 
could be considered on t he defendant’s intent to commit the 
offenses.15  State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi 409, 428 -29, 453 P.3d 
229, 248-49 (2019).  We held that the instruction was an 
incorrect statement of the issues on which the trial  court had 
ruled the prior bad acts were relevant, as it allowed the jury 
to consider the prior bad acts for a purpose other than that for 
which they had been admitted.  Id. at 429-30, 453 P.3d at 249-
50.  Thus, we determined that the trial court had improperly 
instructed the jury on the use of the prior misconduct evidence.  
Id.16   
  In this case, Gallagher duly requested a limiting 
instruction, and the court was required to “restrict the 
evidence to its proper scope.”  Instead,  the court informed the 
jury that Gallagher’s prior acts could be con sidered in 
determining “the issue of the Defendant’s motive to commit the 
offense charged, opportunity to commit the offense charged, 
. . . preparation to commit the offense charged, plan to commit 
                     
 15 The trial court in Lavoie, as in this case, read the limiting 
instruction multiple times to the jury during the course of the trial.  
Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻ i at 429, 453 P.3d at 249 .  
 
 16 We concluded that it was unnecessary to determine whether the 
limiting instruction was “plainly erroneous” in light of our disposition of 
other issues in the case.  Lavoie , 145 Hawai ʻi at 429
 n.36, 453 P.3d at 249 
n.36.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 (continued . . .)  the offense charged, and identity of the person who may have or 
allegedly committed the offense charged. ”  This instruction, 
given twice, was plainly incorrect.   
  T he prior incidents should not have been  considered by 
the jury for Gallagher’s motive, opportunity, preparation, or 
plan because Gallagher’s identity as the per son who committed 
the charged offense was not in dispute.  See Castro, 69 Haw. at 
645, 756 P.2d at 1042 (when “the identity of the perpetrator of 
the crimes was not denied, [] the admission of the other crimes 
evidence as proof of modus operandi,” including plan and 
preparation, “cannot be justified”).   Instead of curing or 
limiting any potential misuse of the evidence, the court’ s 
“limiting” instruction expansively and improperly allowed the 
jury to consider the prior bad acts in order to prove , for 
example, that Gallagher had a plan to damage the car, that these 
prior acts were part of his preparation 
to commit the crime 
charged, and that the prior incidents of misconduct  related to 
Gallagher’s motive for the offense.17  See Lavoie, 145 Hawai ʻi at 
                     
 17 Justice Nakayama’s  dissent fails to recognize the substantial 
risk of the jury misapplying the prior misconduct evidence as a result of the 
court’s flawed limiting instruction --hypothesizing that the jury considered 
the evidence only for issues not in dispute--and thus concludes that the 
instruction was harmless.  Dissent at 19- 20 n.9.  But it is precisely because 
the limiting instruction failed to restrict consideration of the evidence to 
the purpose for which it was admitted while specifically allowing the jury to 
consider the misconduct evidence for issues not relevant to the charge, such 
as plan, preparation, and motive to commit the charged offense, that the 
prejudice to Gallagher from the prior misconduct evidence was exacerbated.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 430 n.39, 453 P.3d at 250 n.39 (trial court erred by not 
tailoring the limiting instructions to the specific matters for 
which the prior bad acts were deemed relevant).  
  N ot only were plan, preparation, and motive not 
elements of the crime, but as Gallagher’s counsel argued to the 
court during the motions in limine and at trial, because 
identification was 
also not in issue, the introduction of the 
prior incidents would confuse and mislead the jury.  It was 
incumbent upon the court to issue a limiting instruction that 
properly instructed the jury as to the legitimate uses of the 
prior incidents after the court admitted the misconduct 
evidence, particularly 
in light of its great potential for 
misapplication by the jury.  See HRE Rule 105 (requiring t he 
court, when requested,  to restrict admitted evidence to its 
proper scope).   We have repeatedly emphasized that it is the 
trial court’s duty to properly  instruct the jury on the 
applicable law, and that once instructional error is 
demonstrated, the judgment will be vacated if the erroneous 
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  See, 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
  
Castro, 69 Haw. at 645 –46, 756 P.2d at 1042 (holding there was “no [] basis 
to consider the evidence admissible under the rubric of ‘preparation’” or 
plan, and “the potential for unfair prejudice being generated by the evidence 
was far greater than its value in  establishing facts of consequence to the 
determination of the case”).  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 e.g., State v. Taylor, 130 Hawaiʻi 196, 204 -08, 307 P.3d 1142, 
1150-54 (2013); State v. Kikuta , 125 Hawaiʻi 78, 95, 253 P.3d 
639, 656 (2011); State v. Stenger , 122 Hawaiʻi 271, 281, 226 P. 3d 
441, 451 (2010).  Thus, the dissent’s reliance on the court’s 
limiting instructi on, see Dissent at 19,  is misplaced because it 
improperly instructed the jury that the evidence of bad acts 
could be considered in determining  Gallagher’s motive, 
opportunity, preparation, or plan to commit the offense charged .   
  U pon hearing the evidence of the prior incidents in 
this case, the jury likely “prejudge[d]” Gallagher based on “a 
bad general record” of interactions with the Normans and 
“den[ied] him a fair opportunity to defend against” the specific 
charge of criminal property damage in the second degree.  
Castro, 69 Haw. at 645, 756 P.2d at 1042 (quoting Michelson v. 
United States, 335 U.S. 469, 476 (1948)); accord Kazanas, 138 
Hawaiʻi at 43, 375 P.3d at 128 1 (holding that the  improper 
admission of a prior domestic abuse offense against a vulnerable 
victim could have roused the jury to overmastering hostility 
against the defendant).   “On balance, the potential for unfair 
prejudice being generated by the evidence was far greater than 
its value in establishing facts of consequence to the 
determination of the case.”  Castro, 69 Haw. at 645- 46, 756 P.2d 
at 1042.  Thus, the circuit court abused its discretion in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 finding that the prejudicial effect of the prior incidents did 
not substantially outweigh their  probative value.  
  Recognizin
g that the admission of the extensive 
details pertaining to the prior incidents was “highly 
prejudicial” and clearly inadmissible, the Chief Justice’s  
dissent argues that Gallagher failed to preserve his objection 
to this evidence and th
us “waived” an objection to its 
introduction.  C.J. Dissent at 6-7.  The basis for  this flawed 
contention is that Gallagher did not object to what the Chief 
Justice’s dissent calls
 “impact testimony” as to the four prior 
incidents.18   
  In this case, Gallagher  objected to the admission of 
the evidence regarding the four prior incidents five separate 
times: in the written motions in limine,  during the hearing on 
the motions in limine and in opposition to the State’s notice s 
of intent, in the State’s opening state ment, and during 
Ms. Norman’s testimony when she was about to testify regarding 
                     
 18 The Chief Justice’s dissent identifies the “impact testimony” as 
including 
 
the Normans’ repeated calling of police regarding the incidents; their 
filing of six police reports involving harassment; the numerous 
protective measures installed in their home, including the tinting of 
windows and the installation of a surveillance system with seven video 
cameras and an alarm system; and – perhaps most prejudicial – the 
recounting of the Normans’ ongoing fear of Gallagher and Ms. Norman’s 
statement that the prior incidents terrorized her.  
 
C.J. Dissent at 6. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 the prior incidents.  Nonetheless, t he “impact testimony” theory 
faults the specificity of Gallagher’s multiple objections , 
positing an artificial distinction between an object ion relating 
to conduct and one relating to the results  of that same conduct .  
Under this theory, Gallagher waived his objection to the “impact 
testimony” because,  while he objected to the introduction of 
evidence of his actions in the various incidents , he did not 
specify that he was also objecting to the reactions  of the 
Normans to his actions.  C .J. Dissent at 6-15. 
  However, t he very substance of Gallagher’s objections 
clearly indicates  that Gallaghe r’s objections were  not 
restricted only to his conduct during the prior incidents.  I n 
Gallagher’s written motions  in limine, he requested an order 
excluding “testimonial or documentary” evidence “ relating to any 
other ‘acts’, bad or otherwise involving the defendant ” and 
specifically “any ” such evidence “ regarding alleged incidents 
involving the Complaining Witnesses and/or other person” on the 
four dates.  (Emphases added.)  This objection manifestly 
included the evidence characterized by the C hief Justice’s 
dissent as “impact testimony”  (e.g., the Normans’ repeated 
calling of police regarding the incidents; their filing of six 
police reports involving harassment; Ms. Norman’s statement that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 the prior incidents terrorized her), as the evidence was 
“relating to” and “regard ing” the prior incidents .19  
  The “impact testimony” theory is further refuted by 
the very nature of the prior incidents that the State sought to 
introduce, which the State identified in its notices of intent 
as harassment or harassment by stalking incidents .  These 
offenses, as they pertain to this case, requires the victim to 
“reasonably believe []” that the actor intends to cause bodily 
injury to the victim or damage to their property.  See HRS 
§§ 711-1106(1)(a), (f) (2014 ), 711-1106.5 (2014).  Thus, by 
definition and by their  inherent nature,  the underlying conduct 
of these offenses directly involve d “impact”  upon Ms. Norman, 
particularly her fear that directly resulted from Gallagher ’s 
actions.  Therefore, Gallagher’s objections to the prior 
incidents listed in the State’s notices of intent because the 
incidents were irrelevant and unduly prejudicial included the 
reactions of the Normans that related to or involved the 
reported harassment.  
  T he State in fact expressly noted in the pretrial 
hearing that it intended to show “an escalating series of 
                     
 19 Indeed, had the court granted Gallagher’s motion to preclude any 
evidence regarding the prior incidents, under the analysis of the  Chief 
Justice’s dissent, the State would nevertheless have been allowed to elicit 
“impact testimony” from Ms. Norman, such as her reporting of the six 
incidents to the police and that the prior incidents terrorized her.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 events” and that it would seek to elicit evidence regarding the 
harassment incidents,  including the threating nature of 
Gallagher’s visits and the resulting extensive countermeasures 
the Normans undertook.   
[COUNSEL]: . . . .  [Gallagher] just started appearing at 
our complaining witness’s house, essentially taking them to 
the point where they had to get a protective order against 
him, installed a video surveillance system on their house, 
basically because he had come around so many times 
threatening them[.]  
 
It is clear that testimony surrounding the incidents that the 
State sought to introduce include d the results of Gallagher’s 
threatening behavior, which at a minimum had “tak[en] [the 
Normans] to the point where they had to . . . install[] a video 
surveillance system.”20  There is no question that the State 
correctly concluded that the circuit court had ruled that 
Ms. Norman could testify as to her reactions during and to the 
                     
 20 The Chief Justice’s dissent po ints to other statements made by 
the prosecutor during the  motions in limine hearing to support its position 
that the prior misconduct sought to be admitted by the prosecutor only 
pertained to Gallagher’s actions and not the results of his actions upon the  
Normans.  However, even in the description of the incidents that the dissent  
relies upon, the prosecutor recounted to the court that Ms. Norman  “observes 
the defendant outside of her house again being aggressive, yelling 
profanities at her, ” that Ms. Norman “reports harassment,” “ reports again to 
the police that this is the same individual ,” and “files a police report.”  
Additionally, in the prosecutor’s written notice s of intent, the incidents 
were identified as four  incidents of harassment and two of harassment by 
stalking.  It is unmistakably clear that the prosecutor sought to introduce 
not only actions by Gallagher in the incidents but the Normans ’ reactions to 
his conduct, including the fear they engendered, the numerous police reports 
filed, and the protective measure cited by the prosecutor.  If the prosecutor 
had intended otherwise, as the Chief Justice’s dissent maintains, its 
admission would have minimized Gallagher’s  conduct by considering his actions 
as something separate from their effects on the Normans.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 incidents since her reactions prompted the phone calls to 
police, the filing of police reports, and the necessity for the 
video surveillance system
.21  And there is also no question that 
Gallagher’s objection s to the evidence “regarding” or “relat ing” 
to the prior incidents likewise sought to exclude this 
testimony.  
  Indeed, the illogicality  of distinguishing between 
objections to the conduct and the  impact of that conduct has its 
own implications.  As the Chief Justice’s dissent aptly notes, 
the State’s notices of intent did not expressly advise that it 
intended to introduce the resulting “impact” occasioned by the  
harassment incidents, and it is partially for this reason that 
the dissent concludes that Gallagher’s  objections to these 
incidents were ineffectual in preserving objections to this 
evidence.  See C. J. Dissent at 9.  Yet, it is clear that the 
prosecutor intended to and did, in fact,  elicit Ms. Norman ’s 
“impact testimony. ”  Thus, under the Chief Justice’s  analysis, 
the State engaged in prosecutorial misconduct by failing to 
provide reasonable 
notice of its intent to adduce “impact” 
evidence of Gallagher’s  “other crimes, wrongs, or act s,” which 
falls squarely within HRE Rule 404(b).  See HRE Rule 404(b) (“ In 
                     
 21 The State’s understanding of the trial court’s ruling is 
abundantly clear from its opening statement when it provided a wholesale 
description of the prior incidents, inclusive of  their resulting impacts.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered under 
this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in advance of 
trial, or during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on 
good cause shown, of the date, location, and general nature of 
any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial. ”); State v. 
Underwood, 142 Hawai ʻi 317, 325 n.12, 418 P.3d 658, 666 n.12 
(2018).  Thus, under the Chief Justice’s analysis , we would be 
compelled to find that the prosecutor ’s misconduct in failing to 
provide notice of its intention to adduce “impact evidence ” was 
“highly prejudicial” and deprived Gallagher of a fair trial.  
  It is noted that the “impact testimony theory” was 
never advocated by the State at trial or raised on appeal, is 
contrary to the approach our courts have long applied, and 
is 
not part of our evidence law.  Additionally, the artificial 
distinction between actions and their effects would create 
difficult problems for counsel and the court in its application .  
Prosecutors and defense attorneys-- and the courts in their 
rulings--would  be required to dissect the series of events in 
any misconduct incident to distinguish between the actions of 
the defendant and the effects of those actions, parceling out 
such matters as the victim’s reactions to the conduct, the 
resulting fear or injuries from the conduct, and  defensive 
responses taken during the incident.  We thus  reject the “impact 
testimony” theory propounded by the Chief Justice’s dissent.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45   In summary,  it is clear that Gallagher properly 
preserved his objection to the testimonial evidence regarding 
the prior incidents, including the unduly prejudicial testimony 
of the extensive surrounding details elicited from Ms. Norman.22    
  Finally, the Chief Justice’s  dissent acknowledges the 
HRE Rule 404(b) principle that “ whether or not the proffer 
survives the [HRE] rule 403 balance may well depend on whether 
                     
 22 It is noted that this court has previously rejected the “waiver” 
analysis that the Chief Justice’s dissent advocates in an analogous context.  
In State v. Schnabel, the petitioner sought to prevent the State from 
eliciting evidence of petitioner’s juvenile  proceedings, arguing that the 
evidence was not relevant and that its probative value was substantially 
outweighed by the risk of prejudice.  127 Hawai ʻi 432, 457– 58, 279 P.3d 1237, 
1262
–63 (2012).  We held that the circuit court had erred in allowing the 
evidence to be introduced because HRS § 571 -84(h) barred the introduction of 
such evidence, and further concluded that petitioner had not waived the 
argument by failing to specify the statute in its objection.  As we explained 
in Schnabel,  
“Case law from our state indicates . . . that the purpose 
of requiring a specific objection is to inform the trial 
court of the error.”  State v. Long , 98 Hawaiʻ i 348, 353, 48 
P.3d 595, 600 (2002).  However, Long explained that an 
appellate court will “consider a meritor ious objection not 
voiced to the trial judge” when “the ground for exclusion 
should have been obvious to [the] judge  and opposing 
counsel[,]” 98 Hawai ʻi at 354, 48 P.3d at 601 (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and emphasis omitted) (emphasis 
added).  Although Petitioner did not specifically raise HRS 
§ 571–84(h), its applicability should have been “apparent 
from the context[,]” HRE Rule 103(a)(1) of Petitioner’s 
objection.  
 
Id. at 458, 279 P.3d at 1263 (alterations in original).  As stated above, 
Gallagher clearly informed the court that he sought to preclude “any 
testimonial or documentary evidence regarding the alleged incidents” and 
repeatedly objected to the State’s introduction of the incidents as 
irrelevant and unduly prejudicial.  Even assuming Gallagher’s objections were 
not specific enough to include the Normans’ reactions to his conduct, which 
they were, it should have been obvious to the court that Gallagher’s 
objections were not limited to his  conduct during the incidents, but rather 
they included “any” testimony “regarding” or “relating” to the prior 
incidents.    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 or not the matter is in dispute[, which requires] consideration 
of the precise defensive  claims being ma de in the case. ”  C.J. 
Dissent at 4 (alterations in original) (quoting Addison M. 
Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual
 § 404-3[3][D], at 4- 60 
(2016-2017 ed.)).  Both dissent s, however, contend that because 
a juror submitted a question regarding Gallagher’s identity, 
that question essentially demonstrated his identity was 
disputed, which in turn rendered Gallagher’s prior conduct as 
“relevant and admissible.”   C.J. Dissent at 5.23  In their 
efforts to por tray identity as a disputed issue that did not 
exist at trial, the dissents seek to establish and apply a new 
legal principle that juror questions submitted  during trial can 
be utilized to evaluate the validity of evidentiary rulings.  
This approach is fundamentally flawed.   
  Under the dissents’ theory, a juror’s question that 
comes before other witnesses are called to testify on the 
“disputed” matter or before other physical evidence is 
introduced may be determinative of the admissibility of HRE Rule 
404(b) evidence.  
The juror question relied upon by the 
                     
 23 Like Justice Nakayama’s dissent, the Chief Justice’s dissent 
points to the fact that because Gallagher did not stipulate to the  elements 
of the offense, the State’s burden of proof provided a basis for admission of 
the HRE Rule 404(b) misconduct  evidence.  C.J. Dissent at 4.  The contention 
that an unstipulated element renders the element in dispute for purposes of 
HRE Rule 404(b) analysis is contrary to our caselaw, conflicts with settled 
evidentiary principles set forth in Professor Addison Bowman’s tre atise, and 
would effectively nullify the restrictions of HRE Rule 404(b).  See supra 
note 9. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 dissents, which occurred at the conclusion of Ms. Norman’s 
testimony, was the following:  “Can the Defendant be positively 
identified that it is really him? ”  C.J. Dissent at 5; see 
Dissent at 14  n.5.  However, even if consideration of jury 
questions were permissible to review evidentiary rulings, the 
obvious problem with the dissents’ reliance on this question to 
show a disputed issue of identity is that the question was posed 
prior to Mr. Norman’s testimony and prior to the defense case 
when Gallagher testified to his actions during the incident.   In 
Mr. Norman’s subsequent testimony, he  identified Gallagher in 
court, described Gallagher’s movements during the night of the 
incident, and stated that Gallagher caused the damage to the 
vehicle depicted in photographs published to the jury.  In 
Gallagher’s testimony , he unequivocally testified that he was 
the person who had kicked the vehicle.   
  T he issue of identify was unquestionably not disputed 
at trial, and it did not become disputed as a result of a juror 
question about the certainty of a witness’  identification that 
occurred before evidence in the case was concluded.  Yet, under 
the dissents’ hypothesis, the substance of questions posed by 
jurors is a factor to be considered when determining questions 
of the admissibility of evidence under HRE Rule 404(b).  This  
rationale merely reflects the absence of a legally valid reason 
given by the dissents for the admission of the prior misconduct ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 (continued . . .)  evidence.  And absurdly, a juror’s question that comes before 
other witnesses are called to testify on the “disputed” matter 
or before other physical evidence is introduced may be 
determinative of the admissibility of HRE Rule 404(b) evidence.24  
Under this approach, th e State would benefit from a prosecutor’s 
deficient direct examination that results  in juror questions to 
clarify a witness’  testimony , which then incongruously provides  
a basis for admission of misconduct evidence.   
  I t is noted that the novel approach of the dissenting 
opinions, that an appellate court may use a juror question to 
review the legal propriety of an evidentiary trial ruling (and 
perhaps other rulings as well), was neither argued n or raised by 
the State.  But even assuming that legal principles permitted 
juror questions to
 be used to support an evidentiary ruling 
(which they emphatically do not), by the same logic, juror 
questions could also be used to show that a prior evidentiary 
ruling was erroneous.25  Trial judges would then be placed in the 
                     
 24 The Chief Justice’s  dissent asserts agreement with this opinion 
that juror questions do not determine the admissibility of evidence under HRE 
Rule 404(b).  But, because it is undisputed that the evidence as to identity 
was not contested, the juror question remains the only basis the dissents 
point to for admission of the misconduct evidence.  As stated, the absence of 
a stipulation does not make an undisputed element of an offense disputed, nor 
does it provide a vehicle to circumvent our settled law on HRE Rule 404(b).  
See authorities and caselaw discussed supra  note 9.  
 
 25 Indeed, one  juror question asked,  “Was this the first time the
defendant caused property damage against the Normans?”   Applying the 
dissents’ reasoning, this question would firmly support Gallagher ’s  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 position of having their evidentiary rulings upended by the 
substance of questions submitted by jurors.  Consequently, a 
trial court would need to 
be ready to reconsider its prior 
evidentiary rulings  based on jury questions , and appellate 
courts would be required to evaluate both the initial 
evidentiary ruling of the trial court and its response to a 
juror question as it relates to the earlier ruling.  This 
underscores the problematic nature of the proposition advocated 
by the dissents. 
 
 In summary, the reliance by the dissents on the juror 
question regarding “identity” is flawed because  the evidence at 
trial unquestionably demonstrated that identity was not in 
dispute, under well-settled legal principles the admissibility 
of HRE Rule 404(b) evidence is not supported or refuted by the 
substance of a juror question, and even assuming such a 
principle existed in our law, neither the State ’s nor the 
defense’s evidence had been completed at the time the question 
was posed.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
contention that because none of the prior incidents involved property damage, 
they should have been excluded as having virtually no probative value to the 
only issue in this case--Gallagher’ s intent regarding the amount of property 
damage caused to the Normans ’ vehicle--and thus their admission violated HRE 
Rule 403. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 B. The Circuit Court’s Error Was Not Harmless.  
  “In applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard[,] the court is required to examine the record and 
determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed
 to the conviction.”  
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai ʻi 339, 368, 219 P.3d 1126, 1155 (2009) 
(alterations in original) (quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 
Hawaiʻi 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996)).   
  This is not a case “[w]here there is a wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show” beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Gallagher intended or knew that his 
actions would cause over $1,500 in damage to the Normans’ 
property.  State v. Rivera, 62 Haw. 120, 128, 612 P.2d 526, 532 
(1980).  Although the repair estimates presented by the State 
may initially suggest that it was manifest that the damage 
exceeded $1,500, the amount of divergence between the estimated 
amounts demonstrates the difficulty of objectively gauging the 
cost of automotive repairs.  Yoshizawa, the mechanic who 
testified for the State, asserted that the repairs would cost 
$4,583.04.  In contrast, Little, an automotive damage specialist 
for the Normans’ insurance company, estimated the damage at 
$3,036.26--$1546.78 less than Yoshizawa.  If the estimates of 
two trained specialists varied to such a degree, it can hardly 
be said beyond a reasonable doubt that Gallagher was aware the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 damage he was causing was likely to exceed $1,500 simply from 
viewing it as it occurred. 
  The State’s other evidence on the issue consisted 
primarily of visual depictions of the incident and its aftermath 
and testimony of the Normans’ perception of the event.  The 
State introduced two video recordings that showed Gallagher 
running up to and flailing at the Norma ns’ vehicle without clear 
purpose or direction.  The State also presented the testimony of 
Mr. Norman, who testified that he saw multiple dents on the 
vehicle after the incident on September 15, 2013, and identified 
a series of photographs that depicted the damage to the vehicle 
that was allegedly caused by Gallagher.  The State published the 
photographs to the jury and entered them into evidence; they do 
not appear to clearly depict extreme damage and show that the 
truck had many preexisting scratches and scuff marks.   
  In contrast, Gallagher testified that he had kicked 
the truck with only the inside of his foot and that the incident 
lasted a total of only ten seconds.  Gallagher said that he was 
5 feet 9 inches tall and weighed 160 pounds and that he was 
wearing a pair of cross- trainers  during the incident.  He 
indicated that he had only “put a couple scuff marks on the 
truck,” which would have amounted to $300 or $400 in damage , 
requiring only a “detail job to buff it out” or a “wax job” to 
repair.  Gallagher stated that he did not intend to do extensive ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 damage to the vehicle.  Given this balance of evidence, the 
jury’s determination essentially turned on whether they credited 
Gallagher’s testimony regarding the extent of the damage he 
intended to cause and was aware he was causing, and this 
assessment could have been colored by the dramatic details of 
the prior incidents.   
  Further, the prejudicial testimony may have led the 
jury to decide the case on considerations completely independent 
of the charged offense.  The jury may have viewed the entire 
course of Gallagher’s conduct as a continuing campaign of 
harassment against the Normans that they could end by convicting 
him.  And the jurors may have decided the case based not on the 
amount of damage Gallagher intended to cause during the charged 
incident, but rather a desire to relieve the Normans of the 
ongoing hardship of constantly dealing with Gallagher’s 
misconduct toward them and the extreme fear that it caused them.   
  “Unfair prejudice ‘ means an undue tendency to suggest 
decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, 
an emotional one.’”  Kaeo v. Davis , 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d 
387, 392 (1986) (quoting Advisory Committee ’s Note to Federal 
Rules of Evidence 403); see HRE Rule 403 cmt . (specifying that a 
form of unfair prejudice is the evidence’s “potential  for 
engendering”  the jury’s emotions, such as “ hostility [] or 
sympathy” ).  Because we do not conclude that the wrongfully ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
53 admitted testimony did not color the jury’s perception as to 
whether the elements of the offense were met or lead the jury to 
decide the case on a basis unrelated to those elements, there is 
a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to 
Gallagher’s conviction .  The error was therefore not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.   
V. CONCLUSION 
  Based upon the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s judgment 
on appeal, vacate the circuit court’s judgment of conviction  and 
sentence, and remand the case for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.  
 
 Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for petitioner  
 
Peter A. Hanano
for respondent  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
