*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29792 29-MAR-2012 
10:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I
 
---O0O--­
STATE OF HAWAI fI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
JASON KIESE, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-29792
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29792; FC-CR. NO. 09-1-1136)
 
March 29, 2012
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCKENNA, J.1
 
We hold that although the ICA correctly held that there was
 
sufficient evidence to sustain Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant
 
Jason Kiese’s (“Kiese”) harassment conviction, it erred in not
 addressing the family court’s failure to stay Kiese’s sentence
 
The Opinion of the Court originally filed on March 29, 2012, is amended to
include the date the Opinion was filed.
 
1
 1 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pending appeal based on the mootness doctrine because the public
 
interest exception to the mootness doctrine applies. 
We further hold that Kiese, as a petty misdemeanant on bail, 
pursuant to Hawai fi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§ 804-4(a) and (b) 
(Supp. 2001), State v. Ortiz, 74 Haw. 343, 845 P.2d 547 (1993), and State v. Miller, 79 Hawai
fi 194, 900 P.2d 770 (1995), was 
entitled to a continuance of bail as a matter of right pending appellate review, and the family court was without jurisdiction to execute Kiese’s sentence. The family court therefore erred by denying Kiese a stay of his petty misdemeanor sentence pending appeal. 
Kiese’s other points are unpersuasive, and we hold that the
 
ICA did not err (1) in concluding that, even if the prosecutor’s
 line of questioning was improper, the family court is presumed to
 have disregarded it; and (2) by making presumptions about non-
responses on the record to sustain the conviction. 
Although we accepted certiorari to address the stay of
 
sentence issue, because we uphold the conviction and because
 Kiese has already served his probationary sentence, we affirm the
 ICA’s judgment on appeal, which affirmed the family court’s
 judgment of conviction and sentence.
 
2
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Kiese was charged by Complaint with one count of harassment,
 
in violation of HRS § 711-1106(1)(a)(Supp. 2008).2 The
 
prosecution stemmed from an incident in which Kiese allegedly
 
slapped his six-year-old son (“Minor”) in the face once with an
 open hand and struck him with a thin bamboo rod on the buttocks,
 arms, and hands multiple times. After a bench trial, the family
 court found Kiese guilty as charged and denied his motion to stay
 his sentence pending appeal. The ICA affirmed the judgment of
 conviction and concluded that the family court’s denial of his
 stay was erroneous but moot. State v. Kiese, No. 29792 (App.
 
Feb. 25, 2011)(mem.) at 20. What follows is a brief history of
 this case. 
A. Competency Hearing
 
Before trial commenced, the Minor was called to the stand to
 
determine whether he was competent to testify. During the
 competency hearing, the Minor’s responses were frequently noted
 as “not audible” in the trial transcripts. The Minor often gave
 non-verbal answers to questions posed by the prosecutor and
 defense counsel, shaking his head, nodding his head, and
 shrugging his shoulders. The court, prosecutor, and defense
 counsel interpreted the Minor’s gestures for the record, when
 
HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) states, as it did at the time of the alleged
offense, “A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to
harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person . . . [s]trikes, shoves,
kicks, or otherwise touches another person in an offensive manner or subjects
the other person to offensive physical contact[.]”
 
3
 2   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
there was apparently no verbal response or even immediately
 
following a verbal response consistent with the gesture. No
 objections were raised to the court’s, prosecutor’s, or defense
 counsel’s interpretations. 
After cross-examining the Minor, however, defense counsel
 
challenged the Minor’s competency based on these gestures by
 saying, “Competency, Your Honor, again, goes beyond whether or
 not the Minor can answer yes or no questions. Sometimes he’s
 shrugging his shoulders. Sometimes he’s nodding his head, Your
 Honor. He has to be able to state in sentences what transpired.” 
The family court responded, “He needs to communicate
 effectively.” Although the family court remarked that the Minor
 presented a “borderline case,” he ultimately found the Minor
 competent to testify. 
The Minor was then administered the oath, with no audible
 
response to the oath registering in the trial transcripts, but
 with the clerk administering the oath stating, “Okay. Thank
 you,” to the Minor. Defense counsel did not object. 
B. Trial 
During the trial itself, the court, prosecutor, and defense
 
counsel continued explaining the Minor’s gestures for the record. 
There were no objections as to any interpretation of the Minor’s
 gestures. 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Because the Minor was not very verbal, the State elicited
 
some of his testimony as follows, referring to prior
 
conversations among the Minor, prosecutor, and defense counsel:
 
Q: (By the State): Okay. [Minor], do you remember talking
to [defense counsel] and myself earlier today?
A: (By Minor): Not really.
Q: Not really. You don’t remember talking to us?
A: (No audible response).
Q: Okay. So you don’t remember telling us that Daddy hit
you with a stick?
A: (No audible response).
Q: Wait, okay. [Minor], do you remember telling me that
Daddy hit you with a stick?
A: (No audible response).
Q: 
So do you remember?
(By the State): 
Your Honor, if the record will reflect the
witness nodded his head.
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
Q (By the State): Okay. And when you told us that Daddy
hit you with the stick, do you remember telling us that
Daddy hit you to the face with a stick?
(By Defense Counsel): Objection, Your Honor. Move to
 strike, hearsay statement, out of court.
(By the State): Your Honor, it’s obvious -- it’s a prior
consistent statement. I’m trying to lay the foundation to
bring in another witness to -- well, -­THE COURT: Objection is sustained.
Rephrase.
(By the State): Okay.
THE COURT: Keep it short.
Q (By the State): [Minor], do you remember telling me that
Daddy hit you with a stick?
A: (No audible response).
Q: Yes. 
Okay.
Your Honor, may the record reflect the witness has nodded.
THE COURT: Yes.
 
Q (By the State): Do you remember telling us that Daddy hit
you to the face?
(By Defense Counsel): Objection, Your Honor. Move to
 strike. Same, hearsay, out-of-court statement.
THE COURT: Overruled. 
Let the record reflect the witness was nodding his head up
and down.
 Q (By the State): Okay. Do you remember telling us that he
hit you to the face with a stick?
(By Defense Counsel): Objection, Your Honor. Move to
 strike.
 THE COURT: Overruled.
 (By the State): Again, Your Honor, prior consistent
statement.
 THE COURT: Same grounds.
And the same, the record will reflect that the witness was
nodding his head up and down.
 
5
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
Q (By the State): Okay. So right now, when you were
sitting there you told us that Daddy hit you with a stick to
the arms and to the butt, right?
A: (No audible response).
Q: Okay. Is that a yes?
A: (No audible response).
Q: 
Yes. 
Okay.
May the record reflect that the witness has nodded his head.
THE COURT: Yes.
 . . . .
 
Q (By the State): Okay. But do you remember telling
[prosecution and defense counsel] earlier that [Kiese] did
[hit you with a stick to the face]?
A: (No audible response).3
 
Q; Yes?
 
A: (No audible response).
By the State: Your Honor, if the record will reflect the
witness is nodding his head.
THE COURT: The record will so reflect.
 . . . .
 Q (By the State): Do you remember telling me earlier that
he hit you about two times on the arm?
(By Defense Counsel): I’m going to raise objections, Your
Honor. It’s an out-of-court statement. It’s hearsay.
A: No.
 
Q (By the State): No, you don’t remember saying that?
A: (No audible response).
 . . . . 
Q (By the State): And how many times did Daddy hit you to
the face?
 
A: Two or one.
 
Q: Two or one. 
Okay. Do you remember telling me that it
was two to three times -­(By Defense Counsel): Objection, Your Honor. Leading.
Witness has answered in court two to one times and it’s an
 out-of-court statement.
 
THE COURT: Overruled. You’ll have your chance.
 
The Minor further testified that, on the day in question, he
 
misbehaved at school and his father scolded him, hit him on the
 
face, and spanked him four or five times with a small stick on
 the hands and butt. He also testified that when his father hit
 him, it hurt, and he cried. 
The Minor subsequently testified that Kiese did “not really” hit him on
the face with a stick, that Kiese “[m]aybe sometimes or not sometimes” hit him
on the face with a stick, and that, on the day of the alleged incident he
“[did not] know” whether Kiese hit him on the face with a stick. The Minor
 nodded his head when the prosecutor asked him if he remembered telling the
prosecutor and defense counsel that Kiese did strike him on the face with a
stick.
 
6
 3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The State then called Honolulu Police Officer Lordy Cullen,
 
who testified that, on the day after the alleged incident, he was
 
called to Minor’s school for a physical abuse case, and noticed
 red marks across the Minor’s arm, hand, and face. Photographs of
 the red marks were entered into evidence. Officer Cullen
 testified that, when asked, the Minor stated that all of the
 marks resulted from his father spanking him with a yellow stick. 
The State then called Ayako Kiese (“Ayako”), Kiese’s wife,
 
who testified that she had told Kiese that the Minor had been
 “too playful” at school for the three days preceding the
 incident. She testified that she did not witness the incident
 because she had come home after it had happened, and the Minor
 was in his room in a time-out, possibly crying or having finished
 crying. She testified that she did not see the Minor that night
 but that the next morning, she saw marks on the Minor’s hands. 
She testified the Minor told her that he got the marks when his
 father spanked his butt while he tried to cover his butt with his
 hands. Ayako testified that Kiese later told her that he spanked
 Minor with a futon stick, which Ayako described as very thin and
 measuring eighteen to twenty-four inches long. 
Kiese decided to testify and was the only defense witness. 
He testified that the Minor had misbehaved at school in the days
 before the incident. After the first day of misbehavior, Kiese
 told the Minor that if he continued misbehaving, Kiese was going
 
7
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to spank him. Kiese stated that he also took away the Minor’s X-
box, snack, and TV privileges. 
Kiese testified that the next day, Ayako told him that the
 
Minor spit in the cafeteria, wrestled with other kids, and was
 not listening. Kiese testified that, at first, the Minor claimed
 his friend did all of those things, and that he was disappointed
 because the Minor was lying. He admitted that he slapped the
 Minor once on the face, but not hard, “because [Minor is] just a
 kid,” and that the Minor’s head moved back a little bit. After
 the slap, Kiese testified, the Minor told the truth about his
 behavior in school. Kiese then testified that he told the Minor
 that he would be punished, first for lying, second for being
 disrespectful and not following the rules.
 
Kiese testified that he spanked the Minor five or six times
 
with the futon stick, aiming for his buttocks, but striking the
 Minor’s hands and arms as he blocked the blows. Defense counsel
 elicited testimony from Kiese that he did not intend to harass
 the Minor but rather, that the slap and spanks were warranted as
 discipline. 
On cross-examination, Kiese testified that the Minor was six
 
years old and less than four feet tall. The prosecutor also
 elicited Kiese’s admission that he could have disciplined the
 Minor with open-handed spanks, as he had done before, rather than
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
with a stick, and the Minor “probably” would have listened to
 
him. 
At the conclusion of trial, the family court found Kiese
 
guilty as charged because “the amount of force used was not
 reasonable, not proportional for the size and age of the child.”
 
C. Sentencing
 
Sentencing occurred immediately after conviction. The State
 
recommended probation with parenting classes. Defense counsel
 agreed, but requested that any sentence be stayed pending Kiese’s
 appeal. The family court imposed a sentence of six months of
 probation, parenting classes, and fees, but denied Kiese’s
 request for a stay of the sentence pending appeal. 
D. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
The family court subsequently filed its Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Judgment of Conviction. The only
 Findings of Fact Kiese challenged before the ICA are the
 following:
 
1. On January 29, 2009, [Ayako] was notified by school
officials at [Minor’s] school that [Minor], who was six
years old on the date of the incident, had misbehaved
earlier that day, acting in a manner described as being
“playful” and not in a dangerous manner.
4. Upon arriving home later that evening, [Ayako] found out
that [Minor] was already in a “timeout” and was crying.
[Ayako] did not talk to [Minor] nor [Kiese] as to the extent
of the interaction between the two that evening and told
[Minor] to get ready for bed.
13. For three consecutive days prior to January 29, 2009,
[Kiese] and [Ayako] had been informed that [Minor] had been
too “playful” and “misbehaved” during school, but none of
the reports indicated that [Minor] was a danger to self or
others.
 
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
16. [Minor] was under four feet tall and based on fact­
finder’s own visual observations, [Minor] was a thin, slight
boy and much smaller in comparison to [Kiese].
 
Kiese also challenged Conclusion of Law Number 5, alleging it was
 
based on erroneous findings of fact. Conclusion of Law Number 5
 states:
 
Based on the credible evidence presented and the justifiable
inferences of fact, this Court finds that [Kiese] is guilty
of the offense of Harassment in violation of HRS § 711­1106(1)(a) as the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that the force employed by [Kiese] was done WITHOUT “due
 regard for the age and size” of the [Minor]. 
E. ICA Appeal
 
On appeal before the ICA, Kiese raised the following points 
of error: (1) the family court erred in finding the Minor 
competent to testify in violation of Rules 603 and 603.1 of the Hawai
fi Rules of Evidence; (2) the State failed to adduce 
sufficient evidence to sustain the conviction; (3) Kiese’s right to a fair trial was violated by the prosecutor’s misconduct; (4) the family court erred as a matter of law in denying Kiese’s request to stay the sentencing pending appeal; and (5) the family court failed to exercise reasonable control over the presentation of evidence. 
The ICA issued a memorandum opinion affirming Kiese’s
 
judgment of conviction. See State v. Kiese, No. 29792 (App. Feb.
 
25, 2011) (mem.) The ICA rejected the first three of Kiese’s
 points of error, summarily held that the family court erred as to
 the fourth point of error but declined to address that point on
 
10
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the merits as moot, and found his fifth point of error meritless. 
Kiese, mem. at 4-20. Kiese timely appealed the ICA’s judgment. 
F. Certiorari 
In his application for certiorari, Kiese presents the
 
following issues:
 
1. The ICA gravely erred in holding that there was
sufficient evidence to sustain Kiese’s conviction of
 
harassment and in using facts not in the record [i.e.,
Kiese’s height and weight] to reach its conclusion.
2. The ICA gravely erred in holding that the prosecutor’s
line of questioning asserting his personal knowledge did not
constitute prosecutorial misconduct.
3. The ICA gravely erred in making presumptions, where the
record reflected “no response” to the oath and throughout
[Minor’s] testimony, to sustain the conviction.
4. The ICA gravely erred in not addressing the family
court’s error of failing to stay the sentence pending appeal
because guidance is necessary for courts.
4
 
II.	 DISCUSSION
 
A. 	Substantial evidence supports Kiese’s conviction
for harassment.
 
Kiese’s first challenge is to the sufficiency of the
 
evidence supporting his conviction for harassment. Under HRS §
 
711-1106(1)(a), the State’s burden at trial was to prove beyond a
 reasonable doubt that Kiese struck, shoved, kicked, or otherwise
 touched the Minor in an offensive manner (or subjected the Minor
 to offensive physical contact), with the intent to harass, annoy,
 or alarm the Minor. The State also had the burden of disproving
 the parental justification defense raised by Kiese beyond a
 reasonable doubt. 
4 The issues underlying the first and fifth points of error before the ICA are
not explicitly pursued on certiorari, so they will not be discussed further.
 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As a threshold matter, several of the family court’s
 
findings of fact were not challenged before the ICA by either the
 
State or Kiese. As such, those facts are binding upon the
 appellate courts. See Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners, 111
 
Hawaifi 205, 227, 140 P.3d 985, 1007 (2006). Specifically, 
neither the State nor Kiese disputes the family court’s findings
 that Kiese slapped the Minor in the face; struck the Minor more
 than five times with a bamboo stick with enough force to leave
 visible welts the next morning; or that photographs taken the day
 after the alleged incident and entered into evidence depict the
 red slash marks on Minor’s hand and arms and the red slap mark
 left on Minor’s face. 
Kiese’s challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence,
 
therefore, is not as to whether he made offensive contact with
 the Minor. Rather, his challenge is to whether those actions
 were accompanied with the requisite intent to harass, alarm, or
 annoy the Minor. Assuming intent was proven, Kiese also
 challenges his conviction on the basis that the State failed to
 disprove his parental justification defense beyond a reasonable
 doubt. Specifically, Kiese asserts that the State did not
 disprove beyond a reasonable doubt that the force he employed was
 with due regard to the Minor’s age and size.
 
Our review of challenges to the sufficiency of evidence is
 
deferential to the trial court:
 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
We have long held that evidence adduced in the trial
court must be considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction; the
same standard applies whether the case was before a judge or
a jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier
of fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a bench trial
that the conviction is against the weight of the evidence,
as long as there is substantial evidence to support the
requisite findings for conviction, the trial court will be
affirmed.
 
“Substantial evidence” as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable [a person]
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier
 of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawaif i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007)(citation omitted).
 
Addressing the issue of intent, we have long held that
 
intent can be proven inferentially:
 
The law recognizes the difficulty by which intent is proved
in criminal cases. We have consistently held that since
intent can rarely be proved by direct evidence, proof by
circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising
from circumstances surrounding the act is sufficient to
establish the requisite intent. Thus, the mind of an
alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct, and
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances.
 
State v. Sadino, 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982)
 
(citations omitted). 
In this case, although Kiese testified that his overriding
 
intent in striking the Minor was disciplinary, there was
 substantial evidence at trial supporting the family court’s
 conclusion that Kiese intended to harass, annoy, or alarm the
 Minor. Although it is undisputed that the Minor’s behavior had
 escalated over the course of three days and that taking away his
 
13
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
privileges had not been effective, Kiese testified that a
 
spanking with his hand “probably” would have corrected the
 misbehavior. Instead, Kiese chose to slap the Minor in the face
 and strike him with a bamboo stick at least five times with
 enough force to leave red welts visible the next day. The Minor
 also testified that the strikes hurt and he cried. 
Kiese argues that State v. Stocker stands for the
 
proposition that a reasonable inference of intent to convict a
 parent for harassment can be drawn when it is shown that the
 parent strikes his child “after becoming angry and ‘yelling[.]’” 
90 Hawaif i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999). Therefore, Kiese 
argues, because he did not become angry and yell at the Minor, no
 
reasonable inference can be drawn that he possessed the requisite
 intent. We agree with Kiese’s summary of Stocker, but we
 disagree with the conclusion he draws. Instead, we look to
 Kiese’s actions and all of the other surrounding circumstances. 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, substantial
 evidence supports the reasonable inference that Kiese acted with
 the requisite intent to harass, annoy, or alarm the Minor. The
 ICA did not gravely err in so concluding. 
Kiese also challenges his conviction on the basis that the
 
State failed to disprove that his conduct was justified as
 parental discipline. We find his argument unpersuasive. The
 Matavale plurality reaffirmed the well-established principle that
 
14
        
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a parent’s right to direct his or her child’s upbringing is “of
 
constitutional dimension.” 115 Hawaif i at 158, 166 P.3d at 331 
(citation omitted). The state, on the other hand, also possesses
 
an interest in protecting child welfare. See id. To strike a
 
balance between the two interests, the legislature created HRS §
 703-309 (1993), which stakes out the boundaries of a parent’s
 privilege to exercise physical control over a child in the face
 of a criminal charge. That statute provides (as it did at the
 time of the alleged offense):
 
Use of force by persons with special responsibility for
care, discipline, or safety of others.  The use of force
 
upon or toward the person of another is justifiable under
the following circumstances:
(1) The actor is the parent or guardian or other person
similarly responsible for the general care and supervision
of a minor, or a person acting at the request of the parent,
guardian, or other responsible person, and:
(a) The force is employed with due regard for the age and
size of the minor and is reasonably related to the purpose
of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor,
including the prevention or punishment of the minor's
misconduct; and
(b) The force used is not designed to cause or known to
create a risk of causing substantial bodily injury,
5
 
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage.
 
The defendant bears the “initial burden of production with
 
respect to the facts necessary to put the parental discipline
 
defense at issue.” Stocker, 90 Hawaif i at 95, 976 P.2d at 409. 
The burden then shifts to the State to “disprove the
 
5 HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2008) defines “substantial bodily” injury as bodily
injury that causes: “(1) A major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the
skin; (2) A burn of at least second degree severity; (3) A bone fracture;
(4) A serious concussion; or (5) A tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to
the esophagus, viscera, or other internal organs.” 
This definition applied at
the time of the alleged offense.
 
15
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
justification evidence that was adduced or to prove facts
 
negativing the justification defense, and to do so beyond a
 reasonable doubt.” State v. Kaimimoku, 9 Haw. App. 345, 350, 841
 
P.2d 1076, 1079 (1992)(citations omitted). “Because the
 requirements of HRS § 703-309(1) are set out in the conjunctive,
 rather than the disjunctive, the prosecution needed only to
 disprove one element beyond a reasonable doubt to defeat the
 
justification defense.” State v. Crouser, 81 Hawaif i 5, 11, 911 
P.2d 725, 731 (1996). 
In this case, the State does not dispute that Kiese is a
 
parent responsible for the general care and supervision of the
 
Minor, so subsection (1)’s requirements are met. As to
 subsection (1)(a)’s requirements, the State’s burden is to prove
 that the force employed by Kiese was without due regard for the
 age and size of the minor or “was not actually (subjective) and
 reasonably (objective) believed necessary to protect the welfare
 
of the [minor.]” State v. Thate, 106 Hawaif i 252, 265, 103 P.3d 
412, 425 (App. 2004). Lastly, although subsection (1)(b) sets
 
forth various kinds of prohibited force, “physical discipline may
 be so excessive that it is no longer reasonably related to
 safeguarding the welfare of the minor, even if it does not exceed
 
the bounds set in subsection (b).” Crouser, 81 Hawaif i at 12, 
911 P.2d at 732. 
16
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
Most recently, the Matavale plurality explained that
 
“reasonableness” of force turns on the totality of the facts and
 
circumstances of each case: 
The means used to effect the discipline must also be
reasonable. In determining whether force is reasonable, the
fact finder must consider the child’s age, the child’s
stature, and the nature of the injuries inflicted, i.e.,
whether the force used was designed to cause or known to
create a risk of causing substantial bodily injury,
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage given the child’s age and size. These
 required factors are obviously general in nature and, by
their very terms, place a large amount of discretion with
the courts to determine whether the actions of a parent fall
within the parameters of parental discipline, as set forth
in HRS § 703-309(1). Clearly, there is no bright line that
dictates what, under all circumstances, is unreasonable or
excessive corporal punishment. Rather, the permissible
degree of force will vary according to the child’s physique
and age, the misconduct of the child, the nature of the
discipline, and all the surrounding circumstances. It
 necessarily follows that the question of reasonableness or
excessiveness of physical punishment given a child by a
parent is determined on a case-by-case basis and is
dependent upon the particular circumstances of the case. 
115 Hawaif i at 164-65, 166 P.3d at 337-38 (emphasis in original). 
Kiese cites Matavale and State v. Robertson, No. 28683 (App.
 
6
Nov. 30, 2009) (mem.),  in which convictions for abuse of a
family or household member were reversed because each parent’s
 
justification defense was not disproven under circumstances in
 which the parent used an implement to strike the child, leaving
 bruises upon the child. Kiese argues that the ICA gravely erred
 in affirming his conviction, thereby casting the law of parental
 discipline “in disarray.” We disagree. 
Under Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35(c)(2) (2010),
“Memorandum opinions and unpublished dispositional orders are not precedent,
but may be cited for persuasive value[.]” 
17
 6   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Insofar as “due regard for the age and size of the minor” is
 
the sole issue related to the parental justification defense on
 
certiorari, Matavale is of limited use to Kiese. In that case,
 the minor daughter was fourteen years old and 150-154 pounds. 115
 
Hawaifi at 165, 166 P.3d at 338. Furthermore, the minor daughter 
in Matavale testified that although her mother hit her multiple
 
times with plastic implements, the strikes were not very hard and
 did not hurt that much. See id. The six-year-old Minor in this
 
case, on the other hand, testified that his father’s strikes hurt
 and he cried. The strikes also left visible welts. 
Second, insofar as every parental discipline case turns on
 
its own unique facts and circumstances, and insofar as the
 Robertson memorandum opinion is, at most, persuasive, it too is
 of limited use to Kiese. In that case, a father disciplined his
 eight-year-old son for lying about receiving a “bad-day note”
 from school by striking him about eight times on the buttocks
 with a folded belt. Robertson, mem. op. at 3. The child
 
testified that he felt sad and cried after the spanking, but
 other witnesses testified that later that night and the next day,
 the child was not in pain and was able to resume his normal
 activities. See id. at 3-4. In reversing Robertson’s
 
conviction, the ICA noted that it was not unreasonable for father
 to conclude that corporal punishment was warranted after non­physical disciplinary measures failed. See id. at 9. In this
 
18
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
case, Kiese did not just resort to corporal punishment after non­
physical disciplinary measures failed. Rather, he stepped up the
 nature of the corporal punishment in excess of what he admitted
 probably would have worked. In any event, Robertson is not
 binding precedent. 
In this case, Kiese slapped the six-year-old Minor on the
 
face and struck him multiple times with a bamboo stick on the
 buttocks, causing him to feel pain and to cry, and leaving
 visible red welts a day after the incident. Furthermore, the
 evidence adduced at trial was that the Minor was a thin, slight,
 boy, no more than four feet tall, and that Kiese was much larger.
 In the light most favorable to the State, substantial evidence
 exists to support the conclusion that the force Kiese employed
 was without due regard for the age and size of the minor,
 disproving Kiese’s parental justification defense.
 
Lastly, none of the challenged findings of fact are clearly
 
erroneous. First, as to challenged Findings of Fact Numbers 1
 and 13, testimony adduced at trial reflected only that the Minor
 was “too playful” at school; there was no testimony or other
 evidence that his behavior was dangerous. Second, Finding of
 Fact Number 4 is not clearly erroneous, as Ayako testified that
 when she came home, the Minor either was crying or had finished
 crying. Third, Finding of Fact Number 16 regarding the family
 court’s visual observations and comparisons of Kiese’s and the
 
19
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Minor’s size is entitled to deference. Lastly, the sole
 
conclusion of law challenged on appeal is correct. Based on the
 totality of circumstances in this case, substantial evidence
 exists to support the conclusion that the state proved beyond a
 reasonable doubt that the force Kiese employed against the Minor
 was without due regard for his age and size, and therefore
 disproved his parental justification defense. Therefore,
 substantial evidence supports Kiese’s harassment conviction.
 
B. 	The prosecutor’s line of questioning asserting his
personal knowledge was improper but harmless.
 
On certiorari, Kiese argues that the prosecutor’s 
questioning of the Minor concerning statements made to him and to 
defense counsel in a prior conversation, reproduced supra, constituted prosecutorial misconduct warranting a new trial. At the outset, we note that we review this challenge under plain error, as prosecutorial misconduct was not the basis of the objections defense counsel made at trial to the prosecutor’s line of questioning. See Hawai
fi Rules of Penal Procedure (“HRPP”) 
Rule 52(b)(1977) (“Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.”). 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under
 
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, and this court
 will not overturn a defendant's conviction on the basis of
 
20
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plainly erroneous prosecutorial misconduct unless “there is a 
reasonable possibility that the misconduct complained of might have contributed to the conviction.” State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
fi 
405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999)(citation omitted). “Factors considered are: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.” State v. Wakisaka, 102 
Hawaifi 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003)(citations omitted). 
In this case, we hold that the prosecutor’s line of questioning
 was improper but harmless, as there is no reasonable possibility
 that the error contributed to Kiese’s conviction. 
At trial, the prosecutor repeatedly questioned the Minor
 
about prior conversations had among the Minor, defense counsel,
 and the prosecutor concerning the incident. During these
 questions, defense counsel objected on the bases of hearsay and
 leading, and the prosecutor justified the questions as laying the
 foundation for the admission of prior consistent statements. 
The family court sustained defense counsel’s first objection, but
 then overruled all of defense counsel’s subsequent objections. 
The prosecutor characterized his questions as necessary to
 
elicit prior consistent statements from the Minor. Hawaif i Rules 
of Evidence Rule 613(c)(1993) (governing prior consistent
 statements) does not support the prosecutor’s position:
 (c) Prior consistent statement of witness. Evidence of a
statement previously made by a witness that is consistent
 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
with the witness' testimony at the trial is admissible to
support the witness' credibility only if it is offered after:
(1) Evidence of the witness' prior inconsistent statement
has been admitted for the purpose of attacking the witness'
credibility, and the consistent statement was made before
the inconsistent statement; or
(2) An express or implied charge has been made that the
witness' testimony at the trial is recently fabricated or is
influenced by bias or other improper motive, and the
consistent statement was made before the bias, motive for
fabrication, or other improper motive is alleged to have
arisen; or
(3) The witness' credibility has been attacked at the
trial by imputation of inaccurate memory, and the consistent
statement was made when the event was recent and the
 witness' memory fresh. 
In this case, the prosecutor’s line of questioning occurred
 
during direct examination of the Minor, who was the first to
 
testify, and whose testimony had not been impeached. Thus, none
 of the purposes for which a prior consistent statement may be
 offered applied. As such, “[a] prior consistent statement of a
 witness who has merely testified in direct examination, without
 impeachment, is ordinarily excluded because it is unnecessary and
 valueless.” State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 504, 559 P.2d 728,
 
736 (1977) (citing 4 Wigmore, Evidence § 1124 (Chadbourn rev.
 1970)). 
In addition, the prosecutor’s questions about the prior
 
conversations asserted personal knowledge of facts at issue in
 the trial where he could not also act as a witness. At oral
 argument, the State conceded that the prosecutor’s questions were
 improper and that the admission of the testimony was error, but
 argued that such error did not constitute reversible error. 
Kiese, on the other hand, asserts that the questions were not
 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
only improper, but constituted prosecutorial misconduct
 
warranting a new trial.
 
In reviewing the nature of the conduct, we do not agree that
 
the prosecutor’s improper conduct was as egregious as that
 present in the cases Kiese cites: Berger v. United States, 295
 
U.S. 78 (1935), State v. Rulona, 71 Haw. 127, 785 P.2d 615
 
(1990), and State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawaif i 517, 923 P.2d 934 (App. 
1996). In Berger, the United States Supreme Court held that the
 
Assistant United States Attorney’s conduct during trial was
 indecorous, calculated to mislead the jury with insinuations of
 out-of-court conversations between the witness and him that never
 actually took place, and that the pronounced and persistent
 misconduct had a cumulative effect on the jury, necessitating a
 new trial. 295 U.S. at 85, 89. In Rulona, this court reversed a
 defendant’s judgment of conviction because the combination of
 three errors made by the trial court (only one of which was that
 it did not stop the prosecutor’s questioning of a witness about a
 prior conversation had between the two of them) denied the
 defendant a fair trial. 71 Haw. at 133, 785 P.2d at 618 (citing
 Berger, 285 U.S. at 84).
 
Similar to Berger, in Sanchez, a new trial was warranted
 
because of multiple instances of aggressive and out-of-bounds
 comments and questions by the prosecutor (including assertions of
 personal knowledge), the cumulative effect of which was to deny
 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the defendant of a fair trial. 82 Hawaif i at 534, 923 P.2d at 
951. In that case, the prosecutor questioned the witnesses about
 
prior conversations had with him and contradicted the testimony
 
they gave. 82 Hawaif i at 529-30, 923 P.2d at 946-47. The 
prosecutor then indicated that he could prove that his version of 
the prior conversation was correct through other witnesses present, but the record did not reflect that this was ever done. See id. 
Unlike the prosecutors in Berger and Sanchez, the 
prosecutor’s improper conduct here seemed merely to reflect an apparent lack of awareness of the prohibition against making himself a witness during trial. Compounding the prosecutor’s misunderstanding was that neither the defense counsel nor the family court explicitly recognized the prosecutor’s line of questioning as improper on the basis of Hawai
fi Rules of 
Professional Conduct Rule 3.4. Instead, defense counsel objected to the line of questioning as hearsay and leading, while the family court overruled and sustained defense counsel’s objections on bases that were not clear. Thus, the prosecutor’s improper conduct proceeded unchecked. The improper conduct, however, was harmless. See, e.g., State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai
fi 10, 13-17, 250 
P.3d 273, 276-80 (2011) (citing, inter alia, State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai
fi 20, 27, 108 P.3d 974, 981 (2005), to hold that the 
24
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
prosecutor’s conduct was improper before proceeding to a
 
harmlessness analysis). 
In examining the second step in the harmlessness analysis,
 
the promptness of a curative instruction, we note that “where a
 case is tried without a jury, it is presumed that the presiding
 judge will have disregarded the incompetent evidence and relied
 upon that which was competent.” State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346,
 
355, 615 P.2d 101, 108 (1980) (citations omitted); see also State
 v. Gutierrez, 1 Haw. App. 268, 270, 618 P.2d 315, 317 (1980).
7
 
The most damaging testimony resulting from the prosecutor’s
 
improper line of questioning was that Kiese may have struck the
 Minor in the face with a bamboo stick. Kiese argues that the
 admission of this testimony forced him to testify that he had
 only slapped the Minor in the face. Kiese’s argument is,
 however, undercut by the record. The Minor’s testimony regarding
 whether Kiese struck him on the face with a stick was deeply
 
8
contradictory ; he testified that Kiese “maybe sometimes or not
sometimes” or did “not really” strike him in the face with a
 stick. He also testified that he “[did not] know” if Kiese
 
We note that while it is generally presumed that the presiding judge in a
bench trial disregarded incompetent evidence, the presumption is, of course,
rebuttable.
 
8 In this regard, we disagree with the ICA’s assertion that “the answers
elicited from [the Minor in response to the prosecutor’s improper line of
questioning] were later confirmed by Kiese.” Kiese, mem. op. at 20. Although
we disagree, the ICA’s statement does not constitute grave error requiring a
reversal of Kiese’s conviction.
 
25
 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
struck him in the face with a stick. When the prosecutor
 
persisted in re-asking the question, the Minor finally nodded. 
Further, Officer Lordy Cullen also testified that the Minor
 
told him, when asked, that all the red marks (including the one
 on his face) were made with “a yellow stick.” Kiese does not
 allege any error with the prosecutor’s questioning of Officer
 Cullen. Kiese’s decision to testify thus may have been prompted
 by Officer Cullen’s testimony, which was properly elicited, not
 just the Minor’s testimony, elicited through the prosecutor’s
 improper line of questioning. 
The family court appears to have disregarded the
 
contradictory testimony given by the Minor about whether Kiese
 struck him in the face with the bamboo stick. No mention is made
 of that testimony at all, and in unchallenged Finding of Fact
 Number 6, the family court found that Kiese slapped the Minor on
 the face with an open hand. Not much, if any, of the Minor’s
 testimony is reflected in the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
 Law. 
Lastly, even disregarding the Minor’s testimony, the
 
evidence against Kiese was not weak. Kiese admitted that he
 slapped the Minor’s face with his open hand once and struck the
 Minor’s hands, arms, and buttocks five or six times with a bamboo
 stick. Kiese also admitted that an open-handed spank would
 probably have been sufficient to correct the Minor’s misbehavior. 
26
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The photographic evidence, entered via Officer Cullen’s
 
testimony, showed that red marks were still visible on the
 Minor’s face, hands, and arms the day after the alleged incident. 
Ayako testified that at one point, the Minor was crying after the
 incident. Based on these facts, we conclude that the
 prosecutor’s improper line of questioning was harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt. 
C. 	The ICA did not gravely err by making presumptions
about the record to sustain the conviction.
 
Kiese argues on certiorari that the ICA improperly assumed
 
that the Minor was competent to testify and improperly relied on
 
facts not in evidence to affirm his conviction. These arguments
 are based upon the numerous instances in the record where the
 Minor’s testimony registered as “no audible response” and the
 court, prosecutor, and defense attorney noted for the record that
 the Minor was nodding, shaking his head, or shrugging. Kiese
 argues, “Because the family court did not require a clear
 response from [the Minor], the transcript was not complete and
 significant portions of [the Minor’s] answers were never
 ascertained.” The gist of his argument is that the ICA could not
 have legitimately rendered its decision with such an incomplete
 transcript of the Minor’s testimony and response to the oath, so
 its disposition is based on assumptions and speculation. We
 reject this argument.
 
27
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
“[T]he general rule is that where the transcripts of a
 
defendant’s trial are incomplete because they omit portions of
 
the trial proceedings, such omissions do not mandate reversal
 unless they specifically prejudice the defendant’s appeal.” 
State v. Ganotisi, 79 Hawaif i 342, 343, 902 P.2d 977, 978 (App. 
1995)(citations omitted). In Ganotisi, the ICA rejected an
 
appellant’s contention that 368 notations by the court reporter
 of “no audible response,” “indiscernible words,” or
 “indiscernible whisperings or conversation” for transcripts
 covering a two-day trial (totaling 325 pages) prejudiced the
 appellant’s right to a meaningful appeal and therefore violated
 his due process rights. See id.
9
 
Similarly, in this case, although no audible response was
 
recorded to the oath and to questions posed to the Minor during
 the competency hearing and trial, the court, prosecutor, and
 defense counsel frequently interpreted for the record the
 gestures the Minor was making. No party objected to the
 interpretations. It appears that what was captured for the
 record at the trial level was understood by all. The transcript
 of the Minor’s testimony was no less ascertainable by the ICA
 than by this court. In any event, as noted earlier, not much, if
 any, of the Minor’s testimony is reflected in the Findings of
 
The number of omissions in the transcript is not dispositive. The question
is whether omissions that render the transcripts incomplete prejudice the
defendant’s appeal. That determination must be made on a case-by-case basis.
 
28
 9  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
Fact, and there was otherwise substantial evidence to sustain
 
Kiese’s harassment conviction. 
D. 	The family court erred in denying Kiese’s request
to stay his sentence.
 
Lastly, both the State and Kiese agree that the family court
 
erred in denying Kiese’s request to stay the execution of his
 
sentence pending appeal. Because we ultimately affirm Kiese’s
 conviction, and since during the pendency of this appeal, Kiese’s
 six-month probationary sentence has been satisfied, the
 determination of whether the trial court erred in denying his
 motion to stay his sentence pending appeal is now moot. 
Appellate courts generally do not decide moot questions. See
 
Wong v. Bd. of Regents, 62 Haw. 391, 395, 616 P.2d 201, 204
 (1980).
 
This court has, however, recognized three exceptions to the
 
mootness doctrine: matters capable of repetition yet evading
 review,
10 matters affecting the public interest, and matters 
10 We first recognized the mootness exception for matters that are capable of
repetition yet evading review in Life of the Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 580
P.2d 405 (1978). In that case, we held:
The phrase, “capable of repetition, yet evading review,”
means that a court will not dismiss a case on the grounds of
mootness where a challenged governmental action would evade
full review because of [sic] the passage of time
would prevent any single plaintiff from remaining subject to
the restriction complained of for the period necessary to
complete the lawsuit.
59 Haw. at 251, 580 P.2d at 409-10 (citation omitted; emphasis added).
In this case, Kiese has not argued applicability of the capable of
repetition yet evading review exception to the mootness doctrine, and we do
not address its applicability to the facts of this case. 
29
  
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
11 12
posing collateral consequences  for the defendant.  Kiese
 
argues applicability of only the second exception; therefore, we
 
analyze only whether that exception applies. 
1. The Public Interest Exception
 
This court recognized the public interest exception to the
 
mootness doctrine in 
Johnston v. Ing, 50 Haw. 379, 441 P.2d 138
 
(1968). In that case, we held:
 
There is a well settled exception to the rule that appellate
courts will not consider moot questions. When the question
involved affects the public interest, and it is likely in
the nature of things that similar questions arising in the
future would likewise become moot before a needed
 authoritative determination by an appellate court can be
made, the exception is invoked.
 
50 Haw. at 381, 441 P.3d at 140. We look to “(1) the public or
 
private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of
 
11 This court recently recognized a third exception to the mootness
doctrine –- the collateral consequences exception –- in Hamilton v. Lethem,
119 Hawaif i 1, 193 P.3d 839 (2008). Collateral consequences include the legal
and reputational consequences of a judicial action otherwise unreviewable formootness. 
To successfully invoke the collateral consequences exception:
[T]he litigant must show that there is a reasonable
possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences will
occur. Accordingly, the litigant must establish these
consequences by more than mere conjecture, but need not
demonstrate that these consequences are more probable than
not. This standard provides the necessary limitations on
justiciability underlying the mootness doctrine itself.
Where there is no direct practical relief available from the
reversal of the judgment, as in this case, the collateral
consequences doctrine acts as a surrogate, calling for a
determination whether a decision in the case can afford the
 litigant some practical relief in the future.
119 Hawaif i at 8, 193 P.3d at 846, citing Putman v. Kennedy, 279 Conn. 162,
169, 900 A.2d 1256, 1262 (2006)(emphasis omitted).
In this case, Kiese has not argued applicability of the collateral
consequences exception to the mootness doctrine, and we do not address its
applicability to the facts of this case.
12 We note that the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine is
“separate and distinct” from the “capable of repetition, yet evading review”exception. United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Yogi, 101 
Hawaifi 46, 59, 62 P.3d 189, 203 (2002) (Acoba, J., concurring). 
30
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
an authoritative determination for future guidance of public 
officers, and (3) the likelihood of future recurrence of the question.” Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai
fi 323, 327, 172 P.3d 1067, 1071 
(2007) (citations omitted). 
In this case, the appellate record refers to multiple cases
 
in which a stay has been denied to petty misdemeanants pending
 appeal. As such, the first and third prongs of the public
 interest exception test are met, in that the denial of a request
 for a stay of sentence appears to be an issue that could
 potentially affect many petty misdemeanor defendants (that is, it
 is not an issue unique to Kiese as a private individual), and is
 likely to recur in the future. As to the second prong, because
 there is no definitive case law on when the issuance of a stay
 after a petty misdemeanor conviction is appropriate, an
 authoritative determination is desirable to guide trial courts. 
As such, the denial of Kiese’s request for a stay meets the
 public interest exception to the mootness doctrine. 
Existing case law also supports the general application of
 
the public interest exception in the context of stays. See State
 
v. Cullen, 86 Hawai
fi 1, 13, 946 P.2d 955, 967 (1997) (“Our 
affirmance of [Appellant’s] conviction moots the prosecution’s
 [challenge to the sentencing court’s application of HRS § 804-4]. 
However, this court has long recognized the exception to the
 mootness doctrine that arises with respect to matters affecting
 
31
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the public interest.”) (citations omitted). Therefore, the ICA 
erred in not addressing the merits of the stay issue based on the mootness doctrine. Cf. State v. Durham, 125 Hawai
fi 114, 126-27, 
254 P.3d 425, 437-38 (2011) (concluding that the mootness doctrine did not preclude this court from reviewing whether the trial court erred in considering improper facts in revoking the defendant’s probation, although the defendant had completed the special probation condition of a one-year term of imprisonment). 
2. The Merits of the Stay Issue
 
Proceeding to the merits of the issue, we conclude that the
 
family court erred by denying Kiese’s request for a stay. 
Under HRAP Rule 8(c)(1984), “Stays in criminal cases shall
 
be had according to law.” HRS § 641-14(a)(1993) provides, “The
 filing of a notice of appeal or the giving of oral notice in open
 court at the time of sentence by the defendant or the defendant's
 counsel of intention to take an appeal may operate as a stay of
 execution and may suspend the operation of any sentence or order
 of probation, in the discretion of the trial court.” 
Although stays are discretionary under HRS § 641-14, HRS §
 
804-4(a) provides, “The right to bail shall continue after
 conviction of a . . . petty misdemeanor[.]” See also HRS § 804­4(b)(“No defendant entitled to bail, . . . shall be subject,
 without the defendant’s written consent, to the operation of any
 sentenced passed upon the defendant, while any proceedings to
 
32
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
procure a review of any action of the trial court . . . are
 
pending and undetermined, except as provided in section 641­14(a)[.]”). In State v. Ortiz, we held, “An accused
 misdemeanant, petty misdemeanant, or law violator on bail is
 entitled to bail as a matter of right after conviction and
 pending appellate review.” 74 Haw. 343, 356, 845 P.2d 547, 553
 
(1993). Furthermore, pursuant to State v. Miller, 79 Hawaif i 
194, 200-01, 900 P.2d 770, 776-77 (1995), once release on bail
 
pending appeal is secured, a trial court is without jurisdiction
 under the sentence of probation that is the subject of the
 defendant’s appeal. 
Therefore, we hold that Kiese, as a petty misdemeanant on
 
bail after conviction, was entitled to a continuance of bail
 pending appellate review, during which time the trial court was
 without jurisdiction to execute his probationary sentence;
 accordingly, the family court erred by denying Kiese a stay of
 his petty misdemeanor sentence pending appeal. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
We hold that the ICA erred in not addressing the stay of
 
sentence issue based on the mootness doctrine because the public
 
interest exception applies, and the family court erred in denying
 Kiese’s motion to stay his sentence pending appeal. Although we
 accepted certiorari to address the stay of sentence issue,
 because Kiese has already served his probationary sentence, and
 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
because Kiese’s judgment of conviction is affirmed, we affirm the
 
ICA’s judgment on appeal.
 
Taryn R. Tomasa and 
Kirsha K. M. Durante,
Deputy Public Defenders, for petitioner/defendant­appellant. /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
   
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Stephen Tsushima, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for respondent/plaintiff-appellee.
  
34
 