 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000697 15-JAN-2016 12:28 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
---o0o---
LOUIS ROBERT SANTIAGO, as Trustee of the Louis Robert Santiago
Revocable Living Trust dated November 17, 1999, as amended, and
YONG HWAN SANTIAGO, as Trustee of the Yong Shimabukuro Revocable
Living Trust dated July 25, 1996, as amended,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees, 
vs. 
RUTH TANAKA, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant. 
SCWC-11-0000697 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-11-0000697; CIVIL NO. 08-1-0094) 
JANUARY 15, 2016 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON JJ. 

AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.

 
I. Introduction 
This case involves the adequacy of disclosures that 
were made to the buyer during the sale of a commercial property 
and the seller’s subsequent nonjudicial foreclosure and sale of 
the property when the mortgage payments were briefly interrupted 
because of an underlying dispute regarding mediation concerning   
 
 
  
 
 
                     
 1   Louis Santiago is referred to herein as “Louis” when he is acting
in his individual capacity. Louis Santiago and Yong Santiago, acting
together, are referred to as “the Santiagos.”  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the property. Two issues are presented: (1) whether the 
seller’s failure to disclose certain facts regarding the 
property’s sewer system is actionable under the common-law 
causes of action of nondisclosure and misrepresentation and (2) 
whether the seller’s nonjudicial foreclosure of the property and 
ejectment of the Santiagos were wrongful under the facts of this 
case. We answer both questions in the affirmative. 
II. Background 
A. The Santiagos’ Lease and Purchase of Nawiliwili Tavern 
On January 1, 1998, Louis Santiago (Louis)1 entered 
into a twenty-year commercial lease agreement to rent approximately 2,560 square feet of ground floor space of the 
Nawiliwili Tavern (Tavern) from owner Ruth Tanaka (Tanaka). 
After leasing the Tavern for over seven years and making all 
payments due under the lease, including his share of utilities, 
taxes, assessments, and insurance, Louis and his wife, Yong Hwan Santiago (collectively, the Santiagos), decided to submit an 
offer to purchase the Tavern from Tanaka.
2 
2 It does not appear that Tanaka personally participated in the
negotiations.  All actions, unless otherwise noted, were taken by her real
estate agent, Wayne Richardson (Richardson) or her attorney. 
2 
  
 
 
  
                     
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1. Negotiations for Purchase of Tavern 
In November 2005, Louis, represented by realtor Glenn 
Takase (Takase) of Coldwell Banker, submitted an offer to 
purchase the Tavern for $1,000,000.00, in the form of a 
“Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance” (DROA) to Tanaka’s 
property manager and realtor, Wayne Richardson (Richardson).3   
3 The DROA contained standard terms, including the following
pertinent provisions: 
C-10 Prorations and Closing Adjustments. At closing,
Escrow shall prorate the following, if applicable, as of
the date of closing: real property tax, lease rents . . .
maintenance, private sewer, marina, and/or association
fees, tenant rents, and ANY OTHERS. 
. . . 
SELLER’S DISCLOSURES  (Required by Hawaii Statute for
residential real property) 
C
-44  Seller’s Obligation to Disclose. Under Hawaii law,
Seller is obligated to fully and accurately disclose in
writing to Buyer any fact, defect, or condition, past or
present, that would be expected to measurably affect the
value of the Property to a reasonable person. . . . Such
Disclosure shall be prepared in good faith and with due
care and shall disclose all material facts relating to theProperty that: (i) are within the knowledge or control of
Seller; (ii) can be observed from visible, accessible
areas; or, (iii) which are required by Section 508D- 15 of 
the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
. . . 
C-47  Buyer’s Remedies If Seller Fails to Comply with
Paragraphs C- 44 or C44A. . . . If Seller negligently 
fails to provide the required disclosure statement or
amended disclosure statement, Seller shall be liable to
Buyer for the amount of actual damages suffered as a resultof the negligence. In addition to the above remedies, a
court may also award the prevailing party’s attorneys’
fees, courts costs, and administrative fees. 
3 
  
 
 
  
                     
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
     
    
       
     
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tanaka did not accept Louis’ initial offer, and the parties 
exchanged multiple counteroffers, all of which referenced and 
incorporated the DROA. 
In January 2006, Tanaka submitted a counteroffer with 
an attached “Agreement of Sale Addendum to the DROA” (Agreement 
of Sale Addendum). In her Agreement of Sale Addendum, Tanaka 
made representations with respect to certain “Monthly 
Installments (based on current estimates; exact figures to be 
determined and adjusted at closing),” including “Sewer Fee & Assessments” in the amount of $150.00.
4 The Santiagos rejected 
Tanaka’s January 2006 counteroffer. 
2. Accepted Purchase Contract 
Ultimately, after further negotiations, Louis accepted 
a subsequent counteroffer from Tanaka (Accepted Counteroffer). 
The Accepted Counteroffer expressly provided that Tanaka and 
4 Tanaka provided the following accounting of “Monthly
Installments” within the Agreement of Sale Addendum: 
2. Payment Terms: 
. . . 
A.	 Monthly Installments (based on current estimates; exactfigures to be determined and adjusted at closing) 
[X] Buyer Collection Fee: $50.00 
[X] Real Property Taxes: 	 $300.00 
[X] Insurance Premiums: $226.00 
[X] Sewer Fee & Assessments: $150.00 
[X] Other: Obatake- Lovell $50.00 
[X] Principal and interest: $9,436.79 
[X] Estimated Total Monthly Payment: $10,212.79 
4 
  
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Louis “agree[] to sell/buy the [Tavern] on the terms and 
conditions set forth in the DROA as modified by this Counter 
Offer.” The Accepted Counteroffer set the purchase price of the 
Tavern at $1,300,000, $800,000 of which was to be paid as a down 
payment, with the remaining $500,000 secured by a sixty-month 
“Mortgage, Security Agreement and Financing Statement” 
(Mortgage) financed by Tanaka. Attached to the Accepted 
Counteroffer were two addenda: a “Purchase Money Mortgage 
Addendum” (Mortgage Addendum) setting forth the provisions of the Mortgage and an “Existing ‘As Is’ Condition Addendum” (“As 
Is” Addendum). 
The stated purpose of the “As Is” Addendum was to note 
that the “Property [was] being sold in its existing condition” 
and that “[e]xcept as may be agreed to elsewhere in [the] DROA, 
[Tanaka] will make no repairs and will convey [the Tavern] 
without any representations or warranties, either expressed or implied.” 
The addendum stated, however, that “[b]y selling 
Property in Existing ‘As Is’ Condition, [Tanaka] remains 
obligated to disclose  in writing any known defects or material 
facts of Property or improvements.” (Emphases added). 
3. Seller’s Disclosures 
In April 2006, Tanaka sent Louis a “Seller’s Real 
Property Disclosure Statement” (Disclosure Statement). 
The 
5 
  
 
 
  
                     
   
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Disclosure Statement expressly stated that it was “intended to 
assist [Tanaka] in organizing and presenting all material facts 
concerning the Property” and that Tanaka is “obligated to fully 
and accurately disclose in writing to a buyer all ‘material 
facts’ concerning the property.”5 
The Disclosure Statement further noted, “It is very 
important that the Seller exercise due care in preparing 
responses to questions posed in the Disclosure Statement, and 
that all responses are made in good faith, are truthful and complete to the best of Seller’s knowledge,” because “Seller’s 
agent, Buyer and Buyer’s agent may rely upon Seller’s 
disclosures.” Finally, the Disclosure Statement instructed 
Tanaka, in her capacity as the Seller of the Tavern, to answer 
all questions and explain all material facts known to her. 
5 In full, the purpose of the Disclosure Statement is described as
follows: 
Purpose of Disclosure Statement: Pursuant to Hawaii 
Revised Statutes, Chapter 508D (for residential real
property), and under common law (for all other real estate
transactions, including the sale of vacant land) a seller
of residential real property is obligated to fully and
accurately disclose in writing to a buyer all “materialfacts” concerning the property. “Material facts” are 
defined as “any fact, defect, or condition, past or
present, that would be expected to measurably affect the
value to a reasonable person of the residential real
property being offered for sale.” This Disclosure Statement is intended to assist Seller in organizing and 
presenting all material facts concerning the Property. 
(Emphasis added). 
6 
  
 
 
  
  
                     
   
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As is relevant to the issues presented in this case, 
question 77 of the Disclosure Statement asked, “What type of 
waste water/sewage system do you have?” Tanaka checked boxes to 
indicate that the Tavern was “Connected” to a “Private Sewer.” 
The last page of the Disclosure Statement provided a space for 
Tanaka to provide further explanation of any prior disclosure. 
In addition to clarifications pertaining to other questions on 
the Disclosure Statement, Tanaka referenced question 77 and 
noted that the Tavern’s sewer is a “private sewer line owned by Anchor Cove. We are connected.”
6 
Tanaka subsequently disclosed twenty documents 
pertaining to different aspects of the Tavern, several of which 
were related to the Tavern’s private sewer connection. One of 
the disclosed documents was an agreement dated May 16, 1995, 
between Tanaka and James Jasper Enterprises, LLP (Jasper), to 
connect the Tavern to Jasper’s existing private sewer system. The agreement, entitled “Agreement for Maintenance and Operation 
of Wastewater System and Connection to Wastewater System Located 
at Nawiliwili, Kauai, Hawaii” (Wastewater Agreement), provided 
6 After Takase received and reviewed the Disclosure Statement, 
Takase made a handwritten notation--“ ✓ on →”--in the margin next to Tanaka’s 
reference to the private sewer system. Takase testified that his “notation 
meant ‘Check on this private sewer line.’” Thereafter, Takase and Louis
reviewed the disclosed documents that related to the private sewer system. 
7 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the following pertinent terms for the maintenance and cleanout 
charges: 
5. Tanaka agrees to pay Jasper monthly maintenance
charges in the amount of One Hundred Fifty Dollars
($150.00) per month, payable on or before the fifteenth day
of every month, commencing the month immediately after this
Agreement is executed by the parties hereto. 
Jasper
reserves the right to adjust the deposit  annually in a sum 
not exceeding twenty percent (20 percent) of the amountpaid in the year immediately preceding. 
. . . 
7. Tanaka agrees to pay Jasper the sum of One Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($150.00) 
as a bi- monthly cleanout charge for 
the Jasper STP.[7] Such payments shall commence sixty (60) 
days after the execution of this Agreement by the parties,
and shall be payable on or before the fifteenth day of
every other month thereafter. Jasper  reserves the right to 
adjust the deposit  annually in a sum not exceeding twenty 
percent (20 percent) of the amount paid in the yearimmediately preceding. 
8.  Tanaka agrees to pay Jasper the sum of Three Hundred
Dollars ($300.00) as a deposit for those charges provided 
for in paragraphs 5 and 7   hereinabove.  Such amount shall 
be paid upon the execution of this Agreement by the
parties. The deposit shall be refunded to Tanaka in the
event the Jasper STP is transferred or conveyed to the
County.    
(Emphases added). 
Based on Tanaka’s disclosures and the $150 estimated 
monthly installment for sewer fees and assessments represented 
in the Agreement of Sale Addendum, Takase and Louis believed the 
costs associated with the Tavern’s private sewer system were the 
amounts listed in the Wastewater Agreement--$150 for a monthly 
7 “Jasper STP” is the short- form used in the agreement for Jasper’s 
Anchor Cove Sewage Pump Station. 
8 
  
 
 
  
 
[T]he Mortgagee may, with or without taking possession, 
foreclose [the] Mortgage, by court proceeding (with the
immediate right to a receivership with the aforesaid powers 
on ex parte order and without bond pending foreclosure
), 
or, as now or then provided by law, by advertisement and 
sale of the mortgaged property or any part or parts thereofat public auction in the county in which the mortgaged
property are situated . . . .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
maintenance fee and $150 for a bi-monthly cleaning fee. After 
reviewing the disclosures with Takase and believing that Tanaka 
had provided all documentation, Louis accepted the disclosed 
documents. 
4. Mortgage, Promissory Note, and Closing on Sale of Tavern 
As noted, to finance a portion of the purchase price 
of the Tavern, the Santiagos obtained a mortgage from Tanaka. In the Mortgage, the Santiagos covenanted to pay the $500,000 
loan pursuant to the terms of a Promissory Note. 
The Mortgage provided that in the event of any default 
“in the performance or observance of any covenant or condition” 
of the Mortgage or the Promissory Note, “the whole amount of all 
indebtedness owing” under the Mortgage “shall at the option of the Mortgagee become at once due and payable without notice or 
demand.” Additionally, the Mortgage provided as follows: 
(Emphases added). 
The Promissory Note provided that payment of $9,724.63 
was due on the tenth 
 day of each month, commencing on August 10, 
2006, until the satisfaction of the debt on August 10, 2011. It 
9 

  
 
 
                      
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
additionally stated that the failure to pay “any sum” due under 
the Promissory Note constitutes an “Event of Default” and that 
“[i]f any Event of Default shall occur and be continuing, the 
entire principal sum and accrued interest thereon” shall 
“immediately become due and payable.” 
(Emphasis added). 
The parties closed the sale pursuant to the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development Settlement Statement 
(HUD Statement) on August 10, 2006, and the deed transferring 
the Tavern’s title from Tanaka to the Santiagos was recorded on the same day. The HUD Statement identified the prorated amounts 
of property taxes and partial month rent due under the 
Santiagos’ former lease agreement, but it was silent as to 
“maintenance, private sewer, marina, and/or association fees” 
required to be listed, if applicable, in accordance with 
paragraph C-10 of the DROA.
8 The HUD Statement additionally 
indicated that the total amount due from the Santiagos, 
including all prorations and closing costs, was $1,317,518.31, 
an amount that the Santiagos paid as follows: $5,000 as an 
8 See note 3 for the full text of paragraph C- 10 of the DROA. 
10 
  
 
 
    
 
                     
 9   The $17,518.31 in excess of the agreed- upon purchase price of 
$1.3 million constitute settlement charges, which included title and
recordi
ng charges, that the Santiagos had to pay at closing.  
 10   Less than two weeks after the Santiagos closed on the sale of the
Tavern, Jasper sent a bill to Tanaka totaling $2,314.20, $1,153.23 for monthly private sewer maintenance and $1,153.23 for bi- monthly sewer 
cleanout, plus excise taxes. Tanaka notified Jasper that the Tavern had beensold and instructed that the bill, and all future billings, be sent to the
Santiagos.  
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
initial deposit, $812,518.31 as an additional deposit, and the 
remaining $500,000 in accordance to the Mortgage.9 
B. Sewer Fee Dispute 
At the beginning of October 2006, Jay Geffert 
(Geffert), the Santiagos’ property manager for the Tavern, received a bill from Jasper in the amount of $3,467.43-­
$2,267.77 past due from August’s sewer maintenance fees and 
$1,153.23 for September’s sewer maintenance fees, inclusive of 
taxes.
10 Geffert, believing Jasper’s bill to be a mistake--at 
the time, he had been paying the Tavern’s utility bills, 
including county sewage bills, since 1998--contacted Jasper to 
inquire about the bill. In response, Jasper wrote to Louis, 
noting that Tanaka had previously paid the sewer fees and that 
the fees had increased twenty percent a year, every year, since 
1995.11 Jasper stated that the Tavern could choose an 
11 In his letter, Jasper outlined the extent to which the monthly
maintenance charge and bimonthly cleanout charge had been increased since the
Wastewater Agreement was executed: in 1995, Jasper charged $156.25 for
monthly maintenance and the same amount for bimonthly cleanout, and in 2006, 
(continued. . .)
11   
 
 
                                                                   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
alternative method of sewage disposal but that, until then, the 
Santiagos had to continue paying pursuant to the Wastewater 
Agreement. 
Louis’ counsel wrote to Tanaka to further inquire 
about the bill that Louis received from Jasper. Counsel 
maintained that although the Agreement of Sale Addendum listed a 
$150.00 sewer assessment fee, Tanaka did not disclose the fact 
that the sewer fees could, and in fact did, increase by twenty 
percent per year. Counsel asserted that Tanaka never disclosed the true amount of the fees for the Tavern’s sewer service. In 
conclusion, counsel stated that had Louis known about the 
possibility that the sewer maintenance charges could be 
increased by twenty percent per year, he would not have agreed 
to pay the amount that he agreed to for the Tavern. 
Louis’ counsel also wrote to Jasper, stating that the 
Wastewater Agreement was never assigned to the Santiagos when Tanaka conveyed the Tavern to them. Counsel also requested from 
Jasper an accounting of his cost and expenses in the maintenance 
of the sewage system and suggested that the costs charged to the 
Santiagos should be adjusted depending upon the parties’ usage 
(. . .continued) 
he was charging $1,160.94 for monthly maintenance and the same  amount for 
bimonthly cleanout.  
12 
  
 
 
   
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of the system. In a forceful response, Jasper intimated no 
interest in negotiating for a lower price because “the price . . 
. was agreed to be paid by . . . Tanaka” and because the 
Wastewater Agreement “does not just provide for the recovery of 
a pro-rated portion of costs.”12 Jasper also threatened that if 
the Santiagos did not “want to be bound by the long standing Agreement,” he would “arrange for [the] Tavern to be immediately 
disconnected from the sewage disposal system.” Finally, Jasper 
outlined three alternatives to which he was open: (1) the Santiagos pay the total amount owing and agree to be bound to 
the Wastewater Agreement; (2) the Santiagos accept a 50% 
deferral of the amount due while they commence an action to 
recover damages from Tanaka; or (3) the Santiagos disconnect the 
Tavern from his sewer system and start building their own. 
In 2007, the Santiagos filed a Complaint in the 
circuit court against Jasper and Tanaka asserting claims pertaining to the Wastewater Agreement. Tanaka filed a motion 
to dismiss, and the court issued an order granting Tanaka’s 
motion to dismiss without prejudice to allow the parties to 
12 Jasper also questioned the Santiagos’ right to demand an
accounting since, at the outset, they were not assigned the Wastewater
Agreement. 
13 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
                     
   
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“engage in good-faith mediation in a prompt and cooperative 
manner.”13 
C. Attempts to Mediate and Initiation of Foreclosure 
Over several months following the circuit court’s 
dismissal of the Santiagos’ 2007 complaint, the parties failed to reach an agreement as to the mediator, or the date, time or 
location of mediation. Notably, the Santiagos were current with 
their payments even after they commenced their 2007 action 
against Tanaka and during the mediation negotiations between the parties. However, when it became apparent that advances in the 
mediation proceedings were not forthcoming, and out of 
frustration from the inability of counsel to reach an agreement 
as to scheduling the mediation and selection of the mediator, on 
March 10, 2008, Louis sent Tanaka a handwritten note stating 
that he halted payment on his account “due to litigation 
problems,” that monthly payments of $10,000 are in a bank account, and that this arrangement “will continue until 
litigation is resolved.”
14 
13 All circuit court proceedings in this case were presided over by 
Judge Kathleen N.A. Watanabe. 
14 Specifically, Louis’ note stated, “I Louis Santiago has halted
payment on my acc’t due to litigation problems! Monthly payments of $10k are
in a bank acc’t + will continue until litigation is resolved.” As he had 
indicated, Santiago “put the ten thousand dollars in a special fund.” 
14 
  
 
 
                      
   
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On March 11, 2008, one day after Louis sent his 
letter, Tanaka sent the Santiagos a “Notice of Default and 
Intention to Foreclose.” Tanaka asserted that because the 
Santiagos defaulted on the Promissory Note and Mortgage, “the 
entire principal sum and accrued interest, plus attorneys’ fees 
and costs, are hereby declared immediately due and payable .” 
Tanaka additionally stated that she “has not granted any extensions of time, renewals, waivers or modifications with 
respect to payment or other provisions of the Note.” 
On March 12, 2008, Tanaka’s mortgage servicer sent the 
Santiagos a payment notice indicating an amount due of $10,250.86--$9,764.63 for the principal and interest payment due 
on March 10, 2008, and a late fee in the amount of $486.23. In 
a subsequent letter dated April 3, 2008, Tanaka clarified that 
she intended to foreclose under power of sale pursuant to HRS § 
667-5 through 667-10
15 at a public auction on May 9, 2008. 
On April 11, 2008, the Santiagos submitted payment for 
the March mortgage payment and the late fee, as well as payment for the April mortgage payment.
16 After receiving the Santiagos’ 
payment, Tanaka informed the Santiagos that she was willing to 
15 See  note 35  for the complete text of HRS § 667- 5.  
16 A small amount, $15.49, remained due on the account, which Louis
paid several days later, on April 15, 2008. 
15 
  
 
 
postpone the public auction for sixty days, “expressly subject 
to two conditions: (1) [the Santiagos] must meet their payment 
obligations, including, but not limited to, attorneys’ fees and 
costs; and (2) [the Santiagos] must not file any lawsuit.” 
Tanaka additionally stated that she “ha[d] not postponed the 
acceleration of the Note and Mortgage,” but “to facilitate the 
mediation, [she] [was] willing to accept monthly payments, 
without waiving [] rights and remedies in any respect.” The 
Santiagos thereafter continued to make their monthly mortgage payments, plus an additional $235.37 principal payment each 
month, and paid Tanaka $15,146.11 in satisfaction of Tanaka’s 
demand for attorneys’ fees.
17   
                      
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On May 5, 2008, a mediation session was scheduled for 
June 12, 2008. However, on the same day, because Tanaka did not 
cancel the scheduled auction sale of the Tavern but only 
postponed it subject to two conditions, the Santiagos commenced 
17 Preferred Contract Management, Inc., the agency responsible for
collecting the Santiagos’ mortgage payments and transmitting them to Tanaka,
notified the Santiagos that from September 2006 through June 2008, they had
paid the following on the mortgage: 
Interest Paid to date: $ 48,125.96  
Principal Pmt to date: $ 170,593.30  
Late Charges to date: $ 486.23  
Attorney Fees to date: $15,146.11  

 Collection fees to date: $810.00
Total amount of Money Received:  $235,161.60  
16 
  
 
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
an action against Tanaka asserting several claims. On May 7, 
2008, the Santiagos filed a Motion for Temporary Restraining 
Order and a Motion for Preliminary Injunction, both seeking to 
“prevent and preclude” Tanaka from proceeding with the 
foreclosure auction. The circuit court denied the Motion for 
Temporary Restraining Order and scheduled a hearing on the 
Santiagos’ Motion for Preliminary Injunction for June 17, 2008. 
Upon learning of the Santiagos’ lawsuit, Tanaka’s 
counsel informed the Santiagos’ counsel, on May 15, 2008, that the postponement offer was being withdrawn, the note and 
mortgage “ha[d] been duly accelerated,” and the “entire debt . . 
. [wa]s due and payable immediately.” 
On June 3, 2008, the 
Santiagos and Tanaka agreed to engage in mediation and to postpone the foreclosure auction during the pendency of 
mediation, subject to the Santiagos’ “full compliance with their 
payment obligations” and withdrawal of their Motion for Preliminary Injunction. Subsequently, on July 14, 2008, Tanaka 
filed a mediator’s declaration of impasse and announced that she 
was “proceed[ing] with the public auction” on August 14, 2008. 
D. The Santiagos’ 2008 Complaint 
On August 5, 2008, the Santiagos filed a First Amended 
Verified Complaint in which they asserted claims of negligent 
17 
  
 
 
  
                     
   
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
misrepresentation and nondisclosure against Tanaka.18 On August 
20, 2008, the Santiagos filed a Motion for Temporary Restraining 
Order, again seeking to prevent Tanaka from proceeding with the 
foreclosure auction. The circuit court denied the Santiagos’ 
motion later that day.19 
On August 27, 2008, the parties stipulated that the 
Santiagos would withdraw without prejudice their Motion for 
Preliminary Injunction and that Tanaka would postpone the 
foreclosure sale pending the circuit court’s ruling on Tanaka’s yet to be filed motion to dismiss. The motion to dismiss was 
subsequently filed, and after conducting a hearing on October 
15, 2008, the circuit court granted in part and denied in part 
Tanaka’s motion. 
Two days later, on October 17, 2008, Tanaka sent the 
Santiagos a letter informing them that the public auction of the 
Tavern was to be held on October 24, 2008. On October 24, 2008, the Santiagos filed a new Motion for Preliminary Injunction, and 
Tanaka filed her Answer to the Santiagos’ First Amended Verified 
18 The Santiagos additionally asserted claims for “breach of
agreement,” “breach of good faith and fair dealing,” “breach of duty of good
faith mediation,” and “violation of HRS § 667- 42.”  These claims were 
dismissed by the circuit court. 
19 The Santiagos filed a series of motions for temporary restraining
orders and motions for preliminary injunctions seeking to “prevent and
preclude” Tanaka from proceeding with the foreclosure auction, all of which
were denied by the circuit court. 
18 
  
 
 
  
 
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Complaint and asserted eleven counterclaims.20 On the same day, 
Tanaka held a public foreclosure auction at which she purchased 
the Tavern by submitting the highest bid of $365,000.00. 
E. Trial on the Santiagos’ Claims for Nondisclosure and
Misrepresentation 
A bench trial was conducted in May 2011, at the 
conclusion of which, the circuit court issued its Findings of 
Fact (FOF), Conclusions of Law (COL) and Order (Trial Order). 
The court found, inter alia, that Tanaka had provided 
disclosures indicating that the Tavern’s private wastewater and 
sewer system’s monthly service fees may escalate up to twenty 
percent annually. The court found that the Wastewater Agreement 
“contains the necessary information to calculate Defendant’s monthly and bi-monthly charges.” The court additionally found 
that the Santiagos “signed off on these disclosures” and “did 
not conduct due diligence with respect to sewer service.” 
The court concluded that after Tanaka “disclosed the 
private sewer system,” “she [was] not required to do anything 
more.” In fact, according to the court, Tanaka “was not 
required to disclose the Wastewater Agreement” in the first 
20 Tanaka brought the following counterclaims: “Breach of Note,”
“Breach of Mortgage,” “Breach of Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing,”
“Ejectment,” “Judicial Foreclosure,” “Failure to Mediate in Good Faith,”
“Breach of Confidentiality,” “Violation of Order,” “Waste,” “Impairment of 
Security,” and “Rescission.” 
19 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instance because that agreement “does not affect [the 
Santiagos].” Instead, the circuit court concluded that the 
Santiagos “had access to all material information” and that 
Tanaka “provided timely and appropriate disclosures of all 
material facts.” Accordingly, the circuit court ordered 
judgment entered in favor of Tanaka on the Santiagos’ claim for 
negligent misrepresentation and nondisclosure. 
With respect to Tanaka’s counterclaims and the 
Santiagos’ defenses thereto, the court concluded that HRS § 667­5 does not require that the Mortgage contain “any particular 
words” to effectuate a power of sale and further concluded that 
the following language in the Mortgage gave Tanaka the ability 
to foreclose by power of sale: “The mortgagee may . . . 
foreclose this Mortgage, (1) by court proceeding . . . or, (2) 
as now or then provided by law, by advertisement and sale of the 
mortgaged property . . . at public auction . . . .” The court additionally concluded that the Santiagos did not have a right 
to cure the default under the loan documents or Hawai i law. 
Accordingly, the circuit court ordered judgment 
entered in favor of Tanaka and against the Santiagos on Tanaka’s 
counterclaims for “Breach of Note,” “Breach of Mortgage,” 
“Breach of Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing,” and 
“Ejectment.” The court additionally ordered that Tanaka be 
20 
  
 
 
  
                     
 21    The evidence at trial established that the Santiagos paid Tanaka
$585,161.60 in principal, interest, and fees pursuant to the Promissory Note
and Mortgage as of May 6, 2011, in addition to the $800,000 down payment,
$17,518.31 closing charges, and $10,110.88 in taxes after Tanaka transferred
title  to the Tavern back to herself.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
awarded reasonable attorney’s fees and costs in the amount of 
$152,246.61. By its rulings, the circuit court determined that 
ownership and possession of the Tavern lawfully belonged to 
Tanaka, who was at the same time allowed to keep the 
approximately $1.4 million that the Santiagos paid to her 
pursuant to the Mortgage and the Promissory Note. 
On June 28, 2011, the circuit court filed its Entry of 
Judgment (Judgment) and issued a Writ of Ejectment ordering the 
Santiagos to vacate the Tavern. The Santiagos subsequently vacated the premises pursuant to the court’s order. 
On July 7, 2011, the Santiagos filed a Motion to 
Reconsider, Alter, and/or Amend the Court’s [Trial Order] and 
Judgment Thereon (Motion for Reconsideration). The Santiagos 
argued that the law of Hawaiʻ i “abhors forfeitures” and that the 
court’s “decision and judgment thereon, if left to stand as is, 
will result in an over $1.3 million cash forfeiture as the 
result of [the Santiagos’] purchase of the [Tavern] and their 
full performance under the” purchase contract and loan 
documents.
21 
21 
  
 
 
  
                     
 22    The Santiagos reduced the total amount they had paid by
$80,355.99 to offset any actual damages Tanaka had incurred because of the
foreclosure sale: $2,323.64 principal, $12.04 interest, and $78,000.00 as
estimated costs to resell the property, which assumed a six percent broker’scommission and a sale price of $1.3 million. The reduction was apparently in
light of the trial court’s ruling that the foreclosure had been lawfully
conducted.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The Santiagos maintained that the court’s decision 
“will result in a grossly inequitable windfall” to Tanaka, in 
violation of Hawaiʻ i law. Accordingly, the Santiagos concluded 
that they were entitled to restitution of $1,342,455.72.22 
In response, Tanaka argued that the Santiagos were in 
effect seeking rescission of the 2006 sale, which, if granted by 
the circuit court, would turn “the trial outcome upside-down, 
converting [the Santiagos’] loss into a win (and [Tanaka’s] win 
into a loss).” 
In their reply, the Santiagos asserted that they were 
entitled to restitution, not rescission of the purchase contract. 
Relying on In re Parish , 2010 WL 1372387, at *2 
(Bankr. D. Haw. Apr. 6, 2010), the Santiagos also argued that 
the right to cure is an equitable right recognized in Hawaiʻ i. 
On August 4, 2011, the circuit court issued an Order Denying the 
Santiagos’ Motion for Reconsideration. 
22 
  
 
 
  
 
  
                     
   
 
  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
III. Appellate Proceedings 
A. Arguments to the ICA 
The Santiagos appealed to the ICA.23 The Santiagos 
argued that the trial court erred in entering judgment for 
Tanaka on their claims of nondisclosure and negligent 
misrepresentation. Specifically, the Santiagos claimed that 
Tanaka failed to disclose material facts during the course of 
the negotiations for the sale of the Tavern, including the 
$1,160.94 monthly sewer maintenance fees and the $1,160.94 bi­
23 The Santiagos appealed from the Trial Order; the circuit court’s
Judgment, filed June 28, 2011; the Writ of Ejectment, filed June 28, 2011
(Writ of Ejectment); Order Denying “Plaintiffs’ Ex Parte Motion for a
Temporary Stay Pending the July 19, 2011 Hearing on Plaintiffs’ ‘Emergency
Motion for a Temporary Stay of Enforcement of the Court’s Writ of Ejectment
Pending Disposition of Plaintiffs’ Motion to Reconsider, Alter, or Amend the
Judgment and Pending Disposition of Plaintiff’s Motion for Stay PendingAppeal,’” filed July 14, 2011 (Order Denying the Santiagos’ Motion for a
Stay); Order Denying Plaintiffs’ Emergency Motion for a Temporary Stay of
Enforcement of the Court’s Writ of Ejectment Pending Disposition of 
Plaintiffs’ Motion to Reconsider, Alter, or Amend the Judgment and Pending
Disposition of Plaintiffs’ Motion for Stay Pending Appeal, filed August 4,2011 (Order Denying the Santiagos’ Motion to Stay Ejectment); Order Denying
Plaintiffs’ Motion for a Stay Pending Appeal, filed August 4, 2011; Order
Denying Plaintiffs’ Motion to Reconsider, Alter, and/or Amend the Court’s
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order, and Judgment Thereon, filed 
August 4, 2011 (Order Denying the Santiagos’ Motion for Reconsideration); andOrder Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant/Counter- Plaintiff Ruth 
Tanaka’s Motion for Fees and Costs, filed August 22, 2011 (Order GrantingTanaka’s Fees). 
The Santiagos also challenged the circuit court’s judgment on
Tanaka’s counterclaims of breach of note, breach of mortgage, and ejectment,and in denying the Motion for Reconsideration. 
Tanaka filed a cross appeal, which is not before this court and,
thus, will not be discussed. 
23 
  
 
 
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
monthly sewer cleanout charges that Tanaka had been required to 
pay. 
Alternatively, the Santiagos contended that Tanaka 
failed to disclose that, if the Santiagos were to buy the 
Tavern, they would be required either to negotiate with Jasper 
for future sewer service or to build their own sewage disposal 
system necessary to operate the Tavern. According to the 
Santiagos, they were misled by the documents, included in 
Tanaka’s Agreement of Sale Addendum to the DROA, that represented $150 monthly sewer fee and assessment. 
Additionally, the Santiagos asserted that the trial 
court erred in entering judgment in favor of Tanaka on her 
counterclaims of breach of note, breach of mortgage, and 
ejectment, and in denying the Motion for Reconsideration. The 
Santiagos maintained that the Mortgage did not accord Tanaka the 
power of non-judicial foreclosure of the Tavern because the Mortgage allowed such power only as “now or then provided by 
law.” Hawaiʻ i law, according to the Santiagos, does not 
independently provide the power of non-judicial foreclosure, and 
the Mortgage did not contain a power of sale. 
Further, the Santiagos argued that the circuit court 
erred because “the Santiagos cured the alleged default under the note and [Mortgage] pursuant to” HRS § 667-5(c) over six months 
24 
  
 
 
   Finally, the Santiagos maintained that the trial court 
“erroneously awarded Tanaka an additional $152,246.61 in 
attorneys’ fees and costs, even though any award of attorneys’ 
fees and costs should have been offset by the Santiagos’ 
forfeiture of over $1.4 million paid by them to Tanaka.” 
  
  
                     
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
before the foreclosure auction. The Santiagos also contended 
that the right to cure exists as an “equitable right” in Hawaiʻ i. 
In her Answering Brief, Tanaka first addressed the 
Santiagos’ claim for nondisclosure and misrepresentation. 
Tanaka argued that she provided adequate disclosure of the 
Wastewater Agreement and that the Santiagos had “all the information they needed to make further inquiry” but ultimately 
failed to exercise due diligence. Tanaka contended that the 
Santiagos “hang their case on a one-line entry of the County 
fees (as opposed to the Jasper charges) on a pre-printed 
Agreement of Sale form that was rejected and that never became 
part of the contract.” 
Additionally, Tanaka argued that the Santiagos’ claims 
were moot because the Tavern had since been sold to a third 
party.
24 Tanaka also maintained that she did not act in bad 
24 Tanaka moved to dismiss the Santiagos’ second point of error as
moot because according to Tanaka’s declaration in support of her dismissal
motion, the Tavern had been resold to a third party on May 1, 2012, after the
circuit court rendered its Judgment. On May 24, 2012, the Santiagos filed a 
(continued. . .)
25   
 
 
  
 The Santiagos further argued that the “plain reading 
of [the Wastewater Agreement] establishes fees in the amount of 
$150, and allowed only for an increase of the $300 ‘deposit.’” 
In conclusion, the Santiagos maintained that the Judgment 
“resulted in a forfeiture of the entire $1,412,790.79” that they 
paid. 
                                                                  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
faith by exercising her contractual right to accelerate the 
Mortgage and foreclose upon the Santiagos’ default. Finally, 
Tanaka argued that Hawaiʻ i law does not provide for the “right to 
cure” and maintained that she never consented to allow the 
Santiagos the ability to cure their default. 
In their reply, the Santiagos stated that while they 
received a copy of the Wastewater Agreement, the agreement 
“clearly did not establish such high payments.” The Santiagos 
also reiterated that the Wastewater Agreement did not apprise 
them that “they would . . . have to negotiate for sewer 
service[] or construct their own sewage disposal system in order to operate the [Tavern].” 
(. . .continued) 
memorandum in opposition to the motion. Subsequently, on June 6, 2012, the
ICA issued an order denying the motion. 
26   
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. The ICA’s Opinion 
On November 28, 2014, the ICA issued its memorandum 
opinion (Opinion) in which it affirmed the circuit court’s 
Judgment; Trial Order; Writ of Ejectment; Order Denying the 
Santiagos’ Motion for Reconsideration; and the Order Granting 
Tanaka’s Fees in the circuit court. 
The ICA found that the Santiagos did not show the 
circuit court erred in concluding that Tanaka provided 
sufficient disclosure of the sewer fees. The ICA reasoned that, “[i]n light of Tanaka’s disclosures, the circuit court properly 
concluded that the Santiagos should have exercised due 
diligence,” which they failed to do by not further investigating 
the sewer system. The ICA concluded that “the Santiagos were 
put on notice of the monthly payments made to Jasper and that 
Jasper reserved the right to raise payments 20 percent 
annually.” 
In evaluating the Santiagos’ nondisclosure claim under 
Section 551 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, the ICA concluded that the Restatement “only requires a party to correct 
a prior representation when the party knows clarification is 
necessary to prevent the representation from being misleading.” 
The ICA found that the Santiagos did not “make [any] argument 
regarding Tanaka’s knowledge” and that “there is no evidence 
27 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
suggesting that Tanaka knew clarification was necessary.” Thus, 
in finding that the Wastewater Agreement “provided actual notice 
that the Jasper charges were separate from the County fees,” the 
ICA concluded that the circuit court did not erroneously rule in 
favor of Tanaka on the nondisclosure and misrepresentation 
claims. 
The ICA next considered whether the Santiagos’ claims, 
that the Mortgage “did not contain a power of sale clause” and 
that they “cured the alleged default,” were moot due to Tanaka’s sale of the Tavern to a third party. The ICA concluded that it 
could not “grant effective relief in terms of title or 
possession of the property” in light of the sale of the Tavern. 
Accordingly, the ICA did not reach the merits of the Santiagos’ 
arguments concerning power of sale and cure. However, the ICA 
concluded that the case was not moot as to “the Santiagos’ 
contention that the circuit court improperly awarded to Tanaka both the property and all amounts paid by the Santiagos.” 
As to the Santiagos’ claim that Tanaka’s retention of 
the Tavern and payments would amount to a windfall, the ICA 
concluded that the Santiagos were unable to demonstrate their 
entitlement to relief because they remained in possession of the 
Tavern for almost three years after foreclosure and because they 
did not proffer any evidence to establish the value of the 
28 
  
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tavern at the time of default or foreclosure so “as to provide 
support for an assertion that Tanaka reaped a windfall.” The 
ICA concluded that the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying the Santiagos’ Motion for Reconsideration. 
Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the Judgment and issued 
its Judgment on Appeal on January 6, 2015. The Santiagos filed 
an application for writ of certiorari to this court on February 
5, 2015. 
IV. Standards of Review 
A trial court’s findings of fact are reviewed under 
the “clearly erroneous” standard of review. Beneficial Haw., 
Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawaiʻ i 289, 305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001).  A 
finding of fact is determined to be clearly erroneous when “the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding,” or 
“despite evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court 
is left with a definite and firm conviction . . . that a mistake 
has been committed.” Id. (first quoting Alejado v. City & Cty. 
of Honolulu, 89 Hawaiʻ i 221, 225, 971 P.2d 310, 314 (App. 1998); 
and then quoting State v. Kane, 87 Hawaiʻ i 71, 74, 951 P.2d 934, 
937 (1998)). The circuit court’s conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard. 
Haw. Nat’l 
Bank v. Cook
, 100 Hawaiʻ i 2, 7, 58 P.3d 60, 65 (2002).   
29 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
                     
 25   The allegations supporting the Santiagos’ negligent
misrepresentation claim are fundamentally the same as those supporting the
nondisclosure cause of action. For negligent misrepresentation, the
Santiagos assert that Tanaka misrepresented the true amount of sewer fees
that she was paying Jasper, stating that the amount was only $150 when in
fact it had increased to $1,160.94 for sewer maintenance and the same amount 
for bi-monthly cleanout charges.  For their nondisclosure claim, the
Santiagos allege that Tanaka failed to disclose the true amount of sewer fees
based on her agreement with Jasper.  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
V. Discussion 
A. Nondisclosure and Negligent Misrepresentation 
In Hawaiʻ i, claims for nondisclosure are governed by 
the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551 (Am. Law Inst. 1977). 
See Molokoa Vill. Dev. Co. v. Kauai Elec. Co., 60 Haw. 582, 590, 
593 P.2d 375 (1979);  Pancakes of Haw., Inc. v. Pomare Props. 
Corp., 85 Hawaiʻ i 300, 318, 944 P.2d 97, 115 (App. 1997);  Sung v. 
Hamilton
, 710 F. Supp. 2d 1036, 1047 (D. Haw. 2010) (noting 
that, under Hawai
ʻi law, fraud can be committed “by non­
disclosure as well as by an affirmative misrepresentation”).25 
Section 551 of the Restatement provides, in pertinent part, as 
follows: 
(1)	 One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he 
knows may justifiably induce the other to act or
refrain from acting in a business transaction  is 
subject to the same liability to the other as though
he had represented the nonexistence of the matter
that he has failed to disclose, if, but only if, he
is under a duty to the other to exercise reasonable
care to disclose the matter in question. 
30 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
  The Restatement further explains the circumstances 
under which a party in a business transaction has a duty to 
disclose facts to the other in order to prevent a partial or 
ambiguous statement from being misleading: 
   So also may 
  
                     
 26   Although the parties exchanged numerous counteroffers, there was
only one DROA, dated November 23, 2005. Each counteroffer referenced and 
incorporated the DROA’s terms, unless otherwise expressly amended by the
counteroffer.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2)	 One party to a business transaction is under a duty 
to exercise reasonable care to disclose to the other before the transaction is consummated, 
(b)	 
matters known to him that he knows to be necessary to
prevent his partial or ambiguous statement of the
facts from being misleading; . . . . 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551 (1977) (emphases added). 
A statement that is partial or incomplete may be amisrepresentation because it is misleading, when it
purports to tell the whole truth and does not.
a statement made so ambiguously that it may have two
interpretations, one of which is false. When such a 
statement has been made, there is a duty to disclose the
additional information necessary to prevent it from
misleading the recipient. In this case there may be
recovery either on the basis of the original misleadingstatement or of the nondisclosure of the additional facts.  
Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 551 cmt. g (emphasis added). 
In this case, Tanaka’s disclosure duties to Santiago 
under the DROA required Tanaka to “ fully and accurately disclose 
in writing to [the Santiagos] any fact , defect, or condition, 
past or present, that would be expected to measurably affect the 
value of the Property to a reasonable person
.”26 (Emphases 
added). In disclosing these facts, Tanaka was expected to, and 
31 
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
indeed was required to, prepare the disclosures “in good faith 
and with due care” and ensure that she “disclose[d] all material 
facts relating to the Property that [] [were] within [her] 
knowledge or control.” 
(Emphasis added). The DROA further 
provided, “At closing, Escrow shall prorate the following, if applicable, as of the date of closing: real property tax, lease 
rents . . . maintenance, private sewer, marina, and/or 
association fees, tenant rents, and ANY OTHERS.” (Emphases 
added). 
Attached to the Accepted Counteroffer were a Mortgage 
Addendum, which set forth the provisions of the seller-financed Mortgage, and an “As Is” Addendum. Pursuant to the “As Is” 
Addendum, Tanaka “
remain[ed] obligated to disclose in writing 
any known defects or material facts of [the Tavern].” (Emphasis added). 
As required by her duty under the DROA and “As Is” 
Addendum, on April 4, 2006, Tanaka sent the Santiagos her Disclosure Statement. 
The Disclosure Statement provided that 
Tanaka, “[p]ursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes, Chapter 508D (for residential real property), and 
under common law (for all 
other real estate transactions),” was “obligated to fully and accurately disclose in writing to a buyer all ‘material facts’ 
concerning the property.” (Emphases added). It also defined 
32 

  
 
 
   
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“material facts” as “any fact, defect, or condition, past or 
present, that would be expected to measurably affect the value 
to a reasonable person of the residential real property being 
offered for sale.” (Emphasis added). The Disclosure Statement 
underscored that the “Seller’s agent, Buyer and Buyer’s agent 
may rely upon Seller’s disclosures.” (Emphasis added). 
In her responses in the Disclosure Statement, Tanaka 
noted that the Tavern was connected to a private sewer system. 
The last page of the Disclosure Statement provided space for Tanaka to provide further explanation or clarification to her 
answers. With respect to the sewer, Tanaka wrote only that 
“it’s a private sewer line owned by Anchor Cove. We are 
connected.” 
Roughly a week after sending her Disclosure 
Statement, Tanaka provided the Santiagos the Wastewater 
Agreement dated May 16, 1995. 
The Wastewater Agreement provided 
that Tanaka agreed to pay Jasper $150 per month for monthly 
maintenance charges and $150 as a bi-monthly cleanout charge. 
Also indicated in the Wastewater Agreement was Jasper’s 
reservation of “the right to adjust the deposit annually in a 
sum not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the amount paid in the 
year immediately preceding.” (Emphasis added). 
33 

  
 
 
   
   
                     
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
After the Santiagos reviewed Tanaka’s Disclosure 
Statement and other disclosed documents with Takase, the 
Santiagos signed off on the disclosures, believing that Tanaka 
“provided all of the documentation.” Based on Tanaka’s 
disclosures, specifically the Wastewater Agreement, and 
representations during negotiations--namely, Tanaka’s estimate 
of monthly expenses provided in her Agreement of Sale Addendum--
Takase and the Santiagos believed that the costs associated with 
the private sewer system were $150.00 per month for maintenance and $150.00 bi-monthly for cleanout charges. 
At closing, pursuant to paragraph C-10 of the DROA,
27 
escrow prepared an HUD Statement, based on information provided 
by Tanaka, that itemized the fees and prorated amounts due from 
the Santiagos to complete the sale, including prorated property 
taxes and partial month rent due under the Santiagos’ former 
lease agreement. However, the HUD Statement did not include prorated private sewer fees even though the sale closed in the 
middle of the month and the DROA expressly required such an 
itemization. Takase testified that had the sewer fees been 
prorated on the HUD statement, he and the Santiagos “would have 
27 See supra note 3.   
34 
  
 
 
   
 
 Despite her knowledge, Tanaka never informed the 
Santiagos that the amount due under the Wastewater Agreement was 
(1) the single largest ownership expense of the Tavern, 
approximately equal to 20% of the agreed-to monthly mortgage 
payments,28 or (2) subject to an increase of 20% each year, which 
Jasper had implemented annually since the inception of the 
Wastewater Agreement in 1995.  Further, although Richardson 
testified that the Santiagos were “not bound by [the] 
agreement,” Tanaka did not disclose that if the Santiagos chose 
not to accept the terms of the Wastewater Agreement, they would 
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
found out” about the actual amount due for Jasper’s private sewer service. 
The foregoing facts clearly establish that Tanaka did 
not disclose to the Santiagos the true amount of the private 
sewer fees while they were negotiating for the sale of the 
Tavern in 2006. Further, the uncontroverted evidence 
demonstrates that Tanaka paid the private sewer fees prior to 
the Santiagos’ purchase of the Tavern and, thus, knew not only 
the amount of the monthly and bi-monthly charges but also that the fees had increased each year by 20%. 
28 Richardson acknowledged that the Jasper sewer fees were the
highest operating expense for the Tavern. 
35 
  
 
 
   
                     
 29   Because the  disclosed sewer fees are composed of $150 for 
maintenance fees per month and $150 bi
-monthly (or $75 per month) for 
cleanout charges, the total monthly sewer fees based on Tanaka’s disclosures
is $225. The $1,700 per month figure is the sum of the $1,160.94 monthlymaintenance fees and half of the $1,160.94 bi- monthly cleanout charges (or 
approximately $600 per month) that Jasper was actually charging for his sewerservice.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
be required to (1) attempt to negotiate a new agreement with 
Jasper or (2) construct their own sewer system. 
It cannot be seriously disputed that the difference 
between a sewer service fee of $225 monthly and the true price 
of approximately $1,700 per month,29 and the possibility of 
having to build a completely new sewer system if the Santiagos were to refuse binding themselves to the Wastewater Agreement, 
are facts that “may justifiably induce” the Santiagos, or any 
reasonable person standing in their shoes, to “act or refrain from acting” in the purchase of the Tavern, Restatement (Second) 
of Torts § 551(1), by seeking to renegotiate the terms of the 
Promissory Note and Mortgage, recalibrating the agreed-upon 
price, or walking away from the transaction altogether. Indeed, 
Louis testified that he and his wife would not have purchased 
the Tavern for $1.3 million had they known the actual sewer fees 
and the terms under which those fees could be increased annually. The substance and significant character of the 
undisclosed facts, and the incomplete and misleading nature of 
36 
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the disclosed facts, leave little room for doubt that they may 
have “justifiably induce[d]” the Santiagos to “act or refrain” 
from taking actions in their purchase of the Tavern. Id. 
Tanaka’s knowledge that these facts would cause 
justifiable inducement on the Santiagos’ part was established by 
Tanaka’s awareness of the actual, non-disclosed price for 
Jasper’s sewer service, the disparity between the actual price 
and the disclosed price, the failure to clarify that the price 
had been actually subject to significant annual increases although the Wastewater Agreement provided that the increase was 
to be applied only to the deposit, and the fact that the 
Disclosure Statement that Tanaka completed unequivocally stated 
that the Santiagos and Takase may rely upon her representations 
therein. See Jones v. Great Am. Life Ins. Co., No. 2:13-CV­
02153, 2015 WL 417909, at *5 (W.D. Ark. Jan. 30, 2015) (inferring from the facts and circumstances the defendant’s knowledge of the falsity of the representation). The aggregate 
of these facts demonstrates Tanaka’s knowledge that her 
inaccurate and incomplete disclosure could have been relied upon 
by, and thus may have justifiably induced, the Santiagos to act 
or to refrain to act. 
Additionally, Tanaka’s representation in the Agreement 
of Sale Addendum--that “based on current estimates,” the “Sewer 
37 
  
 
 
   
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Fee & Assessments” were $150--proved to be a partial, ambiguous, 
and misleading statement.30 Richardson testified that the amount 
reflected under “Sewer Fee & Assessments” constituted the county sewer fees, not the private sewer fees. But Geffert, who had 
been paying county sewer fees for eight years at the time the 
parties were negotiating for the sale of the Tavern, testified 
that county sewer fees were more than double the amount under 
“Sewer Fee & Assessments.” Further, based in part on the size 
of the Tavern and the Santiagos’ knowledge of the building and expenses paid during their seven-year tenancy, the Santiagos 
believed Tanaka’s estimate of $150 reflected the amount of the 
private sewer fees. 
Because Tanaka’s representation on the Agreement of 
Sale lacked additional information or clarification, the 
estimated “Sewer Fee & Assessments” was ambiguous. Thus, under 
comment g of Section 551 of the Restatement, because Tanaka’s statement was subject to two possible interpretations, one of 
30 Although the Agreement of Sale Addendum was part of a rejected
counteroffer and thus did not become part of the contract between the
parties, her representations therein are relevant to the Santiagos’ claims
for nondisclosure and misrepresentation. 
38 
  
 
 
    
  
  
                     
    
  Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which was false, Tanaka was required to provide further 
disclosures to prevent her statement from being misleading.31 
Tanaka subsequently disclosed the Wastewater Agreement 
that, on its face, appeared to confirm the Santiagos’ 
interpretation of Tanaka’s “Sewer Fee & Assessments” estimate. 
The Wastewater Agreement provided that Tanaka paid Jasper $150 
in monthly private sewer maintenance charges and $150 in bi­
monthly sewer cleanout charges, the same numerical amount 
indicated in Tanaka’s estimate. Consequently, Tanaka’s representation on the Agreement of Sale Addendum appeared to 
confirm that the fees listed within the Wastewater Agreement 
were accurate. 
Tanaka’s contention throughout this case, that the 
express terms of the Wastewater Agreement provided that Jasper 
could increase the monthly and bi-monthly fees by up to 20% 
annually and that the Santiagos therefore had adequate notice that the sewer fees may be greater than $150, is unavailing; the 
plain language of the Wastewater Agreement provides that Jasper 
only “reserve[d] the right to adjust the 
deposit annually in a 
sum not exceeding twenty percent (20%).” Thus, contrary to 
31 Additionally, “[t]his court has affirmed the general rule that,
in interpreting contracts, ambiguous terms are construed against the party
who drafted the contract.” , 105 Hawaiʻ i 241, 249,
96 P.3d 261, 269 (2004). 
39 
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tanaka’s argument, the Wastewater Agreement provides a 
reservation to increase the deposit, not the monthly sewer 
maintenance fees or the bi-monthly sewer cleanout fees. 
Tanaka’s contention is further refuted by trial 
testimony supporting the conclusion that the terms of the 
Wastewater Agreement were, at best, ambiguous and misleading. 
Richardson acknowledged that the plain terms of the agreement 
did not state that the monthly and bi-monthly fees could be 
increased by 20% per year. Richardson specifically testified that “perhaps the people who drafted [the agreement] made an 
error” by providing that the “deposit” rather than the 
“maintenance fee” could be increased by up to 20% a year. 
On the other hand, the Santiagos’ realtor, Takase, 
testified that based on all the disclosures he received, he 
believed that the sewer fees were “$150 for a maintenance fee, 
and $150 cleaning fee,” as stated on the face of the Wastewater Agreement. Thus, if in fact the Wastewater Agreement provided 
that Jasper had the ability to increase the monthly and bi­
monthly fees by 20% a year, the drafting “mistake” rendered the 
otherwise plain and clear provisions of the Wastewater Agreement 
ambiguous and misleading. Thus, Tanaka had a “duty to disclose 
the additional information necessary to prevent” the Wastewater 
40 
  
 
 
   
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Agreement from misleading the Santiagos. Restatement (Second) 
of Torts § 551(2)(c). 
An additional opportunity for Tanaka to apprise the 
Santiagos of the true price for Jasper’s sewer service arose at 
closing, when Tanaka was contractually bound, in accordance with 
paragraph C-10 of the DROA, to direct escrow to complete the HUD 
form to reflect, among other things, private sewer fees. At 
this juncture, Tanaka again failed to clarify the ambiguity and 
inaccuracy of her previous disclosures by not specifying the appropriate proration of Jasper’s sewer fees, which, according 
to Takase, could have alerted the Santiagos to the true costs. 
Thus, under Section 551 of the Restatement, to prevent 
her partial and ambiguous statements from being misleading, 
Tanaka had a duty to disclose the monthly amount of the sewer 
fees. By failing to disclose the amount of the Tavern’s monthly 
sewer fees, Tanaka breached this duty. 
Accordingly, for the reasons discussed, the circuit 
court’s Trial Order was based on multiple erroneous findings and misapprehension as to the applicable law. First, contrary to 
the circuit court’s findings and conclusions that the Santiagos’ 
alleged failure to conduct due diligence barred their claims for 
nondisclosure and misrepresentation, “[the] duty to avoid 
misrepresentations is so strong that the deceived party is not 
41 
  
 
 
    
                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
charged with failing to discover the truth.” V.S.H. Realty, 
Inc. v. Texaco, Inc., 757 F.2d 411, 415 (1st Cir. 1985) (citing 
Snyder v. Sperry & Hutchinson Co., 333 N.E.2d 421 (Mass. 1975)) 
(“[I]f the seller’s representations are such as to induce the 
buyer not to undertake an independent examination of the 
pertinent facts, lulling him into placing confidence in the 
seller’s assurances, his failure to ascertain the truth through 
investigation does not preclude recovery.”); see also Yorke v. 
Taylor, 124 N.E.2d 912, 916 (Mass. 1955) (“The recipient in a business transaction of a fraudulent misrepresentation of fact 
is justified in relying on its truth, although he might have 
ascertained the falsity of the representation had he made an 
investigation.”). Thus, Tanaka’s partial and ambiguous 
disclosures are not excused by any alleged failure on the 
Santiagos’ part to further investigate the information provided 
to them.
32 The circuit court’s contrary conclusions and findings 
are therefore erroneous. 
Tanaka also had an affirmative duty, based on the 
clear contractual terms of the DROA, “As Is” Addendum, and 
32 Despite the circuit court’s finding that the Santiagos failed to
exercise appropriate due diligence because they “did not take care to protect
their own interest, or obtain professional advice,” the Santiagos wererepresented throughout the purchase by Takase, an experienced professional
broker, who guided and assisted them in their purchase of the Tavern. Thus,
the court’s contrary finding is clearly erroneous. 
42 
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Seller’s Disclosures, to “fully and accurately disclose in 
writing” “all material facts” to the Santiagos prior to 
finalizing the sale of the Tavern. Therefore, Tanaka’s failure 
to disclose material facts, standing alone, clearly violated her 
duty to disclose, and the circuit court’s conclusion that Tanaka 
“was not required to disclose the Wastewater Agreement” is 
erroneous. 
Additionally, the circuit court’s finding that the 
Wastewater Agreement “provides for annual escalation (up to 20%) of both the monthly maintenance charges and the bi-monthly 
cleanout charge” was clearly erroneous because, as discussed, 
the plain, unambiguous language of the Wastewater Agreement 
established monthly sewer maintenance fees in the amount of $150 
and bi-monthly sewer maintenance fees in the same amount. 
Although the agreement provided that Jasper reserved the right 
to increase the “deposit” by up to 20% per year, the Wastewater Agreement did not provide for any increase to the monthly or bi­
monthly sewer fees. Thus, the circuit court’s conclusion that 
the Wastewater Agreement provides for annual escalation of the 
sewer fees, and that the agreement “contains the necessary 
information to calculate [the Santiagos’] monthly and bi-monthly 
charges,” was clearly erroneous. Similarly erroneous is the 
circuit court’s related conclusion that the Santiagos “had 
43 
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
access to all material information” and that Tanaka “provided 
timely and appropriate disclosures of all material facts .” 
For these reasons, the circuit court and the ICA both 
erred in concluding that Tanaka did not have a duty to disclose, 
and did not breach her duty to disclose, the actual monthly fees 
of the private sewer system and the fact that the Santiagos, if 
they chose not to accept the terms of the Wastewater Agreement, 
would be required to negotiate a new private sewer contract or 
otherwise construct their own sewer system. See
 Restatement 
(Second) of Torts § 551(1). Additionally, once Tanaka made 
partial or ambiguous statements as to the amount of the private 
sewer fees, she breached her duty by subsequently failing to 
disclose the additional information necessary to prevent her 
disclosures and statements from misleading the Santiagos. See 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551(2)(b), cmt. g. 
The foregoing facts also establish proof of the 
Santiagos’ negligent misrepresentation cause of action. 
Negligent misrepresentation has the following elements: “(1) 
false information be supplied as a result of the failure to 
exercise reasonable care or competence in communicating the 
information; (2) the person for whose benefit the information is 
supplied suffered the loss; and (3) the recipient relies upon 
the misrepresentation.” Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawaiʻ i 247, 269, 21 
44 
  
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d 452, 474 (2001) (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts § 
552); Zanakis-Pico v. Cutter Dodge, Inc. , 98 Hawaiʻ i 309, 321, 47 
P.3d 1222, 1234 (2002); see also Chun v. Park, 51 Haw. 462, 468, 
462 P.2d 905, 909 (1969) (“We believe § 552 of Restatement (Second) of Torts . . . is a fair and just restatement of the 
law on the issue of negligent misrepresentation.”). 
As discussed, Tanaka provided false information 
regarding the sewer charges to the Santiagos by only disclosing 
that Jasper’s sewer fees were $150.00 per month for maintenance 
and $150.00 bi-monthly for cleanout charges when in fact Tanaka 
had been paying Jasper $
1,153.23 for monthly private sewer 
maintenance and the same amount for bi-monthly sewer cleanout. 
Further, Tanaka did not clarify that the express terms of the 
Wastewater Agreement, which allowed Jasper to increase the 
deposit every year, was inaccurate because the contractual 
annual increase was actually being applied to the sewer fees. 
With respect to the loss element, the Santiagos were required to 
pay substantially more for sewer fees than what Tanaka 
represented and what the Wastewater Agreement reflected. The 
reliance element is also established by Louis’ testimony that he and his wife would not have bought the Tavern had they known the 
true amount of sewer fees associated with ownership of the 
Tavern. Accordingly, the uncontroverted evidence established 
45 
  
 
 
  
                     
   
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that Tanaka is liable for negligent misrepresentation, and the 
circuit court and the ICA erred in entering judgment against the 
Santiagos on this claim. 
B.	 The Non-Judicial Foreclosure of the Tavern Under HRS § 667­
5 Was Unauthorized 
In 2008, Tanaka conducted a nonjudicial foreclosure 
under the provisions of HRS § 667-5 (Supp. 2008). The circuit court held that Tanaka “complied with applicable foreclosure 
statutes” and that the Santiagos “did not establish any defense 
to foreclosure.” Specifically, the circuit court determined that the Santiagos’ arguments related to their defense of 
wrongful foreclosure to Tanaka’s ejectment counterclaim--that 
there was no power of sale in the Mortgage and that they cured 
their default--were without merit.
33 Accordingly, the court 
issued a writ of ejectment, which the ICA later affirmed. 
33 On appeal, the ICA did not reach these two issues after
determining that the Santiagos’ challenges to the circuit court’s decision on
Tanaka’s counterclaims were rendered moot by the resale of the Tavern to a
third party, making it impossible to return title and possession to the
Santiagos. Santiago v. Tanaka , No. CAAP- 11-0000697 (App. Nov. 28, 2014) 
(mem).  
The ICA may have concluded that any challenge to ejectment and
the underlying nonjudicial foreclosure had been rendered moot because it was
not possible to award the classic remedy for such a cause of action: return
of title and possession. 
However, money damages, which the ICA found were
within its purview to award, may be substituted for title and possession incertain instances pursuant to the equitable powers of a court in adjudicatinga case arising from a mortgage foreclosure, 
see  infra.  Thus, the ICA should
have addressed the Santiagos’ argument as to their right to cure a defaultand the lack of a nonjudicial power of sale in the Mortgage. 
46 
  
 
 
  
  
                     
    
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1.	 The Authority to Contract a Power of Sale under HRS § 667-5 
Prior to its repeal in 2012,34 HRS § 667-5 authorized 
the non-judicial foreclosure of mortgaged property only “[w]hen 
a power of sale is contained in a mortgage.” HRS § 667-5(a).35 
This court examined HRS § 667-5 in Lee v. HSBC Bank USA , 121 
Hawai
ʻi 287, 218 P.3d 775 (2009), and found that that it 
“authorize[d]  nonjudicial foreclosure under a power of sale 
34 HRS §§ 667- 5 to 667- 10 governed the process of foreclosure by 
power of sale (i.e., non- judicial foreclosure) and were within Part I of 
Chapter 667. HRS §§ 667- 5 to 667- 8 were repealed by the legislature in 2012.  
2012 Haw. Sess. Law Act 182, § 50 at 684. 
35	 In 2008, HRS §§ 667- 5 provided in relevant part as follows: 
(a)	 When a power of sale is contained in a mortgage, and
where . . . any person authorized by the power to act
in the premises, desires to foreclose under power of
sale upon breach of a condition of the mortgage, the. . . person shall be represented by an attorney who 
is licensed to practice law in the State and isphysically located in the State. . . . 
. . . 
(c)	 Upon the request of any person entitled to notice
pursuant to this section and sections 667- 5.5 and 667­
6, the attorney, the mortgagee, successor, or personrepresented by the attorney shall disclose to the
requestor the following information: 
(1)	 The amount to cure the default, together with
the estimated amount of the foreclosing
mortgagee’s attorneys’ fees and costs, and all
other fees and costs estimated to be incurred 
by the foreclosing mortgagee related to the
default prior to the auction within fivebusiness days of the request; and 
(2)	 The sale price of the mortgaged property onceauctioned. 
47 
  
 
 
   
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
clause contained in a mortgage.” Id. at 289, 218 P.3d at 777 
(emphases added). In Lee, the plaintiffs argued, and this court 
agreed, that “no state statute creates a right in mortgagees to 
proceed by non-judicial foreclosure; the right is created by 
contract.” Id. at at 292, 218 P.3d at 780. 
Thus, this court has held that HRS § 667-5 does not 
provide the nonjudicial power of foreclosure but only allows its 
creation, if the parties choose to do so, within the four 
corners of a contract.  See id. ; see also Apao v. Bank of N.Y., 
324 F.3d 1091, 1095 (9th Cir. 2003) (finding that HRS § 667-5 
“did not confer the power of sale, but merely authorized the 
parties to contract for the express terms of foreclosure upon 
default”). 
Here, the mortgage states as follows: 
But upon any default .  .  . the Mortgagee may with or 
without taking possession, foreclose this Mortgage,  
by court proceeding 
. . . , or, 
as  now  or then  provided by law , by 
advertisement and sale 
of the mortgaged property .  .  .  at public auction  . . . .   
(Emphasis added). The right to sell the Tavern under the Mortgage is qualified by the phrase “now or as then provided by 
law.” Thus, we analyze the import of “now or as then provided 
by law.” 
Under principles of contract interpretation, an 
agreement should be construed as a whole and its meaning 
48 

  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determined from the entire context and not from any particular 
word, phrase, or clause. Ching v. Hawaiian Rests., Ltd. , 50 
Haw. 563, 565, 445 P.2d 370, 372 (1968). “Since an agreement is interpreted as a whole, it is assumed in the first instance that 
no part of it is superfluous.” Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 203 (1981), cmt. b. Contract terms should be 
interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted 
sense in common speech. Found. Int’l, Inc. v. E.T. Ige Constr., 
Inc., 102 Hawaiʻ i 487, 495, 78 P.3d 23, 31 (2003).  Where a term 
or a clause remains open to more than one reading, we construe 
any ambiguity “against the party who drafted the contract.” 
Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawaiʻ i 241, 249, 96 P.3d 261, 
269 (2004). 
The Mortgage--the relevant contract in this case-­
states that “upon any default . . . the Mortgagee may with or 
without taking possession, foreclose this Mortgage . . . as now 
or then 
provided by law  . . . . ” (Emphasis added). As 
written, HRS § 667-5 is the only source from which the Mortgage’s power to foreclose may be derived. However, HRS 
§ 667-5 does not independently provide for a power of sale, and, 
as noted, it only authorizes a sale where such a power is 
contained in a mortgage. 
Lee
, 121 Hawaiʻ i at 289, 218 P.3d at 
49 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
777. Thus, the Mortgage does not provide for a power of sale 
that would have authorized Tanaka’s nonjudicial foreclosure. 
Alternatively, the clause “as now or then provided by 
law” at a minimum creates an ambiguity for two reasons. First, 
as noted, the Mortgage defers to the statute, but the statute 
similarly defers to the Mortgage. The plain language of the 
Mortgage creates a chicken-and-egg situation where it is not 
clear whether the power of sale is created within the document 
(as required by the statute) or created within the statute (as contemplated by the Mortgage). Second, the meaning of the 
clause “as now or then provided by law” is unclear. The 
Santiagos have represented that the phrase only “allows” 
foreclosure as otherwise provided by law. Another meaning could 
be that the phrase “the Mortgagee may . . . foreclose this 
Mortgage” creates the power of sale, and the succeeding phrase 
“as now or then provided by law” sets forth the manner in which the power of sale must be exercised. 
Where there is an ambiguity, the ambiguity is 
construed against the drafter--Tanaka. Luke, 105 Hawaiʻ i at 249, 
96 P.3d at 269. Thus, if “as now or then provided by law” is interpreted as an ambiguity, the clause should be given the 
meaning that the Mortgage only allows nonjudicial foreclosure as 
provided by law. Since HRS § 667-5, the section under which the 
50 

  
 
 
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
nonjudicial foreclosure sale was conducted, requires a power of 
sale to be contained in a mortgage, Lee, 121 Hawaiʻ i at 289, 218 
P.3d at 777, a power that the Mortgage in this case did not 
provide, Tanaka’s nonjudicial foreclosure was unlawful. 
Thus, 
the conclusions of law of the circuit court in its Trial Order-­
that Tanaka “complied with the applicable foreclosure statutes,” 
that the Santiagos “did not establish any defense to 
foreclosure,” and that the Santiagos’ “‘power of sale’ argument 
is meritless”--are incorrect. 
2. The Right to Cure 
The Santiagos have asserted that there is a statutory 
right to cure default under HRS § 667-5 and that, pursuant to that statutory right, they cured any default under the Mortgage, 
making the ensuing foreclosure wrongful. When construing a 
statute, courts are bound to give effect to all parts of a 
statute, and no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as 
“superfluous, void, or insignificant” if a construction can be legitimately found that will give force to and preserve all 
words of the statute. 
Fagaragan v. State , 132 Hawaiʻ i 224, 241, 
320 P.3d 889, 906 (2014). 
HRS § 667-5(c) provides that “[u]pon the request of 
any person entitled to notice . . . the mortgagee . . . shall 
disclose to the requestor . . . the amount to cure the default 
51 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
. . . .” Thus, subsection (c) clearly imposes certain 
disclosure requirements on the mortgagee intending to foreclose. 
The fact that, upon the mortgagor’s request, the mortgagee must 
disclose the amount to cure the default, together with the 
related obligation to disclose such amount before the auction 
sale, implies a right of the defaulting party to cure in order 
to prevent foreclosure. Construing HRS § 667-5(c) as not 
providing a right to cure would essentially render meaningless 
the express statutory requirement that “[t]he amount to cure the default” be disclosed upon a mortgagor’s request. Under such a 
construction, the requirement that a mortgagee should disclose 
the amount to cure would be superfluous, since that requirement 
would have no practical application if there were no predicate 
right to cure. Viewed another way, it is plainly illogical to 
have a statutory requirement mandating disclosure of the amount 
to cure if, in actuality, there is no statutory right to cure. 
See HRS § 667-5(c) (utilizing the word “shall” to signify an 
imperative command instead of the permissive modal verb “may”). 
Additionally, unlike a power of sale, which HRS § 
667-5 explicitly required to be “contained in a mortgage,” the amount to cure that a mortgagee must disclose upon the 
mortgagor’s request was not statutorily required to have an 
independent contractual source. 
If the legislature intended a 
52 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
right to cure to be agreed upon contractually, it could have 
added to HRS § 667-5(c)(1) the qualifier “when contained in a 
mortgage,” as it did in the power of sale provision. The 
absence of such a qualifier is supportive of the interpretation 
that the right to cure is statutorily provided by HRS § 667­
5(c)(1). 
Finally, our interpretation is consonant with HRS 
§ 677-5(c)’s codification of the common-law right to cure a 
default. 
The purpose that prompted the addition of HRS § 667­
5(c) to the foreclosure statute in 2008 was to “ensure that the 
different nonjudicial foreclosure processes include provisions 
for interested parties to receive sufficient notice and obtain 
information about the intent to foreclose [and] amounts to cure the mortgage default.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 3-08, in 2008 House 
Journal at 1710, 2008 Senate Journal at 793 (emphases added). 
Evident from the legislative history of HRS § 667-5(c) is the recognition that the right to cure a default is intrinsic in the 
law and that, therefore, HRS § 677-5(c) merely codified this 
right to ensure that interested parties were adequately apprised 
of it. 
The common-law right to cure a default originated from 
the fundamental premise that “[m]ortgage foreclosure is a 
proceeding equitable in nature and is thus governed by the rules 
53 

  
 
 
                      
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of equity.” Beneficial Haw., Inc. v. Kida , 96 Hawaiʻ i 289, 312, 
30 P.3d 895, 918 (2001). Because equity abhors forfeitures, 
Jenkins v. Wise, 58 Haw. 592, 597, 574 P.2d 1337, 1341 (1978), 
and “regards and treats as done what ought to be done,” Bank of Haw. v. Horwoth, 71 Haw. 204, 211, 787 P.2d 674, 679 (1990), it 
is typical in foreclosure cases that a right to cure a default 
and stop the foreclosure continues up to the day of the 
confirmation of the sale. Hoge v. Kane, 4 Haw. App. 533, 541, 
670 P.2d 36, 41 (1983). Thus, Hawaii’s courts “would not prevent a mortgagor from curing the default and halting the 
foreclosure prior to the entry of a written order confirming the foreclosure sale.” 
In re Parish
, No. 10-00086, 2010 WL 1372387, 
at *1 (Bankr. D. Haw. Apr. 6, 2010) (emphasis added); see also 
Graf v. Hope Bldg. Corp., 171 N.E. 884 (N.Y. 1930) (Cardozo, J., 
dissenting) (“Equity declines to give effect to a covenant, 
however formal, whereby in the making of a mortgage, the 
mortgagor abjures and surrenders the privilege of 
redemption.”).36 Accordingly, our interpretation that HRS § 667­
5(c) provides a right to cure is directed by HRS § 667-5(c)’s codification of the same right under the common law. To hold 
36 Federal law recognizes an equitable right of redemption and cure.
In re Parish , 2010 WL 1372387, at *1 (“The right of redemption is an
equitable interest that is included in the bankruptcy estate under section
541(a)(1).”). 
54 
  
 
 
     
 
                     
   
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
otherwise would be to disregard the emanating purpose of HRS 
§ 667-5(c) and to indirectly nullify the common-law right to 
cure as incorporated in HRS § 667-5(c).37 
3.	 The Santiagos Cured the Default, and Tanaka’s Nonjudicial
Foreclosure was Wrongful 
Based on the statutory right provided in HRS § 667-5, 
the Santiagos had a right to cure the default occasioned by their non-payment. Thus, the circuit court’s conclusion of law 
that there is no right to cure in Hawaiʻ i law is incorrect. 
Although the Santiagos indicated on March 10, 2008, 
that they were halting payment to the mortgage servicer based on 
concerns regarding mediation, they were continuing to set aside payment. The record further indicates that the Santiagos cured 
any event of default as of May 8, 2008, some four months prior 
to the sale. 
Default is a necessary precondition for nonjudicial 
foreclosure under HRS § 667-5. Lee, 121 Hawaiʻ i at 290, 218 P.3d 
at 778 (“This section specifically requires breach of a condition of the mortgage as a condition precedent to 
37 Because the right to cure is grounded in the common law and has
existed even prior to the 2008 amendment to HRS § 667- 5, the codification of 
that right in HRS § 667- 5, which became effective in June 2008, applies in 
this case. Additionally, the circuit court’s citation to  Weinberg v. Mauch , 
78 Hawaiʻ i 40, 52, 890 P.2d 277, 289 (1995), for the proposition that there is 
no “right to cure” is incorrect. That case is inapposite because it did not
concern a statutory or common- law right to cure but only whether an 
assignment of a right to cure was consented to in the contract. 
55 
  
 
 
  
  
                     
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
foreclosure.”) Lee found that a sale pursuant to HRS § 667-5 
was invalid where a breach of a mortgage contract had been cured 
because, in that instance, the mortgagors “were no longer in 
breach of a condition of the mortgage” and, thus, the mortgagee 
“could not invoke the mortgage’s power of sale clause.” Id. at 
291, 218 P.3d at 779. A foreclosure sale conducted when the default had already been cured, according to Lee, “did not 
comply with the requirements of HRS section 667–5 and was, thus, 
invalid.” Id. at 291, 218 P.3d at 779 (emphasis added). 
Accordingly, since Tanaka’s foreclosure was conducted 
after the Santiagos had cured their default, the sale pursuant to HRS § 667-5 was unlawful, and the circuit court’s conclusion 
that Tanaka “complied with the applicable foreclosure statutes” 
was incorrect.
38 It was also incorrect for the circuit court to 
conclude that Tanaka was “entitled to a writ of ejectment.” 
C. The Santiagos’ Damages 
Where it is determined that the nonjudicial 
foreclosure of a property is wrongful, the sale of the property is invalid and voidable at the election of the mortgagor, who 
38 The Santiagos argue that the circuit court should have granted 
their Motion for Reconsideration because its decision “resulted in an over 
$1.3 million cash forfeiture as a result of [the Santiagos’] purchase of the
subject property and their full performance” under the Mortgage. In light of
our disposition of this case, it is unnecessary to reach this argument. 
56 
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shall then regain title to and possession of the property. See 
Ulrich v. Sec. Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158, 168 (1939) (holding that 
where a self-dealing mortgagee fails to exercise its right to 
non-judicial foreclosure in a manner that is fair, reasonably 
diligent, and in good faith and to demonstrate that an adequate 
price was procured for the property, the resulting sale is 
void); 
Lee v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawaiʻ i 287, 292, 218 P.3d 775, 
780 (2009) (concluding “that an agreement created at a 
foreclosure sale conducted pursuant to HRS section 667–5 is void 
and unenforceable where the foreclosure sale is invalid under 
the statute”). Voiding the foreclosure sale at this time, however, has been rendered impracticable because the Tavern has 
already been resold by Tanaka to a third party. See 123 Am. 
Jur. Proof of Facts 3d § 31 (2011) (“It has long been held that if the property has passed into the hands of an innocent 
purchaser for value, an action at law for damages is generally 
the appropriate remedy.”). 
Thus, based on our power to fashion 
an equitable relief in foreclosure cases, see Beneficial Haw., 
Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawaiʻ i 289, 312,  30 P.3d 895, 918 (2001) 
(reiterating that mortgage foreclosure is a proceeding equitable 
in nature), we consider appropriate relief. 
Jenkins v. Wise , 58 Haw. 592, 574 P.2d 1337 (1978), is 
instructive. In that case, even though this court found the 
57 

  
 
 
   
 Similar to Jenkins, Tanaka’s security interests in the 
Tavern were never in jeopardy. At the time of their ejectment, 
the Santiagos had made virtually full payment to Tanaka for the 
Tavern, including an $800,000 down payment and $585,161.60 in 
mortgage payments. Hence, we exercise our equitable power in 
awarding restitution to the Santiagos so as to prevent 
forfeiture of their interests. Accordingly, we conclude that 
the Santiagos are entitled to restitution of their proven out­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
purchaser to be in default, we disapproved of the circuit 
court’s disposition that essentially effectuated a total 
forfeiture of the purchaser’s interest, in part because the 
seller’s “security interests in the property were never in 
jeopardy.” Id. at 598, 574 P.2d at 1342. In this context, the 
court found that “where no injustice would thereby result to the injured party, equity will generally favor compensation rather 
than forfeiture against the offending party.” Id. at 597, 574 
P.2d at 1341. Thus, instead of cancelling the purchase contract 
and depriving the purchaser of the property and the significant 
amount of money that she already paid, this court ordered the 
purchaser of the property to pay the seller the entire unpaid 
balance of the purchase price and accrued interests in exchange 
for specific performance by the seller under the purchase 
contract. 
Id.
 at 604, 574 P.2d at 1345. 
58 
  
 
 
                      
   
 
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of-pocket losses from Tanaka’s wrongful foreclosure of the 
Mortgage and subsequent sale of the Tavern. See Fleming v. 
Napili Kai, Ltd., 50 Haw. 66, 70, 430 P.2d 316, 319 (1967) (declaring that equity jurisprudence “is not bound by the strict 
rules of the common law, but can mold its decrees to do justice 
amid all the vicissitudes and intricacies of life” (quoting 
Bowen v. Hockley, 71 F.2d 781, 786 (4th Cir. 1934)). This 
amount is equal to the undisputed $800,000 down payment that the 
Santiagos paid for the Tavern, $585,161.60 in mortgage payments from September 2006 to March 2011, consisting of principal, 
interest, and fees, $17,518.31 that the Santiagos were required 
to pay in closing charges associated with the sale, and 
$10,110.88 in property taxes that the Santiagos paid after 
Tanaka had wrongfully sold the Tavern back to herself.
39 In sum, 
the Santiagos suffered total out-of-pocket losses of $1,412,790.79 as a result of Tanaka’s wrongful foreclosure of the Mortgage and subsequent sale of the Tavern.
40     
39 The Santiagos suggested to both the circuit court and the ICA
that Tanaka’s “actual damages,” which they estimated at $80,335, should be
deducted from their gross damages. This deduction proceeded upon the premise
that the nonjudicial foreclosure was valid and that the purchase price at the
foreclosure sale would be $1.3 million. Because both assumptions are
incorrect, the proposed deduction is not applicable. 
40 Relatedly, the Santiagos, who should have been the prevailing
parties as to Tanaka’s breach of mortgage and breach of note counterclaims, 
are also entitled to attorneys’ fees they incurred at the circuit court. HRS 
§ 607-14 (Supp. 1997).  Conversely, because Tanaka should have been the 
(continued. . .)
59   
 
 
  
                                                                  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In cases involving fraud or deceit, which includes 
nondisclosure claims, this court has previously stated that the 
measure of damages “is usually confined to either the ‘out-of­
pocket’ loss or the ‘benefit of the bargain.’” Ellis v. 
Crockett , 51 Haw. 45, 53, 451 P.2d 814, 820 (1969); Zanakis-Pico 
v. Cutter Dodge, Inc.
, 98 Hawaiʻ i 309, 320, 47 P.3d 1222, 1233 
(2002) (same). Under the out-of-pocket rule, “the damages are the difference between the actual value of the property received 
and the price paid for the property, along with any special 
damages naturally and proximately caused by the fraud prior to 
its discovery, including expenses incurred in mitigating the damages.” 
B.F. Goodrich Co. v. Mesabi Tire Co. , 430 N.W.2d 180, 
182 (Minn. 1988); see generally 37 Am. Jur. 2d Fraud and Deceit § 434 (2013). In contrast, the benefit-of-the-bargain rule 
“allows the [recipient of the fraud or deceit] to recover the 
difference between the value of the property received and the 
value to plaintiff that the property would have had if the 
representation had been true.” Id.; see generally 37 Am. Jur. 
(. . .continued) 
losing party, the circuit court’s award of attorneys’ fees to her, based on
HRS § 607- 14, is erroneous.  We therefore remand this case to the circuit 
court for a determination of the amount of attorneys’ fees due the Santiagos. 
60 
  
 
 
   
                     
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2d Fraud and Deceit § 432 (2013).41 It is unnecessary to decide 
the applicable measure of nondisclosure damages due the 
Santiagos because, based on the trial record, the total amount 
of damages to which the Santiagos are entitled on their 
nondisclosure claim is included within the $1,412,790.79 amount 
that this court has already awarded to them. 
With respect to damages for negligent 
misrepresentation, the Santiagos “may recover the pecuniary 
losses caused by their justifiable reliance on a negligent 
misrepresentation.” Zanakis-Pico, 98 Hawaiʻ i at 32 1, 47 P.3d at 
1234 (citing State ex rel. Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp., 82 Hawaiʻi 32, 919 P.2d 294 (1996) (recognizing that “pecuniary 
losses are recoverable in a claim for negligent 
misrepresentation”)); see Chun v. Park, 51 Haw. 462, 468, 462 
P.2d 905, 909 (1969) (approving “out of pocket” expenses incurred in connection with the purchase of a property in 
reliance upon a negligent misrepresentation). The Zanakis
 court 
41 Inherent in the foregoing formulations is the presupposition that
the recipient of fraud or deceit retains some value as a result of the
transaction in which the fraud or deceit was made. Where the recipient of
fraud or deceit is left with no value whatsoever, the proper measure of
damages is “the amount . . . paid with interest from the date of payment,
plus incidental losses and expenses suffered as a result of the seller’smisrepresentations.” 
Salmon v. Brookshire , 301 S.W.2d 48, 54 (Mo. Ct. App. 
1957); accord  Kerr v. Vatterott Educ. Ctrs., Inc., 439 S.W.3d 802, 813- 14 
(Mo. Ct. App. 2014); 
see Anderson v. Heasley, 148 P. 738 (Kan. 1915). 
61 
  
 
 
  
 
Zanakis-Pico , 98 Hawaiʻ i at 322, 47 P.3d at 1235 (2002) 
(alterations and emphasis omitted) (quoting Restatement (Second) 
of Torts § 552B (1977)). Although the Santiagos are entitled to 
damages for negligent misrepresentation, similar to the damages 
for nondisclosure, we need not decide the applicable amount due 
the Santiagos because based on the trial record, the total amount of damages to which the Santiagos are entitled on their 
negligent misrepresentation claim is included within the 
$1,412,790.79 amount that they have already been awarded. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
adopted the following formulation from the Restatement (Second) 
of Torts for damages recoverable for a negligent 
misrepresentation: 
[T]hose damages necessary to compensate the plaintiff for 
the pecuniary loss to him or her of which the
misrepresentat ion is a legal cause, including 
(a) the difference between the value of what he or she has 
received in the transaction and its purchase price or other
value given for it; and 
(b) pecuniary loss suffered otherwise as  a consequence of 
the plaintiff’s reliance upon the misrepresentation.  
VI. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s Judgment, Writ of Ejectment, 
Order Denying the Santiagos’ Motion for Reconsideration, and Order Granting Tanaka’s Fees. The circuit court’s Trial Order, 
which incorporates the FOF and COL, is vacated insofar as it is 
62 
  
 
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inconsistent with this opinion; otherwise, it is affirmed. The 
case is remanded to the circuit court (1) for entry of judgment 
in favor of the Santiagos on their negligent misrepresentation 
and nondisclosure causes of action; (2) for entry of judgment in 
favor of the Santiagos on Tanaka’s breach of note, breach of 
mortgage, breach of covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and 
ejectment causes of action; and (3) for determination of 
interest, attorneys’ fees, and costs in favor of the Santiagos, 
as appropriate. 
Gary Victor Dubin and 
Frederick J. Arensmeyerfor petitioner /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Robert Goldberg for respondent  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
63 
