                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000550 30-JAN-2014 09:14 AM  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
SHAUN L. CABINATAN,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-11-0000550
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000550; CR. NOS. 10-1-0904, 09-1-0854)
 
JANUARY 30, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD,  C.J.,  NAKAYAMA  AND  McKENNA,  JJ.;  WITH  ACOBA,  J.,
CONCURRING  AND  DISSENTING  SEPARATELY,  WITH  WHOM  POLLACK,  J.,  JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
Shaun L. Cabinatan was convicted in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit of Burglary in the First Degree and
 
Unauthorized Entry Into Motor Vehicle (UEMV) in the First Degree,
 in relation to an incident on June 2, 2010, in which Cabinatan
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and co-defendant Kimo Moore allegedly participated in a burglary
 
of a Makakilo home and the unauthorized entry into a van at a
 separate location.
1
 
According to the State, Moore entered Jennifer
 
Kincaid’s garage and Jeffrey Sampson’s van, while Cabinatan was
 the “getaway driver.” Kincaid was the only witness who
 identified Cabinatan as the driver in the incidents. 
Specifically, Kincaid identified Cabinatan and Moore in a field
 show-up procedure conducted at a traffic stop shortly after she
 reported the burglary to police. Cabinatan and Moore, who were
 handcuffed, were the only two suspects present at the field show-
up. According to Kincaid, police informed her prior to the field
 show-up that they had stopped a vehicle that matched her
 description and contained items she described were stolen. 
At trial, Cabinatan maintained that Kincaid
 
misidentified him. Cabinatan also presented testimony from a
 witness indicating that Cabinatan was at her home at the time of
 the offenses. 
Cabinatan requested specific jury instructions
 
regarding the reliability of identification testimony,
 identification procedure, and field show-up identifications. The
 circuit court denied Cabinatan’s request. The jury found
 Cabinatan guilty of Burglary in the First Degree and UEMV in the
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presided.
 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
First Degree. Based on the foregoing convictions, the circuit
 
court found that Cabinatan violated the terms and conditions of
 his probation in an unrelated 2009 case in which he was convicted
 of Escape in the Second Degree, and thus revoked his probation in
 that case. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed Cabinatan’s
 
burglary and UEMV convictions and the circuit court’s probation
 revocation order. State v. Cabinatan, No. CAAP-11-0000550, 2012
 
WL 6720380, at *4 (Haw. App. Dec. 27, 2012). 
Cabinatan argues that his burglary and UEMV convictions
 
should be vacated because the circuit court abused its discretion
 in refusing to provide specific jury instructions on eyewitness
 identification. Cabinatan argues that the circuit court’s order
 revoking his probation based on the burglary and UEMV convictions
 should therefore also be vacated. 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that, under
 
the particular circumstances of this case, the circuit court
 abused its discretion in refusing to give a specific instruction
 on field show-up identifications. Accordingly, we vacate the
 ICA’s judgment on appeal, the circuit court’s Judgment of
 Conviction and Sentence in Cr. No. 10-1-0904, and the circuit
 court’s “Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation” in Cr.
 No. 09-1-0854, and remand this case to the circuit court for
 further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
-3­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
A.	 Cr. No. 09-1-0854: Escape conviction
 
On August 4, 2009, Cabinatan pleaded guilty to the
 
charge of Escape in the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 710­
1021 in Cr. No. 09-1-0854, and was sentenced to five years of
 probation. Included among the terms and conditions of
 Cabinatan’s probation was the requirement that Cabinatan not
 commit another federal or state crime during his probationary
 term. 
B.	 Cr. No. 10-1-0904: Burglary and Unauthorized Entry into
Motor Vehicle convictions
 
On June 15, 2010, Cabinatan and Moore were charged in
 
Cr. No. 10-1-0904 with Burglary in the First Degree in violation
 
2
of HRS § 708-810(1)(c)  (Count 1), UEMV in the First Degree in
3
violation of HRS § 708-836.5  (Count 2), Promoting a Dangerous
2	 HRS § 708-810(1)(c) (1993) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the
first degree if the person intentionally enters or
remains unlawfully in a building, with intent to
commit therein a crime against a person or against
property rights, and:
 
. . . . 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that
the building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling. 
3
 HRS § 708-836.5 (Supp. 2010) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized entry
(continued...)
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Drug in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1243 (Count
 
3), and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia in violation of HRS
 § 329-43.5(a) (Count 4). Moore entered a no contest plea to the
 charges, and was convicted on all counts. 
During his opening statement at trial, the deputy
 
prosecuting attorney (DPA) stated, in relevant part, that Kincaid
 saw a driver and passenger in a gray SUV across the street from
 her house, later noticed that her bag in her garage was gone, and
 called police. The DPA stated that police pulled over an SUV
 matching Kincaid’s description, and that during the police
 investigation, “witnesses [were] brought down to identify
 suspects in the case, or potential suspects in the case.” 
Defense counsel contended during his opening statement
 
that the evidence would show that the State “got the wrong
 guy[.]” Under the defense’s theory, a person named Tommy
 committed the charged offenses with Moore. According to the
 defense, Moore then dropped off Tommy and picked up Cabinatan,
 who was in the SUV when it was stopped by police. Defense
 counsel told the jury that Kincaid misidentified Cabinatan, and
 described the show-up procedure in which Kincaid identified
 Cabinatan as “inherently suggestive.” 
3(...continued)
into motor vehicle in the first degree if the person
intentionally or knowingly enters or remains
unlawfully in a motor vehicle, without being invited,
licensed, or otherwise authorized to enter or remain
within the vehicle, with the intent to commit a crime
against a person or against property rights.
 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
During trial, the jury heard testimony from the
 
complaining witnesses and witnesses who participated in the field
 
show-up. Sampson testified that on the morning of June 2, 2010,
 he went into his garage in his Makakilo home and saw the driver’s
 side door of his van open. Sampson saw “a guy” look up at him
 from behind the steering wheel. When Sampson yelled at the
 person, the person ran away. Sampson chased the person, who
 appeared to be holding Sampson’s CD case. The person jumped into
 the passenger side of a silver “small sized SUV type Hyundai[.]” 
Sampson was able to get the license plate number, but was not
 able to “get a good look” at the driver before the vehicle drove
 away. 
Sampson called the police, who arrived within about
 
five minutes. Sampson stated that “within the same ten minutes
 when the police were there, they said that they had stopped a
 vehicle, and that they had them . . . held up at the side of the
 highway[.]” Sampson stated that he went to the traffic stop and
 saw “two guys sitting on the side of” the road. Sampson
 identified Moore as the person who was in his van. 
On cross-examination, Sampson stated that the incident
 
occurred “[v]ery close to 8:00” in the morning. Sampson could
 not recall whether, when police asked him to go to the location
 where the SUV was stopped, the police said “anything about
 suspects may or may not be there[.]” 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Officer Kaleka Punahele Akana testified that he drove
 
Sampson to the traffic stop for the “field show-up[.]” Officer
 
Akana testified that he followed standard procedure, including
 telling Sampson “that they’re potential suspects,” to “[k]eep an
 open mind,” and “identify them if they’re the people that [he]
 saw that took part in the crime.” Officer Akana stated that
 Sampson identified Moore as the person he saw running from his
 van, but did not identify Cabinatan. Officer Akana also stated
 that after Sampson identified Moore, Officer Akana investigated
 further and “[r]ecovered a black CD case” from the silver SUV. 
During cross-examination, Officer Akana acknowledged
 
that his police report regarding the Sampson incident indicated
 that the incident occurred at 7:50 a.m., and that police were
 notified at 8:05 a.m. Officer Akana testified that he was the
 first officer to respond to Sampson’s house, and that he arrived
 “maybe ten, maybe 15 minutes after the call came in” –- “maybe
 around” 8:26 a.m. 
Officer Akana answered numerous questions about police
 
lineups and photographic arrays. For example, Officer Akana
 described police lineups as presenting eight to ten people to a
 complainant for possible identification of the suspect and stated
 that the reason for having eight to ten people in a lineup is “to
 make it fair for the person that . . . we’re trying to positively
 ID.” Officer Akana explained that police also ensure a fair
 process by using people who match the description of the suspect
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in the lineup. Officer Akana also described field show-up
 
procedures, which he acknowledged do not have the same
 “safeguards” as lineups and photographic arrays. 
The circuit court asked Officer Akana if “any of the
 
persons [were] handcuffed during this show-up,” and Officer Akana
 stated that they were handcuffed behind their backs. On recross-
examination, Officer Akana acknowledged that Sampson would have
 seen that both men were handcuffed. 
Kincaid testified that at 8:05 a.m. on June 2, 2010,
 
she noticed a gray SUV with tinted windows parked across the
 street facing the wrong way on the street, which struck her as
 “kind of odd[.]” Kincaid stated that she looked at the driver but
 didn’t recognize him. Kincaid stated that she saw the driver
 through the open passenger window from her garage, about 25 to 30
 feet away. Nothing blocked her view of the driver. Kincaid
 testified that “it seemed like [the driver] was having [a]
 conversation with somebody outside of the vehicle[.]” Kincaid
 started to walk toward her driveway to see “if he was talking to
 anybody,” and then saw another person standing in the corner of
 her driveway. The person walked toward the street and looked
 towards her but never made eye contact. After the person looked
 toward Kincaid, he talked to the driver of the car. The person
 then entered the SUV, and the SUV went up the street. Kincaid
 estimated that the time between when she first noticed the driver
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and when the SUV drove away was about five minutes. In court,
 
Kincaid identified the driver as Cabinatan. 
Kincaid saw her neighbor, Doug Campbell, in his
 
driveway, and she asked him if he knew who was in the SUV. While
 Kincaid and Campbell talked, the SUV returned and turned onto
 another street. Kincaid said it appeared to her that the person
 in her driveway who had gotten into the passenger seat was then
 driving the SUV. When asked if the person who was previously
 driving was then in the passenger seat, Kincaid answered: 
“Correct. But well, I couldn’t see that that person -­obviously, because it was on the opposite side.” 
Kincaid went back in her house but shortly afterward
 
returned to the garage and noticed that her bag and portfolio,
 which she left on a couch in her garage, were gone. That
 morning, after Kincaid made a police report, the police informed
 her that they had potential suspects. Kincaid and her husband
 followed Sergeant Bryan Loudermilk to the traffic stop, where 
Kincaid pointed out the person she first saw driving the SUV, as
 well as the person she saw near her garage. Kincaid also
 recognized the SUV as the one that was parked near her house, and
 identified her bag in the SUV. 
On cross-examination, Kincaid stated that she saw that
 
the driver was wearing dark sunglasses, a black baseball cap, and
 a blue shirt. Defense counsel questioned Kincaid about her
 
-9­   
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
initial descriptions to police of the driver.4 Kincaid agreed
 
that she indicated the driver was wearing a black baseball cap,
 
and acknowledged that she did not indicate on the police form the
 color of the driver’s shirt. The time indicated on the
 description form read “0756.”
5
 
Defense counsel also questioned Kincaid about the field
 
show-up. Kincaid testified that responding officers informed her
 that police stopped a vehicle that matched her description and
 contained items she described were stolen, and asked her to go to
 the site to identify the suspects, the vehicle, and her items. 
Defense counsel asked, “So the thing that clued you in was the
 vehicle and . . . mainly your personal items then?” Kincaid
 answered in the affirmative. 
Kincaid testified that once she arrived at the traffic
 
stop, Sergeant Loudermilk told Kincaid that “there would be
 individuals there by the car that they would want [her] to look
 at to see if [she] could identify whether or not those were the
 individuals that were up at [her] house.” 
4 Kincaid’s “Suspect, Weapon and Vehicle Description” form for the
 
“man in car[,]” was entered into evidence as Defendant’s Exhibit J.  The form,
which referred to the driver of the SUV, indicated, inter alia, that the man’s
ethnicity was Filipino and Portuguese, that he was in his early 20s, and that
he was wearing sunglasses with black frames, a black baseball cap, and a
short-sleeve T-shirt.  The words “Tanned” and “Brown” were circled to indicate
 the man’s complexion. 
5
 Kincaid was not asked whether she filled in the time on the form.
 
It is unclear from Kincaid’s testimony whether this time was intended to
indicate the time of the incident or when the form was completed.  Another
 witness, Officer Akana, appeared to testify that generally, this space was
used to indicate when the form was completed.
 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defense counsel also asked Kincaid whether she could
 
see the driver’s arms and neck and whether she indicated on the
 
police form that he had any tattoos. Kincaid answered that she
 could see his arms but not his neck, and that she did not
 indicate on the police form that he had tattoos. 
On redirect examination, Kincaid described the police
 
form, which provided choices that she could circle with regard
 to, inter alia, race, complexion, color of glasses frames, and
 color of hats. In contrast, there was no color choice to circle
 with regard to the suspect’s shirt. The DPA also questioned
 Kincaid about the field show-up:
 
Q. . . . Now, when you identified the men down near
the ramp, did you identify them as the suspects or
because you found your stuff or did you recognize
them?
 
A. I recognized them.
 Q. Okay. So it’s not as if you went, there’s my bag,
these must be the guys?
 
A. Correct.
 Q. Okay. You actually looked at them and decided that
those were the people who you had seen by your house?
 
A. Yes.
 Q. Regardless of whether or not your bags were there?
 
A. Correct.
 
On direct examination, Sergeant Loudermilk stated that
 
on the morning of June 2, 2010, he responded to a UEMV case at
 
Sampson’s house, and that immediately after he arrived, there was
 a report of a burglary at Kincaid’s house. Sergeant Loudermilk
 left Sampson’s house and went to Kincaid’s house. Sergeant
 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Loudermilk, who at the time lived in Makakilo and was familiar
 
with the area, estimated the distance between Sampson’s and
 Kincaid’s houses as less than half a mile. After listening to
 Kincaid’s and Campbell’s statements about the incident, Sergeant
 Loudermilk learned about possible suspects detained nearby. 
Sergeant Loudermilk described a field show-up: “If
 
. . . an offense has occurred and we catch a possible suspect a
 short distance away and the time limit is a short amount of time,
 we bring a witness or complaining witness to where the possible
 suspect is and we do an identification at that time.” According
 to Sergeant Loudermilk, police are trained to inform witnesses
 during field show-ups that “these suspects may or may not be
 involved” in the case “so the witness doesn’t feel obligated to
 say this is the person when indeed it’s not[.]” 
Sergeant Loudermilk described the June 2, 2010 field
 
show-up in which Kincaid identified Cabinatan and Moore. 
Sergeant Loudermilk stated that he and Kincaid were outside of
 their vehicles and were about 25 to 30 feet from the suspects
 when he asked if she could identify them. According to Sergeant
 Loudermilk, Kincaid had an “unobstructed view.” Sergeant
 Loudermilk informed Kincaid that the persons at the traffic stop
 may or may not be the suspects involved in the case. Kincaid
 identified Cabinatan as the driver of the SUV, and stated that
 she recognized him from his “facial features.” 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sergeant Loudermilk estimated that Sampson’s house is
 
“just around three miles” from the traffic stop, and that the
 
drive from Sampson’s house to the traffic stop would take
 “[a]nywhere from four to six minutes following all traffic laws.” 
On cross-examination, Sergeant Loudermilk agreed that
 
he arrived at Sampson’s home at about 8:35 a.m., and arrived at
 Kincaid’s home at about 8:40 a.m. Sergeant Loudermilk was at
 Kincaid’s house for about 15 minutes before he proceeded to the
 traffic stop. Sergeant Loudermilk testified about what he told
 Kincaid regarding the field show-up:
 
When we were [at Kincaid’s house], I asked her if she
could identify the people that she saw on Limukele
[Street].  She related she could.
 . . . . 
Then I asked her if she would view some people that we
have down at the bottom of the hill, see if these
people were involved or not.
. . . . 
She related she would.
 . . . .
 And then the husband drove her down to where I
 indicated earlier.  I followed.  We got out of the car
and . . . I told her also that . . . just because
police officers are showing you these people doesn’t
mean they’re involved or not.  If you can identify
 them, let us know.
 
Sergeant Loudermilk stated that he was not sure if he
 
asked Kincaid at her house if she could go to the traffic stop to
 
see if she could identify her property, but said that he “may
 have.” Sergeant Loudermilk stated that Cabinatan and Moore were
 handcuffed during the field show-up, and that Cabinatan had on a
 light blue shirt. Sergeant Loudermilk testified that Cabinatan
 was not wearing dark glasses, and Sergeant Loudermilk did not
 recall Cabinatan wearing a hat. Sergeant Loudermilk stated that
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he did not notice tattoos on Cabinatan and did not note the
 
presence of tattoos on Cabinatan in his police report. 
Sergeant Loudermilk also discussed the differences
 
between a field show-up and line-ups and photographic arrays. In
 discussing lineups and photographic arrays, Sergeant Loudermilk
 stated that police try to include people with similar
 characteristics as the suspect, but stated that if the suspect
 was described as having a hat and sunglasses on, “I would have
 the hats go off and the glasses go off.” Sergeant Loudermilk
 acknowledged that police did not have Kincaid identify Cabinatan
 in a line-up or photographic array. Sergeant Loudermilk also
 stated that “because of the time, the distance, the fact that []
 Kincaid said she could identify the people, that is why we did a
 field lineup. If she stated that she could not identify who she
 saw in front of her house, we would not have taken her down to
 the traffic stop.” Sergeant Loudermilk also stated that he told
 Kincaid “because [Cabinatan] was with the police, . . . not to
 think that he was the person who did it, it’s an alleged
 suspect[.]” 
Defense counsel asked Sergeant Loudermilk whether
 
seeing Cabinatan in handcuffs would suggest to Kincaid “that this
 is the person we’re looking for,” and the following exchange
 occurred:
 
A. I believe it goes on to the person, if the person
believes it’s suggestive, yes.  If another person
doesn’t believe it’s suggestive, it’s not.
 
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q. Okay.  Isn’t it suggestive to tell a witness that,
in this case, [] Kincaid, that we found your property
before she even makes an ID?
 
A. I’m not aware that happened.
 Q. Okay.  If it did happen, isn’t that suggestive?
 A. That could be suggestive.
 . . . . 
Q. If there’s a car that is clearly tied to
perpetrators and the car is present at the scene,
would that be something that’s suggestive to a
witness?
 
A. If that’s the same car that she saw from -­Q. Yeah.
 A. I don't know if it’s suggestive. It -­Q. Kind of?
 A. -- maybe makes her believe the person who committed
the crime could be in the vehicle ‘cause she saw the
 vehicle, she saw two people inside the vehicle.
 
Officer Brandan Ross testified that on June 2, 2010, he
 
was on Makakilo Drive, responding to the UEMV report at Sampson’s
 
house and that before he reached Sampson’s house, he saw the
 “suspect vehicle . . . coming down the hill.” Officer Ross
 stopped the SUV, which contained Moore, who was driving, and
 Cabinatan. On cross-examination, Officer Ross agreed that he
 stopped Moore and Cabinatan at approximately 8:09 a.m. 
Officer Lionel Kawada testified that he accompanied
 
Kincaid to the SUV to inspect it for her items, and that she
 identified a bag and a portfolio. Kawada did not remember
 whether Kincaid identified Cabinatan before or after she
 identified her property. 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kincaid’s neighbor, Campbell, testified that “anywhere
 
from 7:35 to eight o’clock” on June 2, 2010, he noticed a male in
 
Kincaid’s garage and a vehicle he did not recognize parked on the
 street.
6 When the male “noticed that [Campbell] saw what was
 
going on, he hid by the wall and he looked at the guy at the
 vehicle and [Campbell] heard ‘hurry up, start the car.’” 
Campbell was about 50 feet away when he first saw the male, and
 about 30 feet away when the male said “start the car[.]” The
 male then got into the car, and the car drove up the street. 
Campbell spoke to responding police officers shortly
 
afterward, and they informed him that they had “potential
 suspects” and asked him to “go down to identify them.” When
 Campbell went to the traffic stop for the field show-up, he saw
 that the “police had two suspects. . . . [The officer] asked me
 if I could identify the guy and I said, I not a hundred percent
 sure, I’m 75 percent sure, and I pointed out one of the guys to
 him, and I said, I think that’s the guy” who was on Kincaid’s
 property. Campbell was not able to identify the person driving
 the SUV. 
Defense counsel asked Campbell about, inter alia, a
 
police form that he filled out to describe the suspect, which
 
6
 Campbell acknowledged that he wrote “7:35" on his police
 
statement, but stated that a range between 7:35 to 8:00 a.m. was more
accurate.  On cross-examination, Campbell stated that he “didn’t have a watch
on,” presumably at the time of the incident. 
-16­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated “0756” as the time. Campbell stated that he did not fill
 
out the time. 
After the State rested, Cabinatan moved for a judgment
 
of acquittal as to Counts 3 and 4. The circuit court granted the
 motion.
7
 
The circuit court, upon Cabinatan’s request, entered
 
into evidence a certified copy of Moore’s No Contest Plea and
 Motion to Defer Plea form in the case.
8 The circuit court
 
informed the jury that “the defense attorney and the prosecutor
 [have] stipulated or agreed that [the jury] shall be advised that
 [] Moore, in addition to pleading no contest, has asked the Court
 . . . for a deferred acceptance of no contest [plea].” 
The defense called Pearl Lafaver, who testified, inter
 
alia, that Cabinatan was at her home in Makakilo the evening of
 June 1, 2010 through the morning of June 2, 2010. Lafaver
 
7 Subsequently, Cabinatan and the State agreed that Exhibits 18
 
through 20, which pertained to Counts 3 and 4, would not be withdrawn or
stricken, but also would not be provided to the jury during deliberations. 
The circuit court later instructed the jury, as agreed to by the parties:
 
In your deliberations, you are only to consider
[sic] yourself with the guilt or innocence of the
defendant as to Counts I and II.  You shall also only
consider the evidence pertaining to those counts that
is being sent back to the jury deliberation room with
you.
 
Although not at issue in this appeal, we note that the given
instruction did not expressly inform the jury that Exhibits 18 through 20
could not be considered, and also may have confused the jury with respect to
the evidence it could consider as to Counts 1 and 2.
 
8
 Moore chose not to testify at Cabinatan’s trial, asserting his
 
Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that she left her home “close[] to eight o'clock” and
 
that Cabinatan was still there when she left. 
Cabinatan testified on his own behalf and denied the
 
charges. Cabinatan stated that on the evening of June 1, 2010,
 he went to Lafaver’s house and slept over. That night, Moore
 stopped by, and Cabinatan asked him for a ride the next morning
 “into town.” On June 2, 2010, between 7:50 and 8:00 in the
 morning, Moore called Cabinatan to say “if [Cabinatan] was ready,
 he was coming down the road for pick [Cabinatan] up.” About
 three to four minutes later, Moore arrived at Lafaver’s house in
 a silver SUV. Cabinatan jumped in and they left. Cabinatan was
 in the passenger seat when police pulled over the SUV. 
Cabinatan showed the jury that he had tattoos on his
 
neck and “all over” his left arm and stated that he had those
 tattoos for over 10 years. He stated that on June 2, 2010, he
 was wearing a “light blue . . . T-shirt[,]” and that he did not
 wear a black baseball cap or dark sunglasses. Cabinatan also
 described his skin color as “[f]air.” 
After the defense rested, the circuit court proceeded
 
to the settling of jury instructions. The circuit court denied
 Cabinatan’s requested instructions on identification testimony,
 identification procedure, and field show-up identifications. 
Cabinatan’s Requested Instruction No. 1A regarding in-court and
 out-of-court identification testimony read as follows:
 
-18­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[] Cabinatan has pled “Not Guilty” to the
charges against him.  The burden of proving the
identity of the person who committed the offenses is
upon the State.  The State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that this defendant is the person who
committed the offenses.  The defendant has neither the
 burden nor the duty to show that the offenses, if
committed, were committed by someone else, or to prove
the identity of that other person.  You must
 determine, therefore, not only whether the State has
proved each and every element of the offenses charged
beyond a reasonable doubt, but also whether the State
has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that this
defendant is the person who committed them.
 
The State has presented the testimony of one or
more witnesses who may have identified the defendant,
outside-of-court on a prior occasion, or in-court
during this trial, as the person who committed the
offenses.  This identification was based upon the
observations and perceptions that the witness made of
the perpetrator at the time the offenses were being
committed.  It is your function to determine whether
the witness’ identification of the defendant is
 reliable and believable, or whether it is based on a
mistake or for any reason is not worthy of belief.
You must decide whether it is sufficiently reliable
evidence upon which to conclude that this defendant is
the person who committed the offenses charged.  You
 should consider the observations and perceptions on
which the identification was based, and the
circumstances under which the identification was made. 
Although nothing may appear more convincing than a
witness’s categorical identification of a perpetrator,
you must critically analyze such testimony.  Such
 identifications, even if made in good faith, may be
mistaken.  Therefore, when analyzing such testimony,
be advised that a witness’s level of confidence,
standing alone, may not be an indication of the
reliability of the identification.
 
In evaluating the identifications, you should
consider the observations and perceptions on which the
identifications were based, and the witness’ ability
to make those observations and perceptions.  If you
determine that the out-of-court identification is not
 reliable, you may still consider the witness’ in-court
identification of the defendant if you find it to be
reliable.  However, unless the in-court identification
resulted from the witness’ observations or perceptions
of the perpetrator during the commission of the
offenses, rather than being the product of an
impression gained at the out-of-court identification
procedure, it should be afforded no weight.  The
 ultimate issues of the trustworthiness of both the
 in-court and out-of-court identifications are for you
to decide.
 
To decide whether the identification testimony
is sufficiently reliable evidence upon which to
 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conclude that this defendant is the person who
committed the offenses charged, you should evaluate
the testimony of the witness in light of the factors
for considering credibility that I have already
explained to you.  In addition, you may consider the
totality of circumstances in this case, including:
 
(1) The witness’ opportunity to view the person who
committed the offenses at the time of the offenses.
 
(2) The witness’ degree of attention to the
perpetrator at the time of the offenses.
 
(3) The accuracy of any description the witness gave
to the police prior to identifying the perpetrator.
 
(4) The degree of certainty expressed by the witness
in making any identification.
 
(5) The length of time between the witness’
observation of the offense and the first
 identification.
 
(6) Discrepancies or inconsistencies between
identifications, if any.
 
(7)
 The circumstances under which any out-of-court
identification was made, and whether or not it was the
product of a suggestive identification procedure,
including any words or conduct by the police to the
witness before, during, or after the identification
procedure.  In making this determination you may
consider the following circumstances:
 
• whether anything was said to the witness prior to
the identification procedure, and whether that
procedure was a photo array, line-up, or show-up[;]
• whether the witness was told by the police that
they have caught the culprit, or words to that
effect, after which the witness was brought before
defendant;
• whether the defendant was pointed out by words or
conduct before or during the identification
procedure;
• whether the witness’s identification was made
 spontaneously and remained consistent thereafter;
• whether the police conducting the identification
procedure either indicated to the witness that a
suspect was present or failed to warn the witness
that the perpetrator may or may not be present in
the procedure;
• whether the witness was exposed to opinions,
descriptions, or identifications given by other
witnesses, or to any other information or influence
that may have affected the independence of his/her
identification.
 
(8)
 Any other factor based on the evidence or lack of
evidence in the case which you consider relevant to
 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
your determination whether the identifications were
reliable.
 
Unless the in-court and out-of-court
 
identifications resulted from the witness’s
 observations or perceptions of the perpetrator during
the commission of the offenses, rather than being the
product of an impression gained at the in-court and/or
out-of-court identification procedures, it should be
afforded no weight.  The ultimate issue of the
 trustworthiness of the identification is for you to
decide.
 
If, after consideration of all of the evidence,
you determine that the State has not proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that [] Cabinatan was the person who
committed these offenses, then you must find him not
guilty.  If, on the other hand, after consideration of
all of the evidence, you are convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt that [] Cabinatan was correctly
identified, you will then consider whether the State
has proven each and every element of the offenses
charged beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
(Emphases in original). 
Cabinatan’s Requested Instruction No. 2A regarding
 
“Identification Procedures, Risk of Mis-Identification” read:
 
In this case, the state has presented evidence
that an eyewitness identified the defendant in
connection with the charged offenses.  That
 
ident
ification was made during an out-of-court
identification procedure conducted by the police, and
in-court during trial[].  The identification procedure
conducted by the police either indicated to the
witness that a suspect was present in the procedure or
failed to warn the witness that the perpetrator may or
may not be in the procedure.
 
Psychological studies have shown that when the
police indicate to a witness that a suspect is present
in an identification procedure, or fail to warn the
witness that the perpetrator may or may not be in the
procedure, there is an increased likelihood that the
witness will select one of the individuals in the
 procedure, even when the perpetrator is not present. 
Thus, such behavior on the part of the police tends to
increase the probability of a misidentification.
 
This information is not intended to direct you
to give more or less weight to the eyewitness
identification evidence offered by the state.  It is
 your duty to determine whether that evidence is to be
believed.  You may, however, take into account the
results of the psychological studies, as just
explained to you, in making that determination.
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Emphases in original). 
Finally, Cabinatan’s Requested Instruction No. 3
 
stated: “Show-up identifications, such as a field show-up, are
 
inherently suggestive and raise risks of mis-identification.” 
The circuit court denied Cabinatan’s requested 
instructions, citing this court’s decisions in State v. Vinge, 81 Hawai'i 309, 916 P.2d 1210 (1996); State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 
383, 894 P.2d 80 (1995); State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 552 P.2d 357 (1976); and State v. Pahio, 58 Haw. 323, 568 P.2d 1200 (1977). Based on the cited cases, the circuit court stated that “because of the amount of intensity which both counsel have focused the jury on in terms of . . . the identification issue, the Court’s instructions adequately focuses the jury on identification, placing the burden squarely on the prosecution’s shoulder which is to include identification.” Defense counsel objected to the circuit court’s general instruction on the prosecution’s burden of proof, insofar as it would be given in place of the defense’s requested instructions regarding eyewitness identification. The circuit court acknowledged defense counsel’s arguments, but stated that it was bound by the cited cases. 
Additionally, the circuit court stated that the factors
 
a trial court considers in ruling on the admissibility of
 identification evidence should not be included in the
 instructions as “something that the jury is bound to follow.” 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The court explained that these factors are “a guideline to trial
 
courts to look for in ruling [on admissibility] as a matter of
 law,” and should not be given to the jury. 
The circuit court then instructed the jury. Relevant
 
to the instant case, the circuit court instructed the jury
 on the prosecution’s burden of proof, explaining that:
 
[t]he burden of proof is on the prosecution with
reference to every element of a crime charged, and
this burden includes the burden of proving beyond a
reasonable doubt the identity of the defendant as the
person responsible for the crimes charged.
 
(Emphasis added). 
The circuit court also instructed the jury as follows:
 
While you must consider all of the evidence in
determining the facts in this case, this does not mean
that you are bound to give every bit of evidence the
same weight.  You are the sole and exclusive judges of
the effect and value of the evidence and of the
 credibility of the witnesses.
 
It is your exclusive right to determine whether
and to what extent a witness should be believed and to
 give weight to his or her testimony accordingly.  In
 evaluating the weight and credibility of a witness’s
testimony, you may consider the witness’s appearance
and demeanor; the witness’s manner of testifying; the
witness’s intelligence; the witness’s candor or
frankness, or lack thereof; the witness’s interest, if
any, in the result of this case; the witness’s
relation, if any, to a party; the witness’s temper,
feeli
ng or bias, if any has been shown; the witness’s
means and opportunity of acquiring information; the
probability or improbability of the witness’s
testimony; the extent to which the witness is
suppo
rted or contradicted by other evidence; the
extent to which the witness has made contradictory
statements, whether in trial or at other times; and
all other circumstances surrounding the witness and
bearing upon his or her credibility.
 
Inconsistencies or discrepancies in the
testimony of a witness, or between testimony of
different witnesses, may or may not cause you to
discredit such testimony.  In weighing the effect of
inconsistencies or discrepancies, whether they occur
within one witness’s testimony or as between different
witnesses, consider whether they concern matters of
 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
importance or only matters of unimportant detail, and
whether they result from innocent error or deliberate
falsehood.
 
If you find that a witness has deliberately
testi
fied falsely to any important fact or
deliberately exaggerated, or suppressed any important
fact, then you may reject the testimony of that
witness except for those parts which you nevertheless
believe to be true.
 
You are not bound to decide a fact one way or
another just because more witnesses testify on one
side than the other.  It is the testimony that has a
convincing force upon you that counts, and the
testimony of even a single witness, if believed, can
be sufficient to prove a fact.
 
(Emphasis added). 
During closing arguments, the DPA stated that
 
identification was a critical issue in the case and that “what it
 
really comes down to, ladies and gentlemen, is identity.” The
 DPA further stated:
 
So how can you as a fair-minded juror be sure
beyond a reasonable doubt that [] Cabinatan was the
person that committed these crimes?  That’s really,
what the State would argue, is the most important
question.  How can you guys be sure that it was
[Cabinatan] behind the wheel?
So let’s look at that evidence.  [] Kincaid. []
Kincaid was the victim of the burglary.  You heard her
 story about getting up at 6:00 and opening up the
garage door.  So she has five to 10 minutes of contact
 where she comes out, she sees, she said she wasn’t
exact
ly sure, but she saw for a couple minutes across
the street and through the window that was down []
Cabinatan.  Unequivocal identification that morning.
She went down with the police officers and they
said, were you able to identify any of the people
involved?  And there wasn’t a question, yes, that man
was the one who was driving the vehicle, at least at
first she did say she recognized that they swapped. 
They drove up the street and came back down.  And by
the time they came back down they were in different
positions.
Now, [Moore] was driving and [Cabinatan] was the
passenger, which not coincidentally is exactly what
they found when the police pulled them over just
minutes later down the hill near the freeway.
 
-24­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The DPA stated that Kincaid’s in-court identification
 
of Cabinatan was “unequivocal.” The DPA also highlighted the
 
timing of the events and urged the jury to consider whether it
 was reasonable to believe Cabinatan’s theory that Moore “and some
 random person robbed the house, robbed the car,” and that Moore
 then dropped that person off and picked up Cabinatan. The DPA
 continued:
 
And by the way, this random person has to look
so much like [Cabinatan] that [] Kincaid, who’s sure
it was [Cabinatan], . . . mixed up these two people. 
So not enough that it was just timing-wise, but he has
to also look just like [Cabinatan].  And also that he
 can get back down all the way to the bottom of
Makakilo by about 8:09 when Officer Ross says he would
turn up Makakilo Drive and saw the car coming back
down.
 
Finally, the DPA discussed field show-ups, and argued
 
that “if [field show-ups are] so inherently suggestive . . . why
 
is it that only one person was willing to say, yes, I recognize
 this person.” 
Defense counsel’s closing arguments included a
 
discussion about Cabinatan being found without dark sunglasses or
 a black baseball cap, contrary to Kincaid’s description of the
 driver of the SUV.
9 Defense counsel also questioned Kincaid’s
 
reliability as a witness. Defense counsel discussed the form
 Kincaid completed containing her description of the person she
 saw with Moore, and argued that “discrepancies” between that
 description and Cabinatan raise doubts about the reliability of
 
9
 Police officers were not asked at trial whether sunglasses or a
 
black baseball cap were recovered from the SUV.
 
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
her identification. For example, defense counsel noted that
 
Kincaid did not describe the person’s hair or the color of his
 shirt, and that her description of the person’s complexion did
 not match Cabinatan’s. Defense counsel also noted, inter alia,
 that although Cabinatan has tattoos, Kincaid’s form did not
 mention any tattoos. 
Defense counsel also argued that police line-ups and
 
photographic arrays are more reliable and fairer than the field
 show-up, which he described as a “highly, highly suggestive
 procedure.” Defense counsel argued that “the situation was ripe
 for [Kincaid’s] misidentification,” stating that police “primed
 her” before the field show-up by telling her that they caught the
 suspects, and to see if she could identify them, the vehicle, and
 her belongings. Defense counsel also noted that Cabinatan and
 Moore were handcuffed and surrounded by officers at the time of
 the field show-up. 
On February 1, 2011, the jury found Cabinatan guilty as
 
to Counts 1 and 2. The circuit court sentenced Cabinatan to ten
 years imprisonment for Count 1 and five years for Count 2, with
 both terms to run concurrently to each other. 
Following the jury verdict, the State moved to revoke
 
Cabinatan’s probation that he was serving in Cr. No. 09-1-0854
 because Cabinatan’s burglary and UEMV convictions in Cr. No. 10­1-0904 constituted violations of the term of his probation
 requiring that he obey all laws during his probation period. The
 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court revoked Cabinatan’s probation and resentenced him
 
to five years imprisonment to be served consecutive to his
 sentence in Cr. No. 10-1-0904. 
C. ICA Appeal
 
On appeal, Cabinatan argued that his burglary and UEMV
 
convictions in Cr. No. 10-1-0904 should be vacated because the
 
circuit court abused its discretion in refusing to provide a jury
 instruction stating the factors to be considered in assessing the
 accuracy of eyewitness identification. Cabinatan also argued
 that because the circuit court’s order revoking his probation in
 Cr. No. 09-1-0854 was based on his burglary and UEMV convictions
 in Cr. No. 10-1-0904, the revocation order should be vacated. 
While Cabinatan’s appeal was pending, this court issued 
its decision in State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i 302, 304, 313-15, 
277 P.3d 1027, 1029, 1038-40 (2012), which requires circuit courts to “give the jury a specific eyewitness identification instruction whenever identification evidence is a central issue in the case, and it is requested by the defendant[.]” The above rule was given prospective effect; accordingly, the new rule would not apply to cases “currently pending on direct appeal.” Id. at 317, 277 P.3d at 1042. Thus, cases pending on direct appeal at the time Cabagbag was issued would be evaluated under the pre-Cabagbag standard; that is, that the decision to give a specific instruction on eyewitness identification rested in the sound discretion of the trial court. Id. at 315, 277 P.3d at 1040 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(citations omitted). The appellate court “‘must examine all 
aspects of the trial, including the opening statements, the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses, the arguments to the jury, and the general instructions given by the court, to determine whether the jury’s attention was adequately drawn to the identification evidence.’” Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i at 317, 277 
P.3d at 1042 (quoting Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 405, 894 P.2d at 
102). 
In its answering brief, the State acknowledged the new
 
Cabagbag rule but argued that because Cabinatan’s appeal was
 pending when this court issued Cabagbag, the new rule did not
 apply. Accordingly, the State argued, the circuit court’s
 decision regarding the jury instruction was within its
 discretion. The State also argued that the circuit court’s
 revocation of Cabinatan’s probation was therefore proper. 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s judgment of
 
conviction in Cr. No. 10-1-0904 and the circuit court’s “Order of
 Resentencing; Revocation of Probation” in Cr. No. 09-1-0854. 
Cabinatan, 2012 WL 6720380, at *4. The ICA first noted that the
 new Cabagbag rule regarding specific eyewitness identification
 did not apply to the instant case. Id. at *1-2. Thus, the ICA
 
concluded that the pre-Cabagbag rule applied, and that the
 circuit court was not required to provide a special eyewitness
 jury instruction under that rule. Id. at *2-3. The ICA also
 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
held that therefore, the circuit court did not err in revoking
 
Cabinatan’s probation in Cr. No. 09-1-0854. Id. at *4.
 
Cabinatan timely filed his Application for Writ of
 
Certiorari, in which he raises the following questions:
 
1. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in [failing
to give] a more specific jury instruction on
eyewitness identification?
 
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court did not err in revoking Cabinatan’s
probation in Cr. No. 09-1-0854?
 
II. Standard of Review
 
Omission of Jury Instructions
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof
are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is
whether, when read and considered as a whole, the
instructions given are prejudicially insufficient,
erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively
appears from the record as a whole that the error was
not prejudicial.
 
State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted); see
 
also State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 337, 141 P.3d 974, 984 
(2006) (“[O]nce instructional error is demonstrated, we will
 vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if
 there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to
 the defendant’s conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
 instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.”).
 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The circuit court abused its discretion by refusing to
provide a specific jury instruction on field show-up
identifications
 
As a preliminary matter, Cabinatan argues that because 
his case was pending on appeal prior to our decision in Cabagbag, 
the rule we established in that case should be applied here. However, the rule we set forth in Cabagbag –- that circuit courts must give a special jury instruction on eyewitness identification when identification evidence is a central issue and the defendant requests it –- was prospective. 127 Hawai' i at 315, 317, 277 
P.3d at 1040, 1042. Indeed, we expressly stated in Cabagbag that in reviewing cases pending on direct appeal at the time Cabagbag was issued, appellate courts are to “apply the rule then in effect when the cases were tried.” Id. at 317, 277 P.3d at 1042. 
Cabinatan’s case was tried months before Cabagbag was decided. Therefore, we examine Cabinatan’s claim under the pre-Cabagbag standard. 
Under the pre-Cabagbag standard, “‘we must examine all 
aspects of the trial, including the opening statements, the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses, the arguments to the jury, and the general instructions given by the court, to determine whether the jury’s attention was adequately drawn to the identification evidence.’” Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i at 317, 277 
P.3d at 1042 (quoting Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 405, 894 P.2d at 
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
102). The jury’s attention must be adequately drawn to the
 
identification evidence such that specific instructions are
 unnecessary. See Pahio, 58 Haw. at 331, 568 P.2d at 1206
 
(holding that various aspects of the trial “adequately directed
 the jury’s attention to the identification evidence and made
 defendant’s requested instruction unnecessary”). 
Here, we cannot say that the arguments of counsel and
 
the court’s general instructions adequately drew the jury’s
 attention to the issues surrounding Kincaid’s identification of
 Cabinatan such that more specific instructions regarding field
 show-up identifications were unnecessary. In particular, the
 circumstances surrounding Kincaid’s identification of Cabinatan
 were sufficiently suggestive as to require the circuit court to
 provide further guidance to the jury. 
As stated above, Kincaid identified Cabinatan during a 
field show-up. While show-ups are permissible, they are inherently suggestive. See State v. Decenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 
131, 681 P.2d 573, 578 (1984) (“Show-up identifications are inherently suggestive[.]” (citation omitted)); United States v. Sanders, 708 F.3d 976, 984 (7th Cir. 2013) (“In a show up, the police present only one suspect to the identifying witness. Consequently, show ups are ‘inherently suggestive.’” (citations omitted)); cf. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 392, 894 P.2d at 89 
(stating that the identification procedure in which the defendant 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was the only person in the courtroom wearing a prison uniform and
 
shackles was “suggestive”). 
Moreover, the manner in which this particular show-up
 
was conducted raises concerns warranting a more specific
 instruction to guide the jury in assessing the identification
 evidence. First, Cabinatan and Moore were handcuffed during the
 show-up. Second, Kincaid’s testimony suggests the possibility
 that her identification of Cabinatan might have been influenced
 by statements police made to her prior to the field show-up. 
Kincaid testified that before proceeding to the show-up, she was
 informed that police stopped a vehicle that matched her
 description and contained items she described were stolen. 
Kincaid also stated that police asked her to go to the traffic
 stop to identify not only the suspects, but the vehicle and her
 items. When asked by defense counsel whether “the thing that
 clued [her] in was the vehicle and . . . mainly your personal
 items,” Kincaid answered in the affirmative. Sergeant Loudermilk
 stated that he was not sure if he asked Kincaid if she could go
 to the traffic stop to see if she could identify her property,
 but acknowledged that he “may have.” Given the foregoing
 circumstances, a more specific instruction to guide the jury on
 how to assess such identification testimony was necessary.
 
In denying Cabinatan’s request for specific
 
identification instructions, the circuit court relied on this
 
-32­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court’s prior cases regarding eyewitness identification 
instructions. Specifically, the circuit court cited Vinge, 81 Hawai'i 309, 916 P.2d 1210; Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 894 P.2d 80; 
Pahio, 58 Haw. 323, 568 P.2d 1200; and Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 552 P.2d 357, and stated that it was “bound” by the decisions in those cases. However, while the foregoing cases support the pre-Cabagbag proposition that a specific jury instruction was not required under the circumstances of those cases, the pre-Cabagbag rule ultimately afforded circuit courts discretion in determining whether to give a specific identification instruction. See, 
e.g., Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 404, 894 P.2d at 101 (“The giving of 
special instructions on identification has been regarded as within the discretion of the trial judge or superfluous in the light of adequate general instructions.” (quotation marks and citations omitted)). Accordingly, the foregoing cases did not preclude the circuit court from providing a specific instruction on show-up identifications. 
The circuit court also indicated it did not believe the
 
jury should be instructed on factors that relate to the court’s
 ruling on the admissibility of identification evidence. Here,
 Cabinatan’s Requested Instruction No. 3 stated: “Show-up
 identifications, such as a field show-up, are inherently
 suggestive and raise risks of mis-identification.” This proposed
 instruction referred to two factors a court considers in ruling
 on the admissibility of a show-up identification: (1) the
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
suggestiveness of the identification procedure used, and (2)
 
whether the circumstances of the identification support its
 reliability or create a likelihood of misidentification. See
 
DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. at 131-32, 681 P.2d at 578. Accordingly, it
 appears the circuit court may have concluded that Cabinatan’s
 Requested Instruction No. 3 addressed matters outside the jury’s
 fact-finding role. 
However, questions of suggestiveness and reliability
 
also may be at issue for the trier of fact. Put another way, a
 trial court may determine that a suggestive show-up
 identification is sufficiently reliable to be admissible. 
However, the jury is not bound by that determination and is free
 to consider the issues of suggestiveness and reliability in
 determining whether to credit the identification. See State v.
 
Briones, 74 Haw. 442, 464, 848 P.2d 966, 977 (1993) (noting that
 the “fact finder is uniquely qualified to evaluate the
 credibility of witnesses and to weigh the evidence”). Given the
 particularly suggestive factors present in this case, including
 the handcuffing of the defendants and possible statements by
 police that may have influenced Kinkaid’s identification of
 Cabinatan, the circuit court should have provided an instruction
 regarding the inherent suggestiveness of field show-up
 identifications. The failure to do so constituted an abuse of
 discretion. 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Moreover, in light of the circumstances discussed 
above, we cannot say that the lack of an instruction concerning 
the suggestiveness of show-up identifications was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Additionally, identification was a critical issue in the case, and Kincaid was the State’s only witness who identified Cabinatan and tied him to the crime. Cabinatan not only maintained that Kincaid misidentified him, but he presented testimony from Lafaver indicating that Cabinatan was at her home at the time of the offenses. Under these circumstances, there is a reasonable possibility that the instructional error contributed to Cabinatan’s conviction. See Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 337, 141 
P.3d at 984. Accordingly, we vacate Cabinatan’s burglary and UEMV convictions in Cr. No. 10-1-0904 and remand for a new trial. 
Because our resolution of this issue is dispositive, we 
do not reach the issue of whether the circuit court abused its discretion in declining to give additional instructions on eyewitness identification. However, we note that to the extent that Cabinatan receives a new trial, this court’s prospective rule as set forth in Cabagbag will apply; that is, “when eyewitness identification is central to the case, [the] circuit court[] must give a specific jury instruction upon the request of the defendant to focus the jury’s attention on the trustworthiness of the identification.” Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i at 
313-14, 277 P.3d at 1038-39. We further note that although this court in Cabagbag provided a model jury instruction with respect 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to eyewitness identification evidence, we expressly allowed for
 
modifications of the instruction as well as the development of
 other related instructions. Id. at 314, 277 P.3d at 1039.
 
B.	 The circuit court’s order revoking Cabinatan’s probation in
Cr. No. 09-1-0854
 
The circuit court revoked Cabinatan’s probation in Cr.
 
No. 09-1-0854 based on Cabinatan’s burglary and UEMV convictions. 
In light of our above holding regarding Cr. No. 10-1-0904, we
 vacate the circuit court’s order revoking Cabinatan’s probation
 in Cr. No. 09-1-0854.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons set forth in this opinion, we vacate
 
the ICA’s judgment on appeal, the circuit court’s Judgment of
 Conviction and Sentence in Cr. No. 10-1-0904, and the circuit
 court’s “Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation” in Cr.
 No. 09-1-0854, and remand the case to the circuit court for
 further proceedings. 
Edward K. Harada 
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Sonja P. McCullen
for respondent	 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
-36­