 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 ________________________________________________________________ ---oOo--
 ________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-14-0001090 22-APR-2020 10:39 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
-
STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
KEAKA MARTIN, Petitioner/Defendant-
Appellant. 
SCWC-14-0001090  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-
14-0001090; 3PC131000062)  
 
APRIL 22, 2020  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY M
cKENNA, J. 
I. Introduction 
This appeal arises out of the shooting of two Hawaiʻi Police 
Department (“HPD”) officers on the evening of January 2, 2013.  
Keaka Martin (“Martin”) was convicted after a jury trial in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (“
circuit court”) of various 
counts, including attempted murder of one of the officers.  On  
 2 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
August 5, 2014, the circuit court1 entered its judgment of 
conviction and sentence, sentencing Martin to life imprisonment 
without the possibility of parole plus ten years. 
Martin appealed the judgment of conviction and sentence to 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”). The ICA affirmed.  
Martin’s application for writ of certiorari to this court 
(“Application”) raises five questions: 
1. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact when
it held that the trial court did not engage in a deficient Tachibana colloquy? 
2. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact whenit held that the trial court properly admittedevidence of defendant’s suicide attempt? 
3. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact whenit held that the trial court properly admitted 
evidence of defendant’s statement that he shot himself? 
4. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact byholding that the trial court did not err in admittingprior bad acts of defendant? 
5. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact by 
holding that defendant’s convictions for attempted
murder and assault in the first degree should [not] be vacated because the trial court failed to properlyinstruct the jury on lesser -included offenses? 
For the reasons explained below, the issues Martin raises 
on certiorari lack merit. We do, however, address Martin’s 
second question on certiorari regarding his suicide attempt the day after the shooting.  The circuit court properly ruled the 
evidence admissible as probative of Martin’s identity as the 
person who had committed the offenses. The circuit court, 
The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 1  
 3 
    
  
     
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
however, also sua sponte applied the majority rule across the 
country to rule that the evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt 
was also admissible as relevant to his “consciousness of guilt.” 
We hold that evidence of a suicide or attempted suicide is 
not automatically admissible as relevant to a defendant’s 
consciousness of guilt.  As recognized by the Vermont Supreme 
Court, “[t]he underlying reasons motivating an attempt to take 
one’s life can be both numerous and highly complex . . . .”  State v. Onorato, 762 A.2d 858, 859-60 (Vt. 2000). The New 
Jersey Supreme Court has also appropriately noted that, aside from guilt, other factors such as “a defendant’s psychological, social or financial situation may underlie a suicide attempt.”  State v. Mann, 625 A.2d 1102, 1108 (N.J. 1993). Pursuant to HRS 
§ 602-4 (2016),
2 we therefore provide guidance to the trial 
courts for any future cases in which evidence of a suicide or 
suicide attempt is proffered as evidence of consciousness of 
guilt. But because the circuit court correctly ruled the 
evidence admissible as probative of Martin’s identity as the 
person who had committed the offenses charged, there was no error in the circuit court’s admission into evidence of the 
suicide attempt. 
HRS § 602-4 provides, “The supreme court shall have the general 
superintendence of all courts of inferior jurisdiction to prevent and correct 
errors and abuses therein where no other remedy is expressly provided by
law.” 2  
 4 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although the issues raised by Martin on certiorari lack 
merit, we notice plain error affecting Martin’s substantial 
rights with respect to the lack of a merger instruction on 
Martin’s firearms convictions on Counts 7, 8, and 9. We therefore vacate the ICA’s July 9, 2019 judgment on appeal affirming the circuit court’s August 5, 2014 judgment of 
conviction and sentence as to Counts 7, 8, and 9, and remand 
these counts to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
3 We otherwise affirm the ICA’s 
July 9, 2019 judgment on appeal affirming the circuit court’s August 5, 2014 judgment of conviction and sentence. 
II. Background 
A. Factual summary 
On January 2, 2013 at around 8:00 p.m., HPD officers Joshua 
Gouveia (“Officer Gouveia”) and Garrett Hatada (“Officer Hatada”) were assigned to a report of multiple gunshots fired in 
the Wailoa State Park area. During their investigation, the 
officers received information about a man hiding beneath a vehicle at Pono Place. Officers Gouveia and Hatada arrived at Pono Place and shined their flashlights under the vehicles in 
As discussed in note 36, infra, because the circuit court sentenced
Martin to five years on Count 7, ten years on Count 8, and ten years on Count 
9, with the sentences for Counts 7, 8, and 9 to be served concurrently, thelack of a merger instruction does not affect the maximum sentence for
Martin’s convictions on these three charges. 3  
 5 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the parking lot. Officer Gouveia saw a man lying on his back 
beneath a black truck. After calling for backup, Officer 
Gouveia approached the truck from the passenger’s side while 
Officer Hatada approached from the driver’s side.  When Officer Gouveia crouched down, he saw the man under the truck reach into his waistband and remove a black and silver gun. Officers 
Gouveia and Hatada were both then shot in their legs.  
That night, after the shooting, Kawika Paulino (“Paulino”) 
gave a statement to the police regarding an encounter with Martin at the Pono Place parking lot earlier that evening.  
Paulino told the police that Martin had shown him a gun, had said he had been firing the gun “in the middle of Wailoa,” and had also said that he would not go to jail without a fight.  
Darrel Constantino (“Constantino”) also told the police that 
Martin had had a weapon with him at Pono Place. 
The next day, an HPD special response team was assigned to 
make contact with Martin at an East Palai Street residence.  After arriving at the residence and announcing themselves as police, a single shot was heard from inside the house. The response team deployed a remote control surveillance robot 
equipped with a live feed video camera into the house. Through 
the live feed, the team observed a man lying on his back with a pistol on the ground near his hand.  
 6 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Officers entered the house and ordered the man not to move 
and to show his hands.  The man was bleeding from the abdominal 
area. The man raised his hands slightly and said, “I shot 
myself.” Officers told the man to turn over and put his hands behind his back, and the man again said, “I shot myself.” The man was later identified as Martin.  The gun found near Martin 
matched bullet casings recovered from the Pono Place parking 
lot. B. Circuit court proceedings 
1. Pretrial motions 
On February 28, 2013, Martin was charged via an indictment 
with attempted murder in the first degree as to Officer Hatada 
in violation of HRS §§ 705-500(1)(b) (1985) and 707-701 (Supp. 
2011) (Count 1), assault in the first degree as to Officer 
Hatada in violation of HRS § 707-710 (Supp. 1986) (Count 2), carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a separate 
felony in violation of HRS § 134-21(a) (Supp. 2006) (Count 3), 
attempted murder in the first degree as to Officer Gouveia in violation of HRS § 705-500(1)(b) and HRS § 707-710 (Count 4), assault in the first degree as to Officer Gouveia in violation 
of HRS § 707-710 (Count 5), carrying or use of a firearm in the 
commission of a separate felony in violation of HRS § 134-21(a) (Count 6), ownership or possession prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person charged with or convicted of certain  
 7 
   
 
 
  
     
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
crimes in violation of HRS § 134-7(b) and (h) (Supp. 2006) 
(Count 7), carrying or possessing a loaded firearm on a public 
highway in violation of HRS § 134-26(a) (Supp. 2006) (Count 8), 
place to keep pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25(a) (Supp. 2006) (Count 9), alteration of identification marks prohibited in violation of HRS §§ 134-10 (Supp. 1988) and 134-17 
(Supp. 1994) (Count 10), and reckless endangering in the second 
degree in violation of HRS § 707-714(a) (Supp. 2006) (Count 11). 
On December 27, 2013, seeking to introduce into evidence  
Martin’s “I shot myself” statements to the police, the State filed a motion for a determination that these statements had been voluntarily made.
4 The State asserted that it did not have 
the burden of establishing that Miranda warnings were given 
unless the totality of the circumstances reflected that the 
statement was a result of custodial interrogation. The State also contended that these unsolicited, spontaneous statements 
made by a defendant before any police questioning and in the 
absence of any coercion were admissible, citing State v. Amorin, 61 Haw. 356, 360, 604 P.2d 45, 48 (1979). At the voluntariness hearing, Martin testified that he did not recall making any 
HRS § 621- 26 (1993) provides: 
No confession shall be received in evidence unless it is 
first made to appear to the judge before whom the case is
being tried that the confession was in fact voluntarily
made. 4  
 8 
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
statements after he shot himself, that any statement he made was 
the product of a custodial interrogation, and that his physical 
condition impaired his ability to make a voluntary statement. 
The circuit court granted the State’s motion. 
Also on December 27, 2013, Martin filed his motion in 
limine #2 to preclude evidence of his self-inflicted gunshot 
wound. Martin argued that the evidence of his self-inflicted 
gunshot wound was a specific instance of conduct inadmissible 
under Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 404(b) (1994) and 
that the evidence would result in excessive prejudice against him. In its memorandum in opposition, the State argued that 
evidence of Martin’s self
-inflicted gunshot wound was admissible 
under HRE Rule 404(b) as relevant and probative of identity, opportunity, intent, knowledge, and absence of mistake or 
accident. 
At the hearing on the motion in limine #2, the circuit 
court sua sponte proposed that the evidence of Martin’s suicide 
attempt was relevant to Martin’s consciousness of guilt, citing 
an American L aw 
Reports (“ALR”) annotation.5 In its written 
order denying Martin’s motion, the circuit court concluded that 
evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was relevant and probative 
Dale Joseph Gilsinger, Annotation, Admissibility of Evidence Relating 
to Accused’s Attempt to Commit Suicide, 73 A.L.R. 5th 615 (1999). 5  
 9 
  
 
  
  
     
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of Martin’s consciousness of guilt, and that Martin’s self-
inflicted gunshot wound was also relevant to identity.  
Martin’s jury trial commenced on February 27, 2014.  
2. Witness Testimony 
a. HPD Officer Joshua Gouveia 
State witness HPD Officer Gouveia testified as follows.  
On January 2, 2013, at about 7:50 or 8:00 p.m., Officer 
Gouveia was assigned to multiple calls of possible gunshots 
fired in the Wailoa State Park area. Officer Gouveia, Officer 
Keith Nacis (“Officer Nacis”), Officer Hatada, and other 
officers checked the Wailoa State Park area, Pono Place, and Maile Apartments.  During their searches, Officers Gouveia and Hatada received information about a man under a vehicle at Pono 
Place. Officer Gouveia arrived at the Pono Place parking lot at 
approximately 8:30 p.m., and Officer Hatada arrived separately.  There was little to no lighting in the parking lot.  A blue SUV, 
a black pickup truck, and a white vehicle were parked next to 
each other. 
Officer Gouveia walked to the front of the blue SUV, shined 
his flashlight under the vehicles, and saw a man lying on his 
back beneath the black pickup truck.  He discussed the situation 
with Officer Hatada and called for an additional unit.  Officer Nacis arrived within a minute or two. Officer Gouveia approached the black pickup truck along the passenger’s side,  
 10 
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Officer Nacis approached from the back, and Officer Hatada 
approached the driver’s side. 
When Officer Gouveia reached the front passenger door, he 
announced himself as a police officer and instructed the man to come out from under the truck.  Receiving no response, he repeated his instruction, crouched, and shined his flashlight 
under the vehicle. Officer Gouveia saw the man reach into his 
waistband and remove a black and silver handgun.  Upon seeing the gun, Officer Gouveia said, loudly enough for everyone in the 
area to hear, “Let me see your hands.  Let me see your hands. 
Don’t do it. Gun.” 
The man pointed the pistol toward Officer Gouveia from 
approximately one foot away. Officer Gouveia saw a bright flash 
and felt a “hard pressure” in his left upper thigh area. 
Realizing he had been shot, Officer Gouveia crawled away and heard approximately two to three more shots. Officer Gouveia 
did not fire any shots.  He was later unable to identify a 
suspect from a photographic lineup. 
b. Kawika Paulino 
State witness Paulino testified as follows.  Paulino 
arrived at Pono Place to fish on January 2, 2013 at around 3:30 p.m. with his wife Hotina Paulino, Maria Sabater-Hart, Darrel Constantino, and his son. Paulino parked his blue SUV next to a black vehicle in the Pono Place parking lot.  That evening,  
 11 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Paulino called 911 to report hearing over twenty gunshots from 
the Wailoa area.  The police arrived, and Paulino told them he 
had heard gunshots. After the police left, Martin and David 
Carroll (“Carroll”) approached Paulino at his car.  Paulino had known Martin for about three years, but he had only met Carroll a few times. Martin had a fanny pack that contained bullets and 
a silver and black gun, and Martin took out the gun and tried to 
hand it to Paulino.  Martin told Paulino that “they were in the middle of Wailoa shooting the gun.” Martin told Paulino that he 
had an outstanding warrant, was facing some jail time, and that 
he would not go to jail without a fight. After Martin told Paulino about the warrant, the “police approached a second time and [Martin] just ran.”  When the officers returned, they 
approached the black truck. Paulino was sitting in the driver’s 
seat of his car when he heard multiple gunshots that he believed 
came from below the black truck.  Paulino saw two officers “go 
down.” The passenger door to his car had been left open, and 
Martin jumped into the back of his car and told Paulino to drive. Paulino drove to Hilo Lagoon, where he stopped because his wife was “freaking out” and because his son was in the back 
of the car. Paulino asked Martin to leave and “not do this to 
me and my family,” after which Martin left. Paulino then called 911 and met with an officer near the scene to tell him what happened.  
 12 
     
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
  
 
    
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
c. Doctor Dale Wren 
State’s witness Doctor Dale Wren (“Doctor Wren”) testified 
as follows. On January 2, 2013 at about 9:31 p.m., Doctor Wren 
treated Officer Gouveia at the Hilo Medical Center. Officer Gouveia had suffered a gunshot wound to his left thigh hip area, but Doctor Wren did not observe an exit wound.  Using an X-ray 
scan taken of Officer Gouveia’s pelvis on January 2, 2013, 
Doctor Wren identified the bullet fragments to the jury. Doctor Wren explained that, while it was possible to perform surgery to 
remove the bullet fragments, such procedures frequently caused 
more damage than just leaving the fragments in. 
On cross-examination, Doctor Wren testified that, to his 
knowledge, Officer Gouveia did not require any surgeries at the 
hospital. 
d. Darrel Constantino 
Defense witness Constantino testified as follows. On 
January 2, 2013, Constatino was fishing with Paulino and his 
family. Constantino was interviewed by the police after the Pono Place incident and was granted immunity in this case.  Before his police interview, Constatino, Paulino, Hotina 
Paulino, and Maria Hart had discussed how they would present 
their statements to the police because they were afraid the police would think they were accomplices.  
 13 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Constantino had told the police he had spoken to Martin at 
Pono Place and that Martin had a gun. He had also told the 
police that Martin told him that if the police came, he would 
duck under one of the cars and shoot at their legs. Constantino could not, however, remember Martin’s or his own exact words.  Constantino did not know who Martin was when he spoke to Martin, 
but Paulino had verbally identified Martin to Constantino after 
their conversation. After speaking with Martin, Constantino heard gunfire at Pono Place while he was standing in front of 
Paulino’s car, and he jumped onto the car and left with 
Paulino’s family. Constantino did not tell the police that a man had jumped into Paulino’s car as they were leaving Pono Place. 
On cross-examination, Constantino testified that Martin had 
told him that if the police came, “he’d be, like, ‘fuck the cops,’ and he’d disappear.” When Paulino stopped the car, 
Martin jumped out of the back passenger seat. 
e. HPD Officer Garrett Hatada 
State witness HPD Officer Hatada testified as follows.  On 
January 2, 2013 at around 7:44 p.m., Officer Hatada was assigned to reports of gunshots fired in the Wailoa State Park area.  
Officer Hatada and Officer Gouveia went to Pono Place, where several people who were fishing told him they had heard gunshots forty minutes earlier from the Maile Street area. After  
 14 
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
investigating Maile Street, Officer Hatada learned from dispatch 
that someone had reported a man hiding under a vehicle at Pono 
Place. Officer Hatada and Officer Gouveia returned to Pono 
Place, and Officer Gouveia indicated that he saw someone hiding beneath one of the vehicles. They called for an additional unit, and Officer Nacis arrived. Officer Hatada approached the 
driver’s side of the dark-colored vehicle while Officer Gouveia 
approached from the passenger’s side. Officer Hatada knelt down behind the vehicle’s front tire and shined his flashlight on the 
person beneath the vehicle. Officer Hatada saw that the person 
had “short black hair” and tattoos on his arm. Officer Hatada then heard Officer Gouveia shout, “Don’t do it, don’t do it,” as he saw the man fumbling with his waistband. Officer Hatada then 
stood up, drew his weapon, heard three gunshots, and felt pain 
in his leg. Officer Hatada fired two rounds toward the area he had seen the shooter. Officer Hatada then took cover under a 
banyan tree. 
f. Jair Trail 
State witness Jair Trail (“Trail”) testified as follows.  
Trail was staying at his Aunt Maile Labrador’s house on Palai Street between December 2012 and January 2013, and Martin, 
Trail’s uncle, would sometimes come over.  On the night of January 2, 2013, Labrador told Trail that Martin could not come into the house. Later that night, Martin knocked on the door,  
 15 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
but Trail did not let him in.  Trail awoke at around 4:00 a.m. and heard Martin say, “But why? It wasn’t me. I didn’t do it.” 
The next morning, Trail saw Martin sleeping on the couch.  
Martin spent the day reading the Bible and said “some crazy stuff” about living forever.  Martin also told Trail that he was not going back to jail.  At some point, Martin crawled out of 
his room and said that the police were there. Trail saw S.W.A.T 
trucks outside and heard the police identify themselves.  He then saw Martin pull out a black and silver gun, put the gun 
against his chest, and pull the trigger. Trail then exited the 
house and identified himself to the police. On cross -
examination, Trail testified that he heard Martin say, “I would rather die than go back to jail.” Trail did not know if Martin 
had any outstanding warrants or had actually served jail time 
before. 
g. HPD Sergeant Aaron Carvalho 
State witness Sergeant Aaron Carvalho (“Sergeant Carvalho”) 
testified as follows.  On January 3, 2013, Sergeant Carvalho’s special response team was assigned to make contact with a suspect in an attempted murder investigation on East Palai 
Street. Sergeant Carvalho arrived at the residence in an 
armored vehicle at approximately 3:17 p.m.  Sergeant Kahalewai identified the group as police and gave verbal instructions over the PA system. They then received a radio transmission that a  
 16 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
     
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
single shot was heard from inside the house. A man, who later 
identified himself as Trail, came out of the house.  Trail told 
Sergeant Carvalho that Martin was in the house and that he had 
seen Martin shoot himself in the stomach. Sergeant Carvalho then deployed a remote control surveillance robot with a live feed video camera into the house.  Through the live feed, he saw 
a man lying on his back with a pistol on the ground next to his 
left hand. Sergeant Carvalho entered the house and saw the same man and pistol that he had seen through the live feed.  Sergeant 
Carvalho told the man not to move and to show his hands.  The 
man raised his hands slightly and said, “I shot myself.”  Sergeant Carvalho told the man to turn over and put his hands behind his back, and the man again said, “I shot myself.”  The 
man appeared to be bleeding from the abdomen area, but he seemed 
to understand Sergeant Carvalho’s commands.  In the courtroom, Sergeant Carvalho identified Martin as the man he had seen on 
the floor. 
h. HPD Detective Grant Todd 
State witness HPD Detective Grant Todd (“Detective Todd”) 
testified as follows.  At 8:55 p.m. on January 2, 2013, Detective Todd learned that two officers had been shot at Pono 
Place. Detective Todd arrived at Pono Place at around 9:00 p.m.  Detective Todd saw two ambulances taking Officers Gouveia and Hatada away.  After learning what had happened from another  
 17 
   
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
officer at the scene, Detective Todd began to secure the scene 
to preserve evidence. Detective Todd observed three bullet 
casings underneath a black van and two casings at the front of 
the van. Detective Todd noticed a hole in the door of the white truck consistent with “a projectile from a gun.” Detective Todd later received information that Martin was at a residence on 
East Palai Street on January 3, 2013. As part of the 
investigation, Detective Todd sent to the HPD crime lab Officer Hatada’s firearm, the firearm recovered from the East Palai 
Street house, the projectile located in the white truck, eight 
bullet casings recovered from a field at the end of Maile Street, the projectile found at the East Palai Street residence, the three casings located underneath the black van, and the two 
casings located at the front of the black van. 
i. Cindee Lorenzo 
State witness Cindee Lorenzo (“Lorenzo”) testified as 
follows. Lorenzo was a criminalist at the Honolulu Police 
Department Scientific Investigation Section (“SIS”) assigned to the Firearm and Tool Mark Unit. The State and defense stipulated to the chain of custody of items sent to SIS by 
Detective Todd. Lorenzo determined that the eight casings 
recovered from Maile Street and the three casings found beneath the black vehicle matched the firearm recovered from the East Palai Street house.  Lorenzo also determined that the casing  
 18 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recovered from the East Palai Street residence matched the 
firearm from the East Palai Street house.  
j. Sonya Chong 
State witness Sonya Chong (“Chong”) testified as follows.  
Chong had been Martin’s girlfriend from December 2011 to June 2012 and she and Martin had lived together at the beginning of 
2012. Chong had seen Martin with a silver and gray hand -held 
firearm toward the end of their relationship.  Martin would 
practice aiming the firearm and say, “[F]uck the cops.”  On 
cross-examination, Chong testified that Martin did not indicate 
to her that he was fearful of others, but that Martin slept with his gun under his pillow. Chong also acknowledged that testifying against Martin was “an opportunity for [her] to get 
back at [him].” 
k. David Carroll 
Defense witness David Carroll (“Carroll”) testified as 
follows. On January 2, 2013, Carroll was beaten and arrested by 
police for disorderly conduct. On that day, the police told 
Carroll they were “looking for a murderer,” and identified Martin by name. Carroll spent three days in jail and the police 
tried “to get [him] to state that [he had] personally seen 
[Martin] shoot the officers.” Carroll had not, however, seen Martin shoot officers.  On cross-examination, Carroll testified that Martin was “like a brother” to him, and that on January 2,  
 19 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2013, he had been distraught because he thought the police had 
shot Martin. He had left Martin at Pono Place on January 2, 
2013, and he knew Martin had a gun.  Carroll also later testified as a witness called by the State as follows. 
On January 2, 2013, Carroll had been living at the Maile 
Apartments.  At around 7:00 p.m. on that day, Carroll had left 
home with Martin to buy milk for Carroll’s son. Carroll and 
Martin stopped in front of the apartments and Martin asked Carroll if it was “okay to pop off some rounds.” Martin showed 
Carroll a black gun, said “Fuck the police,” and raised his gun 
and started shooting it into the air. After Martin fired the gun, Carroll saw police lights, and he and Martin “started crawling like military soldiers” to avoid being seen for 
approximately half an hour. Carroll and Martin then went to 
Pono Place, where Martin started a conversation with people fishing. Carroll left Martin at Pono Place and bought milk at a 
gas station. Carroll then returned to the Maile Apartments. At 
the Maile Apartments, Carroll ran into Misty Quiocho (“Quiocho”), who asked him where Martin was. Carroll told Quiocho that he was going to check on Martin at Pono Place. 
Carroll then heard a series of gunshots that “weren’t all from 
the same weapon,” and he “ran hysterically toward that direction” thinking Martin had been shot.  While he was crossing a bridge, a police officer approached him from Pono Place and  
 20 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
yelled at him to “get back.” Carroll walked back toward Maile Street to talk with his neighbors, but was then “ordered to 
approach the police officers,” who wanted to question him about 
“why [he] came towards them in that way.” Carroll testified the police slammed him into the ground and beat him up. He was then taken to the police station, where he stayed for three days. 
l. Misty Quiocho 
Defense witness Quiocho testified as follows.  Quiocho had 
previously been convicted of crimes of dishonesty.
6 Martin had 
been Quiocho’s boyfriend off and on for four years.  During Quiocho’s relationship with Martin, he had been afraid to sleep and would barricade the door “so nobody could come in to hurt us or him or his family.” Quiocho had never seen Martin with a gun 
and had not heard him make threats against the police.  Martin 
was fearful of and tried to avoid the police.  Also, Martin had attempted suicide eight months to a year before January 2013. 
On cross-examination, Quiocho testified that she still loved 
Martin and that Martin had been avoiding the police because the police had a warrant for him.  
Quiocho testified that she had been convicted for forgery in the second
degree, theft in the second degree, theft in the fourth degree, and
unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle. The admission of Quiocho’s previous 
convictions are not raised as an issue on appeal. 6  
 21 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Tachibana colloquy 
On April 14, 2014, prior to the close of Martin’s case, the 
circuit court conducted a Tachibana colloquy, which is quoted in 
Section IV.A below.  
4. Martin’s closing argument 
In closing argument, Martin repeatedly argued identity as a 
defense. His arguments included assertions of reasonable doubt as to whether he was the person hiding under the black vehicle on January 2, 2013 who had shot the officers, that Officer 
Hatada had identified the suspect as having a full-sleeved 
tattoo, and that although he had a tattoo running down a portion of his left arm, it was not a full-sleeved tattoo, that Officer Gouveia had not been able to identify him as the suspect, and 
that the witnesses that had identified him as the suspect had 
credibility issues. 
5. Verdict and sentencing 
On April 10, 2014, the court dismissed Counts 2 and 5 (the 
lesser-included assault in the first degree charges) without prejudice.  On April 24, 2014, the jury returned verdicts finding Martin guilty of the included offense of assault in the 
first degree against Officer Hatada (Count 1), two counts of use 
of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony (Counts 3 and 6), attempted murder in the first degree as to Officer Gouveia (Count 4), ownership or possession prohibited of any  
 22 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
firearm or ammunition by a person charged with or convicted of 
certain crimes (Count 7), carrying or possessing a loaded 
firearm on a public highway (Count 8), place to keep pistol or 
revolver (Count 9), and reckless endangering in the second degree (Count 11). The jury found Martin not guilty of 
alteration of identification marks prohibited (Count 10).  
The sentencing hearing occurred on July 25, 2014. The 
State argued that consecutive sentencing was appropriate under the facts of the case. The circuit court stated that “the 
shooting of Officer Hatada involved serious criminal offenses 
which deserve separate punishment and there is a need for [a consecutive sentence] to . . . . stop[] others from committing similar crimes.” The circuit court therefore sentenced Martin 
to ten years imprisonment on Count 1, twenty years on Count 3, life imprisonment without the possibility of parole on Count 4, twenty years on Count 6, five years on Count 7, ten years on 
Count 8, ten years on Count 9, and one year on Count 11.  The 
court ordered that the sentences for Counts 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11 be served concurrently, but consecutively to the sentence in Count 1.  
On August 5, 2014, the court entered its judgment of 
conviction and sentence, which Martin timely appealed to the ICA.  
 23 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The ICA rejected all of Martin’s points of error on appeal 
in its March 29, 2019 summary disposition order.  State v. 
Martin, No. CAAP-14-0001090, at 1, 3 (App. Mar. 29, 2019) (SDO).   
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. ICA proceedings On appeal, Martin raised the following points of error 
relevant to the issues on certiorari:
7 
1. The trial court erred when it gave improper warnings
in violation of State v. Tachibana , 79 Hawaiʻ i 226, 900 P.2d
1293 (1995).
2. The trial court erred by (i) admitting that Defendant
attempted suicide on the date after the officers were shot,
(ii) by determining the Defendant’s statement “I shot myself” was voluntary, and (iii) allowing the introductionof such evidence without a limiting instruction.
3. The trial court erred in allowing in evidence of
other prior “bad acts” and in not providing a limiting 
instruction concerning these “bad acts.”4. Defendant’s convictions for attempted murder and for
assault in the first degree should be vacated because the
trial court failed to properly instruct the jury on lesser -
included offenses. 
   
D. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
Martin’s Application raises presents five questions: 
1. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact
when it held that the trial court did not engage in a
deficient Tachibana colloquy? 2. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact
when it held that the trial court properly admitted
evidence of defendant’s suicide attempt?
3. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact
when it held that the trial court properly admitted 
Martin also raised the following issues to the ICA, which he does not
raise on certiorari: (1) The circuit court judge erred by failing to disqualify/recuse himself for donating money to the wife of one of the victims in this case; (2) Because the jury rendered an impermissibly inconsistent verdict when it found Martin guilty of assault in the first 
degree for the shooting of one officer and attempted murder for the shooting
of the second officer, the circuit court wrongfully denied Martin’s motion for new trial; (3) There was insufficient evidence to support the jury’s conviction for attempted murder in Count 4; (4) The trial court erred inimposing consecutive sentences; and (9) Ineffective assistance of counsel.
As there is no plain error in the ICA’s decisions on these points of error, 
we do not further discuss any of these issues raised to the ICA.   
 24 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 The validity of a defendant’s waiver of constitutional 
rights in a criminal case is a question of law under the state 
and federal constitutions, which we review under the right/wrong
standard. State v. Torres, 144 Hawaiʻi 282, 288, 439 P.3d 234, 
240 (2019) (citations omitted).    
   
 
    
   
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence of defendant’s statement that he shot 
himself? 4. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact
by holding that the trial court did not err in admitting prior bad acts of defendant?5. Did the ICA commit grave errors of law and fact
by holding that defendant’s convictions for attemptedmurder and assault in the first degree should [not]
be vacated because the trial court failed to properly 
instruct the jury on lesser -included offenses? 
III. Standards of review 
A. Validity of waiver of the right to testify 
 
B. Admissibility of evidence 
Different standards of review must be applied to trial 
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particularevidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, theproper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong 
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion
standard is applied in the case of those rules of evidencethat require a “judgment call” on the part of the trialcourt. 
State v. Williams, 146 Hawaiʻi 62, 72, 456 P.3d 135, 145 (2020)
(brackets and citations omitted).   
C. Jury instructions on lesser-i ncluded offenses 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at issue
on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read andconsidered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively 
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless itaffirmatively appears from the record as a whole that theerror was not prejudicial.  
 25 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawaiʻi 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(internal brackets and citations omitted). 
D. Plain error “We may recognize plain error when the error committed 
affects substantial rights of the defendant.” State v. Hauge, 
103 Hawaiʻi 38, 48, 79 P.3d 131, 141 (2003) (internal citations 
and quotation marks omitted); see also Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) (1993) (“Plain error or defects 
affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were 
not brought to the attention of the court.”). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Martin’s right to testify was not violated based on the 
Tachibana 
colloquy 
In his first issue on certiorari, Martin argues that the 
circuit court’s colloquy regarding his waiver of his right to 
testify was deficient as a matter of law. 
Our law protects both the right to testify and the right 
not to testify. State v. Celestine, 142 Hawaiʻi 165, 169, 415 
P.3d 907, 911 (2018). Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawaiʻi 226, 900 
P.2d 1293 (1995)
, established the requirement that when a 
defendant in a criminal case indicates an intention not to testify, the trial court must advise the defendant of the right 
to testify and must obtain an on-the-record waiver of the 
right. 79 Hawaiʻi at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303. We stated that this  
 26 
    
 
  
    
  
      
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
advisement should consist of informing the defendant (1) that 
they8 have a right to testify, (2) that if they want to testify, 
no one can prevent them from doing so, and (3) that if they testify, the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine them. 
79 Hawaiʻi at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7. We also stated that 
in connection with the privilege against self 
-incrimination, the 
defendant should also be advised (4) that they have a right not 
to testify and (5) that if they do not testify, then the jury can be instructed about that right. Id. (citations omitted). In a bench trial, defendants must be advised that if they 
exercise their right not to testify, no inference of guilt may 
be drawn for exercising this right, i.e., that a decision not to testify cannot be used against a defendant by the judge in 
deciding the case. State v. Monteil, 134 Hawaiʻi 361, 371-72, 
341 P.3d 567, 577-78 (2014). 
After Tachibana, we also held that a second component of 
the Tachibana colloquy involves the court engaging in a true 
“colloquy” with the defendant. 
Celestine, 142 Hawaiʻi at 170, 
415 P.3d at 912
, citing State v. Han, 130 Hawaiʻi 83, 90-91, 306 
P.3d 128, 135-36 (2013).  This requires “a verbal exchange 
between the judge and the defendant ‘in which the judge 
“They, them, and their” are used as singular pronouns when the gender 
identity of the person referred to is unknown or immaterial. 8  
 27 
  
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ascertains the defendant’s understanding of the proceedings and 
of the defendant’s rights.’” Celestine, 142 Hawai‘i at 170, 415 
P.3d at 912 (citing Han, 130 Hawai
ʻi at 90, 306 P.3d at 135 
(emphasis omitted)). 
To accomplish the purposes of a true colloquy, we suggested 
that the trial court engage in a verbal exchange with the 
defendant at least twice during the colloquy in order to 
ascertain the defendant’s “understanding of significant 
propositions in the advisement.” 
Han, 130 Hawaiʻi at 90, 306 
P.3d at 135. 
We suggested the first verbal exchange occur after 
the court informs the defendant of the right to testify and of 
the right not to testify and the protections associated with these rights, to obtain an affirmative or negative response as to the defendant’s understanding of these principles. 130 
Hawaiʻi at 90-91, 306 P.3d at 135-36. We also suggested a second 
verbal exchange after a defendant informs the court that the 
defendant does not intend to testify. 130 Hawaiʻi at 91, 306 
P.3d at 136. We stated that as part of this inquiry, the trial court should elicit responses as to whether the defendant 
intends to not testify, whether anyone is forcing the defendant not to testify, and whether the decision to not testify is the  
 28 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defendant’s. Celestine, 142 Hawaiʻi at 170-71, 415 P.3d at 912-
13.9 
A defendant’s right to testify is violated when the 
colloquy does not establish “an objective basis for finding that
[the defendant] knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily gave 
up” their right to testify.  Han, 130 Hawaiʻi   at 91, 306 P.3d at
136. Courts look to the totality of the facts and circumstances
to determine whether a waiver of the right to testify was 
voluntarily and intelligently made. 130 Hawaiʻ
i at 89, 306 P.3d
at 134.    
 
 
 
Applying these principles to this case, prior to the close
of Martin’s case, the following colloquy took place:   
THE COURT: Okay. So you are Keaka Martin?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  
THE COURT: Okay. Are you thinking clearly?THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: Are you presently sick?THE DEFENDANT: No. THE COURT: Within the past 48 hours have you taken any
pills, drugs, medication, or drank any alcohol?   
THE DEFENDANT: Um, ibuprofens.  
THE COURT: Okay. You’re suffering from pain?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Despite your pain and the medication, areyou able to think clearly now? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: Okay.  As I discussed with you before the start 
of the trial, or at the start of the trial, you have theconstitutional right to testify in your own defense.  
Although you should consult with your lawyer regarding the decision to testify, it is your decision and no one canprevent you from testifying should you choose to do so.   If 
In State v. Torres, 144 Hawaiʻ i 282, 439 P.3d 234 (2019), decided after
the Tachibana colloquy at issue here, we further “h[e]ld 
that trial courts 
are required to engage in an on -the- record colloquy with a defendant when the 
defendant chooses to testify to ensure that a waiver of the right not to
testify is knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.”  144 Hawaiʻ i at 294- 95, 439 
P.3d at 246- 47.  9  
 29 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
you decide to testify, the prosecution will be allowed to
cross- examine you.  You also have a constitutional right 
not to testify and to remain silent.   If you choose not to
testify, the jury will be instructed that it cannot holdyour silence against you in deciding your case.  Did you 
understand what I had to say?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  
THE COURT: I have been advised by your lawyer that you do 
not intend to testify in regard to this case; is this true?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: And is it your decision not to testify?THE DEFENDANT: Yes, it is.  
THE COURT: Mr. Strauss, you’ re -- are you going to suggest
any more questions of Keaka?   
MR. STRAUSS: No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: In this area?  No? 
 Okay.   How about the State? 
MS. NAGATA: No, Your Honor.
 
Martin argues that this was not a “true colloquy” because 
the court recited a “litany of rights” without obtaining    a  
response as to Martin’s understanding of the fundamental   
principles pertaining to his rights, and because evidence of  
Martin’s mental illness was a salient fact in this case.  Martin 
compares the colloquy in his case to the colloquy we held  
deficient in State v. Pomroy, 132 Hawaiʻi 85, 319 P.3d 1093 
(2014).  
In Pomroy, we held that the trial court’s failure to engage
in a true colloquy to “ascertain the defendant’s understanding 
of the individual rights comprising the Tachibana colloquy  
results in the failure to ‘ensure that [the defendant]  
understood his rights [and] amounts to a failure to obtain the on-the -record waiver required by Tachibana.’”  Pomroy, 132 
Hawai
ʻi at 93, 319 P.3d at 1101 (quoting  Han, 103 Hawaiʻi at 91,   
 30 
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
306 P.3d at 136). In Pomroy, the court provided the following 
Tachibana colloquy: 
THE COURT: Alright. Mr. Pomroy, before your attorney 
[rests the defense’ s case], let me advise you.  You have 
the right to testify on your own behalf. That decision is yours and yours alone. If you choose to testify you will be subject to cross- examination by the state.  If you
choose not to testify, I cannot hold that against you. But the only evidence I will have is what the State haspresented, unless you have other witnesses; you understandthat? THE DEFENDANT: Yes, ma’am.  
132 Hawaiʻi at 92, 319 P.3d at 1100 (alterations in original). 
In Pomroy, we held that, in addition to failing to advise 
the defendant that he had the right not to testify and that no 
one could prevent him from testifying, the court did not engage 
in a true colloquy, but recited a “litany of rights.” Id. We 
noted that, after reciting this litany of rights, the court only asked Pomroy if he “understood that,” and it was unclear which 
right “that” referenced. Id. 
As compared to Pomroy, in this case, the circuit court also 
advised Martin that he had the right not to testify and that no 
one could prevent him from testifying. In addition, the circuit 
court engaged in a verbal exchange with Martin at least twice during the colloquy in order to ascertain his “understanding of significant propositions in the advisement[,]” as suggested by 
Han, 130 Hawaiʻi at 90, 306 P.3d at 135 (citation omitted). T
 he 
circuit court engaged in a verbal exchange with Martin after 
informing him of the right to testify and the right not to  
 31 
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testify and of the protections associated with these 
rights. The circuit court also engaged in a second verbal 
exchange after it indicated to Martin its understanding that he 
did not intend to testify. Although the circuit court did not ask Martin whether anyone was forcing him not to testify, it engaged in a third exchange with Martin, asking him if it was 
his decision not to testify. Thus, although the circuit court 
did not the use precise terminology, “Is anyone forcing you not 
to testify?” the circuit court’s questioning was tantamount to 
eliciting that information.
10 
We do express concern regarding part of the ICA’s analysis 
of the adequacy of Martin’s Tachibana colloquy. In Han, we held 
that “‘[s]alient facts,’ such as mental illness or language 
barriers, require that a court effectively engage the defendant 
in a dialogue that will effectuate the rationale behind the colloquy and the on-the-record waiver requirements as set forth 
in Tachibana.” 130 Hawaiʻi at 92, 306 P.3d at 137 (citation 
omitted). The ICA determined that Martin’s “impaired mental 
faculties” did not require the court to make 
“additional efforts 
to ensure that [Martin] understood his Tachibana rights” in part because Martin was deemed competent and fit to proceed to trial.  
Martin, SDO at 12.  
Trial judges should, however, include this specific question in their 
colloquies. 10  
 32 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although the fact that a person is “competent and fit to 
proceed” does not necessarily mean that the person’s waiver is 
“voluntary and intelligent,” under the totality of circumstances 
in this case, we hold the circuit court’s Tachibana colloquy provides “an objective basis for finding that [Martin] knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily gave up” his right to 
testify. Han, 130 Hawaiʻi at 91, 306 P.3d at 136. In addition 
to following the requirements of Tachibana, Han, and Celestine, 
the circuit court asked various questions with regard to the clarity of Martin’s state of mind at the time of the colloquy. 
T
hus, under the totality of circumstances, the ICA did not err 
in holding that the circuit court did not violate Martin’s 
constitutional right to testify by failing to conduct a proper 
Tachibana colloquy.  
B. Evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was properly admitted 
as relevant to his identify as the perpetrator of the crimes charged 
1. Background 
In his second question on certiorari, Martin contends the 
ICA erred in holding that evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was admissible. 
In his motion in limine #2 before the circuit 
court, Martin argued that the evidence of his self-inflicted gunshot wound was a specific instance of conduct inadmissible under HRE Rule 404(b) and that the evidence would result in excessive prejudice against him pursuant to HRE Rule 403 (1980).   
 33 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The State argued in opposition that evidence of Martin’s self-
inflicted gunshot wound was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) as 
relevant and probative of identity, opportunity, intent, 
knowledge, and absence of mistake or accident.  On appeal, the State also argued that the evidence that Martin shot himself was necessary to “give context to the manner in which the gun was 
recovered.” 
At the hearing on the motion in limine #2, the circuit 
court sua sponte proposed that the evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was also relevant to Martin’s consciousness of guilt, 
citing an ALR article.
11 In its written order denying Martin’s 
motion, the circuit court concluded that evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was relevant and probative of Martin’s 
consciousness of guilt and also that Martin’s self-inflicted 
gunshot wound was relevant as to identity. 
HRE Rule 404(b) provides: 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show actionin conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistakeor accident. In criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered under this subsection shall providereasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if
the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of
the date, location, and general nature of any such evidenceit intends to introduce at trial. 
See Gilsinger, supra note 5. 
11  
 34 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
According to the commentary for HRE Rule 404(b), “[w]hen offered 
for the specified purposes other than mere character and 
propensity . . . ‘other crimes, wrongs, or acts’ evidence may be 
admissible provided the Rule 403 test is met.”  HRE Rule 404 cmt. 
2. Relevance of suicides and attempted suicides as 
evidence of consciousness of guilt 
Although the State never argued on appeal that Martin’s 
suicide attempt was relevant as consciousness of guilt, 
expressing agreement with the circuit court, the ICA held that the evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was also relevant as evidence of consciousness of guilt.  Martin, SDO at 9-10. We 
therefore preliminarily address the issue of whether evidence of 
a suicide or a suicide attempt is relevant as evidence of consciousness of guilt. 
A court’s determination that evidence is “relevant” within 
the meaning of HRE Rule 401 is reviewed under the right/wrong 
standard of review. State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi 409, 422, 453 
P.3d 229, 242 (2019) (citation omitted). In determining that 
the evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was relevant as 
consciousness of guilt, the circuit court compared the 
probative 
value of a suicide attempt to the probative value of evidence of  
 35 
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
   
  
  
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
flight.12 However, there are many reasons why someone might 
attempt suicide. Mental disorders, alcohol and other substance 
use disorders, and previous suicide attempts are recognized risk 
factors indicating that a person is more likely to attempt suicide.
13 
The history of suicide evidence as relevant of 
consciousness of guilt in American law has actually been traced to an argument made by Daniel Webster.  Arguing for the prosecution in the trial of Commonwealth v. Knapp, 26 Mass. 496 
(1830), Webster asserted that suicide was the equivalent of a 
confession, stating: 
Meantime the guilty soul cannot keep its secret . . . . It 
betrays his discretion, it breaks down his courage, itconquers his prudence. When suspicions from without begin
to embarrass him, and the net of circumstances to entangle 
him, the fatal secret struggles with still greater violenceto burst forth. It must be confessed! It WILL be 
confessed! There is no refuge from confession, butsuicide,— and suicide is confession. 
Mann, 625 A.2d at 1107 (quoting Commonwealth v. Knapp, 7 
American State Trials 395 (1830)) (ellipsis and emphasis in original). Apparently following Webster’s logic, a majority of 
U.S. courts have since then held that evidence of suicide and 
Although many years ago, this court suggested that flight evidence 
could be an indicator of consciousness of guilt . S ee Territory v. Corum, 34 
Haw. 167, 189 ( Haw. Terr. 1937) (Peters, J., dissenting). More recently, we 
have questioned the relevance of flight evidence as an indicator of guilt.  
See State v. Heapy, 113 Hawaiʻ i 283, 294, 151 P.3d 764, 775 (2007) . 
We Can All Prevent Suicide , Suicide Prevention Lifeline ,
https://perma.cc/9QUE- 6PB7. 12 
13  
 36 
  
   
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
       
   
       
 
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
attempted suicide is admissible as relevant to a defendant’s 
consciousness of guilt, often analogizing suicide evidence to 
flight evidence.14 Scholarship from as early as the 1950s, 
however, called into question the relevance of a suicide attempt 
as consciousness of guilt.15 A 1964 Note observed that 
“[p]sychologists rarely find that an attempted suicide was 
motivated by a sense of conscious guilt in connection with a 
crime,” and that studies had failed to find a connection between an attempted suicide and a criminal act.
16 In addition, more 
recently, state courts of last resort have questioned the probative value of suicide evidence as to consciousness of guilt.  In State v. Mann, the New Jersey Supreme Court recognized that, aside from guilt, other factors such as “a 
defendant’s psychological, social or financial situation may 
underlie a suicide attempt.”  625 A.2d at 1108.  The New Jersey Supreme Court held that trial courts should hold hearings to 
“determine whether evidence of a defendant’s suicide attempt is 
sufficient to support a reasonable inference that the suicide 
14 See Gilsinger, supra note 5. 
15 See The Judicial Interpretation of Suicide, 105 U. P A. L. REV. 391 
(1957); Note, Attempted Suicide as Evidence of Guilt in Criminal Cases: The 
Legal and Psychological Views, 1964 W ASH. U. L. Q. 2014. 
16 Attempted Suicide as Evidence of Guilt in Criminal Cases, supra note 
15, at 207.   
   
 
 
 
     
 
  
  
    
  
   
 
 
   
 
  (continued. . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
attempt was . . . evidence of consciousness of guilt.” Id.17 
Similarly, the Vermont Supreme Court has cautioned that “[t]he 
underlying reasons motivating an attempt to take one’s life can 
be both numerous and highly complex . . . .”  Onorato, 762 A.2d at 859-60. 
We reject the majority rule that evidence of suicides and 
attempted suicides are automatically admissible as relevant to a defendant’s consciousness of guilt. We agree with the Vermont Supreme Court that “[t]he underlying reasons motivating an 
attempt to take one’s life can be both numerous and highly 
complex . . . .”  Onorato, 762 A.2d at 859-60.  We also agree with the New Jersey Supreme Court that, aside from guilt, other factors such as “a defendant’s psychological, social or 
financial situation may underlie a suicide attempt.”  Mann, 625 
A.2d at 1108. 
Therefore, we hold that when evidence of a suicide or 
suicide attempt is proffered as evidence of consciousness of guilt, the proponent must establish a foundation for the evidence’s admission for this purpose pursuant to HRE Rule 104 (1984).
18 In a criminal case, if such evidence is being offered 
17 But see text accompanying note 19, infra.  We require an evidentiary
foundation that a suicide or suicide attempt constitutes “consciousness of
guilt,” which requires that foundation be established by a “preponderance ofevidence,” not by a “reasonable inference. ” 
18 HRE Rule 104 reads in relevant part: 
37  
 38 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
against the defendant, “[t]he trial court also should ensure 
that a defendant has been given adequate notice of the State’s
intention to offer proof of the attempted suicide.”  Mann, 625
A.2d at 1108.   
 
In addition, in determining whether a sufficient foundation
exists for admission of a suicide or suicide attempt as relevant  
of consciousness of guilt, as explained in Addison M. Bowman, 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual 1-15 (2018
-19 ed.) (“Bowman”),  
in State v. McGriff, 76 Hawaiʻi 148, 871 P.2d 782 (1994), this 
court “adopted the preponderance of the evidence standard for foundation factfinding in [HRE R]ule 104(a) admissibility 
hearings, citing Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171, 175   
 
(a) Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary 
questions concerning . . . the admissibility of evidence 
shall be determined by the court, subject to the provisions
of subsection (b). In making its determination the court is not bound by the rules of evidence except those withrespect to privileges.(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact. When the relevancy of 
evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of
fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding ofthe fulfillment of the condition. (c) Hearing of jury. Hearings on the admissibility of 
confessions shall in all cases be conducted out of the 
hearing of the jury. Hearings on other preliminary matters shall be so conducted when the interests of justice requireor, when an accused is a witness, if the accused so requests.
(d) Testimony by accused. The accused does not, by 
testifying upon a preliminary matter, subject oneself tocross- examination as to other issues in the case. 
(e) Weight and credibility. This rule does not limit the right of a party to introduce before the jury evidence 
relevant to weight or credibility.  
 39 
      
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(1987).”19 Thus, to establish the requisite foundation for 
relevance under HRE Rule 104(a), a trial court must determine 
that, by a preponderance of the evidence, the suicide or suicide 
attempt constitutes evidence of a consciousness of guilt, while also “consider[ing any] alternative explanations of the suicide attempt offered by a defendant.” Mann, 625 A.2d at 1108. 
Further, assuming relevance is found to exist under HRE Rule 
104(a), but the relevance is conditioned upon the existence of another fact, such as the existence of an alleged suicide note, 
then HRE Rule 104(b) also applies. 
Even if the trial court determines that the requisite 
foundation for admissibility exists, the trial court must still 
conduct an HRE Rule 403 balancing analysis.  See Section IV.B.4, 
infra; see also, Mann, 625 A.2d at 1108 (“The court should 
consider . . . the possible prejudice to a defendant from the introduction of the attempted suicide evidence or from a 
defendant's effort to offer a different explanation of that 
evidence.”). 
As further stated by Professor Bowman: 
This standard of proof for evidence foundations applies in
civil and criminal proceedings. The burden of proof of
preliminary facts is placed on the proponent of the evidence except when privilege is the issue, in which eventthe party asserting the privilege bears the burden of proofof the privilege foundation. 
Bowman, at 1- 15. 19  
 40 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. Martin’s suicide attempt was admissible as relevant to 
identity 
Although the circuit court and ICA erred in determining 
that evidence of Martin’s self-inflicted gunshot wound was 
admissible as showing his consciousness of guilt, the circuit 
court also ruled that, as argued by the State, Martin’s self-
inflicted gunshot wound was relevant as to his identity as the perpetrator of the offenses charged.  The State argued that the 
evidence that Martin shot himself was necessary to “give context 
to the manner in which the gun was recovered.” On certiorari, Martin argues that his history of mental illness, prior suicide attempts, fear of the police, and abnormal paranoid behavior 
renders the probative value of his suicide attempt to show 
consciousness of guilt “minimal at best.” Under the 
circumstances of this case, however, we hold that, as 
alternatively concluded by the circuit court, evidence of 
Martin’s suicide attempt was relevant to his identity as the possessor of the firearm that discharged the eight casings recovered from Maile Street and the three casings found beneath 
the black vehicle at Pono Place.  During closing argument, 
Martin strongly contested that he was the person that had committed the offenses charged.  Therefore, the evidence that 
Martin shot himself with the firearm used in the offenses the 
next day and that the police through remote control saw Martin  
 41 
  
 
  
   
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
lying on his back with the firearm next to him was relevant to 
identifying Martin as the person who had possessed and 
discharged the same firearm the day before. 
4. HRE Rule 403 analysis 
Even if evidence of a suicide or attempted suicide is 
determined to be relevant, a trial court must also engage in an HRE Rule 403 balancing analysis.  Under Rule 403, relevant 
evidence “may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” The balance between the evidence’s probative value and prejudicial effect is “predicated 
upon an assessment of ‘the need for the evidence, the efficacy 
of alternative proof, and the degree to which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to overmastering hostility.’” State v. 
Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻi 442, 463, 60 P.3d 843, 864 (2002). 
Martin argues that the trial judge did not properly 
consider the highly prejudicial nature of the attempted suicide evidence, and that the evidence of the gun and casings found 
near him could have been elicited without discussion of his 
suicide attempt. We agree that the evidence of Martin’s suicide attempt was prejudicial; like the circuit court, it is possible  
 42 
    
  
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
    
 
 20 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that jurors may have assumed that the suicide evidence indicated 
consciousness of guilt.20 
The record does not show that the court meaningfully 
considered the prejudicial effect of Martin’s suicide attempt. Although the circuit court did not appear to have conducted an HRE Rule 403 analysis, under the circumstances, the probative 
value of Martin’s suicide attempt as to his identity as the 
perpetrator of the offenses was not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect, especially because Martin strongly 
argued mistaken identity. 
5. Limiting instruction 
Martin alternatively argues that, if the evidence of his 
suicide attempt was properly admitted, the circuit court should have at least sua sponte provided the jury with a cautionary 
instruction about the limited admissibility of Martin’s suicide attempt. Specifically, Martin argues that the circuit court 
In addition, suicide was a felony at common law and was sometimes 
considered “self- murder.” See Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 710 -17 
(1997) (summarizing the Anglo -American common law tradition of criminalizing 
suicide). As an editorial published by the Centre for Suicide Prevention
points out, contemporary language used to discuss suicide still reflects suicide’s historic criminality, as the phrase to “commit” suicide “equatesthe act with homicide or fratricide, and suggests that it is akin to ‘self -
murder.’” Robert Olson, Suicide and Stigma, Centre for Suicide Prevention ,
https://perma.cc/B4LZ -WZL3. Suicide has also been mistakenly associated with
cowardice. See Glucksberg, 521 U.S. at 712 (quoting Blackstone’s Commentaries as referring to suicide as “the pretend heroism, but real cowardice, of the Stoic philosophers, who destroyed themselves to avoid those
ills which they had not the fortitude to endure”).  
 43 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
should have given Hawaiʻi Jury Instructions—Criminal (“HAWJIC”)
2.03 concerning “Other Crimes, Wrongs or Acts.”    21 
Under HRE Rule 105 (1980)  ,  “[w]hen evidence which is 
admissible as to one party or for one purpose but not admissible
as to another party or for another purpose is admitted, the court, upon request  ,  shall restrict the evidence to its proper 
scope and instruct the jury accordingly.” 
Martin did not  
request a cautionary instruction at trial. Under the circumstances of this case, as the failure to give a cautionary instruction did not amount to plain error affecting substantial  
rights, there was no error based on the circuit court not sua    
HAWJIC 2.03 reads: 
You [are about to hear] [have heard] evidence that the 
Defendant at another time, may have [engaged in][committed] other [crimes] [wrongs] [acts]. This evidence, if believed by you, may be considered only on the issue of
Defendant's [motive to commit the offense charged]
[opportunity to commit the offense charged] [intent tocommit the offense charged] [preparation to commit theoffense charged] [plan to commit the offense charged] [knowledge (specify knowledge required to commit the
offense charged] [identity as the person who committed the
offense charged] [modus operandi] [alleged conduct havingresulted from a mistake or accident]. Do not consider this evidence for any other purpose. You must not use this evidence to conclude that because the Defendant at another 
time may have [engaged in] [committed] other [crimes]
[wrongs] [acts] that [they are] a person of bad character and therefore must have committed the offense[s] charged in this case. 
In considering the evidence for the limited purpose for
which it has been received, you must weigh it in the samemanner as you would all other evidence in this case, andconsider it along with all other evidence in this case.  
 44 
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
    
 
  
 
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sponte providing the jury with HAWJIC 2.03, “Other Crimes, Wrongs or Acts.” 
Martin argues that we should adopt a rule similar to that 
in Mann requiring courts to provide a cautionary instruction “in all cases where evidence of [a] Defendant’s attempt at suicide is elicited.”
22 Given what appear to be common misconceptions 
regarding suicide or attempted suicides as consciousness of guilt and the potential prejudicial nature of suicide evidence, trial courts should provide a limiting instruction as 
appropriate under the facts of a case when evidence of an 
attempted suicide is admitted.
23 Again, under the circumstances 
of this case, as the failure to give a cautionary instruction did not amount to plain error affecting substantial rights, 
there was no error requiring vacatur of Martin’s convictions. 
22 In Mann, the New Jersey Supreme Court held that if evidence of a 
defendant’s suicide attempt is admitted, the trial court should instruct the
jury that “it first must find that an actual suicide attempt had occurred.”625 A.2d at 1108.  Second, the jury “should then consider whether that
attempt was made to avoid the burdens of prosecution and punishment.” 625 
A.2d at 1108- 09.  Third, the jury “should also determine whether [the]
defendant’s attempted suicide demonstrated consciousness of guilt.  The trial 
court should instruct the jury that if it credits any alternative explanationoffered by the defendant, it may not infer consciousness of guilt from the
evidence of a suicide attempt.” 625 A.2d at 1109. 
23 We do not hold that all cases with suicide or attempted suicide 
evidence require a limiting instruction if not requested, but we encourage
trial judges to exercise their discretion to fashion limiting instructions as
appropriate in the contexts of the cases in which suicide evidence might be 
admitted. We also do not adopt the Mann standards for limiting instructions.  
 45 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Martin’s statement that he shot himself was properly 
admitted as voluntarily made 
In his third question on certiorari, Martin argues that the 
ICA gravely erred by not reversing the circuit court’s 
determination that his “I shot myself” statement was made 
voluntarily. Specifically, Martin argues that his deteriorated 
physical condition due to his gunshot wound rendered his statement involuntary. 
“Under the fifth amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article 1, section 10 of the Hawaii Constitution, ‘[n]o person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against [themself].”  State v. 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 501, 849 P.2d 58, 69 (1993) (quoting 
State v. Pauʻu, 72 Haw. 505, 509, 824 P.2d 833, 835 (1992)).  
“Any waiver of one’s constitutional rights must be voluntarily 
and intelligently undertaken[.]
”  Pauʻu, 72 Haw. at 509, 824 P.2d 
at 835. HRS § 621
-26 also provides that “[n]o confession shall 
be received in evidence unless it is first made to appear to the 
judge before whom the case is being tried that the confession 
was in fact voluntarily made.” 
The voluntariness of a defendant’s statement is determined 
by a totality of the circumstances.  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 502, 
849 P.2d at 69. “A defendant’s mental and physical condition 
can be part of the ‘totality of circumstances’ relevant to the  
 46 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
issue of the voluntariness of [their] custodial statements.”  74 
Haw. at 503, 849 P.2d at 69. A confession may be rendered 
involuntary by “impermissible police conduct.”  74 Haw. at 503, 
849 P.2d at 70. The burden is on the prosecution to show that a 
defendant’s statement was voluntarily made and not the product of coercion. 74 Haw. at 502, 849 P.2d at 69. 
In this case, Martin said, “I shot myself” to the police 
after suffering a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the abdomen.  Although Martin testified that he did not recall making the 
statement, the hearing indicated the statement was spontaneous 
and not a product of custodial interrogation or police coercion.  Although a defendant’s mental and physical condition can be part of the “totality of circumstances” relevant to the issue of the 
voluntariness of custodial statements, and Martin testified that 
he did not recall making the statement after he shot himself, under the circumstances of this case, the State met its burden 
of establishing that Martin’s “I shot myself” statement was 
voluntary under the totality of the circumstances. In any 
event, even if the statement was improperly admitted as an involuntary statement, any error based on its admission would be 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt as there is no reasonable 
possibility that admission of this statement contributed to Martin’s convictions based on the overwhelming additional evidence that Martin had in fact shot himself.  
 47 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Evidence of Martin’s prior bad acts was properly admitted 
1. Background 
In his fourth question on certiorari, Martin argues that 
the ICA erred by holding the circuit court did not err by admitting testimony of Martin’s prior bad acts.  Martin argues that statements made by five witnesses—Sonya Chong, Kawika 
Paulino, David Carroll, Misty Quiocho, and Darrel Constantino— 
were improperly admitted under HRE Rule 404(b). 
As noted earlier, under HRE Rule 404(b), “[e]vidence of 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.” However, evidence may be admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) if it is probative of “motive, opportunity, intent, 
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or 
absence of mistake or accident.” If evidence of prior bad acts is “offered for substantive reasons rather than propensity, a 
trial court must additionally weigh the potential prejudicial 
effects of the evidence against its probative value under HRE 
Rule 403.” State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawaiʻi 90, 103, 237 P.3d 
1156, 1169 (2010). A trial court’s balancing “of such evidence 
under HRE Rule 403 . . . is reviewed for abuse of discretion.”  124 
Hawaiʻi at 115, 237 P.3d at 1181 (quotations omitted). 
Although Martin objected to Paulino’s testimony as leading 
and hearsay, to Q
uiocho’s testimony based on exceeding the scope  
 48 
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of his direct examination, and to Constantino’s testimony on the 
basis of improper refreshment, Martin did not object to the 
challenged testimonies of these five witnesses based on HRE 
Rule 404(b). Martin also did not challenge any of the testimony 
based on HRE Rule 403 grounds. Therefore, as did the ICA, we review the challenged testimonies of the five witnesses to 
determine whether there was plain error affecting Martin’s 
substantial rights. 
2. Sonya Chong 
Martin challenges Chong’s testimony that, approximately six 
months prior to the shooting, Martin possessed a silver and gray hand-held firearm.  Chong testified that Martin would practice aiming the firearm while saying “Fuck the cops” and he had said 
that he would shoot cops with the firearm.  Chong’s testimony 
was not offered for the purpose of showing that Martin acted in conformity with his prior acts.  Chong’s testimony that Martin 
practiced aiming the firearm while saying “Fuck the cops,” and 
that Martin indicated that he would shoot cops with the firearm was probative of his intent and absence of mistake or accident. In addition, the probative value of Chong’s testimony outweighed 
the danger of unfair prejudicial effect.  
Thus, the ICA did not err in concluding there was no plain 
error affecting Martin’s substantial rights as to Chong’s 
testimony.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 3. Kawika Paulino 
Martin challenges Paulino’s testimony that earlier in the 
day on which the officers were shot, Martin told him that he had 
outstanding warrants, was facing jail time, and would not go to jail without a fight. Paulino’s statements regarding Martin’s awareness of his warrants and potential jail time were probative 
of Martin’s motive, intent, and state of mind.  The probative 
value of the evidence was not outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Thus, the ICA did not err in concluding there was no 
plain error affecting Martin’s substantial rights as to 
Paulino’s testimony. 
4. David Carroll 
Martin challenges Carroll’s testimony that, after about  
7:00 p.m. on January 2, 2013, about an hour before the officers were shot, Martin asked him if he could “pop off some rounds,” shot rounds into the air, and said,  “Fuck the police.”  The 
challenged evidence was probative of Martin’s state of mind and  
also suggests that Martin did not shoot Officers Gouveia and  
Hatada by mistake or accident.  The probative value of the   
evidence was not outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Thus, 
the ICA did not err in concluding there was no plain error 
affecting Martin’s substantial rights as to Paulino’s testimony. 
49  
 50 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
5. Misty Quiocho 
Martin challenges Quiocho’s cross-examination testimony 
elicited by the State that Martin was avoiding the police 
because he had a warrant. Martin objected to this testimony on the grounds that it exceeded the scope of direct examination, but the State elicited this testimony in response to Quiocho’s 
direct testimony that Martin was fearful of and tried to avoid 
the police. Quiocho was Martin’s girlfriend for several years up to the date of the offenses, and her testimony about Martin 
avoiding the police was probative of Martin’s state of mind. 
Also, its probative value was not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Even if Martin had objected to this testimony on HRE Rule 403 grounds based on it being cumulative, 
which it may have been, reviewing the admission of this 
testimony under the plain error standard, Martin’s substantial rights were not violated. Therefore, the ICA did not err in 
concluding there was no plain error affecting Martin’s 
substantial rights as to Quiocho’s testimony. 
6. Darrel Constantino 
Martin challenges Constantino’s testimony that, on the 
evening of January 2, 2013, prior to the shooting, Martin said, “Fuck the cops.” Constantino’s testimony was probative of Martin’s intent and state of mind, and his testimony also suggests that Martin did not shoot Officers Gouveia and Hatada  
 51 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
by mistake or accident. Its probative value was not 
substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect. Martin 
objected to this testimony on the basis of improper refreshment. 
Even if Martin had objected on HRE Rule 403 grounds based on it being cumulative of Carroll’s testimony, which it may have been, reviewing the admission of this testimony under the plain error 
standard, Martin’s substantial rights were not violated. 
Therefore, the ICA did not err in concluding there was no plain error affecting Martin’s substantial rights as to Constantino’s 
testimony. 
E. The circuit court did not err with respect to lesser-
included offense instructions 
1. Background 
In his last question on certiorari, Martin argues that the 
jury should have been instructed on various lesser-included 
offenses for both Count 1 regarding Officer Hatada and Count 4 
regarding Officer Gouveia. 
“[J]ury instructions on lesser-included offenses must be 
given when there is a rational basis in the evidence for a 
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and 
convicting the defendant of the included offense.” State v. 
Flores, 131 Hawaiʻi 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 (2013).  An offense 
is included when: 
(a) It is established by proof of the same or less than all
the facts required to establish the commission of theoffense charged;  
 52 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(b) It consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged 
or to commit an offense otherwise included therein; or(c) It differs from the offense charged only in the respect
that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same
person, property, or public interest or a different stateof mind indicating lesser degree of culpability suffices to establish its commission. 
HRS § 701-109 (Supp. 1984).  
In Count 1, Martin was charged with attempted murder in the 
first degree of Officer Hatada.  The jury was instructed on the 
lesser-included offenses of attempted murder in the second 
degree, assault in the first degree, assault in the second degree, assault against a law enforcement officer in the first degree, assault against a law enforcement officer in the second 
degree, and reckless endangering in the first degree.  Martin 
was convicted in Count 1 of the lesser-included offense of assault in the first degree.  Martin argues that the circuit 
court should have also instructed the jury on attempted assault 
in the first degree,
24 attempted assault against a law 
enforcement officer in the first degree,25 attempted assault in 
24 A person commits assault in the first degree “if the person
intentionally or knowingly causes serious bodily injury to another person.”
HRS § 707- 710 (Supp. 1986). 
25 A person commits assault against a law enforcement officer in the first
degree if the person “[i]ntentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury to alaw enforcement officer who is engaged in the performance of duty; or . . .[r]ecklessly or negligently causes, with a dangerous instrument, bodily injury to a law enforcement officer who is engaged in the performance of
duty.” HRS § 707 -712.5 (Supp. 2003).  
 53 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 . . . . 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
        
 
        
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the second degree,  assault in the third degree,  and reckless
endangering in the second degree.    2827 26  
In Count 4, Martin was charged with and convicted of 
attempted murder in the first degree as to Officer Gouveia. The
jury was also instructed on attempted murder in the second degree, assault in the first degree, attempted assault in the 
first degree, assault in the second degree, assault against a  
26 HRS § 707- 711 (Supp. 2011), “Assault in the second degree,” provides in 
relevant part, 
A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; [or]
(b) The person recklessly causes serious orsubstantial bodily injury to another.”
27 HRS § 707- 712 (Supp. 1984), “Assault in the third degree,” provides in 
relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the thirddegree if the person:
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causesbodily injury to another person; or
(b) Negligently causes bodily injury to anotherperson with a dangerous instrument. 
28 HRS § 707- 714, “Reckless endangering in the second degree,” provides in 
relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of reckless endangering
in the second degree if the person:
(a) Engages in conduct that recklessly places
another person in danger of death or serious bodilyinjury; or(b) Intentionally discharges a firearm in a
populated area, in a residential area, or within the
boundaries or in the direction of any road, street,
or highway; provided that the provisions of thisparagraph shall not apply to any person whodischarges a firearm upon a target range for thepurpose of the target shooting done in compliance
with all laws and regulations applicable thereto.  
 54 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
law enforcement officer in the first degree, assault against a 
law enforcement officer in the second degree, attempted assault 
against a law enforcement officer in the first degree, and 
reckless endangering in the first degree.  Martin argues, however, that the court should have also instructed the jury on attempted assault in the second degree, assault in the third 
degree, and reckless endangering in the second degree. 
Martin’s assertions are without merit because there was no 
rational basis in the evidence to acquit Martin of the charges for which he was convicted in Counts 1 and 4 and to instead 
convict him of these lesser-included offenses.  Also, with respect to Count 1, the only evidence of shots fired in Officer Hatada’s direction was the shot that struck Officer Hatada in 
the leg. In addition, there was no evidence to suggest that 
both officers were not law enforcement officers engaged in the performance of duty when they were shot. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in failing to give 
required lesser-included instructions. F. The circuit court should have given a merger instruction Finally, although not raised as an issue on appeal, we note 
that in addition to his convictions in Counts 3 (Officer Hatada) and 6 (Officer Gouveia) for carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony in violation of HRS  
 55 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 (continued. . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 134-21(a),  Martin was also convicted of ownership or 
possession prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person 
charged with or convicted of certain crimes in violation of HRS  
§ 134-7(b)  in Count 7, carrying or possessing a loaded firearm 
on a public highway in violation of HRS §  134-26(a)  in Count 8,
and place to keep pistol or revolver in violation of HRS  
§ 134-25(a)  in Count 9.  Counts 7, 8, and 9 were all charged as
having occurred on January 2, 2013.  Plain error or defects 32313029
 
 
29 HRS § 134- 21 provides in relevant part as follows: 
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly carry
on the person or have within the person ’s immediate control 
or intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while 
engaged in the commission of a separate felony, whether thefirearm was loaded or not, and whether operable or not; . . . . (b) A conviction and sentence under this section shall be 
in addition to and not in lieu of any conviction andsentence for the separate felony; provided that the sentence imposed under this section may run concurrently orconsecutively with the sentence for the separate felony. 
30 HRS § 134- 7(b) provides in relevant part: 
No person who is under indictment for, or has waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit courtfor, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of
having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an
illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control anyfirearm or ammunition therefor. 
31 HRS § 134- 26(a) provides in relevant part: 
It shall be unlawful for any person on any public highwayto carry on the person, or to have in the person'spossession, or to carry in a vehicle any firearm loadedwith ammunition; . . . . 
32 HRS § 134- 25(a) provides: 
(a) Except as provided in sections 134 -5 and 134- 9, all 
firearms shall be confined to the possessor's place of
business, residence, or sojourn; provided that it shall be 
 56 
   In Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi 409, 453 P.3d 229, consistent with
our prior holding in State v. Matias,  102 Hawaiʻi 300, 75 P.3d
1191 (2003), we stated  :  
    
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
        
        
        
       
 
        
      
 
   
 . . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were
not brought to the attention of the court.     
 
 
Generally, when the same conduct of a defendant may 
establish an element of more than one offense, the
defendant may be prosecuted for each offense of which such 
conduct is an element. HRS § 701- 109(1) (1993). A 
defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one offense if the offense is defined as a continuing course of conduct and the defendant’s course of conduct was 
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses. HRS § 701- 109(1)(e). Thus, this court has concluded that only
one crime is committed when (1) there is but one intention, one general impulse, and one plan, (2) the two offenses are
part and parcel of a continuing and uninterrupted course of
conduct, and (3) the law does not provide that specificperiods of conduct constitute separate offenses. 
The test for whether a crime can be charged as a continuous offense is whether the statute precludes charging anoffense as a continuous off
ense, and whether the element (s)
of the offense may constitute a continuous, unlawful act or
series of acts, however long a time the act or acts may 
occur. 
lawful to carry unloaded firearms in an enclosed container 
from the place of purchase to the purchaser ’s place of 
business, residence, or sojourn, or between these placesupon change of place of business, residence, or sojourn, or
between these places and the following:
(1) A place of repair;
(2) A target range;
(3) A licensed dealer's place of business;
(4) An organized, scheduled firearms show or exhibit;
(5) A place of formal hunter or firearm use training
or instruction; or
(6) A police station.
“Enclosed container” means a rigidly constructed 
receptacle, or a commercially manufactured gun case, or theequivalent thereof that completely encloses the firearm.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  . . . . 
 
 
 . . . . If the statute provides that distinct acts constitute
separate offenses, then conduct may not be charged as acontinuous offense . . . . 
In State v. Matias, the defendant was convicted of felon in 
possession and place to keep. We vacated the defendant’s 
convictions because the circuit court failed to provide amerger instruction to the jury. As we would later explain, 
both offenses arose out of the same elemental conduct, 
i.e., what the defendant did with the object, namely, possessed it. 
Accordingly, in vacating the felon in possession and place
to keep convictions and remanding for a new trial for
failure to instruct the jury on merger, the Matias court concluded that these statutes did not preclude the charging of these offenses as continuous offenses. Implicit in thecourt’s holding was the conclusion that the statutes are
comprised of elements--namely, the element of possession--
that may extend beyond isolated moments. 
Here, Lavoie was also convicted for violating the felon in possession (HRS § 134
-7(b)) and place to keep (HRS 
§ 134- 23(2)) statutes, neither of which excludes charging 
the offense as continuous . . . . 
Thus, the offenses of felon in possession and place to keep 
may be charged as continuous offenses, and the jury wasrequired to determine whether there was one intention, onegeneral impulse, and one plan, and whether the two offenses merged. 
Here, both the felon in possession and place to keepoffenses were charged as having occurred on the same date,
and the court’s instructions on the elements of these 
offenses specified that date. 
Whether Lavoie’s conduct 
constituted “separate and distinct culpable acts or an uninterrupted continuous course of conduct” was a questionof fact that was required to be determined by the
jury. And, the jury should also have been required to 
determine whether Lavoie had one intention, one general impulse, and one plan to commit both offenses. The circuit court’s failure to instruct the jury to make thesedeterminations was prejudicial and plainly erroneous. 
Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 251-53, 453 P.3d at 431-33 (citations,
parentheticals, brackets, quotation marks, emphases, and footnotes omitted.
).    
57  
 58 
   
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, consistent with Matias, Lavoie held that although a 
defendant can be charged with both ownership or possession 
prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person charged with 
or convicted of certain crimes in violation of HRS § 134 -7(b) as 
well as place to keep pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25(a), as these offenses can be charged as continuous 
offenses, a jury must determine whether “there was one 
intention, one general impulse, and one plan, and whether the two offenses merged[;]” if so, a defendant could only be 
convicted of one of the two charged offenses pursuant to HRS 
§ 701-109(1)(e) (Supp. 1984), which provides: 
(1) When the same conduct of a defendant may establish an
element of more than one offense, the defendant may beprosecuted for each offense of which such conduct is an
element. The defendant may not, however, be convicted of 
more than one offense if: . . . 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course ofconduct and the defendant’ s course of conduct was 
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses. 
In other words, HRS § 701–109(1)(e) interposes a constraint on 
multiple convictions arising from the same criminal conduct. 
Matias, 102 Hawaiʻi at 305, 75 P.3d at 1196. The statute 
“reflects a policy to limit the possibility of multiple 
convictions and extended sentences when the defendant has 
basically engaged in only one course of criminal conduct directed at one criminal goal[.]” 
See HRS § 701–109 cmt.; State 
v. Deguair, 139 Hawaiʻi 117, 128, 384 P.3d 893, 904 (2016).  
 59 
   
     
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In Martin’s case, the State argued slightly different time 
periods of possession on January 2, 2013 for Counts 7 and 9.33 
Based on Matias, however, which preceded Martin’s trial, as 
Count 7, ownership or possession prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person charged with or convicted of certain crimes in violation of HRS § 134-7(b), and Count 9, place to 
keep pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25(a), could 
be charged as continuing offenses, and “both offenses arose out of the same elemental conduct, i.e., what the defendant did with 
the object, namely, possessed [the firearm,]” Martin was 
clearly entitled to a merger instruction.  Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 252, 453 P.3d at 432 (internal quotation marks omitted).  
Pursuant to Matias, it was for the jury to determine whether 
there was one intention, one general impulse, and one plan, 
and 
whether the offenses merged. 
In addition, in this case, Martin was also charged and 
convicted in Count 8 of carrying or possessing a loaded firearm 
on a public highway in violation of HRS § 134-
26(a).  Martin’s 
conviction on this offense while also being convicted of Counts 
In closing argument, the State argued that Count 7, ownership or 
possession prohibited of any firearm or ammunition by a person charged or 
convicted of certain crimes in violation of HRS § 134 -7(b), was based on 
Martin’s possession and shooting of the firearm on Maile Street.  The State argued that Count 9, place to keep pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134- 25(a), was based on Martin carrying the firearm at Pono Place as well 
as additional areas. 33  
 60 
   
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7 and 9 also implicates HRS § 701-109(1)(e) because, likewise, 
this “offense is defined as a continuing course of conduct” and 
does not “provide[] that specific periods of conduct constitute 
separate offenses.”34 Thus, in this case, for Counts 7, 8, and 
9, Martin was entitled to a merger instruction, and it was for the jury to determine whether there was one intention, one 
general impulse, and one plan, and whether the offenses merged.
35 
Although there was no merger instruction, a new trial on 
Counts 7, 8, and 9 is not required.  Pursuant to State v. 
Padilla, 114 Hawaiʻi 507, 164 P.3d 765 (App. 2007), the State has 
the option of dismissing two of the three charges and 
maintaining the judgment of conviction and sentence on one 
charge.36 Padilla, 114 Hawaiʻi at 517, 164 P.3d at 775. 
V. Conclusion 
Based on the reasoning above, we vacate the ICA’s July 9, 
2019 judgment on appeal affirming the circuit court’s August 5, 
2014 judgment of conviction and sentence as to Counts 7, 8, and 
34 With respect to Count 8, carrying or possessing a loaded firearm on a 
public highway in violation of HRS § 134 -26(a), the State argued that the 
charge was based on Martin walking on Kilauea Avenue from the field to Pono
Place after shooting the firearm and reloading it with another magazine. 
35 The record does not reflect a request for or discussion of a merger 
instruction. 
36 As noted earlier, the circuit court sentenced Martin to five years on
Count 7, ten years on Count 8, and ten years on Count 9, with the sentences
for Counts 7, 8, and 9 to be served concurrently.  Thus, the lack of a merger
instruction does not affect the maximum sentence for Martin’s conviction on 
these three charges.  
 61 
  
 
 
 
      
  
  
      
            
   
 
 
 
 
 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
9 only, and remand Counts 7, 8, and 9 to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  We otherwise 
affirm the ICA’s July 9, 2019 judgment on appeal affirming the 
circuit court’s August 5, 2014 judgment of conviction and sentence. Lars Robert Isaacson  
for Petitioner   
Ricky R. Damerville
 
for Respondent   /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson 