*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000625 23-DEC-2013 
11:01 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
SIERRA CLUB, Petitioner/Appellant-Appellee,
 
vs. 
CASTLE & COOKE HOMES HAWAI' I, INC.; and
THE LAND USE COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Respondents/Appellees-Appellants, 
and
 
OFFICE OF PLANNING, STATE OF HAWAI' I; DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND
PERMITTING; and NEIGHBORHOOD BOARD NO. 25,
Respondents/Appellees-Appellees.
 
SCWC-11-0000625
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-00006251; CIV. NO. 10-1-2424-11)
 
December 23, 2013
 
NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., WITH
RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
1
 CAAP-11-0000627, CAAP-11-0000730, and CAAP-11-0000744 were
 
consolidated with CAAP-11-0000625 on November 16, 2011.
    
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
This case requires us to consider whether the Hawai' i 
State Senate’s express rejection of a board member’s nomination 
for a second term effectively disqualifies the member from continuing to serve on the board and from voting on matters of critical importance to the community. 
On April 26, 2010, the Senate rejected Duane Kanuha’s
 
(Kanuha) nomination for a second term as a commissioner on the
 
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant state Land Use Commission (LUC),
 
based in part on the finding that Kanuha lacked the requisite
 
knowledge and experience to qualify as the designated member with
 expertise on Hawaiian land usage. More than four months after
 the Senate’s rejection, Kanuha continued to participate in the
 LUC’s consideration of a significant development project
 involving the reclassification of agricultural land for urban
 
use. At that time, the Petitioner/Appellant-Appellee Sierra Club
 
(Sierra Club) filed an action to disqualify Kanuha from serving
 
on the LUC as of the date of his rejection and to invalidate any
 
actions Kanuha had taken with respect to the development project. 
The LUC denied the action and, that same day, deliberated on and
 voted to approve the subject reclassification. Despite the
 Senate’s finding that he was unqualified to continue serving as
 an LUC member, Kanuha participated in the LUC’s vote and the
 LUC’s subsequent vote to approve the written findings,
 conclusions, and decision and order approving the project. The
 
-2­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decision and order would not have been approved without Kanuha’s
 
vote. 
For the reasons set forth herein, we conclude that in 
light of the Senate’s rejection of Kanuha’s nomination for a second term, Kanuha was not a valid holdover member of the LUC under Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 26-34 when he voted on the 
reclassification. Kanuha also did not qualify as a de facto member of the LUC given the Senate’s express rejection of his nomination. Without Kanuha’s disqualified vote, the LUC lacked the requisite number of votes to approve the reclassification. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) and affirm the judgment of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). 
I.
 
Kanuha was nominated by the governor for a four-year
 
term as a LUC commissioner on April 12, 2005. 2005 Senate
 Journal, at 586 (Governor’s Message 630). His nomination was
 confirmed by the Senate on April 27, 2005. 2005 Senate Journal,
 at 770. 
On July 3, 2007, Respondent/Appellee-Appellant Castle & 
Cooke Homes Hawai' i, Inc. (Castle & Cooke) filed a Petition for 
Land Use District Boundary Amendment with the LUC. Subsequently on May 16, 2008, Castle & Cooke filed an Amended Petition for Land Use District Boundary Amendment Verification 
-3­   
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2
 (Reclassification Petition), seeking to amend the land use
district boundary to reclassify approximately 767 acres in 
Waipi
'o and Waiawa, O' ahu, from an agricultural to urban district. 
The petition involved two geographic areas referred to as Koa Ridge Makai, consisting of approximately 576.435 acres of land in Waipio, and Castle & Cooke Waiawa, consisting of approximately 191.214 acres of land in Waiawa. 
The petition was filed pursuant to HRS § 205-4 
(governing district boundary amendments to land areas greater than fifteen acres) and Hawai
'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 15­
15 (governing LUC rules). The boundary amendment and reclassification was requested as part of a proposal for the two-
phase development of 5,000 residential units, mixed-use village 
center, hotel, medical center, commercial properties, light 
industrial, elementary schools, parks, churches, recreation centers, open space, and roadways. The development was expected to span more than ten years, with Koa Ridge Makai projected to be completed by 2020 and Castle & Cooke Waiawa projected to be completed by 2024. 
The LUC held several evidentiary hearings on the
 
Reclassification Petition, during which it received numerous oral
 and written testimonies from the public, both in support of and
 in opposition to the Project. 
2
 The Reclassification Petition included three amendments to the
 
petition submitted by Castle & Cooke on June 17, June 30, and November 2,
2009.
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
While the LUC was still in the process of considering
 
the Reclassification Petition, Kanuha’s first term expired on
 
June 30, 2009. See 2005 Senate Journal, at 586 (Governor’s
 
Message 630). He continued to serve as a LUC commissioner as a
 holdover member. 
On December 4, 2009, the LUC voted to approve the
 
Sierra Club’s petition to intervene in the matter.
3
 
On March 3, 2010, the governor nominated Kanuha to
 
serve a second term as a LUC commissioner. 2010 Senate Journal,
 at 283 (Governor’s Message 338). The Water, Land, Agriculture,
 and Hawaiian Affairs committee prepared a report on Kanuha’s
 nomination. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3208, 2010 Senate Journal,
 at 1332. The committee stated that Kanuha “is presently a member
 of the [LUC], and is the designated member with substantial
 experience or expertise in traditional Hawaiian land usage and
 knowledge of cultural practices.”
4 Id. However, the committee
 
found that Kanuha had “limited experience with traditional
 Hawaiian land usage and knowledge.” Id.
 
3 The LUC also voted to allow the Mililani/Waipio/Melemanu
 
Neighborhood Board No. 25 (Neighborhood Board No. 25) to intervene in the
matter.  
4
 In 2006, after Kanuha was appointed for his first term, HRS § 205­
1 was amended to require that one member of the LUC “shall have substantial
experience or expertise in traditional Hawaiian land usage and knowledge of
cultural land practices.”  2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 296, § 1 at 1198.  During
the Senate’s floor discussion of Kanuha’s nomination for a second term, there
was disagreement as to whether Kanuha was currently serving as, or being
nominated to serve as, the designated member with cultural expertise. See
 
2010 Senate Journal, at 561-64.  Kanuha’s position was that he was not aware
that he was currently serving as, or being nominated to serve as, the
designated member.  See id. 
-5­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The committee further noted that it had been referred a
 
total of four nominees to the LUC during the 2010 regular
 
session, consisting of three current LUC commissioners and a
 fourth nominee, a “civil litigation attorney with no experience
 in land issues.” Id. 
Despite its concerns, the committee recommended that
 
the Senate consent to Kanuha’s nomination. Id.
 
On April 26, 2010, the full Senate considered Kanuha’s
 
nomination for a second term. 2010 Senate Journal, at 564. 
During the floor discussion on Kanuha’s nomination, Senators Hee
 and Hemmings spoke in opposition to the nomination, citing
 Kanuha’s lack of expertise as a cultural practitioner. 2010
 Senate Journal, at 561-64. Senator Hemmings in particular argued
 that the Senate had “no choice” but to reject Kanuha’s nomination
 in order to comply with HRS § 205-1, which requires one member of
 the LUC to have “substantial experience or expertise in
 traditional Hawaiian land usage and knowledge of cultural land
 practices”:
 
Through it all in all of the discussion, one clear factor
cannot be denied: We passed a law requiring a cultural
practitioner.  The Governor has not followed it.  This
 nominee, by his own admission, is not a cultural
practitioner.  We have no choice but to vote ‘no’ in order
 
to stay compliant with the law as it is written and, more
importantly, with the moral integrity of this body to stay
consistent with what we voted for.
 
2010 Senate Journal, at 564 (emphasis added). 
-6­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After completion of the floor discussion, the Senate
 
voted to reject Kanuha’s nomination by a vote of 14-9, with two
 
Senators excused. Id. 
More than four months after the Senate’s vote to reject
 
his nomination for a second term, Kanuha continued to participate
 in the LUC’s consideration of the Reclassification Petition. On
 September 8, 2010, the Sierra Club filed a Motion to Disqualify
 Duane Kanuha, Nunc Pro Tunc, as of April 26, 2010 (Motion to
 Disqualify) with the LUC.
5 The Sierra Club argued that Kanuha’s
 
capacity to be a holdover member under HRS § 26-34 was terminated
 on April 26, when the Senate declined to confirm his nomination
 for re-appointment. The Sierra Club requested that the LUC issue
 an order providing that Kanuha was not a commissioner as of April
 26, 2010, and that any actions taken by Kanuha with respect to
 the Reclassification Petition since that time be deemed invalid.
 
The LUC convened for a meeting on September 23, 2010,
 
to consider the Motion to Disqualify and the Reclassification
 
Petition. The LUC voted 6-0 to deny the Motion to Disqualify,
 
with Kanuha and one other commissioner abstaining from voting. 
Prior to voting on the Reclassification Petition, the LUC
 Chairman informed the commissioners that if a decision was
 
5
 The motion was filed pursuant to HAR § 15-15-70, which provides
 
that “[a]ny party may make motions before, during, or after the close of a
hearing.”  HAR § 15-15-70(a).  Castle & Cooke filed a memorandum in opposition
to the motion, arguing that the incumbent LUC commissioner retains the right
to hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified.  The state Office
 of Planning filed a joinder in Castle & Cooke’s memorandum in opposition.  
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reached that day, the LUC staff would be directed to draft
 
findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a decision and order
 reflecting the decision. Those findings and conclusions would
 “be further deliberated” at the next hearing. The LUC then voted
 to approve the Reclassification Petition by a vote of 7-1, with
 Kanuha voting in favor of approval and one commissioner being
 excused.
 
The LUC convened again on October 15, 2010 to
 
deliberate on the proposed “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 Decision and Order” (Decision and Order) prepared by the staff
 following the prior meeting. The commissioners proposed and
 deliberated on multiple amendments to the conditions in the
 proposed order.
6 The LUC, including Kanuha, voted 6-0 to approve
 
the Decision and Order, as amended by the discussion during the
 meeting.
 
The Sierra Club filed an appeal with the circuit court
 
on November 10, 2010, challenging the Decision and Order. The
 Sierra Club argued that Kanuha’s capacity to continue serving as
 a commissioner was terminated by the Senate’s rejection of his
 
6
 Commissioner Judge proposed amendments to Condition 3 (integrated
 
solid waste management plan), Condition 8 (civil defense), and Condition 12
(public school facilities).  Commissioner Jencks proposed amendments to
Condition 13 (archaeological and historic preservation), Condition 14
(previously unidentified burials and archaeological/historic sites), Condition
15 (access rights), Condition 19 (best management practices), and Condition 26
(annual reports).  Following an executive session, Commissioner Jencks
withdrew his proposed amendments in favor of future discussion.  Commissioner
 Contrades proposed a revision to Condition 16 (compliance with sustainability
plan).  
Commissioner Lezy proposed a revision to Finding of Fact 277
regarding developing Koa Ridge Makai independently of Castle & Cooke Waiawa. 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
nomination for a second term.7 Thus, Kanuha should not have been
 
permitted to vote on the Reclassification Petition, and the
 
petition should have been denied because the October 15 LUC vote
 approving the Decision and Order failed to receive the requisite
 six affirmative votes. The Sierra Club asked the circuit court
 to stay the order granting the amendment of the land use district
 boundaries and to stay the appellees, including the LUC and
 Castle & Cooke, from taking further action pursuant to the
 order.
8 The Sierra Club also asked the circuit court to reverse
 
the Decision and Order and remand with instructions to the LUC to
 enter findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a decision and
 order denying the Reclassification Petition.
 
In response, the LUC argued that Kanuha was a valid
 
holdover member under HRS § 26-34, as nothing in the statute or
 its legislative history indicated that the Senate’s rejection of
 an incumbent’s nomination for a second term has any effect on the
 incumbent’s status as a holdover member. Alternatively, the LUC
 argued that even assuming Kanuha was disqualified from
 participating in the proceedings on the Reclassification
 
7
 The Sierra Club specifically alleged that Kanuha’s continued 
participation in LUC proceedings regarding the Reclassification Petition
violated article V, section 6 of the Hawai 'i Constitution (requiring Senate’s
advice and consent for appointments), HRS § 26-34 (establishing holdover
provision), HRS § 205-1 (requiring member with expertise in traditionalHawaiian land usage and requiring six affirmative votes for any boundaryamendment), and HAR § 15-15-13 (requiring six affirmative votes for boundaryamendments).  
8
 The other named appellees were the state Office of Planning, the
 
city Department of Planning and Permitting, and Neighborhood Board No. 25.
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Petition, the petition was still approved by the requisite six
 
affirmative votes on September 23, 2010. The LUC contended that
 the subsequent vote to approve the Decision and Order was “an
 administrative or ministerial act,” which only required five
 affirmative votes pursuant to HRS § 92-15. Castle & Cooke
 reiterated many of the same arguments, maintaining that the
 Reclassification Petition was approved by more than six
 affirmative votes on September 23 and that Kanuha was a valid
 holdover under HRS § 26-34. 
At the hearing on the appeal, the LUC argued for the
 
first time that the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to review
 the LUC’s approval of the Reclassification Petition because a quo
 warranto action to remove Kanuha was the exclusive remedy
 available to Sierra Club.
9 The court set a briefing schedule
 
with respect to the jurisdiction issue and proceeded to address
 the merits of the Sierra Club’s appeal.
 
The circuit court held that Kanuha was disqualified
 
from serving as a holdover member as a result of the Senate’s
 
9
 “Quo warranto is ‘a common-law writ used to inquire into the 
authority by which a public office is held or a franchise is claimed.’” 
Dejetley v. Kaho 'ohalahala, 122 Hawai 'i 251, 265, 226 P.3d 421, 435 (2010)
(quoting Black’s Law Dictionary 1371 (6th ed. 1991)).  The common law remedy
is codified under HRS Chapter 659 and defined by HRS § 659-1 (1993) as “anorder issuing in the name of the State by a circuit court and directed to aperson who claims or usurps an office of the State or of any subdivisionthereof, or of any corporation or quasi-corporation, public or private, or anyfranchise, inquiring by what authority the person claims the office orfranchise.” 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rejection of his nomination for a second term.10 Under HRS § 26­
34, “a board member is appointed only after advice and consent of
 
the Senate.” After the Senate rejected Kanuha’s nomination,
 “Kanuha could not be a board member pursuant to 26-34(a), and
 thus, was disqualified as a holdover member under 26-34(b)”:
 
Under 26-34(b), a board member may continue office as a
holdover member as long as that member is not disqualified
from membership under subsection A.  Under 26-34, subsection
A, a board member is appointed only after advice and consent
of the Senate.  In this particular case, the Senate
expressly rejected Mr. Kanuha’s appointment for a second
term on the LUC.  Accordingly, Mr. Kanuha could not be a
board member pursuant to 26-34(a), and thus, was
disqualified as a holdover member under 26-34(b). 
The court explained, “In essence, the legislative body rejected
 
the continuance of Mr. Kanuha in his executive branch performance
 of duties, and it would seem contrary to that effect to allow a
 person who was affirmatively rejected to continue in his
 position.” 
The circuit court concluded that because Kanuha was
 
disqualified, the Reclassification Petition did not receive six
 affirmative votes as required by HRS § 205-4. The court rejected
 the argument that the LUC’s October 15, 2010 vote approving the
 Decision and Order was ministerial in nature. The court reasoned
 that the LUC “had the ability to not only approve, but also to
 deny or to modify a petition by imposing further conditions” at
 the October 15 meeting. The court noted that pursuant to HRS §
 205-4(g), the Commission acts to approve, deny, or modify the
 petition by filing findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
10
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
-11­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, “it is the actual filing of the actual findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law that constitutes the final LUC action in
 approving a boundary amendment.” 
The court therefore concluded “that the ultimate
 
decision to approve the boundary amendment petition took place on
 October 15th 2010, when the LUC voted to approve the adoption of
 the findings of fact and conclusions of law before filing.” 
Without Kanuha’s disqualified vote, the LUC lacked the six
 affirmative votes required to approve the boundary amendment. 
The court held that it would reverse the LUC’s Decision and Order
 approving the Reclassification Petition, subject to briefing on
 the LUC’s jurisdiction argument. 
Subsequently on July 29, 2011, the circuit court
 
entered an order denying the LUC’s supplemental memorandum on
 jurisdiction and affirming its reversal of the LUC’s Decision and
 Order.
11 The court’s final judgment was entered on October 5,
 
2011.
 
On appeal, the ICA reversed the circuit court’s final
 
judgment, holding that Kanuha was not disqualified from serving
 
11
 The LUC filed a supplemental memorandum on the jurisdiction issue
 
on July 27, 2011.  In the circuit court’s order summarily denying the
supplemental memorandum, the court noted that the LUC “essentially argues that
. . . Kanuha should have been disqualified through a proceeding brought by the
State, and that until then, his actions were valid as a de facto officer.” 
However, the court determined that the LUC’s quo warranto argument “merely
constitute[d] an attack on [Sierra Club’s] standing to bring this suit.”  The
 court found that such an “argument was not timely raised in [the LUC’s]
original briefing,” and did not affect the court’s jurisdiction over the
appeal.  
Castle & Cooke filed a motion for reconsideration of the circuit
 
court’s order.  The court denied the motion on August 15, 2011.  
-12­   
   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
as a holdover member under HRS § 26-34(b) as a result of the
 
Senate’s rejection of his nomination for a second term.12 Sierra
 
Club v. Castle & Cooke Homes Haw., Inc., 128 Hawai' i 375, 289 
P.3d 1011 (App. 2012). The ICA determined that pursuant to the 
plain language of HRS § 26-34(a), “the sole disqualification [from holdover status] is that ‘no person shall be appointed consecutively to more than two terms as a member of the same board or commission; provided that membership on any board or commission shall not exceed eight consecutive years.’” 128 Hawai'i at 377, 289 P.3d at 1013 (brackets omitted). 
The ICA therefore concluded that “Kanuha was not
 
disqualified under HRS § 26-34(a) as he had not been a
 commissioner appointed consecutively to more than two terms as a
 member of LUC nor had his membership on LUC exceeded eight
 consecutive years.” Id. The ICA held that the circuit court
 
erred in holding that Kanuha was not a valid holdover based on
 the Senate’s rejection of his nomination, and reversed the
 circuit court’s judgment. Id. at 377-78, 289 P.3d at 1013-14. 
Given its disposition, the ICA did not address whether the
 circuit court erred in holding that six votes were necessary for
 
the LUC’s October 15, 2010 approval of the Decision and Order,
 
although the ICA characterized the vote as “the ministerial act
 
12
 The Honorable Daniel R. Foley, Alexa D.M. Fujise, and Katherine G.
 
Leonard presided.  The parties filed four separate appeals from the circuit
court’s order denying the LUC’s supplemental memorandum on jurisdiction, order
denying Castle & Cooke’s motion for reconsideration, and final judgment.  The
 ICA consolidated the appeals by order on November 16, 2011. 
-13­   
  
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of approving LUC’s decision as to form.”13 Id. at 378 n.3, 289
 
P.3d at 1014 n.3.
 
In its application for writ of certiorari, the Sierra
 
Club maintained that Kanuha was statutorily disqualified from
 
voting on the Reclassification Petition under HRS § 26-34 because
 he failed to receive the advice and consent of the Senate for his
 second term. The Sierra Club argued that “[w]hen read within the
 entire framework of § 26-43, the disqualifying criteria logically
 include[s]” the member’s failure to receive the Senate’s advice
 and consent for reappointment. The Sierra Club further argued
 that the ICA’s narrow interpretation of the term “disqualified”
 to only disqualify members who served for two terms or eight
 
13 The ICA also did not address Castle & Cooke’s and the LUC’s
 
argument that the circuit court erred in determining that it had subject
matter jurisdiction over the appeal.  Both parties argued that the Sierra
Club’s Motion to Disqualify was in the nature of a quo warranto action and
therefore governed by HRS Chapter 659.  See supra note 9.  They contended that
the LUC lacked jurisdiction to determine quo warranto actions and that the
circuit court therefore lacked jurisdiction to review the appeal.
The parties have not raised the issue of jurisdiction on appeal to
 
this court.  However, we address the issue sua sponte. See Chun v. Employees’
Ret. Sys., 73 Haw. 9, 13, 828 P.2d 260, 263 (1992) (“If the parties do not
raise the issue [of lack of subject matter jurisdiction], a court sua sponte
will, for unless jurisdiction of the court over the subject matter exists, any
judgment rendered is invalid.”) (quotation marks and citations omitted).   
We conclude that the circuit court properly exercised subject
matter jurisdiction over Sierra Club’s appeal from the LUC’s Decision and
Order approving the Reclassification Petition.  See HRS § 205-4(i) (2001)
(“Parties to proceedings to amend land use district boundaries may obtain
judicial review thereof in the manner set forth in section 91-14”); HRS § 91­14(a) (“Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case
. . . is entitled to judicial review”).  Additionally, the LUC had
jurisdiction to consider the Motion to Disqualify.  See HRS § 659-10 (1993)
(“Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the obtaining of relief available by
quo warranto by other appropriate action.”); Dejetley v. Kaho 'ohalahala, 122 
Hawai'i 251, 269, 226 P.3d 421, 439 (2010) (permitting declaratory action to
proceed even though quo warranto relief may have been available); HAR § 15-15­
70 (providing that motions may be made “before, during, or after the close ofa hearing” on a petition for boundary amendment and “[m]otions that do notinvolve the final determination of a proceeding may be heard and determined bythe chairperson, commissioner, or hearings officer”). 
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consecutive years has the effect of undermining the Senate’s
 
advice and consent power under article V, section 6 of the
 Hawai'i Constitution. 
II.
 
A.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 205-1 (Supp. 2010), the LUC consists
 
of nine members who “shall be appointed in the manner and serve
 for the term set forth in section 26-34.” Six affirmative votes
 are required to approve any district boundary amendment under HRS
 § 205-1, as well as under HRS § 205-4, which applies to district
 boundary amendments involving land areas greater than fifteen
 acres. 
HRS § 26-34 (2009), entitled “Selection and terms of
 
members of boards and commissions,” governs the process by which
 an individual is qualified to serve as a commissioner. The
 statute provides that members of a commission “shall be nominated
 and, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, appointed
 by the governor”: 
Selection and terms of members of boards and commissions.
 
(a) The members of each board and commission established by
law shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and
consent of the senate , appointed by the governor. Unless
otherwise provided by this chapter or by law hereafter
enacted, the terms of the members shall be for four years;
provided that the governor may reduce the terms of those
initially appointed so as to provide, as nearly as can be,
for the expiration of an equal number of terms at intervals
of one year for each board and commission. Unless otherwise
provided by law, each term shall commence on July 1 and
expire on June 30 . . . . No person shall be appointed
consecutively to more than two terms as a member of the same
board or commission; provided that membership on any board
or commission shall not exceed eight consecutive years.
 
-15­   
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(b) Any member of a board or commission whose term has
expired and who is not disqualified for membership under
subsection (a) may continue in office as a holdover member
until a successor is nominated and appointed; provided that
a holdover member shall not hold office beyond the end of
the second regular legislative session following the
expiration of the member’s term of office.
 
(Emphases added). 
At issue in this case is whether an LUC commissioner
 
whose first term has expired can continue to serve as a holdover
 
member under subsection (b) after the Senate has rejected the
 commissioner’s nomination for a second term pursuant to
 subsection (a). In other words, the relevant question is whether
 the Senate’s rejection of Kanuha’s nomination for a second term
 rendered Kanuha “disqualified for membership under subsection
 (a)” and therefore unable to serve as a valid holdover member. 
The ICA concluded that the Senate’s refusal to confirm 
a nomination is irrelevant to the determination of holdover status because the only way in which an LUC member can be “disqualified for membership under subsection (a)” is for the member to serve more than two consecutive terms or eight consecutive years. 128 Hawai' i at 377, 289 P.3d at 1013. 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (quotation marks omitted). In this case, the ICA’s interpretation of HRS § 26-34 is contrary to the plain language of the statute and the intent of the legislature. See 
Riethbrock v. Lange, 128 Hawai' i 1, 11, 282 P.3d 543, 553 (2012) 
(“implicit in the task of statutory construction is our foremost 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language
 contained in the statute itself”) (quotation marks and citation
 omitted). 
HRS § 26-34(b) provides that “[a]ny member of a board 
or commission whose term has expired and who is not disqualified for membership under subsection (a) may continue in office as a holdover member until a successor is nominated and appointed[.]” (Emphasis added). “Under general principles of statutory construction, courts give words their ordinary meaning unless something in the statute requires a different interpretation.” Saranillio v. Silva, 78 Hawai' i 1, 10, 889 P.2d 685, 694 (1995). 
See HRS § 1-14 (2009) (“The words of a law are generally to be
 
understood in their most known and usual signification, without
 attending so much to the literal and strictly grammatical
 construction of the words as to their general or popular use or
 meaning.”). “[I]t must be supposed that the legislature, in
 enacting a statute, intended that the words used therein should
 be understood in the sense in which they are ordinarily and
 popularly understood by the people, for whose guidance and
 government the law was enacted . . . .” In re Taxes of Johnson,
 
44 Haw. 519, 530, 356 P.2d 1028, 1034 (1960) (quotation marks
 omitted). 
In the holdover provision at issue here, the
 
legislature used the phrase “disqualified for membership under
 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
subsection (a)” to describe commissioners who are not permitted
 
to serve as holdover members. “Disqualification” means “[t]he
 act of making ineligible; the fact or condition of being
 ineligible.” Black’s Law Dictionary 540 (9th ed. 2009)
 
[hereinafter Black’s Law]. See Webster’s Third New Int’l
 
Dictionary 655 (1993) [hereinafter Webster’s] (defining
 “disqualify” to mean “to deprive of the qualities, properties, or
 conditions necessary for a purpose” or “to deprive of a power,
 right, or privilege”). “Dis” is a prefix meaning to “do the
 opposite of” or “reverse.” Id. at 642. Thus, subsection (b)
 
provides that persons who were formerly qualified are no longer
 qualified to serve as holdover members as defined by “subsection
 (a).” 
Subsection (a) sets forth the manner in which an 
individual becomes eligible to serve as a commissioner, providing that such members “shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, appointed by the governor.” HRS § 26­34(a) (emphases added). Cf. Blair v. Harris, 98 Hawai' i 176, 
179, 45 P.3d 798, 801 (2002) (“‘Eligible’ means ‘fit or proper to be chosen’ or ‘legally qualified to be elected or appointed to office.’”) (quoting Random House College Dictionary 429 (Rev. Ed. 1979)). Accordingly, an individual can only become eligible to serve as an LUC commissioner by being nominated by the governor and thereafter confirmed by the Senate. The last sentence of subsection (a) limits an LUC member to no more than two 
-18­   
  
 
  
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consecutive terms, i.e. eight consecutive years.14 HRS § 26­
34(a). Thus, considered in its entirety, subsection (a)
 
encompasses two situations in which a member would be
 
“disqualified for membership,” or become ineligible where the
 
member was formerly eligible: 1) a nominated member is rejected
 
by the Senate; or 2) a member has consecutively served two terms
 or eight years.
15
 
Subsection (b) references “subsection (a)” as a whole 
when describing an eligible holdover member as any member “who is not disqualified for membership under subsection (a).” Thus, the word “disqualified” must be construed to give it meaning within the context of all provisions of subsection (a). See Potter v. 
Haw. Newspaper Agency, 89 Hawai' i 411, 422, 974 P.2d 51, 62-63 
(1999) (“Our rules of statutory construction require us to reject an interpretation of [a] statute that renders any part of the statutory language a nullity.”); Blair, 98 Hawai' i at 179, 45 
P.3d at 801 (“Courts are bound to give effect to all parts of a statute, and no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as 
14 An LUC member’s term is four years.  HRS § 26-34(a) (“Unless
 
otherwise provided by this chapter or by law hereafter enacted, the terms of
the members shall be four years”); HRS § 205-1 (LUC members shall “serve for
the term set forth in section 26-34”).  Accordingly, it appears that the
requirement that an LUC member not serve for longer than two consecutive terms
is the same as the requirement that a member not serve for longer than eight
consecutive years.
15
     A member who has not been nominated for a second term is not
 
disqualified from serving as a holdover under the plain language of HRS § 26­
34(b), as the member continues to occupy a status of being eligible for
nomination and confirmation, whereas the Senate’s rejection of a member’s
nomination for a second term renders the member ineligible, and therefore
disqualified for membership under subsection (a).
 
-19­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be
 
legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all
 words of the statute.”) (quotation marks, citation and ellipses
 omitted). 
Because subsection (a) identifies two situations in
 
which an individual would be disqualified for membership, the
 plain meaning of subsection (b) is that a member is not eligible
 to serve as a holdover if either situation is applicable. 
Therefore, a member who is nominated but rejected by
 
the Senate is “disqualified” from serving as a holdover member. 
On the other hand, an LUC member who has served one
 
term and who has not been re-nominated and rejected by the Senate
 is permitted to serve as a holdover under subsection (b) until a
 successor is appointed or nominated within a “reasonable time,”
16
 
or until “the end of the second regular legislative session
 following the expiration of the member’s term of office.” HRS §
 26-34(b). In this case, Kanuha was able to serve nearly ten
 months as a valid holdover from June 30, 2009, when his first
 term expired, until April 26, 2010, when the Senate rejected his
 nomination for a second term. In the absence of re-nomination
 and Senate rejection, Kanuha could have continued to serve as a
 
16
 This court has stated that under HRS § 26-34, “the governor would 
be entitled to at least a reasonable time after a term expires to nominate a
qualified person to a board or commission.”  Life of the Land v. Burns , 59 
Haw. 244, 251, 580 P.2d 405, 410 (1978).  See Hanabusa v. Lingle, 119 Hawai 'i 
341, 351, 198 P.3d 604, 614 (2008) (per curiam) (holding that governor’s dutyto nominate and appoint members of the Board of Regents of the University of
Hawai'i “is subject to a reasonable time standard,” “judged by the totality of
the circumstances”). 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
holdover member subject to the limitation that holdover status
 
not extend beyond the end of the second regular legislative
 session following the expiration of his first term, and subject
 to the requirement that the governor appoint a successor within a
 reasonable time. Thus the plain language of the statute is not
 superfluous, as a member who has not been rejected by the Senate
 may serve as a holdover for up to two years after the expiration
 of the member’s term. However, HRS § 26-34(b) disqualifies a
 member who has served one term from holding over upon rejection
 by the Senate, as that member is no longer eligible to serve on
 the LUC at all. 
Moreover, under the ICA’s interpretation of HRS § 26­
34, a member who had served only one term could never be disqualified from serving as a holdover because the “sole” basis for disqualification is for a member to have served two consecutive terms. 128 Hawai' i at 377, 289 P.3d at 1013. 
Pursuant to this interpretation, a one-term member would always be entitled to continue serving as a holdover, potentially until the end of the second regular legislative session following the expiration of the member’s term; in this case, that date would have been May 5, 2011, or nearly two years after Kanuha’s first term expired and over a year after the Senate’s rejection. Under the ICA’s interpretation, the Senate would have no recourse during this time to terminate the member’s holdover status despite rejecting the member’s nomination for a second term. 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Yet, if it was the legislature’s intent to so restrict its power
 
and to limit the members who could be disqualified from serving
 as holdovers, the legislature could have simply disqualified any
 member who had served more than two terms. Instead, the
 legislature referenced “subsection (a)” in its entirety to define
 the way a member is “disqualified” from serving as a holdover
 member. 
As specifically drafted by the legislature, subsection
 
(a) plainly provides that an individual may only become eligible
 to serve as a member of the LUC by receiving the Senate’s
 consent. For a member who has already served a term, the
 Senate’s act of rejecting the member’s nomination for a second
 term is an act that disqualifies the member from holding over. 
To presume the legislature would have used the phrase
 “disqualified for membership under subsection (a)” to apply
 exclusively to members who had served more than two consecutive
 terms is illogical and nullifies the general meaning and
 application of the words employed by the legislature. 
B.
 
The legislative history of HRS § 26-34 also reflects
 
that the intent of the statute was to prohibit a member from
 serving as a holdover where the member’s nomination for a second
 term has been rejected by the Senate. See Franks v. City & Cnty.
 
of Honolulu, 74 Haw. 328, 335, 843 P.2d 668, 671-72 (1993) (“If
 the statutory language is ambiguous or doubt exists as to its
 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meaning, courts may take legislative history into consideration
 
in construing a statute.”) (quotation marks and brackets
 omitted). 
1.
 
When the holdover provision under HRS § 26-34(b) was
 
adopted in 1984, the original version of the bill provided that
 “Any member of a board or commission whose term has expired and
 who is not disqualified for membership under subsection (a) may
 continue in office as a holdover member[.]” S.B. 1725-84, 12th
 Leg., Reg. Sess. (1984) (emphasis added). 
The Senate Judiciary Committee then amended the bill to
 
provide, “Any member of a board or commission whose term has
 expired and who is not qualified for membership under subsection
 (a) may continue in office as a holdover member[.]” S.B. 1725­84, S.D. 1, 12th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1984) (emphasis added).
17
 
Subsequently, the House Judiciary Committee changed the
 
word “qualified” back to “disqualified.” S.B. 1725-84, S.D. 1,
 H.D. 1, 12th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1984). The report, as reproduced
 in the House Journal, provides that the intent of the proposed
 amendment was to allow any member of a board whose term has
 expired and who is not “disqualified for membership” to serve
 only two years beyond the member’s four-year appointment: 
Your Committee finds that the bill, as received, would allow
for a member’s term of office to extend beyond eight years. 
17
 The Senate’s discussion of the amendment indicates that the use of
 
the word “qualified” was a typographical error and should have read
“disqualified.”  See  1984 Senate Journal, at 330.
 
-23­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, the intent of the proposed amendment to section 26­
34, Hawaii
 Revised Statutes, is to allow any member of a
board or commission whose term has expired and who is not
disqualified for membership to serve only two years beyond
the member’s four-year appointment.  Accordingly, your
Committee 
has amended the bill by changing the word
“qualify” in page 2, line 6, to “disqualify” to clarify the
legislative intent. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 690-84, in 1984 House Journal, at 1194
 
(emphasis added). 
The House Standing Committee Report No. 690-84 retained
 
in the Hawai' i State Archives contains slightly different 
language from the version of the report that appears in the House
 Journal.
18 The Committee Report provides that the intent of the
 
amendment was to allow any member whose term has expired and “who
 is not disqualified from serving another term” to serve only two
 years beyond the member’s “first four-year appointment”:
 
Your Committee finds that the bill, as received, would allow
for a member’s term of office to extend beyond eight years. 
However, the intent of the proposed amendment to section 26­34, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is to allow any member of a
board or commission whose term has expired and who is not
disqualified from serving another term to serve only two
years beyond the member’s first four-year appointment. 
Accordingly, your Committee has amended the bill by changing
the word “qualify” in page 2, line 6, to “disqualify” to
clarify the legislative intent.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 690-84, 12th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1984)
 
(emphases added). The Committee Report is dated March 30, 1984
 and is signed by the committee members. 
In both versions, the language of the House Committee
 
report indicates that the legislature intended for members to be
 
18
 The Archives does not have any amended reports or other documents
 
explaining the reason for the discrepancy between the two versions of the
report.  The House Journal provides only that the “Stand. Com. Rep. No. 690-84
on S.B. No. 1725-84, SD 1, HD1,” was adopted.  1984 House Journal, at 416. 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disqualified by factors other than serving beyond eight
 
consecutive years. In other words, the legislature intended to
 limit holdover membership to members who had served only two
 years beyond the member’s first four-year term and to members who
 were not otherwise “disqualified for membership.” 
The version of the report reproduced in the House
 
Journal provides that the intent of the holdover provision was to
 allow a member “whose term has expired and who is not
 disqualified for membership to serve only two years beyond the
 member’s four-year appointment.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 690­84, in 1984 House Journal, at 1194 (emphasis added). The report
 clearly focuses on members who had only served one term thus far,
 as anyone who had served two consecutive terms would already be
 excluded from serving as a holdover based on the subsection (a)
 clause providing that membership “shall not exceed eight
 consecutive years.” HRS § 26-34(a). 
If it had been the legislature’s sole intent to limit
 
the time that a holdover member was permitted to serve, without
 imposing any other disqualifying factors, then such a result
 could have been easily achieved without including the language
 “and who is not disqualified for membership” in the committee
 report. The report would have then simply read: “the intent of
 the proposed amendment to section 26-34, Hawaii Revised Statutes,
 is to allow any member of a board or commission whose term has
 
-25­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expired to serve only two years beyond the member’s four-year
 
appointment.” 
The focus on one-term members is even clearer in the
 
signed Committee Report retained in the Archives, which expressly
 states that the holdover provision was intended to allow any
 member whose term has expired and “who is not disqualified from
 serving another term” to serve only two years beyond the member’s
 “first four-year appointment.” (Emphases added).
 
Thus, the reference to members who are “not
 
disqualified” in both versions of the Committee Report and the
 
resulting inclusion of the phrase “and who is not disqualified
 
for membership under subsection (a)” in HRS § 26-34(b) manifestly
 
indicates that the legislature intended for disqualification to
 
apply to circumstances other than the number of years that a
 
member has served. The legislature’s clear intent was to require
 
holdover members to be members who had only served one term, and
 who were not disqualified from serving another term. 
2. 
There are several additional reasons underscoring the
 
conclusion that the legislature did not intend for the
 disqualification provision to apply solely to two-term members
 such that a member who had served only one term could never be
 disqualified from serving as a holdover member. 
First, HRS § 26-34(c) (2009) expressly provides that
 
“[a] vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or
 commission during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
 
-26­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
thereof, subject to Article V, Section 6 of the Constitution of
 
the State.” In 1984, when the holdover member provision was
 added to HRS § 26-34, the House Public Employment and Government
 Operations committee noted that “allowing holdover membership
 with limitations on the length of service of a holdover board or
 commission member better serves the intent of Article V, Section
 6[.]” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 604-84, in 1984 House Journal, at
 1148. See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 229-84, in 1984 Senate
 
Journal, at 1087 (“Your Committee finds that limiting the length
 of service of a holdover board or commission member better serves
 the intent of Article V, Section 6 of the State
 Constitution[.]”). 
Article V, section 6, which governs executive and
 
administrative offices and departments, provides that the
 governor may appoint individuals for interim appointments to any
 
office if a vacancy occurs while the Senate is not in session. 
Haw. Const. art. V, § 6. The interim appointment expires at the
 
end of the next Senate session, unless the appointment is
 confirmed by the Senate. Id. However, section 6 specifically
 
provides that an individual whose nomination for appointment to
 any office has been rejected by the Senate is no longer eligible
 to serve an interim appointment in that office: 
When the senate is not in session and a vacancy occurs in
any office, appointment to which requires the confirmation
of the senate, the governor may fill the office by granting
a commission which shall expire, unless such appointment is
confirmed, at the end of the next session of the senate. The
person so appointed shall not be eligible for another
interim appointment to such office if the appointment failed
to be confirmed by the senate.
 
-27­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
No person who has been nominated for appointment to any
office and whose appointment has not received the consent of
the senate shall be eligible to an interim appointment
thereafter to such office.
 
Id. (emphasis added). 
Under the State constitution, then, an individual who 
has not received the Senate’s consent to be appointed to any 
office is no longer eligible to serve an interim appointment to such office, even though an interim appointment is already limited in length to the end of the next Senate session. It would have been illogical for the committee reports to state that limiting the length of service of a holdover member “better serves the intent of Article V, Section 6,” if the holdover provision was intended to permit a rejected nominee to remain serving as a holdover for up to two years when the nominee would be ineligible to serve as an interim appointee under the constitution. See State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i 1, 19, 928 P.2d 
843, 861 (1996) (“The legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality.”) (brackets and quotation marks omitted). 
Second, allowing a board member who has been expressly
 
denied reappointment to continue serving up to two years after
 the expiration of the member’s first term has the unquestioned
 effect of diminishing the advice and consent power of the Senate. 
“[T]he subject of appointment of members to boards and
 commission[s] must necessarily be considered to be the joint
 responsibility of the governor and senate[.]” Life of the Land
 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
v. Burns , 59 Haw. 244, 251, 580 P.2d 405, 410 (1978). The ICA’s 
interpretation of HRS § 26-34 essentially provides the executive 
with a means to bypass the will of the Senate by enabling a board member to continue serving in a position that the Senate has expressly recognized the member to be disqualified from filling. Indeed, pursuant to the ICA’s opinion, the executive can leave the disqualified member in that position until two years have passed or until forced to appoint a new member by a court order determining that the length of the holdover term has become unreasonable. 
See 128 Hawai' i at 377 n.2, 289 P.3d at 1013 n.2 
(noting that Kanuha would be prevented from “serving indefinitely” because the governor would be required to appoint a 
successor “within a reasonable period of time”).  The legislative 
history of the statute does not indicate that such an effect was 
intended. 
According to the LUC, however, the Senate’s advice and
 
consent power is not diminished by permitting a rejected member
 to continue serving as a holdover because “[a] holdover is an
 extension of a term to which advice and consent of the Senate has
 already been given.” Thus, the LUC argues that the Senate’s
 refusal to consent to the member’s nomination for a second term
 has no effect on the member’s ability to serve as a holdover
 because the Senate has already impliedly consented to the
 holdover term. However, a member’s authority to serve as a
 holdover is not based on the Senate’s implicit consent. Rather,
 the authority for serving as a holdover derives from HRS § 26-34,
 
-29­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
which expressly authorizes holdover members within the statutory
 
restrictions. Moreover, even assuming that the Senate’s consent
 for the member’s first term constitutes implied consent for the
 member to serve as a holdover, any implicit consent would be
 revoked upon the Senate expressly declining to consent to the
 member’s nomination for a second term. See Black’s Law, supra at
 
346 (defining “implied consent” as “[c]onsent inferred from one’s
 conduct rather than from one’s direct expression”). 
Finally, any vacancies created by the Senate’s
 
rejection of an LUC member’s nomination may be filled by the
 governor, who has the ability to nominate another individual or
 to appoint an interim appointee under article V, section 6 of the
 State constitution. 
Even if a temporary vacancy were to occur
 
before the governor took such action, the vacancy would not
 obstruct the LUC’s consideration of matters before it inasmuch as
 the LUC is comprised of nine members and only six affirmative
 votes are required for any boundary amendment. HRS § 205-1. 
C.
 
Accordingly, the plain language of HRS § 26-34(b) and
 
the legislative history of the holdover provision demonstrate
 that the legislature intended to require a holdover to be a
 member “who is not disqualified for membership under subsection
 (a).” A member whose nomination for a second term has been
 rejected by the Senate is disqualified from serving another term
 and therefore “disqualified for membership under subsection (a).” 
The legislative history of the statute does not indicate that it
 
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was the legislature’s sole intent to limit the length of time
 
that a holdover member was allowed to serve, without imposing any
 other disqualifying factors. 
Additionally, interpreting HRS § 26-34(b) to solely
 
disqualify members who had served either two consecutive terms or
 eight years is inconsistent with article V, section 6, which
 disqualifies individuals rejected by the Senate from serving as
 interim appointees. Finally, interpreting the holdover provision
 to allow a board member who has been rejected by the Senate to
 continue serving up to two years after the expiration of the
 member’s term or until a “reasonable time” has elapsed undermines
 the Senate’s advice and consent power. 
The ICA therefore erred in determining that Kanuha
 
continued to serve as a valid holdover after the Senate’s
 rejection of his nomination for a second term.
 
III.
 
Because Kanuha was not a valid holdover member of the
 
LUC under HRS § 26-34, his actions taken with respect to the
 Reclassification Petition are invalid unless determined to be
 valid through an application of the de facto officer doctrine. 
A.
 
This court has defined an “officer de jure” as “one who 
is in all respects legally appointed . . . and qualified to exercise the office[.]” Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Cayetano, 
94 Hawai' i 1, 7, 6 P.3d 799, 805 (2000) (quotation marks and 
brackets omitted) [hereinafter OHA]. In contrast, a “de facto 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
official” is “one who by some color of right is in possession of
 
an office, and for the time being performs his or her duties with
 public acquiescence, though having no right in fact[.]” 63C Am.
 Jur. 2d Public Officers and Employees § 23 (2d ed. 2009)
 (emphasis added). 
The de facto officer doctrine gives legal effect to the 
public acts of de facto officers, id., and precludes challenges to government action “on the ground that the officials who took the action were improperly in office.” Andrade v. Lauer, 729 
F.2d 1475, 1496-97 (D.C. Cir. 1984). In OHA, this court recognized that “[c]ourts have consistently held that actions 
taken by de facto officeholders are valid and enforceable.” 94 Hawai'i at 7, 6 P.3d at 805. 
The de facto officer doctrine was adopted from the
 
common law of England. See Kathryn A. Clokey, The De Facto
 
Officer Doctrine: The Case for Continued Application, 85 Colum.
 
L. Rev. 1121, 1125 (1985) (“The doctrine was received in this
 county as part of the common law, and the United States has
 become the locus of its most prolific development.”) (footnote
 omitted). “[T]he doctrine’s purpose is to protect the public’s
 reliance on an officer’s authority and to ensure the orderly
 administration of government by preventing technical challenges
 to an officer’s authority.” 63 Am. Jur. 2d § 23. 
In OHA, this court identified the following four
 
circumstances in which an officer becomes a de facto officer: 
A officer becomes a de facto  officer under four
 
circumstances: (1) by exercising his or her duties without a
 
-32­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
known appointment or election, but under such circumstances
of reputation or acquiescence as were calculated to induce
people, without inquiry, to submit to or invoke his or her
action, supposing him or her to be the officer he or she
assumed to be; (2) where the official exercises his or her
duties under color of known and valid appointment or
election, but fails to conform to some precedent,
requirement, or condition, such as to take an oath, give a
bond, or the like; (3) under color of a known election or
appointment, void because the officer was not eligible, or
because there was a want of power in the electing or
appointing body, or by reason of some defect or irregularity
in its exercise, such ineligibility, want of power, or
defect being unknown to the public; or (4) under color of
any election or an appointment by or pursuant to a public
unconstitutional law, before the same is adjudged as such.
 
94 Hawai' i at 7, 6 P.3d at 805. 
During oral argument, counsel for the LUC indicated
 
that the third category delineated by the OHA court would be
 
applicable to the circumstances of this case. Oral Argument at
 40:49-41:08 (Feb. 7, 2013), Sierra Club v. Castle & Cooke Homes
 Haw., Inc., No. SCWC-11-0000625, available at
 http://state.hi.us/jud/oa/13/SCOA_020713_11_0625.mp3 [hereinafter
 Oral Argument]. Under the third OHA category, an officer becomes
 a de facto officer when exercising his or her duties “under color
 of a known . . . appointment, void because the officer was not
 eligible, or because there was a want of power in the electing or
 appointing body, or by reason of some defect or irregularity in
 its exercise, such ineligibility, want of power, or defect being
 unknown to the public[.]” Id. (emphases added). “Color” means
 
“[a]ppearance, guise, or semblance; esp., the appearance of a
 legal claim to a right, authority, or office.” Black’s Law,
 
supra at 301. 
Consequently, in order for the third category to apply,
 
the officer must appear to have legal authority and the defect in
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the officer’s eligibility must be unknown to the public. In this
 
case, the Senate rejected Kanuha’s nomination for a second term
 on April 26, 2010, which effectively served as public notice that
 Kanuha was ineligible to serve as a holdover member.
 Additionally, the Sierra Club filed its Motion to Disqualify with
 the LUC on September 8, 2010, prior to the LUC’s September 23,
 2010 vote to approve the Reclassification Petition and the
 October 15, 2010 vote to approve the Decision and Order. The
 defect in Kanuha’s eligibility to continue serving as a holdover
 member was therefore known to the public, Castle & Cooke, and the
 LUC when Kanuha participated in the voting on the
 Reclassification Petition. Under these circumstances, it cannot
 be said that Kanuha was a de facto officer pursuant to the third
 OHA category. 
The other categories set forth in OHA are similarly 
inapplicable in this case. In contrast to the other three categories, which involve appointed officers with defective appointments, the first OHA category refers to an officer who was not appointed in the first instance, but who has nevertheless been holding himself or herself out as a de jure officer: “(1) by exercising his or her duties without a known appointment or election, but under such circumstances of reputation or acquiescence as were calculated to induce people, without inquiry, to submit to or invoke his or her action[.]” 94 Hawai' i 
at 7, 6 P.3d at 805 (emphasis added). In this case, the issue is not whether Kanuha was appointed to be an LUC officer at all. 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kanuha was validly appointed to serve his first term. However,
 
following his first term, he was disqualified from continuing to
 serve as a de jure holdover because of the Senate’s rejection of
 his nomination for a second term. The first OHA category is
 therefore inapplicable to the facts of this case.
 
In regard to the second OHA category, Kanuha was not
 
exercising his duties “under color of a known and valid
 appointment . . . , but fail[ing] to conform to some precedent,
 requirement, or condition, such as to take an oath, give a bond,
 or the like[.]” Id. As stated, Kanuha was not acting under
 
“color” of a valid appointment, given the public nature of the
 Senate’s rejection of his nomination. The Senate’s rejection,
 which disqualified Kanuha from holdover status, is also unlike
 the failure to conform to a technical requirement such as taking
 an oath, furnishing a bond, or being under the required age for
 members. See Black’s Law, supra at 1194 (a de facto officer may
 
have “failed to qualify for office for any one of various
 reasons, [such] as . . . being under the required age, having
 failed to take the oath, [or] having not furnished a required
 bond”). Such imperfections in an officer’s authority are more
 likely to be overlooked by members of the public who rely on the
 finality of government decisions, thereby necessitating the
 application of the de facto officer doctrine. In this case,
 however, the Senate publicly rejected Kanuha’s nomination for a
 second term, which served as notice of Kanuha’s disqualification
 to the public, the LUC, and Castle & Cooke.
 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Finally, with respect to the fourth OHA category, 
Kanuha was not exercising his duties “under color of [an] 
election or an appointment by or pursuant to a public unconstitutional law, before the same is adjudged as such.” 94 Hawai'i at 7, 6 P.3d at 805. In OHA, the court found that this 
definition was applicable, where eight trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs “were elected under the color of an election pursuant to an unconstitutional public law, before the law was adjudged to be unconstitutional” by the U.S. Supreme Court in Rice v. Cayetano, 528 U.S. 495 (2000). 94 Hawai' i at 4-5, 8, 6 
P.3d at 801-02, 805. The court held that the trustees became de 
facto officials following the Rice v. Cayetano decision. Id. at 
7-8, 6 P.3d at 805-06. In this case, there is no issue regarding 
whether Kanuha was appointed pursuant to an unconstitutional public law; rather, the issue is whether Kanuha was disqualified from holdover status pursuant to a valid public law. 
Accordingly, Kanuha is not a de facto officer under the
 
parameters of the doctrine articulated by this court in OHA. 
B.
 
Counsel for the LUC argued during oral argument that
 
the four OHA categories were merely “examples” of how one becomes
 a de facto officer, and do not constitute an exhaustive list. 
Oral Argument at 41:04-42:00. However, nothing in the OHA
 decision indicates that there are other bases, outside of the
 four enumerated categories, for invoking the de facto officer
 doctrine. The court did not provide that an officer becomes a de
 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
facto officer under certain circumstances, including the four 
categories. Rather, the court affirmatively stated that an 
“officer becomes a de facto officer under four circumstances[.]” 
94 Hawai' i at 7, 6 P.3d at 805 (emphasis added). 
In addition, the four OHA categories were first
 
articulated by the Connecticut Supreme Court in State v. Carroll,
 
38 Conn. 449 (1871). The Carroll court undertook a review of
 English and American cases invoking the doctrine and found that
 the cases did not provide a concise general definition of the
 doctrine. Id. at 467-71. The court explained that it was
 
“[d]oubtless” that the de facto doctrine requires “color of
 election or appointment from competent authority.” Id. at 471. 
The court then provided the four-part definition of the doctrine,
 stating that the definition was “sufficiently accurate and
 comprehensive to cover the whole ground” of the de facto officer
 doctrine. Id. at 471-72. The court stated that “[a]nything less
 
comprehensive and discriminating will, I think, be imperfect and
 deceptive as a definition.” Id. at 472. 
Subsequently, the U.S. Supreme Court favorably cited
 
Carroll, calling the opinion “an elaborate and admirable
 
statement of the law . . . on the validity of the acts of de
 
facto officers, however illegal the mode of their appointment.” 
Norton v. Shelby Cnty., 118 U.S. 425, 445-46 (1886). See Clokey,
 
supra at 1125 (“In State v. Carroll , the Connecticut Supreme
 
Court articulated the definitive American expression of the
 
doctrine[.]”) (footnote omitted) (emphasis added); People v.
 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Wortman, 165 N.E. 788, 789 (Ill. 1928) (“The definition of an
 
officer de facto in the case of [Carroll] has been approved by
 many courts.”). The Shelby Court further considered whether the
 fourth Carroll category was applicable to the circumstances of
 that case, before holding that the definition did not apply where
 the issue was the unconstitutionality of the act creating the
 office itself. 118 U.S. at 446. The Court held that the public
 officers in that case were mere usurpers rather than de facto
 officers, and reasoned that its decision was “in harmony” with
 Carroll. Id. at 445. 
The OHA court’s definition of the de facto officer
 
doctrine, which is identical to the Carroll court’s definition,
 
should therefore be considered a definitive expression of the
 doctrine.
 
Nevertheless, counsel for the LUC argued that the OHA
 
court’s definition of a de facto officer is not dispositive
 because in In re Sherretz, 40 Haw. 366, 373 (Terr. 1953), the
 court applied a more general standard for determining an
 officer’s de facto status. Oral Argument at 41:25-42:00. In
 Sherretz, the court acknowledged several definitions frequently
 given to de facto officers. 40 Haw. at 372-73. The court also
 reviewed numerous cases on the issue of de facto officers,
 including Carroll, which the court viewed favorably, stating that
 
Carroll “gives a comprehensive definition of an officer de
 
facto.” Id. at 377-78. The court then recited the four
 
Carroll/OHA categories. Id. The court concluded, based on its
 
-38­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
review of a wide variety of cases, the public officer in that
 
case “came within the requirements of a de facto official.” Id.
 
at 380. Inasmuch as the Sherretz court did not adopt a
 
definitive definition of the de facto officer doctrine, it is not
 dispositive in this case. Moreover, the Caroll definition that
 was viewed favorably by the Sherretz court was later expressly
 adopted by this court in OHA.
 
The four OHA categories thus constitute a comprehensive
 
definition of the de facto officer doctrine as adopted by this
 
court. In this case, Kanuha does not qualify as a de facto
 
holdover under any of the four tests because of the uniqueness of
 
the Senate’s rejection of his nomination as a disqualifying
 defect. 
C.
 
Furthermore, not only does Kanuha fail to qualify as a
 
de facto officer under the four OHA categories, he also fails to
 
qualify under the most basic, fundamental understanding of the
 
doctrine. 
The very basis of a de facto officer’s authority is the
 
appearance or color of authority. See Black’s Law, supra at 301
 
(defining “color” as “the appearance of a legal claim to a right,
 authority, or office”); Sherretz, 40 Haw. at 373 (all that is
 required is possession of office, performance of duties, and
 “claiming to be such officer under color of an election or
 appointment”) (quotation marks omitted); Carroll, 38 Conn. at 471
 (“Doubtless color of election or appointment from competent
 
-39­   
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
authority is necessary for the protection of an officer de
 
facto.”); Nguyen v. United States, 539 U.S. 69, 77 (2003) (de
 facto officer doctrine “confers validity upon acts performed by a
 
person acting under the color of official title even though it is
 
later discovered that the legality of that person’s appointment
 or election to office is deficient.”) (quotation marks omitted)
 (emphasis added); Equal Emp’t Opportunity Comm’n v. Sears,
 Roebuck & Co., 650 F.2d 14, 18 (2d Cir. 1981) (“Since the primary
 purpose of the doctrine is to protect the public and the
 government agencies which act in reliance on the validity of an
 officer’s actions,” the officer’s “appearance to others” is more
 directly pertinent than the officer’s own knowledge of defects in
 title). Because appearance of right is the essence of a de facto
 officer’s authority, “[i]f an official’s claim to office is known
 to be unlawful, the notoriety of his title defect prevents a
 finding of color of authority.” Clokey, supra at 1123. See
 
Gutierrez v. Guam Election Comm’n, No. WRM10-003 2011 WL 768694,
 at *16 (Guam Terr. Feb. 3, 2011) (“A de facto officer performs
 duties under color of right, or color of official title, when a
 defect in the officers authority . . . escapes public notice.”). 
This emphasis on appearance of authority is consistent
 
with the primary interests served by the de facto officer
 doctrine, which are the protection of “citizens’ reliance on past
 government actions and the government’s ability to take effective
 and final action[.]” Andrade, 729 F.2d at 1499. If a public
 
officer is, by all appearances, exercising his or her duties
 
-40­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under color of authority, then it is in the public interest to
 
grant validity to the officer’s actions even if it is later
 discovered that the officer’s authority was defective. See
 
Norton, 118 U.S. at 445 (“The official acts of [de facto
 officers] are recognized as valid on grounds of public policy,
 and for the protection of those having official business to
 transact.”) (quotation marks omitted); State v. Oren, 627 A.2d
 337, 339 (Vt. 1993) (“Third persons are entitled to rely on the
 actions of such public officers without the necessity of
 investigating their title.”).
 
In Sherretz, the court applied the de facto officer
 
doctrine to validate the acts of a member of the civil service
 commission, who continued to serve on the commission after
 accepting an appointive office as a notary public. 40 Haw. 366. 
While declining to determine whether the member rendered himself
 ineligible to serve on the commission by accepting the appointive
 office, the court concluded that the member was at least a de
 facto official, reasoning: “It is undisputed that Kum was in
 possession of the office, performing its duties, claiming to be
 an officer under color of an appointment, his right unquestioned
 by the appointing authority or by the other members of the
 commission operating with him; he thus came within the
 
requirements of a de facto official.” Id. at 380 (emphasis
 
added). On the above basis, the member’s “acts were as valid as
 
though he had an undisputed legal title.” Id. 
-41­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In this case, however, the defect in Kanuha’s authority
 
was known to the public following his rejection by the Senate. 
The Senate’s act of rejecting his appointment occurred in the
 most public of venues, with the Senate committee that reviewed
 Kanuha’s nomination expressing concern over Kanuha’s lack of
 experience and knowledge in traditional Hawaiian land usage and
 cultural practices. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3208, 2010 Senate
 Journal, at 1332. Subsequently, during the floor debates on his
 nomination, Senate members again focused on Kanuha’s lack of
 experience and knowledge before voting to reject his nomination. 
2010 Senate Journal, at 561-64. Even assuming this very public
 Senate proceeding was not known to the LUC, following the filing
 of the Sierra Club’s Motion to Disqualify, the LUC and Castle &
 Cooke clearly would have become aware of Kanuha’s
 disqualification. Thus the notoriety of Kanuha’s title defect
 following the Senate’s rejection prevents a finding of color of
 authority, which is a critical component of the de facto officer
 doctrine under any definition of the doctrine. 
D.
 
Finally, applying the de facto officer doctrine to
 
validate Kanuha’s votes on the Reclassification Petition in this
 case would be contrary to the public policy purposes of the
 doctrine. 
As previously referenced, “[t]he de facto  doctrine was
 
ingrafted upon the law some five hundred years ago as a matter of
 policy and necessity to protect the interests of the public and
 
-42­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
individuals involved in official acts of a person exercising the
 
duty of an officer without actually being one in strict point of
 
law.” Sherretz, 40 Haw. at 373 (emphasis added). In Carroll,
 
the court explained that “[a]n officer de facto is one whose
 
acts, though not those of a lawful officer, the law, upon
 
principles of policy and justice, will hold valid so far as they
 involve the interests of the public and third persons[.]” 38
 Conn. at 471 (emphasis added). 
The de facto officer doctrine therefore stems from an
 
assumption that it protects the public. See Ryder, 515 U.S. at
 
180 (purpose of doctrine is “to protect the public by insuring
 the orderly functioning of the government despite technical
 defects in title to office”) (quotation marks and citation
 omitted); Hussey v. Smith, 99 U.S. 20, 24 (1878) (“The acts of
 such [de facto] officers are held to be valid because the public
 good requires it. The principle wrongs no one.”) (emphasis
 
added).
 
Consequently, while the OHA/Carroll categories
 
establish the outer parameters for the application of the de
 facto officer doctrine, public interest is clearly a significant
 factor to consider when applying the doctrine. In this case, the
 public interest is not served by validating Kanuha’s actions
 through an application of the de facto officer doctrine. The
 LUC’s consideration of the Reclassification Petition was a matter
 of great importance to the community, as it involved the proposed
 
-43­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reclassification and long-term development of land in Waipi#o and
 
Waiawa from an agricultural to urban district. 
The LUC’s role in this process was to consider the
 
impact of the proposed reclassification on areas of state
 concern, including the maintenance of valued cultural,
 historical, or natural resources. See HRS § 205-17 (Supp. 2010)
 
(setting forth LUC decision-making criteria); HAR § 15-15-77
 (setting forth LUC decision-making criteria for boundary
 amendments). HRS §§ 205-1 and 205-4 expressly require six of the
 nine LUC members to vote in favor of any boundary amendment. In
 1961 when the land use law was enacted and the LUC was
 established, the LUC consisted of seven members, and six
 affirmative votes were required to approve district boundary
 amendments. 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, §§ 2, 6 at 300-01. 
Comparatively, only five affirmative votes were required for
 granting special permits. 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 7 at
 302. See 1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 205, §§ 1-2 at 315-19
 
(clarifying Act 187, retaining six vote requirement for boundary
 amendments and amending special permit approval to require
 majority approval). 
In 1975, the land use law was reformed and the LUC
 
became a nine-member commission. 1975 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 193,
 §§ 1-2 at 441. The original bill did not propose amending HRS §
 205-1 to require six affirmative votes for any boundary
 amendment. H.B. 1870, 8th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1975). The
 conference committee amended the bill to add the six affirmative
 
-44­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
votes requirement to HRS § 205-1. H.B. 1870, H.D. 1, S.D. 3,
 
C.D. 1, 8th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1975). The committee explained
 that the purpose of the amendment was to “make it express that
 six affirmative votes are required for the Commission to amend
 any land use district boundary,” in order to “bring[] the bill
 into conformity with the existing provision of the land use law
 in this regard.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 23, in 1975 House Journal,
 at 890. 
Thus, the legislature has always been particularly
 
concerned with the LUC’s approval of district boundary amendments
 and has retained the six-vote requirement throughout the history
 of the land use law because of the importance of such amendments. 
It is manifest that the legislature intended for the six required
 votes to be cast by individuals who qualified under the law to
 serve as LUC commissioners. The legislature would not have
 contemplated that the prescribed number of votes required for a
 boundary amendment could be compromised by an unqualified LUC
 member’s participation in voting. 
In addition, the LUC is required under article XII, 
section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution to “preserve and protect 
customary and traditional practices of native Hawaiians.”
19 Ka 
Pa'akai O Ka 'Aina v. Land Use Comm’n, 94 Hawai' i 31, 45, 7 P.3d 
19
 The constitutional provision provides: “The State reaffirms and
 
shall protect all rights, customarily and traditionally exercised for
subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua a tenants
who are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands
 prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State to regulate such rights.” 
Haw. Const. art. XII, § 7.
 
-45­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1068, 1082 (2000). Consistent with this constitutional
 
provision, HRS § 205-1 requires one member of the LUC to have
 “substantial experience or expertise in traditional Hawaiian land
 usage and knowledge of cultural land practices.” 
At least some members of the Senate rejected Kanuha’s
 
nomination for a second term based on their belief that Kanuha
 was being nominated to serve as the designated member and that
 Kanuha was not qualified for the position because of his limited
 knowledge and experience in traditional Hawaiian land usage. See
 
2010 Senate Journal, at 561-62 (remarks by Senators Hee and
 Hemmings). Senator Hemmings stated that the Senate had “no
 choice but to vote ‘no’” on Kanuha’s nomination “in order to stay
 compliant” with HRS § 205-1. Id. at 564. 
Under these circumstances, it is apparent that the
 
public’s interest is not protected by giving de facto validity to
 Kanuha’s votes. Rather, the public good is served when the
 applicable statutes are followed, in order to ensure that the
 individuals who are deciding whether the project should be
 approved are actually qualified under the law to render such a
 decision. Allowing a disqualified commissioner to participate in
 the LUC’s consideration of a petition has the effect of
 undermining the Senate’s advice and consent power and undermining
 the laws the legislature and the LUC itself specifically put in
 place on behalf of the public. See HRS § 205-1 (requiring six
 
affirmative votes for any boundary amendment and requiring a
 member with expertise in Hawaiian land usage and cultural land
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
practices); HRS § 205-4(h) (requiring six affirmative votes for
 
any boundary amendment); HAR § 15-15-13(a) (requiring LUC to have
 six affirmative votes to approve boundary amendments under HRS §
 205-4). 
The public interest in having six valid, qualified
 
votes determine the Reclassification Petition, in having an LUC
 member who has the requisite expertise and experience in Hawaiian
 land usage, and in having the Senate’s input in reviewing and
 appointing LUC members, are undermined and frustrated by giving
 de facto validity to Kanuha’s actions.
 
Second, a stated purpose of the de facto doctrine is
 
its intent to facilitate government efficiency. 63C Am. Jur. 2d
 § 23 (“the doctrine’s purpose is to . . . ensure the orderly
 administration of government by preventing technical challenges
 to an officer’s authority”); Norton, 118 U.S. at 441-42
 (“[P]rivate parties are not permitted to inquire into the title
 of persons . . . in apparent possession of their powers and
 functions . . . . It is manifest that endless confusion would
 result if in every proceeding before such officers their title
 could be called in question.”). Permitting challenges to the
 actions of public officials based on the mere potential of
 technical shortcomings in an officer’s authority such as the
 failure to take an oath or to furnish payment would adversely
 impact the orderly functioning of government. 
In this case, however, the Sierra Club’s challenge to
 
Kanuha’s participation in the Reclassification Petition
 
-47­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceedings was based on the knowledge that the Senate had
 
rejected Kanuha’s nomination for a second term. It was not based
 on the type of unlimited conjecture that the doctrine is intended
 to protect against. Additionally, the Sierra Club filed its
 Motion to Disqualify with the LUC prior to the LUC’s votes on the
 Reclassification Petition, rather than waiting for the outcome of
 the vote to challenge Kanuha’s participation. See Glidden Co. v.
 
Zdanok, 370 U.S. 530, 535 (1962) (de facto officer doctrine is
 intended to “prevent[] litigants from abiding the outcome of a
 lawsuit and then overturning it if adverse upon a technicality of
 which they were previously aware”). 
Thus the dual purposes of the de facto officer
 
doctrine, “to protect the public’s reliance on an officer’s
 authority and to ensure the orderly administration of
 government,” 63C Am. Jur. 2d § 23, are not served by applying the
 
doctrine in this case. This case is not one in which the “public
 
good requires” that Kanuha’s actions be held valid, Hussey, 99
 
U.S. at 24 (emphasis added). On the contrary, applying the
 doctrine to validate Kanuha’s actions with respect to the
 Reclassification Petition would have the effect of harming the
 public’s interest, which is protected when qualified public
 officials deliberate on matters of public significance. The
 interests of the public and third persons require Kanuha’s
 actions to be invalidated as those of a disqualified officer. 
IV.
 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The invalidation of Kanuha’s actions with respect to
 
the Reclassification Petition raises the question of whether the
 
LUC’s approval of the petition must also be invalidated. 
As stated, the Reclassification Petition proposed
 
amending the land use district boundary to reclassify 767 acres
 of land. The Reclassification Petition was filed pursuant to HRS
 § 205-4 and HAR § 15-15. On September 23, 2010, the LUC voted to
 approve the Reclassification Petition by a vote of 7-1, with
 Kanuha voting in favor of approval and one commissioner being
 excused. Subsequently on October 15, 2010, the LUC voted to
 approve the Decision and Order by a vote of 6-0, with Kanuha
 voting in favor of approval. 
HRS § 92-15 (1993) provides that when “the number of
 
members necessary to validate any act . . . is not specified . .
 . in any other law or ordinance, . . . the concurrence of a
 majority of all the members to which the board or commission is
 entitled shall be necessary to make any action of the board or
 commission valid.” (Emphasis added). In this case, the relevant
 statutes and rules expressly provide that six affirmative votes
 are required for the LUC’s approval of any boundary amendment. 
HRS § 205-4(h) (Supp. 2010) provides that “[s]ix
 
affirmative votes of the commission shall be necessary for any
 boundary amendment” to land areas greater than fifteen acres. 
See HRS § 205-1 (Supp. 2010) (“Six affirmative votes shall be
 necessary for any boundary amendment.”). HAR § 15-15-13(a)
 (2000), governing the LUC’s rules for quorum and number of votes
 
-49­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
necessary for a decision, confirms that “unless otherwise
 
provided by law, . . . the concurrence of a majority of all the
 members to which the commission is entitled shall be necessary to
 make a commission decision valid provided all approvals of
 petitions for boundary amendments under section 205-4, HRS, shall
 require six affirmative votes[.]” (Emphasis added). Thus, HRS §
 92-15 is not applicable. Without Kanuha’s disqualified vote, the
 LUC lacked the requisite six affirmative votes to approve the
 
Decision and Order on October 15.
 
The LUC and Castle & Cooke, however, argued to the ICA
 
that HRS § 92-15 was applicable to the LUC’s approval of the
 
Decision and Order because the October 15 vote “was an
 administrative or ministerial act to memorialize the LUC’s
 
approval vote on September 23, 2010, and not [part of] the
 
district boundary amendment action[.]” 
There is no merit to the argument that the LUC’s vote
 
to approve the Decision and Order was not part of the LUC’s
 
decision on the Reclassification Petition. Rather than
 constituting a mere ministerial act rubber-stamping the LUC’s
 September 23 vote, the Decision and Order was statutorily
 required and constituted an integral part of the LUC’s decision
 to approve the boundary amendment requested in the
 Reclassification Petition. 
Under HRS § 205-4(g) (2001), the LUC is required to
 
approve, deny, or modify a petition for a district boundary
 amendment involving land areas greater than fifteen acres “by
 
-50­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
filing findings of fact and conclusions of law”: 
[T]he commission, by filing findings of fact and conclusions
of law, shall act to approve the petition, deny the
petition, or to modify the petition by imposing conditions
necessary to uphold the intent and spirit of this chapter or
the policies and criteria established pursuant to section
205-17 or to assure substantial compliance with
representations made by the petitioner in seeking a boundary
change.
 
(Emphasis added). Accordingly, as the circuit court ruled in
 
this case, the act of “filing findings of fact and conclusions of
 law” is not only part of the LUC’s deliberation on the boundary
 amendment, it is the final act required for the LUC to approve,
 deny, or modify the petition at issue. 
Consistent with this requirement, HAR § 15-15-36(a)
 
(2000), entitled “Decisions and orders,” provides that “All
 decisions and orders for boundary amendment and special permit
 applications shall be signed by the chairperson or the
 commissioners who have heard or examined the evidence in the
 proceeding and have voted affirmatively on the decision.” 
Additionally, “[u]nless otherwise indicated in the order, the
 effective date of a decision and order shall be the date of
 service.” HAR § 15-15-36(b). Thus, the LUC’s own rules indicate
 that the LUC’s decision on a boundary amendment is made final and
 effective only after the Decision and Order is signed and served. 
Moreover, in Life of the Land, Inc. v. West Beach
 
Development Corp., 63 Haw. 529, 534, 631 P.2d 588, 592 (1981),
 the court held that the LUC’s oral denial of a party’s
 intervention in a commission hearing was not a final decision
 triggering the statute of limitations for an appeal. The court
 
-51­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
interpreted an LUC rule containing substantially the same
 
language as HAR § 15-15-36(b), and explained that “the Commission
 by its own rules expressly requires that its decisions be in
 writing, signed, and are to be effective as of the date of
 service.”
20 Id. Thus, the court held that the statute of
 
limitations “did not begin [to run] until after the date of
 service of the duly signed written order” upon the party. Id. 
Consequently, under HRS § 205-4 and HAR § 15-15-36(a),
 
an LUC decision on a boundary amendment petition is not final
 until the findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision and
 order are filed and served. The LUC’s October 15 vote to approve
 the Decision and Order in this case was therefore clearly part of
 the LUC’s approval of the requested boundary amendments. Thus,
 based on a plain reading of HRS § 205-4, six affirmative votes
 were required for the LUC to adopt the Decision and Order. 
Absent Kanuha’s disqualified vote, only five members voted to
 approve the Decision and Order. 
In addition, the LUC and Castle & Cooke’s attempt to
 
devalue the importance of the Decision and Order in this case is
 
20	 The court interpreted Land Use Commission Rule 1-4(6), providing:
 
1-4(6) Decisions and Orders.  All decisions and orders shall
 
be signed by the Commissioners who have heard and examined
the evidence in the proceeding.  Commission members who have
 not heard and examined all of the evidence may vote and sign
only after the procedures set fort in section 91-11, HRS,
have been complied with.
(a)	 Effec
tive Date.  Unless otherwise indicated in the
 
order, the effective date of a decision and order
shall be the date of service.
 
Life of the Land, Inc., 63 Haw. at 534 n.4, 631 P.2d at 592 n.4.
 
-52­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unsupported by the facts. At the September 23 LUC meeting,
 
Chairman Devens explained that the “objective” of the meeting was
 “to determine by way of motion the Commission’s decision on
 whether to grant in whole . . . or in part Petitioner’s request
 to reclassify the subject property or to deny the Petition and if
 
granted, what conditions of approval to impose.”  The Chairman
 
further explained that if a decision was reached at the meeting,
 
staff would “draft appropriate findings of fact, conclusions of
 law and decision and order reflecting the Commission’s decision,”
 which would then be “further deliberated at the next meeting.” 
(Emphasis added).
 
Consistent with the Chairman’s instructions, during the
 
September 23 meeting, Commissioner Chock expressed his
 understanding that the LUC would deliberate on “key” conditions
 of approval at a later date: “Some of the key issues that were
 raised in terms of traffic and agriculture I think are very
 important items that we can get a little further into when we
 deliberate on conditions.” He further stated that he would
 “reserve the rest of my comments until we get into that specific
 discussion.” After the LUC’s vote to approve the
 Reclassification Petition, Chairman Devens directed the staff “to
 draft the appropriate findings of fact, conclusions of law that
 will be hashed out at the next meeting.” (Emphasis added). 
The resulting Decision and Order contains 279 findings
 
of fact, 10 conclusions of law, and 29 conditions to the
 reclassification and incremental redistricting of the land at
 
-53­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
issue. During the October 15, 2010 LUC meeting, the
 
commissioners suggested amendments to the conditions of approval
 as well as to the findings of fact.
21 These amendments had not
 
previously been discussed at the September 23 meeting. There is
 no indication in the record that any Commissioner was required to
 vote to approve the Decision and Order based on their vote at the
 prior meeting. Rather, the record demonstrates that the October
 15 deliberations were a critical component of the LUC’s decision
 to approve the Reclassification Petition and were not simply
 ministerial in nature. The October 15 vote to approve the
 Decision and Order thus concerned a boundary amendment and was
 required to be approved by six affirmative votes. Pursuant to
 Kanuha’s disqualification, the boundary amendment only received
 five affirmative votes.
22
 
The circuit court therefore correctly determined that
 
the LUC did not have the requisite six affirmative votes to
 approve the Reclassification Petition. Pursuant to HAR § 15-15­13(b), findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a decision and
 
21 See supra note 6.
 
22 In light of our disposition, we do not address the validity of the
 
LUC’s vote at the September 23, 2010 meeting.   Compare Waikiki Resort Hotel,
Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 249, 624 P.2d 1353, 1371 (1981)
(“We know of no reason, in the present case, why the invalid vote of one
member of the council should be held to invalidate the perfectly legal vote of
the other members.”) (quoting Marshall v. Ellwood City Borough, 41 A. 994 (Pa.
1899)), with Liberty Dialysis-Hawai 'i, LL
 C v. Rainbow Dialysis, LLC, 13
0 
Hawai'i 95, 126, 306 P.3d 140, 171 (2013) (Acoba, J., concurring and
dissenting, with whom Pollack, J., joins) (“The actual contribution of anyparticular decision maker cannot be measured with precision, but frequentlyextends significantly beyond the actual vote cast. . . . [A] significantthreat to accuracy can exist even when a particular vote was numericallyunnecessary for the decision.”) (quotation marks and citation omitted). 
-54­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order denying the Reclassification Petition should have been
 
filed by the LUC.23 Therefore, the circuit court properly
 
reversed the Decision and Order of the LUC. 
V.
 Based on the foregoing, the ICA gravely erred in
 
concluding that Kanuha was a valid holdover member when he
 participated and voted on the Reclassification Petition. The
 Senate’s rejection of Kanuha’s nomination for a second term
 disqualified Kanuha from serving as a holdover member under HRS §
 26-34(b). Kanuha’s actions taken with respect to the
 Reclassification Petition are therefore invalid. His actions are
 not validated as those of a de facto officer because Kanuha does
 not qualify as a de facto officer under the four categories
 identified by this court in OHA. Inasmuch as the de facto
 officer doctrine only validates the acts of a de facto officer
 “so far as they involve the interests of the public and third
 persons,” Carroll, 38 Conn. at 471, the application of the
 
doctrine in this case would also be contrary to the doctrine’s
 
purpose. Kanuha’s actions taken after his disqualification from
 
serving as a holdover member are therefore invalid. 
Because Kanuha was disqualified from participating in
 
the Reclassification Petition proceedings following the Senate’s
 rejection, the LUC lacked the six affirmative votes required to
 
23
 “If the commission's action on a petition for boundary amendment
 
under section 205-4, HRS, fails to obtain six affirmative votes, findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order denying the petition shall be
filed by the commission.”  HAR § 15-15-13(b).
 
-55­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
approve the Reclassification Petition. Accordingly, the ICA’s
 
judgment is reversed, and the circuit court’s judgment is
 affirmed.
 
Robert D. Harris,
for petitioner
 
Marissa H.I. Luning,
for respondentLand Use Commission of the 
State of Hawai' i 
Benjamin M. Matsubara,
Curtis T. Tabata, and
Wyeth M. Matsubara,
for respondent
Castle & Cooke Homes Hawai' i,
Inc. /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
-56­