***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
SUSAN P. GORDON, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
IRA GORDON, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
  
SCWC-12-0000806 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0000806; FC-D NO. 10-1-6664) 
 
June 4, 2015 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE KUBO, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
Hawaiʻi law follows a framework based on partnership 
principles for the division of marital partnership property 
during divorce proceedings.  This opinion addresses the application of partnership principles and a family court’s 
discretion to deviate from an equal division of property when 
there are equitable considerations justifying such deviation.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-12-0000806
04-JUN-2015
07:55 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 2 Of central importance in this case is the family court’s duty to 
provide sufficient documentation of its findings for its 
division of marital partnership properties so that the parties 
and reviewing court may ensure the division is equitable and 
free from miscalculations or other errors.   
 BACKGROUND I.
  This case arises out of the Family Court of the First 
Circuit’s1 (family court) August 22, 2012 divorce decree 
dissolving the marriage between Ira Gordon (Ira) and Susan Gordon (Susan).
2   
A. Factual Background 
 1. Relationship Prior to Marriage 
  Susan and Ira, who married in December of 1997, first met in Las Vegas in the summer of 1992.  At the time they met, 
Ira was living in Hawaiʻ i and was married but separated.  Between 
1992 and 1993, Ira made several trips to Las Vegas to work and 
to spend time with Susan, who lived and worked in Las Vegas.  
Susan also made several trips to Hawaiʻ i to visit Ira, and she 
would typically stay with Ira at his residence during her 
visits. 
                         
 1  The Honorable Francis Q.F. Wong presided.   
 2 This case involves a consolidated appeal from the family court’s 
August 22, 2012 Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and the family court’s 
November 28, 2012 Order re: Plaintiff’s Motion and Declaration For Post-
Decree Relief Filed September 26, 2012. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 3   In 1993, Susan moved to Hawaiʻ i to live with Ira at his 
residence.  On January 12, 1995, Susan purchased a residence, 
which the parties moved into a few months later.  By the time Ira’s divorce was finalized on March 14, 1996, Ira and Susan had 
been living together at the residence purchased by Susan for one 
year.  Susan paid the mortgage on the residence without 
contribution from Ira during this time. 
 2.  Marriage and Tax Liability  
  Ira and Susan were married on December 16, 1997, and 
they subsequently filed their joint tax return for 1997.  Ira 
was responsible for filing and paying the taxes.  The parties 
received a home interest tax deduction in the amount of $40,605 for the residence initially purchased by Susan.  The 1997 joint 
tax return, which was considered by the family court to be the 
best evidence of the parties’ pre-marital property, listed 
thirteen rental properties and three businesses.  The return 
included reference to three Texas properties owned by Susan, and 
several properties that were distributed to Ira in the divorce 
decree relating to his prior marriage.     The parties continued to live in the residence 
initially purchased by Susan until July 2010.  During that time, 
the parties twice obtained equity lines of credit against the 
residence.  The first line of credit was $150,000, and it was 
used primarily for the down payment on two investment ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 4 properties, with the remaining $58,119.67 balance being 
deposited into a bank account held by Susan. 
  The second line of credit in the amount of $450,000
 
was obtained in March 2010, and the family court found that the parties obtained it, in part to satisfy the couple’s outstanding 
tax liability.  On March 12, 2010, Ira deposited $280,000 from 
the second equity line into his personal bank account, and he 
withdrew $103,000 from that account in the form of a cashier’s check payable to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), with the 
memo line stating “various tax returns.”  However, this payment 
did not satisfy the couple’s entire debt owed to the IRS, and by 
the time of trial, the couple still owed approximately $140,000 
to the IRS originating from past tax liability for the principal 
amount of $116,000, plus penalties and accruals.  Susan 
testified that she believed the $280,000 had been used to pay 
off the parties’ entire tax debt.   
 3. Ira’s Girlfriend  
  At some point as early as the beginning of 2009, Ira began dating a woman, whom he eventually lived with at one of 
Susan and Ira’s properties.
3  On May 20, 2009, Ira opened a 
                         
 3 The record is unclear as to when Ira began dating and living with 
his girlfriend.  Ira initially testified that the relationship began in late 
2009, but when confronted at trial with the fact that he purchased airline 
tickets for his girlfriend and her daughter in December 2008, Ira admitted 
the relationship began in early 2009.  Additionally, Susan testified that Ira 
had been living with his girlfriend and her daughter since August 2009. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 5 massage parlor for his girlfriend, which was listed on Ira and 
Susan’s 2009 joint income tax return.  In 2010, the massage 
parlor was raided by Honolulu police, resulting in the arrest of 
Ira’s girlfriend for prostitution, and Ira paid at least $10,000 
out of the business’s account for her criminal defense.   
  As mentioned earlier, Ira deposited $280,000 from the 
second equity line into his personal account, which Susan 
believed would be used to satisfy their tax liability.  Following his deposit of the money, Ira made purchases of 
jewelry for his girlfriend on March 13, 2010, and April 9, 2010, 
totaling over $30,000.  He also traveled with his girlfriend and 
her daughter to the Big Island and Las Vegas, and he remodeled 
the unit they all lived in together. 
 4.  Separation and Divorce  
  On July 24, 2010, Ira and Susan argued at their 
residence regarding Ira’s infidelity and his desire to end the 
marriage.4  That month, Ira permanently left the residence he 
shared with Susan, and Susan filed for divorce on July 28, 2010.  
The family court found that the exact date at which Ira “moved 
out” of the marital residence was “unclear,” but the family 
                         
 4 Susan alleged that Ira assaulted her and threatened to kill her, 
which resulted in Ira’s arrest on the same day.  On August 5, 2010, the case 
against Ira for the alleged incident was formally classified “no action” by 
the prosecutor’s office. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 6 court’s findings repeatedly referred to the “July 2010” date as 
the time at which the parties separated. 
 
 In August 2010, without Ira’s knowledge and consent, 
Susan changed the beneficiary designation on Ira’s existing life insurance policy; obtained another life insurance policy, naming 
herself as the beneficiary and authorizing the premium to be 
paid out of Ira’s checking account; and terminated their home 
equity line, removing around $7,000.   Susan first learned of her and Ira’s outstanding tax 
liability when she received a letter from the IRS notifying her 
that her monthly social security check of $484 would be 
garnished in the amount of $72.60 for nonpayment of taxes.  
Susan filed for innocent spouse relief, but her application and 
subsequent appeal were both denied by the IRS.   
  Susan remained at the couple’s marital residence until 
it was sold on May 24, 2011, in conjunction with the divorce 
proceedings.  The family court found that Susan’s only regular sources of income were her monthly social security check, money 
given to her by her sister, and the periodic disbursements made 
from the marital funds that were held in escrow at the time.  
However, statements from Susan’s personal bank account indicate 
that from December 2009 to April 2012, approximately $390,000 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 7 was deposited into her account.5  In her Income and Expense 
Statement filed November 7, 2011, eight months before trial, 
Susan stated that her monthly personal expenses amounted to 
$1,390.  
  At the time of trial, Susan was living in a rented 
room in Waikiki and was renting a vehicle because the one left 
in her possession was broken-down.  Ira was living at the 
property he moved into with his girlfriend and was receiving regular income from three businesses, including the massage 
parlor.   
B. Court Proceedings 
  On July 28, 2010, Susan filed a Complaint for Divorce 
against Ira in the family court.  A two-day divorce trial took 
place in June of 2012.   
  On July 17, 2012, Ira filed a closing argument, 
proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, and a property 
division chart identifying and valuing the assets at the date of marriage and date of the trial’s conclusion.  On July 18, 2012, 
Susan filed a closing argument and proposed findings of fact and 
                         
 5 The record also indicates the following: from February 2010 to 
March 2010, Susan donated $23,550 to her sister’s convent; from February 2010 
to March 2012, Susan received $98,034.74 in purported reimbursements from the 
convent; and from April 2010 to March 2012, Susan “cashed out” $49,221.91 out 
of her personal bank account, including $7,168.59 on September 7, 2010, in 
the form of a money market account. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 8 conclusions of law, and, on August 22, 2012, she filed a 
proposed divorce decree. 
1. Family Court Minute Order and Ira’s Motion for 
Reconsideration   
  On July 24, 2012, the family court, by minute order, 
adopted Susan’s recommended findings of fact and conclusions of 
law with modifications.  On August 3, 2012, Ira filed a motion 
for reconsideration of the family court’s minute order decision 
and the amended minute order.  Ira contended that the family court made a multitude of errors in its property division.  Ira 
pointed out that the family court made the “colossal mistake of 
$538,200” by awarding real property to Ira that was no longer in 
the parties’ possession as it was sold prior to 2005. 
2. Divorce Decree  
  On August 22, 2012, the family court filed its 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Decree Granting 
Absolute Divorce (Decree), and Order Denying Defendant’s Motion 
for Reconsideration, Filed August 3, 2012.  
  In its Decree, the family court found that the 
equities in this case were skewed in favor of Susan, and the 
court concluded that the record fully supported deviation from 
equal distribution of the marital estate to a 75%/25% distribution in favor of Susan.  The court found that Ira’s 
“actions throughout the relationship, including the pre-***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 9 partnership phase through and including the post-filing phase, 
time and again placed [Susan] in worsening financial 
circumstances.”  In its Findings of Facts and Conclusions of 
Law, the family court noted that there were valid and relevant 
considerations authorizing a deviation from the partnership 
model.  The family court stated that it would use the 
outstanding federal tax liability as a factor to deviate from a 
strict 50/50 division although the court noted that it had a “sufficient basis” to allocate the entirety of the debt to Ira.  
The court also found the liquidation of Susan’s three Texas 
properties and a bond she held prior to the marriage to be valid 
and relevant considerations in deviating from the marital 
partnership model. 
  T
he family court found that Susan purchased the 
couple’s marital residence for $685,000 on January 12, 1995, and the court noted that Susan paid for the property as follows: (1) 
$21,674.13 in deposit/earnest money; (2) $486,500.00 in the form of a mortgage; and (3) $200,000 as an option payment.  The court 
concluded that “these funds” constituted a pre-marital capital 
contribution to the partnership.   
  With respect to one of the Texas properties, the 
family court found that the property was not encumbered by a 
mortgage, was sold in February or March 1999, and generated 
proceeds in the amount of $29,270.40, which also constituted a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 10 pre-marital capital contribution to the partnership.  In regard 
to the other two Texas properties, the family court found that 
the properties were encumbered by a mortgage and were sold at 
some point during the marriage.  The court additionally found 
that Susan was entitled to a pre-marital credit for the value of 
the bond Susan liquidated in support of the marital partnership. 
  As for 
Ira’s pre-marital capital contributions, the 
court found that Ira “brought numerous real properties into the 
economic partnership and marriage” with Susan and that the best 
evidence reflecting this was Ira’s first divorce decree and 
separation agreement.  The family court also found that these 
properties “were not unencumbered by debt.”  However, the family 
court did not make any findings as to the value of Ira’s pre-
marital contribution but instead found “that the appraised 
values of the properties are irrelevant to [Ira’s] equity 
interest in the properties.”   
 In its Decree, the family court divided the parties’ 
real properties into three groups: (1) properties awarded to Susan; (2) properties awarded to Ira; and (3) properties to be 
sold with the proceeds to be awarded 75% to Susan and 25% to 
Ira.  The Decree awarded three properties to Susan and ten 
properties to Ira, while designating four properties for sale 
and distribution of the proceeds.  The family court awarded Ira 
the property that Ira previously raised in his motion for ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 11 reconsideration as being no longer in the parties’ possession 
having been sold prior to 2005.  The escrow account for the 
parties’ marital residence, which was to be sold, was first to 
be used to pay the existing IRS debt in full before being 
distributed to the parties.   
 The 
family court did not file a property division 
chart or other document explaining its categorizations of the 
properties and its computations related to the property division.  The court noted that Susan and Ira stipulated to the 
appraised values of the properties in existence at the date of 
marriage and in the month prior to trial; however, these values 
are not clear from the court’s findings.   
  Susan was awarded a “property settlement” in the 
amount of $41,830, “representing the marital assets willfully 
wasted” by Ira in “his new romantic relationship.”
6  This amount 
appears to correspond to the family court’s finding that Ira paid at least $10,000 for his girlfriend’s criminal defense and purchased over $30,000 in jewelry for her. 
  The family court also awarded Susan monthly alimony in 
the amount of $3,000 per month for ten years.  The court stated 
its reason for awarding alimony:  
                         
 6 Susan was also awarded $40,875 representing her 75% share of a 
business investment and the value of the vehicles awarded to Ira. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 12 Based on the length of the marriage, the financial conduct of the parties as it affected the economic partnership of 
the parties both pre and post marriage, the small amount of 
social security income received by [Susan] as her only 
source of continuing income (said source having been 
compromised by [Ira]’s actions), and the current age of 
[Susan], the Court will award alimony by [Ira] to [Susan] . 
. . .  
The court also awarded Susan two of Ira’s retirement accounts 
and specified that Susan shall be Ira’s sole beneficiary under 
his life insurance policy. 
  The family court awarded Ira his real estate business 
and the massage parlor business. 
3. Appeal  
  On September 20, 2012, Ira filed a notice of appeal 
from the Decree and the family court’s Findings of Fact and 
Conclusion of Law.  Ira asked the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA) to vacate the property division and alimony award.  Ira argued that the court erred in deviating from partnership 
principles based on Ira’s financial misconduct, in distributing 
the parties’ properties without a clear application of 
partnership principles or explanation for its division, and in 
awarding alimony based on Ira’s financial misconduct rather than 
on the factors required by Hawaiʻ i law.
7   
  Susan urged the ICA to affirm the family court’s 
Decree.  Regarding property division, she argued that the family 
                         
 7 Ira also argued that the family court erred when a different 
judge from the one that conducted the trial signed the Decree. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 13 court distributed the parties’ marital assets and debts almost 
equally, and she maintained that Ira failed to meet his burden 
to show that he had any net value assets at the time the 
economic partnership began.  Susan also argued that the family 
court’s alimony award was “very reasonable” considering Susan’s 
“dire economic situation” and Ira’s income. 
  In
 its Memorandum Opinion issued on November 29, 2013, 
the ICA vacated the Decree as it pertained to the property 
division and remanded the case for further proceedings.  The ICA 
affirmed the family court’s deviation from partnership 
principles, finding that Ira’s financial misconduct constituted 
a “valid and relevant circumstance” as it reduced the marital 
estate and “continues to reduce Susan’s income.”  The ICA also 
affirmed the family court’s awarding of $41,830 to Susan for 
wasted marital assets as a result of Ira’s relationship with his 
girlfriend.  The ICA reasoned that because there was evidence 
that the date of final separation could have happened before the expenditures, the family court did not err in considering the 
expenditures in deviating from the partnership model. 
  The ICA rejected Ira’s argument that the family 
court’s property division appeared “arbitrary” absent a property 
division chart or justification of its division of marital 
property.  The ICA found that the “family court was able to 
identify and value marital assets without a property division ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 14 chart.”  The ICA also found that “the family court’s decision to 
award alimony to Susan contrary to Ira’s representations of his 
own needs” was not an abuse of discretion in light of the family 
court’s “negative credibility findings” with respect to Ira. 
  Although the ICA found that the family court was able 
to identify and value
 marital assets without a property division 
chart, the ICA found that the family court committed reversible error by distributing a property to Ira that was no longer in the parties possession at the time of the divorce.  
Consequently, the ICA vacated the Decree as it pertained to the 
property division and remanded the case for further proceedings. 
  Ira filed his Application for Writ of Certiorari with 
this court following the ICA’s January 3, 2014 Judgment on 
Appeal. 
 STANDARDS OF REVIEW II.
  The family court’s findings of facts are reviewed 
under the clearly erroneous standard, while the court’s conclusions of law are reviewed de novo under the right/wrong 
standard.  Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 
695, 705 (2012). 
  “We review the family court’s final division and 
distribution of the estate of the parties under the abuse of 
discretion standard, in view of the factors set forth in HRS § 
580-47 and partnership principles.”  Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai i ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 15 19, 868 P.2d 437 (1994) (quoting Gussin v. Gussin, 73 Haw. 470, 
486, 836 P.2d 484, 492 (1992)) (footnote omitted).  The family 
court’s determination of whether facts present valid and 
relevant considerations authorizing a deviation from the 
partnership model division is a question of law that this court 
reviews under the right/wrong standard of appellate review.  
Jackson v. Jackson, 84 Hawai i 319, 332-33, 933 P.2d 1353, 1366-
67 (App. 1997). 
 DISCUSSION III.
  Ira raises three issues in his application.  First, 
whether the family court erred in failing to support its 
property division determination with a property division chart or other documented showing of its categorizations, valuations, 
and computations.  Second, whether the family court erred in 
deviating from partnership principles when it based its 
determination of marital property division and alimony on Ira’s 
alleged financial misconduct.  Finally, whether the family court 
erred in its award of alimony to Susan by not considering 
Susan’s actual financial need and Ira’s age, health, ability to pay, and adverse financial condition. 
A. Whether the Family Court Failed to Adequately  
Support the Property Division   
  Ira argues that in the absence of a property chart or 
other schedule reflecting the family court’s categorizations and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
computations, the reviewing court is faced with an “impossible” 
task of trying to determine the basis for the trial court’s 
“unexplained property division ruling” in deciding whether the 
family court’s division of the property appears to be “just and 
equitable.” 
 16 1. Partnership Principles 
  Under HRS § 580-47 (2006),8 the family court has wide 
discretion to divide marital partnership property according to 
what is “just and equitable” based on the facts and 
circumstances of each case.  Tougas, 76 Hawai i at 26, 868 P.2d 
at 444.  Hawaiʻ i case law follows a framework based on 
partnership principles that provides guidance for family courts in dividing marital partnership property.  Kakinami, 127 Hawai i 
at 137, 276 P.3d at 706; see also Tougas, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 28, 868 
P.2d at 446 (“The partnership model is the appropriate law for 
the family courts to apply when exercising their discretion in 
the adjudication of property division in divorce proceedings.”); 
                         
 8 HRS § 580- 47 provides that upon granting a divorce, the family 
court may “make any further orders as shall appear just and equitable . . . 
finally dividing and distributing the estate of the parties, real, personal, 
or mixed, whether community, joint, or separate.”  In making these orders, 
the family court shall consider “the respective merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will be 
left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of 
the children of the parties, and all other circumstances of the case.”  HRS § 
580-47(a) (2006).  HRS § 580- 47(a) was amended in 2011 to also require the 
consideration of “the concealment of or failure to disclose income or an 
asset, or violation of a restraining order.”  See HRS § 580- 47(a) (Supp. 
2011). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 17 Gussin, 73 Hawai i at 471, 836 P.2d at 486 (noting that the 
partnership model of marriage “provides the necessary guidance 
to the family courts in exercising their discretion and to facilitate appellate review”). 
  The partnership model distinguishes between marital partnership property that is brought into the marriage and 
marital partnership property that is acquired during the 
marriage.
9  Accordingly, Hawaiʻ i courts assign values to marital 
partnership property using five categories designed to assist 
courts in determining the equitable division and distribution of 
property between spouses:  
Category 1 includes the net market value of property 
separately owned by a spouse on the date of marriage;10  
Category 2 includes the increase in the net market value of 
Category 1 property during the marriage;11  
                         
 9 Marital separate property is not discussed in this opinion. 
 10 See Tougas, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 27, 868 P.2d at 445 (“The net market 
value “plus or minus, of all property separately owned by one spouse on the 
date of marriage . . . but excluding the [net market value] attributable to 
property that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to the other 
spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party.”).  
 11 See id. (describing Category 2 as the increase in the net market 
value of all property whose net market value on the date of marriage “is 
included in category 1 and that the owner separately owns continuously from the” date of marriage to the date of the conclusion of the evidentiary part 
of the trial). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 18 Category 3 includes the net market value of property 
separately acquired by gift or inheritance during the marriage;12 
Category 4 includes the increase in the net market value of 
Category 3 property during the marriage;13 and  
Category 5 includes the net market value of the remaining 
marital estate at the conclusion of the evidentiary part of the 
trial.14  See Tougas, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 26, 868 P.2d at 444. 
  Each partner’s individual contributions to the 
marriage, i.e., the values of Category 1 and Category 3, are to 
be repaid to the contributing spouse absent equitable 
considerations15 justifying a deviation.  See Tougas, 76 Hawaiʻ i 
at 26, 868 P.2d at 444; see also Helbush v. Helbush, 108 Hawaiʻ i 
508, 512-13, 122 P.3d 288, 292-93 (App. 2005); Wong v. Wong, 87 
                         
 12 See id. (describing Category 3 as the date- of-acquisition net 
market value, “plus or minus, of property separately acquired by gift or 
inheritance during the marriage but excluding the [net market value] attributable to property that is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to 
the other spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party”). 
 13 See id. (describing Category 4 as the increase in the net market 
value of all property whose net market value “on the date of acquisition 
during the marriage is included in category 3 and that the owner separately owns continuously from the date of acquisition to the” date of the conclusion 
of the evidentiary part of the trial). 
 14 See id. (describing Category 5 as the difference between the net 
market values, “plus or minus, of all property owned by one or both of the 
spouses on the [date of the conclusion of the evidentiary part of the trial] 
minus the [net market values], plus or minus, includable in categories 1, 2, 
3, and 4”).  
15  Hawaiʻi courts frequently refer to “valid and relevant 
considerations” and “valid and relevant circumstances” when discussing 
deviation from partnership principles.  We also use the term “equitable 
considerations” in this opinion. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 19 Hawaiʻi 475, 483, 960 P.2d 145, 153 (App. 1998).  Absent 
equitable considerations justifying a different result, the 
increase in the value of each partner’s individual contributions to the marriage, i.e., the values of Category 2 and Category 4, 
are divided equally between the parties.  See Tougas, 76 Hawaiʻ i 
at 26, 868 P.2d at 445.  The value of Category 5, which is the 
net profit or loss of the marital partnership after deducting the other four categories, is to be divided equally unless 
equitable considerations merit deviation.  Id.; see also 
Helbush, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 513, 122 P.3d at 293 (“[I]f there is no 
agreement between the husband and wife defining the respective 
property interests, partnership principles dictate an equal 
division of the marital estate ‘where the only facts proved are 
the marriage itself and the existence of jointly owned 
property.’” (quoting Gussin, 73 Haw. at 482, 836 P.2d at 491)).  
In other words, the values of Category 2, Category 4, and 
Category 5 are awarded one-half to each spouse absent equitable 
considerations justifying deviation from a 50/50 distribution.  
Jackson, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 332, 933 P.2d at 1366. 
  The partnership model requires the family court to 
first find all of the facts necessary for categorization of the 
properties and assignment of the relevant net market values.  
Id. at 332, 933 P.2d at 1367.  Second, the court must identify 
any equitable considerations justifying deviation from an equal ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 20 distribution.  Id.  Third, the court must “decide whether or not 
there will be a deviation,” and in its fourth step, the court 
decides the extent of any deviation.  Id.  
 2. Division of Property in This Case  
  The ICA held that the family court clearly exceeded 
the bounds of reason by awarding a non-existent asset valued at 
$538,200 to one spouse, necessitating remand to the family court 
for re-division of the property.  Despite the award of a property that had been sold several years before the divorce, 
the ICA found that the “family court was able to identify and 
value marital assets without a property division chart.”  The 
record, however, indicates otherwise.  Thus, we also consider 
whether the record in this case is adequate for review of the 
equities of the family court’s division of the marital estate.  
  The family court divided the real estate properties of 
the marital estate into three groups: (1) properties to be 
distributed to Susan (three); (2) properties to be distributed to Ira (ten); and (3) properties to be sold with the proceeds to 
be divided between Susan and Ira (four).  In its division of the 
real properties into these three groups, the family court did 
not list any of the properties’ outstanding mortgages or net 
market values either at the date of marriage or close of 
evidence at trial.  The family court also did not assign net ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
market values to each property according to the categories of 
the partnership model.  
 21   While t
he family court made several findings regarding 
Susan’s pre-marital capital contribution and the valuation of 
her properties, these findings were incomplete.  The court found 
that the funds Susan used to purchase the marital residence 
constituted a pre-marital capital contribution to the 
partnership.  The family court also found that the liquidation of one of Susan’s Texas properties constituted a pre-marital 
capital contribution to the partnership.  However, the family 
court did not specify the value of the marital residence or the 
Texas property on the date of marriage or the increase in value 
of the properties during the marriage.  With respect to the 
other two Texas properties, the family court found that the 
properties were encumbered by a mortgage and were sold during 
the marriage, but the court did not determine the proceeds of 
the sales or assign values to the property.  Additionally, it is not clear whether the court credited Susan with the proceeds of 
the sales of these properties as pre-marital capital 
contributions.   
  With respect to the family court’s findings regarding 
Ira’s pre-marital capital contributions, the court found only 
that Ira “brought numerous real properties into the economic 
partnership and marriage” and that the best evidence of this was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 22 the divorce decree and separation agreement from his previous 
divorce.  The family court found that these properties “were not 
unencumbered by debt,” but the court did not include in its 
findings the net market values of any of Ira’s “numerous real 
properties” on the date of marriage or the increase in value of 
the properties during the marriage. 
  As a result, the family court
’s findings do not 
reflect that the court credited Ira with any pre-marital capital 
contributions.  The absence of such findings renders it 
infeasible for the parties and the reviewing court to understand 
the basis for the property division.  Further, in the absence of 
determinations of pre-marital net market values of assets at the 
date of marriage and the close of evidence at trial and a 
categorization of the marital assets, the reviewing court is not 
able to discern whether or not the family court correctly 
calculated its overall property division.   
 3. Property Division Chart  
  It is well established that a family court is guided in divorce proceedings by partnership principles in governing 
division and distribution of marital partnership property.  See 
Helbush, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 513, 122 P.3d at 293.  It is axiomatic 
that a family court cannot satisfactorily fulfill its 
responsibility under general partnership principles to determine 
each party’s contributions and equitably divide marital property ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 23 without first assessing the net market values of the parties’ 
respective properties at various time frames.  See Jackson, 84 
Hawaiʻi at 332, 933 P.2d at 1366 (describing what the partnership 
model requires of the family court). 
  In Higashi v. Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i 228, 103 P.3d 388 
(App. 2004), the ICA held that, in applying partnership model principles and determining property categorizations, the family court should utilize a property division chart or other similar 
document.  Higashi directs the family court to file, as part of 
its findings and conclusions, a property division chart that includes the following: 
(1) all of the parties’ assets stating the relevant net 
market values of the assets using the five-category scheme of 
the partnership model,  
(2) the partnership model division of the assets,  
(3) the actual division of the assets, and  
(4) an explanation of the reasons for the material 
differences between the partnership model division and the actual division.
16  Id. 
                         
16 Specifically, Higashi directs the family court to include the 
following in its property division chart:  
(a) an itemized list of each of plaintiff’s Category 1 and 3 
assets/debts, stating (i) the Category 1 and 3 value/amount of each and (ii) the Category 2 and 4 net market value of 
each asset;  
(continued. . . ) 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 24    A family court that chooses to ignore the sound 
recommendation of the Higashi decision runs the risk that its 
decision will not appear “just and equitable” to the reviewing court and the parties.  We endorse the recommendation made by 
the Higashi court and emphasize that a chart or equivalent 
itemization of the information required by the five-category partnership model is a valuable and important tool for the 
family court to properly divide property and afford transparency 
to the parties and reviewing court.  See Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 
230, 103 P.3d at 390 (providing a detailed description of what 
the family court’s property division chart should include).  
                         
(. . .continued) 
(b) an itemized list of each of defendant’s Category 1 and 3 
assets/debts, stating (i) the Category 1 and 3 value/amount of each and (ii) the Category 2 and 4 net market value of 
each asset;  
(c) an itemized list of each of plaintiff’s and/or defendant’s Category 5 assets/debts stating the net market value of each;  
(d) an itemized statement of the Partnership Model Division of 
each of the assets/debts owned/owed at the time of the 
divorce;  
(e) an itemized statement of the actual division by the court of each of the assets/debts owned/owed at the time of the 
divorce;  
(f) an itemized statement of the specifics of each material 
difference between (i) the Partnership Model Division and 
(ii) the actual division by the court; and  
(g) a statement/explanation of the court’s reason(s) for each 
material difference. 
Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 230, 103 P.3d at 390 (formatting added). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 25 Given the numerous omissions of property categorizations and net 
market values in this case, the record is deficient to enable 
meaningful appellate review of the family court’s distribution 
of the marital estate. 
B. Whether the Family Court’s Deviation from a 50/50 
Division of the Marital Estate in Addition to a Deduction 
for Marital Waste Was Justified 
  While the ICA has remanded this case for re-division of the property, the ICA upheld the family court’s deviation 
from partnership principles.  Thus, we consider whether Ira’s 
dissipation of marital assets through gifts and payments to his 
girlfriend and negligently late payments to the IRS constitute 
equitable considerations allowing deviation from marital 
partnership principles in the division of the marital estate. 
  In its decision, the ICA found that Ira’s conduct with respect to the IRS tax debt constituted a valid and relevant 
circumstance for deviation from marital partnership principles.  
The ICA reasoned that the present and future garnishment of 
Susan’s social security check was an appropriate factor for the 
family court to consider in deviating from an equal division of 
their marital partnership property.  Further, the ICA affirmed 
the family court’s designation of Ira’s financial misconduct as a waste of marital assets.  In his Application, Ira suggests 
that the ICA’s analysis condones the family court’s punishing of 
him twice for the same conduct. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 26   Because the family court appeared to treat Ira’s 
financial misconduct as an equitable consideration justifying 
deviation from partnership principles and as marital waste 
during the divorce to be charged to Ira, we discuss both 
concepts below.  
1. Deviation from Partnership Principles and Marital 
Waste  
  As discussed, Hawaiʻ i law follows a partnership model 
that governs the division and distribution of marital 
partnership property.  Helbush, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 513, 122 P.3d at 
293.  “[W]hile the family court judges are accorded wide 
discretion pursuant to HRS § 580-47 in adjudicating the rights 
of parties to a divorce, the family court strives for ‘a certain 
degree of uniformity, stability, clarity or predictability in 
its decision-making and thus are compelled to apply the appropriate law to the facts of each case and be guided by 
reason and conscience to attain a just result.’”  Tougas, 76 
Hawaiʻi at 28, 868 P.2d at 446 (alteration omitted) (quoting 
Gussin, 73 Haw. at 486, 836 P.2d at 492).  Accordingly, our law 
provides certain parameters for a family judge’s discretion. 
  While a family court is not required to presume 
specific percentage splits in the division of each category of 
property, Gussin, 73 Haw. at 481, 836 P.2d at 490, it must 
exercise its discretion within the framework provided by our ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 27 law.  The family court’s first step is to find the requisite 
facts under the partnership model (i.e., utilize the five 
categories and assign net market values) before proceeding to 
the second step of deciding whether or not the facts present any 
equitable considerations warranting deviation from the 
partnership model.  Jackson, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 332, 933 P.2d at 1366.   
  Whether equitable considerations exist justifying 
deviation from partnership principles is a separate issue from 
whether or not the court should charge a divorcing party for 
wasted marital assets.  A family court may charge a divorcing 
party for wasted marital assets when, during the divorce, “a 
party’s action or inaction caused a reduction of the dollar value of the marital estate under such circumstances that he or 
she equitably should be charged with having received the dollar 
value of the reduction.”  Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 241, 103 P.3d 
at 401.   
  As discussed below, in the case of marital waste, the 
wasted assets are treated as a part of the marital partnership 
property that has already been awarded to the spouse responsible 
for the waste.  This is a separate consideration from whether or 
not to deviate from partnership principles.  Because these are 
distinct legal considerations, we discuss equitable deviation 
from the partnership model separately from chargeable deductions for marital waste.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 28 2. Equitable Deviation from the Partnership Model  
  In determining whether the circumstances justify 
deviation from the partnership model, the family court must 
consider the following:  
the respective merits of the parties, the relative 
abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party 
will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon 
either party for the benefit of the children of the 
parties, and all other circumstances of the case. 
HRS § 580-47(a) (2006); see also Jackson, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 333, 933 
P.2d at 1367.  “Other than relative circumstances of the parties 
when they entered into the marital partnership and possible 
exceptional situations, the above-quoted part of HRS § 580–47(a) 
requires the family court to focus on the present and the 
future, not the past.”  Jackson, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 333, 933 P.2d at 
1367.17  In other words, deviation from the partnership model 
should be based primarily on the current and future economic 
needs of the parties rather than on punishing one party for 
financial misconduct.18 
  In its Findings of Facts and Conclusions of Law, the family court found that there were valid and relevant 
                         
 17 See also Jacoby v. Jacoby, 134 Hawaiʻ i 431, 448, 341 P.3d 1231, 
1248 (App. 2014); Epp v. Epp, 80 Hawaiʻ i 79, 89, 905 P.2d 54, 64 (App. 1995).     
 18 Under the 2011 amendments to HRS § 580- 47(a), a court must also 
consider “the concealment of or failure to disclose income or an asset, or 
violation of a restraining order.”  See HRS § 580- 47(a) (Supp. 2011).   These 
amendments do not apply in this case.  See 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 140, § 3 
at 356 (providing an effective date of October 1, 2011, and stating that the act “does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were 
incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 29 circumstances for departure from the partnership model.  The 
family court considered the outstanding federal tax liability 
and the liquidation of Susan’s three Texas properties during the 
marriage to be equitable considerations.  In the Decree, the 
court found that the equities in this case were skewed in favor 
of Susan, and the court explained that Ira’s “actions throughout 
the relationship . . . time and again placed” Susan “in 
worsening financial circumstances.”  Thus, the family court apparently found an equitable consideration based on Ira’s 
financial misconduct.  
  The family court focused on Ira’s financial misconduct while “underemphasiz[ing] the relative abilities of the parties 
and the condition in which each party will be left after the 
divorce.”  See Hatayama v. Hatayama, 9 Haw. App. 1, 11, 818 P.2d 
277, 282 (1991).  This evidences “a fundamental misunderstanding of the economic consequence of being married.”  Id.  Divorce “is 
not a vehicle by which one spouse is compensated for having 
given more than he or she received during the marriage or for 
having had to suffer during the marriage from the other spouse’s 
inadvertent, negligent, or intentional inadequacies, failures, 
or wrongdoings, financial or otherwise.”  Id.; cf. Richards v. 
Richards, 44 Haw. 491, 509, 355 P.2d 188, 198 (1960) (explaining 
that “respective merits of the parties” as used in HRS  § 580-47 
does not have “any reference to personal conduct of the spouse” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 30 but only means the “merits of the respective claims of the 
spouses”).  Thus, the court’s analysis in deciding whether or 
not to apply a deviation should focus on the abilities of the 
parties and the circumstances in which each party will be left by 
the divorc e.  
  Consequently, Ira’s financial misconduct during the 
marriage should not have been considered by the family court 
when deciding whether to deviate from an equal division of marital partnership property in the absence of a finding of 
extraordinary circumstances.
19  Instead, the family court should 
have focused on the factors set forth in HRS § 580-47(a) in making its determination of whether or not equitable 
considerations justified a deviation from an equal division of 
the marital partnership property.  Accordingly, the family 
court’s decision to deviate from an equal division to a 75/25 
division was an abuse of discretion to the extent the family 
court considered Ira’s financial misconduct to be a “valid and relevant consideration.” 
  Although financial misconduct is not a proper 
consideration in determining a deviation from partnership 
                         
 19 In Hatayama the ICA noted that a spouse’s financial misconduct 
may justify a deviation in “extraordinary circumstances.”  9 Haw. App. at 12, 
818 P.2d at 283.  T he family court may, on remand, consider whether this case 
presents “extraordinary circumstances.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 31 principles in the absence of a finding of exceptional 
circumstances, our law does allow for a court to charge a 
divorcing party for marital waste during the pendency of a 
divorce, which is discussed in the next section. 
3. Chargeable Deduction for Marital Waste 
  Hawaiʻ i courts charge a divorcing party for marital 
waste during the divorce when doing so would be equitable.  See 
Chen v. Hoeflinger, 127 Hawaiʻ i 346, 358, 279 P.3d 11, 23 (App. 
2012); Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 241, 103 P.3d at 401.  It is 
fundamental to recognize that marital waste is only a chargeable deduction if it occurs during the divorce; thus, “a reduction of 
the value of the marital estate during the marriage, but prior to the time of the divorce, is not a chargeable reduction.”  
Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 241, 103 P.3d at 401.  Thus, a court 
cannot find that a party’s use of marital partnership property 
is chargeable as marital waste without first finding the date on 
which the divorce commenced.  See id. 
  The divorce commences on the earliest of the following 
dates:  
(1) the filing of a complaint for divorce;  (2) the date of final separation (i.e., the earlier of the 
date the trial is completed or the unconditional, unmodified communication from one spouse to the other that the marriage has 
ended and divorce is desired); or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 32 (3) a substantial step is taken toward final separation, 
which later occurs, or filing the complaint, which later is 
filed.  See Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 241, 103 P.3d at 401; Myers 
v. Myers, 70 Haw. 143, 151-52, 764 P.2d 1237, 1243 (1988) 
(defining the date of final separation).  
  In the present case, the family court did not make a 
finding that the parties’ divorce commenced on a specific date.  
While the family court found that Ira purchased airline tickets 
for his girlfriend and her daughter in December 2008 and began 
dating and living with her in 2009, the court did not make a 
specific finding of the date the divorce commenced for the 
purpose of determining whether dollar reductions to the value of the marital estate were chargeable to Ira. 
  Although the family court found that the exact date at 
which Ira “moved out” of the marital residence was “unclear,” 
the family court’s findings referred to the “July 2010” date as 
the “time of separation.”  Notwithstanding the absence of a 
finding regarding the date the divorce commenced, the ICA held 
that the parties’ divorce date occurred prior to 2010 because Ira took a substantial step towards the date of separation 
through the purchases expended on his girlfriend. 
  The family court awarded Susan $41,830 representing 
wasted marital assets with regard to Ira’s relationship with his 
girlfriend.  Presumably, the family court awarded Susan this ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 33 amount in light of the $10,000 Ira paid for his girlfriend’s 
criminal defense in addition to the $30,000 he spent on jewelry 
in 2010.20  However, the family court should have first 
determined the parties’ date on which the divorce commenced before designating Ira’s expenditures on his girlfriend as 
marital waste.  If the starting date of the divorce was a date 
in early 2009, any subsequent dissipation of marital assets, 
which would include the jewelry expenditures, could be chargeable to Ira as marital waste, and the family court may 
accordingly “treat that dollar amount as having been awarded to 
the divorcing party who caused that chargeable reduction.”
21  
Higashi, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 241-42, 103 P.3d at 401-02.  However, if 
the divorce began in July 2010, Ira’s dissipation of marital 
                         
 20 Ira’s purchasing of the $30,000 in jewelry for his girlfriend is 
closely related to his failure to pay the IRS tax debt in full with the 
second home equity line.  The family court found that the money Ira used for the purchase of the jewelry “was intended to be utilized for the payment of 
taxes.”  On remand, the family court may consider whether the excess 
penalties and fees incurred because of Ira’s failure to pay the IRS debt with 
the second equity line should be considered a wasted marital asset. This 
determination will depend on the court’s determination of the date of the 
commencement of the divorce.   
 21 Instead of considering Ira’s expenditures on his girlfriend as 
having been awarded to Ira, the family court awarded Susan a property 
settlement to be paid from Ira’s share of the escrow account for the marital 
residence, and if the funds from the escrow account were insufficient, Ira would have to make payment in full within a certain number of days from the 
filing of the Decree.  The amount of the settlement awarded to Susan appeared 
to be the full value of the waste.  This is contrary to Higashi, which 
requires the court to treat the dollar amount as being a part of the marital partnership property and treating it as already awarded to Ira.  In requiring 
Ira to pay the full amount of the waste to Susan, the family court required 
Ira to pay more than he was required under the Higashi approach.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 34 assets could not be considered a chargeable reduction because 
the March and April 2010 jewelry purchases would be considered 
as having occurred during the marriage.  Id. at 241, 103 P.3d at 
401. 
  Thus, absent a finding by the family court regarding 
the date the divorce commenced, it is unclear as to whether or 
not Ira’s dissipation of marital assets should have qualified as 
a chargeable reduction in the division of marital assets.  The ICA therefore erred in affirming the family court’s award to 
Susan for wasted marital assets.
22  
C. Whether the Family Court Erred by Basing the  
Alimony Award on Ira’s Financial Misconduct 
In his third question presented, Ira argues that the 
family court erroneously based its alimony ruling on its finding of his financial misconduct while failing to consider Susan’s 
“actual expenses” and his “age, health, ability to pay, and 
“adverse financial condition after the divorce.”  The ICA 
declined to find that the family court’s alimony award to Susan constituted an abuse of discretion in light of the family 
court’s finding that Ira was “not credible.” 
                         
22  Consequently, we do not address Ira’s argument that the family 
court and the ICA also erred by penalizing him twice for the asserted 
financial misconduct by treating it both as an equitable consideration 
justifying deviation from partnership principles and as marital waste. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 35 However, because the court’s division of property 
likely had an impact in determining Susan’s entitlement to 
alimony, the ICA should have also vacated the family court’s 
alimony award.23  Kuroda v. Kuroda, 87 Hawaiʻ i 419, 430, 958 P.2d 
541, 552 (App. 1998) (vacating an alimony award and remanding 
for reconsideration in light of the court’s decision to vacate 
the corresponding property division of the divorce decree). 
Secondly, although the ICA characterized the family 
court as having relied on the financial condition of the parties 
in determining the alimony award, the family court’s 
justification for the award apparently took into account Ira’s 
financial misconduct.  Because alimony will be re-determined on remand, we discuss the appropriate circumstances that may be 
considered in an award of spousal support. 
  HRS § 580-47(a) (2006) requires the family court upon 
decreeing a separation to take into consideration the following 
criteria when making further orders for the support and 
maintenance of either spouse: “the respective merits of the 
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens 
imposed upon either party for the benefit of the children of the 
parties, and all other circumstances of the case.”  The court 
                         
 23 We do not suggest that vacating a division of property would 
require vacating an award of alimony in all cases.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 36 must also consider all of the following factors in ordering 
spousal support and maintenance: 
(1) Financial resources of the parties; 
(2) Ability of the party seeking support and 
maintenance to meet his or her needs independently;  
(3) Duration of the marriage;  
(4) Standard of living established during the 
marriage; 
(5) Age of the parties; (6) Physical and emotional condition of the parties; (7) Usual occupation of the parties during the 
marriage; 
(8) Vocational skills and employability of the party 
seeking support and maintenance; 
(9) Needs of the parties; (10) Custodial and child support responsibilities;  (11) Ability of the party from whom support and 
maintenance is sought to meet his or her own needs while meeting the needs of the party seeking support 
and maintenance; 
(12) Other factors which measure the financial 
condition in which the parties will be left as the result of the action under which the determination of maintenance is made; and 
(13) Probable duration of the need of the party 
seeking support and maintenance. 
 
HRS § 580-47(a); Cassiday v. Cassiday, 6 Haw. App. 207, 
215, 716 P.2d 1145, 1151 (1985) (“When deciding in a 
divorce case whether one party must pay periodic support to 
the other, for how long, and how much, the family court 
must consider all of the factors enumerated in HRS § 580-***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 37 47(a)[].”), aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 68 Haw. 383, 716 
P.2d 1133 (1986).   
In its Decree the family court provided four reasons 
as the basis for its awarding of $3,000 per month for ten years 
to Susan: “the length of the marriage”; “the financial conduct 
of the parties”; “the small amount of social security income” as Susan’s “only source of continuing income (said source having 
been compromised by [Ira’s] actions)”; and Susan’s age.  (Emphasis added).  While the ICA characterized the family court 
as actually relying on the financial condition of the parties 
and not Ira’s financial conduct, the family court’s specified 
justification for the alimony award appears to have taken into 
account Ira’s financial misconduct.   
Further, the family court’s Decree incorrectly states 
that Susan’s social security check would continue to be 
garnished by the IRS.  However, given that the family court also 
ordered the outstanding IRS debt to be paid in full from the escrow account of the marital property, there could be no 
genuine concern for the future garnishment of Susan’s social 
security check.   
Additionally, Ira argues that the family court erred 
in its alimony award to Susan because it awarded more money than 
Susan’s actual needs required.  Susan provided the family court 
with a statement of actual expenses.  In her Income and Expense ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 38 Statement filed November 7, 2011, Susan stated that her monthly 
personal expenses amounted to $1,390.  In her proposed divorce 
decree, Susan requested that the court award her alimony in a 
single lump-sum payment of $250,000.  In its Decree, the court 
ordered monthly alimony in the amount of $3,000 per month for 
ten years, totaling $360,000 without making a finding as to the 
actual monthly spousal support that Susan would require based on 
her demonstrated needs. 
Even if Ira is able to pay the additional amount of 
alimony, Susan is not entitled to more spousal support than is required to satisfy her demonstrated needs.  See Cassiday, 6 
Haw. App. at 215, 716 P.2d at 1151.  The family court did not make a finding that Susan required $3,000 in monthly support and 
maintenance.  The family court should not have awarded Susan 
this amount absent a finding that she required funds beyond the 
amount provided in her Income and Expense Statement. 
Furthermore, the family court did not make any finding 
with respect to the large sums of money (approximately $390,000) that were deposited into Susan’s personal bank account between 
December 2009 and April 2012, which included the reimbursement 
checks from her sister’s convent totaling $98,034.74 and the 
$49,221.91 in “cashed out” funds. 
On remand, the family court should make any award of 
alimony in accordance with the factors set out in HRS § 580-***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 39 47(a) (2006).  This requires, among other things, consideration 
of the needs of both of the parties and Ira’s ability to pay.  
 CONCLUSION IV.
For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s January 3, 2014 
Judgment on Appeal is affirmed to the extent that it vacates the family court’s property division.  The ICA’s January 3, 2014 
Judgment on Appeal and the family court’s August 22, 2012 
“Decree Granting Absolute Divorce” are otherwise vacated.  This case is remanded to the family court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.  
Peter Van Name Esser and 
Huilin Dong for petitioner  
Samuel P. King, Jr.  
for respondent   
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Edward H. Kubo, Jr. 
 
