 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
          
        
         
         
         ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-23-0000743 17-JUN-2026 08:24 AM Dkt. 13 OP 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI‘I  
 
 ---o0o---
STATE  OF
  HAWAIʻI,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.
  
 
SILBER  M.  JERCY,  
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant.  
SCWC-23-0000743  
 
CERTIORARI  TO
  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS  
(CAAP-23-0000743;  CASE  NO.  1CPC-22-0000352)  
 
JUNE  17,  2026  
 
DEVENS,  C.J.,  McKENNA,  EDDINS,  AND  GINOZA,  JJ.,  
AND  CIRCUIT  JUDGE  CATALDO,  ASSIGNED  BY  REASON  OF  VACANCY  
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  DEVENS,  C.J.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
This
 case centers on the factors a trial court must 
consider when a criminal defendant moves to suppress 
identification evidence from a field show-up. The Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA) correctly determined that the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) overlooked certain            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
           
          
           
         
         
          
          
         
     
   
 
  
 
        
            
              
          
            
         
             
             
            
             
 
 
 
         relevant factors that should have been considered when it denied 
defendant’s motion to suppress. However, in remanding the case 
for a new trial, the ICA should have also determined whether, 
upon balancing all relevant factors as was required, the 
suppression motion was correctly denied. Given that the 
totality of the circumstances weighed in favor of granting the 
suppression motion on this record, we clarify that the motion 
should have been granted, and thus, the identification evidence 
shall be suppressed on remand. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Incident 
According to trial testimony, the complaining witness (CW), 
who was sixty-nine years old at the time, was hanging laundry at 
her Halawa home on March 22, 2022, when a man she had never seen 
before attacked her by hitting her several times around her 
head. The man ran off and two of CW’s neighbors separately 
chased after him. One neighbor, C. Hernandez (Hernandez), 
testified that he went after the man on his moped but lost sight 
of the man for ten to fifteen seconds during the chase. The 
other neighbor, J. Wainit (Wainit), drove off in a car with his 
“friend” but admitted that he did not get a “clear view” of the 
assailant.1 
1 The record does not identify Wainit’s “friend.” 
2  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
     
           
          
          
            
        
         
          
           
         
            
       
             
           
          
         
            
         
         
             
          
 
 
             
    The neighbors subsequently saw Respondent/Defendant-
Appellant Silber M. Jercy (Jercy) sitting at a nearby bus stop 
(approximately one to two minutes away by moped, according to 
Hernandez’s testimony), believing that Jercy was the man who had 
hit CW. The neighbors detained Jercy and called the police. 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Alayna Benton (Officer 
Benton) arrived at the bus stop and handcuffed Jercy. 
Back at CW’s home, CW, whose primary language is Chuukese, 
verbally provided HPD with a brief description of the assailant. 
CW’s granddaughter was present to interpret between Chuukese and 
English, but HPD did not obtain a written statement from CW at 
the time because of the language barrier.2 
CW was told that HPD “had a male in custody” and that she 
“would identify him before [going] to the hospital.” CW was 
then placed in an ambulance for transport to the hospital 
without her granddaughter or a Chuukese interpreter. The 
ambulance was then rerouted to the nearby bus stop to have CW 
identify her attacker. HPD Officer Jon Tomishima (Officer 
Tomishima) testified that although HPD wanted to instruct CW 
that the perpetrator may or may not be present in the show-up, 
Officer Tomishima was unable to provide that instruction due to 
2 According to HPD Officer Jon Tomishima, a Chuukese translator was not 
available at the time. 
3  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
    
           
             
           
          
            
     
            
      
    
 
          
        
  
           
        
          
           
           
          
       
      
 
 
        the language barrier. 
After the ambulance arrived near the bus stop, CW, who was 
sitting on a gurney in the back of the ambulance, was able to 
view Jercy through the rear windows. During this field show-up, 
Jercy stood alone and remained handcuffed, with his hands behind 
his back and an HPD officer standing behind him. No other 
persons were shown to CW. 
CW identified Jercy as her attacker. CW testified that she 
based her identification on Jercy’s face. 
B. Relevant Procedural Background 
Jercy was charged with assault in the second degree, in 
violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statu tes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(m) 
(Supp. 2021). 
Prior to his
 jury trial, Jercy moved to suppress CW’s field 
show-up identification, arguing that the show-up was so 
suggestive that it was unreliable for presentation at trial.3 
Relying on our decision in State v. Kaneaiakala, 145 Hawai‘i 231,  
450 P.3d
 761 (2019), the circuit court analyzed the facts in 
light of the relevant factors listed in Hawai‘i Pattern Jury 
Instructions--Criminal (HAWJIC) 3.19 and determined that CW’s 
identification was sufficiently reliable notwithstanding the 
3 The Honorable Rowena A. Somerville presided. 
4  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
           
 
 
       
 
 
        
   
 
      
    
 
         
      
 
          
      
 
       
      
 
 
       
 
 
       
 
       
        
 
         
      
 
         
    
 
        
 
 
 
    (continued . . .) suggestiveness of the field show-up.4 The circuit court denied 
4 HAWJIC 3.19 reads as follows: 
The  burden  of   proof  is  on  the  prosecution  with  
reference  to  every  element  of  a  crime  charged,  and  this  
burden  includes  the  burden  of  proving  beyond  a  reasonable  
doubt  the  identity  of  the  defendant  as  the  person  
responsible  for  the  crime  charged.  
You mu
st decide whether an eyewitness gave accurate 
testimony regarding identification. 
In evaluating identification testimony, you may 
consider the following factors: 
The opportunity of the witness to observe the person 
involved in the alleged criminal act; 
The stress, if any, to which the witness was subject 
at the time of the observation; 
The witness’s ability, following the observation, to 
provide a description of the person; 
The  extent  to   which  the  defendant  fits  or  does  not  
fit  the  description  of  the  person  previously  given  by  the  
witness;  
The cr
oss-racial or ethnic nature of the 
identification; 
The witness’s capacity to make an identification; 
Evidence relating to the witness’s ability to 
identify other participants in the alleged criminal act; 
Whether the witness was able to identify the person 
in a photographic or physical lineup; 
The period of time between the alleged criminal act 
and the witness’s identification; 
Whether the witness had prior contacts with the 
person; 
The  ex tent  to  which  the  witness  is  either  certain  or  
uncertain  of  the  identification  and  whether  the  witness’s  
assertions  concerning  certainty  or  uncertainty  are  well-
founded;  
5  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
    
        
 
 
        
      
 
        
    
 
      
 
       
 
        
       
          
         
      
         
         
         
      
 
        
       
          
      
 
        
           
            
  
  Jercy’s suppression motion. 
The jury later found Jercy guilty as charged. 
On  appeal,  the  ICA   vacated  the  circuit  court’s  judgment  and  
remanded  for  a  new  trial.   Applying  Kaneaiakala,  the  ICA  found  
that  the  circuit  court  erroneously  failed  to  consider  the  
relevant  factors  listed  in  HAWJIC  3.19A  and  the  effect  of  the  
suggestiveness  of  the  show-up  on  the  reliability  of  CW’s  
identification.    The  ICA  did  not  indicate  whether  CW’s  5
Whether the witness’s identification is in fact the 
product of his/her own recollection; and 
Any other evidence relating to the witness’s ability 
to make an identification. 
HAWJIC 3.19 Eyewitness Testimony (eff. 2014). 
5HAWJIC
 3.19A reads as follows: 
In this case, in addition to other eyewitness 
identification testimony, you have received evidence that 
the defendant was identified by a witness at a so-called 
“show-up” conducted by the police. While show-ups are 
permissible, they are inherently suggestive police 
procedures. In determining the reliability and accuracy of 
an identification made at a police show-up, you must 
consider the totality of the circumstances involved in the 
show-up, which may include the following: 
Whether the identification was the result of a 
suggestive procedure, including actions taken or words 
spoken by police or anyone else to the witness before, 
during, or after the identification process; 
Whether the police either indicated to the witness 
that a suspect was present in the procedure or failed to 
warn the witness that the perpetrator may or may not be in 
the procedure; 
Whether  the  defendant  was  required  to  wear  
distinctive  clothing  that  the  perpetrator  allegedly  wore,  
or  was  handcuffed  or  otherwise  appeared  to  be  in  police  
custody;  
    (continued . . .) 
6  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
     
 
       
          
         
         
 
 
          
        
          
     
 
          
        
         
          
    
 
          
        
         
    
 
         
     
 
        
 
 
 
       
      
 
      
      
 
         
      
 
        identification  would  be  admissible  or  was  suppressed  upon  
remand.  
C. State’s Certiorari Application 
On certiorari, the State presents four questions: 
1. Did the ICA gravely err or act inconsistently with 
prior decisions by requiring the Circuit Court to expressly 
address the factors in HAWJIC 3.19A in its admissibility 
determination? 
2. Did the ICA gravely err or act inconsistently with 
prior decisions when it vacated the Circuit Court’s 
decision even though the Circuit Court did in fact consider 
the relevant factors regarding suggestiveness[?] 
3. Did the ICA gravely err or act inconsistently with 
prior decisions when it vacated the Circuit Court’s 
decision based on the suggestiveness of the show-up when 
the real issue in this case was whether the identification 
was reliable notwithstanding suggestiveness? 
4. Did the ICA gravely err or act inconsistently with 
prior decisions by vacating Defendant’s Amended Judgment of 
Conviction even though any errors in the identification by 
Complainant constituted harmless error? 
We granted the State’s application on April 29, 2026. 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
With respect to whether an eyewitness identification should 
Whether  the  witness   was  exposed   to  opinions,  
descriptions,  or  identifications  made  by  other  witnesses,  
or  to  photographs,  news  media,  or  to  any  other  information  
that  may  have  influenced  the  independence  of  the  
identification;  
Wh
ether other participants in the show-up were 
similar in appearance to the defendant; 
Whether the witness’s identification was made 
spontaneously and remained consistent thereafter; [and] 
. . . any other circumstance relating to the 
witness’s ability to make an identification. 
HAWJIC 3.19A Show-Up Identification (eff. 2014) (brackets removed). 
7  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
           
          
           
  
   
 
          
       
        
 
       
 be suppressed, we have held that questions of suggestiveness and 
reliability are questions of law that are freely reviewable on 
appeal. Kaneaiakala
, 145 Hawai‘i at 240, 450 P.3d at 770 
(cleaned up). 
IV.
 DISCUSSION 
A. The circuit court should have considered the effect of 
suggestiveness on the reliability of CW’s identification 
and the relevant factors provided by HAWJIC 3.19A. 
Before
 the ICA, the disputed issue was 
whether  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  
relevant  HAWJIC  3.19A  factors,  the  impact  of  the  
suggestiveness  of  the  procedures  used  in  the  
identification,  and  other  relevant  factors  under  the  
totality  of  the  circumstances  of  the  identification  in  its  
determination  that  [CW’s]  identification  was  reliable,  
notwithstanding  that  it  was  impermissibly  suggestive.  
The  ICA  determined  that  the  circuit  court  erred  because  it  was  
required  to  weigh  these  additional  considerations  and  failed  to  
do  so  in  denying  Jercy’s  motion  to  suppress.   We  agree.  
“A  defendant  is  denied  due  process  of  law  when  the  
procedure  used  to  obtain  an  eyewitness  identification  admitted  
at  trial  is  ‘unnecessarily  suggestive  and  conducive  to  
irreparable  mistaken  identification.’”   Id.  at  240,  450  P.3d  at  
770  (quoting  State  v.  Masaniai,  63  Haw.  354,  362,  628  P.2d  1018,  
1024  (1981)).   However,  “an  eyewitness  identification  is  not  
inadmissible  merely  because  the  identification  procedure  was  
impermissibly  suggestive.   Rather,  whether  an  eyewitness  
identification  obtained  through  an  impermissibly  suggestive  
8
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
          
   
       
           
          
        
       
 
          
        
         
           
         
           
     procedure is admissible depends upon the reliability of the 
identification.” Kaneaiakala
, 145 Hawai‘i at 240, 450 P.3d at 
770 (cleaned up). 
“While
 show-ups are permissible, they are inherently 
suggestive.” State v. Cabinatan
, 132 Hawai‘i 63, 76, 319 P.3d 
1071, 1084 (2014). Accordingly, the key issue before the 
circuit court was whether CW’s identification was reliable 
notwithstanding the inherent suggestiveness of the show-up. 
In  vacating  the  circuit  court’s  decision,  the  ICA  applied  
Kaneaiakala.   In  Kaneaiakala,  this  court  laid  out  the  
considerations  a  trial  court  must  weigh  when  assessing  the  
reliability  of  challenged  show-up  identifications:  
[T]rial  courts  must,  at  minimum,  consider  any  relevant  
factors  set  out  in  the  Hawai‘i  Standard  Instructions  
governing  eyewitness  and  show-up  identifications ,  as  may  be  
amended,  as  well  as  any  other  relevant  factors  that  may  be  
set  out  in  binding  precedent  in  addressing  whether,  under  a  
totality  of  circumstances,  an  impermissibly  suggestive  
eyewitness  or  show-up  identification  is  nonetheless  
sufficiently  reliable  to  be  admissible  in  evidence.  
Kaneaiakala , 145  Hawai‘i at 247, 450 P.3d at 777 (emphases 
added). The instructions “governing eyewitness and show-up 
identifications” are HAWJIC 3.19 and HAWJIC 3.19A, respectively. 
See
 id. (“[T]he factors a jury must consider in evaluating the 
reliability of an eyewitness or show-up identification must also 
be considered by a trial court in addressing admissibility of an 
impermissibly suggestive eyewitness or show-up 
9
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
         
         
        
          
             
          
          
        
         
          
         
           
     
         
          
          
          
          
         
 
          
         
         identification[.]” (emphasis added)). This court added that 
“trial courts must also consider the effect of the 
suggestiveness on the reliability of the identification in 
determining whether it should be admitted into evidence.” Id. 
at 248, 450 P.3d at 778. Thus, the circuit court was required, 
“at minimum,” to consider any relevant factors in HAWJIC 3.19 
and HAWJIC 3.19A, the “effect of the suggestiveness on the 
reliability of the identification,” and “any other relevant 
factors[.]” Id. at 247-48, 450 P.3d at 777-78. 
Here, Jercy moved to suppress CW’s identification. The 
circuit court held an evidentiary hearing and later issued 
findings of fact (FOFs), conclusions of law (COLs), and an order 
denying Jercy’s motion to suppress. 
The parties do not dispute that the circuit court 
considered the factors set forth under HAWJIC 3.19 in denying 
Jercy’s motion. Indeed, the circuit court based its decision 
exclusively on those factors. The circuit court did not, 
however, consider the relevant factors listed in HAWJIC 3.19A or 
the effect of suggestiveness on the reliability of CW’s 
identification. 
As an initial matter, the State does not challenge the 
ICA’s determination that the circuit court failed to evaluate 
the effect of suggestiveness on the reliability of CW’s 
10
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
  
          
            
           
        
         
          identification. 
As  to  HAWJIC  3.19A,  the  State  argues  that  the  circuit  court  
was  not  required  to  expressly  address  those  factors.   Regardless   
of  whether   the  circuit   court  was  required   to  expressly  address   
the  3.19A  factors,   the  issue  is  that  the  court  gave  no  
indication  that  it  based  its  decision  on  anything  beyond  the  
factors  enumerated  in  HAWJIC  3.19.   But  Kaneaiakala  requires  
more.  
Six  of  the  seven  HAWJIC  3.19A  factors  were  relevant  to  this  
case.   See  infra  Section  IV.C.2.   The  circuit  court  was  thus  
required  to  consider  these  relevant  factors.   But  there  is  no  
indication  in  the  record  that  the  circuit  court  did  so.   As  
stated,  the  circuit  court’s  FOFs,  COLs,  and  order  denying  the  
motion  to  suppress  were  based  entirely  on  the  HAWJIC  3.19  
factors.   At  the  hearing  on  Jercy’s  motion,  the  circuit  court  
expressly  addressed  the  HAWJIC  3.19  factors  and  then  stated,  
“And  so  for  those  reasons,  I  will  deny  the  motion.”  
The
 court’s only mention of the HAWJIC 3.19A factors came 
right after it orally denied the motion: “I also, you know, if 
this goes to trial, will include the HAWJIC 3.19[A] which talks 
about the identification, the field show-up identification.” 
This representation, coming after the oral denial of Jercy’s 
motion, reflects that the circuit court did not evaluate the 
11
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 HAWJIC  3.19A  factors  in  making  its  decision,  but  rather  
delegated  the  evaluation  of  those  factors  to  the  jury.   
The  State  contends  that  the  circuit  court  did  in  fact  
consider  these  factors,  citing  the  court’s  statements  that  it  
was  considering  “the  totality  of  the  circumstances.”   This  
argument  is  unavailing.   Again,  the  circuit  court  did  not  
indicate  that  its  totality-of-the-circumstances  balancing  
included  anything  other  than  the  HAWJIC  3.19  factors.  
The  State  also  argues  that  “Kaneaiakala  itself  cannot  be  
read  logically  as  incorporating  the  factors  in  HAWJIC  3.19A  in  
its  analysis”  because  the  first  HAWJIC  3.19A  factor  (i.e.,  
whether  the  identification  was  the  result  of  a  suggestive  
procedure)  “is  essentially  the  same  as  ‘the  effect  of  
suggestiveness.’”   We  do  not  interpret  these  two  factors  as  
being  the  same.  
The  first  HAWJIC  3.19A  factor  inquires  as  to  whether  the  
show-up  procedure  itself  led  to  the  identification  (e.g.,  
considering  the  impact  of  the  suspect  being  handcuffed  during  
the  field  show-up).   The  “effect  of  suggestiveness,”  on  the  
other  hand,  pertains  to  whether  the  circumstances  surrounding  
the  identification  affected  the  identification  (e.g.,  
considering  the  impact  of  HPD  implying  that  the  assailant  would  
be  present  in  the  field  show-up).   Although  these  considerations  
12
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
           
       
  
         
            
          
       
    
           
         
            
         
        
        
  
 
           
           
         
      
 in some cases may be overlapping and inextricable to some 
extent, they nonetheless highlight distinct concerns regarding 
field show-ups. 
Separately, the State argues that Jercy “never raised the 
argument regarding the HAWJIC 3.19A factors. . . . The ICA 
raised the HAWJIC 3.19A argument sua sponte, and even worse, 
failed to request supplemental briefing on it.” 
HRAP
 Rule 28(b)(4) provides: 
If an appellate court, when acting on a case on appeal, 
contemplates basing the disposition of the case wholly or 
in part upon an issue of plain error not raised by the 
parties through briefing, it shall not affirm, reverse, or 
vacate the case without allowing the parties the 
opportunity to brief the potential plain-error issue prior 
to disposition. 
The  State  is  correct  that  the  parties  did  not  specifically  
address  in  their  briefings  before  the  ICA  whether  Kaneaiakala  
requires  courts  to  consider  the  factors  in  HAWJIC  3.19A.   
However,  because  the  State  raised  this  issue  on  certiorari,  it  
briefed  the  issue,  and  Jercy  had  an  opportunity  to  do  so  as  
well.   Thus,  supplemental  briefing  is  neither  necessary  nor  
warranted  here.  
Based on the foregoing, we find that the ICA was correct 
when it concluded that the circuit court failed to consider the 
relevant HAWJIC 3.19A factors and the effect of suggestiveness 
in finding CW’s identification sufficiently reliable. 
13
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
 
 
          
         
          
           
          
         
     
          
        
            
             
           B. The reliability of CW’s identification should have been 
assessed. 
Although  the  ICA  correctly  concluded  that  the  circuit  court  
did  not  address  the  relevant  HAWJIC  3.19A  factors  and  the  effect  
of  suggestiveness,  we  hold  that  the  reliability  of  CW’s  
identification  should  have  also  been  decided  based  on  this  
record.  
“With  respect  to  whether  an  eyewitness  identification  
should  be  suppressed,  we  have  held  that  questions  of  
suggestiveness  and  reliability  are  questions  of  law  that  are  
freely  reviewable  on  appeal.”   Kaneaiakala,  145  Hawai‘i  at  240,  
450  P.3d  at  770  (cleaned  up).  
The
 ICA remanded the case to the circuit court for 
proceedings consistent with its Summary Disposition Order. But 
there was no indication from the ICA whether CW’s identification 
would be admissible upon retrial. That is, it is unclear 
whether the circuit court, upon remand, is to reevaluate Jercy’s 
suppression motion under all the relevant Kaneaiakala factors or 
simply exclude the identification evidence. 
If Jercy’s suppression motion is to be reevaluated by the 
circuit court, the court after considering the appropriate 
factors may again end up denying the motion. There would then 
be a new trial and Jercy would be retried with the same evidence 
that existed in the first trial. This outcome would constitute 
14
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
     
        
        
         
           
         
         
           
            
          
          
       
         
            
   an unnecessary expenditure of judicial resources and would be 
unduly burdensome on the parties. 
The latter scenario (i.e., CW’s identification evidence is 
automatically excluded on remand) would not be appropriate 
either. If CW’s identification were sufficiently reliable, it 
would be unfair to the State, which presented argument on the 
3.19A factors in opposing Jercy’s suppression motion, to exclude 
the identification evidence simply because the circuit court did 
not consider the relevant factors as required. Cf. People v. 
Busija, 509 N.E.2d 168, 172 (Ill. App. Ct. 1986) (“[T]o order a 
retrial of the question of the accused's guilt without first 
determining there was reversible error in the first trial would 
be uncalled for and wasteful.” (citation omitted)). 
Instead,
 the circuit court should have been instructed, 
based  on  this  record,  as  to  whether  CW’s  identification  was  
sufficiently  reliable  to  be  admissible.   The  record  here  is  
sufficiently  developed  for  a  reviewing  court  to  balance  the  
factors  required  by  Kaneaiakala.   Indeed,  as  stated  above,  the  
parties  presented  argument  on  the  HAWJIC  3.19A  factors  and  the  
effect  of  suggestiveness  on  the  reliability  of  the  
identification  in  briefing  Jercy’s  motion  to  suppress.   
For
 the sake of finality, we opine on the merits of Jercy’s 
suppression motion below. 
15
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
        
 
       
       
         
          
         
         
           
           
            
          
         
            
   
          
         
       
        
    
    
 
         
       
 
          
            C. CW’s identification was not sufficiently reliable. 
In reviewing whether a show-up identification is 
sufficiently reliable for admissibility purposes, we are 
required, “at minimum,” to consider the relevant factors in 
HAWJIC 3.19 and HAWJIC 3.19A, the “effect of the suggestiveness 
on the reliability of the identification,” and “any other 
relevant factors[.]” Kaneaiakala, 145 Hawai‘i at 247-48, 450 
P.3d
 at 777-78. We may consider the entire record, including 
the trial record, to make this determination. See State v. 
Kong,
 77 Hawai‘i 264, 266, 883 P.2d  686, 688 (App. 1994) (“[W]hen 
deciding an appeal of the pretrial denial of the defendant’s 
motion to suppress, the appellate court considers both the 
record of the hearing on the motion to suppress and the record 
of the trial.”). 
In this section, we e
valuate the factors required by 
Kaneaiakala and determine that, under the totality of the 
circumstances, CW’s identification was not sufficiently reliable 
for admissibility purposes. Thus, Jercy’s suppression motion 
should have been granted. 
1. HAWJIC 3.19 Factors 
a. The opportunity of the witness to observe the 
person involved in the alleged criminal act. 
CW had an opportunity to observe her attacker. CW’s 
statement to HPD indicated that she “was able to turn around and 
16
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
              
            
 
 
       
       
 
         
            
          
          
         
          look at [Jercy] asking him why he attacked her.” At trial, CW 
also testified that she was able to see Jercy’s face during the 
incident. 
This  factor  weighs  in   favor  of  concluding  that  CW’s  
identification  was  reliable.  
b.  The  stress,  if  any,  to  which  the  witness  was  
subject  at  the  time  of  the  observation.  
CW  was  under  substantial  stress  at  the  time  of  the  
observation--she  was  being  attacked.   This  factor  weighs  against  
concluding  that  CW’s  identification  was  reliable.   See  State  v.  
Cabagbag,  127  Hawai‘i  302,  310   n.9,  277  P.3d  1027,  1035  n.9  
(2012)  (citing  Deffenbacher,  et  al.,  A  Meta–Analytic  Review  of  
the  Effects  of  High  Stress  on  Eyewitness  Memory,  28  Law  &  Hum.  
Behav.  687  (2004)  (finding  “considerable  support  for  the  
hypothesis  that  high  levels  of  stress  negatively  impact  .  .  .  
eyewitness  memory”)).  
c. The witness’s ability,
 following the observation, 
to provide a description of the person. 
CW provided a verbal statement describing the assailant to 
HPD prior to the field show-up. However, due to a language 
barrier, HPD was unable to document CW’s description until after 
the field show-up. Thus, the documented description may have 
been influenced by CW’s participation in the show-up procedure. 
Although we find that this factor weighs in favor of 
17
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
         
          
          
        
    
 
       
          
           
         
    
          
            
             
           
 concluding that CW’s identification was reliable, we assign it 
less weight because CW’s documented description may have been 
influenced by the field show-up. See infra Section IV.C.3. 
d. The extent to which the defendant fits or does 
not fit the description of the person previously 
given by the witness. 
CW’s description, provided after the field show-up, 
indicated that the assailant was a 5’4”-to-5’6” male in his 
twenties to thirties with black hair and brown complexion. CW 
described the assailant as wearing a black long-sleeved jacket 
and a black facemask. 
At the field show-up, Jercy was wearing a black short-
sleeved t-shirt and dark blue jeans. Jercy testified that he is 
Chuukese and was 5’6” and 140 pounds on the day of the incident. 
Aside
 from the shirt worn by the assailant, Jercy generally 
matched  CW’s  description.   Thus,  this  factor  weighs  in  favor  of  
concluding  that  CW’s  identification  was  reliable.   However,  this  
factor  should  hold  slightly  less  weight  because  CW’s  description  
may  have  been  influenced  by  her  participation  in  the  field  show-
up.   See  infra  Section  IV.C.3.  
e.  The  cross-racial  or  ethnic  nature  of  the  
identification.  
The  field  show-up  did  not  involve  cross-racial  
identification.   Both  CW  and  Jercy  testified  that  they  are  
Chuukese.   This  factor  weighs  in  favor  of  concluding  that  CW’s  
18
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
    
        
 
          
             
             
          
          
     
        
      
  
 
          
           
 
         
       
 
          
           
     
         
     
 
           
           
           
      identification was reliable. 
f. The witness’s capacity to make an identification. 
CW testified that although she uses reading glasses and was 
not wearing them on the day of the incident, she did not need 
them to see Jercy. There was no evidence relating to any other 
physical or mental limitations that hindered her ability to make 
an identification. This factor weighs in favor of concluding 
that CW’s identification was reliable. 
g. Evidence relating to the witness’s ability to 
identify other participants in the alleged 
criminal act. 
There was no evidence of any other participants in the 
alleged criminal act. This factor does not weigh into our 
analysis. 
h. Whether the witness was able to identify the 
person in a photographic or physical lineup. 
There was no evidence of a photographic or physical lineup 
being presented to CW for her identification. This factor does 
not weigh into our analysis. 
i. The period of time between the alleged criminal 
act and the witness’s identification. 
The field show-up occurred just over an hour after CW was 
attacked. Because CW was able to participate in the field show-
up shortly after the incident, this factor weighs in favor of 
concluding that CW’s identification was reliable. 
19
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
  
          
       
      
   
 
           
            
           
          
          
         
        
           
           
    
        
      
 
         
         
           j.  Whether  the  witness  had  prior  contacts  with  the  
person.  
CW  had  never  seen  Jercy  prior  to  the  day  of  the  incident.   
There  is  no  evidence  suggesting  that  CW  had  prior  contacts  with  
Jercy.   This  factor  weighs  against  concluding  that  CW’s  
identification  was  reliable,  as  CW’s  identification  would  have  
been  more  reliable  had  she  had  prior  contacts  with  Jercy.  
k. The extent to which the witness is either certain 
or uncertain of the identification and whether 
the witness’s assertions concerning certainty or 
uncertainty are well-founded. 
Following the field show-up, CW related to HPD that she was 
“sure that [Jercy] was the person who attacked her.” She stated 
at trial that she remembered Jercy from the incident. However, 
there are concerns as to how “well-founded” CW’s certainty was, 
given the suggestiveness of the field show-up. See infra 
Section IV.C.3. Further muddying the basis of CW’s 
identification is CW’s statement that the perpetrator was 
wearing a facemask during the incident. Thus, we assign less 
weight to this factor, which weighs in favor of concluding that 
CW’s identification was reliable. 
l. Whether the witness’s identification is in fact 
the product of their own recollection. 
CW testified that her identification was based on her 
recollection of Jercy’s face and indicated the same following 
the field show-up. As with the previous factor, there is 
20
  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
           
         
 
        
     
 
          
             
          
         
        
    
 
         
      
         
      
  
 
        
        
         
         
 
           concern about the effect the suggestiveness had on CW’s 
recollection. See infra Section IV.C.3. We weigh this factor 
slightly in favor of concluding that CW’s identification was 
reliable. 
m. Any other evidence relating to the witness’s 
ability to make an identification. 
CW testified that the assailant was wearing a facemask when 
he was attacking her. Although CW stated that she could see his 
eyes and nose clearly, we find that the facemask negatively 
affected the reliability of CW’s identification. This factor 
weighs against concluding that CW’s identification was reliable. 
2. HAWJIC 3.19A Factors 
a. Whether the identification was the result of a 
suggestive procedure, including actions taken or 
words spoken by police or anyone else to the 
witness before, during, or after the 
identification process. 
On  this  record,  this   factor  relating  to  the  suggestiveness  
of  the  procedure  overlaps  with  the  effect  of  suggestiveness  on  
the  reliability  of  CW’s  identification.   See  infra  Section  
IV.C.3.   It  is  appropriate  to  consider  the  two  factors  as  one.  
b. Whether the police
 either indicated to the 
witness that a suspect was present in the 
procedure or failed to warn the witness that the 
perpetrator may or may not be in the procedure. 
It appears that HPD indicated to CW that a suspect was 
21            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
            
            
            
             
          
    
            
           
       
        
     
       
      
 
           
         
            
 
 
            
         present in the field show-up.6 HPD Corporal John Agena (Corporal 
Agena), who met with CW at her home shortly after the attack, 
testified that HPD told CW prior to the field show-up that HPD 
“had a male in custody.” CW testified that HPD told her that 
“they found [the assailant and she] would identify him before 
[going] to the hospital.” 
HPD  also  apparently  failed   to  inform  CW  that  the  
perpetrator  may  or  may  not  have  been  in  the  procedure.   Officer  
Tomishima,  who  accompanied  CW  during  the  field  show-up,  
testified  that  he  was  unable  to  instruct  CW  that  the  perpetrator  
may  or  may  not  be  present  in  the  show-up  due  to  the  language  
barrier.  
Because HPD was unable
 to warn CW that the assailant may or 
may not have been in the show-up procedure, this factor weighs 
against concluding that CW’s identification was reliable. 
c. Whether the defendant was required to wear 
distinctive clothing that the perpetrator 
allegedly wore, or was handcuffed or otherwise 
appeared to be in police custody. 
There is no evidence that Jercy was required to wear any 
distinctive clothing. However, during the field show-up, Jercy 
was standing in front of a uniformed HPD officer with his hands 
Body-worn camera footage capturing HPD’s conversations with CW prior to 
the field show-up were never entered into the record. 
22 6  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
     
          
            
          
           
           
         
      
       
   
        
      
        
       
     
 
           
       
           
         
            
           
 
        
 
 
            
      handcuffed behind his back.7 
Officer Tomishima testified that he was unable to see that 
Jercy was handcuffed from where he was in the ambulance as he 
accompanied CW during the field show-up. Although it is 
possible that CW did not see that Jercy was handcuffed, the 
parties did not dispute that Jercy “otherwise appeared to be in 
police custody,” particularly given that he was standing in 
front of a uniformed HPD officer. 
This factor weighs against concluding that CW’s 
identification was reliable. 
d. Whether the witness was exposed to opinions, 
descriptions, or identifications made by other 
witnesses, or to photographs, news media, or to 
any other information that may have influenced 
the independence of the identification. 
The record does not reflect that CW was exposed to any 
opinions, descriptions, or identifications made by other 
witnesses. The record does not suggest that CW discussed the 
assailant with neighbors Hernandez or Wainit. Officer Tomishima 
and Corporal Agena both testified that they did not prompt CW or 
suggest in any way the suspect’s appearance prior to the field 
show-up. 
However, it is possible that CW’s identification was 
Officer Benton testified that Jercy was handcuffed as a safety 
precaution, “due to the assault concerns.” 
23 7  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
         
          
            
           
            
         
        
       
         
       
 
 
          
            
          
         
           
           
             influenced by HPD’s statements regarding the field show-up 
procedure. On cross-examination, CW was asked, “Okay. The 
officers at your house, they told you they had the guy who 
attacked you, right?” CW answered, “Yes, they told me they 
found him, but I would identify him before I go to the 
hospital.” This testimony suggests that CW believed her 
assailant would be present in the field show-up. 
This potential bias may have influenced CW’s 
identification. Accordingly, we find that this factor weighs 
against concluding that CW’s identification was reliable. 
e.  Whether  other  participants   in  the  show-up  were  
similar  in  appearance  to  the  defendant.  
There  was  no  evidence  of  other  participants  in  the  field  
show-up.   Thus,  this  factor  does  not  weigh  into  our  
determination.  
f.  Whether  the  witness’s  identification  was  made  
spontaneously  and  remained  consistent  thereafter.  
It appears that CW’s
 identification was prompted. In one 
of the HPD body-worn camera videos, as Jercy was walked to the 
back of the ambulance for the field show-up, someone--likely the 
emergency medical technician (EMT) who was sitting in the 
ambulance with CW--can be heard asking, “That’s the guy? You 
can see him?” Immediately after, CW exclaimed at Jercy several 
times, “Why you punch me?” It is unclear from the video whether 
24  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
          
          
         
        
           
         
          
             
     
        
        
 
 
       
   
 CW said anything prior to the EMT prompting her. 
Although it is possible that CW did not understand the 
EMT’s prompting (due to the language barrier) and thus 
identified Jercy spontaneously, we hesitate to draw that 
conclusion. Instead, it is plausible that CW was prompted by 
the EMT’s statements, particularly in light of our earlier 
concern about CW apparently being told that HPD found the 
assailant and she would identify him on the way to the hospital. 
CW’s identification remained consistent thereafter. 
Because CW’s identification was likely prompted, we weigh 
this factor against concluding that CW’s identification was 
reliable. 
g.  Any  other   circumstance  relating  to  the  witness’s  
ability  to  make  an  identification.  
The  field  show-up  occurred  as  CW  was  on  the  way  to  the  
hospital  in  an  ambulance.   CW  was  strapped  to  a  gurney,  wearing  
a  neck  brace,  and  attached  to  other  medical  equipment  in  the  
back  of  the  ambulance.   This  was  obviously  a  stressful  situation  
for  her  that  may  have  hindered  CW’s  ability  to  make  a  reliable  
identification.  
This factor weighs
 against concluding that CW’s 
identification was reliable. 
25  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
         
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
         
        
         
          
           3. Effect of Suggestiveness on the Reliability of 
Identification 
The ICA stated the following: 
The  entire  procedure  was  extremely  suggestive,  beginning  
with  her  testimony  that  “they  told  me  that  they  found  him”  
–  with  “they”  meaning  the  police,  to  the  dramatic  diversion  
of  an  ambulance  headed  to  the  emergency  room  of  a  hospital,  
to  the  stressful  identification  from  a  gurney  in  the  back  
of  an  ambulance  prompted  with  repeated  uniformed  police  
queries  of  is  that  the  guy,  including  the  extreme  
suggestiveness  that  he  was  in  fact  the  guy  because  he  was  
in  handcuffs,  and  physically  restrained  by  a  police   
officer,  with  multiple  officers  in  the  immediate  vicinity.   
The  [c]ircuit  [c]ourt  clearly  erred  in  its  findings  and  
conclusions  when  it  found  and  concluded  that  the  
identification  was  made  “without  any  prompting.”   These  are  
precisely  the  kind  of  circumstances  that  warrant  trial  
court  examination  of  the  impact  of  suggestive  procedures  as  
a  part  of  the  reliability  evaluation.  
We  generally  agree  with  the  ICA’s  assessment.   We  also  
reiterate  that,  prior  to  the  field  show-up,  HPD  did  not  document   
CW’s  description  of  the  assailant  or  warn  her  that  the  assailant   
may  or  may  not  be  present.  
These  circumstances  indicate   that  the  suggestiveness  of  the  
show-up  procedure  diminished  the  reliability  of  CW’s  
identification.   Accordingly,  this  factor  weighs  against  
concluding  that  CW’s  identification  was  reliable.  
4. Totality of
 the Circumstances 
Under the totality of the circumstances, we find that CW’s 
identification was not sufficiently reliable to overcome the 
impermissible and inherent suggestiveness of the field show-up. 
More than half of the relevant factors weigh against concluding 
that CW’s identification was reliable. Of those that weigh in 
26            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
          
          
           
           
        
        
        
         
           
        
          
         
          
  
 
        
           
            
            
         
          
           
         
           
         favor of finding the identification was reliable, half are 
dampened by HPD’s inability, prior to the field show-up, to 
obtain a written statement from CW and warn CW that the 
perpetrator may or may not be present. In balancing the 
factors, we find that CW’s identification was impermissibly 
influenced by the suggestiveness surrounding the field show-up. 
In light of the Kaneaiakala court’s concern that 
“misidentifications are one of the leading causes of wrongful 
convictions[,]” 145 Hawai‘i at 242, 450  P.3d at 772, we conclude 
that CW’s identification was not sufficiently reliable to 
overcome the suggestiveness of the field show-up. We therefore 
hold that Jercy’s suppression motion should have been granted. 
D. The circuit court’s
 error was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
Since Jercy’s suppression motion should have been granted, 
we next analyze whether the court’s error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. See State v. Jones, 148 Hawai‘i 152, 165,  468 
P.3d 166, 179 (2020) (“In a criminal case, if there is a 
reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to a 
conviction, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which the error may 
have been based must be set aside.” (citation omitted)). 
The State argues
 that even if the circuit court erred in 
admitting CW’s identification evidence, such error was harmless. 
27  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
           
         
           
         
         
     
          
         
           
          
          
       
        
            
             
             
           
       
         
           
           
  
        
           
         The State reasons that “[b]ecause the jury was given an 
instruction based on HAWJIC 3.19A, the seven factors were 
addressed by the jury pursuant to that instruction.” The State 
also asserts that “there was strong evidence identifying [Jercy] 
as the assailant even without [CW’s] identification.” The 
State’s arguments are not persuasive. 
First, it is unlikely that the circuit court’s general 
instruction negated the prejudicial effect of the evidence of 
CW’s identification. Cf. State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai‘i  405, 415,  
984 P.2d 1231, 1241 (1999) (holding that general instructions to 
jury that counsels’ arguments were not evidence were unlikely to 
“negate[] the prejudicial effect” of the prosecutor’s 
inflammatory comments). CW testified about her identification 
to the police while in the ambulance and identified Jercy as the 
assailant in open court on July 20, 2023. The circuit court did 
not read HAWJIC 3.19A to the jury until July 26, 2023, six days 
later. We cannot conclude that the erroneous admission of CW’s 
identification was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Second, the
 State’s “strong evidence” identifying Jercy as 
the assailant was not nearly strong enough to render the circuit 
court’s error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. As this court 
has stated: 
With respect to assessing whether the erroneous admission 
of evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, . . . 
mere sufficiency of the evidence to support the jury 
28  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
  verdict,  apart  from  that  aspect  of  the  case  affected  by  the  
error,  would  not  be  enough.   However,  .  .  .  where  there  is  
a  wealth  of  overwhelming  and  compelling  evidence  tending  to  
show  the  defendant  [is]  guilty  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt,  
errors  in  the  admission  or  exclusion  of  evidence  are  deemed  
harmless.  
State  v.  Spies,  157  Hawai‘i   75,  10 2,  575  P.3d  708,  735  (2025)  
(emphasis  added)  (cleaned  up).  
Here,  the   State  posits  that  “there  was  ample  evidence  from  
the  testimony  of  Mr.  Hernandez  that  [Jercy]  was  the  person  who  
committed  the  offense.”   Although  Hernandez  did  identify  Jercy  
as  the  perpetrator,  Hernandez  also  conceded  that  he  lost  sight  
of  the  assailant  for  ten  to  fifteen  seconds.   On  the  other  hand,  
Jercy  testified  that  he  was  on  the  way  to  work  when  Hernandez  
approached  him  at  the  bus  stop  and  denied  assaulting  CW.   From  
the  trial  testimony,  a  reasonable  juror  could  have  inferred  that  
Hernandez  misidentified  Jercy  as  the  assailant  after  briefly  
losing  sight  of  CW’s  attacker.   We  thus  cannot  conclude  that  
there  was  a  “wealth  of  overwhelming  and  compelling  evidence  
tending  to  show  [that  Jercy  is]  guilty  beyond  a  reasonable  
doubt[.]”   Id.  at  102,  575  P.3d  at  735.  
Further,  the  State  relied  on  CW’s  identification  at  trial,  
highlighting  her  identification  in  its  opening  statement  and  
closing  argument.   CW  also  testified  about  her  identification  in  
the  ambulance  and  identified  Jercy  as  the  assailant  in  open  
court.   Accordingly,  given  the  importance  of  CW’s  identification  
29  
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
            
        
             
        
       
 
 
 to the State’s case, there is “a reasonable possibility that the 
[circuit court’s] error might have contributed to [Jercy’s] 
conviction.” Id. at 102, 575 P.3d at 735. We cannot conclude 
that the circuit court’s admission of the identification 
evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
On  remand,  evidence   of  CW’s  field  show-up  identification  of  
Jercy  shall  be  suppressed  and  excluded.  
V.   CONCLUSION  
The  ICA’s  March  5,  2026  Judgment  on  Appeal  is  affirmed  to  
the  extent  it  vacated  the  circuit  court’s  July  28,  2022  Findings   
of  Fact,  Conclusions  of  Law  and  Order  Denying  Defendant’s  Motion  
to  Suppress  Identification  and  the  November  21,  2023  Amended  
Judgment  of  Conviction  and  Sentence.   The  case  is  remanded  to  
the  circuit  court  for  further  proceedings  consistent  with  this  
opinion.  
Robert  T.   Nakatsuji   
for  petitioner  
 
Benjamin  E.  Lowenthal  
for  respondent  /s/  Vladimir  P.  Devens  
/s/  Sabrina  S.  McKenna  
/s/  Todd  W.  Eddins  
/s/  Lisa  M.  Ginoza  
/s/  Lisa  W.  Cataldo   
30 