                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000667 14-FEB-2014 
08:45 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
JOHN WALTON, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-11-0000667
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000667; CR. NO. 09-1-0498)
 
FEBRUARY 14, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINIONS OF THE COURT
 
This case arises from an incident in which a taxi
 
driver (complaining witness or “CW”) was stabbed and robbed after
 
transporting John Walton and Courage Lee Elkshoulder to Manoa
 Valley. 
According to the State, after CW drove Walton and
 
Elkshoulder to Manoa, Elkshoulder grabbed CW from behind and
 stabbed him in the neck; Walton assisted in the attack by
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reaching over from the rear passenger-side seat and holding CW
 
down. 
Police recovered a backpack from CW’s taxi, searched
 
the backpack pursuant to a warrant, and recovered a General
 Nutrition Center (GNC) membership card. Police then contacted
 GNC and learned that the card was registered in Walton’s name. 
Police also obtained a surveillance video depicting two men
 crossing the street near where CW had picked up Walton and
 Elkshoulder. Images from this video were posted on online news
 sites and shown on the evening news. Police received tips
 identifying the men in the images as Walton and Elkshoulder and
 several coworkers identified Walton and Elkshoulder as the men in
 the images. 
The State indicted both Walton and Elkshoulder for
 
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree and Robbery in the First
 
1
Degree. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit  consolidated
Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s trials, and subsequently denied both
 Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s motions for severance. 
During trial, the State maintained that Elkshoulder
 
stabbed CW while Walton held him down. 
Elkshoulder and Walton,
 
however, advanced irreconcilable defenses. Specifically,
 Elkshoulder testified that he was not in the taxi when CW was
 stabbed. Elkshoulder also introduced a recorded telephone
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided until October 1, 2010, when
 
the case was re-assigned to the Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi. 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conversation that he had made, in which Walton admitted to
 
stabbing CW. The State argued the recording was not worthy of
 belief. On the other hand, Walton elicited testimony from CW
 that it was Elkshoulder who stabbed him. In other words, Walton
 and Elkshoulder each argued that the other had stabbed CW. The
 jury found Walton guilty of both Attempted Murder in the Second
 Degree and Robbery in the First Degree, but found Elkshoulder
 guilty of only Assault in the First Degree and Robbery in First
 Degree. 
The circuit court sentenced Walton to a life term of
 
incarceration with the possibility of parole for Attempted Murder
 in the Second Degree and dismissed the robbery charge without
 prejudice because the jury found that the two offenses had
 merged, and Walton brought the instant appeal. The Intermediate
 Court of Appeals affirmed the circuit court’s judgment of
 conviction and sentence. 
Walton argues that the circuit court erred in: (1)
 
denying Walton’s motion for severance; (2) denying Walton’s
 motion to suppress evidence (i.e., the information obtained from
 GNC) and identification testimony (i.e., the identification of
 Walton and Elkshoulder by their co-workers); (3) admitting the
 recorded telephone conversation; (4) limiting Walton’s cross-
examination of Elkshoulder concerning the making of the
 recording; (5) instructing the jury; and (6) denying Walton’s
 motion for judgment of acquittal. 
-3­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We hold that, on the facts of this case, the circuit
 
court erred in denying Walton’s motion for severance. Walton was
 
forced, in effect, to defend against two prosecutors with two
 different theories of his guilt. The State argued that Walton
 assisted Elkshoulder by holding CW down, while Elkshoulder argued
 that it was Walton who stabbed CW. Elkshoulder relied on the
 recorded telephone conversation in support of his theory, and
 that evidence appears to have been persuasive. Despite the
 State’s theory of the case, and CW’s testimony in support of that
 theory, the jury — after hearing Walton’s admission on the
 recording — convicted Walton of attempted murder, but convicted
 Elkshoulder only of assault in the first degree. In these
 circumstances, Walton was prejudiced and denied a fair trial. 
The circuit court therefore should have granted Walton’s motion
 for severance. Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s and the circuit
 court’s judgments, and remand Walton’s case for a new trial. 
Because our resolution of this issue is dispositive, we
 
do not consider several of Walton’s other arguments. We do,
 however, address Walton’s arguments that the circuit court erred
 in denying his motion to suppress evidence and identification
 testimony and in instructing the jury, because those issues may
 arise again on remand in Walton’s separate trial. We also
 conclude that because sufficient evidence supported the jury’s
 verdict, the circuit court did not err in denying Walton’s motion
 for acquittal. 
-4­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
On April 8, 2009, the State indicted Walton for
 
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS
 
2 3 
§§ 705-500,  707-701.5,  and 706-6564 ; and Robbery in the First 
2 HRS § 705-500 provides that:
 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime
if the person:
 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would
constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances
 were as the person believes them to be; or
 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the
circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person’s commission of
the crime.
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit
the crime if, acting with the state of mind required
to establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the
crime, the person intentionally engages in conduct
which is a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended or known to cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative
of the defendant’s criminal intent.
 
3 HRS § 707-701.5 provides:
 
(1) Except as provided in section 707-701, a person
commits the offense of murder in the second degree if
the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death
of another person.
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as
provided in section 706-656.
 
4
 HRS § 706-656 provides, in relevant part:
 
(2)
 Except as provided in section 706-657, pertaining
(continued...)
 
-5­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i).5 The State
 
indicted Elkshoulder for the same offenses on November 26, 2008. 
A. Consolidation of trials
 
The State filed a motion to consolidate the trials of
 
Walton and Elkshoulder, stating that the charges involved the
 
same conduct or series of acts and were connected by a single
 scheme or plan. The State explained that the only reason Walton
 and Elkshoulder were charged separately was that police had been
 unable to locate both defendants at or near the same time. This
 
4(...continued)
to enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment
with possibility of parole.  The minimum length of
imprisonment shall be determined by the Hawaii
paroling authority; provided that persons who are
repeat offenders under section 706-606.5 shall serve
at least the applicable mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment.
 
If the court imposes a sentence of life imprisonment
without possibility of parole pursuant to section
706-657, as part of that sentence, the court shall
order the director of public safety and the Hawaii
paroling authority to prepare an application for the
governor to commute the sentence to life imprisonment
with parole at the end of twenty years of
imprisonment; provided that persons who are repeat
offenders under section 706-606.5 shall serve at least
 the applicable mandatory minimum term of imprisonment.
 
5 HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the
first degree if, in the course of committing theft or
non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle:
. . .
  
(b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument
and:
 
(i) The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with intent to overcome that person’s physical
resistance or physical power of resistance[.]
 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was a result of the fact that Elkshoulder turned himself in to
 
authorities approximately one week after the incident, while
 Walton fled the state and was not apprehended until mid-March
 2010. 
The circuit court held a hearing on the consolidation
 
motion, to which both Walton and Elkshoulder objected. During
 the hearing, Walton’s counsel stated that he had just been
 informed of a recorded telephone conversation between Walton and
 Elkshoulder in which Walton allegedly made incriminating
 statements.
6 Walton argued that the recording presented a
 
problem under Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123 (1968).7 The
 
circuit court granted the State’s motion to consolidate, subject
 to review in pretrial motions. 
Before the start of trial, Walton filed a motion for
 
severance, arguing that his rights to confrontation, effective
 assistance of counsel, and due process of law would be violated
 by a joint trial. Walton argued that Elkshoulder, using the
 recorded telephone conversation, would contend that it was Walton
 who had stabbed CW. Walton argued that because the recording
 appeared to directly implicate him, his defense conflicted with
 that of Elkshoulder. The State filed an opposition to the
 
6
 As discussed infra, this recording was made by Elkshoulder. 
7
 In Bruton, the United States Supreme Court held that a defendant
 
is deprived of the Sixth Amendment right of confrontation when an
incriminating statement of a non-testifying co-defendant is introduced at
their joint trial.  391 U.S. at 126.
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion, arguing that the recorded phone conversation included
 
Walton’s own statements and that Walton’s voice had been verified
 by two of Walton’s co-workers, Jeremy Koki and Matthew Rodrigues. 
The circuit court denied Walton’s motion to sever. 
On the eve of trial, Elkshoulder filed a motion to
 
sever his and Walton’s trials, in which Walton joined, arguing
 that Elkshoulder would be prejudiced if the State argued that the
 defendants had engaged in a conspiracy or mutual agreement in
 making the recording. The circuit court denied the motion. 
After trial began, Walton again moved for severance,
 
arguing that the strategies adopted by himself and Elkshoulder
 were inconsistent and contradictory, and that a joint trial would
 deprive him of a fair trial. The circuit court denied the
 motion, stating that no additional information had been presented
 that would warrant reversal of the prior ruling denying
 severance. 
After trial, the circuit court issued its Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order denying severance of
 trials, finding that Walton and Elkshoulder failed to present any
 new information that had not already been presented to the
 circuit court when it consolidated the trials. The order also
 stated that joinder would not be unfair to either defendant. 
Specifically, the order stated that the recording did not present
 a Bruton issue because “[u]nlike Bruton, this phone conversation
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is not a statement made by a non-testifying co-defendant which
 
implicates a defendant in a joint trial.” (Emphasis added). 
The order further explained that: 
[n]either defendant is being prevented from producing
evidence which would have otherwise been inadmissible
 in their separate trials.  Had Defendant Walton gone
to trial separately, the State could still introduce
the taped phone conversation against Walton as his own
statement. . . . Although both defendants may attempt
to point the finger at the other, the Court does not
find this irreconcilable.  There is other evidence
 that this court may consider and in its discretion
finds that these matters should be tried together.
 
B. Suppression of Identification and Evidence
 
Walton also filed a motion to suppress evidence and
 
identification testimony. Specifically, Walton sought to
 
suppress the identification testimony of Jeremy Koki and Matthew
 Rodrigues, who identified Walton in still photos taken from a
 surveillance video recorded on the day of the incident, and in a
 photographic lineup array. Walton argued that Rodrigues’s and
 Koki’s identifications were the result of impermissibly
 suggestive procedures and not reliable because Rodrigues and Koki
 had previously viewed surveillance photos of persons identified
 by the news media as alleged suspects in the incident and
 discussed with others their belief that Walton was depicted in
 those photos. 
Walton also sought to suppress information police
 
obtained using a registration number on the GNC card recovered
 from the backpack found in CW’s taxi. Walton acknowledged that
 police obtained a warrant to search the backpack, but argued that
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
police were required to secure an additional warrant to obtain
 
from GNC any information associated with the card’s registration
 number. 
The State opposed Walton’s motion, stating that the 
identification procedures used were not unfair or inherently suggestive, because both Koki and Rodrigues had worked with Walton and Elkshoulder for nearly a year, were very familiar with Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s appearances and personal information, and had already recognized Walton and Elkshoulder in news reports showing the surveillance photos and video before being contacted by police to confirm the identities of Walton and Elkshoulder in photo lineups. The State argued that Koki’s and Rodrigues’s familiarity with Walton and Elkshoulder supported an unequivocal recognition of them both in the surveillance images and photographic lineups. The State noted that Walton and Elkshoulder were captured on surveillance video while at the corner of Pensacola and Young streets — the approximate location where CW told police he picked up Walton and Elkshoulder — and that police provided the images to television news stations, which broadcast the images. According to the State, police subsequently received an anonymous call identifying the men in the images as Walton and Elkshoulder, and stating that they worked for the Hawai' i Medical Service Association (HMSA). 
Police then contacted HMSA to speak with anyone who might be familiar with Walton or Elkshoulder. 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Regarding the information obtained using the GNC card,
 
the State argued that the police’s contact with a GNC store to
 
ascertain ownership of the card based on the card’s registration
 number was allowable under the warrant police obtained to search
 the backpack found in CW’s taxi, which contained the card. 
During a hearing on Walton’s motion, Rodrigues
 
testified that on November 20, 2008, he went to a news website to
 view photos of two men accused of a crime, after his supervisor
 called him and told him to check out the news. Rodrigues
 testified that he believed his supervisor told him that
 Elkshoulder and Walton might be depicted in the video. 
Rodrigues explained that he was a quality assurance
 
coordinator for HMSA, and that he had supervised Walton for about
 five months and Elkshoulder for about seven months. Rodrigues
 testified that he looked at the photos on the website about 20
 times and consulted with his family, who had met Elkshoulder. At
 first, Rodrigues thought that the online images did not depict
 Walton and Elkshoulder. However, by the time Rodrigues saw the
 images on the evening news, it was clear to him that Walton and
 Elkshoulder were the men depicted in the images. Rodrigues
 testified that he was able to identify Walton based on his
 stature, his overall appearance, the style of his hair, his
 glasses, and his backpack. 
Rodrigues further testified that a day or two later,
 
police contacted him and showed him the same surveillance photo. 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
About a month after that, Rodrigues was again contacted by police
 
to view a photographic lineup, from which he identified Walton. 
8
Koki testified that he worked for HMSA and that in
November 2008, he received a phone call telling him to look at a
 surveillance photo in an online news report. The person told
 Koki, “I think it’s one of your guys” but did not identify the
 person depicted in the photo by name. Koki stated that he looked
 at the online photo about ten times over ten minutes, after
 which he called his manager and stated that he believed the men
 depicted in the photo were Walton and Elkshoulder. Koki
 testified that he concluded on his own that it was Elkshoulder
 and Walton in the photo. 
Koki further testified that he viewed the photo
 
repeatedly because he did not want to believe that it was Walton
 and Elkshoulder in the photo, but that after he was confident
 that it was them, he decided to report it to his manager. 
Koki identified Elkshoulder in the photo by his clothing and
 hair, and identified Walton by his hair and backpack. Koki
 stated that almost a month later, he identified Walton and
 Elkshoulder from a lineup of photos. 
HPD Detective Michael Ogawa testified that he prepared 
a photographic lineup using photos from Hawai' i driver’s licenses 
and state IDs, and showed them to Rodrigues, Koki, and Richard 
8
 Koki did not testify at trial.
 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Laumauna, another of Walton’s co-workers.9 Detective Ogawa also
 
showed Koki and Rodrigues photographs taken from the surveillance
 
video. 
Detective Ogawa explained that CW identified the two
 
men in the surveillance photo as the men who were involved in the
 incident. Although CW was able to identify Elkshoulder from a
 photo lineup, he was unable to identify Walton. 
Detective Ogawa further testified that another
 
detective obtained a search warrant to search the contents of the
 backpack found in CW’s taxi. Detective Ogawa explained that the
 GNC card was found in the backpack, and described the card as a
 rewards card attached to a key ring. Detective Ogawa further
 explained that the GNC card did not have a name on it, but that
 it had an identification number, which he provided to GNC to
 determine who might be associated with the number. 
The circuit court denied Walton’s suppression motion. 
The circuit court found that Koki and Rodrigues identified Walton
 and Elkshoulder independently as a result of their familiarity
 with Walton and Elkshoulder, and that the photo lineup had not
 been impermissibly suggestive. The order noted that Koki and
 Rodrigues saw the surveillance images of Walton and Elkshoulder
 shown by news media the day before they were contacted by police
 
9
 Walton did not seek to suppress the testimony of Laumauna, who
 
also testified during the suppression hearing that he met with Detective Ogawa
and identified Walton and Elkshoulder as the men depicted in the surveillance
photos.  Laumauna also identified Walton in a photo lineup, based on his
familiarity with Walton as a co-worker. 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to identify Walton and Elkshoulder, and that police did not know
 
Koki and Rodrigues had seen the photos. Specifically, the order
 explained that:
 
[e]ach of the witnesses identified Elkshoulder and
Walton independently as a result of their contact with
defendants.  The fact that the photos used in the
photo lineup array [are] pictures of the defendants
not in the video stills, but pictures of them as they
appeared on different dates and times (i.e., photos
from driver’s license or state identification cards)
is not impermissibly suggestive.
 
The circuit court also concluded that the police
 
inquiry to establish ownership of the GNC card found in the
 
backpack was within the scope of the search warrant and that the
 card was not a closed container requiring an additional warrant. 
C. Recording of telephone conversation
 
Prior to trial, the circuit court held an HRE Rule 104
 
hearing regarding the recorded telephone conversation between
 
Elkshoulder and Walton. Elkshoulder indicated that he would
 offer parts of the recording into evidence as exceptions to the
 hearsay rule, as an admission by a party-opponent, or as a
 statement against interest. 
Walton objected to the admission of the entire
 
transcript of the recording and the recording itself, arguing
 that the recording was irrelevant, prejudicial, and that its
 admission would violate Walton’s right of confrontation. The
 circuit court ruled that it would admit certain portions of the
 recording, including the portion in which Walton stated that he
 
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stabbed CW two to three times. The circuit court stated that it
 
would address confrontation and evidentiary issues at trial. 
D. Trial
 
1. State’s Case-in-Chief
 
CW testified that on November 15, 2008 at approximately
 
1:00 p.m., two men approached him outside his taxicab near the
 
corner of Pensacola and Young streets and requested a ride. 
There is no dispute that the two men were Walton and Elkshoulder. 
CW agreed to give Walton and Elkshoulder a ride, and they entered
 his taxi. Elkshoulder sat in the rear seat directly behind CW,
 and Walton sat in the rear seat on the passenger side. At their
 request, CW drove the men to Manoa. 
As the taxi approached Manoa, Elkshoulder asked CW the
 
cost of a fare to Waianae, and whether CW had change for a $100
 bill. CW responded that he was not sure if he had change, and
 Elkshoulder told CW that he would not need change. Walton was on
 a cell phone during much of the ride and did not speak to CW. 
Elkshoulder directed CW to drive to a park in Manoa, then changed
 his mind and said he wanted to go to his sister’s home. 
Eventually, the taxi reached a dead-end street, and Elkshoulder
 told CW to stop because they had arrived at his sister’s house. 
CW then stopped the taxi and reached to his right to stop the
 taxi meter. 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
CW testified that as he turned his head to the right, a
 
left arm grabbed him around the neck from directly behind, and he
 
was cut on the right side of his neck. CW was certain that
 Elkshoulder had stabbed him, because, at the time, he saw Walton
 still seated on the rear passenger side of the taxi. CW
 testified that both men then pinned him down between the two
 front seats. CW was facing the ceiling of the car and could see
 both men pinning him down. CW then saw another hand start
 stabbing him a few more times with a knife. CW grabbed the knife
 with his left hand, which was cut as he struggled with the person
 holding the weapon. CW did not see who was holding the knife,
 but saw three hands trying to pin him down while a fourth hand
 was trying to stab him. CW was unsure exactly how the struggle
 ended. The two men opened the rear doors of the taxi, exited and 
ran. 
When police arrived at the scene, they recovered 
various pieces of evidence, including two knives. One knife was
 found in the taxi behind the driver’s seat. The second knife was
 found under the taxi, closer to the driver’s side of the vehicle. 
The police also recovered a backpack from inside the taxi. The
 police obtained a search warrant to search inside the backpack,
 and its contents included the GNC card. 
CW explained that, following the attack, about $90 to
 
$100 was missing from one of his pants pockets, and that his
 wallet was also missing from another pants pocket. However, CW
 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
also testified that he received his wallet and cell phone from
 
the hospital when he was discharged a few days later. 
Detective Ogawa testified that on November 17, 2008, he
 
reviewed evidence recovered from the backpack pursuant to a
 search warrant, including the GNC card and a Powerhouse Gym
 membership card. Detective Ogawa called the Ala Moana branch of
 GNC, provided the store with the number that was printed on the
 GNC card, and GNC provided him with a name associated with the
 card. Detective Ogawa also called Powerhouse Gym, which provided
 him with a name associated with the gym membership card. The GNC
 card was associated with Walton and the Powerhouse Gym card was
 associated with Elkshoulder. 
Detective Ogawa testified that he showed CW the photos
 
from a surveillance video taken near the corner where CW had
 indicated he picked up the passengers who attacked him. CW
 identified the men in the photos as the passengers who attacked
 him, and Detective Ogawa then released copies of the photos to
 news media via Crime Stoppers. Detective Ogawa then received
 tips via Crime Stoppers identifying Walton and Elkshoulder. The
 tips also revealed that Walton and Elkshoulder worked for
 Staffing Partners as temporary workers in the HMSA building. 
Detective Ogawa contacted a Staffing Partners employee who
 confirmed that Walton and Elkshoulder were employees of the
 company. Detective Ogawa then contacted HMSA and interviewed
 Koki, Rodrigues, and Laumauna. Detective Ogawa showed the
 
-17­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
surveillance photos to Koki and Rodrigues, who identified Walton
 
and Elkshoulder. Detective Ogawa also showed Koki and Rodrigues
 photographic lineups that included state identification photos of
 
Walton, Elkshoulder and others with similar appearances.  Koki
 
and Rodrigues each identified Walton and Elkshoulder from the
 
lineups. 
Rodrigues testified that he worked at HMSA and
 
supervised both Walton and Elkshoulder. On approximately
 November 18, 2011, Rodrigues’s supervisor, Koki, directed him to
 view photos on an online news site to try to determine who was in
 the photos. Rodrigues recognized Elkshoulder and Walton in the
 photo, but he did not want to believe that it was them. 
Rodrigues looked at the photo on the news site repeatedly because
 it appeared fuzzy, but seeing a clearer image on the evening news
 confirmed to him that the men in the photo were Elkshoulder and
 Walton. 
Rodrigues testified that Elkshoulder called him on
 
November 19, 2011, and Rodrigues asked Elkshoulder if he knew his
 face was being shown on the news. According to Rodrigues,
 Elkshoulder responded that “he’s sorry, that he messed up” and
 that “[t]hings weren’t supposed to go down that way.” 
Elkshoulder also told Rodrigues that he did not mean to hurt
 anybody. 
Rodrigues further testified that Elkshoulder and Walton
 
always worked together, arrived together, and left together. 
-18­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
According to Rodrigues, Elkshoulder seemed like an adult leader
 
and Walton seemed like a follower who was young and clueless. 
Elkshoulder would tell Walton what to do, and Walton would listen
 and not argue. On cross-examination by Elkshoulder, Rodrigues
 stated that during his telephone conversation with Elkshoulder,
 Elkshoulder did not discuss details of the incident involving CW,
 or refer to who stabbed anyone. 
Laumauna testified that he worked with Elkshoulder and
 
Walton at HMSA, and that he had invited them to his grandniece’s
 birthday party at Ala Moana Beach Park on November 15, 2008, but
 that neither Elkshoulder nor Walton attended. While Laumauna was
 at the party that day, he received a call from Elkshoulder, who
 asked him for a ride from his sister’s house in Manoa. 
Elkshoulder told Laumauna that “they” needed a ride from Manoa,
 which Laumauna understood to mean that Walton was with
 Elkshoulder. Laumauna did not pick up Elkshoulder because he was
 hosting the party. In court, Laumauna was shown one of the
 surveillance video photos, and he identified the two men in the
 photo as Elkshoulder and Walton. 
Trauma surgeon Frederick Yost, M.D. testified that he
 
treated CW for two stab wounds to the neck. Dr. Yost testified
 that CW also suffered lacerations on his right forearm and left
 hand and a puncture wound on his right hand. On cross-
examination, Dr. Yost testified that one of CW’s neck wounds
 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
could have caused death if untreated, but that death from his
 
other wounds was unlikely. 
After the State rested, Walton and Elkshoulder each
 
moved for a judgment of acquittal. The circuit court denied the
 motions. 
2. Elkshoulder’s defense
 
Elkshoulder testified in his own defense. Elkshoulder
 
stated that on November 15, 2008, he had planned to go to
 
Laumauna’s grandniece’s birthday party at Ala Moana Beach with
 Elkshoulder’s girlfriend and her friend. According to
 Elkshoulder, Walton showed up unexpectedly at Elkshoulder’s
 apartment at around 11:30 a.m. According to Elkshoulder, Walton
 told him that he needed a place to stay, and asked if he could
 stay with Elkshoulder, who declined. At some point,
 Elkshoulder’s girlfriend no longer wanted to go to the party, so,
 at about 12:30 p.m., Elkshoulder and Walton began walking down
 Pensacola Street toward Ala Moana. 
According to Elkshoulder, Walton suggested catching a
 
taxi to go and get some money from a friend, at which point
 Walton approached CW’s taxi and asked for a ride. Elkshoulder
 testified that Walton directed CW where to go. According to
 Elkshoulder, when the taxi stopped in Manoa, “it just happened
 real fast.” Elkshoulder explained that Walton whispered to him
 to “get my back,” and Elkshoulder thought that Walton was going
 to run out of the taxi without paying. Elkshoulder testified
 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that Walton then jumped on CW, at which point Elkshoulder exited
 
the taxi. Elkshoulder stated that once he exited the taxi he
 walked away at a fast pace but did not run. Elkshoulder stated
 that he heard the taxi’s horn honking repeatedly, and looked back
 and saw the taxi shaking. According to Elkshoulder, Walton
 exited the cab from the back driver’s side. Elkshoulder
 testified that he continued walking, heard running behind him,
 turned and saw Walton running toward him. Elkshoulder stated
 that he began to run away because he saw what looked like blood
 on Walton’s shirt and shorts. Elkshoulder stated that Walton
 followed him into a small ravine, and that the following exchange
 occurred:
 
I turned to him and just the look on his face and he
said I can’t believe it, I can’t believe it.  And I
 said what and he said I stabbed him, I stabbed him. 
And my –- my heart just sank when I heard him say
that, especially when I put together that what was on
him when he came out was blood.  And I didn’t know if
 [CW] was -- I didn’t know what happened to him, if he
was still alive or whatever.
 
Elkshoulder stated that he kept walking and wanted to
 
get away from Walton. Elkshoulder stated that he called Laumauna
 
to ask for a ride, and that Laumauna said he was busy setting up
 at the party. According to Elkshoulder, he walked from Manoa to
 Kapiolani Park and stayed there for several days. On November
 17, 2008, Elkshoulder walked to Walton’s girlfriend’s house, told
 Walton he planned to turn himself in to police, and urged Walton
 to turn himself in. Elkshoulder stated that Walton refused to
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
turn himself in and said he would leave, but did not say where he
 
would go. 
Elkshoulder testified that Rodrigues called him a few
 
days after the incident, and informed Elkshoulder that his face
 was “all over the news and the paper.” Elkshoulder testified
 that he told Rodrigues: “I didn’t have anything to do with it. 
I messed up by going with John Walton and that was it.” 
Elkshoulder further testified that he told Rodrigues that “[i]t
 wasn’t supposed to happen that way, I didn’t know it was going to
 happen that way,” and that “I said I didn’t hurt anybody and I
 would never mean to hurt anybody.” Elkshoulder turned himself in
 to authorities and was arrested on November 21, 2008. 
According to Elkshoulder, Walton called Elkshoulder’s
 
cell phone on November 17, 2009 at about 10:00 a.m. from a number
 with a Kansas area code. Elkshoulder told Walton that he was
 busy and to call back in the evening. After hanging up,
 Elkshoulder immediately called his attorney, a deputy public
 defender (DPD).
10 After consulting with the DPD, Elkshoulder
 
obtained a tape recorder and audio tape. Elkshoulder stated that
 his purpose for getting the tape recorder was to get Walton’s
 side of the story and “[t]he truth of what happened that day.” 
Walton called back that evening, while Elkshoulder was
 
at his parents’ home. Elkshoulder put his cell phone on speaker
 
10
 The same DPD served as Elkshoulder’s trial attorney in the instant
 
case.
 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
mode and began to record his conversation with Walton. 
Elkshoulder stated that he did not record the entire
 conversation, because the cassette tape had 60 minutes of
 recording capacity and he did not want to waste any recording
 space on small talk. Consequently, there were gaps in the tape
 that indicated times when Elkshoulder turned the recorder on and
 off. Elkshoulder identified his Exhibit C as an accurate but
 edited and shortened version of the taped recording. Elkshoulder
 offered it into evidence, upon which Walton requested and
 conducted a voir dire examination. 
During the voir dire examination, Walton asked
 
Elkshoulder about his conversation with the DPD prior to making
 the cassette recording. The DPD objected and, at a bench
 conference, stated that such questioning infringed on the
 attorney-client privilege. Walton argued that the DPD had made
 himself a witness to how the recording was made. Walton also
 complained that the recording was not authenticated by any means
 other than Elkshoulder’s self-serving statements. Walton asked
 the circuit court to allow questioning of the DPD about his
 involvement in producing the recording. 
The State agreed with Walton that the DPD had made
 
himself a witness in this case by trying to introduce the
 recording. The DPD stated that he was not a witness because he
 was not present when the recording was made. The DPD also argued
 that an adequate foundation was laid for the recording, and that
 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Walton’s and the State’s arguments went to the weight of the
 
evidence rather than its admissibility. The circuit court stated
 that it would be a fair line of questioning to ask Elkshoulder
 why the tape had been made, but that the DPD could not be
 questioned as a witness. 
Walton argued that the DPD made himself a witness by
 
being directly involved in transferring the tape to CD format. 
Walton argued that he should be able to inquire about the
 conversation the DPD had with Elkshoulder prior to the making of
 the recording. 
Walton filed a memorandum in support of his request to
 
question Elkshoulder regarding his discussions with the DPD 
regarding the recording. The court sustained Elkshoulder’s
 objection as to attorney-client communications, but ruled that
 Elkshoulder was subject to cross-examination concerning his
 purpose and motive for recording the conversation, and concerning
 various copies of the recording. The circuit court stated that
 Elkshoulder laid a proper foundation for the recording, and also
 stated that prior to trial, the court listened to the original CD
 recording and the enhanced CD recording several times to evaluate
 the content of the recording. The circuit court stated that
 Walton had no legitimate need to determine what was communicated
 between Elkshoulder and the DPD concerning the taped
 conversation. 
-24­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court further ruled that Walton’s inquiries
 
regarding whether the contents of the recording that were
 
transferred to the CD went to the weight of the evidence and
 noted that Elkshoulder had made himself subject to cross-
examination. The circuit court noted that all copies of the
 recording had been available for weeks prior to trial to both the
 State and Walton’s counsel to listen to and compare. The circuit
 court further stated that Walton had moved to continue the trial
 date on more than one occasion for the specific purpose of
 conducting tests on the recording and had never filed a timely
 motion regarding the recordings. 
The CD version of the recording was entered into
 
evidence over objections by Walton and the State. The court
 instructed the jury that the recording included portions of a
 telephone conversation between Elkshoulder and Walton, noted that
 the recording had been edited by the court, instructed that the
 jury must not speculate about what may have been edited out, and
 explained that the recording would be available to the jury to
 listen to during deliberations. The recording was then played
 for the jury. 
The recording included the following exchange:
 
ELKSHOULDER:  Dude . . . Dude . . . how many
times did you stab that guy, do you remember . . .
between you and me . . . 
WALTON:
  I think 2-3 times . . . 
ELKSHOULDER: 
 Oh . . . okay . . . well, the
 
thing is this . . . 
-25­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
WALTON: 
 I just remember stabbing like to the
side . . . but 2-3 times.
 
Elkshoulder testified about the recording on direct
 
examination as follows:
 
BY DPD:  Okay. . . . [S]o when you made these
recor
dings, why did you make these recordings?
 
A: I
 wanted the truth to come out. I wanted to
 
basically just the truth to come out.
 
Q: Is there a way that you had planned to
converse with [Walton] during these conversations?
 
A: No. When he called me the first time, that’s
when I called you . . . and then we -- we consulted. 
And then the second time it wasn’t a plan, it was just
a matter of him calling and just recording and trying
to really put Mr. Walton at ease.  And when I say at
ease, there were some things that I had to say that
were not true.
 
Q: Like what?
 
A: I told him I took the heat for both of us.
 
Again, I hadn’t talked to him in a year, I didn’t know
where he was except for the 785 area code, even [if]
it was his phone.  So, again, with respect to the
recording of the conversations that we had, there were
other things in there, again to put him at ease, I had
to say that were not true.
 
Q: So the first recording, this was -- well, the
first phone call was, again, what day?
 
A: November 17th and that was in the morning -­
Q: Yeah.
 A: -- on or around about 10 AM. And the second
 
phone call was the same day that evening.
 
Q: Okay. The second phone call you called him or
he called you?
 
A: He called me.
 
On cross-examination by Walton, Elkshoulder
 
acknowledged that the backpack found in CW’s taxi had his name
 
written on it, but testified that he had given the backpack to
 
-26­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Walton more than one month before the incident. Elkshoulder said
 
a hair-band and computer flash drive that police found in the
 backpack belonged to him, but that he did not know whether a
 Powerhouse Gym membership card found in the backpack was the one
 Walton had given to him.
11
 
On cross-examination by the State, Elkshoulder
 
testified that he immediately exited the taxi when Walton jumped
 on CW because he was scared, but acknowledged that he did not see
 Walton with a knife or other weapon. According to Elkshoulder,
 when he was 30 or 40 feet away from the taxi, he heard its horn
 honking, turned, and saw Walton running toward him, then
 Elkshoulder began running while Walton began calling his name. 
Elkshoulder stated that he saw blood on Walton’s shorts and
 shirt. 
Elkshoulder further testified that he later spoke to
 
Rodrigues on the telephone and told him that he did not mean for
 anyone to get hurt and that he “didn’t have anything to do with
 it.” Elkshoulder stated that he recorded his conversation with
 Walton because Elkshoulder wanted the truth to come out. 
3. Walton’s Defense
 
Walton did not present evidence or testimony. 
11
 The State subsequently obtained a stipulation from Walton and
 
Elkshoulder that HPD Detective Ogawa would testify if recalled that on
November 17, 2008, he contacted Powerhouse Gym owner Alvin Paguio regarding a
gym membership card found in the backpack discovered in CW’s taxi, and that
Paguio told Ogawa that the name the gym associated with a membership number on
the card was Elkshoulder.
 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4. State’s Rebuttal
 
The State recalled Rodrigues, who testified that when
 
he spoke to Elkshoulder on the telephone regarding Elkshoulder’s
 
face being on the news, he was certain that Elkshoulder did not
 say “I didn’t have anything to do with it.” 
5. Jury Instructions
 
On May 27, 2011, Walton joined Elkshoulder’s running
 
objection to all jury instructions as to the charged offenses and
 
lesser included offenses, arguing that the words “as a principal”
 should be added to clarify that the instructions regarding
 substantive offenses apply to a defendant charged as a principal
 rather than as an accomplice. Walton also joined Elkshoulder’s
 objection to the circuit court’s instruction regarding accomplice
 
12
 liability ,  asserting a need to clarify and emphasize that the
intent to promote or facilitate the commission of a specific
 offense was required. 
The circuit court approved the jury
 
instructions over the above objections and so instructed the
 jury. Specifically, the court instructed the jury with regard to
 Attempted Murder in the Second Degree as follows:
 
A person commits the offense of Attempted Murder
in the Second Degree if he intentionally engages in
conduct which, under the circumstances as he believes
them to be, is a substantial step in a course of
conduct intended or known to cause the death of
 another person.
There are two material elements of the offense
 
of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, each of
 
12
 Specifically, Walton and Elkshoulder objected to Court’s
 
Supplemental Instruction No. KK. 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
which
 the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
These two elements are:
 
1.
 That on or about November 15, 2008, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i, the
Defendant John Walton intentionally engaged in
conduct; and
2. That the conduct, under the circumstances as
defendant believed them to be, was a substantial step
in a course of conduct intended or known to be
 practically certain by the defendant to cause the
death of another person.
Conduct shall not be considered a substantial
 
step unless it is strongly corroborative of the
defendant’s intent to commit Murder in the Second
 Degree, which is intentionally or knowingly causing
the death of another person.
 
The circuit court also instructed the jury on the
 
lesser included offenses of Assault in the First Degree, Assault
 
in the Second Degree, Assault in the Third Degree, and Reckless
 Endangering in the Second Degree and similarly did not include
 the words “as a principal” in those instructions. 
Finally, the court instructed the jury with regard to
 
accomplice liability as follows:
 
A defendant charged with committing an offense
may be guilty because he is an accomplice of another
person in the commission of the offense.  The
 prosecution must prove accomplice liability beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
A person is an accomplice of another in the
commission of an offense if:
 
1. With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of the offense he
 
a. solicits the other person to commit it; or
b. aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other
person in the planning or commission of the offense.
Mere presence at the scene of an offense or
knowledge that an offense is being committed, without
more, does not make a person an accomplice to the
offense.  However, if the person plans or participates
in the commission of an offense with the intent to
 promote or facilitate the offense, he is an accomplice
to the commission of the offense.
 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6. Closing arguments
 
The State argued that both Walton and Elkshoulder
 
participated in the stabbing incident. The State summarized CW’s
 
testimony:
 
Who stabbed you?  There were only three people
 
in the car.  [CW] was in the front, the two defendants
 
in the back.  Who stabbed you?  The Asian guy.  Are
 you absolutely certain?  Yes, it was the Asian guy. 
Who held you down with both hands while the knife is
being pushed down on you?  He talks about the shorter
 guy, meaning [] Walton, pushing him down while he
still saw the knife over him.  [CW] says there were
three hands on me and one hand holding the knife.
 
The State further argued that although there was “no
 
doubt” that the recorded phone conversation was between
 
Elkshoulder and Walton, “the circumstances under which they took
 place [were] highly suspect” because at the time of the
 recording, Elkshoulder was awaiting trial and Walton was “nowhere
 to be found.” 
The State also highlighted testimony about Elkshoulder
 
being “the leader and [Walton] being the follower,” and argued
 that Walton was guilty as an accomplice. 
[W]e don’t need to prove who was the principal
and who was the accomplice.  The charge is Attempted
Murder in the Second Degree, one or both of them
stabbed him and one or both of them helped each other.
Now, [] Elkshoulder has accused [] Walton of
doing it and he uses this tape.  [] Walton says yeah,
I stabbed him two to three times.  On the assumption
that you find the tape credible and you believe that
[] Walton is actually the person who stabbed the
taxicab driver, [CW], two to three times, he says that
right on the tape and you have that tape before you,
[] Elkshoulder was still there and still held.
If [CW] was mistaken in who actually stabbed
him, certainly he was not mistaken that both of them
were in the car, two sets of hands were on him.
Now, when the defense of [] Elkshoulder presents
this tape to you he talks about how many times did you
 
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stab, two to three times.  But listen to that tape
some more as you hear [] Walton saying, you know, he’s
saying they’re talking about the honking of the horn. 
[] Walton says, you know, this whole F-ing thing, the
honking of the horn, and then -- and then me and you
skip out.  Then me and you skip out.  Listen to that
 part of that tape.
And when you listen to that tape you’re going
to see [] Elkshoulder has a lot of time to insert his
own defense there, he’s talking about what he did,
what he did, what he did.  It’s almost like a setup,
 almost like a setup.  But [] Walton says yeah, but the
honking of the horn and then you and I got out. That
means . . . [Elkshoulder] was in there, was in there. 
By [] Walton’s own admission of himself being
involved, he involves [] Elkshoulder as well.
So if [CW] was mistaken, the bottom line
is so what?  If he’s mistaken, then it was [Walton]
that stabbed him and it was [Elkshoulder] who held him
down.  Either way they’re both guilty either as the
person who actually stabbed him or an accomplice.
 
Elkshoulder argued that Walton was the person who
 
stabbed CW, and that the “sudden and unexpected attack was . . .
 
a surprise to [] Elkshoulder, who was an unwitting, accidental
 spectator and witness to this incident.” Elkshoulder argued that
 Walton’s recorded statement that he stabbed CW “about two to
 three times . . . explains all the injuries that you see here
 that was suffered by [CW].” Elkshoulder also argued that CW’s
 recollection of certain details the day of the incident – such as
 which passenger directed him where to drive – was inconsistent. 
Walton argued that Elkshoulder’s testimony was not
 
credible, and that he “wasn’t being straightforward and honest
 with [the jury] when he attempts to blame [] Walton for doing all
 of the bad things that happened later on.” Walton noted CW’s
 testimony that the “Asian male” stabbed him, and that he never
 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
saw “the Caucasian male” with the knife. Walton further argued
 
that:
 
there is absolutely no question that [CW] has been
consistent throughout all of his testimony and his -­and his contact with the police and with the court
that it was not [] Walton that did anything. [] Walton
didn’t have a knife, he was seated in the back seat
when [CW] was first stabbed, and that it was the guy,
the fat guy, the big guy, the Asian guy, the guy who
he struggled with with the knife, [] Elkshoulder, who
stabbed him.
 
Walton also argued that the recording “in which
 
[Walton] is claimed to have stated that he stabbed [CW]” was not
 
credible:
 
. . . First of all, who provided the tape
recorder?  . . . It wasn’t . . . [the DPD].  The
 
testimony was that he didn’t have a hand in actually
setting up the conversation and taping it.  Did
 Detective Ogawa, the police investigator who was
responsible for being the lead investigator in this
case, did he have a copy of the tape recording so that
he could conduct a police investigation about it? 
Well, you heard the detective testify right here
before you that he had been told about the recording
but never got a copy.  Never had a chance to duly take
a look at it, examine it forensically or do whatever,
never got a copy.
Well, during the trial did [] Rodrigues or []
Laumauna testify under oath subject to cross-
examination that they listened to the recording and
identified [] Elkshoulder and [] Walton on the
recording?  Was there any testimony like that?  No,
 there wasn’t, there was no such testimony.  Did the
 prosecutor present the recording as part of its case?
Did [the State] say hey, we have this recording, we
want you to listen to it?  No, he did not.
So what is the state of the evidence about the
 
recording?  The only person vouching for it as being
-- as something that accurately and truly reflects
what it purports to be, by testimony here by the
evidence that is before you, ladies and gentlemen of
the jury, is [] Elkshoulder.  And you heard about how
you judge credibility and [the State] went through a
whole list, including bias, motive, whatever.
Now, we would submit . . .  that [] Elkshoulder
and his tape recording and his claim that it’s
truthful and accurate, is not worthy of your belief. 
It’s not worthy of any type of credibility.
. . . . 

. . .
 Was there some type of manipulation going
on with the recording?  We certainly don’t know but
 
-32­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . . we would submit that given the type of
circumstances in which the recording was presented,
that it lacks credibility and it’s not worthy of your
belief.
 
In rebuttal, the State argued that although the
 
recording – which the State characterized as “suspect” – would
 
indicate that Walton was guilty, “that’s not how the State
 believes [] Walton is guilty.” 
[The] State believes [] Walton is guilty by the
very words the way [CW] told you what happened, that
upon [CW] being stabbed, he was pulled down by two of
the men and that the knife over him, he struggled with
as a third attempt was made to stab him.  Whichever of
 the two it may have been, [CW] believes it was
probably still [] Elkshoulder.  But, regardless, the
two of them worked in concert together, they were both
participants.  It wasn’t one was a witness and one did
 everything else, they worked together.
. . . .
 
With respect to this tape, you know, well, it is
what it is.  But we’re not asking you to convict []
Walton for attempted murder based on that tape.  That
 tape was full of deception.  We don’t know what []
Elkshoulder did, but we know he’s a leader, we know
Walton is a follower, kind of clueless.  We don’t know
 everything about what happened with that tape but that
tape just reeks with suspicion.
If it was anymore substantial and believable,
the State would have presented it in its case-in-chief
but it is not worthy of belief.  Exactly what
[Walton’s counsel] said, it is not worthy of belief.
But [CW] is worthy of belief and it is on that
evidence that we ask you to find the defendants, both
of them, guilty for both charges.
 
7. Verdict and sentencing
 
The jury found Walton guilty as charged on both counts. 
In contrast, the jury found Elkshoulder guilty of Assault in the
 
First Degree and Robbery in the First Degree. Pursuant to a
 special interrogatory, the jury found a merger of Walton’s
 offenses. On August 10, 2011, the circuit court entered its
 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, convicting Walton of
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree and Robbery in the First
 
Degree. The judgment dismissed the Robbery charge without
 prejudice, and sentenced Walton to a life term of incarceration
 with the possibility of parole for Attempted Murder in the Second
 Degree. 
E. ICA Appeal
 
In his opening brief to the ICA, Walton asserted six
 
points of error. First, Walton argued that the circuit court
 
erred in denying his motion for severance, stating that
 Elkshoulder’s and his defenses were in irreconcilable conflict
 with each other because Elkshoulder sought to blame Walton for
 the stabbing. Second, Walton argued that the circuit court erred
 in denying his motion to suppress the identifications made by
 Koki and Rodrigues, and the information obtained using the GNC
 card. Third, Walton argued that the circuit court erred in
 admitting certain photographs.
13 Fourth, Walton argued that the
 
circuit court erred when it admitted the recorded phone
 conversation because it was not properly authenticated, was
 improper hearsay, and he was denied his right to confront
 Elkshoulder and the DPD about their conversations regarding the
 recording. Fifth, Walton argued that the jury instructions
 regarding the charged offense and lesser included offenses
 “resulted in prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent,
 
13
 Walton does not argue this point in his application to this court. 
-34­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or misleading instructions.” Finally, Walton argued that the
 
State’s evidence was “defective” and that the circuit court thus
 erred in denying his motion for a judgment of acquittal at the
 conclusion of the State’s case. 
In its Memorandum Opinion, the ICA rejected all of
 
Walton’s claims and affirmed the circuit court’s August 10, 2011
 judgment. First, the ICA held that the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying Walton’s motions for severance. 
The ICA explained that although Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s
 defenses “conflicted to an extent,” Walton failed to demonstrate
 that the conflict alone led the jury to infer his guilt. The ICA
 further explained that Walton failed to demonstrate that evidence
 damaging to his case in the joint trial would not have been
 admissible in a separate trial. Second, the ICA held that the
 photographic line-up was not impermissibly suggestive, and that
 Walton did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in GNC’s
 business records. Third, the ICA held that the recorded
 telephone conversation was properly authenticated and admitted as
 a statement against interest. Fourth, the ICA held that the
 circuit court properly instructed the jury. Finally, the ICA
 held that substantial evidence supported Walton’s conviction.
14
 
14
 The ICA also held that the circuit court properly admitted
 
photographs of CW’s injury.  Again, Walton does not raise that issue here.
 
-35­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Severance of Defendants
 
This court reviews the denial of a motion for severance 
for an abuse of discretion. State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96, 98, 550 
P.2d 900, 902 (1976); State v. Timas, 82 Hawai' i 499, 512, 923 
P.2d 916, 929 (App. 1996). In deciding a motion for severance, 
the trial court must “balance possible prejudice to the defendant from joinder with the public interest in efficient use of judicial time through joint trial of defendants and offenses which are connected.” Matias, 57 Haw. at 98, 550 P.2d at 902. 
An appellate court “may not conclude that the defendant suffered prejudice from a joint trial unless it first concludes that a defendant was denied a fair trial. What might have happened had the motion for severance been granted is irrelevant speculation.” Timas, 82 Hawai' i at 512, 923 P.2d at 929 (brackets and ellipsis 
omitted) (quoting State v. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. 317, 327, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (App. 1990)). 
B. Motion to Suppress Evidence and Identification Testimony
 
This court reviews a trial court’s ruling on a motion
 
to suppress evidence de novo:
 
to determine whether the ruling was “right” or
“wrong.”  The proponent of the motion to suppress hasthe burden of establishing, by a preponderance of theevidence, that the statements or items sought to beexcluded were unlawfully secured and that his or herright to be free from unreasonable searches orseizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution. 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai' i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007) 
(citations omitted). 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of
eyewitness identification on the grounds of
impermissibly suggestive pre-trial identification
procedure, he or she has the burden of proof, and the
court, trial or appellate, is faced with two
questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether,
upon viewing the totality of the circumstances, such
as opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the
degree of attention, and the elapsed time, the
witness’s identification is deemed sufficiently
reliable so that it is worthy of presentation to and
consideration by the jury.
 
State v. Araki, 82 Hawai' i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996) 
(quoting State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 80, 88 
(1995)). 
C. Jury Instructions
 
It is the circuit court’s duty and ultimate 
responsibility to ensure that the jury was properly instructed on 
issues of criminal liability. State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 
90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). “When jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.” Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai' i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 
(2013). 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal/Sufficiency of Evidence
 
The standard to be applied by the trial
court in ruling upon a motion for a judgment
of acquittal is whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the
province of the [trier of fact], a reasonable
mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai' i 1, 4, 108 P.3d 304, 307 (2005). This 
court employs the same standard of review in reviewing a motion
 
for a judgment of acquittal. Id.
 
III. Discussion
 
PART I: OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
We hold that the circuit court erred in denying 
Walton’s motion for severance because Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s irreconcilable defenses, combined with the admission of the recorded telephone conversation, denied Walton his right to a fair trial. Although our resolution of the severance issue is dispositive of this appeal, we nevertheless address Walton’s arguments concerning the suppression of evidence and jury instructions, because those issues may arise again on remand in Walton’s separate trial. See, e.g., State v. Solomon, 107 
Hawai'i 117, 120, 111 P.3d 12, 15 (2005) (addressing points of 
error “in order to provide guidance to the [trial court] on remand”). Finally, we consider Walton’s argument that the circuit court erred in denying his motion for a judgment of acquittal, because the double jeopardy clauses of the United 
-38­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
States Constitution and Hawai' i Constitution would prohibit 
Walton’s retrial if the State had failed to adduce sufficient 
evidence for a jury to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See, e.g., State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai' i 43, 52, 237 P.3d 1109, 
1118 (2010). 
A.	 The circuit court erred in denying Walton’s motion for
severance
 
Walton argues that the circuit court erred in denying
 
his motion for severance because his and Elkshoulder’s defenses
 
were “inconsistent, antagonistic, and irreconcilable,” and
 because he was “substantially prejudiced” by evidence admitted at
 trial. Specifically, Walton argues that he suffered prejudice
 because Elkshoulder was allowed to introduce the recorded
 telephone conversation in which Walton admitted that he had
 stabbed CW. 
As set forth below, the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying Walton’s motion for severance. Under the
 circumstances of this case, Walton was denied a fair trial where
 he and Elkshoulder not only had irreconcilable defenses, but
 Elkshoulder offered a recording containing Walton’s admission
 that he stabbed CW. Walton therefore had to defend against
 evidence supporting two different theories of his guilt, one
 advanced by the State and one by his co-defendant. 
-39­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
8(b)(2011), permits joinder of two or more defendants in the same
 
charge: 
(1) when each of the defendants is charged with
accountability for each offense included in the
charge; 
(2) when each of the defendants is charged with
conspiracy and some of the defendants are also charged
with one or more offenses alleged to be in furtherance
of the conspiracy; or 
(3) when, even if conspiracy is not charged and all of
the defendants are not charged in each count, the
several offenses charged:
(i) were part of a common scheme or plan; or 
(ii) were so closely connected in respect to time,
place and occasion that it would be difficult to
separate proof of one charge from proof of the others.
 
However, “[i]f it appears that a defendant or the
 
government is prejudiced by a joinder of offenses or of
 
defendants in a charge or by such joinder for trial together, the
 court may order an election or separate trials of counts, grant a
 severance of defendants or provide whatever other relief justice
 requires.” HRPP Rule 14. 
In deciding a motion for severance, the trial court 
must “balance the possible prejudice to the defendant from joinder with the public interest in efficient use of judicial time through joint trial of defendants and offenses which are connected.” State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96, 98, 550 P.2d 900, 902 
(1976). An appellate court “may not conclude that the defendant suffered prejudice from a joint trial unless it first concludes that a defendant was denied a fair trial.” Timas, 82 Hawai' i at 
-40­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
511, 923 P.2d at 929 (ellipsis and brackets omitted) (quoting
 
State v. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. 317, 327, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (1990)).
 
The defendant bears the burden of proving a denial of a 
fair trial. Timas, 82 Hawai' i at 512, 923 P.2d at 928. A joint 
trial may be unfair to one defendant when: (1) the core of each defense is in irreconcilable conflict with the other, (2) the defendant in question is prevented from introducing evidence that would have been admissible in that defendant’s separate trial not involving other defendants, or (3) evidence damaging to the defendant in question is admitted and it would not have been admissible in that defendant’s separate trial not involving other defendants. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. at 327, 801 P.2d at 35; see also 
Timas, 82 Hawai' i at 511, 923 P.2d at 928. As the United States 
Supreme Court has observed, however, there is no test or exclusive list of prejudices because “[t]he risk of prejudice will vary with the facts in each case.” Zafiro v. United States, 
506 U.S. 534, 539 (1993). 
It is well settled that defendants are not entitled to
 
severance merely because their defenses are inconsistent or they
 may have a better chance of acquittal in separate trials. Id. at
 
540. As the Ninth Circuit has explained, 
Mere inconsistency in defense positions is
insufficient to find codefendants’ defenses
 antagonistic.  Inconsistency, alone, seldom produces
the type of prejudice that warrants reversal.  The
 probability of reversible prejudice increases as the
defenses move beyond the merely inconsistent to the
antagonistic.
 
-41­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mutually exclusive defenses are said to exist when
acquittal of one codefendant would necessarily call
for the conviction of the other.  The prototypical
example is a trial in which each of two defendants
claims innocence, seeking to prove instead that the
other committed the crime.
 
United States v. Tootick, 952 F.2d 1078, 1081 (9th Cir. 1991)
 
(internal citations and quotation marks omitted); United States
 v. Throckmorton, 87 F.3d 1069, 1072 (9th Cir. 1996) (“Antagonism
 between defenses or the desire of one defendant to exculpate
 himself by inculpating a codefendant . . . is insufficient to
 require severance.”). 
Although the joinder of trials in which defendants
 
maintain mutually exclusive defenses produces heightened dangers
 of prejudice, there is no per se rule against joinder in such
 cases. Tootick, 952 F.2d at 1083; Zafiro, 506 U.S. at 538
 
(“Mutually antagonistic defenses are not prejudicial per se.”). 
Rather, “in order to establish an abuse of discretion, the
 defendant[] must demonstrate that clear and manifest prejudice
 did occur.” Tootick, 952 F.2d at 1083.
 
For example, in State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw. 106, 807 P.2d
 
1264 (1991), two co-defendants were jointly tried and both were
 convicted of murder in the beating death of a teenager. 72 Haw.
 at 109, 807 P.2d at 1266. One of the defendants, Joefrey Mabuti,
 testified that he was not involved in the beating, and the other
 defendant, Vicente Acosta, testified that he tried to stop the
 
-42­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
beating, and that he saw Mabuti participate in the beating. Id.
 
at 109-10, 807 P.2d at 1267. 
Before Mabuti and Acosta’s joint trial, another
 
individual, Enrique Pintoy, confessed to his own participation in
 
the beating, and stated that Mabuti had participated in the
 beating. Id. at at 110, 807 P.2d at 1267. Acosta sought to have
 
Pintoy’s confession admitted, as a statement against interest,
 arguing that it was exculpatory as to himself. Id. Mabuti,
 
however, objected, because Pintoy’s confession was damaging to
 his case. Id. After the parties redacted Pintoy’s statement,
 
what was left “was of little consequence,” and Acosta chose not
 to use it at trial. Id. 
Based, in part, on Pintoy’s confession, Acosta made
 
several attempts to have the trial severed. Id. at 111, 807 P.2d
 
at 1267. After Acosta’s initial motion was denied by a motions
 judge, the trial judge twice stated that the case should have
 been severed, but nevertheless denied Acosta’s motions because he
 felt bound by the earlier ruling of the motions judge.
15 Id. at
 
15 In the instant case, Judge Town originally consolidated the trial,
 
and Judge Garibaldi was subsequently asked to sever.  In denying Walton’s
March 23, 2011 motion for severance, Judge Garibaldi noted that she was “not
inclined to alter the decision that was made by [Judge Town].”  Specifically,
Judge Garibaldi explained that “[u]nless there are cogent reasons to support a
second court’s action, any modification of a prior ruling of another court of
equal and concurrent jurisdiction is deemed –- could be deemed an abuse of
discretion.”  In denying Elkshoulder’s May 12, 2011 motion for severance — to
which Walton joined — Judge Garibaldi explained that she was “torn at this
point” and “not quite certain,” and that it was “a very close issue.”  Judge
Garibaldi nevertheless concluded that she was not “inclined to set aside [the
court’s] prior order denying the motion to sever the trial.”
As th
is case makes clear, it is “very difficult for the trial
judge to make a finding on the prejudice issue before trial, as it involves
(continued...)
 
-43­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
110, 807 P.2d at 1267. On appeal, Mabuti and Acosta each argued
 
that their trials should have been severed. Id. at 113, 807 P.2d
 
at 1268.
 
This court concluded that the trial court abused its
 
discretion in denying Acosta’s motion for severance because he
 was prejudiced by not being able to present his exculpatory
 evidence, i.e., the unredacted statement of Pintoy. Id. at 114,
 
807 P.2d at 1269. However, this court rejected Mabuti’s argument
 that the trial should have been severed. The court concluded
 that Mabuti’s and Acosta’s defenses were not sufficiently
 antagonistic because “any combination of guilty or not guilty
 verdicts, as to either or both of these defendants, would have
 withstood any complaint of inconsistent verdicts.” Id. at 113,
 
807 P.2d at 1268. The court further noted that Mabuti was
 allowed to present all of his evidence. Id. at 113-14, 807 P.2d
 
at 1269. 
In Tootick, three individuals — Moses Tootick, Charles
 
Frank, and Aaron Hart — drove to a secluded hill, where Hart was
 
15(...continued)
speculation about many things which may or may not occur.”  Matias, 57 Haw. at 
98, 550 P.2d at 902 (quotation marks and citation omitted).  Here, for
example, prior to trial it was impossible for the circuit court to know forcertain whether Elkshoulder would testify, and, consequently, whether therecorded conversation would be offered as evidence.  Because of this difficulty in determining prejudice prior to trial, a pretrial motion forseverance must also be renewed during trial or else any claim of error will beconsidered waived.  State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai 'i 279, 288, 1 P.3d 281, 290
(2000); State v. Hilongo, 64 Haw. 577, 578, 645 P.2d 314, 316 (1982) (“failureto renew the motion to sever under [HRPP Rule 14] during the course of thetrial waived any claimed error”).  Thus, in evaluating each successive motionfor severance, the trial court must consider anew whether “it appears that adefendant or the government is prejudiced by a joinder of offenses or ofdefendants in a charge or by such joinder for trial together.”  HRPP Rule 14.  
-44­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stabbed. Hart testified that Frank stabbed him. Id. at 1080. 
Frank testified that Tootick stabbed Hart. Id. at 1081. Tootick
 
did not testify, but his lawyer claimed that Tootick was highly
 
intoxicated and was either passed out or was asleep during the
 entire episode. Id. The Ninth Circuit explained that “[b]ecause
 
only Frank and Tootick were present when Hart was attacked, and
 because there was no suggestion that Hart injured himself, the
 jury could not acquit Tootick without disbelieving Frank. Each
 defense theory contradicted the other in such a way that the
 acquittal of one necessitates the conviction of the other.” Id. 
The Ninth Circuit held, therefore, that Tootick’s and Frank’s
 defenses were irreconcilable. Id. 
Like in Tootick, Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s defenses
 
were irreconcilable. Elkshoulder testified that Walton jumped on
 CW and that he immediately got out of the taxi and started
 walking away. In short, Elkshoulder argued that he was not in
 the taxi when CW was stabbed. Walton, however, also argued that
 he did not stab CW. In this regard, during his cross-examination
 of CW, Walton elicited testimony confirming that it was
 Elkshoulder who had initially grabbed and stabbed CW. Walton
 further elicited testimony that CW never saw him holding a knife. 
Walton’s and Elkshoulder’s defenses were therefore irreconcilable
 because they each maintained that the other person stabbed CW. 
See Tootick, 952 F.2d at 1081. 
-45­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As stated above, there is no per se rule against
 
joinder in trials in which defendants maintain mutually exclusive
 
defenses. Tootick, 952 F.2d at 1083; Zafiro, 506 U.S. at 538. 
Here, however, the admission of the recording — in conjunction
 with Walton and Elkshoulder’s irreconcilable defenses — deprived
 Walton of a fair trial. Courts have recognized that “the primary
 danger that [the rule requiring severance based on irreconcilable
 defenses] seeks to avoid is a defendant faced with two
 prosecutors — the state and his co-defendant.” United States v.
 
Sherlock, 962 F.2d 1349, 1363 (9th Cir. 1989); United States v.
 Lee, 744 F.2d 1124, 1126 (5th Cir. 1984). “The rule is also
 designed to prevent a situation in which each defendant is the
 government’s best witness against the other.” Lee, 744 F.2d at
 
1126. Here, Walton was in effect forced to face two prosecutors,
 the State and Elkshoulder, each of which offered different
 evidence supporting conflicting theories of his culpability. 
On the recording, Walton admitted to stabbing CW “2-3
 
times.” Elkshoulder relied on the recording to argue that Walton
 had stabbed CW. In contrast, the State asserted that “it was not
 Walton who stabbed . . . [CW], it was Elkshoulder who stabbed
 him,” while Walton helped to hold CW down. 
Because the recording was inconsistent with the State’s
 
theory of the case, the State contended that it was “scripted”
 and “rehearsed.” The State repeated its position during its
 closing argument, arguing that “the tape was rehearsed,”
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
specifically noting that the circumstances under which the
 
recording was made were “highly suspect.” And, during its
 rebuttal argument, the State argued that the “tape just reeks
 with suspicion,” noting that “[i]f it was anymore substantial and
 believable, the State would have presented it in its case in
 chief but it is not worthy of belief.” Nevertheless, during its
 closing argument, the State argued that the jury could still find
 Walton guilty even if the jury found the tape credible. In
 effect, the State was able to rely on its primary theory (i.e.,
 that Walton held CW down), while simultaneously suggesting that
 the jury could accept Elkshoulder’s theory (i.e., that Walton
 wielded the knife). Similarly, Walton had to defend against both
 theories. 
As it turned out, Elkshoulder’s recording appears to
 
have been persuasive evidence against Walton. Despite the
 State’s theory of the case, and CW’s testimony in support of that
 theory, the jury — after hearing Walton’s admission on the
 recording — convicted Walton of attempted murder, but convicted
 Elkshoulder only of assault in the first degree. It is clear,
 therefore, that Elkshoulder’s offering of a recording in which
 Walton confessed to stabbing CW, where the State challenged the
 veracity of the recording, and where Walton’s apparent confession
 was inconsistent with the State’s theory of the case, prejudiced
 Walton and denied him a fair trial. 
-47­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Courts of this State have stated that “speculation
 
about what might have happened had a motion for severance been
 
granted is irrelevant,” and that the “only relevant facts are
 what actually happened.” Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. at 328, 801 P.2d at
 
36 (rejecting defendant’s argument that he did not testify
 because his testimony would have implicated his co-defendant, who
 would have retaliated by testifying and incriminating defendant);
 State v. White, 5 Haw. App. 670, 672, 706 P.2d 1331, 1333 (1985)
 (finding that trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 defendant’s motion for severance where defendant was not
 prevented from presenting his evidence, and no damaging evidence
 was introduced in the joint trial that would not have been
 admissible in defendant’s separate trial). In this case “what
 actually happened” prejudiced Walton because the admission of the
 recording unfairly forced Walton to, in effect, confront two
 prosecutors.
 
Moreover, it appears that, had Walton’s trial been
 
severed, the recording would not have been offered by the State
 in his separate trial. It was Elkshoulder who authenticated the
 tape through his own testimony. As stated above, the State
 attacked the recording as “rehearsed,” “scripted,” “highly
 suspect,” “reek[ing] with suspicion,” and “not worthy of belief.” 
Any argument by the State that it would have offered the
 recording in Walton’s separate trial, therefore, would appear to
 be inconsistent with that position. Moreover, absent the
 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testimony of Elkshoulder, it is unclear how the State would have
 
been able to authenticate the recording. 
Accordingly, on the facts of this case, Walton was
 
denied a fair trial. The circuit court therefore abused its
 discretion in denying Walton’s motion for severance.
 
B.	 The circuit court correctly denied Walton’s motion to
suppress identification evidence
 
Walton also challenges the admissibility of
 
identification evidence from two of his co-workers, Koki and
 
Rodrigues. Specifically, Walton argues that the “circumstances
 leading up to the photographic line-up, including repeated prior
 viewings, and prior comments and opinions from others, resulted
 in bolstering and tainting the subsequent photo line-up procedure
 as well as the in-court trial identifications.” 
At trial, Rodrigues testified that he identified Walton
 
in the surveillance photos. Although Koki did not testify at
 trial, Detective Ogawa testified that Koki identified the men in
 the surveillance photos as Walton and Elkshoulder, and that Koki
 also identified Walton and Elkshoulder in photo line-ups. 
Laumauna also testified at trial that the men in the surveillance
 photos were Walton and Elkshoulder. Although Walton sought to
 suppress the identification evidence from Rodrigues and Koki, he
 never sought to suppress Laumauna’s testimony. Given Laumauna’s
 identification of Walton and Elkshoulder, it is therefore unclear
 what prejudice, if any, Walton suffered as a result of
 
-49­        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Rodrigues’s and Koki’s identifications. Nevertheless, for the
 
reasons set forth below, we conclude that the circuit court did
 not err in denying Walton’s motion to suppress the identification
 evidence. 
In general, “[a] conviction based on eyewitness
 
identification at trial will be set aside if a pretrial
 identification by photographic display was conducted in a manner
 impermissibly suggestive as to give rise to a very substantial
 likelihood of irreparable misidentification.” State v. Malani,
 
59 Haw. 167, 170, 578 P.2d 236, 238 (1978). Specifically, 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of
eyewitness identification on the grounds of
impermissibly suggestive pretrial identification
procedure, he or she has the burden of proof, and the
court, trial or appellate, is faced with two
questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether,
upon viewing the totality of the circumstances, such
as opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the
degree of attention, the accuracy of prior
description, the level of certainty, and the elapsed
time, the witness’ identification is deemed
sufficiently reliable so that it is worthy of
presentation to and consideration by the jury.
 
State v. DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 131, 681 P.2d 573, 577-78
 
(1984).
 
As a preliminary matter, we note that this case does
 
not raise many of the concerns usually associated with eyewitness
 identifications because Koki and Rodrigues did not witness the
 incident, and neither of them identified Walton as participating
 in the criminal conduct at issue in this case. See, e.g., State
 
v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i 302, 310-11, 277 P.3d 1027, 1035-36 
-50­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2012) (discussing recent studies on the reliability of
 
eyewitness identifications). Instead, Rodrigues and Koki merely
 confirmed the identity of Elkshoulder and Walton in surveillance
 camera photos and photo line-ups, based on their familiarity with
 Walton and Elkshoulder from work. In any event, the
 identification process used in this case was not improper.
 
As stated above, at Walton’s motion to suppress
 
hearing, Rodrigues testified that he went to an online news
 website to view photos of two men “accused of a crime” after his
 supervisor called him and told him “to check out the news.” 
Rodrigues stated that the photos were “kind of blurry but . . .
 there’s certain things that you can pick out.” Rodrigues stated
 that he looked at the photos on the website “[a]bout 20 times”
 and consulted with his family, who had met Elkshoulder. 
Rodrigues testified that, although the photos on the website were
 “kind of hard,” “once I seen [the photos] on the news I knew
 definitely” that the photos depicted Walton and Elkshoulder. 
Rodrigues explained that he was able to identify Walton by “[h]is
 stature, the way he –- just the overall appearance, the style of
 his hair, the glasses, the backpack, just that kind of things in
 nature.” Rodrigues further explained that he had been
 supervising Walton at work for about five months, and that he had
 been supervising Elkshoulder for about seven months. Rodrigues
 stated that a day or two later, police contacted him and showed
 him the same surveillance photo, and that, about a month later,
 
-51­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he was contacted by police to view a photographic lineup, from
 
which he identified Walton. 
Koki similarly testified that he received a phone call
 
from someone who told him to look at a surveillance photo in an
 online news report. The person told Koki, “I think it’s one of
 your guys” but did not mention any names. Koki stated that he
 looked at the photo online about ten times over ten minutes,
 after which he called his manager and stated, “I believe this is
 [Elkshoulder] and [Walton].” Koki explained that he concluded on
 his own that it was Elkshoulder and Walton in the photo. Koki
 noted that he identified Elkshoulder in the photo by his
 clothing and hair, and identified Walton by his hair and the
 backpack. Koki stated that almost a month later, he identified
 Walton and Elkshoulder from a lineup of photos. 
In other words, Rodrigues and Koki each identified
 
Walton and Elkshoulder as the men depicted in the surveillance
 photograph before they had been contacted by the police. Based
 on their regular contact with Elkshoulder and Walton, Rodrigues,
 and Koki were able to identify them as the individuals depicted
 in the news segment and the photo line-up. The circuit court
 correctly concluded, therefore, that Koki and Rodrigues
 identified Walton and Elkshoulder independently as a result of
 their familiarity with them. 
Moreover, the photographic line-up was not
 
impermissibly suggestive. Detective Michael Ogawa testified that
 
-52­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he put together a photographic lineup using photos from Hawai' i 
driver’s licenses and state IDs, and showed them to Rodrigues and 
Koki. Detective Ogawa also stated that he showed Rodrigues and Koki photographs taken from the surveillance video. The images included in the photo line-up are not suggestive, and the record does not indicate that the photo line-up was otherwise conducted in an impermissibly suggestive manner. In this regard, the police first showed Rodrigues and Koki the surveillance photo and then showed them the photo line-up. Rodrigues and Koki then each identified Walton as a person with whom they had worked. The circuit court correctly concluded, therefore, that the photo line-up was not impermissibly suggestive. Finally, even assuming that the photo line-up was impermissibly suggestive, under the totality of the circumstances, Rodrigues’s and Koki’s identifications of Walton were sufficiently reliable because of their familiarity with Walton and Elkshoulder from work. See 
DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. at 131, 681 P.2d at 577-78. For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court correctly denied Walton’s motion to suppress. 
C. The circuit court properly instructed the jury
 
Walton argues that the circuit court erred in
 
instructing the jury because the instructions failed to
 
distinguish between liability as a principal and liability as an
 accomplice. Specifically, Walton asserts that “the words ‘as a
 principal’ should [have been] included in all substantive offense
 
-53­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instructions, and the instruction that the accomplice must have
 
the specific intent or conscious object to commit the underlying
 crime.” Walton argues, therefore, that the instructions were
 “prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 misleading.” 
It is the circuit court’s duty and ultimate
 
responsibility to ensure that the jury was properly instructed on
 issues of criminal liability. State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 
90, 253 P.3d 639, 65 1 (2011). 
When jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are
at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether,
when read and considered as a whole, the instructions
given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous,
inconsistent, or misleading.  Erroneous instructions
 are presumptively harmful and are a ground for
reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.
 
Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai' i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 
(2013). 
Under Hawai' i law, a person is “guilty of an offense if 
it is committed by his own conduct or by the conduct of another
 
person for which he is legally accountable, or both.” HRS § 702­221(1). A person is “legally accountable” for the conduct of
 another person when:
 
(a) Acting with the state of mind that is sufficient
for the commission of the offense, he causes an
innocent or irresponsible person to engage in such
conduct; or
(b) He is made accountable for the conduct of such
other person by this Code or by the law defining the
offense; or
(c) He is an accomplice of such other person in the
commission of the offense. 
HRS § 702-221(2). 
-54­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A person is an accomplice of another person in the
 
commission of an offense if:
 
(1) With the intention of promoting or facilitating
the commission of the offense, the person:
(a) Solicits the other person to commit it; or
(b) Aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other person
in planning or committing it; or
(c) Having a legal duty to prevent the commission of
the offense, fails to make reasonable effort so to do;
 or
 
(2)
 The person’s conduct is expressly declared by law
to establish the person’s complicity.
 
HRS § 702-222 (emphasis added).
 
Here, the circuit court instructed the jury with
 
respect to accomplice liability as follows:
 
A defendant charged with committing an offense
may be guilty because he is an accomplice of another
person in the commission of the offense. The
prosecution must prove accomplice liability beyond a
reasonable doubt.  
A person is an accomplice of another in the
commission of an offense if: 
1.
 With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of the offense he 
a. solicits the other person to commit it; or
b. aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other
person in the planning or commission of the offense.
 
Mere presence at the scene . . . of an offense
or knowledge that an offense is being committed,
without more, does not make a person an accomplice to
the offense.  However, if a person plans or
participates in the commission of an offense with the
intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he is an
accomplice to the commission of the offense.
 
A person is not guilty of an offense unless the
State proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person
acted with the required states of mind, as these
instructions specify, with respect to each element of
the offense. The instruction for the offense charged
specifies the states of mind required to be proved. 
The circuit court also instructed the jury on the
 
charged offenses, the lesser included offenses, and the states of
 
mind associated with each of those offenses. Accordingly, the
 
-55­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court’s instructions to the jury accurately represented
 
the relevant law.
 
Nevertheless, Walton argues that the words “‘as a 
principal’ should [have been] included in all substantive offense instructions.” That argument is unfounded. As the commentary on HRS § 702-221(1) states, “[d]istinctions between principals and accessories are dispensed with and a defendant may be convicted directly of an offense committed by another for whose conduct the defendant is accountable.” See State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 
462, 489, 946 P.2d 32, 59 (1997) (same). 
Walton’s argument that the circuit court should have
 
instructed the jury that “the accomplice must have the specific
 intent or conscious object to commit the underlying crime” is
 similarly without merit, since the circuit court’s instructions
 accurately stated the relevant law. The circuit court instructed
 the jury that “[a] defendant charged with committing an offense
 may be guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in
 the commission of the offense.” See HRS § 702-221(1) (“A person
 
is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his own conduct or
 by the conduct of another person for which he is legally
 accountable, or both.”); HRS § 702-221(2) (“A person is legally
 accountable for the conduct of another person when . . . he is an
 accomplice of such other person in the commission of the
 offense.”). The circuit court further instructed the jury that: 
-56­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A person is an accomplice of another in the commission
of an offense if: 
1. With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of the offense he 
a. solicits the other person to commit it; or
b. aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other
person in the planning or commission of the offense.
 
This instruction accurately states the law under HRS
 
§ 702-222. No further instruction, therefore, was required, and
 
the ICA correctly concluded that the circuit court’s instructions
 were not erroneous, misleading, or prejudicially insufficient.
 
D.	 The circuit court correctly denied Walton’s motion for
judgment of acquittal since substantial evidence supported
Walton’s conviction 
Finally, Walton argues that the circuit court erred in
 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal, and that the
 
evidence was insufficient to support his conviction. Walton’s
 arguments in this regard are meritless.
 
“The standard to be applied by the trial court in 
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the [trier of fact], a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Keawe, 107 Hawai' i at 4, 108 P.3d at 307. 
This court employs the same standard of review in reviewing a motion for a judgment of acquittal. Id. 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence supporting
 
a conviction on appeal, the evidence adduced at trial must be
 considered in the strongest light for the prosecution. State v.
 
-57­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Bailey, 126 Hawai' i 383, 398, 271 P.3d 1142, 1157 (2012). “The 
test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a 
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.” Id. at 399, 271 
P.3d at 1158 (citation omitted). “‘Substantial evidence’ as to every material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” Id. (quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Based on the statutory elements of the offense of 
attempted murder in the second degree, the State was required to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Walton intentionally engaged in conduct which, under the circumstances as Walton believed them to be, constituted a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known by Walton to cause the death of CW. See HRS §§ 705-500 and 707-701.5; State v. Kekona, 120 Hawai' i 
420, 443, 209 P.3d 1234, 1257 (App. 2009). 
At trial, CW testified that, after his neck was
 
initially cut, Walton and Elkshoulder pinned him down. CW
 further testified that, as the two men were holding him down, he
 saw a hand holding a knife start stabbing him. 
CW also identified the two men depicted in the
 
surveillance photos as the men he had picked up and who later
 attacked him. Detective Ogawa similarly testified that CW had
 identified the two men depicted in the photograph as the two men
 
-58­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that had attacked him. And Rodrigues and Laumauna each
 
identified the men in the photograph as Elkshoulder and Walton. 
Finally, Dr. Yost testified that CW suffered two stab
 
wounds to his neck, lacerations on his right forearm and left
 hand, and a puncture wound on his right hand. Dr. Yost further
 testified that one of CW’s wounds could have caused death if it
 had gone untreated. 
Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to
 
the State, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude Walton’s guilt
 beyond a reasonable doubt. The aforementioned testimony placed
 Walton in CW’s taxi, and, at the very least, supports the
 conclusion that Walton held CW down while he was stabbed. The
 circuit court, therefore, correctly denied Walton’s motion for
 judgment of acquittal, and Walton’s conviction was supported by
 substantial evidence.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s June 21,
 
2013 judgment, and the circuit court’s August 10, 2011 judgment
 of conviction and sentence, and remand this case to the circuit
 court for a new trial.
 
Richard S. Kawana 
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 Stephen K. Tsushima
for respondent 
-59­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
PART II: MOTION TO SUPPRESS, OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.,
WITH WHOM McKENNA AND POLLACK, J., JOIN
 
Article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution16 
protects all information in which individuals have a legitimate 
expectation of privacy. Accordingly, the bare assertion that information was disclosed to a third party does not place such information outside the parameters of article 1, section 7. Rather, the protection afforded to information disclosed to a third party must be determined by examining whether an individual reasonably expected such information to remain private as to others and whether society would view such expectation as reasonable. Thus, we must respectfully disagree with the holding of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) that article 1, section 7 “does not apply to basic information revealed to a third party, ‘even if the information is revealed on the assumption that it will be used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the third party will not be betrayed.’” State v. Walton, No. CAAP-11-0000667, 2013 WL 2190159, at *5 (App. May 21, 2013) (mem.) (quoting United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435, 443 (1976)). This rule is untenable in a technological
 
16
 Article 1, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides as 
follows: 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches,
seizures and invasions of privacy shall not be violated; and
no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, supported
by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the
place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized
or the communications sought to be intercepted. 
-60­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
age where in the ordinary course of life, individuals will of
 
necessity have disclosed a boundless amount of information to
 third parties.
 
I.
 A.
 
The search in the instant case involves a General
 
Nutrition Corporation (GNC) membership card located in a backpack
 found at the scene of the crime. To recount briefly, after
 stabbing the complaining witness (CW), the assailants fled from
 the scene, leaving behind a backpack. Prior to searching the
 backpack, police obtained a warrant to search the backpack and
 any or all closed containers within the backpack for “[a]rticles
 of personal property tending to establish the identity of the
 person in control” of the backpack:
 
You Are Commanded to Search:
 
A.	 A black and blue, nylon backpack . . . which was 
recovered by Honolulu Police Department . . . officers
at 3291 Pinaoula Street . . . .
 
B.	 Any and all closed containers located within Item A, 
as described above, capable of concealing the
whereabouts of the below mentioned property:
 
For the following property:
 
Any and all evidence pertaining to a Robbery in the First
Degree . . . including, but not limited to:
 
1.	 Unknown denominations of United States paper 
currencies taken in the aforementioned Robbery in the 
First Degree case;
 
2.	 One (1) unknown make knife, with an unknown blade 
length, and grip;
 
3. 	Articles of personal property, tending to establish 
the identity of [the] person in control of said 
backpack and property, including, but not limited to: 
personal identification, bills, bank account 
statements, checks, photographs, receipts, agreements,
letters, lists, notes, personal telephone lists, 
-61­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
photographs, books, and other information and
documents tending to establish ownership of said 
backpack, and/or property [.]
 
[RA, Dkt. 4:106] (Emphasis added.) Inside the backpack, the
 
police found the GNC card containing a membership number but no
 other identifying information. Police officers contacted GNC to
 obtain the name
17 associated with the number on the membership
 
card. GNC informed police that the card belonged to
 Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant John Walton (Walton).
18
 
B.
 
Before trial, Walton filed a motion to suppress, inter 
alia, the information recovered from GNC regarding the identity of the card’s owner. Walton maintained that the card constituted a “paper [or] effect” under article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution and therefore the police were “required to obtain a warrant to obtain the information represented by the registration number of the gold card.” 
1 9
 The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (the court )
concluded that the “inquiry to the Ala Moana GNC store in order
 to establish ownership of the GNC card . . . was within the realm
 of the search warrant” because “[a] plain reading of the warrant
 
17
 Walton’s motion to suppress also asserted that police obtained his
 
address from GNC, however, at trial police testified only that the inquiry to
GNC revealed Walton’s name.
 
18
 It appears that no other evidence introduced at trial was the
 
fruit of the search.  In his Application, Walton does not identify any
specific items introduced at trial that was a fruit of the search. 
19
 The Honorable Collette Y. Garabaldi presided.
 
-62­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and its specificity with respect to the contents and purposes
 
including establishing the identification of the owner of the
 backpack” showed that the search was permissible. At trial,
 Walton was subsequently convicted of attempted murder in the
 second degree.
20
  
II.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Walton again challenged the 
inquiry to GNC regarding the ownership of the card as unconstitutional. Walton again argued that police were required to obtain a search warrant to “learn the identity of the owner of the card by using the serial number on it.” The ICA did not discuss the court’s conclusion that the inquiry to GNC was “within the realm of the search warrant.” Instead, the ICA determined that this search was not prohibited by article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution because, inter alia, Walton 
“voluntarily disclosed [his name] to GNC as part of a business transaction.” Walton, 2013 WL 2190159, at *5. In reaching this 
conclusion, the ICA relied on Miller and this court’s decision in State v. Klattenhoff, 71 Haw. 598, 606, 801 P.2d 548, 552 (1990). 
20 At trial, Walton’s co-defendant Courage Elkshoulder introduced a 
recording of a phone conversation where Walton allegedly confessed to stabbing
CW. [Tr. 5/26/11, Dkt. 35:15]  Elkshoulder testified that he spoke to hisattorney prior to recording the conversation.  [Tr. 5/24/11, Dkt. 33:106] However, based on the attorney-client privilege, the court refused to allowWalton to cross-examine Elkshoulder or to examine Elkshoulder’s attorney. [Tr. 5/26/11, Dkt. 35:8]  Inasmuch as on remand Elkshoulder will not be Walton’s co-defendant, it is not clear that the recorded conversation will beintroduced into evidence.  However, should the conversation be introduced,limitations on Walton’s examination of Elkshoulder or his attorney wouldpresent serious constitutional issues.  See State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai 'i 172, 
182, 65 P.3d 119, 129 (2003). 
-63­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
21
 In Miller , in response to subpoenas,  the presidents
of two different banks produced the defendant’s “records of
 
accounts,” including “checks, deposit slips, [] financial
 statements, and [] monthly statements.” 425 U.S. at 438. The
 defendant challenged the subpoenas as invalid under the Fourth
 Amendment. 
Id.
 at 439.
 
However, the Supreme Court rejected the defendant’s
 
contention that he had a legitimate expectation of privacy in the
 bank records. Id. at 442. According to the Court, “[t]he checks
 
are not confidential communications but negotiable instruments to
 be used in commercial transactions.” Id. Additionally, “[a]ll
 
of the documents obtained, including financial statements and
 deposit slips, contain only information voluntarily conveyed to
 the banks and exposed to their employees in the ordinary course
 of business.” Id. The information was not protected by the
 
United States Constitution because “the Fourth Amendment does not
 prohibit the obtaining of information revealed to a third party
 and conveyed by him [or her] to government authorities, even if
 the information is revealed on the assumption that it will be
 used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the
 third party will not be betrayed.” Id. at 443.
 
21
 The Fifth Circuit had concluded that the subpoenas did not
 
“constitute adequate legal process” under the Fourth Amendment.  Miller, 425
 
U.S. at 439 (internal quotation marks omitted).  The validity of the subpoenas
was not discussed either by the majority or the dissents in light of the
majority’s conclusion that the Fourth Amendment did not apply.  See id. at 446
 n.9. 
-64­ 
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, the dissenting opinion in Miller referred to a
 
California Supreme Court opinion where “‘[r]epresentatives of
 
several banks testified . . . that information in their
 possession regarding a customer’s account is deemed by them to be
 confidential.” Miller, 425 U.S. at 450 (Brennan, J., dissenting)
 
(quoting Burrows v. Superior Court, 529 P.2d 590, 593 (1974)). 
In that situation, “‘[a] bank customer’s reasonable expectation
 is that absent compulsion by legal process, the matters he
 reveals to the bank will be utilized by the bank only for
 internal banking purposes.’” Id. (quoting Burrows, 529 P.2d at
 
593). Additionally, “‘the disclosure by individuals or business
 firms of their financial affairs to a bank is not entirely 
volitional, since it is impossible to participate in the economic
 life of contemporary society without maintaining a bank account.” 
Id. at 451 (quoting Burrows, 529 P.2d at 596). 
Finally, “[f]inancial transactions can reveal much
 
about a person’s activities, associations, and beliefs.” Id. at
 
452 (quoting Burrows, 529 P.2d at 595). “‘To permit a police
 officer access to these records without any judicial control as
 to relevancy or other traditional requirements of the legal
 process, and to allow the evidence to be used in any subsequent
 criminal prosecution against a defendant, opens the door to a
 vast and unlimited range of very real abuses of police power.’”
 Id. at 451 (quoting Burrows, 529 P.2d at 596). Thus, Justice
 
-65­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Brennan would have held that the bank records were entitled to
 
Fourth Amendment protection.22 Id. at 454.
 
Similarly, in Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979),
 
the police, acting without a warrant, installed a “pen register”
 
on the defendant’s phone. Id. at 737. The pen register revealed
 
to law enforcement the numbers dialed by the defendant’s phone. 
Smith, 442 U.S. at 741. The Supreme Court rejected the
 defendant’s claim that the warrantless installation of the pen
 register constituted an illegal search, because “[t]his Court
 consistently has held that a person has no legitimate expectation
 of privacy in the information he voluntarily turns over to third
 parties.” Id. at 743-44. The Court explained that when the
 
defendant “used his phone, [he] voluntarily conveyed numerical
 information to his telephone company and ‘exposed’ that
 information to its equipment in the ordinary course of business.” 
22
 Justice Brennan also added that the California Supreme Court
 
decision in Burrows “strikingly illustrates the emerging trend among high
state courts of relying upon state constitutional protections pervading
counterpart provisions of the United States Constitution, but increasingly
being ignored by decisions of this Court.”  Miller , 425 U.S. at 454-55
 
(Brennan, J., dissenting).
 
-66­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. at 744. Thus, the court held that the Fourth Amendment did
 
not protect the information recovered from the pen register. Id.
 
But, Justice Stewart’s dissenting opinion argued that
 
“it is simply not enough to say . . . that there is no legitimate
 expectation or privacy in the numbers dialed [on a phone] because
 the caller assumes the risk that the telephone company will
 disclose them to the police.” Id. at 747 (Stewart, J.,
 
dissenting). According to Justice Stewart, no telephone user
 “would be happy to have broadcast to the world a list of the
 local or long distance numbers they have called,” because “such a
 list . . . easily could reveal the identities of the persons and
 the places called, and thus reveal the most intimate details of a
 person’s life.” Id. at 748. Therefore, the “information
 
obtained by pen register surveillance is information in which the
 telephone subscriber has a legitimate expectation of privacy.” 
Id.
 
Additionally, Justice Marshall’s dissenting opinion
 
explained that “constitutional protections are not abrogated
 whenever a person apprises another of facts valuable in criminal
 investigations,” because individuals may disclose information to
 a third party with the expectation that it will not be disclosed
 further. Id. at 748-49 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (citations
 
omitted). Justice Marshall also noted that “unless a person is 
-67­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prepared to forgo use” of a telephone, which “for many has become
 
a personal or professional necessity, he cannot help but accept
 the risk of surveillance.” Smith, 442 U.S. at 750 (Marshall, J.,
 
dissenting) (citation omitted). Thus, “[i]t is idle to speak of
 assuming risks in contexts where, as a practical matter,
 individuals have no realistic alternative.” Id.
 
Justice Marshall explained that, “[m]ore fundamentally,
 
to make risk analysis dispositive in assessing the reasonableness
 of privacy expectations would allow the government to define the
 scope of Fourth Amendment protections.” Id. Thus, “law
 
enforcement officials, simply by announcing their intent to
 monitor the content of random samples of first-class mail or
 private phone conversations, could put the public on notice of
 the risks they would thereafter assume in such communications.” 
Id.
 
Justice Marshall reasoned that “whether privacy
 
expectations are legitimate . . . depends not on the risks an
 individual can be presumed to accept when imparting information
 to third parties, but on the risks he should be forced to assume
 in a free and open society.” Id. For “those extensive
 
intrusions that significantly jeopardize individuals’ sense of
 security, more than self-restraint by law enforcement officials
 is required.” Id. at 751 (internal quotations marks, brackets, 
-68­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and punctuation omitted). In light of the “vital role telephonic
 
communication plays in our personal and professional
 relationships,” and “the First and Fourth Amendment interests
 implicated by unfettered official surveillance,” Justice Marshall
 concluded that “[t]he use of pen registers . . . constitutes such
 an extensive intrusion.” Id. Accordingly, Justice Marshall
 
“would required law enforcement officials to obtain a warrant
 before they enlist telephone companies to secure information
 otherwise beyond the government’s reach.” Id. at 752.
 
In State v. Rothman, 70 Haw. 546, 779 P.2d 1 (1989), 
this court declined to adopt the Supreme Court’s holding in Smith. Rothman held that under article 1, section 6 of the 
Hawai'i Constitution,
23 “persons using telephones in the State of 
Hawai'i have a reasonable expectation of privacy, with respect to 
the telephone numbers they call on their private lines[.]” 70 Haw. at 556, 779 P.2d at 7. However, in Klattenhoff, decided in 1990, this court adopted Miller. Klattenhoff, 71 Haw. at 606, 
801 P.2d at 548. This court stated that defendants had no reasonable expectation of privacy in bank records, inasmuch as “[t]he records are owned by the banks because they are business 
23
 Article 1, section 6 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides as 
follows: 
The right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall
not be infringed without the showing of a compelling state
interest. The legislature shall take affirmative steps to
implement this right.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
-69­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
records, they are not the private papers of the account holder.” 
Id. “These records contain information voluntarily conveyed to
 
the banks and exposed to their employees in the ordinary course
 of business.” Id. “Furthermore, ‘[t]he depositor takes the
 
risk, in revealing his affairs to another, that the information
 will be conveyed to the government.’” Id. (quoting Miller, 425
 
U.S. at 443). Therefore, this court held that “there is no
 reasonable expectation of privacy in bank records.” Id. 
B.
 
More recently, it has been explained that the approach
 
used in Miller and Smith, and previously adopted by this court in
 Klattenhoff, “is ill suited to the digital age, in which people
 reveal a great deal of information about themselves to third
 parties in the course of carrying out mundane tasks.” United
 
States v. Jones, 132 S. Ct. 945, 957 (Sotomayor, J., concurring). 
As declared by Justice Sotomayor, “[p]eople disclose the phone
 numbers that they dial or text to their cellular providers; the
 URLs that they visit and the e-mail addresses with which they
 correspond to their Internet service providers; and the books,
 groceries, and medications they purchase to online retailers.” 
Id. 
In Jones, the use of a GPS attached to the underside of
 
a vehicle to gather 2000 pages of information about the
 
-70­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defendant24 led Justice Sotomayor to suggest that “some unique
 
aspects of GPS surveillance . . . will require particular
 
attention” inasmuch as “GPS monitoring generates a precise,
 comprehensive record of a person’s public movements that reflects
 a wealth of detail about her familial, political, professional,
 religious, and sexual associations.” Id. at 955. Moreover,
 
“because GPS monitoring is cheap in comparison to conventional
 surveillance techniques, and by design, proceeds surreptitiously,
 it evades the ordinary checks that constrain law enforcement
 practices: limited police resources and community hostility.” 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). In light of the immense
 amount of information that could be unprotected under the
 approach of Miller and Smith, Justice Sotomayor concluded that
 “it may be necessary to reconsider the premise that an individual
 has no reasonable expectation of privacy in information
 voluntarily disclosed to third parties.” Id.
 
III.
 
In assessing U.S. Supreme Court opinions construing the
 
federal constitution, Justice Brennan suggested that “the
 decisions of the Court are not, and should not be, dispositive of
 questions regarding rights guaranteed by counterpart provisions
 
24
 The police obtained a warrant commanding them to install the GPS
 
locator within ten days and in the District of Columbia.  Jones, 132 S. Ct. at
 
947 (majority opinion).  However, the police installed the GPS locator on the
eleventh day, in Maryland.  Id.  Thus, the Government conceded that the
warrant did not extend to the installation of the GPS locator.  Id. at 947
 n.1.
 
-71­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of state law.” William J. Brennan, State Constitutions and the
 
Protection of Individual Rights, 90 Harv. L. Rev. 489, 502
 (1977). Rather, “such decisions are not mechanically applicable
 to state law issues, and state court judges and the members of
 the bar seriously err if they so treat them.” Id. In that
 
regard, he advised that “although in the past it might have been
 safe for counsel to raise only federal constitutional issues in
 state courts, plainly it would be most unwise these days not also
 to raise the state constitutional questions.” Id. Justice
 
Brennan explained that “state court judges, and also
 practitioners, do well to scrutinize constitutional decisions by
 federal courts, for only if they are found to be logically
 persuasive and well-reasoned, paying due regard to precedent and
 the policies underlying specific constitutional guarantees, may
 they properly claim persuasive weight as guideposts when
 interpreting counterpart state guarantees.” Id. 
The hazard in applying Miller, Smith, and Klattenhoff
 
in the modern age is the fundamental incompatibility of those
 cases with the basic precepts of our jurisprudence. It is beyond
 question that “in the absence of a warrant or exigent
 circumstances, it is unreasonable for the government to search an
 area where a person has an expectation of privacy.” State v. 
-72­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Cuntapay, 104 Hawai' i 109, 117, 85 P.3d 634, 642 (2004). In 
determining “when a person’s expectation of privacy may be deemed 
reasonable,” this court considers, first, if a defendant “exhibit[ed] an actual, subjective expectation of privacy” in the area searched, and second if “that expectation [is] one that society would recognize as objectively reasonable.”
25 State v. 
Bonnell, 75 Haw. 124, 139, 856 P.2d 1265, 1273 (1993). 
The rule that an individual has no legitimate
 
expectation of privacy in any information shared with a third
 party cannot be justified in all situations. As explained by
 Justice Marshall in Smith, “[p]rivacy is not a discrete
 commodity, possessed absolutely or not at all. Those who
 disclose certain facts to a bank or phone company for a limited
 business purpose need not assume that this information will be
 released to other persons for other purposes.” Smith, 442 U.S.
 
at 749 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (emphasis added) (citations
 omitted). Hence, Justice Sotomayor stated that it cannot be said
 that “all information voluntarily disclosed to some member of the
 public for a limited purpose is, for that reason alone,
 
25
 The exquisite and concise definition of privacy was set forth in
 
Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), by Justice Harlan in concurrence: 
“My understanding of the rule that has emerged from prior decisions is that
there is a twofold requirement, first that a person have exhibited an actual
(subjective) expectation of privacy and, second, that the expectation by one
that society is prepared to recognize as ‘reasonable[,]’” thus identifying a
subjective and an objective component of the privacy formulation.  389 U.S. at
 361 (Harlan, J., concurring). 
-73­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disentitled to Fourth Amendment protection.” Jones, 132 S. Ct.
 
at 957 (Sotomayor, J., concurring).
 
For example, although individuals share the addresses
 
of each Web site they visit with their internet service provider,
 
it is unlikely that “people would accept without complaint the
 warrantless disclosure to the Government a list [containing]
 every Web site they had visited in the last week, month, or
 year.” Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 957 (Sotomayor, J., concurring). 
Thus, even when information is disclosed to a third party,
 individuals may retain an expectation that such information will
 not be disclosed to others for purposes other than that for which
 the information had already been revealed. 
Moreover, Miller, Smith, and Klattenhoff incorrectly
 
rely on the principle that individuals who convey information to
 a third party have assumed the risk of that party disclosing the
 information to the government. In our times individuals may have
 no reasonable alternative, Smith, 442 U.S. at 750 (Marshall, J.,
 dissenting), but to disclose confidential information to obtain a
 necessary service. Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 957 (Sotomayor, J.,
 
concurring).
 
The decisions in Miller and Smith, and as adopted by 
this court in Klattenhoff, are inconsistent with the recognition that article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution protects 
all areas in which an individual possesses a legitimate 
-74­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
expectation of privacy.26 Even when information is shared with a 
third party, an individual may retain a legitimate expectation 
that such information will not be further disseminated for purposes other than those for which they were disclosed in the first place. Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 957 (Sotomayor, J., 
concurring); Smith, 442 U.S. at 749 (Marshall, J., dissenting); Miller, 425 U.S. at 449 (Brennan, J., dissenting). Thus, it cannot be said that information disclosed to another person automatically loses the protection it would otherwise receive under the Hawai' i Constitution. Cf. Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 957 
(Sotomayor, J., concurring). As Justice Brennan maintained, “the very premise of the cases that foreclose federal remedies constitutes a clear call to state courts to step into the breach. . . . With federal scrutiny [of individual rights] diminished, 
26 Relatedly, in State v. Detroy, 102 Hawai 'i 13, 72 P.2d 485 (2003), 
this court relied in part on the U.S. Supreme Court’s conclusion in Kyllo v.
United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2003), that thermal imagers were “not in generalpublic use,” 533 U.S. at 34, in concluding that the use of thermal imagery wasa search that required a warrant.  Detroy, 102 Hawai 'i at 21, 72 P.3d at 493. 
Unlike the U.S. Supreme Court, this court noted that “the wide use of a devicesuch as a thermal imager” would not “be determinative of whether anindividual’s right to privacy is forfeited,” but that “it may be a factor.”Id. at 22 n.11, 72 P.3d at 494 n.11.  However, individuals may retain areasonable expectation that some searches will not be reasonable even if atechnological device is in general public use.  Thus, this court’s reliance onthe fact that thermal imagers were not widely available in Detroy  would
warrant reconsideration. 
-75­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
state courts must respond by increasing their own.”27 Brennan,
 
State Constitutions, 90 Harv. L. Rev. at 503.
 
Respectfully, based on the forgoing, the ICA erred in 
concluding that Walton lost all constitutional protection in his 
name simply because that information had been previously disclosed to a third party. Walton, 2013 WL 2190159, at *5. 
Rather, under article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution, 
it must be determined whether Walton held a legitimate expectation that such information would not be shared with others. Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 957 (Sotomayor, J., concurring); 
Smith, 442 U.S. at 749 (Marshall, J., dissenting); Miller, 425 U.S. at 449 (Brennan, J., dissenting). In making such a
 determination, this court should decide whether the individual
 considered such information to be private, see Miller, 425 U.S.
 at 449 (Brennan, J., dissenting), whether that information
 reveals “intimate details of a person’s life,” Smith, 442 U.S. at
 748 (Stewart, J., dissenting), whether the individual released
 
27 Soon and inevitably to come are overflights by drones –- will they
 
be too numerous in number to sustain a claim of any expectation of privacy?
See Jonathan Olivito, Note, Beyond the Fourth Amendment: Limiting Drone
Surveillance Through the Constitutional Right to Informational Privacy , 74
Ohio St. L.J. 669, 687 (2013).  Contained within a person’s luggage is not
only its contents but an expectation of privacy.  Yet, it is permissible for
the police to legally ascertain the contents of a suitcase through a sniff by
trained dogs of the air around the suitcase, because there is said to be no
expectation of privacy in the air containing the odor of marijuana.  United
 States v. Place , 462 U.S.696, 707 (1983).  However, the use of a thermal
imager in a marijuana-growing investigation to measure the heat emanating from
the walls of a house, presumably in the air that might surround a suitcase, is
said to violate one’s privacy.   Kyllo, 533 U.S. at 37.  But a swab of one’s
 
inner cheek to search for “DNA”, is permissible, even if not connected to any
crime because on balance the intrusion on a person is not discomforting and
identification of an arrestee is a government interest that weighs more
heavily, according to Maryland v. King, 133 S. Ct. 1 (2012).
 
-76­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the information to a third party to obtain a necessary service,
 
Smith, 442 U.S. at 750 (Marshall, J., dissenting), whether there
 was no realistic alternative but to disclose the information,
 id., and the extent to which disclosing such information would
 jeopardize an individual’s sense of security.
28 Id. If such
 
information is protected by article 1, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, the State is not precluded from seeking to
 introduce such evidence at trial. 
Rather, the police simply must
 
obtain a warrant before conducting such searches, thus subjecting
 the issue to the scrutiny of a neutral disinterested magistrate
 before a search is conducted. Cf. Katz, 389 U.S. at 357
 
(“Bypassing a neutral predetermination of the scope of a search
 leaves individuals secure from Fourth Amendment violations only
 in the discretion of the police.” (internal quotation marks and
 citation omitted)).
 
IV.
 
28 This court, “[a]s the ultimate judicial tribunal with final, 
unreviewable authority to interpret and enforce the Hawai 'i Constitution, [is]
free to give broader protection than that given by the federal constitution.”
Detroy, 102 Hawai 'i at 22, 72 P.3d at 494 (citations and internal quotation 
marks omitted).  I would therefore conclude on independent stateconstitutional grounds, that information disclosed to third parties may beentitled to protection under article 1, section 7 of the Hawai 'i Constitution. 
It must be noted that “state courts are absolutely free to
interpret state constitutional provisions to accord greater protection toindividual rights than do similar provisions of the United StatesConstitution.”  Arizona v. Evans, 514 U.S. 1, 8 (1995).  “If a state court 
chooses merely to rely on federal precedents as it would on the precedents ofall other jurisdictions, then it need only make clear by a plain statement inits judgment or opinion that the federal cases are being used only for thepurpose of guidance, and do not themselves compel the result that the courthas reached.”  Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 1041 (1983). In consonance
with Long, federal cases are cited in this opinion only for the purpose of
guidance. The Hawai 'i Constitution, as opposed to federal law, compels the
result reached herein. 
-77­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Rapid changes in technology have altered our
 
lifestyles, creating a dissonance between a mechanical
 
application of the expectation of privacy test and its core
 meaning. The last fifty years have witnessed a significant
 period of change in the law pertaining to criminal procedure. 
United States Supreme Court and Hawai' i Supreme Court decisions 
have diverged
29
  in the area of constitutional protections against
unreasonable searches and seizures. But as noted, the U.S.
 Supreme Court itself recognized, “state courts are absolutely
 free to interpret state constitutional provisions to accord
 greater protection to individual rights than do similar
 provisions of the United States Constitution.” Evans, 514 U.S.
 
at 8. 
29 The most significant difference between the Federal and Hawai 'i 
decisions, to this point at least, is the Supreme Court’s jettison of two of
the three purposes of the exclusionary rule – protection of privacy andjudicial integrity.  The singular focus in United States v. Leon, 468 U.S.928, 928-929 (1984), on deterring police misconduct, see id.  at 910, upended
the tripartite formulation established in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 659-60(1961).  The result seemingly reads out of the Fourth Amendment the expressrequirement of probable cause for the issuance of warrants.  Under Leon,insofar as a warrant seems valid on its face and the police thus, in “goodfaith,” execute it -- the evidence obtained is admissible without regard towhether the warrant is, as a matter of fact, supported by probable cause ornot.  468 U.S. at 926.  On this development, Justice Brennan said, “in caseafter case, I have witnessed the Court's gradual but determined strangulationof the [exclusionary] rule.”  Leon, 468 U.S. at 928-929 (Brennan, J., 
dissenting).
Under the Hawai 'i Constitution it has been held that “the three 
purposes underlying our exclusionary rule” are “judicial integrity, [the]protection of individual privacy, and [the] deterrence of illegal policemisconduct.”  State v. Torres, 125 Hawai 'i 382, 394, 262 P.3d 1006, 1019
(2011); see also State v. Lopez, 78 Hawai 'i 433, 446, 86 P.2d 889, 902 (1995). 
See State v. Matsunaga, 82 Hawai 'i 162, 168-69, 920 P.2d 376, 382-83 (App.
1996) (the good faith exception to the warrant requirement is rejected underthe Hawai 'i Constitution); compare State v. McKnight, --- Hawai 'i ---, --- P.3d
---, 2013 WL 680774 at *17 (Dec. 31, 2013) (holding that an error by theissuing judge resulting in conflicting dates on the face of the warrant didnot render a search warrant invalid). 
-78­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ascent of state supreme courts’ independence in
 
interpreting their own constitutions to afford more or broader
 
rights to individuals than the national minimum standard
 established by the Supreme Court, so long as these decisions do
 not violate the federal constitution or statutes, reflects a “New
 Federalism.” Brennan, State Constitutions, 90 Harv. L. Rev. at
 501. In this context, the co-existence of two constitutions – 
the federal constitution and the state constitution – in one jurisdiction can result in contrasting outcomes in federal and state court, although arising out of the same or similar factual scenarios, with the concomitant effect on the duties and authority of law enforcement agencies affected by these decisions. See Torres, 125 Hawai' i at 397, 262 P.3d at 1021. 
The modification or reformulation of a privacy test is
 
possible, thus, at the state level. It would seem beyond purview
 that a reasonable person would not expect that disclosure to
 third parties would, ipso facto, permit government scrutiny or
 intrusion into otherwise protected privacy zones without at least
 some safeguards inhering in the checks among the separate
 branches of government. An expectation of privacy, even though
 extended to matters exposed to third persons, would be viewed as
 reasonable by society, where such exposure is inevitable and
 inescapable in the conduct of the necessary affairs of life. The
 alternative is to countenance the inexorable diminishment of
 personal privacy and the substantial risk of privacy zones
 
-79­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disappearing altogether. Cf. Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S.
 
479, 484 (1965) (holding that “specific guarantees in the Bill of
 
Rights have penumbras, formed by emanations from those guarantees
 that help give them life and substance,” and that “[v]arious
 [constitutional] guarantees create zones of privacy,” such as the
 Fourth Amendment’s “protection against all governmental invasions
 of the sanctity of a man’s home and the privacies of life”
 (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 
The contours of an expectation of privacy in the
 
context of disclosure to third persons would be shaped on a case­by-case basis as guided by the core values of personal dignity
 and security grounded in the privacy right. Considerations of
 purpose, history, logic, and precedent -- accepted tools of
 constitutional construction -- would be pertinent. As explained
 by Justice Brandeis, “[i]t is one of the happy incidents of the
 federal system that a single courageous state may, if its
 citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and
 economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country.” 
New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 311 (1932)
 (Brandeis, J., dissenting).
 
V.
 
The majority’s belief that there is no expectation of
 
privacy in a name, under the facts, may be too broad a construct. 
One’s identity is a gateway to information collected by third
 persons -- some collection occurring even without a person’s
 
-80­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
knowledge; only context can determine whether the disclosure of
 
one's name would be the key that unlocks the door to a protected
 zone of privacy. For example, in Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial Dist.
 Court of Nevada, Humbolt County, 542 U.S. 177 (2004), Justice
 Stevens rejected the Supreme Court’s conclusion that the Fifth
 Amendment right against self incrimination did not extend to an
 individual’s name.
30 See 542 U.S. at 195 (Stevens, J.,
 
dissenting). Justice Stevens believed that it was “clear that
 the disclosure of [the defendant’s] identity is protected” by the
 Fifth Amendment because “[a] person’s identity obviously bears
 informational and incriminating worth, ‘even if the name itself
 is not inculpatory.’” Id. at 196 (internal brackets omitted)
 
(quoting United States v. Hubbell, 530 U.S. 27, 38 (2000)). 
Additionally, “[a] name can provide the key to a broad array of
 information about the person, particularly in the hands of a
 police officer with access to a range of law enforcement
 databases.” Id.
 
However, it is unnecessary to decide whether, under the
 
circumstances presented here, Walton possessed a legitimate
 expectation of privacy in his name because the introduction of
 
30
 In Hiibel, the defendant was arrested pursuant to a Nevada statute
 
requiring an individual detained by a police officer to identify himself or
herself to the officer.  542 U.S. at 181.  The defendant argued, inter alia ,
that the statute violated “the Fifth Amendment’s prohibition on compelled
self-incrimination.”  Id. at 189.
 
-81­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that evidence at trial was plainly harmless.31 In determining 
whether an error is harmless, this court considers whether “there 
is a reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to conviction.” State v. Machado, 109 Hawai' i 445, 452-53, 127 P.3d 
941, 948-49 (2006) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). In the instant case, the association of Walton’s name with the GNC card served only to establish his presence at the crime scene. However, that fact was also established by a wealth of other evidence presented at trial.
32 Thus, the introduction 
of the information obtained from the inquiry to GNC regarding the ownership of the GNC card was harmless. 
31 Additionally, by leaving the backpack and the GNC card at the 
scene Walton may have abandoned the card and thus relinquished any expectation
of privacy he had in the card.  Cf. State v. Kolia , 116 Hawai 'i 29, 35-36, 169
P.3d 981, 987-88 (App. 2007) (holding that a defendant abandoned a fanny packby throwing it away while fleeing from police). 
32 A surveillance camera captured an image of Walton entering the
 
taxi where the stabbing occurred, and the taxi driver identified that image as
being one of the perpetrators.  Subsequently, in response to a “Crime
Stoppers” tip, two of Walton’s co-workers identified him as the individual in
the picture.  Most significantly, Walton’s co-defendant Elkshoulder, also
admitted that Walton was present at the scene of the crime.  None of this
 evidence was related to the inquiry to GNC, inasmuch as the Crime Stoppers tip
was circulated independently and Elkshoulder turned himself in.
In light of the evidence connecting Walton to the crime scene, it
cannot be said that there is a reasonable possibility that the introduction ofthe name connected to the GNC card contributed to Walton’s conviction. Machado, 109 Hawai 'i at 452-53, 127 P.3d at 948-49; see also Territory v.
Chang Tai Kun, 26 Haw. 133, 136 (Terr. 1921) (“[T]he only effect detrimentalto the defendant which this evidence could have had would be to show that there had been gambling carried on at the premises in question and [] this
fact is so thoroughly proven by other evidence in the case that it could nothave affected the verdict and was therefore not prejudicial to the rights ofthe defendant.” (emphasis added)). 
-82­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
VI.
 
Based on the foregoing, the court’s September 7, 2011
 
order denying Walton’s motion to suppress his name as obtained
 
through the use of the GNC card is affirmed, but for the reasons
 set forth herein.
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
-83­