 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29440 28-FEB-2014 
03:09 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
---o0o--­
KAUAI SPRINGS, INC.,
Petitioner/Appellant-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE COUNTY OF KAUA #I,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant.
 
SCWC-29440
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29440; CIV. NO. 07-1-0042)
 
FEBRUARY 28, 2014
 
NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This appeal arises out of a decision by 
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant Planning Commission of the County 
of Kaua #i (Planning Commission) to deny Petitioner/Appellant­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellee Kauai Springs, Inc.’s (Kauai Springs) application for 
three permits related to the continued operation of Kauai Springs’ water bottling facility. The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court) reversed in part and vacated in part the Planning Commission’s decision and order, ordered that all three permits be issued, and entered final judgment in favor of Kauai Springs. The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), pursuant to its published opinion of April 30, 2013, vacated the circuit court’s final judgment and remanded the case to the Planning Commission for consideration of whether Kauai Springs can meet the requirements for the permits. Kauai Springs filed an application for writ of certiorari to this court (Application), seeking reversal of the ICA’s May 30, 2013 Judgment on Appeal. 
For the reasons set forth herein, we affirm the ICA 
Judgment to the extent that it vacated the Final Judgment entered by the circuit court and remand the case to the Planning Commission to clarify its findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Kauai Springs is a water bottling and distribution 
company owned by Jim and Denise Satterfield. Kauai Springs 
operates out of land located in Koloa, Kaua #i (the Property). 
2
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Property is leased from Makana Properties, LLC (Makana 
Properties). The majority of the Property is designated 
agricultural by the General Plan for the County of Kaua #i (Kaua #i 
General Plan), Chapter 7 of the Kaua #i County Code (KCC). 
On April 17, 2003, the County of Kaua #i (County) issued 
Kauai Springs a Class IV Zoning Permit for the construction of a 
watershed on the Property. On September 17, 2003, the County issued a building permit to Kauai Springs for the construction of a 1,600 square-foot “bottled water processing facility” on the Property. On July 9, 2004, the State Department of Health issued a four-year permit approving Kauai Springs as a “bottled water manufacturer.” 
Kauai Springs subsequently began operating its water 
bottling facility. The water that Kauai Springs uses for its operations originates from an underground spring located several miles from the Property, 1,000 feet up Kahili Mountain.
1 Kauai 
Springs apparently “purchases” or “licenses” its water from EAK Knudsen Trust (Knudsen Trust), the owner of the land where the 
1 Contrary to the findings of the circuit court, the EAK Knudsen
Trust does not “own the spring [or] the water.” See, e.g., In re Water Use 
Permit Applications , 94 Hawai #i 97, 129, 9 P.3d 409, 441 (2000) (“a public
trust was imposed upon all the waters of the kingdom. That is, . . . not
ownership in the corporeal sense . . . rather, . . . a retention of suchauthority to assure the continued existence and beneficial application of theresource for the common good.”). 
3
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
spring is located. The water is transmitted to the Property by a 
private, gravity-fed system dating back to the 1890s, which is owned by Knudsen Trust and operated by Grove Farm Company (Grove Farm).
2 
Grove Farm owns the private water tank servicing the 
Property. The water tank feeds several lines and services at least eleven other residences neighboring the Property. Kauai Springs has installed a tap into the water line connected to the tank, which feeds a meter and an underground line to the water bottling facility on the Property. Water overflows from the tank into a tributary to Waihohonu Stream. Kauai Springs purifies the water it extracts, bottles the water into five-gallon containers, 
and delivers the bottles to customers on Kaua #i. 
On May 15, 2006, the County Planning Department 
(Planning Department) issued a cease and desist letter to Makana 
Properties. The letter provided that upon receiving a complaint, the Planning Department conducted a field inspection of the Property on April 27, 2005, and found violations of KCC Chapter 8, The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the County of Kauai 
2 According to the State Public Utilities Commission (PUC), “[t]he
Grove Farm water system originates at one of two tunnels located on the land
owned by the [Knudsen Trust] at the foot of Mount Kahili . . . . The water line delivers water to Kahili Mountain Park and a number of domestic and agricultural users on various Knudsen Trust-owned and other parcels on its wayto Koloa Town, where it supplies at least eleven residential lots on WailaauRoad.” 
4
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(CZO).3 The Planning Department specified that 1) the “activity 
of processing and packaging without the proper permits” 
constitutes a violation of KCC § 8-19.14; and 2) the use of the 
Property “for Industrial processing and packaging purposes is not generally permitted within the Agriculture District,” pursuant to KCC § 8-7.2.
5 Makana Properties was instructed to immediately 
“[c]ease and desist such use and relocate to an appropriate land use district.” 
On July 5, 2006, the Planning Department accepted Kauai 
Springs’ completed application for three zoning permits: 1) a Use Permit under KCC Article 20 (Use Permit); 2) a Special Permit 
under Hawai #i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205-6 (2005) (Special 
Permit); and 3) a Class IV Zoning Permit under KCC Article 19 
(Class IV Zoning Permit). According to the Planning Department, a Use Permit and Special Permit were required because the proposed use was not generally permitted in the agricultural 
3 On December 3, 2012, the County of Kauai enacted the first of two
phases of updating the CZO, which had not been comprehensively updated since
its adoption in 1972. Ordinance No. 935 (Dec. 3, 2012), available athttp://qcode.us/codes/kauaicounty/. 
4 KCC § 8-19.1 (1972) provides: “No person shall undertake any
construction or development or carry on any activity or use, for which azoning permit is required by this Chapter, or obtain a building permit forconstruction, development, activity or use regulated by this Chapter, withoutfirst obtaining the required zoning permit.” 
5 KCC § 8-7.2 (1972) specifies the uses and structures permitted in
agriculture districts. 
5
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
district. A Class IV Zoning Permit is a procedural requirement 
of a Use Permit in the agricultural district. 
Kauai Springs’ application provided that it was 
“requesting a permit for a water harvesting and bottling operation.” The application stated that the “maximum current capacity for the Kauai Springs’ operation is 1,000 [five-gallon] bottles per day during one 8 hour shift.” Kauai Springs estimated that it “expect[ed] vehicle capacity to reach a maximum level of 8 trips per day by delivery and office personnel.” Furthermore, Kauai Springs planned to expand its operation to include bottling water in smaller bottles for distribution throughout the State. 
The Planning Commission held four public hearings on 
the application, on August 8, September 26, November 14, and November 28, 2006. The Commission also discussed the application at a regular meeting on January 23, 2007. Public oral testimony on the application was taken at each meeting. The minutes of the hearings indicate that Kauai Springs’ application was identified at each hearing as follows: “Use Permit U-2007-1, Special Permit 
2007-1 and Class IV Zoning Z-IV-2007-1 = Kaua #i Springs, Inc. 
(For a spring water bottling facility, Koloa, Tax Map Key 2-8­
2:por. 5.).” There is no indication in the record that members 
6
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
7of the public were restricted to testifying on any particular
permit at any of the hearings.  Many of those testifyingcommented generally on the application as a whole rather than onthe permits individually.  
Additionally, the Planning Department also requested
input from various State and County agencies throughout itspublic hearings process.
Prior to the August 8 public hearing, the Planning
Department prepared a staff report describing the application andproviding a preliminary evaluation.  The preliminary evaluationstated that while Kauai Springs’ existing use is “relatively lowimpact,” the expansion of operations “would intensify the use”: 
The existing water bottling facility is relatively low
impact . . . in its current function and capacity.  However,
expansion of the facility to include small bottle productionat the site would involve increased production machinery,
delivery frequency, generate more traffic, and generally
would intensify the use, which may not be appropriate orcompatible at this location.  
At the August 8 hearing, Kauai Springs confirmed that
it had been in business for two to three years at that point and
the purpose of its application was to “increase . . .
productivity.”  Kauai Springs stated that it was currently
filling between 300 and 500 five-gallon bottles per week.  KauaiSprings requested approval to expand to their maximum capacity of
1,000 five-gallon bottles per day at the existing facility, seven *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
days a week (i.e., 35,000 gallons per week). At maximum 
capacity, Kauai Springs anticipated “8 total vehicles” making daily round-trips. 
Kauai Springs stated that “there is no limit” to how 
much water can be extracted from the private water system. Kauai Springs also informed the Planning Commission that it planned to produce smaller bottles at its existing facility once it had the capacity to do so. The Planning Commission members discussed whether they should base their decision on the permits upon Kauai Springs’ current operations or upon the maximum capacity of the operations. 
The Planning Commission also discussed the overflow 
from the water system. The Planning Department planner stated that it was her understanding that “[t]he overflow from the pipe and from the water tank . . . is overflowing into Waihohonu Stream.” Commissioner Imai Aiu noted that if Kauai Springs reached its full potential, “then that is 1,000 gallons a day that is basically taken out of the Waihohonu Stream.” In response to an individual who testified that the water “is being wasted” by not being bottled, Commissioner Aiu stated, “So I don’t know how much currently flows through there and how much of an [effect] that would have but . . . it’s not a waste when it’s 
8
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
going through an actual river and riparian environment. That is 
a natural system that does deserve to be looked at.” 
The Trustee of the Knudsen Trust appeared at the August 
8 meeting, in support of Kauai Springs’ application. The trustee confirmed that the private water system was owned by Knudsen Trust, and the trust had a signed licensing agreement for Kauai Springs to take the water. The trustee did not think that the licensing agreement was received by the Water Commission. 
The August 8 meeting was continued to September 26 to 
request clarification from the State Land Use Commission regarding the size of the land area under consideration for a Special Permit, and receive clarification from the Department of Land and Natural Resources Commission on Water Resource Management (Water Commission) regarding whether “the proposed quantity of water to be captured and bottled by the operation is of concern to them.” Kauai Springs was also asked “to define what it wanted more clearly.” Additionally, the Planning Department noted that “[a] question also arose as to whether the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) . . . had any jurisdiction over the water system or the sale of water to the Applicant.” 
In a letter dated September 26, 2006, the Water 
Commission responded to the Planning Department’s request for input on the application. The Water Commission commented that 
9
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
6The State Department of Health (DOH) offered several
“environmental health concerns” for the Planning Commission to consider,
regarding: 1) sanitary facilities and disposal of wastewater; 2) the waterbottling facility’s compliance with applicable ventilating requirements; and3) air pollution control measures.  The DOH concluded that “[d]ue to thegeneral nature of the application submitted,” it “reserve[d] the right toimplement future environmental health restrictions when more detailedinformation is provided.” 
10“[t]here may be the potential for ground or surface water
degradation/contamination,” and therefore “recommend[ed] thatapprovals for this project be conditioned upon a review by theState Department of Health and the developer’s acceptance of anyresulting requirements related to water quality.”
6  The Water
Commission further commented that “[g]round-water withdrawalsfrom this project may affect streamflows, which may require aninstream flow standard amendment.”  Finally, the Water Commissionstated that although a water use permit was not required because
the island of Kaua #i was not a designated ground-water management
area, other permits from the Water Commission may be required if
the source of Kauai Springs’ water was modified:
The Island of Kauai has not been designated as a ground-
water management area; therefore a water use permit from theCommission is not required to use the existing source(s) orto change the type of water use.  However, if the sourceneeds to be modified in any way, a well modification permitfrom the Commission may be required.  In addition, if a pumpis to be installed to induce additional water flow,
 a pump
installation permit from the Commission would be required. If the source is modified to induce additional water flow,and the modification results in impacts to surface waters, a
petition to amend the interim instream flow standard foraffected surface waters  must be made and approved prior to
use of the water. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Emphases added). 
At the September 26, 2006 public hearing, Kauai Springs 
clarified that it was requesting “approval to fill up to 1,000 5­
gallon bottles of water per day, and up to 1,000 cases of bottled water per week at the existing facility.” Kauai Springs further clarified that it was requesting ten vans “to be added to our existing facility to accommodate steady growth.” The Planning Commission briefly discussed the Water Commission’s letter with the applicant, but noted that the Water Commission would be sending additional comments. At the end of the hearing, the Planning Department planner commented that she did not know “whether water is coming out of the tunnel and going into a stream,” or “how much water is in the system,” although Kauai Springs had “represented that 275,000 gallons a day are the capabilities of this tunnel.” 
On October 26, 2006, the Planning Department staff 
conducted a site visit, accompanied by the applicants, to view the tunnel where the water system originates, the Kahili Mountain Park portion of the water system, the water bottling facility, 
11
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
7The Planning Commission did not attend the site visit.  Although
the Commission approved a motion for a site visit to the tunnel and bottling
facility sometime between October 25 and October 31, 2006, the visit was notscheduled due to Sunshine Law concerns and trail conditions.
12and the adjacent Grove Farm water tank.7  The staff described the
water system as follows: 
The tunnel entrance is located adjacent to a streambed withsteep sides, where it enters the hillside horizontally.  Toprevent infiltration of surface water into the tunnel, aconcrete stem wall was constructed at the bottom of theentrance to above the water level within the tunnel, and asteel panel was mounted over the tunnel entrance.  Insidethe tunnel, water enters the system through a water pipeinstalled at or below the water surface.  Except for twoplaces where the pipe crosses stream beds on piers, the pipeis buried underground from the tunnel to a water tank on TMK2-7-01:03.  Water is chlorinated at the tank, which servesthe Kahili Mountain Park parcel, and feeds the line going toKoloa Town.  A second tunnel and a Kuia Stream intake usedto join this line in a junction house below the water tank;however, these two water sources have been bypassed due toDepartment of Health concerns for the influence of surfacewater.  The sole water source is Tunnel #1.  Overflow fromthe system on Kahili Mountain Park is returned to theadjacent stream.
In a letter dated November 6, 2006, the Planning
Department requested clarification of the Water Commission’s
comments in its September 26 letter.  The Planning Departmentsummarized its understanding that, providing certain hypotheticalconditions applied, no permit was required for Kauai Springs’ useof water from the existing water system:
II.The tunnel is not being changed, and the Applicant’s
use of the water is not affecting the source in any way
(i.e. not inducing more water to come out of the source ortunnel)
III.The existing source has been registered and is
basically grandfathered, and there is an agreement betweenthe new user (Applicant) and the operator of the system.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. There is a closed line from the tunnel to the tank. 
It was also the Planning Department’s understanding that 
additional permits and a petition to amend the interim instream flow standard for affected surface waters may be required under the circumstances outlined in the Water Commission’s letter. 
At the November 14, 2006 hearing, counsel for Kauai 
Springs stated that the application request was to bottle a maximum of 1,000 gallons of water per day, and to use a maximum of two vans a day for the delivery of that water. Counsel agreed that “[t]his would represent an amendment to the previous request of 1,000 five-gallon bottles a day and one thousand cases of water in smaller bottles a week to be delivered in ten . . . vans per day and one 40-foot container per day.” 
A consultant for Grove Farm also appeared at the 
November 14 hearing. He confirmed that Grove Farm did not own the water tunnel, but managed the water system and sold the water. He stated that Grove Farm was not “involved . . . at all” in Kauai Springs’ Use Permit request because the request did not involve Grove Farm property. The consultant stated that he had “no clue” if there were any applicable PUC requirements regarding Grove Farm selling the water to Kauai Springs. To his knowledge, Grove Farm had never communicated with the PUC. The Planning 
13
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Department planner suggested that the PUC does not “grandfather 
at all so they just probably didn’t know about [the Grove Farm system]. It wasn’t something that came to anybody’s attention because it was so small a system.” 
By letter dated November 20, 2006, the Water Commission 
responded to the Planning Department’s request for clarification. The Water Commission stated, “We concur with your summary of our comments and confirm that no permits from the Commission are required for the proposed use of water under the three conditions outlined in your letter.” 
By letter dated November 22, 2006, the PUC responded to 
the Planning Department’s November 6 inquiry “as to whether Grove Farm’s water system and Kauai Springs, Inc.’s sale of water from the Grove Farm water system are regulated by the [PUC].” The PUC responded that based on “the limited information provided, there is a possibility that Grove Farm may be operating as a public utility[.]”
8 However, the PUC stated that an analysis of whether 
Grove Farm was operating as a public utility would include determining whether Grove Farm provides water service for the 
8 A “public utility” is defined as “every person who may own,
control, operate, or manage as owner, lessee, trustee, receiver, or otherwise,
whether under a franchise, charter, license, articles of association, orotherwise, any plant or equipment, of any part thereof, directly or indirectlyfor public use . . . for the production, conveyance, transmission, delivery,or furnishing of . . . water[.]” HRS § 269-1 (Supp. 2012). 
14
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
15public’s use and the amount of control its customers may exert
over the water system.  Accordingly, “[a]dditional information,
including a review of all relevant facts and possibly testimony
from all concerned parties, would be necessary before adetermination could be made[.]”  With respect to Kauai Springs,the PUC stated that “it does not appear that Kauai Springs would
be a public utility subject to commission jurisdiction.”  The PUC
explained: 
Such operations may not rise to services of such a public
character and of public consequence and concern that is to
be regulated under HRS Chapter 269, as bottled water may be
obtained from a number of competing sources and providers. 
The commission does not currently exercise jurisdiction over
any water bottling facilities in the State.
The PUC cautioned that its letter constituted an “informal
opinion” based on the information provided and was not binding onthe PUC.  The PUC concluded, “If you require a formal opinion onthis matter, you may file a petition for declaratory reliefpursuant to chapter 6-61, subchapter 16, Hawaii Administrative
Rules.”
At the November 28, 2006 public hearing, the Planning
Commission discussed granting conditional permits, provided thatKauai Springs would agree to furnish status reports that would
allow the Commission to monitor progress.  Specifically in regard
to the Use Permit, counsel for Kauai Springs informed the
Planning Commission that Kauai Springs would be willing to accept *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
restrictions on the permit, such that the permit would be 
exclusively for the use of Kauai Springs, it would not be transferable, and the Commission would have the right to review the permit if Kauai Springs sold its business. 
The Planning Commission also discussed postponing its 
decision pending a declaratory ruling by the PUC or Water Commission, or conditioning approval of the permits on a declaratory ruling. However, the Planning Commission stated that it was required to act on the Special Permit by January 31, 2007 and that the rules of the Commission did not allow for an extension of time. The Commission members thus voted to close the public hearing. 
By letter dated November 28, 2006, counsel for Kauai 
Springs wrote to the Planning Commission to “confirm, in writing, the Applicant’s request.” Counsel wrote, “In order to be capable of further growth, the Applicant, after careful consideration of the evidence presented at the public hearings and notwithstanding the testimony provided by myself to the contrary, has decided to maintain the request for approval as set forth in his original application.” This request was for a maximum of 1,000 five-gallon bottles per day (or 5,000 gallons per day or 35,000 gallons per week), a maximum of ten van round-trips per day, a maximum of one 40-foot container round-trip per week, and a 
16
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
maximum of five employees at any one time. Counsel wrote that he 
regretted any confusion caused by his testimony at the November 14 hearing and “look[ed] forward to coming to agreeable terms that are acceptable to all parties involved.” 
In a letter dated November 30, 2006, the Office of 
Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) wrote that it was concerned with Kauai Springs’ application “because it involves the use of an important public trust resource - fresh water - for personal financial gain,” and it “appear[ed] to be the first attempt to bottle and sell Hawaii’s surface water[.]” OHA stated that the Planning Commission had acted pursuant to its public trust duty “by requesting clarification on public trust issues from [the Water Commission] and the [PUC].” OHA wrote that it was not enough to require Kauai Springs to request a declaratory ruling from the Water Commission. Rather, the Water Commission should 
investigate whether “Hawai #i water law is already being 
violated.” “For example, the off-stream flows may have already 
increased with Kauai Springs’ use of the water, or there may be transport of water outside the watershed of origin.” OHA requested that the Commission require these studies to be conducted prior to issuing any permits. OHA further requested that the Planning Commission resolve the “outstanding PUC issues” regarding whether Grove Farm and Kauai Springs were operating as 
17
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public utilities. Given the January 27, 2007 deadline for a 
decision on the application, OHA argued that the Commission “uphold its public trust responsibilities by denying Kauai Springs’ permit applications without prejudice, until the applicant can show, and the appropriate agencies can concur, that Kauai Springs’ proposed use is reasonable-beneficial and will not interfere with public trust purposes.” At a minimum, OHA contended that Kauai Springs should be required to obtain a declaratory ruling from the Water Commission “regarding the need for an instream flow standard amendment and a final decision from the PUC regarding the need to register as a public utility.” 
By letter dated December 1, 2006, counsel for Kauai 
Springs wrote to the Planning Commission, suggesting specific language regarding the “non-transferability” condition to the Use Permit that had been discussed at the prior public hearing. 
At the January 23, 2007 regular meeting of the Planning 
Commission, the Commission considered the recommendation to deny the permits made by Planning Department planner Bryan Mamaclay, who had recently replaced the prior planner. Counsel for Kauai Springs stated that he “was really surprised” when he received Mr. Mamaclay’s staff report recommending that the permits be denied. Counsel believed that Mr. Mamaclay “was put in a difficult position by inheriting this file at the last minute.” 
18
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Counsel explained that based on his last conversation with Mr. 
Mamaclay, his impression had been that Mr. Mamaclay “would like to have some more time to look at it but because of the rules we weren’t afforded that opportunity. So instead of working with conditions . . . as you are enabled to do he chose to take the denial route.” 
Mr. Mamaclay explained that the comments received from 
the Water Commission, PUC, and OHA were “an issue because . . . we need some comfort level or some certainty that the applicant has the right or the authority to extract and draw the water on a commercial basis.” Mr. Mamaclay noted that the Water Commission’s letter included “caveats or some qualifying statements,” which raised the question of whether Kauai Springs had gone “through a process to ensure that there is no violation of any [Water Commission] rules.” Mr. Mamaclay further informed the Commission that the “absolute deadline” for the Special Permit was January 31, 2007. 
After further discussion and public testimony, the 
Planning Commission voted 6-1 to deny the three permits. That same day, January 23, 2007, the Commission issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order (Decision and Order) denying the application. 
19
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
20With respect to time constraints for acting on the
application, the Planning Commission found that “[t]he absolute
deadline for action on the application based on procedures foraction on Special Permits is 210 days after the acceptance of theapplication or January 31, 2007.”  The Planning Commission foundthat “[t]he delay in reaching a decision . . . was attributed tostaff’s effort in obtaining additional information relating tothe Applicant’s authority and right to obtain and extract thewater for commercial purposes.” 
The Planning Commission summarized the findings and
comments submitted by the Water Commission and the PUC.  Inrelation to the Water Commission’s input, the Planning Commissionfound the Water Commission had qualified its comments by statingthat permits may be required if certain modifications were made:
b. The Planning Department further acknowledges the
qualifying remarks by [the Water Commission] that:
I.if the source needs to be modified in any way, a well
modification permit from [the Water Commission] may be
required;
II.if a pump is to be installed to induce additional
water flow, a pump installation permit from [the WaterCommission] would be required; 
III.if the modification results in impacts to surface
waters, a petition to amend the interim instream flowstandard for affected surface waters must be made and
approved prior to use of the water. 
Relative to these comments, the Planning Commission found that
the Planning Department’s site visit to the tunnel where the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
private water line is located confirmed that a “concrete stem 
wall” and “steel panel” had been constructed at the tunnel entrance: 
c. Relative to the foregoing, it is also acknowledged as
confirmed during a site visit to Tunnel #1, that to preventinfiltration of surface water into the tunnel, a concrete 
stem wall was constructed at the bottom of the tunnel entrance to above water level within the tunnel and a steel panel was mounted over the tunnel entrance . Furthermore and 
as noted by the staff, inside the tunnel, water enters thesystem through a water pipe installed at or below the watersurface. 
Thereafter, the water line is buried up to a water
tank . . . where it is chlorinated before servicing Kahili
Mountain Park and the 11 homes in Koloa Town . 
(Emphasis added). 
In relation to the PUC’s comments, the Planning 
Commission found that “Kauai Springs would not be a public 
utility subject to commission jurisdiction since the commission does not currently exercise jurisdiction over any water bottling facility in the State.” However, the Commission found that the “PUC further draws interest in its findings relating to Grove Farm as the seller of the water from its system to the Applicant and its status with the PUC.” The Commission found in this regard that the PUC’s letter stated “there is a possibility that Grove Farm may be operating as a public utility,” and that the PUC qualified its response as an “informal opinion based on the limited information provided[.]” (Quotation marks omitted). 
In light of the observations made during the site visit 
and the comments made by the PUC and the Water Commission, the 
21
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
22Planning Commission found “there may be outstanding regulatory
processes” that Kauai Springs must satisfy: 
In view of the foregoing, there may be outstanding
regulatory processes with [the Water Commission] that the
Applicant must satisfy.
  Based on the comments provided by
[the Water Commission] and staff observations during thefield trip, it should be the Applicant’s responsibility toconfirm and determine the need for any permits that may berequired for the construction of the concrete stem wall andthe steel panel mounted over the tunnel entrance.  Thepermit requirements administered by [the Water Commission]are cited in HRS Section 174C-71(3)(A), (Protection of
Instream Uses) . . . and requires persons to obtain a permit
from the Commission prior to undertaking stream channel
alteration provided that routine streambed and drainage way
maintenance activities and maintenance of existingfacilities are exempt from obtaining a permit.
Comments received from the PUC also draws interest to the
extent that as a purchaser of the water from Grove Farm, the
operation may be subject to PUC regulation.  The PUC in thisregard encourages that a declaratory ruling be sought to
allow more diligent review of the relevant facts and
information associated with the proposed water bottling
facility.
As evidenced by additional testimony provided by [OHA] and
concerned parties, the Planning Commission is being
requested to exercise caution and deny the Applicant’s
request in its role as decision maker in the land use permit
process.
(Emphases added).  
Based on the above findings, the Planning Commission
concluded that Kauai Springs had failed to carry its burden of
demonstrating that its proposed use did not violate allapplicable requirements and regulatory processes relating to
water rights, and that there was no substantive evidence that
Kauai Springs had legal standing and authority for its proposed
water use:     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
233. In view of the comments received from [the Water
Commission] and PUC the land use permit process should
insure that all applicable requirements and regulatoryprocesses relating to water rights, usage, and sale are
satisfactorily complied with prior to taking action on the
subject permits.  The Applicant, as a party to this
proceeding should also carry the burden of proof that theproposed use and sale of the water does not violate any
applicable law  administered by [the Water Commission], the
PUC or any other applicable regulatory agency.
4. There is no substantive evidence that the Applicant has
any legal standing and authority to extract and sell thewater on a commercial basis .
(Emphases added).  
At the Planning Commission’s February 13, 2007 regular
meeting, the Commission considered Kauai Springs’ request for
reconsideration of the Decision and Order.  At the hearing,counsel for Kauai Springs argued that the purpose of the motionfor reconsideration was “to prevent hasty or ill advised action.” Counsel stated that “after four months of lengthy public hearingsthe new planning staff person received the file just days beforethe purported deadline that we were told a decision had to be
made[,] which was the 210 day deadline [for the Special Permit].” 
Counsel argued that it was a mistake for the Commission to deny
the permits based on issues raised in OHA’s letter, where OHAerroneously stated that the application involved a surface water
system, and where every other administrative agency had
“responded favorably to the applicant.”  Counsel requested that
the Commission “vote to reconsider and then continue this matter    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
24to a time in the not to[o] distant future when we can all get our
arms around any of the remaining issues including any issuesraised by that OHA letter that came in just days before [thestaff] report and that we can make a fully reasoned decision.”
In response to counsel’s comments, Commissioner Randall
Nishimura questioned whether granting reconsideration would placethe Commission in violation of the “210 day requirement for theSpecial Permit.”  The County Attorney responded that it was hisimpression that the Commission could not grant an extension ofthe deadline even if Kauai Springs requested it.  Counsel forKauai Springs stated that he had discussed this issue with aCounty Attorney and the Mayor, and it was his understanding thatKauai Springs could waive the 210 day requirement.  The CountyAttorney informed the Commission that the Decision and Order hadbeen issued on the 203
rd day following acceptance of the
application, which would leave the Commission with seven days toact upon reconsideration.  
After further discussion, counsel for Kauai Springs
stated that “[t]he applicant would certainly be willing to waivesomething to avoid a hasty decision[.]”  Counsel continued:
I think we would have asked for that two weeks ago in my
discussions with the planner had we known that we could andthat was why I was somewhat heartened after our meeting aweek and a half ago with the Mayor.  But absolutely we wouldbe willing to execute a document, I’m happy to work with theCounty Attorney, a waiver of our rights .  We are not trying    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
25to have you open it today and then argue that that’s an
automatic approval we want to get this right.  We believethere are important issues to be resolved.  We are nottrying to sneak anything by here.
(Emphasis added).  
Following public oral testimony on the request for
reconsideration, a formal motion to reconsider the Decision and
Order was made.  Several Commissioners stated that they could notsupport the motion due to their belief that the Commission wasnot in a position to resolve the “water rights issue.”  ThePlanning Commission voted 4-1 to deny the motion forreconsideration. 
In a letter dated February 15, 2007, the Planning
Department confirmed the Commission’s vote to deny the motion forreconsideration and notified Kauai Springs that continuedoperation on the Property constituted a land use violation.  OnMarch 13, 2007, the Planning Department ordered Kauai Springs toshut down its operations on the Property.  The PlanningDepartment’s Notice of Violation dated March 13, 2007 providedthat the department inspected the Property on March 8, 2007, andfound violations of the Kauai CZO based on the continuedoperation of the water bottling facility without the requiredpermits.  Kauai Springs was ordered to correct the violation(s) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
within fifteen days and to cease and desist the illegal 
activities. 
II. Circuit Court Proceedings 
On March 15, 2007, Kauai Springs appealed the Decision 
and Order to the circuit court. On May 15, 2007, the circuit court granted Kauai Springs’ motion for a preliminary injunction and enjoined the Planning Department from enforcing the Decision and Order. 
On September 17, 2008, the circuit court issued its 
order, reversing in part and vacating in part the Planning Commission’s Decision and Order. 
The circuit court concluded that pursuant to 
HRS § 91-13.5 (Supp. 2006) and the relevant county code provisions, and based upon the Planning Commission’s acceptance of Kauai Springs’ application on July 5, 2006, the Commission was required to act upon the three requested permits by the following dates: 1) October 18, 2006 for the Use Permit; 2) November 2, 2006 for the Class IV Zoning Permit; and 3) January 31, 2007 for the Special Permit.
9 The circuit court concluded that the 
9 For use permits, the Planning Director is required to either make
a decision on the permit or refer the permit application to the Planning
Commission within forty-five (45) days. KCC § 18-9.5(d). See KCC § 8-20.6(a)
(providing that use permit procedures are governed by KCC § 18-9.5, whichdescribes the procedures for a Class III zoning permit). If the applicationis referred to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission is required toact on the application within sixty (60) days. KCC § 18-9.5(f). Thus the 
26
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Planning Commission’s failure to act within the time frame for 
the Use and Class IV Zoning permits meant that “Kauai Springs had a legitimate claim of entitlement” to those permits and those permits were “deemed approved” as of the date of the deadlines. 
The circuit court further concluded that Kauai Springs 
did not waive the deadlines or assent to extensions by appearing and participating in subsequent public hearings or by not demanding that its application be approved. The circuit court concluded that “[i]t was reasonable for Kauai Springs to await the Planning Commission’s decision,” and “[t]he failure to adhere to the time requirements was due solely to the actions of the Planning Commission.” 
In regard to the criteria applied by the Planning 
Commission in denying the permits, the circuit court concluded 
Planning Commission had a total of 105 days from July 5, 2006 to act upon the
Use Permit, unless there was assent to an extension of the deadline.
For Class IV zoning permits, the Planning Director is required to
prepare a report on the application within sixty (60) days. KCC § 18-9.6(c).Within sixty (60) days of receiving the report, the Planning Commission isrequired to hold at least one public hearing on the application and to make adetermination on the application. KCC § 18-9.6(d). Thus the PlanningCommission had a total of 120 days from July 5, 2006 to act upon the Class IVZoning Permit, absent assent to an extension.
Special Permits are governed by Chapter 13 of the Rules of
Practice and Procedures of the Planning Commission (Planning CommissionRules). Section 13-7(a) provides that the Commission must vote on a SpecialPermit application no later than 210 days after the acceptance of theapplication, “or within a longer period as may be agreed by the applicant tothe extent permitted by law.” For purposes of HRS § 91-13.5, if theCommission fails to vote on the petition within the established time frame,the petition is deemed approved after an additional thirty (30) days. § 13­8(a)(2). 
27
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
28that the Planning Commission did not consider the proper
criteria, although the “applicable standards” for the threepermits were “clearly established.” 
Regarding the Use Permit, the circuit court concluded
that the Kauai CZO provides that the purpose of the permit, toassure proper integration into the community of uses, wassatisfied by Kauai Springs’ proposed use: 
42.  The Kauai Zoning Code provides “the purpose of the ‘use
permit’ is to assure the proper integration into the
community of uses which may be suitable only in specificlocations in a district . . . and to prohibit such uses ifthe proper integration cannot be assured.”
43. Kauai Springs is properly integrated into the community
of uses. It had been operating without issue and with allthe state and county permits necessary including two Countybuilding permits. The Planning Department staffer remarkedabout Kauai Springs, “[t]he existing water bottling facilityis relatively low impact at the subject location in itscurrent function and capacity.” 
44.  The Planning Department staffer also stated that the
watershed on the Property looked “just like any other Ag.Building.”
45. There is nothing in the Decision and Order or the Record
to indicate that Kauai Springs’ existing or proposed useswere not or will not be integrated .
(Citations omitted) (emphases added).  The circuit court further
concluded that KCC § 8-20.5 “sets forth the standards thePlanning Commission should have applied when considering KauaiSprings’ application for a Use Permit.”  The circuit courtconcluded that the Decision and Order did not state, and the    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
29record did not indicate, that Kauai Springs did not meet these
standards.  
In regard to the standards for the Special Permit, the
circuit court similarly concluded that HRS § 205-6, countyordinances, and the Planning Commission Rules set forth theproper standard for issuing the permit and there was noindication in the Decision and Order or the record that KauaiSprings failed to meet these criteria.  The circuit court reacheda similar conclusion for the Class IV Zoning Permit.
The circuit court then addressed the Planning
Commission’s duties under the public trust.  The circuit courtfirst concluded that the County has duties under the publictrust:
61. The State of Hawaii and its political subdivisions have
duties under the public trust. Haw. Const. art. IX; Kelly v.
1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai #i 205, 140 P.3d 985
(2006).
62. “Political subdivisions” of the State include the County
of Kauai. Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners , 111 Hawai #i 205,
140 P.3d 985 (2006).
(Emphases added).  The circuit court then concluded that the
record was devoid of any evidence that Kauai Springs’ proposed orexisting use would affect public trust resources, and nothing toindicate that the Planning Commission did not fulfill its publictrust duties:     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
3063. Decisions on permit applications must be grounded in
fact and the Record, not speculation, and the Record in this
case is devoid of any evidence that Kauai Springs[’]existing or proposed uses might affect water resourcessubject to the public trust.
64.  In the Decision and Order, the Planning Commissionconcluded that Kauai Springs’ applications could be deniedbecause Kauai Springs should have pursued “outstandingregulatory processes.”  The only regulatory process assertedby the Planning Commission as being outstanding was thatKauai Springs had not “proactively sought a declaratoryruling” from either the Water Commission or the PUC.
With respect to the Water Commission and the PUC’s
input, the circuit court found that those agencies informed the
Planning Commission that Kauai Springs was not within their“jurisdictions, interests, or concerns,” and the Water Commissionstated that no permits were required because of the circumstancesof Kauai Springs’ water use:
53.  The Decision and Order stated the Planning Commission
had sought and received the input of the . . . Water
Commission and the PUC, both of which informed the PlanningCommission that Kauai Springs was not within theirrespective jurisdictions, interests, or concerns. 
. . . . 
RA at 344 (FOF #18).
54. The Decision and Order stated the Water Commission
informed the Planning Commission that Kauai Springs required“no permits” because “the Applicant's use of the water isnot affecting the source in any way (i.e., not inducing morewater to come out of the source or tunnel),” “the existingsource has been registered and is basically grandfathered,and there is an agreement between the new user (Applicant)and the operator of the system,” and “there is a closed linefrom the tunnel to the tank.”  RA at 344 (FOF #19.a.).
The circuit court concluded that the Water Commission and PUC
disclaimed interest in the application, state law did not require“pursuit of futile administrative processes,” and the Commission    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
31had not identified “any other outstanding regulatory processes”
required to be fulfilled by Kauai Springs: 
65. The Water Commission and the PUC are authorized pursuant
to Haw. Rev. Stat. ch. 269 and ch. 174C respectively to
regulate water allocations and public utilities.  Both
agencies informed the Planning Commission that Kauai
Springs’ uses were of no significant interest to them. 
. . . . 
70.  Hawaii law does not require pursuit of futile
administrative processes. 
71. The Planning Commission did not identify any other
outstanding regulatory processes that it claimed must have
been fulfilled in order to satisfy any duty under the public
trust that it may have had.
(Citations omitted).  Accordingly, the circuit court concluded
that there was “nothing in the Record . . . to show that thePlanning Commission did not fulfill any duty it may have underthe public trust.” 
Finally, the circuit court concluded that Kauai Springs
carried its burden of showing that its proposed use did notviolate any applicable law administered by any applicableregulatory agencies:
73. If Kauai Springs bore the burden of proof that its
proposed use did “not violate any applicable lawadministered by [the Water Commission], the PUC or any otherapplicable regulatory agency,” Kauai Springs plainly carriedthat burden of proof. Both of these agencies had providedtheir input to the Planning Commission, and neither agencyhad any substantial concerns with Kauai Springs, asreflected in the Decision and Order.
74. There was no evidence presented at the public hearings,and no findings made by the Planning Commission that KauaiSprings did not carry any of its burdens to show it wasentitled to the three permits at issue in this appeal, andthe Planning Commission was clearly erroneous when it *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
determined that Kauai Springs did not meet the burden on the
zoning permit applications . 
(Citations omitted) (emphases added). 
The circuit court concluded that the Decision and Order 
“purport[ed] to shift a burden to Kauai Springs to disprove 
future events,” and therefore the Decision and Order was arbitrary or capricious. The circuit court further concluded that “[t]he Decision and Order is in violation of statutory provisions, in excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the Planning Commission, made upon unlawful procedure, affected by other error of law, clearly erroneous, and arbitrary or capricious.” 
Based on the above, the circuit court reversed the 
Decision and Order with regard to the Use Permit and the Zoning Permit. The circuit court ruled that Kauai Springs’ application for those permits was approved and “shall be issued by the appropriate agency or department.” The circuit court vacated the Decision and Order with regard to the Special Permit and remanded the case to the Planning Commission “with an order to issue the Special Permit to Kauai Springs immediately.” 
The circuit court further ruled that the Decision and 
Order “exceeds the Planning Commission’s authority or jurisdiction, is clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
32
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
33probative  and substantial evidence on the whole record; and is
arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion
or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.”  The circuit
court permanently enjoined the Planning Commission from enforcing
the Decision and Order. 
The circuit court’s final judgment in favor of Kauai
Springs and against the Planning Commission was entered on
September 23, 2008.  On October 22, 2008, the Planning Commission
timely appealed to the ICA.
III.  ICA Appeal
A.
On appeal to the ICA, the Planning Commission raised
four points of error:
a.Whether the circuit court was correct that the Use Permit
and the Class IV Zoning Permit were automatically approved
pursuant to provisions in the KCC.
b.Whether the Planning Commission had public trust
obligations to review Kauai Springs’ use of water.
c.If the Planning Commission had public trust obligations
to review Kauai Springs’ use of water, whether the Planning
Commission applied the proper standards and criteria in
reviewing the application for the permits.
d.Whether the circuit court was correct that Kauai Springs
met its burden of proof to be entitled to the permits. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm’n of the Cnty. of Kauai , 130 
Hawai#i 407, 410, 312 P.3d 283, 286 (App. 2013). 
First, with respect to the automatic approval deadlines 
for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits, the Planning Commission 
argued that the circuit court erred in concluding that Kauai Springs did not assent to extending the deadlines and that the failure to adhere to the time requirements was due solely to the actions of the Planning Commission. The Commission argued that the CZO plainly permits applicants to “assent” to a delay in the approval process for Use and Class IV Zoning permits. (Citing KCC §§ 8-19.5(g) and 8-19.6). The Planning Commission noted that the deadline for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits had expired on October 18 and November 2, 2006, respectively. However, during the five public meetings held between August 8, 2006 and February 13, 2007, Kauai Springs and its counsel “were fully engaged in deliberations and negotiations” and did not assert that the deadlines were set to expire or had expired. The Planning Commission thus contended that “[b]y its conduct, [Kauai Springs] led the Planning Commission to reasonably believe that [Kauai Springs] assented to a delay in the final decision” on the Use and Class IV Zoning permits. The Planning Commission argued that the ICA should reverse the circuit court’s order deeming the 
34
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Use and Class IV Zoning permits to have been automatically 
approved.10 
Second,  the Planning Commission argued that the circuit 
court erred in implicitly holding that the Planning Commission had no duty under the public trust doctrine to consider the implications of the proposed water use on public trust resources.
11 The Planning Commission argued that based on 
article 11, section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution and applicable 
law, the circuit court should have concluded that the Planning Commission, as a political subdivision, had a duty to examine the legality of Kauai Springs’ water use, regardless of whether the Water Commission asserted jurisdiction over the matter. 
The Planning Commission also challenged the circuit 
court’s COL ¶ 63, concluding that the record was “devoid of any 
10 Malama Kaua #i and Hawaii’s Thousand Friends (MKHTF) filed a brief
of amici curiae in the proceedings before the ICA. MKHTF agreed with the
Planning Commission that Kauai Springs assented to an extension of the timeperiod for consideration of the Use and Class IV Zoning permits.Additionally, MKHTF argued that “deeming Kauai Springs’ applications‘automatically approved,’ where [the Planning Commission] specifically anddiligently sought to fulfill its trust duties with Kauai Springs’ assent,would wrongly penalize [the Planning Commission] and the public trust andnullify [the Planning Commission’s] duties and Kauai Springs’ burden of proofand, therefore, run afoul of the constitution.” 
11 The Planning Commission specifically challenged the circuit
court’s COL ¶ 71 (“The Planning Commission did not identify any otheroutstanding regulatory processes that it claimed must have been fulfilled inorder to satisfy any duty under the public trust that it may have had”) andCOL ¶ 72 (“There is nothing in the Record . . . to show that the PlanningCommission did not fulfill any duty it may have under the public trust”) basedon the use of the word “may” to describe the Planning Commission’s publictrust duties. 
35
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence that Kauai Springs existing or proposed use might affect 
water resources subject to the public trust.” The Planning Commission argued that the public trust doctrine applies to all 
water resources. Thus, although the Knudsen Trust owns the land containing the water source and Grove Farm owns the water system, the Planning Commission was obligated to examine Kauai Springs’ use of water, and Kauai Springs was required to show that its use was “legal.” Given that Kauai Springs “sought after-the-fact permits to greatly increase its industrial bottling and commercialization of drinking water taken from a ground-water source,” the Planning Commission argued that “the record contained ample evidence demonstrating that [Kauai Springs’] existing or proposed use might affect resources subject to the public trust.” 
Third, the Planning Commission argued that the circuit 
court erred in concluding that the Planning Commission did not consider the proper criteria when reviewing and processing Kauai Springs’ application. The Planning Commission contended that implicit in the circuit court’s conclusion was the assumption that Kauai Springs was only bound by the specific permit requirements and “was not required [under the public trust doctrine] to prove the legality of its commercialization of fresh-water resources[.]” The Planning Commission argued that 
36
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kauai Springs had the burden of justifying its proposed uses in 
light of the public trust doctrine and the higher level of scrutiny imposed for private commercial uses of public resources. Thus, the Planning Commission did not act arbitrarily or capriciously by scrutinizing Kauai Springs’ water use and denying the three permits based on the issue of water rights. 
Finally, the Planning Commission argued that the 
circuit court erred in concluding that assuming Kauai Springs bore the burden of proof in showing that its proposed use did “not violate any applicable law” administered by the Water Commission, the PUC or any other applicable regulatory agency, Kauai Springs “plainly carried that burden of proof.” According to the Planning Commission, Kauai Springs “was required to present concrete evidence that it possessed a legal right to bottle and sell water taken from the cave owned by Knudsen Trust, and that the proposed use was not inimical to the purposes of the public trust.” Kauai Springs failed to present such evidence, offering “only conclusory assertions regarding the impact of [its] proposed increase in water use on the interests of other users, the general public, and the environment,” and offering insufficient information as to its relationship with Grove Farm and Knudsen Trust. The Planning Commission focused on the “equivocal responses” from the Water Commission and the PUC and 
37
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
argued that it was erroneous for the circuit court to conclude 
that “neither agency had any substantial concerns.” 
Relatedly, the Planning Commission argued that the 
circuit court erred in concluding that Kauai Springs met the relevant permit criteria. Specifically, the Planning Commission argued that the circuit court erred by concluding that Kauai Springs’ existing or proposed uses “were not or will not be integrated” into the community of uses, given that: 1) the applicable law required Kauai Springs to present evidence that its existing and proposed uses were integrated into the community 
of uses; and 2) Kauai Springs’ “burden to demonstrate the integration of its proposed land-use was not mutually exclusive from its burden to demonstrate the legality of its proposed water-use.” The Planning Commission contended that Kauai Springs failed to present “substantive evidence concerning either water rights or possible impacts that the proposed increase in water usage would have on the ground-water source or neighboring users’ access to the water.” Thus, Kauai Springs did not satisfy the applicable permit criteria.
12 
12 OHA filed an amicus curiae brief in which it argued that the
circuit court erred in concluding that the record was devoid of any evidence
that Kauai Springs’ proposed or existing uses might affect public trustresources. OHA argued that the “bottling and sale of water is inconsistentwith protecting” the water resource “in its natural state,” and that “it wasnecessary for the Planning Commission to evaluate these two competing uses ofwater.” OHA also challenged the circuit court’s COL ¶ 72 as improperly 
38
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. 
Kauai Springs first responded that the County 
ordinances and rules permitting a permit applicant to assent to 
an extension were invalid because they exceeded the scope of their enabling statute, HRS § 91-13.5. HRS § 91-13.5 provides that agencies shall adopt rules specifying maximum time periods for acting on certain permits, and that any application not decided within the established time frame is “deemed approved.” Kauai Springs emphasized that HRS § 91-13.5(e) provides for only three circumstances under which the designated time periods may be extended, for national disasters, state emergencies, or union strikes preventing the fulfillment of application or review requirements. Kauai Springs argued that the statute does not include the applicant’s “assent” as a reason for extending deadline, which demonstrates that “assent” was intended to be excluded from the statute’s scope. Thus, Kauai Springs argued that the County ordinances and rules permitting an applicant to 
stating that the Planning Commission had no duty to address the impact of
Kauai Springs’ operation on the public trust resource. OHA contended that because the Water Commission and PUC stated that they did not have directjurisdiction over the operation, the duty to protect the public trustresources fell to the Planning Commission, which properly denied the permits“when it became clear that Applicant Kauai Springs had not met its burden ofaddressing the public trust values incorporated into Hawaii’s Constitution andin the State Water Code.” 
39
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“assent” to an extension were in conflict with superior state law 
and therefore invalid. 
Even assuming that an applicant is permitted to assent 
to an extension, Kauai Springs argued that the circuit court correctly found that Kauai Springs did not assent to an extension by appearing at the public hearings after the deadlines had passed. Kauai Springs contended that merely appearing at the hearings did not constitute waiver or affirmation, and that in this case, it did not waive the deadlines by any affirmative conduct such as asking for extra time or withdrawing its application. 
Second, Kauai Springs argued that the circuit court 
recognized the Planning Commission’s public trust duties and held that the Planning Commission satisfied those duties. Kauai Springs further argued that it did not seek approval for a “use of water” because the application did not seek the Planning Commission’s permission to take or extract water, as Kauai Springs does not control the source of the water or the transmission system. Rather, Kauai Springs sought only to tap into a “pipeline that crosses its property,” similar to “any person or business statewide that purchases water from someone else, or fills a bottle with a garden hose.” “Thus, the Planning Commission’s public trust inquiry was limited to whether public 
40
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
resources would be impacted by Kauai Springs’ building on 
agriculturally-zoned land.” 
Kauai Springs argued that the Planning Commission’s 
public trust duties did not entitle it to “turn the usual zoning process into an open-ended and standardless inquiry . . . merely because a connection can be made between a permit application and water resources.” Kauai Springs claimed that in this case, the Planning Commission took reasonable measures and made appropriate assessments to assess the impact of Kauai Springs’ use on public trust resources, and possessed affirmative evidence, based on input from the other county agencies, that the use would have no impact on such resources. 
Kauai Springs argued that the Planning Commission 
sought to have Kauai Springs pursue “outstanding regulatory processes,” without identifying the required “processes.” Kauai Springs notes that as the circuit court determined, “[t]he only regulatory process asserted by the Planning Commission as being outstanding was that Kauai Springs had not ‘proactively sought a declaratory ruling’ from either the Water Commission or the PUC.” However, those agencies “had already expressly informed the Planning Commission they had no interest in Kauai Springs,” and the “Planning Commission has never revealed what . . . declaratory rulings . . . would accomplish.” Kauai Springs 
41
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concluded that “[t]he public trust doctrine does not empower an 
agency to deny an application for zoning permits simply because the agency asserts it lacks information.” 
C. 
The ICA vacated the circuit court’s judgment and 
remanded the case to the Planning Commission for further proceedings to consider whether Kauai Springs satisfied the specific criteria for the requested permits, in light of the public trust doctrine. 
On the first issue of the “deemed approved” deadlines, 
the ICA found it uncontested that the deadlines for the Planning Commission to act on the Use and Class IV Zoning permits were October 18 and November 2, 2006, respectively, and that the Decision and Order was not issued until January 23, 2007. Kauai 
Springs, 130 Hawai #i at 418, 312 P.3d at 294. However, the ICA 
recognized that the applicable ordinances provide that permits shall be deemed approved if the Planning Commission fails to take action within the prescribed time limits, “ unless the applicant 
assents to a delay .” Id.
 (emphasis in original) (quoting KCC §§ 
8-19.5(g), 18-9.6(e)). 
The ICA rejected Kauai Springs’ argument that the 
County ordinances are in conflict with HRS § 91-13.5(e) because 
42

  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“assent” is not one of the three enumerated circumstances for 
extending agency deadlines. Id. Examining the legislative 
history of HRS § 91-13.5, the ICA found that the legislature “contemplated flexibility in rule-making and a balance between streamlining on one hand and constitutional demands, public input, and environmental concerns on the other hand[.]” Id. The 
ICA thus held that the “challenged assent provisions do not conflict with HRS § 91-13.5.” Id. (citations omitted). 
The ICA then held that Kauai Springs assented to an 
extension of the deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits based on the following conduct by Kauai Springs and its counsel: 1) on November 14, 2006, amending the original application to seek approval for only its current needs; 2) on November 28, 2006, retracting its earlier amendment and asking the Planning Commission to consider its original application for approval of future needs, and continuing to negotiate for the granting of a conditional Use Permit; 3) on January 23, 2007, contending that the Planning Commission should grant all three permits; and 4) on February 13, 2007, requesting reconsideration of the Decision and Order, offering to accept conditional permits, and requesting a continuance to obtain more evidence pertaining to the issue of water rights. Id. at 419-20, 312 P.3d 
at 295-96. The ICA reasoned that “[a]t no point in time did 
43
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kauai Springs assert that its permit application had been 
automatically approved.” Id. at 421, 312 P.3d at 297. 
Accordingly, the ICA held that the circuit court erred 
in concluding that Kauai Springs did not assent to an extension of the deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits. Id. 
Second, in regard to the Planning Commission’s public 
trust obligations to review Kauai Springs’ use of water, the ICA found the circuit court’s conclusions “somewhat conflicting” as to the scope of the Planning Commission’s public trust duties, 
given that COL ¶ 63 provided that the record “is devoid of any evidence that Kauai Springs existing or proposed uses might affect water resources subject to the public trust,” and COLs ¶¶ 71 and 72 suggested that the Planning Commission “may” have public trust duties. Id. at 422-23, 312 P.3d at 298-99. The ICA 
therefore held that COLs ¶¶ 63, 71 and 72 were “incorrect in that they do not recognize the Planning Commission’s public trust duty 
to consider and review Kauai Springs’ water usage in its water bottling operation .” Id. (emphasis added). 
The public trust duty to protect ocean waters is based 
on a “combined analysis of article XI, section I and the ‘general laws’ that delegated duties and responsibilities to the county.” Id. at 423, 312 P.3d at 299 (citing Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside 
Partners , 111 Hawai #i 205, 224-25, 140 P.3d 985, 1004-05 (2006)). 
44
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
45The ICA concluded that the County’s public trust duty and the
general laws conferring zoning power to the County established
that the Planning Commission “had a duty to conserve and protect
water in considering whether to issue the Use Permit and the
Class IV Zoning Permit[.]”  Id. at 425-426, 312 P.3d at 301-02. 
The ICA then found that Kauai Springs’ current and
proposed use of the Property “directly affects a public trust
resource.”  Id. at 427, 312 P.3d at 303.  Thus, the ICA vacated
the circuit court’s COLs ¶¶ 63, 71 and 72 and rejected Kauai
Springs’ claim that the Planning Commission’s public trust
inquiry was limited to whether public resources would be affected
by Kauai Springs’ building  on the land.  Id.  
Third, the ICA considered whether the Planning
Commission applied “the correct standards and criteria in
carrying out its public trust obligations.”  Id.  The ICA held
that the Planning Commission was required to make “appropriate
assessments and require reasonable measures to protect the water
resources,” to employ a “higher level of scrutiny,” and to place
the burden on Kauai Springs to justify its proposed use of water
in light of the public trust purposes: 
Based on our reading of Kelly, Wai~hole I, and in In re Kukui
(Molokai), Inc. , we thus hold that the Planning Commission's
decision be initially grounded in the framework of the statutes
and regulatory provisions that authorize the Planning Commission
to act in this instance; in addition thereto, that the Planning   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Commission make appropriate assessments  and require reasonable 
measures  to protect the water resources at issue in this case; 
Id. at 429, 312 P.3d at 305 (emphasis in original). 
The ICA found that although the Planning Commission’s 
Decision and Order cited the applicable criteria for issuing the 
permits (citing KCC § 8-20.5 and Planning Commission Rules § 13­6), the Planning Commission’s denial of the permits was not based on such criteria. Id. at 429-30, 312 P.3d at 305-06. Rather, 
the “Planning Commission essentially required Kauai Springs to prove that its water usage – and the sale of the water by the Knudsen Trust and Grove Farm’s operation of the water system – were legal and met all potentially applicable regulatory requirements.” Id. 
The ICA held that such a requirement was not a 
“reasonable measure,” as it “create[d] an obscure and indefinite burden of proof” and was “completely open-ended as to the ‘applicable law’.” Id. at 431-32, 312 P.3d at 307-08. Thus, the 
Decision and Order was arbitrary and capricious. Id. 
The ICA further explained that “it was not a reasonable 
measure for the Planning Commission to require Kauai Springs to undertake regulatory action to establish and confirm that other parties, Knudsen Trust and Grove Farm, were in compliance with all applicable requirements and regulatory processes,” 
46
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
particularly “given the limited and specific concerns raised by 
the Water Commission and the PUC.” Id. at 432, 312 P.3d at 308. 
The ICA found that although the Water Commission raised some concerns about issues that could affect the water resource, these issues were “ factual questions that could have been addressed 
directly by the Planning Commission .” Id., (emphasis added). 
Accordingly, the ICA held that the circuit court’s COL 
¶ 41 was correct to the extent that it concluded the Planning Commission did not consider the proper criteria. Id. at 433, 312 
P.3d at 309. The ICA vacated the remaining portion of COL ¶ 41 to the extent it suggested standards inconsistent with the ICA’s opinion. Id. 
The ICA held that the circuit court was correct in 
concluding that the Planning Commission’s: COL ¶ 3 (“land use 
permit process should insure that all applicable requirements and regulatory processes related to water rights” are complied with), and COL ¶ 4 (there was no substantive evidence that Kauai Springs “has any legal standing and authority to extract and sell the water on a commercial basis”) were wrong as a basis for denying the permits.
13 Id. 
13 The ICA then vacated the circuit court’s FOF ¶ 54, which misstated
the Decision and Order and the information provided by the Water Commission,
and vacated the circuit court’s COLs ¶¶ 73 and 74, which determined that theWater Commission and PUC had not raised substantial concerns about the permitapplication. Id. 
47
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In regard to the Planning Commission’s claim that the 
circuit court erred in concluding that Kauai Springs met the 
specific criteria set forth for the permits in the CZO and the Planning Commission Rules (COLs ¶¶ 43, 45, 59), the ICA explained that the circuit court’s conclusions “appear to hold that Kauai Springs met the regulatory criteria . . . for issuing the permits.” Id. at 434, 312 P.3d at 310. However, the ICA again 
stated that the Decision and Order did not “address in any substantive way” the regulatory criteria. Id. Therefore, the 
ICA concluded that “it would be more appropriate to allow the Planning Commission to consider and decide whether Kauai Springs can carry its burden in meeting the requirements[.]” Id. The 
ICA thus vacated the challenged COLs and remanded to the Planning Commission to consider Kauai Springs’ application for the three permits based on the specific criteria established in the CZO and the Planning Commission Rules. Id. 
IV. Application 
A. 
In its Application to this court, Kauai Springs raised 
two issues for consideration: 1) whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that Kauai Springs impliedly assented to extend the designated time periods for consideration of the Use and Class IV Zoning permits; and 2) whether the ICA gravely erred in remanding 
48
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the case to the Planning Commission, where the Planning 
Commission already had the opportunity to make the relevant inquiries and denied the three permits based on reasons that the circuit court and ICA concluded were “unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious.” 
Regarding the first issue, Kauai Springs maintained 
that HRS § 91-13.5(e) does not permit extending the relevant deadlines based on an applicant’s assent. Kauai Springs argued that the legislature’s concern for flexibility in rulemaking, which the ICA cited, was satisfied by the option for counties to opt out of setting maximum time periods for consideration of permits. 
Even assuming that an applicant could assent to an 
extension, Kauai Springs argued that the ICA erred in construing “post-approval cooperation” to “imply assent” to an extension of the deemed approved deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits. Kauai Springs contended that by the time it had purportedly assented to the extensions by conduct, the Use and Class IV Zoning permits had already “vested” and been deemed approved. 
Finally, Kauai Springs noted that the ICA did not 
identify any limitation to the extension of deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits on remand. Kauai Springs argued that 
49
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remanding for consideration of the Special Permit is futile, 
given that only eight days remain before the deadline for that permit expires. 
In regard to the second issue, Kauai Springs asserted 
that the ICA’s decision to remand the case “rests on its incorrect conclusion [that] the circuit court did not recognize” the Planning Commission’s public trust duties. Kauai Springs argued that the circuit court clearly recognized its public trust duty, and it was appropriate for the circuit court to state that the Planning Commission “may” have had public trust duties “because it was not its duty to define the exact extent of [its] 
Kelly duties.” Rather, it was the circuit court’s duty to determine whether the Planning Commission made “appropriate 
assessments” and “reasonable measures,” and whether the Planning Commission’s denial of the permits was “unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious.” 
Kauai Springs maintained that the Planning Commission 
possessed all of the necessary information to act on the permits and should not have been permitted to base its denial on a lack of information. Kauai Springs concluded that “the ICA’s opinion serves as a blueprint for agency abuse under the guise of the public trust in every case,” by allowing an agency to “issue an unreasonable and arbitrary denial” and then “argue[] that its own 
50
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Order was lacking” because the applicant failed to seek the 
“right information.” 
B. 
On the first issue, the Planning Commission responded 
that Kauai Springs’ conduct was reasonably interpreted as manifesting its assent to delaying final action on the Use and Class IV Zoning permits. The Planning Commission also argued that it would have been inconsistent and illogical for the Legislature to permit counties to opt out of establishing deadlines entirely, while precluding counties from permitting extensions of any deadlines based on the circumstances of the application and the applicant’s assent. 
In regard to the ICA ordering a remand without setting 
a time limit for the Planning Commission’s consideration on remand, the Planning Commission noted that the ICA “remanded the case for the Planning Commission’s review under specific standards and criteria, and that review necessarily will take time.” 
On the second issue, the Planning Commission argued 
that the ICA properly remanded the case upon finding the circuit court’s conclusions to be erroneous. The Planning Commission argued that the circuit court did not recognize the Planning Commission’s public trust duties under Kelly, as demonstrated by 
51
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
52COL ¶ 63, providing that “the Record . . . is devoid of any
evidence that Kauai Springs[’] existing or proposed use might
affect water resources subject to the public trust.”  COL ¶ 63
was erroneous because the record clearly contained evidence that
Kauai Springs’ existing and proposed use of the Property directly
affected a public trust resource.
The Planning Commission further argued that despite
Kauai Springs’ claim that the Commission argued “its own process
was inadequate,” the Commission consistently considered its
public trust duties, and Kauai Springs failed to carry its burden
of establishing that its use of water was inconsistent with the
public trust. 
V.  Standard of Review
A.  Statutory Interpretation 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo.”  Franks v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 74 Haw.
328, 334, 843 P.2d 668, 671 (1993).  This court's construction of
statutes is guided by the following rules:
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself.  We must read
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. When
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute an
ambiguity exists.  If the statutory language is ambiguous or
doubt exists as to its meaning, courts may take legislative
history into consideration in construing a statute.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
53Id., at 334-35, 843 P.2d at 671-72 (quotation marks and citations
omitted).  “It is fundamental in statutory construction that each
part or section of a statute should be construed in connection
with every other part or section so as to produce a harmonious
whole.”  State v. Davis , 63 Haw. 191, 196, 624 P.2d 376, 380
(1981).
  B.  Agency appeals
Review of a decision made by a court upon its review of an
administrative decision is a secondary appeal. The standard
of review is one in which this court must determine whether
the court under review was right or wrong in its decision.  
To determine if the decision under review is right or wrong,
we apply the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g) to the
agency's decision.
Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of the Cnty. of Haw. , 109 Hawai #i 384,
391, 126 P.3d 1071, 1078 (2006) (quotation marks and citations
omitted).  HRS § 91-14(g) (2012) provides:
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse
of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
54Additionally, 
[i]t is well settled that in an appeal from a circuit
court's review of an administrative decision the appellatecourt will utilize identical standards applied by thecircuit court.  The clearly erroneous standard governs anagency's findings of fact.  An agency's findings are notclearly erroneous and will be upheld if supported byreliable, probative and substantial evidence unless thereviewing court is left with a firm and definite convictionthat a mistake has been made.
The courts may freely review an agency’s conclusions of law.
Leslie, 109 Hawai #i at 391, 126 P.3d at 1078 (quotation marks,
brackets and citations omitted). See Save Diamond Head Waters LLC
v. Hans Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai #i 16, 24, 211 P.3d 74, 82
(2009).
Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, pursuant to
subsections (1), (2) and (4); questions regarding procedural
defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact(FOF) are reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard,pursuant to subsection (5), and an agency’s exercise ofdiscretion is reviewed under the arbitrary and capriciousstandard, pursuant to subsection (6).  Save Diamond Head Waters
LLC, 121 Hawai
#i at 24, 211 P.3d at 82.  Mixed questions of law
and fact are “‘reviewed under the clearly erroneous standardbecause the conclusion is dependent upon the facts andcircumstances of the particular case.’”  Id. at 25, 211 P.3d at
83 (quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce (Haw), Inc. v. Int’l 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Longshore & Warehouse Union , 112 Hawai #i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 
1076 (2006)). 
A court reviewing the decision of an agency should 
ensure that the “agency . . . make its findings reasonably clear. 
The parties and the court should not be left to guess . . . the 
precise finding of the agency.” In re Water Use Permit 
Applications , 94 Hawai #i 97, 15 7, 9 P.3d 409, 469 (2000) 
(“Wai~hole I”) (quoting In re Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens 
Utilities Co. , 60 Haw. 166, 183, 590 P.2d 524, 537 (1978) ). An 
agency's findings should be “sufficient to allow the reviewing court to track the steps by which the agency reached its decision.” Kilauea Neighborhood Ass’n v. Land Use Comm’n , 7 Haw. 
App. 227, 230, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988). See also In re 
Wai
#ola O Mokoka #i, Inc., 103 Hawai #i 401, 432, 83 P.3d 664, 695 
(2004) (explaining that any presumption of validity, given to an agency's decision, “presupposes that the agency has grounded its decision in reasonably clear” findings of fact and conclusions of law). 
C. Public trust 
Review of an agency decision under the public trust 
doctrine requires additional rigor. “Clarity in the agency’s decision is all the more essential ‘in a case such as this where 
55
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
56the agency performs as a public trustee and is duty bound to
demonstrate that it has properly exercised the discretion vested
in it by the constitution and the statute.’”  Wai~hole I, 94
Hawai#i at 158, 9 P.3d at 470 (quoting Save Ourselves, Inc. v.
La. Envtl. Control Comm’n, 452 So. 2d 1152, 1159 (La. 1984)).
[T]he special public interests in trust resources demand
that this court observe certain qualifications of itsstandard of review.  As in other cases, agency decisionsaffecting public trust resources carry a presumption ofvalidity.  The presumption is particularly significant wherethe appellant challenges a substantive decision within theagency’s expertise as “clearly erroneous,” “arbitrary,”“capricious,” or an “abuse of discretion.” 
The public trust, however, is a state constitutional
doctrine.  As with other state constitutional guarantees,the ultimate authority to interpret and defend the public
trust in Hawai #i rests with the courts of this state.
Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455 (citations omitted)
(emphasis added).  
In light of the duty imposed on the state under the
public trust doctrine, we have stated we must take a “close
look” at agency decisions that involve the public trust.  In reWater Use Permit Applications , 105 Haw. 1, 16, 93 P.3d 643, 658
(2004) (“Wai
~hole II”), cited by In re Contested Case Hearing on
Water Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 
116 Hawai #i 481, 490-91, 174 P.3d 320, 329-30 (2007) (“ Kukui
(Molokai), Inc. ”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Questions of constitutional law require the court to 
“exercis[e] its own independent judgment based on the facts of 
the case” under the right or wrong standard. Kelly, 111 Hawai #i 
at 221, 140 P.3d at 1001 (quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
“Under the right or wrong standard, this court examines the facts and answers the question without being required to give any weight to the trial court’s answer to it.” Id. (quotation marks 
and brackets omitted). 
VI. Discussion 
A. 
The first issue raised is whether the ICA gravely erred 
in holding that Kauai Springs assented, through verbal and nonverbal conduct, to extend the automatic approval deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits. 
1. 
HRS § 91-13.5(a) requires state and county agencies to 
adopt rules specifying a maximum time period for granting or denying a business or development-related permit. The statute provides that permits are “deemed approved” if the issuing agency fails to take action within the specified time period. HRS § 91-13.5(c). In conjunction thereto, KCC §§ 8-19.5(g) and 8-19.6(e) provide that an application that is not acted upon 
57
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
within the prescribed time limits (120 days for a special permit, 
90 days for a use permit) is “ deemed approved ” unless the 
applicant assents to a delay. (Emphasis added). 
Kauai Springs maintains that these ordinances 
permitting assent to a delay are in conflict with HRS § 91-13.5 and are therefore invalid. In support of this argument, Kauai Springs relies on HRS § 91-13.5(e), which provides that the established time period “shall be extended in the event of a national disaster, state emergency, or union strike, which would prevent the applicant, the agency, or the department from fulfilling application or review requirements.” Thus, Kauai Springs maintains that the legislature authorized no other exception to the automatic approval deadline other than those circumstances specified in the statute. 
“Courts may take legislative history into consideration 
in construing a statute.” Life of the Land, Inc. v. City Council 
of City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 61 Haw. 390, 447, 606 P.2d 866, 899 
(1980), see also Franks , 74 Haw. at 335, 843 P.2d 671-72. The 
legislative history of HRS § 91-13.5 demonstrates that the legislature was concerned that the automatic approval process should not affect the agency’s ability to make an accurate determination on the application, and therefore contemplated that 
58
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any established deadline could be extended with the assent of the 
parties. 
When HRS § 91-13.5 was adopted in 1998, its purpose was 
“to take constructive steps to improve Hawaii’s business climate” and to address concerns about the “lengthy and indeterminate time required for business and development-related regulatory approvals[.]” 1998 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 2 at 613. Thus the statute was intended “to require the establishment of maximum time periods for the review and approval of all business and development-related permit approvals,” in order “to provide all parties with a greater level of certainty of the time required for review and final determination by an agency[.]”
14 Id. 
The committee reports on the bill indicate that the 
legislature was concerned with balancing the need to streamline the permit application process with the need for agencies to properly and thoroughly consider each application. The conference committee recognized “the continued concerns of some that automatic permit approval will be misused to short-circuit public input processes.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 127, in 1998 Senate Journal, at 799. The committee noted that such concerns 
14 The ICA noted that the County had adopted maximum time periods for
the Planning Commission to act on the permits involved in this case prior to
the adoption of HRS § 91-13.5. Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai #i at 418, 312 P.3d at
294. 
59
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
should be addressed by the agencies themselves: “Your Committee 
is confident that agencies will account for the preservation of such processes in their rulemaking.” Id. Similarly, the Senate 
standing committee noted that “[i]n streamlining the approval process,” the committee was “also mindful of environmental concerns.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2760, in 1998 Senate Journal, at 1121. The committee clarified that the bill was “not intended to jeopardize the environment” and was “intended to allow for the continued safeguard of legitimate review and public comment on those issues.” Id. Therefore, the legislature was 
concerned that the automatic approval process should not affect the agency’s ability to make an accurate determination on the application. 
Additionally, in 2005, HRS § 91-13.5(c) was amended to 
provide that a delay in acting on the application caused by the lack of quorum at a regular meeting shall not result in an automatic approval of the application. 2005 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 68, § 1 at 150. The amendment also provided that “any subsequent lack of quorum at a regular meeting of the issuing agency that delays the same matter shall not give cause for further extension, unless an extension is agreed to by all parties .” Id. 
(emphasis added). Thus, the statute contemplates in the context of automatic approvals that an extension may be granted by 
60
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
agreement of the parties, which is analogous to granting an 
extension by assent of the applicant. See Black’s Law Dictionary 
132 (9th ed. 2009) (defining “assent” as “[a]greement, approval, or permission”). 
Finally, in 2006 the statute was amended to provide 
that it does not apply to “[a]ny county or county agency that is exempted by county ordinance from this section.” HRS § 91­13.5(e)(2); 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 280, § 2, at 1156. The purpose of the act was “to allow a county to opt out of the automatic approval law by adopting an ordinance to exempt the county as a whole or any county agency from the automatic permit approval law.” 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws. Act 280, § 1, at 1156. In adopting this amendment, the legislature explained that it found automatic approval to be “poor public policy” that “can lead to negative consequences for the community.” 
Id. at 1155. Due to 
the automatic approval law, applications for development approvals and other permits “can be granted by default.” Id.  
The legislature emphasized that automatic approval was especially harmful in situations involving complex applications, which require significant time to consider public input and “various needs”: 
Automatic approval eliminates the opportunity for local
decision making. Applications are often complex and must be
carefully reviewed, which can take significant time . 
In 
many situations, this is difficult because departments are 
61
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
understaffed and people serving on boards are volunteers.
Any good decision requires open public input, thoroughdiscussion, and careful consideration of various needs fromthe county government, environmental interests, andcommunity groups . 
Id. (emphases added). The legislature further explained that 
even when “a government body unjustifiably fails to take timely action on an application, . . . the public should not have to suffer the consequences of having an ill-advised or harmful project go forward.” Id. In support of its determination that 
automatic approval was “poor public policy,” the legislature gave examples of counties granting applications “because it could not satisfactorily review the application within the time limits.” Id. at 1155-56. 
Based on the above, the legislative history of HRS § 
91-13.5 does not indicate that it prohibits agencies from considering an applicant’s assent as a reason for extending the maximum time period for acting on a permit application. See 
Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 63 Haw. 
222, 241, 624 P.2d 1353, 1366 (1981) (“A test to determine whether an ordinance conflicts with a statute is whether it . . . permits what the statute prohibits.”). On the contrary, the history of the statute demonstrates that it would be considered poor public policy for an issuing agency to make a decision on a complex permit application solely for the purpose of meeting the 
62
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
established deadline, where the applicant has assented to an 
extension of the deadline and the issuing agency is justified in taking more time to thoroughly and accurately consider the merits of the application.
15 
Accordingly, the ICA correctly determined that the 
assent provisions in KCC §§ 8-19.5(g) and 8-19.6(e) do not 
conflict with HRS § 91-13.5. Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai #i at 419, 
317 P.3d at 295. The Planning Commission was permitted to extend 
the time frame for considering Kauai Springs’ application for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits based on Kauai Springs’ assent to such an extension. 
2. 
Having determined that the applicant’s assent is a 
valid reason for extending the time frame for acting on permits, the next issue is whether the ICA correctly determined that Kauai Springs assented to extending the automatic approval deadlines for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits in this case. Kauai 
Springs, 130 Hawai
#i at 419-20, 317 P.3d at 295-296. 
15 Given the legislative history of the statute, the canon of
construction that “the express mention of a particular provision may imply the
exclusion of that which is not included” does not support the inference thatthe legislature intended to prohibit counties from considering an applicant’sassent as a reason for delaying a decision on an application. See Int’l Sav. 
& Loan Ass’n, Ltd. v. Wiig , 82 Hawai #i 197, 201, 921 P.2d 117, 121 (1996)
(maxim “exists only as an aid to statutory interpretation and its applicationshould be limited to ascertaining legislative intent which is not otherwiseapparent”). 
63
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
64The circuit court concluded that Kauai Springs did not
“waive” the automatic approval deadlines or “consent to” or
“affirm” an extension of the deadlines by participating in thepermit application process after the deadlines had passed.  Thecircuit court concluded that time deadlines can be “waived byaffirmative conduct such as an applicant requesting extra time,”or by an applicant withdrawing its application.  The circuitcourt concluded that Kauai Springs did not ask for extra time orwithdraw its application.  
As noted by the ICA, the word “assent” is defined to
mean “[a]greement, approval, or permission; esp., verbal ornonverbal conduct reasonably interpreted as willingness.” Black’s
Law Dictionary  132 (9th ed. 2009).  There are different types of
assent, including actual, apparent, constructive, or impliedassent:
actual assent . Assent given by words or conduct intended to
express willingness.
apparent assent . Assent given by language or conduct that,
while not necessarily intended to express willingness, would
be understood by a reasonable person to be so intended andis actually so understood.
constructive assent . Assent imputed to someone based on
conduct.express assent . Assent clearly and unmistakably
communicated.implied assent . Assent inferred from one's conduct rather
than from direct expression.
Id.  Although the circuit court referred interchangeably to
“waiver” and “assent,” the concept of waiver is distinct in that  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it is generally defined as an “ intentional  relinquishment of a 
known right.” Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 98 Hawai #i 233, 
261, 47 P.3d 348, 376 (2002) (quotation marks omitted) (emphasis 
added). Although waiver may be “implied . . . by acts and conduct from which an intention to waive may be reasonably inferred,” id. (quotation marks and brackets omitted), this is 
distinct from “assent,” which is “conduct reasonably interpreted as willingness ” rather than conduct reasonably interpreted as an 
intentional relinquishment of a known right. 
The ICA held that Kauai Springs assented to a delay in 
the final decision on the Use and Class IV Zoning permits by participating in public hearings, amending its application, and continuing to negotiate for a conditional Use Permit after the relevant deadlines had passed, without asserting at any point that the permits had been automatically approved. Kauai Springs , 
130 Hawai
#i at 420, 317 P.3d at 296. The ICA determined that 
based on the above conduct, which occurred after the deadlines had passed, the Planning Commission reasonably interpreted Kauai Springs’ conduct as willingness to extend the applicable automatic approval deadlines. Id. 
However, the ICA’s reliance on post-approval conduct to 
find assent is inconsistent with the plain language of the 
65
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
relevant ordinances, which provide that Use and Class IV Zoning 
permits are “deemed approved” if the application is not acted upon during the established time frame, unless the applicant assents to a delay. See KCC §§ 8-19.5(g) and 8-19.6(e). The 
applicant’s assent to a delay must occur prior to the deadline. Permitting an applicant to “assent” to a delay after the fact would be contrary to the purpose of establishing maximum time frames, which are intended to benefit permit applicants and “to provide all parties with a greater level of certainty of the time required for review and final determination” of an application. 1998 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 2 at 613. 
Under the ICA’s analysis, the time frame for acting on 
a permit application could be extended indefinitely based on conduct occurring after the relevant deadline had already passed; the ICA provided no limits as to when conduct could not be interpreted as retroactive assent to an extension of a deadline. It would also defeat the purpose of providing that “application approval would be automatic ” if the established time frame was 
not met, 1998 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 2 at 613 (emphasis added), if post-approval conduct could be construed as assenting to a delay. See Webster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary  148 (1993) 
(defining “automatic” as “having a self-acting or self-regulating mechanism that performs a required act at a predetermined point 
66
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in an operation” or “aris[ing] as . . . apparently necessary 
reaction to or consequence of a given set of circumstances”). 
If the Use and Class IV Zoning permits in this case 
were automatically approved as of October 18, 2006 and November 2, 2006, respectively, then any conduct occurring thereafter cannot be retroactively applied to establish “assent” to an extension of the relevant deadlines. Thus, the ICA erred by relying on post-approval conduct to find that Kauai Springs assented to an extension of the deadlines. 
However, the record in this case demonstrates that 
Kauai Springs assented to an extension of the time frame for considering the Use and Class IV Zoning permits, prior to the deadlines for those individual permits, as both Kauai Springs and the Planning Commission treated the application for the three permits as comprising a consolidated application request. In accordance with this understanding, the parties agreed, as repeatedly evidenced by their conduct, that the Planning Commission would be required to render a decision on the consolidated application by January 31, 2007, which was the latest deadline possible for the Special Permit. Under the circumstances, this was clearly the most reasonable manner to proceed. 
67
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kauai Springs submitted a single application for the 
three permits. From the outset, it was understood that Kauai 
Springs was required to obtain all three permits in order to continue operating its water bottling facility. The Planning Department’s cease and desist letter of May 15, 2006 stated that the department found various violations of the CZO, including the “activity of processing and packaging without the proper permits” and the use of the Property “for Industrial processing and packaging purposes,” which is “not generally permitted within the Agriculture District.” The landowner, Makana Properties, was instructed to immediately cease and desist the above use of the Property. 
Soon after, the Planning Department accepted Kauai 
Springs’ completed application for the three permits. The Use Permit and Special Permit were the substantive permits required in order to permit Kauai Springs’ proposed use, which was not otherwise permitted in the agricultural district. See KCC § 8­
20.1 (providing that a Use Permit is required to assure proper integration into the community of uses in a district)
16; HRS § 
16 KCC § 8-20.1 (1976) provides: “The purpose of the ‘use permit’
procedure is to assure the proper integration into the community of uses which
may be suitable only in specific locations in a district, or only undercertain conditions, or only if the uses are designed, arranged or conducted ina particular manner, and to prohibit such uses if the proper integrationcannot be assured.” 
68
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
205-6 (providing that a Special Permit is required to permit 
“certain unusual and reasonable uses” within the agricultural district).
17 The Class IV Zoning Permit was simply a procedural 
requirement of a Use Permit in the agricultural district. See KCC § 8-19.1 (prohibiting any activity or use regulated by the CZO without first obtaining the required zoning permit).
18 
Thus, in order for Kauai Springs to validly operate its 
water bottling facility in the agricultural district, Kauai Springs was required to obtain all three permits. Kauai Springs would not have been able to operate legally with just the Use Permit after October 18, 2006, or with just the Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit after November 2, 2006. Rather, Kauai Springs was required to also obtain the Special Permit, which had the latest review deadline of January 31, 2007. 
From the Planning Commission’s position, it would have 
been illogical and impractical to decide separately upon the Use Permit and Special Permit, given the similarity of the permits’ 
17 HRS § 205-6 (Supp. 2006), entitled “Special Permit,” provides that
“the county planning commission may permit certain unusual and reasonable uses
within agricultural and rural districts other than those for which thedistrict is classified,” provided that “the use would promote theeffectiveness and objectives” of Chapter 205. 
18 KCC § 8-19.1 (1976) provides: “No person shall undertake any
construction or development or carry on any activity or use, for which azoning permit is required by this Chapter, or obtain a building permit forconstruction, development, activity or use regulated by this Chapter, withoutfirst obtaining the required zoning permit.” 
69
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requirements. A use permit may be granted only if the Planning 
Commission finds that the activity or use “is a compatible use” and is not detrimental or injurious to the general welfare of the community, neighborhood, land or waters. KCC § 8-20.5. Consideration of use permits are guided by the Kauai General Plan, which guides all zoning decisions pursuant to HRS § 46-4 and requires the County to “practice careful stewardship of the island’s land and waters.”
19 Kauai General Plan at Chapter 2, 
available at  http://www.kauai.gov/Portals/0/planning/Ch2.PDF. 
Similarly, a special permit may be granted only if the 
Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is “an unusual and reasonable use of land,” after considering factors such as whether the proposed use is suitable for the uses permitted within the district or would adversely affect the surrounding property. Planning Commission Rules § 13-6. As with use permits, special permits are guided by more general objectives; special permits may only be granted for uses that “promote the effectiveness and objectives” of HRS Chapter 205, which provides that its “overarching purpose” is to “protect and conserve 
19 Pursuant to KCC § 7-1.2 (2000), the General Plan “states the
County’s vision for Kaua #i and establishes strategies for achieving that
vision.” “All actions and decisions undertaken by the County Council and the
County Administration, including all County departments, agencies, boards andcommissions, shall be guided by the vision statement, policies, and theimplementing actions of the General Plan.” KCC § 7-1.4 (2000). 
70
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and orderly 
land allocation and development.” See HRS § 205-6(c); Curtis v. 
Bd. of Appeals, Cnty. of Haw. , 90 Hawai #i 384, 396, 978 P.2d 822, 
834 (1999). 
Given the similarities in standards for use and special 
permits, it was reasonable for all parties to expect that the Planning Commission would rely on common information to render consistent decisions on both permits. It would have been incongruous for the Planning Commission to have rendered a decision on the Use Permit by October 18, 2006, but to continue deliberating on the Special Permit until January 31, 2007, when both permits required consideration of similar standards. None of the parties treated the application as if the Planning Commission’s decision-making would be divisible in this way. 
Consistent with the expectation that the three permits 
would be considered together rather than separately, the Planning Commission accepted public oral testimony on the application in its entirety at the public hearings on August 8, 2006, September 26, 2006, November 14, 2006, and January 23, 2007. The minutes indicate that the public was permitted to testify generally on the application as a whole and was not restricted to testifying on any particular permit. Additionally, members of the public 
71
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
were permitted to continue commenting on the Use Permit after the 
purported deadline for the permit had passed. 
Kauai Springs’ conduct also confirms its expectation 
that the Planning Commission would treat the three permits as part of a single application. Although Kauai Springs’ conduct subsequent to the established time frame for the Use and Class IV Zoning permits cannot be used to establish its post-deadline assent to an extension of the automatic deadlines, Kauai Springs’ subsequent conduct was clearly consistent with and evidence of an earlier mutual agreement between the Planning Commission and 
Kauai Springs, from the onset of the application process, to treat the application for the three permits as a consolidated application and to allow the Planning Commission to render a decision on the application based on the time frame for the Special Permit. 
At the November 14, 2006 hearing, after the Use Permit 
and Class IV Zoning Permit deadlines would have passed absent the applicant’s assent, counsel for Kauai Springs amended the application request, from requesting permission to bottle 5,000 gallons a day to 1,000 gallons a day. Subsequently at the November 28, 2006 public hearing, counsel for Kauai Springs continued to negotiate for the Planning Commission to grant the Use Permit, informing the Planning Commission that Kauai Springs 
72
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
would be willing to accept certain conditions with the permit. 
There was no indication that Kauai Springs was proceeding upon a premise that the Use Permit had already been granted. At the same hearing, the Planning Commission stated, and there was no disagreement from Kauai Springs, that the Planning Commission was required to act on the application by January 31, 2007. 
In a letter dated November 28, 2006, counsel for Kauai 
Springs wrote to the Planning Commission, confirming that Kauai Springs was retracting its earlier amendment to the application and was again asking for permission to bottle a maximum of 5,000 gallons per day. Counsel wrote that he was “looking forward to coming to agreeable terms that are acceptable to all parties involved.” In a letter dated December 1, 2006, counsel continued to negotiate the granting of the Use Permit, suggesting specific language for the proposed “non-transferability” condition. 
At the January 23, 2007 meeting, the Planning 
Commission considered the Planning Department’s recommendation to deny all three permits. Counsel for Kauai Springs reacted to the recommendation by stating that he was “really surprised.” Counsel also stated that he believed the Planning Department planner had not had sufficient time to consider the application. Counsel did not argue that the Use and Class IV Zoning permits had already been approved by operation of the automatic approval 
73
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ordinances. On the contrary, counsel indicated the Planning 
Commission could take more time to “work[] with conditions[.]” 
At the same meeting, the Planning Department informed 
the Planning Commission that the “absolute deadline” for acting on the Special Permit was January 31, 2007. 
There was no 
disagreement or discussion regarding whether the other two permits had already been deemed approved. Consistent with the actions of all parties throughout the permit proceedings, the Planning Commission’s Decision and Order found that “[t]he absolute deadline for action on the application based on procedures for action on Special Permits” was January 31, 2007.
20 
20 Following the entry of the Decision and Order, the Planning
Commission considered Kauai Springs’ request for reconsideration. At the 
reconsideration meeting on February 13, 2007, counsel for Kauai Springs didnot take issue with the Planning Commission’s finding that the absolutedeadline for acting “on the application” was January 31. Rather, counsel 
continued to argue that the Planning Commission should grant all three
permits, and specifically argued that the Commission should continue the
matter for consideration of the issues raised by OHA in its letter to thePlanning Commission.
When the Planning Commission responded that voting for
reconsideration would put the Planning Commission in violation of the January31 deadline, counsel stated that Kauai Springs “would certainly be willing towaive something to avoid a hasty decision[.]” Counsel also demonstrated that he was aware of the automatic approval rules, by stating that Kauai Springswas not attempting to have the Planning Commission open the matter forreconsideration in order to argue that the Planning Commission was inviolation of the automatic approval rule and that the application wastherefore deemed approved: “We are not trying to have you open it today andthen argue that that’s an automatic approval[.] [W]e want to get this right.We believe there are important issues to be resolved. We are not trying to
sneak anything by here.” Counsel and the Planning Commission both agreed
that Kauai Springs could agree to an extension of the January 31 deadline if
the request for reconsideration was granted. 
74
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, Kauai Springs’ conduct evidences an assent 
agreement to consolidate the Planning Commission’s consideration 
of the three permits into a single application that the Planning Commission would render a decision upon by January 31, 2007. Kauai Springs therefore assented to an extension of the time frame for decision on the Use and Class IV Permits, and the Planning Commission timely rendered its decision on all three permits.
21 
B. 
1. 
The second issue raised by Kauai Springs’ Application 
is whether the ICA gravely erred in remanding the case to the 
Planning Commission for additional findings. Kauai Springs questions whether a permit can be denied “for reasons every court concluded were unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious” “[w]hen an agency has the opportunity to make every inquiry of an applicant that it desires,” and whether that agency “can claim that its own process was lacking[]” when that denial is challenged. The application also challenged the ICA’s determination that the 
21 Amici contend that “deeming Kauai Springs’ applications
‘automatically approved,’. . . would wrongly penalize . . . the public trust
and . . . therefore, run afoul of the constitution . . . .” In light of our
determination that Kauai Springs assented to an extension of the time frame
for decision on the consolidated permits and the Planning Commission timelyrendered its decision, we do not address this argument. 
75
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court failed to recognize the Planning Commission’s 
duties under the water resources public trust. Essentially, the Application contends that, given that the ICA agreed with the circuit court that the Decision and Order was arbitrary and capricious, remand is unwarranted. 
To address Kauai Springs’ contentions, we first address 
general principles and factors that an agency must consider when reviewing a permit for the use of a public resource, and then examine whether a decision to deny permits can be predicated upon the lack of information. Second, we consider whether the permits were denied upon grounds that were “unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious.” Third, we determine whether the case should be remanded to the Planning Commission for clarification of its findings of fact and conclusions of law in accordance with the public trust doctrine. 
2. 
a. 
The Hawai #i Constitution “adopt[s] the public trust 
doctrine as a fundamental principle of constitutional law[.]” 
Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 132, 9 P.3d at 444. Article XI, 
section 1 declares that “all public resources are held in trust 
by the state for the benefit of its people” and mandates that the 
76
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“State and its subdivisions  shall conserve and protect” the 
State’s water resources.22 (Emphasis added). Article XI, 
section 7 reiterates that “[t]he State has an obligation to 
protect, control and regulate the use of Hawaii’s water resources for the benefit of its people.” 
“In Hawaii, this court has recognized . . . a distinct 
public trust encompassing all the water resources of the 
State.”
23   Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 133, 9 P.3d at 445. “[T]he 
public trust doctrine applies to all water resources  without 
exception or distinction.” Id. at 133, 9 P.3d at 445 (emphasis 
added). “The state water resources trust thus embodies a dual 
mandate of 1) protection and 2) maximum reasonable and beneficial 
use.” Id., 94 Hawai #i at 139, 9 P.3d at 451. The public trust 
22 Article XI, section 1 of the Hawai #i Constitution provides: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, the State
and its political subdivisions shall conserve and protectHawaii’s natural beauty and all natural resources, includingland, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and shallpromote the development and utilization of these resourcesin a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State. 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State
for the benefit of the people. 
23 “The public trust in the water resources of this state . . . has
its genesis in the common law.” Wai ~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 130, 9 P.3d at 442. 
See King v. Oahu Ry. & Land Co. , 11 Haw. 717, 725 (Hawai #i Rep. 1899) (holding
that “[t]he people of Hawaii hold the absolute rights to all its navigablewaters and the soils under them for their own common use,” and “[t]he landsunder the navigable waters in and around the territory of the HawaiiGovernment are held in trust for the public uses of navigation”) (citationsomitted). 
77
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is, therefore, the duty and authority to maintain the purity and 
flow of our waters for future generations and to assure that the waters of our land are put to reasonable and beneficial uses. 
Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450. 
b. 
Certain “fundamental principles” provide a framework 
for the state’s “authority and duty to preserve the rights of 
present and future generations in the waters of the state.” Id. 
at 141, 9 P.3d at 453. Id. As a first principle, the authority 
of the State and its political subdivisions “precludes any grant or assertion of vested rights to use water to the detriment of public trust purposes[]” and “empowers the state to reexamine any prior use.” Id. Under this first principle, no person or entity 
has automatic vested rights to water. 
Second, the public trust creates an “affirmative duty” 
of the State and its political subdivisions “to take the public trust into account in the planning and allocation of water resources, and to protect public trust uses whenever feasible.” Id. (emphasis in original) (footnote omitted) (quoting Nat’l 
Audubon Society v. Superior Court of Alpine Cnty. , 658 P.2d 709, 
728 (1983) cert. denied, 464 U.S. 977 (1983)). 
78
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Lastly, there are no “absolute priorities” between uses 
under the public trust, so the state and its subdivisions must 
“weigh competing public and private water uses on a case-by-case 
basis,” according to any standards applicable by law. Wai~hole 
I, 94 Hawai #i at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. 
As the public trust arises out of a constitutional 
mandate, the duty and authority of the state and its subdivisions to weigh competing public and private uses on a case-by-case basis is independent of statutory duties and authorities created by the legislature. “[T]he public trust doctrine at all times forms the outer boundaries of permissible government action[.]” Id. at 132, 9 P.3d at 444, (quoting Kootenai Envtl. Alliance v. 
Panhandle Yacht Club, Inc. , 105 Idaho 622, 671 P.2d 1085, 1095 
(1983)). Therefore “mere compliance by agencies with their legislative authority” may not be sufficient to determine if competing uses are properly balanced in the context of uses protected by the public trust and its foundational principals. 
Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 132, 9 P.3d at 444. 
c. 
The purpose of the state water resource public trust is 
to protect certain uses. Our jurisprudence has referred to these 
protected uses as the “purposes” of the water resource public 
79
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
trust; in this context “protected use” and “purpose” are 
synonymous. See Wai ~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 136, 9 P.3d at 448 
(equating purpose and use). We have recognized four such 
protected uses. First, “the maintenance of waters in their natural state constitutes a distinct ‘use’” that the public trust protects.
24 Id. at 136, 9 P.3d at 448. Second, the public trust 
protects domestic water use, in particular, protecting an adequate supply of drinking water. Id. at 136-37, 9 P.3d at 449­
50. Third, the public trust protects the use of water in “the 
exercise of Native Hawaiian and traditional and customary rights[.]” Id. at 137, 9 P.3d at 450. Lastly, the reservation 
of water enumerated by the State Water Code constitutes a 
protected use under the public trust. Wai
#ola O Moloka #i, 103 
Hawai#i at 431, 83 P.3d at 694. 
Private commercial use is not protected by the public 
trust. “[T]he public trust has never been understood to 
safeguard rights of exclusive use for private commercial gain.” 
Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450. The very meaning 
of the public trust is to recognize separate and enduring public 
24 “This disposes of any portrayal of retention of waters in their
natural state as ‘waste.’” Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 136-37, 9 P.3d at 448­
49. See also Reppun v. Bd. of Water Supply , 65 Haw. 531, 560 n. 20, 656 P.2d
57, 76 n. 20 (1982) (citing article XI, section 1 of the Hawai #i Constitution 
as an acknowledgment of the public interest in “a free-flowing stream for its
own sake”). 
80
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rights in trust resources superior to any private interest. Id. 
In accordance with the fundamental principles of the public trust 
and the fact that private commercial use is not one of the uses the public trust protects, a “higher level of scrutiny” is therefore employed when considering proposals for private commercial use. Id. at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. 
d. 
When an agency is confronted with its duty to perform 
as a public trustee under the public trust doctrine, it must preserve the rights of present and future generations in the 
waters of the state. Wai
~hole I, 97 Hawai #i at 141, 9 P.3d at 
453. An agency must take the initiative in considering, 
protecting, and advancing public rights in the resource at every 
stage of the planning and decision-making process. Id. at 143, 9 
P.3d at 455. The agency measures the proposed use under a “reasonable and beneficial use” standard, which requires examination of the proposed use in relation to other public and private uses. Id. at 161, 9 P.3d at 473. The agency must apply 
a presumption in favor of public use, access, enjoyment, and resource protection. Id. at 142, 154 n.59, 9 P.3d at 454, 466 
n.59. 
The agency is duty-bound to place the burden on the 
applicant to justify the proposed water use in light of the trust 
81
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
purposes. Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 490, 174 P.3d at 
329. Permit applicants must demonstrate their actual needs, and, 
within the constraints of available knowledge, the propriety of 
draining water from public streams to satisfy those needs. 
Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 162, 9 P.3d at 474. If there is a 
reasonable allegation of harm to one of the uses protected by the 
public trust, then the applicant must demonstrate that there is no harm in fact or that any potential harm does not preclude a finding that the requested use is nevertheless reasonable and 
beneficial. Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai
#i at 499, 174 P.3d 
at 338. 
The applicant is “obligated to demonstrate 
affirmatively  that the proposed [use] [will] not affect [a 
protected use], in other words, the absence of evidence that the 
proposed use would affect [a protected use] [is] insufficient[.]” 
Wai#ola O Moloka #i, 103 Hawai #i at 442, 83 P.3d at 705 (emphases 
in original). See also Kukui (Molokai), Inc.,  116 Hawai #i at 
509, 174 P.3d at 348 (“[T]he [Water Commission's] conclusion that 
‘no evidence was presented’ . . . that the [protected use] would be adversely affected erroneously shifted the burden of proof[.]”) 
82
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Additionally, the applicant must demonstrate the 
absence of a practicable alternative water source. Wai~hole I, 
94 Hawai #i at 161, 9 P.3d at 473. The applicant’s proposed use 
must be denied if the applicant does not show that there is no 
practicable alternative water source. Id. at 161 n.65, 9 P.3d at 
473 n.65. “Such a requirement is intrinsic to the public trust.” 
Id.; see also Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 496, 174 P.3d 
at 335 (“The [agency] cannot fairly balance competing interests in a scarce public trust resource if it renders its decision prior to evaluating the availability of alternative sources of water.”). 
Lastly, if the impact is found to be reasonable and 
beneficial, then in light of the cumulative impact of existing and proposed diversions on trust purposes, the applicant must implement reasonable measures to mitigate this impact. 
Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 143, 161, 9 P.3d at 455, 473. 
When an agency or other deciding body considers an 
application for permits under circumstances that requires the 
deciding body to perform as a public trustee to protect a public trust resource,  the agency or other deciding body must make 
findings sufficient to enable an appellate court to track the steps that the agency took in reaching its decision. Kilauea 
83
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Neighborhood Ass’n , 7 Haw. App. at 230, 751 P.2d at 1034. An 
agency is encouraged to be clear; “clarity in the agency’s 
decision is all the more essential . . . where the agency performs as a public trustee and is duty bound to demonstrate 
that it has properly exercised the discretion vested in it by the 
constitution and the statute.” Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 158, 9 
P.3d at 470 (quotation marks omitted). 
e. 
Under the foregoing principles and purposes of the 
public trust, it is manifest that a government body is precluded 
from allowing an applicant’s proposed use to impact the public trust in the absence of an affirmative showing that the use does not conflict with those principles and purposes. Therefore, the applicant is “obligated to demonstrate affirmatively that the 
proposed [use] [will] not affect [a protected use],” Wai
#ola O 
Moloka #i, 103 Hawai #i at 442, 83 P.3d at 705 (emphases omitted). 
In other words, “ the absence of evidence that the proposed use 
would affect [a protected use] [is] insufficient [.]” Id. 
(emphasis added). Kauai Springs has asserted “the public trust 
84
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
doctrine imposes a duty to assess, but does not empower an agency 
to deny an application simply because it claims it lacks information within its power to obtain, thus shifting the burden to the applicant.” However, contrary to Kauai Springs’ assertion, a lack of information from the applicant is exactly the reason an agency is empowered to deny a proposed use of a public trust resource. 
f. 
To assist agencies in the application of the public 
trust doctrine, we distill from our prior cases the following principles:
25 
a. The agency ’s duty and authority is to maintain
the purity and flow of our waters for future
generations and to assure that the waters of ourland are put to reasonable and beneficial use.
26 
b. The agency must determine whether the proposeduse is consistent with the trust purposes: 
25 We provide this framework for assistance and do not indicate that
it is mandatory or that it precludes other analytical approaches that are
consistent with the public trust doctrine. 
26 Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450. 
85
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
i. the maintenance of waters in their 
natural state; 
ii. the protection of domestic water use;
iii. the protection of water in the
exercise of Native Hawaiian and 
traditional and customary rights; and
iv. the reservation of water enumerated by
the State Water Code. 
c. The agency is to apply a presumption in favorof public use, access, enjoyment, and resourceprotection.
27 
d. The agency should evaluate each proposal foruse on a case-by-case basis, recognizing thatthere can be no vested rights in the use of publicwater.
28 
e. If the requested use is private or commercial,the agency should apply a high level ofscrutiny.
29 
f. The agency should evaluate the proposed useunder a “reasonable and beneficial use” standard,which requires examination of the proposed use inrelation to other public and private uses.
30 
Applicants have the burden to justify the proposed 
water use in light of the trust purposes.31 
27 Id. at 142, 154 n.59, 9 P.3d at 454, 466 n.59. 
28 Id. at 141, 9 P.3d at 453; Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 
490, 174 P.3d at 329. 
29 Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. 
30 Id. at 161, 9 P.3d at 473. 
31 Kukui (Molokai), Inc.,  116 Hawai #i at 490, 174 P.3d at 329. 
86
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a.Permit applicants must demonstrate their actual
needs and the propriety of draining water from
public streams to satisfy those needs.32
b.The applicant must demonstrate the absence of a
practicable alternative water source.33
c.If there is a reasonable allegation of harm to
public trust purposes, then the applicant mustdemonstrate that there is no harm in fact or that the requested use is nevertheless reasonable andbeneficial.
34
d.If the impact is found to be reasonable and
beneficial, the applicant must implementreasonable measures to mitigate the cumulativeimpact of existing and proposed diversions ontrust purposes, if the proposed use is to beapproved.
35
3. 
In this case, the parties do not dispute that the 
Planning Commission had public trust duties.36 Therefore, the 
“devoid of any evidence that Kauai Springs[’] existing or proposed uses might32 Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 162, 9 P.3d at 474. 
33 Id. at 161, 9 P.3d at 473. 
34 Kukui (Molokai), Inc.,  116 Hawai #i at 499, 174 P.3d at 338. 
35 Wai~hole I, at 143, 161, 9 P.3d at 455, 473. 
36 The ICA held that the circuit court’s COLs ¶ 63 (record was
affect water resources subject to the public trust”), ¶ 71 and ¶ 72
(suggesting that Planning Commission “may” have public trust duties in thiscase) were “incorrect in that they do not recognize the Planning Commission’spublic trust duty to consider and review Kauai Springs’ water usage in its
water bottling operation.”
 Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai #i at 423, 312 P.3d at 299. 
In its Application, Kauai Springs does not challenge the ICA’s
conclusion that the Planning Commission had a duty to consider Kauai Springs’
water usage in reviewing its permit application. Rather, Kauai Springs argues
(continued...) 
87
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
36(...continued)
that the ICA erred in vacating the circuit court’s COLs because the circuit
court recognized the Planning Commission’s public trust duties and correctlyfound that the Planning Commission fulfilled these duties.
37It is undisputed that Kauai Springs’ use of the public trust
resource was commercial.
88Planning Commission was “duty-bound to place the burden on the
applicant to justify the proposed water use in light of the trustpurposes and weigh competing public and private water uses on acase-by-case basis, requiring a higher level of scrutiny for
private commercial water usage.”  Wai
~hole II, 105 Hawai #i at 16,
93 P.3d at 658 (quotation marks and brackets omitted).
The ICA recognized, and we concur, that “[t]o its
credit, the Planning Commission took seriously its public trust
duty . . . by, inter alia, investigating the water source and thetransmission of the water, seeking comment from a number ofcounty and state agencies, and holding several hearings andseeking input from the community related to Kauai Springs ’
application for the permits.”  Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai
#i at 431,
312 P.3d at 30 7.  It is also apparent that the Planning
Commission applied a high level of scrutiny when it examinedKauai Springs’ proposed private commercial use.
37
We now address the question as to whether the findings
and conclusions of the Planning Commission, viewed in the light  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the duties and authority mandated by the public trust, were 
arbitrary or capricious. 
a. 
In COL ¶ 4, the Planning Commission concluded that the 
record was devoid of evidence that Kauai Springs or its commercial water supplier(s) had legal standing to extract or sell the water on a commercial basis. 
4. There is no substantive evidence that the Applicant has
any legal standing and authority to extract and sell the
water on a commercial basis . 
(Emphasis added). In accordance with the public trust doctrine, 
it was clearly within the exercise of the Planning Commission’s authority to require Kauai Springs to affirmatively demonstrate its right to extract water, which depended on Kauai Springs’ commercial supplier(s) having legal authority to sell the water to Kauai Springs. 
A fundamental principle of the public trust doctrine 
precludes assertion of prior uses or vested rights to use water to the detriment of public trust purposes. Wai
~hole I, 94 
Hawai#i at 141, 9 P.3d at 453. The Planning Commission’s 
requirement that Kauai Springs demonstrate its “legal standing and authority” is therefore consistent with the Planning Commission’s duty and authority to reexamine any prior use and “revisit prior diversions” in order to “preserve the rights of 
89
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
38The record indicates that the Water Commission “assigned” Well No.
5729-01 to the water source on November 20, 2006, based on a November 6, 2006
letter from the Planning Commission.  The well number assignment does notappear to have been requested prior to November 6, 2006, nor by Knudsen Trust,Grove Farm, or Kauai Springs.  It is not clear what rights, if any, are
(continued...)
90present and future generations in the waters of this state.”  Id. 
The burden imposed by the Planning Commission on Kauai Springs to
demonstrate its legal authority to the proposed use was a
properly imposed affirmative obligation.  See, e.g., Wai #ola O
Moloka #i, 103 Hawai #i at 442, 83 P.3d at 705 (holding that an
applicant is “obligated to demonstrate affirmatively  that the
proposed [use] [will] not affect [a protected use]”).  Further,
the Planning Commission’s requirement that Kauai Springs
demonstrate its legal authority to extract the water was inkeeping with the presumption in favor of the purposes of thepublic trust, public use, access, and enjoyment.  Wai
~hole I, 94
Hawai#i at 142, 9 P.3d at 454.  
The Planning Commission’s request for clarification
from the Water Commission hypothesized  the condition that “[t]he
existing source has been registered and is basicallygrandfathered[.]”  Those conditions were not, in fact, verified,
as noted by the ICA.  Kauai Springs, 130 Hawai
#i at 433, n.22,
312 P.3d at 309.  Nor is there any indication in the record as to
what was meant by “registered” or “grandfathered.”38     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
38(...continued)
conveyed to any party by assignment of a well number. 
39An instructive demonstration of the burden on the applicant is
provided by Wai #ola O Moloka #i.  In that case, notwithstanding our ultimate
remand, this court found that the Water Commission had met its public trust
duty to balance an existing use against the proposed use only after the WaterCommission found that the applicant had provided two hydrologic studies thatshowed that the impact of the proposed use would have no or relatively small
impact on the existing use.  Wai
#ola O Moloka #i, 103 Hawai #i at 432-33, 83 P.3d
at 695-96 (remanded to the Water Commission on other grounds). 
91Additionally, “existing uses are not automatically
‘grandfathered’ under the constitution . . . especially in
relation to public trust uses .”  Wai ~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 149, 9
P.3d at 461 (emphasis added).  “The public trust doctrine takesprecedent even over vested water rights.”  Id. at 141, 9 P.3d 453
(quoting Kootenai , 671 P.2d at 1094).
 
Kauai Springs failed to provide any evidence that it
had legal authority to the commercial use of the public trustwater resource.  There is also no indication in the record of thesubstance of any water purchase agreement, nor of the watersupplier’s right to make the public trust resource commerciallyavailable.  Under the higher scrutiny given to private commercialuse, it was within the Planning Commission’s authority to reviewany purchase arrangements it found relevant, and it was KauaiSprings’ burden to produce documentation of any agreements orcontracts to determine what legal rights Kauai Springs had toextract the water.
39    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
b.
The Planning Commission’s COL ¶ 3 places a burden on
Kauai Springs to demonstrate its satisfaction of regulatory
requirements by other agencies.  That conclusion states:
In view of the comments from [the Water Commission] and PUC
the land use permit process should insure that allapplicable requirements and regulatory processes  relating to
water rights, usage, and sale are satisfactorily compliedwith prior to taking action on the subject permits.  TheApplicant, as a party to this proceeding should also carrythe burden of proof that the proposed use and sale of thewater does not violate any applicable law administered by[the Water Commission], the PUC or any other applicableregulatory agency.
 
(Emphasis added).  COL ¶ 3 is first a statement that a permit
should not be issued if applicable requirements and regulatory
92Consequently COL ¶ 4 is correct in that “[t]here was no
substantive evidence that [Kauai Springs] ha[d] any legalstanding and authority to extract and sell the water on acommercial basis.”  Furthermore, in light of the responsibilityof the Planning Commission to protect the public trust resource,it was appropriate for the Planning Commission to inquire intoKauai Springs’ legal standing and authority to extract water forthe proposed use.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
processes are unsatisfied, and second, an application of that 
statement to Kauai Springs. We initially consider “applicable requirements and regulatory processes” that must be satisfied in order for a permit to be issued. 
In regards to both the Use Permit and Special Permit, 
pursuant to HRS § 46-4(a) (Supp. 2006), zoning in the County is required to be accomplished within the framework of Kauai’s General Plan. Kauai’s General Plan provides that Kauai’s county governments will “practice careful stewardship of the island’s land and waters” and manage the “high mountains, forested watershed areas, the ocean and coral reefs, [and] beaches . . . as part of the public lands trust.” Kauai General Plan at 2-3. Therefore, neither the Use Permit nor the Special Permit could be issued if issuance would not be in keeping with careful 
stewardship of the island’s waters. 
The purpose of the Use Permit, according to the CZO, 
“is to assure the proper integration into the community of uses 
which may be suitable only in specific locations in a district . . . and to prohibit such uses if proper integration cannot be assured.” KCC § 8-20.1. Additionally, the CZO provides that a Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit may only be granted if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed use or activity “will not cause any substantial harmful environmental consequences on 
93
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the land of the applicant or on other lands or waters, and will 
not be inconsistent with the intent [of the CZO] and the General Plan.” KCC § 8-20.5. Therefore, the Planning Commission could not issue the Use Permit unless it found that issuance would not cause substantial harmful environmental consequences to the water. 
Relevant to the Special Permit, HRS § 205-6 provides 
that the Planning Commission may only grant the special permit for “certain unusual and reasonable uses” within the agricultural district “when the use would promote the effectiveness and objectives” of HRS Chapter 205. The express purpose of HRS Chapter 205 is to conserve “water resources and land.” Curtis v. 
Bd. of Appeals, Cnty. of Haw. , 90 Hawai
#i 384, 396, 978 P.2d 822, 
834 (1999) (citing Hse. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 395, in 1961 House Journal, at 855-56). Therefore, the Planning Commission was required to deny the Special Permit if issuance was contrary to the protection of natural resources. 
As previously discussed, the Planning Commission also 
had duties under the public trust independent of the permit requirements, including the duty to place the burden on the applicant to demonstrate “the propriety  of draining water from 
public streams[.]” Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 132, 162, 9 P.3d at 
94
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
444, 474 (emphasis added); Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 
490, 174 P.3d at 329. 
In light of the Planning Commission’s constitutionally-
mandated duties under the public trust doctrine to require the 
applicant to demonstrate the propriety of the proposed use, and the requirements of the Use Permit and Special Permit to protect the environment, water, and natural resources, the first statement in COL ¶ 3 correctly states that the permitting process “should insure that all applicable requirements and regulatory processes relating to water rights, usage, and sale are satisfactorily complied with prior to taking action on the subject permits.” 
The second statement in COL ¶ 3, that Kauai Springs 
“should carry the burden of proof that the proposed use and sale of the water does not violate any applicable law administered by [the Water Commission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory agency” should not be read in a vacuum. The ICA found that “any other applicable regulatory agency” created “an obscure and indefinite burden of proof” that is “open-ended as to the 
‘applicable law[.]’” Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai
#i at 431, 312 P.3d 
at 307. Here, the Planning Commission in its FOF found specific 
95
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
applicable requirements and regulatory processes relating to 
water rights that were, in fact, unsatisfied. 
In November 2006, the Planning Commission sought input 
from other agencies in order to determine Kauai Springs’ “authority and right to obtain and extract the water for commercial purposes.” As a result of this effort, the Planning Commission found that “there may be outstanding regulatory processes . . . that [Kauai Springs] must satisfy.” In particular, the Planning Commission found that there may be unsatisfied regulatory requirements from the Water Commission and the PUC. Id. 
The Planning Commission was informed by the Water 
Commission of three potentially applicable permits implicated by 
Kauai Springs’ proposed use of the public trust resource. First “[g]round-water withdrawals from [Kauai Springs’ proposed use] may affect streamflows, which may require an instream flow standard amendment.”
40 Second, a pump installation permit would 
be required if a pump is installed at the water source to induce 
40 “Instream flow standard” means a quantity or flow of water or
depth of water which is required to be present at a specific location in a
stream system at certain specified times of the year to protect fishery,wildlife, recreational, aesthetic, scenic, and other beneficial instream uses.HRS § 174C-3. Instream flows are regulated by the Water Commission.HRS 174C-71. The Water Commission set instream flow standards for Kauai in 1988. Haw. Admin. Rules § 13-169-45. Instream flows cannot be diminished (i.e., additional water cannot be extracted) without petitioning the WaterCommission. HRS § 174C-71. 
96
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
additional water flow.41 Third, a well modification permit from 
the Water Commission may be required “ if the [water] source needs 
to be modified in any way [.]”42 (Emphasis added). 
Subsequently, the Planning Commission visited the site 
where the tunnel water system originates. The visit found “a 
concrete stem wall was constructed at the bottom of the tunnel entrance . . . and a steel panel was mounted over the tunnel entrance.” Therefore, the Planning Commission confirmed that the source of the water and the tunnel may have been modified, and thus may have required additional permitting. 
The Planning Commission found similar concerns as to 
the propriety of Kauai Springs’ proposed use due to potential regulatory jurisdiction by the PUC. A representative of Grove Farm testified to the Planning Commission that there had never been communications with the PUC regarding its water system. The Planning Commission was informed by the PUC that although Kauai Springs’ bottling operations  were not subject to PUC regulation, 
it was possible that Grove Farm  was operating as a public 
utility. Specifically, the Planning Commission was informed that whether Grove Farm was operating as a public utility would 
41 The Water Commission regulates wells and pumps under HRS §§ 174C­
81 though 174C-87 . 
42 Id. 
97
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
43The Dissent suggests that because Grove Farm is not a party to
Kauai Springs’ permit applications, review of the operation by the PUC would
not further the purposes of the public trust and that it would be unfair toKauai Springs if Grove Farm declined to pursue such review.   Dissent at 4. However, Grove Farm is involved both through its individual involvement in thesale or licensing of the trust resource to Kauai Springs and its combinedinvolvement of providing water to an entity commercially bottling and sellingpublic water.  Under the analysis of the Dissent, Grove Farm or Knudsen trustcould sell or license the public trust resource to third-party bottlerswithout any review whatsoever.  The purposes of the public trust proscribeexactly such a result.  Further, it is noted that a consultant representativeof Grove Farm testified in support of Kauai Springs’ permit applications atthe November 14, 2006 Planning Commission hearing. 
44Kauai Springs may satisfy its burden regarding its use of a public
trust resource in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Commission.    
98depend, in part, on “the amount of control, if any, its customers
may be able to exert over Grove Farm’s water systems and its
operations.”  (Emphasis added).  Based on this information, thePlanning Commission concluded that Kauai Springs’ planned use ofthe water through its purchase from Grove Farm could subject theoperation to PUC jurisdiction, notwithstanding that as anindependently operating entity, Kauai Springs would not normallybe subject to such regulation.
43  The Planning Commission stated
that
the PUC also draws interest to the extent that as [a]
purchaser of water from Grove Farm, the operation may be
subject to PUC regulation.  The PUC in this regardencourages  that a declaratory ruling be sought to allow more
diligent review of the relevant facts and informationassociated with the proposed water bottling facility.
(Emphases added). While “encouraging” review, the Planning
Commission did not require Kauai Springs, or any other party, toinitiate such a proceeding.
44    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
45The ICA improperly shifted the burden to the Planning Commission
to disprove harm to the public trust resource.  The ICA stated that “a denial
of the permits . . . would be appropriate under the public trust doctrine ifmodification of the water source or installation of a pump would jeopardize
the water.”  Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai
#i at 432, 312 P.3d 308 (emphasis added). 
It is incorrect to suggest that a denial of the permit is only permissible if
the water is “jeopardized.”  Under the public trust doctrine, the PlanningCommission is empowered to deny use of the trust resource if Kauai Springs
failed to show that the water will not be jeopardized.  Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i
at 142-43, 9 P.3d at 454-55; Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 490, 509,
174 P.3d at 329, 348 (“[T]he [Water Commission's] conclusion that ‘no evidence
was presented’ . . . that the [protected use] would be adversely affectederroneously shifted the burden of proof[.]”).
Similarly, the ICA found that “[w]ith regard to the concern raised
. . . that Grove Farm may possibly be . . . subject to PUC regulation, thereis nothing . . . that suggests the water resources are in jeopardy or affectedwithout PUC regulation of Grove Farm as a public utility.”  Kauai Springs, 130
Hawai
#i at 432, 312 P.3d 308.  The ICA’s analysis misstates the burden of
proof in application for use of public trust resources; it was Kauai Springs’
responsibility to demonstrate that the propriety of its water usage by showingthe water was to be obtained from a validly operating entity.  Wai
~hole I, 94
Hawai#i at 142-43, 9 P.3d at 454-55; Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 490,
174 P.3d at 329.  The Dissent adopts this same improper burden shifting
(continued...)
99Accordingly, based on responses from the Water
Commission, the PUC, and its own site visit, the Planning
Commission identified specific statutory requirements of theWater Commission and PUC that it reasonably believed wereapplicable and unsatisfied.  Kauai Springs presented no evidenceregarding the inapplicability or satisfaction of the conditionsoutlined by the Water Commission.  Kauai Springs also offered noinformation on the issue of whether its operation would affectGrove Farm’s status as a public utility.  Therefore, the PlanningCommission’s statement in FOF ¶ 19 that “there may be outstandingregulatory processes. . . that [Kauai Springs] must satisfy[]” iscorrect.
45    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
45(...continued)
regarding jeopardy to the water resource.  Dissent at 10.
The Dissent similarly shifts the burden to disprove harm to the
public trust resource from the applicant to the Planning Commission in
contending that there was nothing in the record to suggest that a well-modification permit, a pump installation permit, or a petition for an interimflow stream standard was required.  Dissent at 10-11.  In addition toimproperly shifting the burden, the record does suggest that a wellmodification permit may have been required. As noted above, the PlanningCommission had conducted a site visit and confirmed that a concrete stem walland steel panel had been mounted over the face of the tunnel, indicating thata well modification permit may have been warranted.  The Dissent also suggeststhat the stem wall and steel panel may originate from the 1890s.  The recorddoes not date the wall and panel installation. Photographs of the wall andpanel in the record do not indicate construction of an 1890s vintage.
46The Dissent posits a parade of oblique scenarios by suggesting
that the Kauai building division or elevator inspectors would have toundertake a review of the public trust doctrine before issuing the relevantpermits.  Dissent at 8-9.  The obvious distinction is that a permit for anelevator would not state that the applicant is “requesting a permit for water
(continued...)
100Read in the context of FOF ¶ 19, it is clear that COL
¶ 3’s statement that Kauai Springs should “carry the burden of
proof that the proposed use and sale of the water does not
violate any applicable law administered by [the WaterCommission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory agencywas not intended to create an “obscure and indefinite burden of
proof.”  Kauai Springs , 130 Hawai
#i at 431, 312 P.3d at 307.  On
the contrary, the Planning Commission correctly imposed on Kauai
Springs the burden to demonstrate the propriety of its proposeduse of the public trust resource, which, under the circumstancesof this case, required Kauai Springs to demonstrate that anynecessary permits and applicable regulations from the WaterCommission and PUC were complied with.
46  In light of the duties    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
46(...continued)
harvesting . . . ” as it did in this case.  Further, it is not clear that any
statute or regulation requires the building division or elevator inspectors toconsider the impact of a permit on the environment or in conformance with theGeneral Plan, as the applicable statutes and regulations did require of thePlanning Commission here.  The public trust does not “impose[] a burden todisprove all potentialities unrelated to the protection or conservation ofwater resources.”  Dissent at 10, n.4.
47The Dissent characterizes the review of the Decision and
Order as “crafting an outcome that neither party sought.”   Dissent at 5. Kauai Springs specifically raised the issue of whether the Decision and Orderwas arbitrary and capricious, and this issue was an essential component of thecircuit court and ICA decisions.  Therefore, this court could not reviewwhether the Decision and Order of the Planning Commission was arbitrary andcapricious without considering whether it was premised upon sound findings andconclusions.
101of the Planning Commission to preserve the rights of present and
future generations in the waters of the state, this burden is notunreasonable.  Therefore, COL ¶ 3 is correct.
c. 
The Planning Commission’s COL ¶ 4 is correct because
its authority under the public trust permitted it to inquire intoKauai Springs’ legal rights to extract the water for commercialuse.  COL ¶ 3 was correct because the Planning Commission’sduties under the public trust required it to ensure that KauaiSprings’ proposed use was in compliance with Water Commission andPUC requirements.  Therefore, the Decision and Order to deny thepermits was not arbitrary or capricious.
47
4.  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defendant County of Hawai #i to assess whether a landowner had 
reasonable erosion control measures in place; that is, to 
ascertain whether “reasonable measures” were being adequately 
complied with. 111 Hawai #i 205, 228, 140 P.3d 985, 1008 (2006). 
In Kelly, we held that duties under the public trust “require[] 
[an agency] . . . to ensure that the prescribed measures are actually being implemented after a thorough assessment of the possible adverse impacts the development would have on the 
State’s natural resources.” Kelly, 111 Hawai
#i at 231, 140 P.3d 
at 1011. “Appropriate assessments” therefore refers to efforts 
by the state or an agency to ensure “reasonable measures” are implemented after permits are granted. 
At a minimum, the test crafted by the ICA is incorrect 
because it inverts the public trust doctrine by mandating appropriate assessments and reasonable measures be evaluated before assessing the propriety of the proposed use in light of the public trust purposes. Additionally, the standard does not require the agency to consider all of the factors protecting the public trust resource. See generally Wai
~hole I, 94 Hawai #i 97, 
9 P.3d 409 (2000) and Kukui (Molokai), Inc.  116 Hawai #i 148, 174 
P.3d 320 (2007). For instance, the ICA’s proposed test does not require a demonstration of the absence of practicable alternative 
103
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
102The Dissent contends that the ICA recognized the proper
test for the Planning Commission to employ when applying the
public trust doctrine.  Dissent at 9.  The ICA stated that the
Planning Commission’s decision should
be initially grounded in the framework of the statutes and
regulatory provisions that authorize the Planning Commissionto act in this instance; in addition thereto, that the
Planning Commission [should] make appropriate assessments
and require reasonable measures  to protect the water
resources at issue in this case; and becuase Kauai Springs
seeks to use the water for economic gain, this case requiresthat the Planning Commission give the permit application ahigher level of scrutiny and, although Kauai Springs’ use of
the water is not illegal or improper per se, that Kauai
Springs carries the burden to justify the use of the water
in light of the purposes protected by the public trust.
Kauai Springs, 130 Hawai #i at 429, 312 P.2d at 305 (emphases
added).   This test is not in conformance with our prior
holdings.  
Our cases have used the term  “reasonable measures” to
indicate that if the impact is found to be reasonable and
beneficial in light of the cumulative impact of existing andproposed diversions on trust purposes, then the applicant must
implement reasonable measures to mitigate this impact.  Wai
~hole
I, 94 Hawai #i at 143, 161, 9 P.3d at 455, 473.  Therefore,
reasonable measure are indicated only after the use has beendetermined to be beneficial.  
Similarly, the phrase “appropriate assessments” is used
in Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners  to refer to efforts by the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
water sources. Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 161, 9 P.3d at 473. 
(“Such a requirement is intrinsic to the public trust[.]”). 
Therefore, the ICA’s proposed test is deficient because it does not provide the degree of protection of the public trust required by the law that our prior holdings recognize. 
5. 
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the ICA 
erred in its determination that the Planning Commission’s COL ¶¶ 3 and 4 were wrong. The ICA also erred in affirming the circuit court’s conclusion that the Planning Commission did not use proper criteria in reviewing Kauai Springs’ permit application. The ICA’s vacation of the circuit court’s conclusion regarding proper criteria was correct to the extent that the circuit court suggested applicable standards inconsistent with this court’s decision. 
The Application specifically challenged the ICA’s 
determination that the circuit court’s conclusions were incorrect in COL ¶ 63, 71, 72. In those conclusions the circuit court determined that: there was no evidence that Kauai Springs’ proposed use would affect water resources protected by the public trust, (COL 63); the Planning Commission did not identify any outstanding regulatory processes that must be fulfilled in order to satisfy any duty under the public trust, (COL 71); and the 
104
 Planning Commission fulfilled any duty it had under the public 
trust, (COL 72). Based on the discussion presented above, we affirm the ICA’s vacation of the circuit court’s COL ¶¶ 63, 71 and 72.
48 
Ultimately, while the Planning Commission’s findings of 
fact were not erroneous and its conclusions of law correct, and therefore its decision to deny the permits was not arbitrary and capricious, nevertheless clarity and completeness in the Planning Commission’s FOF and COL are essential when it performs as a 
public trustee.
49   Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 158, 9 P.3d at 470 
(“clarity in the agency's decision is all the more essential . . 
. where the agency performs as a public trustee and is duty bound to demonstrate that it has properly exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute ”).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
48 Although not challenged in the Application, the ICA was correct in
its vacation of the circuit court’s COL ¶¶ 43, 45, and 59 (the circuit court
was clearly erroneous in concluding that Kauai Springs satisfied the relevantpermit requirements); and 73 and 74 (the circuit court was clearly erroneousin concluding that the Water Commission and PUC did not raise substantialconcerns). 
49 For example, the public trust doctrine requires an applicant to
demonstrate the feasibility of alternative sources of water. The findings donot indicate whether Applicant complied with this requirement. “[P]ermitapplicants must . . . demonstrate the absence . . . of alternative watersources. Such a requirement is intrinsic to the public trust[.]” Wai
~hole I,
94 Hawai #i at 161, 9 P.3d at 473; see also Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i 
at 496, 174 P.3d at 335 (“The [agency] cannot fairly balance competinginterests in a scarce public trust resource if it renders its decision priorto evaluating the availability of alternative sources of water.”). 
105
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Accordingly, we remand this matter to the Planning 
Commission to clarify its findings and conclusions consistent 
with this opinion. Wai~hole I, 94 Hawai #i at 158, 9 P.3d at 470 
(citing Application of Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Utilities 
Co., 60 Haw. 166, 185-86, 590 P.2d 524, 537-38 (recognizing 
remand as an appropriate remedy “where the agency has made invalid, inadequate, or incomplete findings”); cf. In re Kukui 
(Molokai), Inc. , 116 Hawai #i at 495, 174 P.3d at 334 (finding 
that the Water Commission failed to explain the rationale behind its decision and remanding for additional findings and conclusions). 
VII. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the ICA Judgment on Appeal 
filed May 30, 2013 is affirmed to the extent that it vacated the Final Judgment filed by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit on September 23, 2008, and we remand this case to the Planning Commission for further proceedings consistent with the opinion of 
this court. 
106
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Robert H. Thomas and 
Mark M. Murakami for petitioner 
Alfred B. Castillo, Jr.,
Mauna Kea Trask,David J. Minkin, andDayna H. Kamimura-Chingfor respondent /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr. /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
107
 