   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-23-0000013 20-SEP-2024 07:50 AM Dkt. 21 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF 
 ---o0o---HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘I,   
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
 vs.  
 
OSCAR CARDONA,  
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.  
SCWC-23-0000013  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-23-0000013; CASE NO. 1CPC-21-0000633)  
 
SEPTEMBER 20, 2024  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA,  EDDINS, GINOZA, and DEVENS, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This appeal of a murder conviction arises out of an 
altercation between strangers in Waikīkī after midnight on June 
1, 2021. Elijah Horn (“Horn”) was near Kuhio Beach with a group 
of four women he had just met. Two m ale visitors, decedent 
Elian Delacerda (“Delacerda”) and Osvaldo Castaneda -Pena 
1    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(“Castaneda -Pena”) approached, friendly at first, but then 
started arguing with Horn and the women. Horn called his friend 
and roommate , Defendant Oscar K. Cardona, Jr. (“Cardona”), for 
help. 
As Cardona arrived at the scene on his electric bicycle, 
the verbal argument escalat ed into a physical fight. Cardona 
pulled out a gold pocketknife. Castaneda -Pena struck Horn. 
Horn struck Castaneda -Pena back with his skateboard. One of the 
women also hit Castaneda -Pena with the skateboard. 
Delacerda approached Cardona and punched him in the face. 
Cardona, who claimed to have extremely poor uncorrected vision, 
lost his glasses in the scuffle. He stabbed Delacerda several 
times. Delacerda died at the scene from a sharp force wound to 
his heart. 
A jury convicted Cardona of murder in the second degree. 
Cardona appealed to the ICA alleging prosecutorial misconduct 
and instructional error. T he ICA affirmed the conviction and 
sentence in a summary disposition order (“SDO”). 
Cardona’s application for writ of certiorari presents the 
following questions: 
A. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) gravely 
err in its Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”) by relying 
upon facts not in evidence to rationalize and otherwise justify the DPA’s improper conduct, and did the ICA gravely 
err in its SDO by analyzing the DPA’s misconduct out of 
context?  
B. Did the ICA gravely err in it s SDO by concluding that 
the DPA did not commit prosecutorial misconduct by offering 
2    
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
his personal opinions on witness cre dibility, and di d the 
ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that the DPA did 
not commit prosecutorial misconduct by attacking 
Petitioner’s credibility based on his defend ant party 
status? 
C. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that 
although the DPA’s contumac ious and repeated use of leading 
questions was “improper,” the same was “harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt” and by al so concluding th at “the DPA’s 
remarks were either ‘benign statements,’ or ‘reasonable 
inferences’ that could b e drawn from the record facts?” 
D. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that 
the trial court did not commit reversible error by failing 
to provide a State v. Gabriel limiting instruction? 
E. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concludin g the 
trial court did not commit reversible error by sua sponte 
providing the “Vo luntary Act” jury instruction? 
We hold that the DPA committed prosecutorial misconduct in 
his closing argument by improperly characterizing Cardona as a 
liar and a Waikiki “enforcer ,” which denied  Cardona of his due 
process right to a fair trial under Article I, Section 5 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution.  The misconduct was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  We therefore vacate the ICA’s March 7, 2024 
judgment on appeal, as well as the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit’s (“circuit cou rt”) December 13, 2022 judgment of 
conviction and sentence.   We remand this case to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  1
The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided. 
3 1    
 
        
   
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Indictment 
On June 4, 2021, Cardona  was charged by indictment with 
one count of murder in the second degree, in violation of HRS §§ 
707-710.5  and 706-656,  for intentionally or knowingly causing 
Delacerda’s death.    3 2
2. Pretrial matters 
a. Notice of intent re e yesight evidence 
Cardona filed a notice of intent to use evidence,  
indicating:  
1. Both currently and at the time of the incident, 
Defendant OSCAR CARDONA suffers from an eye disease called 
myopic degeneration. 
2. The result of this disease is that the Defendant suffers 
from extremely blurred vision, headaches and he requires 
thick glasses at all times in order to see. 
3. Defendant has been a patient of Dr. David Young of 
Pediatric Ophthalmology of Hawaii since early childhood and 
Dr. Jon Portis of Sugiki Portis Eye Center as an adult. 
4. During the incident, the Defendant’s glasses were 
damaged when he was assaulted by either the decedent ELIAN 
DELACARDA and/or his friend OSVALDO CASTANEDA -PENA. 
5. The glasses were collected and returned to the 
Defendant. 
2 HRS § 707 -710.5 is titled “Murder in the second degree” and defines the 
offense as “intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] the death of another person. 
. . .” Murder in the second degree is a felony. Id. 
3   HRS § 706- 656 is titled “Terms of imprisonment for first and second 
degree murder and attempted first and second degree murder.” Relevant to 
this appeal, a person over 18 years of age who is convicted of murder in the 
second degree “shall be sentenced to  life imprisonment with possibility of 
parole.”  
4    
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
     
    
 
 
 
  
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6. The glasses were subsequently transferred from the 
Defendant to Public Defender investigator MATTHEW TINAY 
where they are being kept in a safe pending the trial. 
7. The State is welcome to examine the glasses upon 
request. 
At an August 17, 2022 pre-trial hearing, the circuit court 
ruled Cardona could testify about his poor eyesight . The 
circuit court also noted that the DPA was having difficulty 
securing the presence of Cardona’s op hthalmologist for trial. 
The DPA expressed doubt as to whether Cardona was qualified to 
testify about his own eyesight because Cardona was not a doctor 
but acknowledged that Cardona’s testimony could be weighed by 
the jury. 
b. Gabriel instruction discussion 
At the pretrial hearing, t he DPA and defense counsel also 
discussed whether a limiting instruction (Gabriel instruction) 
should be given due to the State’s plan to call Officer Cyrus 
Coen (“Coen”) to identify Cardona. Officer Coen was able to 
identify Cardona on video recordings because he had cited 
Cardona for a COVID mask violation the year before . Defense 
counsel expressed concern that the jurors might think Officer 
Coen recognized Cardona “because he’s a bad guy.” 
The court suggested providing a limiting instruction that 
Officer Coen’s testimony would be considered for identification 
purposes only.   Defense counsel expressed concern that a 
5    
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 4 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
limiting instruction could instead call more attention to 
Cardona’s prior police contact.    
The circuit court eventually ruled it would allow Officer 
Coen to testify as to Cardona’s identity “based upon his prior 
familiarity with the defendant.”   Defense counsel said he did 
not think a limiting instruction would be  necessary,  but the 
circuit court said  it would give one in an abundance of caution.   
No limiting instruction ended up being given.    4
3. Jury Trial 
Cardona’s jury trial began  on August 25, 2022.   At issue 
was whether Cardona stabbed Delacerda in self-defense or 
involuntarily.  The State presented many witnesses. Only 
It appears the circuit court was considering a Gabriel instruction : 
You have heard evidence that the defendant . . . at another 
time may have had a prior contact or interaction with a 
Honolulu Police Department officer. The evidence, if 
believed by you, may be considered only on the issue of the 
defendant’s identity as th e person who committed the 
offense charged. Do not consider the evidence for any 
other purpose. You must not use this evidence to conclude 
because the defendant, at another time, may have had prior 
interactions or contacts with the Honolulu Police 
Department officer that he is a person of bad character 
and, therefore, must have committed the offense charged in 
this case. You must not draw any adverse inference against 
[the defendant] from the fact that the witness is a law 
enforcement officer. In consid ering the evidence for the 
limited purpose for which it has been received or will be 
received, you must weigh it in the same manner as you would 
all other evidence in the case and consider it along with 
all other evidence in this case. If believed, you ma y give 
the evidence such weight as you feel it deserves but only 
for the limited purpose that I described to you. 
State v. Gabriel , 2022 WL 1284613 at *11 ( Haw. App. Apr. 29, 2022). 
6    
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
    
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Cardona testified for the defense and his credibility was 
central to his defense. 
Salient testimony included the following. 
a. Testimony of Elijah Horn 
Horn was Cardona’s roommate. Horn had met a few women the 
night before and, shortly after midnight on June 1, 2021 , they 
were gathered at the tables near Kuhio Beach . Delacerda and 
Castaneda -Pena approached and asked if they wanted a shot. Horn 
said yes, but Delacerda and Castaneda -Pena then became vulgar 
and aggressive, calling Horn the N -word. The women verbally 
defended Horn, so Delacerda and Castaneda -Pena started calling 
them “stupid cunts” and the “B word.” Horn did not walk away 
because he did not want to look like a “pip-squeak.” 
Instead, Horn called Cardona because he was scared and 
Cardona was like a father figure to him. When Cardona arrived, 
Cardona pulled out a gold knife that Horn had never seen before. 
He thought Cardona was just going to use it to scare off 
Delacerda and Castaneda -Pena. Cardona and Horn told Delacerda 
and Castaneda -Pena to leave because they did not want to fight 
with them. 
Delacerda then slapped Horn. Then Castaneda -Pena rushed 
toward Horn and hit him in the face, so Horn engaged with 
Castaneda -Pena. Horn hit Castaneda -Pena with his skateboard. 
7    
 
  
  
   
 
   
 
    
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Horn ended up on the ground and one of the women hit Castaneda -
Pena with the skateboard. 
Horn did not know what happened between Delacerda and 
Cardona. When he and Castaneda -Pena disengaged, Horn saw 
Delacerda lying on the ground with a woman kneeling beside him 
yelling for help. Horn then helped Cardona find his glasses 
because, without them, Cardona “couldn’t see” and was “in 
complete . . . panic mode.” 
Horn then returned to the hotel room , where Cardona was 
showering. Cardona’s face looked beaten up and bloodied. There 
were bloody towels in their bathroom. Cardona told Horn to “lay 
low.” Cardona said he thought he had stabbed Delacerda three 
times in the stomach. Cardona told Horn he was going to throw 
out the gold knife. (He ended up not doing so.) 
According to Horn, although Cardona seemed like a “hard 
guy” and “not . . . the type of person that you would see like 
as a pushover,” Cardona was “not a fighter” and he had “[n]ever 
seen him fight before.” Cardona was physically strong and the 
two used to arm -wrestle and spar, but he had never known Cardona 
to be violent. In fact, he had never seen Cardona raise his 
voice in anger at anyone. 
8  There were numerous instances during Horn’s testimony when 
the DPA asked improper leading questions resulting in sustained    
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
     
  
    
   
  
  
  
     
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
objections, striking of testimony and/or cautionary instructions 
from the circuit court. 
b. Testimony of Osvaldo Castaneda -Pena 
Castaneda -Pena and Delacerda were visiting Hawai ʻi from 
Vacaville, California. The night before, they had been drinking 
at their hotel pool and decided to go down to Waikīkī Beach. 
Castaneda -Pena did not recall how the altercation started and 
did not see what happened between Cardona and Delacerda . 
c. Testimony of Melissa Del Sarto 
Melissa Del Sarto (“Del Sarto”) , a registered nurse from a 
Chicago suburb, was visit ing Hawaiʻi. Del Sarto and two others 
were on Kuhio Beach when she heard a commotion “like a fight 
breaking out on the walkway area.” She saw four men fighting, 
two on two. She saw one man hit another in the head or body 
with a skateboard. She saw the other two men facing each other, 
then one “just kind of slowly went to the ground,” “fell on his 
butt and slumped over,” until he was “laying in the grass.” The 
crowd ran away until only “the victim and the victim’s friend” 
remained. 
Del Sarto ran up to the victim and started performing CPR , 
but she knew he was dying because of his “agonal breathing,” 
which she explained as the body’s “last -ditch effort to try and 
oxygenate” itself. She stopped her efforts after police and EMS 
showed up and asked her to step aside. 
9    
 
      
 
   
  
    
 
 
   
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
   
     
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
d. Testimony of Arkadiy Plekhanov 
Arkadiy Plekhanov (“Plekhanov”) was near the scene when he 
heard an argument and decided to record it on Facebook Live. 
When he saw someone hit someone else, he stopped recording and 
walked away to call 911 to summon police. While he was still on 
the 911 call, he saw a body lying on the ground and asked for an 
ambulance as well. He then started recording again. 
Plekhanov’s recording did not capture the moment s Delacerda was 
stabbed. 
e. Testimony of Phillip Montoya 
Phillip Montoya (“Montoya”) was a visitor from California 
staying at the Marriott Waikiki. While he was relaxing on the 
lanai of his 23rd floor hotel room, his attention was drawn to a 
“scuffle on the beach .” With his cell phone, he started 
recording a group of about ten people gathered at Waikīkī Beach. 
When he saw police arrive and put up yellow caution tape, he 
realized something serious had happened and called the police to 
let them know he had recorded the incident. Montoya’s recording 
also did not capture the moment Delacerda was stabbed because 
Montoya had started looking around and his phone camera’s 
viewfinder drifted to the right of the scene. 
f. Testimony of Cheyne Kaninau 
HPD officer Cheyne Kaninau was dispatched to the fight 
scene. When he arrived, he saw a woman performing CPR on an 
10    
 
    
    
 
   
  
  
  
    
  
 
     
 
 
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unresponsive person lying on the ground. He told the woman to 
stop because he could see the person breathing. 
g. Testimony of Jon Kurosu 
Jon Kurosu (“Kurosu”) , an EMS paramedic , responded to the 
incident. Delacerda had no pulse and was not breathing when he 
arrived. Delacerda appeared to have stab wounds to the chest, 
armpit, and the back of his left shoulder. Kurosu testified 
that CPR should not be performed on someone who is still 
breathing and still has a pulse. 
h. Testimony of Star Sutherland 
Cardona’s friend, Star Sutherland (“Sutherland”) , read to 
the jury some text message exchange s between her and Cardona . 
Between 1:37 to 1:45 am on June 1, 2021, were the following 
messages : 
Cardona: Hey how are you? Hope you’re doing well  
 
Cardona: Can I call you? I need to talk to you about  
    something major.  
 Sutherland: Ya what  
 Sutherland: Call  
Cardona called Sutherland at 1:47 am, and the call lasted 
five minutes. Cardona told her he had been in a fight and he 
“did not sound okay.” Cardona told her he stabbed somebody, but 
Sutherland did not believe him, stating, “[I]t’s completely not 
something that I would expect from him.” 
11    
 
  The text messaging then resumed at 8:34 am with the 
following exchange, after Sutherland had seen posts about two 
Waikīīkī  stabbings on social media:  
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sutherland: How are you?  
 
Cardona:  Good  
 Sutherland: Ok good. Have you seen the news?  
 Cardona:  No  
Cardona:  Have you?  
 
Sutherland: Yes!  
 
Cardona:  What happened?  
 Sutherland: There was two stabbing s  in Waikiki last   
  night, one guy in critical & one dead  
Sutherland: They arrested a 29 year old guy  
 
Cardona:  Oh fuck  
Cardona:  I’m a dead man  
 Sutherland: The guy that was in a fight and got   
  stabbed is dead & they haven’t arrested anyone  
  yet  
Sutherland: The other guy that got stabbed was    
  following a couple and then stabbed the   
  boyfriend  
Cardona: Really 
Sutherland: That guy is in critical and they 
arrested a 29 -year old in that case 
Cardona: Can you show me the news 
Sutherland: So weird both happened like a block from 
each other 20 minutes apart 
Sutherland: Yes 
Sutherland: [sending three attachments from news 
outlets] 
Sutherland: Fuck 
Sutherland: [sending two more attachments from news 
outlets] 
At 10:49 am, Sutherland texted Cardona asking, “ Is that the 
fight you got in? You ok? ”   Sutherland told Cardona  to turn 
himself in.    
12    
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
During direct examination, the following exchange also took 
place: 
DPA: But you told the detective that he carried a gold 
 knife, correct?  
 
Sutherland: I said that he carried a knife, yeah,  like 
 most -- yes, yes I did.  
 
DPA: No, I meant -- what I was going to say was --  
Defense Counsel: Objection --  
Sutherland: -- most everybody that I know -- 
 Defense Counsel: -- leading.  
 
The Court: Sustained. Court’s going to strike that last 
 response.  
On cross-examination, Sutherland testified that Cardona sounded 
“scared,” “upset,” and “distraught” during their phone call and 
that she “couldn’t tell if he was crying.”   She worried that he 
was suffering from a concussion.    
i. Testimony of Cyrus Coen 
HPD Crime Reduction Unit Officer Cyrus Coen participate d in 
the murder investigation . He went to Ohia Waikiki Suites , where 
Cardona and Horn lived, and reviewed surveillance videos. 
Officer Coen recognized Cardona on those videos. When Cardona 
returned to the hotel at around 6:00 pm on June 1, 2021, Officer 
Coen arrested him. 
On cross -examination, the following exchange took place 
regarding how Officer Coen recognized Cardona: 
Defense counsel : I think you testified that you watched 
the video and you recognized Oscar Cardona. 
Officer Coen : Yes. 
13    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Defense counsel : And, in fact, you gave him a --a COVID 
ticket on September 1st, 2020? 
Officer Coen : No, I believe it was March 4, 2021. 
Defense counsel : Excuse me. I have one here. It says 
date of issuance, September 1st, 2020. Might have 
been two times. But would you like to take a look at 
this? 
Officer Coen : Sure. 
Defense counsel: Well, in any event, you recall giving him 
 a COVID ticket, correct?  
Officer Coen : Yes. 
Defense counsel: And a COVID ticket, basically he wasn’t
 wearing a mask, right?   
Officer Coen : Yes. 
j. Testimony of Charles Rezentes 
HPD detective Charles Rezentes (“Rezentes”) also reviewed 
the Ohia Waikiki Suites surveillance videos, which showed Horn 
and Cardona coming and going from the evening of May 31, 2021 
through the morning of June 1, 2021. Rezentes did not te stify 
that he recognized Cardona from prior contacts . 
k. Testimony of Veronica De Mello 
HPD evidence specialist Veronica De Mello went to Cardona’s 
residence to help execute a search warrant. She collected 
evidence that included a towel, bed cover, and shorts, all with 
blood-like substance s on them, as well as a knife and a 
necklace . 
14    
 
      
   
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
l. Testimony of Shannon Klum 
HPD criminalist Shannon K lum testified as an expert in 
serology and forensic DN A testing. Cardona’s DNA was found in 
blood samples taken from the sidewalk at the scene and on a gold 
chain. Delacerda’s DNA was found in blood samples taken from 
the sidewalk at the scene and on the knife. A mixture of two 
sets of DNA was found on the knife ; Castaneda -Pena and Horn were 
ruled out as sources. One blood stain on Cardona’s shirt 
contained DNA matching Cardona’s profile, and another blood 
stain on the shirt contained a mixture of DNA, for which Cardona 
and Delacerda could not be ruled out as possible sources. Blood 
on Cardona’s shorts matc hed the DNA profiles for Delacerda and 
Cardona. She also could not exclude Cardona as a possible 
contributor to the DNA found on a blood sample taken from the 
surface of Delacerda’s left hand . 
m. Testimony of Masahiko Kobayashi 
Dr. Masahiko Kobayashi, the chief medical examiner for the 
City and County of Honolulu, who performed Delacerda’s autopsy , 
testified as an expert in forensic pathology. There were five 
sharp-force injuries on Delacerda: a shallow and small wound to 
the head; an inch -long wound to the chest that was between one 
and two inches deep that had “hit the heart”; an inch -long and 
inch-deep cut to the left side of the body that penetrated only 
muscle tissue; a “tiny” one -fourth inch wound to the back of the 
15    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
    
   
  
    
   
   
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
right upper arm; and a one-inch entry cut on the shoulder, where 
a weapon had exited through a small hole  on the other side.   
Delacerda’s cause of death was “stab wound of the chest,” specifically from the wound that had penetrated his heart.  
Also, Delacerda’s blood alcohol content was 0.245 grams per 
deciliter. 
n. Testimony of Hideko Yoshihara 
HPD evidence specialist Hideko Yoshihara was present at the 
morgue when Dr. Kobayashi performed the autopsy. She 
photographed the injuries on Delacerda’s chest, left side, back 
of the right arm, and left shoulder, as well as possible 
injuries to his forehead and left ear. She also processed 
Cardona on June 3, 2021 and photographed a possible injury to 
the top side of his left hand. 
o. Testimony of Kathy Gunderson 
Kathy Gunderson was the general manager of the Ohia Waikiki 
Suites, where Cardona resided (with Horn and two other men) from 
March to June 2021. During the three months Cardona lived at 
the hotel, he paid his bills, did not cause any problems, and 
was a good guest. 
p. Testimony of Oscar K. Cardona, Jr. 
The defense’s only witness was Cardona. He was 21 years 
old on the night of June 1, 2021. He grew up in Waikīkī and had 
lived there his entire life. He is the only child of a mother 
16    
 
    
    
  
  
   
   
  
   
 
  
  
   
 
    
 
 
   
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
originally from Nagano, Japan . As a single mother, she worked 
every day, sometimes both day and night shifts, as a jewelry 
salesperson in Waikīkī. He had never met or communicated with 
his father, who lives in Mexico. He spent much of his younger 
years with caregivers in Kaimuk ī while his mother worked, 
because she considered Waikīkī too dangerous. Cardona liked to 
spend time at home playing Pokemon Go and later played clarinet 
in the Saint Louis School band. 
Cardona’s eyesight had been poor since he was four years 
old. He began seeing an eye specialist at that time , who 
prescribe d new glasses every six months because his vision 
deteriorated at a rapid pace. When he takes off his glasses, 
“everything is blurry, and the only thing I can see is figures.” 
Without his glasses, he can clearly see objects only when they 
are a few inches away from his face. It would not be safe for 
him to ride a bike , walk around outside , or do any kind of ocean 
activity , like swimming , without his glasses. His vision is 
even worse at night. 
As to the incident , Cardona had been riding his bike around 
Waikīkī when Horn called asking for help. When Cardona arrived 
at Horn’s location, he saw two guys and a bunch of girls arguing 
with each other. He parked his bike and took out a knife “just 
in case” something were to happen. He had never been in a fight 
before. Delacerda was “angry and aggressive,” “swearing, saying 
17    
 
    
  
     
 
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
    
  
   
    
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the N word, the B word, the C word, the H word,” and had an 
overall “scary” demeanor. Horn and Cardona asked Delacerda and 
Castaneda -Pena to leave. While Cardona was trying to “defuse” 
the situation, the girls were arguing back. 
Cardona saw Castaneda -Pena pick something up from the 
ground but Cardona could not tell what it was. At that point, 
Cardona was worried that the object was a weapon, so he had his 
knife in his hand . He saw Ca staneda-Pena stumble, and the girls 
were laughing at him. Delacerda then got upset and jumped off a 
low wall and slapped Horn. 
Castaneda -Pena then punched Cardona in the face. Cardona 
had never before been punched in the face. His glasses broke 
and fell to the ground. He could not see and could not run 
away. Everything was “blurry and dark” and he felt scared and 
vulnerable. 
Someone started attacking him so he “tried to fight back, 
but it was very hard . . . to see what was going on.” No one 
came to help him. At some point, his attacker stopped without 
saying anything. Cardona then stood in place trying to find his 
glasses. Horn found Cardona’s glasses for him. Cardona did not 
know if he himself had been injured. Cardona also testified he 
had held his knife out and that it was possible Delacerda had 
run up against it and stabbed himself. 
18    
 
   
    
  
   
 
 On cross-examination, the DPA  and Cardona entered into the 
following exchange concerning the moment Cardona used his knife:  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
When Cardona returned to his hotel room, he was in pain, 
bleeding, and scared. He reached out to Sutherland. When he 
found out later what had happened, he was in shock and could not 
process the night’s events. He did not throw the gold knife 
away and instead placed it in his room safe and went to work. 
He did not intend to kill Delacerda; he was only trying to 
protect himself. 
DPA: So when you stabbed him, how were you stabbing him? 
 You got a pen over there? I don’t want to give you 
 the knife.  
Cardona: No.  
DPA: You want a pen? I guess I’ll give you my pen. Use 
 that as the knife. Show us how -- how were yo u 
 stabbing Elian Delacerda?  
Cardona: I wasn’t stabbing him. I was just protecting 
myself. 
DPA: Wait, wait, wait, wait. Did you go like that? 
(demonstrates.) 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: So you were holding it. 
Cardona: Yeah, I was just holding it. 
DPA: So you never stabbed at him? 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: So when you told Elijah Horn you stabbed him three 
 times in the stomach, that wasn’t true?  
Cardona: I didn’t tell him that. 
DPA: He made that up? 
Cardona: I said I thought I probably did. 
19    
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
DPA: Okay. Well, are you saying he walked into the knife? 
You was just holding it like that (demonstrates), and 
he walked into the knife? 
Cardona: Well, I didn’t say that either. 
DPA: Okay. So you were defending yourself, so you had to 
at least give him one? (Demonstrates) 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: No? 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: You never gave him any strikes? 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: You don’t know how he got all those injuries? 
Cardona: Well, he was attacking me, so probably when he 
was attacking me. 
DPA: So he was attacking you, so you were stabbing him? 
Cardona: No, I didn’t stab him. 
DPA: So you never stabbed him with this knife? 
Cardona: No. 
DPA: Okay. So you don’t know how his blood, his DNA, got 
on the blade of this knife? 
Cardona: Well, he came attacking me, so maybe he did it to 
himself. 
DPA: Oh, so he stabbed himself? 
Cardona: He probably ran into it. 
DPA: He ran into it? 
Cardona: Yeah. 
DPA:   Okay. So tell us how you were holding the knife. 
 Show us.  
Cardona: I was just holding it out. 
DPA: We want to see you. 
Cardona: I was just holding it out. 
DPA: Stand up, please. Stand up. Stand up. 
20    
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Cardona: Okay. 
DPA: Show us how you were holding the knife. 
Cardona: Like this. (Demonstrates.) 
DPA:   Okay. So you was holding the knife like this. 
 (Demonstrates.) And then what? You weren’t moving 
 your arms?  
Cardona:   Well, he -- when he came at me, of course my arms 
 would move.  
DPA: Okay. So show us what you did. 
Cardona:   I don’t know what I did. He was coming at me. 
 It’s just a reaction, that he’s coming at me.  
DPA: So you had to stab him; right? 
Cardona: No. 
DPA:   How did it get -- how did he get that stab wound in 
 his heart?  
Cardona: I . . . . 
DPA: How? 
Defense counsel: Asked and answered. He says he doesn’t 
know.  
The Court : Sustained. Court’s going to sustain the 
objection. 
4. Voluntary act j ury instruction 
 During the settling of jury instructions, the State asked 
the court to give Hawaiʻi Standard Jury Instructions Criminal 
(HAWJIC)  instruction 7.16 on “Voluntary Act or Voluntary 
Omission.”   That instruction read as follows:  
In any prosecution[] it is a defense that the conduct 
alleged in the charged offense does not inc lude a voluntary 
act [or the voluntary omission to perform an act of which 
the Defendant is physically capable]. A “voluntary act” 
means a bodily movement performed consciously or habitually 
as the result of effort or determination of the Defendant. 
The burden is upon the prosecution to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the Defendant’s conduct as to the 
(specify offense) charge included a voluntary act [or the 
voluntary omission to perform an act of which the Defendant 
21    
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is physically capable]. If the prosecution fails to meet 
its burden, then you must find the Defendant not guilty of 
the charge. 
HAWJIC 7.16 (eff. March 1, 2021). 
 The DPA noted that there was “a scintilla of evidence” to 
support requiring the instruction because Cardona had testified  
he just held the knife out and that it was possible that 
Delacerda ran into it and stabbed himself.   Defense counsel 
objected on the grounds he did not think there was a basis in the evidence to give the instruction based on his recall  of 
Cardona’s  testimony.   The circuit court indicated the existence 
of  a scintilla of evidence, requiring the court to give  the 
instruction, citing State v. Adviento.   See  132 
Hawaiʻi 123, 137-
38, 319 P.3d 1131, 1145-46  (2014)  (noting our cases holding that 
it is a judge’s obligation to properly instruct the jury and 
requiring an extreme mental or emotional disturbance (“ EMED”)  
instruction when the record reflects any  evidence that the 
defendant acted under a loss of self-control resulting from 
EMED).   It gave HAWJIC  instruction 7.16 over defense  objection.  
5. Closing arguments 
The DPA’s closing argument included the following : 
“The prosecution is required to prove causation. 
Causation has a special meaning under the law. To prove 
causation, the State must prove two components beyond a 
reasonable doubt. ” 
“In the first component, the State must prove that 
the defendant’s conduct is an antecedent but for which the 
result in question would not have occurred. ” What does 
that all mean? Oh, my goodn ess. Then it says, “In other 
words, without defendant’s actions, the result would n ot 
22    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have happened.” If he didn’t pull out that knife, if he 
didn’t stab Elian Delacerda, the result would n ot have 
happened. 
During his rebuttal closing argument, t he DPA’s stated: 
 People lie.   The evidence doesn’t lie. You have 
these photographs [of the cones where DNA swabs were taken 
at the scene of the incident].  
(Emphasis added.) 
 [Cardona] wasn’t scared. That’s why we put those 
videos in there [o f  Cardona riding his electric bicycle 
around Waikiki before and after the incident], because when 
everybody comes to court, they’re on their best behavior. 
But you look at those videos. He’s riding around Waikiki. He’s on his bike. (Gestures.) For 14 m inutes. Some big 
guys walk past him. He ain’t no -- he ain’t no puppy with 
his tail between his le gs. He knows those streets in and 
out of Waikiki.  
 These girls that Horn said needed to be protected ?   I 
wouldn’t want to run into them. They looked like the 
Waikiki wrecking crew. They beat up on those guys, because 
they were drunk. They’re too drunk to defend themselves, 
falling, stumbling.  
 . . . . 
Defendant said, well, when I don’t wear my glasses, 
I’m blurry. He didn’t say he was color blind. Guy was 
wearing a red hat, blac k  shirt, red shorts. You take off 
your glasses, you get up close to somebody, maybe you might 
see, but you see a figure.  
 . . . . 
[T]hat’s how [Cardona] was on those streets. He 
looked like he owned those streets, riding his bike all over, sometimes with the light on, sometimes with the light 
off, going up the one way, going against -- going against 
traffic, riding on the sidewalk, whatever, doing whatever 
he wants. He’s scared? He looks like the enforcer.  
 . . . . 
The defendant would have you believe that an unarmed 
man ran into his knife. That’s not self -defense. He’s 
saying self -defense. What he said on the stand, that ain’t 
self-defense. He said, I was holding the knife. I don’t 
know what happened. He’s attacking me. I don’t know. 
Come on. He’s holding the knife like that? 
(Demonstrates.) Come on. Be truthful. He knows exactly 
what  happened. He’s playing that thing over and over in 
his mind.  
23    
 
  
 . . . . 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[R]emember, there’s no credible evidence th at he 
can’t see. There’s no credible, independent evidence that 
he had an eye problem.  
At one point during closing arguments, the DPA’s glasses 
started fogging up, and he made a comment about it to the jury 
(“Sorry. My glasses are fogging up here. I got to see.”)  
6. Verdict, conviction, sentencing, and notice of appeal 
 The jury found Cardona guilty as charged of the offense of
murder in the second degree.   The circuit court entered its 
judgment of conviction and sentence on December 13, 2022, sentencing  Cardona to life imprisonment with the possibility of
parole.   On January 30, 2023, Cardona filed a  notice of appeal. 
 
 
B. ICA Proceedings 
Cardona raised the following points of error: 
A. The DPA committed misconduct throughout the proceedings 
that violated Cardona’s constitutional right to a fair 
trial by offering his personal opinions about witness 
credibility, including an attack on Cardona’s credibility 
solely based on party status.  
B. The DPA committed misconduct throughout the proceedings 
that violated Cardona’s constitutional right to a fair 
trial by testifying as a witness in his own case, and by asking excessive l eading questions.   . . . . 
. . . . 
C. The Circuit Court plainly erred when it did not provide 
a State v. Gabriel  limiting instruction in response to 
Rezentes’s, and Coen’s, Police Identification of Cardona 
from video evidence.  
D. The Circuit Court plainly erred when it provided the 
“Voluntary Act” instruction.  . . . . 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court in a February 6, 2024 
SDO.   State v. Cardona, No. CAAP-23-0000013, 2024 WL 450038 
24    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Haw. App. Feb. 6, 2024) (SDO). The ICA characterized as 
“either benign statements, or reasonable inferences that could 
be drawn from the record facts” (1) the DPA’s statement about 
Cardona’s poor eyesight, (2) the “Waikiki wrecking crew” 
comment, (3) the DPA ’s use of a pen rather than a knife during 
Cardona’s testimony, and (4) his “general statement” that “People lie,” which was “not specifically directed at Cardona.”   
Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *2. The ICA footnoted that the 
DPA’s statement about his glasses fogging up were due to th e 
fact that the DPA  “was wearing a face mask, consistent with the 
court’s COVID protocol. . . .”  Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *1 
n.3.   
The ICA then concluded that “the DPA’s repeated use of 
leading questions throughout trial was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,” because defense counsel objected, the circuit 
court sustained the objection and struck witness testimony where 
warranted, and  the circuit court directed the DPA  to ask open-
ended questions.   Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *2. Nevertheless, 
the ICA footnoted its concern that “the DPA’s repeated asking of leading questions, in spite of the circuit court’s directions to 
the contrary,  does not promote a positive image of the legal 
profession, does not assist the court and/or the jury in 
reviewing the case, and does not display appropriate respect for 
25    
 
   
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the criminal justice system.” Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *2 
n.4. 
As to whether the circuit court plainly erred in failing to 
give the jury a Gabriel  instruction, the ICA stated, “On this 
record, we conclude that the lack of a limiting instruction, 
regarding the testifying officers’ identification of Cardona 
from video evidence, was not prejudicially insufficient, 
erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.”   Cardona, 2024 WL 
450038, at *2. The ICA also concluded the “voluntary act” 
instruction  was properly given  because it “informed the jury of 
a potential defense available to Cardona.”   Id.    
The ICA issued its judgment on appeal on March 7, 2024. 
C. Certiorari proceedings 
On certiorari Cardona presents the following questions: 
A. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) gravely 
err in its Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”) by relying 
upon facts not in evidence to rationalize and otherwise 
justify the DPA’s improper conduct, and did the ICA gravely 
err in its SDO by analyzin g the DPA’s misconduct out of 
context?  
B. Did the ICA gravely err in it s SDO by concluding that 
the DPA did not commit prosecutorial misconduct by offering 
his personal opinions on witness cre dibility, and di d the 
ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that the DPA did 
not commit prosecutorial misconduct by attacking 
Petitioner’s credibility based on his defend ant party 
status? 
C. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that 
although the DPA’s contumac ious and repeated use of leading 
questions was “improper,” the same was “harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt” and by al so concluding th at “the DPA’s 
remarks were either ‘benign statements,’ or ‘reasonable 
inferences’ that could b e drawn from the record facts?” 
26    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concluding that 
the trial court did not commit reversible error by failing 
to provide a State v. Gabriel limiting instruction? 
E. Did the ICA gravely err in its SDO by concludin g the 
trial court did not commit reversible error by sua sponte 
providing the “Vo luntary Act” jury instruction? 
In addition to his arguments below, Cardona argues that the 
ICA relied upon facts not in evidence to conclude that the DPA’s 
comments about eyesight were harmless; specifically, Cardona 
points to the ICA’s notation that the DPA  was wearing a face 
mask due to court COVID protocols.  
III. Standard of Review : Prosecutorial Misconduct 
Because prosecutorial misconduct impacts the fundamental 
right to a fair trial, there is no difference between the 
plain error and harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standards of review. 
In prosecutorial misconduct cases, then, once the defense 
establishes misconduct --objection or no objection --
appellate review is the same: “After considering the nature 
of the prosecuting attorney’s conduct, promptness or lack 
of a curative instruction, and strength or weakness of the 
evidence against the defendant, a reviewing court will 
vacate a conviction if there is a reasonable possibili ty 
that the conduct might have affected the trial’s outcome. 
State v. Hirata, 152  Hawaiʻi 27,  31, 520  P.3d 225, 229  (2022) 
(citation omitted).  
IV. Discussion 
A. The ICA did not rely on facts outside of the evidence in 
its SDO but did err by analyzing some of the DPA’s 
misconduct out of context 
27  In his first question on certiorari, Cardona  initially 
argues that the ICA relied upon facts not in evidence to 
conclude the DPA’s comments about eyesight were harmless. The 
DPA had stated during closing arguments, “ Sorry. My glasses are    
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
fogging up here. I got to see.”   Specifically, Cardona points 
to the ICA’s footnote stating that the DPA was wearing a face 
mask due to court COVID protocols, which he asserts  was a fact 
not in evidence.   See  Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *1 n.3.      
The DPA’s statements about his glasses fogging up were 
indeed due to mask use during trial. During jury selection, the circuit court told the jury, “Everyone’s required to wear a face 
mask in the courthouse.”   It was not error for the ICA to take 
judicial notice of court mask protocols in place at that time.  
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence Rule 201, Judicial notice of 
adjudicative facts.  Also, although Cardona links the “I got to 
see” comment to the DPA’s other comments about Cardona’s 
eyesight, the first comment was not related or close in time to 
the DPA’s other comments about Cardona’s eyesight.     
Cardona also asserts that the ICA erred by analyzing some 
of the DPA’s misconduct out of context . With respect to the 
“Waikiki wrecking crew” comment , the ICA did not err by ruling 
it was made “in reference to other individuals that Cardona was 
with during the night of the incident.” Cardona, 2024 WL 
450038, at *1. Read in context, it is clear the DPA was 
referring to the women Horn met, one of whom had hit Castaneda -
Pena with a skateboard , and not to Cardona : 
These girls that Horn said needed to be protected? I 
wouldn’t want to run into them. They looked like the 
Waikiki wrecking crew. They beat up on those guys, because 
28    
 
  
 
   
 
  
    
 
  
  
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
they were drunk. They’re too drunk to defend themselves, 
falling, stumbling.  
Further, the ICA did not err with respect to the DPA’s 
comment that he did not want to give Cardona a knife to 
demonstrate what happened. See Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *1. 
Realistically, a knife would not be used in a courtroom 
reenactment. The DPA should have chosen his words more 
carefully as a written transcript cannot reveal a statement ’s 
tone. We have no doubt that the circuit court would have 
stepped in if the DPA was suggesting something sinister or 
prejudicial , rather than attempting to lighten the mood . 
 As discussed in Section IV.B  below, however, the ICA did 
err in its analysis of  the DPA’s stat ements  in closing argument  
(1) that “People lie” and to “Be truthful”; (2) characterizing  
Cardona as an “enforcer”;  and (3) in inserting his  personal 
opinion and new evidence concerning Cardona’s eyesight .   See 
Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at **1-2.   
B.    The DPA  committed  prosecutorial misconduct  
In his second question on certiorari, Cardona asserts the 
ICA erred in not finding prosecutorial misconduct. 
1. Definition of prosecutorial misconduct 
29  “Prosecutorial  misconduct”  is a legal term  of  art  referring  
to any  improper action committed by a prosecutor, however 
harmless or unintentional.   State  v.  Borge, 152 Hawaiʻi  458, 464, 
526 P.3d 435, 441 (2023)  (cleaned up).  It does not matter that    
 
  
 
 
      
  
 
 
 . . . . 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defense counsel objected to some but not all of the comments. 
“In prosecutorial misconduct cases, . . . once the defense 
establishes misconduct -- objection or no objection --  appellate 
review is the same: After considering the nature of the prosecuting attorney’s conduct, promptness or lack of a curative 
instruction, and strength or weakness of the evidence against 
defendant, a reviewing court will vacate a conviction if there 
is a reasonable possibility that the conduct might have affected 
the trial’s outcome.” Hirata, 153 
Hawaiʻi  at 31, 520 P.3d at 229 
(citation omitted). Prosecutorial  misconduct  warrants a new 
trial or the setting aside of a guilty verdict where the actions 
of the prosecutor have caused  prejudice to the defendant ’s right 
to a fair  trial.   State  v.  Austin, 143 Hawaiʻ i  18, 39, 422 P.3d 
18, 39 (2018).  
2. Some of the DPA’s statements constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct 
a. “People lie” and “Com e on. Be truthful” 
 It was prosecutorial misconduct for the DPA, in closing 
argument, to characterize Cardona as a liar with his “People lie” and “Come on. Be truthful” comments :  
People lie. The evidence doesn’t lie. You have these 
photographs [of the cones where DNA swabs were taken at the 
scene of the incident]. 
The defendant would have you believe that an unarmed man 
ran into his knife. That’s not self -defense. He’s saying 
self-defense. What he said on the stand, that ain’t self -
defense. He said, I was holding the knife. I don’t know 
30    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
what happened. He’s attacking me. I don’t know. Come on. 
He’s holding the knife like that? (Demonstrates.) Come 
on. Be truthful. He knows exactly what happened. He’s 
playing that thing over and over in his mind. 
 . . . . 
[R]emember, there’s no credible evidence that he can’t see. 
There’s no credible, independent evidence that he had an 
eye problem. 
 The ICA  ruled t hat the “people lie” statement was not 
specifically directed at Cardona.  In the context of the DPA’s 
closing argument, however, including the later statements quoted 
above, “Come on.  Be truthful,” it is clear the only material 
testimony the DPA sought to discredit was that of Cardona.  In 
Austin, we held that a prosecutor’s assertion that a defendant 
or witness lied to  the jury is improper and should not be 
permitted. 143 Hawai ʻi at  56, 422 P.3d at  56.    We also 5
31 5   Austin  points out that courts across the country have recognized that 
the word “lie” and its derivatives may inject unfair prejudice when utilized 
by the prosecution.  143 Hawaiʻ i at 50- 51, 422 P.3d at 50 -51. It also 
provides a  detailed explanation of the myriad reasons why it is improper for 
a prosecutor to use the word “lie” or its derivatives in reference to any 
witness, and much more so regarding a defendant, including (1) it carrying 
severe negative associations beyond a simple expression of factual inaccuracy 
and denoting an intentional, wrongful act to actively deceive a listener; (2) 
its strongly pejorative tone conveying subjective disapproval that the 
witness would taint the judicial process with dishonesty; (3) amounting to an 
assertion of the prosecutor’s personal opinion as to the dishones t  character 
of the testifier; (4 ) an invasion of the province of the jury, usurping its 
power to make credibility determ inations; (5) the special weight given by 
juries to a prosecutor’s arguments because of the fact -finding facilities 
presumably available to the office; (6) the prosecutor’s opinion carrying 
with it the imprimatur of the government, especially with the high respect for integrity, fairness, and impartiality accorded t o  the office; (7)  the 
inflammatory nature of the accusation with the reprehensible nature of lying deeply ingrained in most people from childhood; (8)  the emotional  reaction 
likely to be experienced by a juror when authoritatively told the juror has been lied to; (9 ) the actual immateriality of the term, as the ultimate 
concern of jurors is not whether a witness knows testimony to be false; (10) 
the possibility that the lie will be viewed as a separate wrongful act, which 
has the dangerous potential of swaying the jury from its duty to determine 
guilt regarding the charged offense; (11) ultimately creating the    
 
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
explained that such statements are functionally equivalent to 
the prosecutor expressing a personal opinion as to the veracity 
of a witness. 143 Hawaiʻi at 51, 422 P.3d at 51. 
With respect to the “People lie” comment, Cardona did not 
dispute that the results of the DNA swabbing connected him to 
Delacerda’s stabbing. Thus, this statement was not only 
improper under Austin because it characterized Cardona as a 
liar, it was therefore also misleading. In addition, through 
this and the “Come on. Be truthful” comment, the DPA also 
improperly implied his personal opinion of Cardona’s 
credibility. In a case with no other direct eyewitness 
testimony regarding the moment the stabbing occurred, Cardona’s 
testimony was critical to his defense . 
Thus, these statements by the DPA constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct . 
b. The “enforcer” 
 In addition, the DPA’s characterization of Cardona as an 
“enforcer” who was “not scared” was improper:    
[T]hat’s how [Cardona] was on those streets. He looked 
like he owned those streets, riding his bike all over, 
sometimes with the light on, sometimes with the light off, 
going up the one way, going against -- going against 
traffic, riding on the sidewalk, whatever, doing whatever 
he wants. He’s scared? He looks like the enforcer.  
potentiality of extreme prejudice.   143 Hawaiʻi at 50-56, 422 P.3d at 50 -56. 
And since the time of Cardona’s trial, we have admonished prosecutors to 
“scrub lie  and its derivatives from their closing argument vocabulary.” 
Hirata, 152 Hawaiʻ i at 31 n.5, 520 P.3d at 229 n.5.  
32    
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Cardona never testified that he was scared riding his 
electric bicycle on the streets of Waikīkī, where he had grown 
up. Rather, Cardona testified that he was scared after 
Castaneda -Pena punched him, Cardona’s glasses fell off , and he 
could not see . Thus, the prosecutor improperly implied that 
Cardona’s manner of riding his electric bicycle through the 
streets of Waikīkī meant that Cardona was not scared during the 
altercation. See, e.g., Basham, 132 Hawaiʻi at 112, 319 P.3d at 
1120 (“Whether the evidence bears a logical and proximate 
connection to the point the prosecutor wishes to prove is 
perhaps the most obvious consideration in determining whether an 
inference is reasonable. ”) (citation omitted). 
Further, t he prosecutor’s comment that Cardona “looks like 
the enforcer” was improper because there was no evidence or 
testimony from which the DPA could reasonably infer that Cardona 
somehow ran the streets of Waikīkī  or was otherwise acting as an 
“enforcer .” See, e.g., Basham, 132 Hawaiʻi at 112, 319 P.3d at 
1120 (“It is also relevant [in determining whether an inference 
is reasonably inferred from the evidence] whether the prosecutor 
made the argument simply to enflame the passions of the jury.”) 
(citation omitted). 
c. Statements re Cardona’s eyesight testimony 
33  The DPA’s statements about Cardona’s eyesight testimony 
also improperly characterized him as a liar.     
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
 6 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[R]emember, there’s no credible evidence that he can’t see. 
There’s no credible, independent evidence that he had an 
eye problem.  
A defendant can testify as to his visual perception.   See, e.g., 
State v. Vliet, 91 Hawaiʻi 288, 192, 983 P.2d 189, 291 (1999) 
(summarizing OVUII defendant’s testimony that gabapentin gives 
him double vision and muscle spasms in his eyes). Cardona 
testified extensively about his apparent poor eyesight, 
discovered when he was four years old, and which deteriorates so 
rapidly that he needs a new glasses prescription every six 
months.  
This court has warned prosecutors to “refrain from 
expressing their personal views as to a defendant’s guilt or 
credibility of witnesses.” See State v. Marsh , 68 Haw. 659, 
660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986). The DPA’s statement implied 
his personal views regarding Cardona’s credibility.6 
The DPA also improperly inserted new evidence when he stated: 
Defendant said, well, when I don’t wear my glasses, I’m 
blurry. He didn’t say he was color blind. Guy was wearing 
a red hat, black shirt, red shorts. You take off your 
glasses, you get up close to somebody, maybe you might see, 
but you see a figure. 
We have instructed that closing arguments are “not the place to introduce new 
evidence outside the safeguards of the Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence.” Basham, 
132 Hawaiʻi at  113, 319 P.3d at  1121. There had been no evidence at trial 
introduced about whether Cardona was colorblind. The DPA suggested that 
Cardona should have been able to see that his attacker had on a red hat, 
black shirt, and red shorts, but had not asked whether Cardona could see 
colors.  
34    
 
    
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
All of these statements by the DPA in closing argument were 
not benign or reasonable inferences; rather, they constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct. 
3. The prosecutorial conduct violated Cardona’s right to 
a fair trial 
As misconduct has been established, we next address the 
promptness or lack of a curative instruction and the strength 
or weakness of the evidence against Cardona to determine 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the conduct 
might have affected the trial’s outcome.   Hirata, 152  Hawaiʻi at 
31, 520  P.3d at 229  (citation omitted).   If so, the misconduct 
is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,  and vacatur of the 
conviction is required.  
35  With respect to “ the promptness or lack of a curative 
instruction,” Rogan, 91 Hawaiʻi at  413, 984 P.2d at  1239, defense 
counsel did not object to the  statements during the DPA’s 
closing argument.   Therefore, there were no curative 
instructions. Even if specific curative instructions had been 
given, however, as this court recently pointed out in Hirata, 
“curative instructions are not particularly effective .”   152 
Hawaiʻi at 34, 520 P.3d at 232.  This factor weighs in favor of 
concluding that prosecutorial misconduct prejudiced Cardona’s right to a fair trial.      
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The last factor to consider in prosecutorial misconduct 
claims is “the strength or weakness of the evidence against the 
defendant.” Rogan, 91 Hawaiʻi at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239. In this 
case, the “strength or weakness of the evidence against the 
defendant” hinged entirely upon Cardona’s testimony, as he was 
the only one who testified about what happened between h im and 
Delacerda . Thus, the defendant’s credibility here was 
particularly important. See, e.g., State v. Williams , 149 
Hawaiʻi 381, 393, 491 P.3d 592, 604 (2021) (“This court has 
expressed concerns about prosecutorial misconduct in cases where 
the defendant’s credibility is particularly important. In 
Underwood , this court stated that ‘[t]he potential for prejudice 
is particularly evident where . . . the improper comments 
specifically concerned the credibility of the testimony on which 
the case turned.”) (citing State v. Underwoo d, 142 Hawaiʻi 317, 
329, 418 P.3d 658, 670 (2018)). 
Hence, we conclude that prosecutorial misconduct prejudiced 
Cardona’s right to a fair trial in violation of the due process 
clause of Article I, Section 5 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution . The 
prosecutorial misconduct in this case was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt because there is a reasonable possibility that 
it affected the outcome of Cardona’s trial. 
36    
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. In light of these instances of prosecutorial misconduct, 
the DPA’s excessive leading questions contributed to the 
unfairness of Cardona’s trial 
In his third question on certiorari, Cardona also asserts 
the ICA erred by ruling that the DPA’s contumacious and repeated 
use of leading questions was “improper” yet “harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt .” We agree with the ICA in its footnote 
regarding the disrespectful nature of the DPA’s conduct during 
trial: “[T]he DPA’s repeated asking of leading questions, in 
spite of the circuit court’s directions to the contrary, does 
not promote a positive image of the legal profession, does not 
assist the court and/or the jury in reviewing the case, and does 
not display appropriate respect for the criminal justice 
system.” Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *2 n.4. 
 This court has previously held that, even where “no single 
instance of prosecutorial misconduct substantially prejudiced 
[defendants’] right to a fair trial,” the “cumulative weight of 
the prosecutor’s improper conduct” can be “so prejudicial as to deny [defendants] a fair  trial.” State v. Soares, 72 Haw. 278, 
815 P.2d 428 (1991).  
37  Other courts have  held that leading questions, in addition 
to other prosecutorial misconduct, can cumulatively prejudice a defendant’s right to a fair trial.   See, e.g., Com. v. Culver, 
51 A.3d 866, 881-82  (Pa. Super. 2012) (holding that it was 
prosecutorial misconduct for a prosecutor to ask excessive    
 
      
       
   
   
 
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
leading questions despite sustained objections because the 
prosecutor refused to obey the repeated instructions of the 
trial court; further, while this conduct alone would not have 
prejudiced the defendant, the prosecutor’s other conduct during 
closing arguments, coupled with this conduct, was prejudicial);  
Dillon v. State, 844 S.W.2d 944 (Ark. 1993) (cumulatively, leading questions insinuating that the defendant, a police 
officer, planted evidence on women in exchange for sex and 
forced sex upon multiple others, denied the defendant a fair 
trial).   
Here, the clear instances of prosecutorial misconduct 
discussed above, coupled with the pervasive leading questions, 
cumulatively contributed to the denial of Cardona’s right to a 
fair trial. 
D. A Gabriel instruction was not required 
In his fourth question on certiorari, Cardona argues the 
circuit court’s failure to give a Gabriel instruction after 
Officers Rezentes’ and Coen’s identifications “allowed the jury 
to think Cardona was a bad person because HPD knows him, and his 
Waikiki routine.” At the August 17, 2022 pretrial hearing, 
however, defense counsel himself stated , “I don’t know if [the 
Gabriel instruction is] even necessary.” 
In any event, a Gabriel instruction was not necessary. 
First, Rezentes did not even testify that he recognized Cardona 
38    
 
    
 
  
 
  
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from a prior contact.   Second, after Coen identified Cardona on 
direct examination, defense counsel elicited, on cross-
examination, the relatively benign circumstances of Coen’s prior 
contacts with Cardona: citations for COVID mask violations.   In 
sum, before  trial, defense counsel did not want a Gabriel  
instruction so as not to call attention to officers’ prior 
contacts with Cardona. But  on cross-examination, he elicited 
the benign nature of the prior contacts himself. In these circumstances, a  Gabriel  instruction was not required, contrary 
to what Cardona now asserts.  
E. The circuit court properly gave the “voluntary act” 
instruction 
In his fifth and last question on certiorari, Cardona 
claims that the circuit court’s “voluntary act” instruction 
confused the jury into thinking that “but for” Cardona’s 
possession of the knife in question, Delacerda would n ot have 
perished. We disagree. 
In this case, the ICA correctly concluded the instruction 
was proper because it “informed the jury of a potential defense 
available to Cardona.”   Cardona, 2024 WL 450038, at *2. In a 
prosecution for murder, which is statutorily defined in HRS § 
707-701.5 as “intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] the death of 
another person,” “[a]ny voluntary act (e.g., physical abuse) or 
omission may satisfy the conduct element of the offense. The  
39    
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
death of another person, as the intentional or knowing result of 
the conduct, constitutes the result element of the offense.” 
State v. Aganon, 97 Hawaiʻi 299, 302, 36 P.3d 1269, 1273 (2001).  
A person cannot be convicted of murder in the second degree if 
his conduct was not a voluntary act. See  HRS § 702-200(1) (“In 
any prosecution it is a defense that the conduct alleged does not include a voluntary act . . . .”); HRS § 702 -201 (“‘A 
voluntary act’ means a bodily movement performed consciously or habitually as the result of the effort or determination of the 
defendant.”).  
There was a scintilla of evidence to require giving the  
instruction, because Cardona testified he had held his knife out and that it was possible Delacerda had run up against it and 
stabbed himself.   The circuit court did not err in giving the 
“voluntary act” jury instruction, even over the defense’s 
objection. See  Adviento, 132 
Hawaiʻi at  137, 150, 319 P.3d at  
1145, 1158 (“[T]he trial court has a duty to instruct the jury 
on the defense of EMED if the record reflects ‘any evidence’ 
supporting the defense, notwithstanding the defendant’s trial 
strategy or theory of the case,”  because “in our judicial 
system, the trial courts, not the parties, have the duty and 
ultimate responsibility to insure that juries are properly 
instructed on issues of criminal liability.” ).  
40    
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
V. Conclusion 
 Based on prosecutorial misconduct that violated 
Cardona’s right to a fair trial, as explained above, we vacate 
the ICA’s March 7, 2024 judgment on appeal, as well as the 
circuit court’s December 13, 2022 judgment of conviction and 
sentence.  We remand this case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
Andrew Strand,     /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
(Myles S. Breiner,  
Sean Fitzsimmons, and   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
Kyle T. Dowd with him  
on the briefs)     /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
for petitioner  
      /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
Brian R. Vincent  
for respondent     /s/ Vladimir P. Devens   
41 