***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
RENE UMBERGER, MIKE NAKACHI, KA ʻIMI KAUPIKO, WILLIE KAUPIKO, 
CONSERVATION COUNCIL FOR HAWAI ʻI, THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE  
UNITED STATES, and CENTER FOR BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
 
vs. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, 
Respondent/Defendant- Appellee.   
 
 
SCWC-13-0002125 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13-0002125; CIVIL NO. 12- 1-2625-10 JHC) 
 
SEPTEMBER 6, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  For a nominal fee per year, the Department of Land and 
Natural Resources  (DLNR) authorizes  the collection of fish or  
other aquatic life for aquarium purposes (aquarium collection) Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0002125
06-SEP-2017
08:07 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 by issuing permits pursuant to  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 
188-31 (2011) and its administrative rules.  Subject to certain  
terms and conditions contained in the permit and restrictions 
provided by statutes and administrative rules, e ach commercial 
aquarium collection permit authorizes the extraction of an 
unlimited number of fish or other aquatic life annually from the 
State’s coastal waters .  DLNR also issues recreational aquarium 
collection permits that authorize an annual catch limit for each 
permit of almost 2,000 fish or other aquatic life.   The 
fundamental issue presented in this case is whether aquarium 
collection pursuant to permits issued under HRS § 188-31  and 
DLNR’s administrative scheme  is subject to the  environmental 
review procedures provided in the Hawaii Environmental Policy 
Act (HEPA).  We hold that commercial aquarium collection under 
HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s administrative rules is subject to 
HEPA’s requirements.   We further hold that the record is not 
adequate for this court to determine whether recreational 
aquarium collection may be exempt from HEPA.  Accordingly, we 
remand this case to the circuit court for further proceedings to 
resolve the issue of whether recreational aquarium collection 
under HRS § 188 -31 and DLNR’s administrative rules is also 
subject to HEPA. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
  Petitioners Rene Umberger, Mike Nakachi, Ka imi 
Kaupiko, and Willie Kaupiko identify themselves as concerned 
Hawaii citizens, avid divers, and subsistence fishermen.  
Petitioner Conservation Council for Hawai i is a nonprofit 
organization based in Hawai i with approximately  5,500 members 
worldwide whose mission is to protect native Hawaiian species 
and to restore native Hawaiian ecosystems for future 
generations.  Petitioner Humane Society of the United States, a 
national nonprofit organization with over 11 million members, is  
dedicated to the protection of wildlife and habitat.  Petitioner 
Center for Biological Diversity is a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to preserving, protecting, and restoring biodiversity, 
native species, ecosystems, and public lands;  the organization 
has approximately 450,000 members, many of whom live in Hawai i.  
Respondent Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) is 
the state agency that holds the statutory authority to issue 
permits for aquarium collection.  
  On October 24, 2012, Petitioners filed a complaint for 
declaratory judgment and injunctive relief in the C ircuit C ourt 
of the First Circuit (circuit court) specifically challenging 
fifty aquarium collection permits that DLNR had issued in the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 1120 days before the filing of the complaint.   The complaint 
sought (1) a declaration that DLNR is in violation of HEPA , 
chapter 343 of the HRS, for failing to complete the HEPA review 
process prior to approving the challenged permits; (2) a 
declaration that DLNR’s issuance and renewal of these permi ts 
without complying with HEPA is invalid and illegal; (3) an 
injunction enjoining collection under the challenged permits 
until DLNR fully complies with HEPA; and (4) an injunction 
enjoining DLNR from approving, renewing, or issuing any aquarium 
collection permits prior to completing a HEPA review of the 
2issuance of the challenged permits.   DLNR filed an answer 
requesting a dismissal with prejud ice of Petitioners’ complaint.  
  Thereafter, DLNR moved for summary judgment, arguing 
that (1) DLNR’s practice o f not requiring environmental review 
of applications for aquarium collection permits is entitled to 
deference and (2) environmental review is not required for 
aquarium collection permits because there is no action initiated 
by an applicant requiring agency  approval (applicant action).3  
                     
 1 In addition to these named permits, Petitioners challenged any 
other aquarium collection permits renewed or granted by DLNR in the 120 days 
prior to the filing of their complaint.  
 2 The complaint also requested that the circuit court retain 
continuing jurisdiction to review DLNR’s compliance with all judgments and 
orders. 
 3 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti  presided over the 
proceedings in this case.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 In support of DLNR’s motion for summary judgment, Alton K. 
Miyasaka, an aquatic biologist in DLNR’s Division of Aquatic 
Resources, submitted a declaration.  Miyasaka averred that 
“[a]nyone who applies for a permit pursuant t o [HRS] § 188- 31 
and who goes through the above process receives a permit” and 
that DLNR “does not have and does not exercise discretion with 
respect to the permits.”  Thus, according to Miyasaka, the 
process does not involve discretionary consent and there is no 
applicant action. 
  Petitioners opposed DLNR’s motion for summary 
judgment, contending that (1) DLNR’s failure to comply with HEPA 
prior to issuing aquarium collection permits is not entitled to 
deference because the aquarium collection permitting statute is 
clear and not subject to agency interpretation and (2) aquarium 
collection is a HEPA “action” subject to DLNR’s discretionary 
consent.  
  P etitioners cross-moved for summary judgment, 
contending that (1) HEPA mandates environmental review of 
aquarium collection permits and (2) the issuance of aquarium 
collection permits is subject to DLNR’s discretionary consent .  
In support of Petitioners’ summary judgment motion, they 
attached (1) the declarations of Gail Grabowsky, Petitioner 
Umberger, Petitioner Nakachi, Petitioner Ka imi Kaupiko, 
Petitioner Wilfred Kaupiko, Marjorie F.Y. Ziegler, Inga Gibson, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 Miyoko Sakashita, and Dane Enos; (2) excerpts of The Report to 
the Twenty- Fifth Legislature on the Findings and Recommendations 
of Effectiveness of the West Hawai i Regional Fishery Management 
Area [hereinafter The Report to the Twenty-Fifth Legislature]4; 
(3) excerpts of Hawaii’s State of the Reef, published by DLNR’s 
Division of Aquatic Resources5; and (4) DLNR’s approval of Disney 
Aulani’s request for a special activity permit to collect 
aquarium fish for a period of one year in order to stock a 
saltwater swimming pool.  
  Gail Grabowsky, an associate professor at Chaminade 
University and the Director of the University’s Environmental 
6Studies Program,  stated  that commercial aquarium collectors 
                     
 4 Petitioners relied on this report in asserting that “[o]ver 200 
species are collected for the aquarium trade in Hawai i,” that “the level of 
aquarium collection along the west coast of the island of Hawai i have 
documented substantial increases, i.e., 25 percent between 2000 and 2010, in 
the number of collectors and in the collection of certain species,” and that 
aquarium collection permits allow the collection of species that are 
“particularly vulnerable to depletion.” 
 5 Petitioners relied on this publication in explaining that DLNR is 
charged as the steward of Hawaii’s natural resources, including ocean 
ecosystems, and that DLNR manages the fourth longest coastline in the United 
States, including 410,000 acres of coral reefs.  Petitioners also used this 
publication in contending that DLNR itself has previously recognized the 
detrimental effects of removal of reef fish on the coral reef ecosystem and 
that further studies in this area are necessary if this activity is to 
continue. 
 6 Grabowsky holds a bachelor’s degree and a doctorate in zoology 
from Duke University, has authored or co -authored various published 
scientific works, and has received several honors, scholarships, and grants 
in her field.  As relevant here, her research has focused on ornamental reef 
fish collection on O ahu, marine invertebrate zoology, molecular/morphological 
evolution, coral reef health, sea bird habitat conservation, sea bird by -
catch reduction, box jellyfish dispersal, and natural history in Hawai i. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 self-report to DLNR th e type and quantity of marine animals that 
they collect  and that this practice results in underreporting 
because commercial collectors “ may either fail to turn in catch 
reports or inaccurately quantify their catch.”  Grabowsky 
explained that “[a]quarium collectors utilize mode rn and ever-
improving technologies, like scuba equipment, highly camouflaged 
wetsuits, nitrox (a mix of nitrogen and oxygen, usually with a 
higher-than-normal level of oxygen to extend dive time), GPS 
systems, and underwater scooters, to increase their ability to 
locate aquarium fish.”7 
  Acc ording to Grabowsky, “although aquarium collection 
is prohibited along 35% of the west coast of the island of 
Hawaii, less than 1% of the remaining area around the Main 
8Hawaiian Islands is protected.”   Grabowsky opined that the 
drastic differences in species abundances between well- protected 
areas and those that are not “reveal [] that aquarium collection 
is removing and having detrimental effects on species that play 
important ecologic al roles in reef ecosystems.”  Because the 
most heavily fished species are herbivorous algae eaters, 
                     
 7 Grabowsky declared that aquarium collectors at times also use 
underwater blankets to cover the reef so that fish would not be able to take 
refuge in the coral. 
 8 Based on other studies, Grabowsky declared that “there has been a 
severe depletion of fish” in the Main Hawaiian Islands when compared to the 
diversity and population of fish in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 Grabowsky stated that their removal from the reef ecosystem 
decreases the reef’s ability to  withstand habitat degradation 
and could result in an algal- dominated reef.  Grabowsky found 
that “the most greatly affected species are those that have been 
heavily exploited.”  Grabowsky’s survey of relevant studies  
indicated “that certain rare, vulnerab le species are under 
intense collection pressure, and the effects of collection on 
many of their populations [are] unknown.”9 
  Grabowsky explained  that aquarium collection typically 
focuses on juvenile fish because they are smaller and more 
aesthetically pleasing and thus more popular to customers.  
According to Grabowsky, this “can result in top -heavy age 
distributions of many of the heavily collected species on reefs, 
and means that there are fewer juveniles in reef ecosystems that 
are able to grow up to repro duce as adults.”  
  Based on her research and review of relevant 
scientific literature, Grabowsky  concluded that “aquarium 
collection is having a detrimental effect on fish populations 
around O ahu and in other areas of the state,” it “disrupts the 
ecosystems and makes them less able to respond to other 
                     
 9 According to Grabowsky, some of these vulnerable species, such as 
Tinker’s butterflyfish and psychedelic wrasse, have been listed on DLNR’s 
“Species of Greatest Conservation Need,” but they are still being collected 
without any limits. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 stressors,”  and “it removes animals that occupy important and 
unique ecological niches. ”  Grabowsky opined that prohibiting 
collection in certain areas does not adequately addr ess the 
problem in that, “while it may slow the disappearance of the  
fish species and reef degradation, . . . it will not prevent 
it.”  Finally,  Grabowsky  declared that the “data showing that 
the current permitting system and designation of protected areas 
adequately protects the reef ecosystems is lacking. ” 
  Petitioner Umberger also submitted a declaration 
stating that she had been diving professionally since 1983 and 
had done at least 10,000 scuba dives around the Main Hawaiian 
Islands and in various international locations.  Umberger stated 
that, based on her observations during her dives through the 
years, fish species that are highly prized by the aquarium trade 
have abruptly disappeared from a lot of dive sites.10 
  Based on Umberger’s experience diving and snorkeling 
along the west coast of the island of Hawai i, she declared that 
there is a marked difference in the condition between those 
reefs that are open to collection and those that are not:  reefs 
                     
 10 For example, Umberger explained that the three dragon eels (which 
could retail for over a thousand dollars apiece) and several flame angelfish 
that she had been seeing in the Red Hill area of south Maui for years had 
disappeared.  In addition, during the years that she had spent scuba diving, 
Umberger stated that she saw corals physically broken apart to expose the 
crevices in the reef.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 open to collection have fewer colorful and aesthetically 
pleasing fish and invertebrates.  Umberger also attested that 
she had “noticed a dramatic reduction in biodiversity on reefs 
and in the density of species of fish that are collected by the 
aquarium trade.”  Finally, Umberger opined that DLNR’s current 
permitting practices “will have irreversible, negative 
consequences for Hawai i’s reef ecosystems and [her] interests in 
enjoying and protecting these precious ar eas.” 
  Petitioner Nakachi also submitted a declaration in 
support of Petitioners’ summary judgment motion.  Nakachi stated 
that he is a resident of Kailua- Kona on the island of Hawai i and 
a scuba diving tour operator since 1987 who has gone on tens of 
thousands of scuba dives, both recreationally and as part of his 
scuba diving tour business, in and around Hawai i waters for the 
past forty years.  According to Nakachi, his “recreational and 
aesthetic interests in seeing healthy reef ecosystems full of 
colorful fish are harmed by aquarium collection under the 
challenged permits.”  Nakachi also averred that his economic 
interests are harmed because his business relies on a healthy 
marine environment in order to be successful.  Nakachi described 
his experience in which a dive site that was once populated by 
colorful fish species experienced a decline in the fish 
population and coral damage when aquarium collectors discovered ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 11the dive site’s location.   Over the years that he had spent 
diving in the waters of H awaii, Nakachi observed “negative 
changes on the coral reefs . . . because of aquarium collection, 
particularly along the west coast of the island of Hawai i.”  
Based on Nakachi’s diving experience in State waters, he 
declared that “[t]here is a very noticeable difference in 
aquarium fish species’ populations and coral damage between the 
areas that are open to collection and the areas that are 
closed.”  Nakachi averred that his clients “have expressed 
concern . . .  about the changes they see on the coral reefs 
where they dive,” the fact that there are fewer fish in the 
reefs, and damaged corals.  According to Nakachi, these concerns 
had prompted his clients not to dive in Hawai i anymore. 
  Nakachi echoes  Grabowsky’s description of  the 
technology he had observed aquarium collectors use over the 
years, see supra.  Based on the decline that he had witnessed in 
aquarium fish population and the health of corals where he 
dives, Nakachi stated that he is “afraid  that [the] reef 
ecosystems will continue to decline until they are not able to 
sustain marine life anywhere near the p revious levels.”  
                     
 11 One site on the island of Hawai i had “no fish left” by 2006 when 
Nakachi went back to scuba dive there.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12   Petitioners  Ka‘imi Kaupiko and Wilfred “Willie” Kaupiko  
also submitted declarations  in support of Petitioners ’ summary  
judgment motion.  The Kaupikos  are Native Hawaiian  subsistence 
fishermen living in the village of Miloli‘i, which is located on 
the west side of the island of Hawai ‘i.  They attested that their 
cultural, subsistence, and aesthetic interests are harmed by 
DLNR’s issuance of aquarium collection permits without first 
engaging in HEPA review “because aquarium collectors  remove 
species of fish that [they] fish for” and because they  had 
“noticed a substantial decline in the variety and number of fish 
on reefs along the west coast of Hawai ‘i over the past decade.”  
Based on the Kaupikos’ experience, when they had gone out 
fishing, they had hardly seen any types of fish that are 
collected by the aquarium trade, even in areas near Miloli ‘i that 
are closed to collection.12 
  Ka ‘imi Kaupiko stated that the dwindling number of fish 
affects his ability to feed himself and his family and 
negatively impacts the ecosystem of which they are a part.  
Ka‘imi also declared that he had noticed coral dying after being 
damaged by boat anchors and pollution and that “removal of fish 
                     
 12 Willie Kaupiko stated that he had seen, in January and November 
2012, aquarium collectors taking fish in areas where collection is 
prohibited. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 for aquarium collection further disrupts an  already-stressed 
ecosystem.”  Ka ‘imi attested that “[t]he reefs on the west coast 
of the island of Hawai ‘i do not look as healthy as they used to” 
and that he is “worried about the ability of [the] reef 
ecosystems to survive so that future generations can continue 
fishing and practicing . . . Native Hawaiian traditions.”13 
  The Kaupikos concluded that aquarium collection under 
the challenged permits affects their ability to catch fish for 
food, disrupts the ecosystem, hurts the reef’s ability to 
withstand harm from things like pollution and physical damage, 
and harms their cultural, subsistence, recreational, and 
aesthetic interests, as well as their ability to  use, enjoy, and 
protect the ocean and coral reefs for future generations’ use 
and education. 
  Marjorie Ziegler, the Executive Director of Petitioner 
Conservation Council for Hawaii,  and Miyoko Sakashita, a staff 
member of Petitioner Center for Biological Diversity (CBD), 
submitted declarations  stating that the members of their 
respective organizations are harmed by DLNR’s aquariu m 
collection permitting system “because it threatens to impair 
                     
 13 Because Ka ‘imi Kaupiko is involved in educating young people  in 
Miloli‘i about Hawaiian cultural traditions involving fishing and the ocean, 
he also declared that aquarium collection affects his “ability to educate 
children in the village about h ealthy reefs and fish populations.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 their aesthetic, subsistence,  and recreational interests in 
using, enjoying, and protecting the State’s reefs.”14  They 
further averred that “DLNR’s failure to comply with its legal 
obligations deprives ” their organization s and their “members of 
both the information that would be generated through the HEPA 
process and the opportunity to participate actively in the 
process of environmental review.”  
  Inga Gibson, the Hawai ‘i State Director of Petitioner 
Humane Society of the United States (HSUS ), declared that DLNR’s 
issuance of aquarium collection permits without HEPA review 
“adversely affects HSUS’s organization al interests in protecting 
animals from unnecessary harm, suffering, and death, as well as 
its members’ and supporters’ ability to protect, observe, and 
enjoy Hawai‘ i’s coral reef animals and ecosys tems that are and 
will be affected by collection under the challenged permits.”  
Gibson averred that aquarium collectors remove types of fish 
that serve a larger role in reef ecosystems, a practice that 
“has negative effects on other marine species that in habit coral 
reefs.”  Gibson also stated that HSUS views “aquarium collection 
as a harmful, disposable trade, because up to forty percent of 
fish may die before reaching their final destination and many of 
                     
 14 Sakashita also stated that CBD’s members, including herself, 
“regularly use Hawai‘ i’s coastal waters for recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, 
observation, research, and other educational activities.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 the collected fish are not suitable for living in captivity, 
surviving only a fraction of their natural lives.”  Gibson 
concluded that DLNR’s permitting regime “affects HSUS’s members’ 
recreational, aesthetic and educational interests in protecting, 
studying, and observing these fish and invertebrates and their 
coral reef habitats.”  
  Dane Enos, a resident of Kailua- Kona and a former 
commercial aquarium fish collector, submitted  a declaration in 
support of Petitioners’ summary judgment motion describing the 
procedure he followed in collecting aquarium fish before he left 
the trade.  Enos explained that his “decisions about which 
species to take and how many animals to collect were based on 
consumer demand.”  Once he received an order for a particular 
species from a wholesaler, he would “go out to the reefs t o try 
and fill that order” and that “[t]he price [he] would get paid . 
. . would fluctuate depending on whether the wholesalers already 
had that particular species of fish in their shops.”  Enos’s 
practice was to “operate[] on a fourteen to eighteen month 
system of rotation at sites where [he] collected[]  to give fish 
time to reproduce before going back to the same spot.”  Enos 
declared that his commercial aquarium collection permit allowed 
him “to take an unlimited type and quantity of species from 
coastal waters” and “to collect anywhere in the State of Hawai ‘i 
other than in areas . . . where aquarium collection was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 prohibited.”  Enos stated that, when he first started collecting 
in 1985, there were not as many collectors as there were when he 
left the trade in 2002.  At the tail end of his participation in 
the trade, Enos described how other collectors would take “fish 
from the same spot too frequently, affecting the number of 
animals and the balance of the ecosystem.”  Some collectors, 
according to Enos, also broke off finger corals so as to create 
a uniform surface for their nets.  Enos attested that “after 
witnessing collectors over- harvesting fish and invertebrates and 
damaging the reefs, in addition to the stress on the reefs from 
other factors, like pollution, [he] decided that [he] could not 
continue collecting”  and left the trade. 
  DLNR opposed Petitioners’ motion for summary judgment, 
reiterating its position that there is no HEPA “action”  and no 
“approval” involved in aquarium collection and that the 
environment is not harmed by the current permitting system.  In 
support of its opposition, DLNR submitted a declaration from 
Alton Miyasaka, averring that DLNR’s Div ision of Aquatic 
Resources “continually monitors and studies populations of fish 
and other aquatic life potentially affected by aquarium fish 
permits issued pursuant to [HRS]  § 188-31” and that the current 
population levels  of aquarium fish are sustainable.  Miyasaka 
stated that the collection “areas are quite limited,” that  
Hawaii and Oahu are the “main collecting islands,” and that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 Kauai, Moloka i, and Lana i “have essentially no contribution to 
the statewide totals and may be considered unfished.”  On the 
island of Hawai i, Miyasaka continued, “35% of the 90 -mile Kona 
coast is closed to aquarium collecting.”  However, Miyasaka 
stated that, although the 90- mile Kona coast “represent [s] 
approximately 12.6% of the total coastline of the state, [it] 
accounted for 68% of the statewide total catch numbers” in 2011.  
Miyasaka averred that the top ten areas where aquarium 
collection is conducted “account for 90% of all animals 
collected” and that “[t]hese top ten areas represent less than 
22% of the entire coastline.”  As such, Miyasaka represented 
that “the vast majority of the State’s coastli ne is largely 
unfished.” 
  Miyasaka declared that the annual total for animals 
caught from 1999 to 2010 ranged from 412,587 to 1,019,720 per 
year, but he reasoned that “most of these numbers are from 
invertebrates rather than fish”  (i.e., the ratio of 
invertebrates to fish ranges from 50% to close to 90% per year) .  
According to Miyasaka, “this is significant because 
invertebrates generally reproduce faster than fish and therefore 
can replenish themselves faster.”  However, Miyasaka neither 
addressed nor referenced Petitioners’ contentions that were 
based on excerpts of The Report to the Twenty- Fifth Legislature 
and Hawaii’s State of the Reef , both of which were published by ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 DLNR.  See supra notes 4 & 5.  These publications stated that 
aquarium collection permits allow the collection of species that 
are particularly vulnerable to depletion and recognized the 
detrimental effects of removal of reef fish on the coral reef 
ecosystem. 
  The Report to the Twenty- Fifth Legislature , on which 
Petitioners relied as part of their summary judgment motion, 
also addressed the issues surrounding the collection of 
invertebrates for aquarium purposes.  The Report stated that 
researchers studying the Florida marine aquarium fishery had 
found that “the once small ornamental fish fishery has grown 
dramatically in recent years to become a large scale 
invertebrate- dominated industry.”  The researchers noted that 
the focus of aquarium collection shifted from “purely ornamental 
species to ones providing biological services in home aquaria,” 
such as “[i]nvertebrate grazers [that] can control al gal 
growth.”  The researchers concluded that “the intensive 
collecting of such spec ies was ecologically unsound.”  
  Miyasaka also described the process used in aquarium 
collection: 
Typically each animal is hand caught.  The collector sets 
[the] net, guides  the fish into the net, then hand scoops 
the fish off the net.  Each fish is carefully selected for 
its condition (no damage to fins or body), size, and 
species.  Fish that are damaged or imperfect are returned 
to the ocean.  Any fish that is not the right  size, color, 
or species is not taken.  Little or no unwanted fish are 
taken so there is little or no bycatch (a fish that is 
taken unintentionally).  This attention to detail is why ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 the marine life in the Hawaiian aquarium fishery is 
considered one of the  highest quality products in the 
world. 
  In their reply to DLNR’s opposition, Petitioners 
argued that aquarium collection is an “ action” and that aquarium 
collection permit applications require DLNR’s “approval,” i.e., 
discretionary consent.  In addition, Petitioners challenged 
DLNR’s assertion that aquarium collection was being conducted in 
a sustainable and environmentally sound manner, stating that 
this assertion is not based on anything other than Miyasaka’s 
conclusory declaration.  Thus, Petitioners concluded that HEPA 
applies to aquarium collection under permits issued by DLNR. 
  After a hearing on the respective partie s’ motions for 
summary judgment, the circuit court granted DLNR’s motion for 
summary judgment and denied Petitioners’ cross motion for 
summary judgment, reasoning that there is no applicant “action” 
that triggers HEPA in this case.  The circuit court stated that 
environmental review under HEPA is required only if there is an 
“action,” i.e., a “program” or “project.”  Because “program” an d 
“project” are not statutorily defined under HEPA, the circuit 
court, relying on a generally accepted dictionary , defined 
“program” “as a ‘plan or system under which action may be taken 
toward a goal.’”  The circuit court defined “project” “as ‘a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 specific plan or design; scheme’ or a ‘planned undertaking.’” 15  
Because aquarium collection, according to the circuit court, is 
not a “specifically identifiable program[] or project[],” the 
court determined “that as a matter of law, ‘aquarium collection’ 
is not an applicant ‘action’ that triggers HEPA.”  The circuit 
court entered its final judgment on June 24, 2013. 
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  Petitioners appealed from the orde r denying their 
cross motion for summary judgment,  the order granting DLNR’s 
motion for summary judgment,  and the circuit court’s final 
judgment.  In its published opinion, the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA) outlined the steps for evaluating whether an 
action is subject to environmental review.  Preliminarily, there 
must be a “program or project to be initiated by an agency or 
applicant.”  Umberger v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res. , 138 Hawai i 
508, 512, 382 P.3d 320, 324 (App. 2016) (quoting HRS § 343 –2 
(2010)).  In addition, the program or project must (1) be 
initiated by an agency or a private party and require government 
approval; (2) qualify under one or more of the nine categories 
of land uses and administrative acts enumerated in HRS § 343 -
                     
 15 The circuit court relied on Merriam -Webster’s definition of 
“program” and “project.”  See Program, Merriam -Webster, http://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/program (last visited July 13, 2017); Project, 
Merriam- Webster, http://www.merriam -webster.com/dictionary/program (last 
visited July 13, 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 5(a) (2010); and (3) not be exempt under HRS § 343- 6(a)(2) 
(2010).  Id. at 512—13, 382 P.3d at 324 —25. 
  The ICA characterized the “action” in this case as 
“the ‘taking of marine or freshwater nongame fish and other 
aquatic life for aquarium purposes,’ that is initi ated by an 
applicant’s request for an aquarium fish permit.”  Id. at 513, 
382 P.3d at  325 (quoting HRS § 188- 31(a) (2011)).  The ICA 
emphasized that while the “[a]ppellants described the alleged 
action as the ‘directed, intentional, large -scale commercial 
removal under each [p]ermit, and collectively under the dozens 
of such [p]ermits DLNR issued,’”  they sought “ an interpretation 
of HEPA that would apply equally to both recreational and 
commercial aquarium fish permits. ”  Id. at 513–14, 382 P.3d at 
325–26. 
  The statutory analysis of the ICA commenced with an 
examination of the meaning of “action.”  While HEPA defines 
“action” as “any program or project to be initiated by an agency 
or applicant,” the ICA acknowledged that HEPA does not define 
“program” and “project.”  Id. at 514, 382 P.3d at 326 (quoting 
HRS § 343- 2).  The ICA discussed various decisions issued by the 
appellate courts of Hawai i that held there was an “action” under 
HEPA such that the environmental review process  was triggered.  
Those cases involved “[t]he Napilihau Villages, Mahukona Lodge, 
Koa Ridge project, harbor improvements for the Superferry ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 Project, Laumaka subdivision, and a research program concerning 
genetically modified algae.”  Id. at 516, 382 P.3d at 328.  In 
these cases, the ICA observed that there were “specifically 
identifiable programs or projects.”  Id.  According to the ICA, 
aquarium collection is unlike any of the activities that this 
court has previously considered as programs or projects for the 
purposes of HEPA.  Id.  In concluding that aquarium collection 
is not a “specifically identifiable program or project ,” the ICA 
emphasized that aquarium collection “includes a parent netting 
one or two fish from a stream for his or her child ’s fish tank, 
as well as larger scale commercial operations.”  Id. 
  In addition, the ICA reasoned that HEPA review is not 
the sole mechanism through which marine life and reef ecosystem 
could be protected from unconstrained removal in large numbers.  
The ICA highlighted other  statutory frameworks and 
administrative rules that allow DLNR to manage aquatic life and 
resources, including catch limits and restrictions for certain 
species applicable to commercial aquarium collection permit 
holders and DLNR’s authority to attach conditions to commercial 
marine licenses and permits.  Id. 
  Further , the ICA noted that DLNR issues permits and 
licenses for activities similar to aquarium collection-- e.g., 
bait fish licenses, freshwater game fish licenses, hunting 
licenses, camping permits, etc.  According to the ICA, there is ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 “no rational distinction or logical reason why HEPA 
environmental review procedures should be required for aquarium 
fish permits, but not for these other types of licenses and 
permits.”  Id.  Thus, the ICA concluded that aquarium collection 
under permits issued pursuant to HRS § 188- 31 does not qualify 
as a HEPA “action.”   Id. at 517, 382 P.3d at 329. 
  The ICA , however, rejected DLNR’s argument “that, even 
if aquarium collection fell within the definition of an 
‘applicant action,’ it is not subject to HEPA because there is 
no discretionary agency approval of aquarium fish permits.”  Id. 
at 517–18, 382 P.3d at 329 –30.  The ICA determined that the fact 
that the application for an aquarium fish permit is online and 
completely automatic does not equate to DLNR lacking discretion 
because the plain language of HRS § 188- 31, as supported by its 
legislative history, explicitly confers discretion on DLNR in 
deciding  whether to approve an application.  Id. at 518, 382 
P.3d at 330.  The ICA also reasoned that the online application 
“is simply the means by which DLNR has determined to exercise 
its discretion.”  Id.  Thus, the ICA affirmed the circuit 
court’s judgment that granted DLNR’s motion for summary judgment  
and denied Petitioners’ cross motion for summary judgment.  Id.  
III. ARGUMENTS ON CERTIORARI  
  In their application  for writ of certiorari , 
Petitioners advance four contentions: (1) the legislature ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 intended the words “program” and “project” to encompass a  broad 
scope of human activity, including aquarium collection; (2) HEPA 
applies to individuals and provides mechanisms to resolve 
practical difficulties that may be encountered  during the 
environmental review process16; (3) the ICA’s construction of 
“program or project” undermines DLNR’s public trust and 
statutory duties to conserve Hawaii’s marine resources; and (4) 
other regulatory tools that DLNR possesses are not substitutes 
for HEPA, nor do such tools excuse violations of HEPA. 
  In its response, DLNR c ontends that (1) the ICA was 
correct in concluding that aquarium collection is not an 
“action” within the meaning of HEPA; (2)  the environment is not 
harmed by the present system and any harm to the environment is 
irrelevant to the analysis; (3) Petitioner s’ argument regarding 
public trust was never pleaded and, in any event, does not 
assist this court in construing HRS chapter 343; and (4) the ICA 
erred in holding that the issuance of aquarium collection 
permits requires DLNR’s discretionary consent.  
                     
 16 Petitioners argue that the ICA’s concern about one -fish 
recreational aquarium collection is unjustified because that activity may be 
exempted from HEPA pursuant to HRS § 343 -6(a)(2) (2010) as it may fall within 
one of DLNR’s exempt categories-- minor alteration in the conditions of land, 
water, or vegetation.  Petitioners also assert that “tiering,” which allows 
an agency to incorporate previous environmental assessments and impact 
statements or to group similar actions in a single environmental assessment 
or impact statement, would address the ICA’s apparent concern about the 
burden on small- time aquarium collectors of complying with HEPA’s 
requirements. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 IV. STANDARD S OF REVIEW 
  A trial court’s ruling on a motion for summary 
judgment is reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.  
Salera v. Caldwell , 137 Hawaii 409, 415, 375 P.3d 188, 194 
(2016).  “The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.”  Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm ’n of 
Cty. of Kaua i, 133 Hawai i 141, 163, 324 P.3d 951, 973 (2014) 
(quoting Franks v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 74 Haw. 328, 334, 
843 P.2d 668, 671 (1993)). 
V. DISCUSSION 
  The central question in this case is whether aquarium 
collection pursuant to permits issued under HRS § 188 -31 (2011) 
and DLNR’s administrative rules is subject to the environmental 
review provisions of HEPA.  An environmental assessment under 
HEPA is required if three conditions are satisfied: (1) the 
proposed activity is an “action” under HRS § 343 -2 (2010); (2) 
the action proposes one or more of the nine categories of land 
uses or administrative acts  enumerated in HRS § 343 -5(a) (2010); 
and (3) the action is not declared exempt pursuant to HRS § 343-
6(a)(2) (2010) .  See Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp.  of the 
State of Haw. , 115 Hawai i 299, 306, 167 P.3d 292, 299 (2007).  
In cases where the proposed action is initiated by a private 
party for approval by a government agency, an additional ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 requirement is that the agency exercises  discretionary consent 
in the approval process.  HRS § 343 -5(e) (Supp. 2012).  The 
circuit court granted DLNR’s summary judgment motion and de nied 
Petitioners’ cross motion for summary judgment on the grounds 
that aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 is not a HEPA 
“action.”  Thus, i f there is  a genuine issue of material fact as 
to whether aquarium collection is a HEPA “action,”  then summary 
judgment in favor of DLNR on this basis was erroneous.  If, on 
the other hand, there is no genuine issue of material fact that 
aquarium collection under HRS § 188-31  and the DLNR 
administrative scheme is a HEPA “action,” that it falls within 
one of the categories of land uses or administrative actions set 
forth in HRS § 343- 5(a), that it is not exempt from HEPA, and 
that the issuance of a permit requires DLNR’s exercise of 
discretionary consent, then the circuit court erred in denying 
Petitioners’ cross motion for summary judgment. 
A. Whether Issuance of a Permit for Aquarium  Collection is a 
HEPA “Action”  
1. The Plain- Language Construction of “Action” under HRS § 343- 2 
  To determine whether aquarium collection is a HEPA 
“action,” we begin by interpreting HRS § 343 -2, which sets forth 
the statutory definition of “action.”   HEPA defines “action” as 
“any program or project to be initiated by any agency or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 applicant.”17  HRS § 343- 2.  “Program” and “project” are not 
defined terms under HEPA.  As such, “this court may  resort to 
legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to 
determine the ordinary meaning” of those words.   State v. 
Guyton, 135 Hawaii 372, 378, 351 P.3d 1138, 1144 (2015) (quoting 
State v. Pali , 129 Hawai i 363, 370, 300 P.3d 1022, 1029 (2013)).  
“Program” is generally defined as “a plan or system under which 
action may be taken toward a goal.”18  “Project” is defined as  “a 
specific plan or design ” or “a planned undertaking.”19 
  In determining whether aquarium collection is a 
program or project, the crucial  first step is properly defining 
the activity authorized by aquarium collection permits issued by 
DLNR.  See Sierra Club , 115 Hawai i at 306 n.6, 167 P.3d at 299 
n.6 (“An important preliminary step in assessing whether an 
‘action’ is subject to environmental review is defining the 
action itself.”).  HRS § 188- 31(a) provides that 
                     
 17 It follows from this definition that there are two types of HEPA 
“actions”: agency actions and applicant actions.  Sierra Club, 115 Hawai i at 
306, 167 P.3d at 299.  The parties’ position in this case is that aquarium 
collection under HRS § 188 -31 constitutes an applicant action and not an 
agency action.  An applicant action is initiated “by a private party who 
requires government approvals for the project to proceed.”  Id. 
 18 Program, Merriam -Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/program (last visited July 14, 2017).  
 19 Project, Merriam -Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/project (last visited July 14, 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 [e]xcept as prohibited by law, the department, upon receipt 
of a written application, may issue an aquarium fish 
permit, not longer than one year in duration, to use fine 
meshed traps, or fine meshed nets other than throw nets, 
for the taking of marine or freshwater nongame fish and 
other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.[20] 
This statutory subsection , together with DLNR’s admin istrative 
rules, allows permit applicants to engage in two general types 
of activities: recreational aquarium collection and commercial 
aquarium collection.  
  Recreational aquarium collection permits-- those 
“issued . . . for non- commercial use ,” Hawaii Administrative 
Rules (HAR ) § 13-77-2 (effective 2015)--allow the extraction of 
up to “five fish or aquatic life specimens per person per day ,” 
HAR § 13 -75-14 (effective 2007 ).  Thus, each  recreational permit 
authorizes the collection of up to 1,825 fish or other aquatic 
life within a one -year period.  Id.  In the case of commercial 
aquarium collection permits, which is intended for issuance to 
persons who collect “ for profit or gain or as a means of 
livelihood,” HAR § 13 -74-1 (effective 2010), DLNR has not 
promulgated any rules that establish limits on the total number 
of fish and other aquatic life that commercial collectors may 
extract for the entire period in which the permits are 
                     
 20 Although permits issued under HRS § 188 -31 are valid for no 
longer than one year, DLNR allows such permits to be renewed instead of 
requiring holders of expired permits to reapply.  See Licenses & Permits, 
State of Haw. Division of Aquatic Resources, 
http://dlnr.hawaii.gov/dar/licenses -permits/ (last visited July 24, 2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 effective.  See HAR § 13 -75-14 (providing a total catch limit 
only for recreational collection).21 
  HRS § 188- 31 also clearly delineates the aquarium 
collection practices that must be complied with to obtain a 
permit when aquarium collectors  are allowed to use fine meshed 
traps or nets to take fish and other aquatic life  for aquarium 
purposes.  Subsection (b) of HRS § 188- 31 states that, “[e]xcept 
as prohibited by law, the permits shall be issued only to 
persons who can satisfy the department that they possess 
facilities to and can maintain fish and other aquatic life alive 
and in reasonable health. ”  HRS § 188- 31(b). 
  The extraction of fish or other aquatic life under 
aquarium collection permits is also limited to “aquarium 
purposes,” HRS § 188- 31(c), which, per the statute, “means to 
hold salt water fish, freshwater nongame fish, or other aquatic 
life alive in a state of captivity as pets, for scientific 
                     
 21 A few statutes and regulations restrict or limit the manner and 
extent to which aquarium collection may be conducted: bag and size limits for 
certain aquatic species on O ahu (see HAR § 13 -77-6(b), (c), (d) (effective 
2015)) and in West Hawai i (see HAR § 13- 60.4-4 (effective 2013)), length and 
height requirements for allowed mesh nets that apply to O ahu (see  HAR § 13-
77-6(a)), monthly reporting requirements for commercial collectors (see HRS 
§§ 189-3 (2011), 189- 3.5 (2011); HAR § 13- 74-20(d) (effective 2010)), and 
DLNR’s power pursuant to HAR § 13 -75-14(4) (effective 2007) to attach 
conditions to commercial permits.  Permits issued are also subject to terms 
and conditions imposed by DLNR that are generally consistent with or 
reference the statutes and rules that relate to aquarium collection.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 study, or for public exhibition or display, or for sale for 
these purposes,” HRS § 188 -31(d)(1). 
  Based on the language of HRS § 188- 31, the framework 
it establishes, and the administrative rules that DLNR 
promulgated pursuant to HRS § 188- 31, the defined activity 
authorized under an aquarium collection permit is  as follows: 
(1) the extraction annually from State waters of 
an unlimited number of fish or other  aquatic 
life for profit or other gains (in the case 
of commercial aquarium collection) or of 
1,825 fish or other aquatic life for non-
commercial purposes (in the case of 
recreational aquarium collection), subject 
to the terms and conditions of the permit 
and restrictio ns set by law; 
(2) through the use of fine meshed nets or 
traps; 
(3) by individuals who can satisfy DLNR that 
they possess facilities that can maintain 
aquatic life alive and in reasonable health; 
and  
(4) for the purpose  of holding aquatic life 
alive in a state of captivity as pets, for 
scientific study, or for public exhibition 
or display, or for sale for these purposes.  
  T he course and scope of conduct allowed by both 
recreational and commercial aquarium collection permits issued 
under HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s administrative scheme encompass ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 activity that qualifies as a “program” or “project.”  The 
activity is a “specific plan” or “a planned undertaking” --and, 
therefore, a “ project”--because it involves the systematic and 
deliberate extraction of aquatic life using procedures, 
equipment, facilities, and techniques authorized or required by 
HRS § 188- 31 and related administrative rules for the specific 
purpose of holding captive such  aquatic life for aquarium 
purposes in order to earn profit (in the case of commercial 
permit holders) or for non- commercial use (in the case of 
recreational permit holders).  
  In the same vein, both recreational and commercial 
aquarium collection are “programs” within the plain meaning of 
that word: the “plan or system  under which action may be taken ” 
is the purposeful and methodical extraction of aquatic life  from 
State waters through the use of fine meshed nets  and traps and 
the transfer of such aquatic life to facilities  that are capable 
of keeping the collected aquatic life alive.  The “desired goal” 
is to take aquatic life from its habitat and hold it in a state 
of captivity for aquarium purposes,  as defined by HRS § 188-
31(d)(1),  in order to earn profits (in the case of commercial 
permit holders) or for non- commercial use (in the case of 
recreational permit holders).   Additionally, the method by which 
extraction is accomplished involve s instruments and techniques ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 that enhance the efficiency and amount of the collection.22  
Accordingly, aquarium collection conducted under permits issued 
pursuant to HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s administrative rules  is a 
“program or project”  and therefore constitutes a HEPA “action.”  
2. HEPA’s Purpose and Structure Support the Plain -Language 
Construction of the Word “Action”  
  Our interpretation of “action,” together with our 
conclusion that aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 and 
DLNR’s administrative rules constitutes a HEPA “action,” is 
confirmed by the purpose of HEPA, as explained in HRS § 343- 1 
(2010), and by HEPA’s fra mework.  See State v. Bovee , 139 Hawai i 
530, 544 n.13, 394 P.3d 760, 774 n.13 (2017) (explaining that 
laws in pari materia-- those dealing with the same subject 
matter-- shall be construed with reference to  each other); State 
v. Alangcas , 134 Hawai i 515, 5 26, 345 P.3d 181, 192 (2015) 
(stating that legislative history is relevant in statutory 
construction even when the language appears clear because it 
ensures that the literal interpretation is consonant with the 
                     
 22 The declarations that Petitioners submitted, describing several 
aquarium collection practices that holders of permits employ, firmly support 
the conclusion that aquarium collection under HRS § 188 -31 is both a 
“program” and “project”: sophisticated and advan ced techniques--such as the 
use of scuba technology, underwater jet propulsion systems, nitrox tanks, 
fizzing, underwater blankets, etc.--are utilized to extract aquatic life from 
State waters for aquarium purposes.  These averments illustrate how 
elaborate, methodical, and systematic aquarium collection under HRS §  188-31 
is practiced in order to achieve the ultimate purpose of holding captive 
aquatic life for specific, statutorily enumerated purposes.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 underlying policy that the legislature sought to implement 
through the statute
, thereby avoiding an absurd or unjust 
result). 
  It has been frequently stated that “HEPA’s purpose is 
‘to establish a system of environmental review which will ensure 
that environmental concerns are given appropriate consideration 
in decision making along with economic and technical 
considerations.’”  Nuuanu Valley Ass’n v. City & Cty. of 
Honolulu , 119 Hawai i 90, 103, 194 P.3d 531, 544 (2008) (quoting 
HRS § 343–1).  The Hawai i Legislature enacted HEPA after finding 
“that an environmental review process will integrate the review 
of environmental concerns with existing planning processes of 
the State and counties and alert decision makers to significant 
environmental effects which may result from the implementation 
of certain actions.”  HRS § 343 -1.  The legislature also found 
“that the process of reviewing environmental effects is 
desirable because environmental consciousness is enhanced, 
cooperation and coordination are encouraged, and public 
participation during the review process benefits all parties 
involved and society as a whole.”  Id.  Environmental impact 
statements also “allow decision -makers to make informed 
decisions” when confronted by certain proposed action s.  H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 521, in 2005 House Journal, at 1242. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34   The purpose of HEPA and the legislature’ s intent in 
enacting HEPA indicate that it was not meant to be applied only 
to a narrow set of activities.  See generally Pearl Ridge  
Estates Cmty. Assʻ n v. Lear Siegler, Inc. , 65 Haw. 133, 140 –41, 
648 P.2d 702, 707 (1982) (noting that HEPA’s scope is wider 
“than the federal or the typical state analogue” (quoting 
Molokai Homesteaders Coop.  Ass’n v. Cobb , 63 Haw. 453, 465, 629 
P.2d 1134, 1143 (1981))).  This determination is supported by 
the wide range of activities and courses of conduct to which 
HEPA has been applied, including construction of buildings, 
expansion of or modifications to preexisting buildings, 
development of residential communities, and other real estate 
23developments;  construction on government lands in order to 
build or connect to sewage lines, waterlines, or other 
infrastructure;24 development of public transportation;25 
                     
 23 See Unite Here! Local 5 v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 123 Hawai i 
150, 155, 231 P.3d 423, 428 (2010) (expansion of the Turtle Bay resort, 
including the addition of hotel and condominium units and infrastructure); 
Nuuanu Valley Ass’n, 119 Hawai i at 94, 194 P.3d at 535 (development of a 
subdivision consisting  of nine residential lots); Price v. Obayashi Haw. 
Corp., 81 Hawai i 171, 173, 914 P.2d 1364, 1366 (1996) (recreational 
development project on the North Shore of O ahu); Kahana Sunset Owners Ass’n 
v. Cty. of Maui, 86 Hawai i 66, 68, 947 P.2d 378, 380 (1997) (multi -family 
residential development on Maui); Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cty. 
of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 224, 624 P.2d 1353, 1356 –57 (1981) (construction of 
a hotel building in Waikīkī); Hewitt v. Waikiki Shopping Plaza, 6 Haw. App. 
387, 390, 722 P.2d 1055, 1057 (1986) (construction of a shopping and parking 
complex in Waikīkī).  
 24 See Sierra Club v. Office of Planning, State of Haw., 109 Hawai i 
411, 413, 126 P.3d 1098, 1100 (2006) (tunneling underneath several state 
highways in order to construct a sewage transmission line and a water 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 construction of power generating facilities and the drilling of 
exploratory geothermal wells;26 the growing  of imported algae on 
facilities in state lands;27 and the Management Plan of the 
Observatory Site on the summit of Haleakal a̅ in which a new solar 
telescope was under construction.28  The commonality among the 
varied activities to which HEPA has been applied is their 
potential of producing “environmental concerns” that HEPA 
intended to be “ given appropriate consideration  in decision 
making along with economic and technical considerations. ”  See 
Nuuanu Valley Ass’n , 119 Hawai i at 103, 194 P.3d  at 544 (quoting 
                                                                               
(continued . . .) 
 
transmission line); Citizens for Prot. of N. Kohala Coastline v. Cty. of 
Haw., 91 Hawai i 94, 103, 979 P.2d 1120, 1129 (1999) (construction of 
underpasses below a state highway for golf carts); McGlone v. Inaba, 64 Haw. 
27, 29, 636 P.2d 158, 160 –61 (1981) (construction of underground utilities on 
state conservation land); Molokai Homesteaders Coop. Ass’n , 63 Haw. at 455, 
629 P.2d at 1137 (use of transmission facilities of the Molokai Irrigation 
System to transport water to a resort complex on the west end of Moloka i); 
Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 157 –67, 577 P.2d 1116, 1117 (1978) 
(construction of the Central Maui Water Transmission System).  
 25 See Sierra Club, 115 Hawai i at 305, 167  P.3d at 298 (proposed 
developments to the Kahului Harbor in order to accommodate the operations of 
the Hawai i Superferry project).  
 26 Kepoo v. Kane, 106 Hawai i 270, 275, 103 P.3d 939, 944 (2005) 
(power generating facility); Medeiros v. Haw. Cty. Planni ng Comm’n , 8 Haw. 
App. 183, 186, 797 P.2d 59, 61 (1990) (drilling of four exploratory 
geothermal wells); Waianae Coast Neighborhood Bd. v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., 64 
Haw. 126, 127, 637 P.2d 776, 777 (1981) (addition of an electric generating 
plant on O ahu). 
 27 Ohana Pale Ke Ao v. Bd. of Agric., State of Haw., 118 Hawai i 247, 
254, 188 P.3d 761, 768 (App. 2008).  
 28 Kilakila O Haleakala v. Univ. of Hawai i, 138 Hawai i 364, 371, 
382 P.3d 176, 183 (2016).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 HRS § 343-1) .  The diversity of the subject matter of previous 
HEPA cases affirms that the word “action” has not been  (and 
should not be) narrowly construed.  In this light , our 
determination that aquarium collection is a HEPA “action” 
furthers HEPA’s purpose  as stated under HRS § 188- 31: it “will 
ensure that environmental concerns are given appropriate 
consideration in decision making” so as to foster a holistic and 
thoughtful decisional  process.  HRS § 343 –1.  Given the nature, 
magnitude, and scale of aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 
and DLNR’s administrative rules , any environmental  effects that  
aquarium collection may have  fall squarely within the ambit of 
what HEPA’s environmental review framework intends to integrate 
into governmental decision making.29 
  Lastly, our  interpretation of “action” and our 
conclusion that it includes aquarium collection pursuant to 
permits issued under HRS § 188- 31 and DL NR’s administrative 
rules are also supported by HEPA’s framework.  As discussed, the 
fact that a proposed activity qualifies as an “action” does not 
mean that it would require environmental review, since the 
activity must also fall within a statutory category listed in 
HRS § 343- 5(a) and not be exempt from HEPA.  See Sierra Club , 
                     
 29 Compare the challenged activities in previous HEPA cases, supra 
notes 23—28. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 115 Hawai i at 306, 167 P.3d at  299.  And for applicant actions, 
as in this case, the agency must exercise discretionary consent 
as to the proposed activity in order for the activity to be 
subject to HEPA.  See infra  Part V.D.  Thus, our interpretation 
of “action,” which would include a range of activities that has  
the potential of producing environmental effects, is supported 
by the HEPA framework because  other steps in the HEPA analysis 
serve to counterbalance the scope of the meaning of “action.”  
That is, the succeeding steps in the HEPA analysis filter 
activities that qualify as “actions” in order to determine which 
“actions” actually require environmental review. 
3. The ICA Erred in its Analysis  
  The ICA , in the course of conduct ing a plain-language 
interpretation of HEPA “action,”  noted that the circuit court 
used a well- accepted dictionary to define “program” and 
“project. ”  Umberger v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res. , 138 Hawai i 
508, 514, 382 P.3d 320, 326 (App. 2016).  The ICA concluded that 
aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 is not a HEPA “action”  
because (1) none of the other cases decided by Hawai i appellate 
courts involved activity similar to aquarium collection; (2) a 
permit might include a situation in which a parent collects one 
or two fish or other aquatic life for use in a home aquarium;  
(3) other statutes and administrative rules exist that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 sufficiently regulate aquarium collection; and (4) other 
permitting regimes would be subject to HEPA environmental review 
if aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 were considered an 
“action. ”  Id. at 515—17, 382 P.3d at 327 —29. 
  With respect to t he ICA’s first line of reasoning, it 
concluded that aquarium collection is not a HEPA “action” 
because,  compared to any of the activities involved in previous 
HEPA cases, it is not a “specifically identifiable program or 
project.”  Id. at 516, 382 P.3d at 328.  However, as discussed, 
the class of activities and courses of action that HEPA covers 
is broad so as to successfully effectuate the intent and purpose 
of the statutory scheme.  See supra notes 23—28.  Additionally, 
there has been no HEPA case in which this court determined 
whether an activity is a HEPA “action” by evaluating its 
similarity to the challenged activities in other HEPA cases.  
Doing so would unreasonably del imit HEPA’s application  in a 
manner inconsistent with its purpose.30 
  T he ICA’s second line of reasoning is that it would be 
“unprecedented” to apply HEPA to the hypothetical situation in 
                     
 30 Further, if the similarity of aquarium collection to a previous 
activity to which HEPA was applied is a relevant consideration on whether 
aquarium collection is an “action,” then aquarium  collection qualifies as an 
“action” because it is similar to Disney Aulani’s request for a permit to use 
small mesh nets to collect live marine life for stocking a saltwater swimming 
pool.  Under the ICA’s analysis, just as Disney Aulani’s proposed activi ty 
was deemed to be a HEPA “action,” so would aquarium collection under permits 
issued pursuant to HRS § 188 -31 and DLNR’s administrative rules.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 which a “parent net[s] one or two fish from a stream for his or 
her child’s fish tank.”  Umberger , 138 Hawai i at 516, 382 P.3d 
at 328.  The premise of this line of reasoning is that, even 
though recreational aquarium collection permits  authorize the 
extraction of almost 2,000 fish or other aquatic life per person
annually, for the purpose of determining whether HEPA applies, 
the focus should be on the possibility that a person would use 
his or her recreational aquarium collection permit to take only 
one or two fish.  
  This analysis is flawed because the properly defined 
activity for the purposes of the HEPA analysis must encompass 
the outer limits of what the permits allow and not only the most 
restrictive  hypothetical manner in which the permits may be 
used.  That is , as discussed, the analysis must proceed from the 
properly defined activity allowed under aquarium collection 
permits, see supra  Part V.A.  (defining the activity authorized 
under HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s related administrative rules).   
See Sierra Club , 115 Hawai i at 306 n.6, 167 P.3d at 299 n.6.   
  In addition, a parent netting one or two fish for a 
home aquarium may not even be within the ambit of HRS § 188- 31 
because aquarium collection permits are required only if the 
applicant intends “to use fine meshed traps, or fine meshed nets 
other than throw nets, for the taking of marine or freshwater 
nongame fish and other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.”  HRS ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 § 188-31(a).  DLNR expounds on this distinction on its own 
website, informing the public that a permit to collect fish and 
other aquatic life for a home aquarium is not required “if a) 
the net has large mesh (more than two inches mesh); b) the net 
has small mesh but is less than three feet in length, height, or 
width, including the hand le; or c) using a slurp gun.”  FAQ’s, 
State of Haw . Division of Aquatic Resources, 
http://dlnr.hawaii.gov/dar/fishing/faqs/ (last visited July 11, 
2017).  Under these circumstances, the act of netting one or two 
fish would not constitute aquarium collection under HRS § 188- 31 
and, consequently, would not be a HEPA “action.”31  Lastly, the 
situation postulated by the ICA --a parent netting one or two 
fish or other aquatic life for recreational purposes--is n ot 
present in this case,32 and DLNR’s own evi dence in fact showed 
that, from 1999 to 2010, millions of aquatic life were harvested 
under aquarium collection permits issued pursuant to HRS § 188-
31. 
                     
 31 In addition, a parent collecting one or two fish for recreational 
purposes would not fall within any of the categories of land uses and 
administrative acts under HRS § 343 -5(a), see  infra Part V.B. & note 47, and 
even if it were to qualify under any of the categories under HRS § 343 -5(a), 
a parent engaging in aquarium collection of this nature may also be exempt 
from HEPA, see infra Part V.C. & note 51. 
 32 Petitioners also emphasize in their application for writ of 
certiorari that this scenario is not part of the record in this case.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41   In holding that aquarium collection does not 
constitute a HEPA “action,” the ICA also reasoned that t here is 
a “panoply of other regulatory tools that are in place” “to 
protect marine life and the reef ecosystem from the 
‘unconstrained removal’ of large numbers of aquarium fish.”  
Umberger , 138 Hawai i at 516, 382 P.3d at 329.  The regulations 
that the ICA identified include bag and size limits for certain 
aquatic species on O ahu (see HAR § 13-77- 6(b), (c), (d) 
(effective 2015)), length and height requirements for allowed 
mesh nets that apply to O ahu (see HAR § 13-77- 6(a)), monthly 
reporting requirements for commercial collectors ( see HRS §§ 
189-3 (2011), 189 -3.5 (2011); HAR § 13- 74-20(d) (effective 
2010)), and DLNR’s power pursuant to HAR § 13 -75-14(4) 
(effective 2007) to attach other conditions to commercial 
permits.  Umberger , 138 Hawai i at 516 –17, 382 P.3d at 328 –29.33  
However, as the ICA itself acknowledged, these regulations and 
statutory frameworks are not “dispositive” of whether aquarium 
collection pursuant to HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s administrative 
rules is a HEPA action.  Id. at 517, 382 P.3d at 329 .  Further, 
                     
 33 The ICA also referenced statutory provisions governing Marine 
Life Conservation Districts, Regional Fisheries Management Areas (including 
Fish Replenishment Areas), Shoreline Fisheries Management Areas (including 
Marine Protection Areas), and Marine Refuges.  Umberger, 138 Hawai i at 516–
17, 382 P.3d at 328– 29. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 none of these regulations and statutes defines or modifies 
aquarium collection pursuant to  HRS § 188 -31 and DLNR’s 
administrative rules in a manner that would exclude such 
collection from the meaning of “action” under HEPA .34   
  The ICA’s  reasoning that other statutes and rules that 
overlap with HEPA could somehow place certain activities outside 
of the meaning of “action” or preclude the application of HEPA 
to such activities is also contradicted by its own precedent.  
As the ICA itself recognized in Ohana Pale Ke Ao, where HEPA 
overlaps and is consistent with another chapter of the HRS, both 
would be given effect.  Ohana Pale Ke Ao v. Bd. of Agric., State 
of Haw., 118 Hawai i 247, 25 5, 188 P.3d 761, 769  (App. 2008).  
Here, there is no hindrance to giving effect to the statutes and 
                     
 34 The ICA’s suggestion that the number or comprehensiveness of 
agency rules plays a significant role in determining whether an activity 
qualifies as a HEPA “action” generates numerous evaluative considerations and 
other complications.  For example, there is no standard for deciding whether 
a statutory or regulatory scheme is sufficiently comprehensive, protective, 
and enforced as to render a regulated activity not a HEPA “action.”  In 
addition, the existence of other statutes and rules concerning a particular 
activity does not necessarily mean that  their purpose would be identical to 
that of HEPA or that they, in fact, are sufficiently protective.  In this 
case, for example, despite the statutes and rules that the ICA underscored in 
its opinion, excerpts of publications that Petitioners submitted in  support 
of their motion for summary judgment illustrate the detrimental effects of 
aquarium collection to fish population and coral reef ecosystems.  
  Further, the feasibility of the ICA’s analysis is also predicated 
on the assumption that any comprehensive statutory or regulatory scheme in 
place is strictly enforced.  However, there is no evidence in the record that 
could support this assumption.  Petitioner Willie Kaupiko declared that some 
aquarium collectors fish in prohibited areas, that he reported the incidents 
to DLNR, that DLNR is non -responsive or slow to respond, and that DLNR did 
not investigate the allegations.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 regulations identified by the ICA while also applying the 
requirements of HEPA to aquarium collection because the statutes 
and regulations have not been demonstrated to be inconsistent 
with HEPA.  See id.35 
  Further, a s mentioned, HEPA’s purpose is “to establish 
a system of environmental review which will ensure that 
environmental concerns are given appropriate consideration in 
decision making along with economic and technical 
considerations.”  HRS § 343– 1.  If the fact that other laws and 
rules that facially appear to bear  upon the environmental 
effects of an activity would exclude the activity from HEPA’s 
purview, then this would frustrate  HEPA’s purpose of requiring 
agencies to appropriately consider environmental concerns in 
their decision- making process.  In other words, under the ICA’s 
analysis, an agency would be able  to bypass the protections 
provided through HEPA by promulgating administrative rules that 
appear to address or bear upon the possible environmental 
effects of an activity that the agency regulates without 
actually engaging in the informed and deliberate decision-  
making process that HEPA requires . 
                     
 35 No evidence was presented to demonstrate any inconsistency 
between HEPA, on the one hand, and the statutes and rules that the ICA 
referenced in its opinion, on the other.  DLNR does not argue (nor has it 
argued in the lower courts) that such an inconsistency exists.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44   The ICA ’s final reason  for its holding that aquarium 
collection under HRS § 188- 31 is not a HEPA “action” is that 
Petitioners “offered no rational distinction or logical reason 
why HEPA environmental review procedures should be required for 
aquarium fish permits, but not for . . . other types of licenses 
and permits,” including (among others) bait fish licenses, 
commercial marine licenses, special activity permits, permits to 
enter or conduct activities in certain areas, hunting licenses, 
camping permits, collecting permits, and commercial activity 
permits.  Umberger , 138 Hawai i at 517, 382 P.3d at 329.  
Implicit in the ICA’s reasoning is the concern that, if aquarium 
collection under HRS § 188- 31 were considered a HEPA “action” 
subject to environmental review, other permitting regimes 
administered by government agencies would also be subject to 
environmental review.  See id.  However, the fact that aquarium 
collection is conducted pursuant to the permitting scheme that 
DLNR administers does not drive the conclusion that aquarium 
collection is a HEPA “action” or that H EPA applies.  The 
activities authorized by the permitting schemes that the ICA 
utilized in its analysis are not effective points of comparison 
given their substantial differences, both in magnitude and 
nature, from  the activities sanctioned by aquarium collection 
permits.  For example, many of the activities under the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 permitting regimes that the ICA identified do not appear to be 
“programs” or “projects.”  
  Further, as stated , in order for HEPA to apply, the 
activity must be an action that falls within a category 
enumerated in HRS § 343- 5(a), discussed infra Part V.B., and not 
be exempt, discussed infra Part V.C.  See Sierra Club , 115 
Hawaii at 306, 167 P.3d at 299.  A nd for applicant actions, an 
additional prerequisite is that the action must be subject to an 
agency’s exercise of discretionary consent, discussed infra Part 
V.D.  Thus, concluding that  aquarium collection under HRS § 188-
31 and DLNR’s administrative rules is a HEPA “action” or is 
subject to HEPA does not necessarily prescribe  a determination 
that activities under other permitting regimes are also HEPA 
“actions”  or are subject to HEPA’s environmental review 
requirements.  Such activities must independently meet the 
analytical framework set forth in Sierra Club  and discussed in 
this case. 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA ’s analysis did not 
proceed from a full and proper definition of  the activity  
authorized under aquarium collection permits.   Instead, the ICA 
appeared to focus on an extreme hypothetical subset of the 
activity being proposed.  In addition, the ICA improperly relied  
on other statutes, administrative rules, and other permitting ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 regimes in its analysis.   For these reasons, the ICA erred in 
concluding that aquarium collection is not a HEPA “action .”36 
B. Whether  Aquarium Collection Falls Within O ne or More of the 
Nine Categories  Listed U nder HRS § 343 –5(a) 
  For an activity to be subject to HEPA environmental 
review, the second requirement is that it must fall within at 
least one category of land uses or administrative acts (known as 
“triggers”) enumerated in HRS § 343 -5(a) (2010).37  See Sierra 
Club v. Dep’t of Transp.  of the State of Haw. , 115 Hawai i 299, 
306, 167 P.3d 292, 299 (2007).  DLNR conceded for the purposes 
of the summary judgment proceedings that “there is a use of 
state land ” in this case and that, therefore, “[t]here is a 
‘trigger’ pursuant to Haw. Rev. Stat. § 343 -5(a) (2010).”  After 
                     
 36 Petitioners also contend that the ICA’s construction of “program” 
and “project” undermines DLNR’s public trust and st atutory duties to conserve 
marine resources.  In light of our disposition in this case, this issue need 
not be reached. 
 37 The parties’ primary dispute in this case involves whether 
activities allowed under permits issued pursuant to HRS § 188 -31 and DLNR’s 
administrative rules are HEPA “actions.”  Having found that aquarium 
collection pursuant to permits issued by DLNR is a H EPA “action” --contrary to 
the circuit court’s ruling --we proceed to consider other grounds upon which 
the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment to DLNR may be affirmed.  See 
Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai i 137, 140– 41, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 –85 (1994) 
(“This court may affirm a grant of summary judgment on any ground appearing 
in the record, even if the circuit court did not rely on it.”).  Thus, we 
consider whether there is an issue of material fact as to either of the two 
other requisites of HEPA review.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 reviewing the applicable legal principles in the discussion that 
follows, we conclude that DLNR’s concession  is correct.38 
  C ategories of land use under which aquarium collection 
may fall include HRS § 343- 5(a)(1) (actions that “[p]ropose the 
use of state or county lands ”)39 and HRS § 343- 5(a)(2) (actions 
that “[p]ropose any use within any land classified as a 
conservation district by the state land use commission under 
chapter 205”). 
 Therefore, we determine (1) whether marine 
waters40 and the submerged lands in which aquarium collection is 
                     
 38 We review the merits of DLNR’s concession because a court is not 
bound by a party’s “apparent concession of law.”  Ass’n of Apartment Owners 
of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Dirs. v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai i 
232, 254, 167 P.3d 225, 247 (2007) (citing McCandless v. Campbell, 20 Haw. 
404, 405 (1911)).  “[W]e are free to interpret . . . and apply the correct 
law to its enforcement.”  Beclar Corp. v. Young, 7 Haw. App. 183, 190, 750 
P.2d 934, 938– 39 (1988).  
 39 In full, HRS § 343 -5(a)(1) provides as follows: 
(a) Except as otherwise provided, an environmental 
assessment shall be required for actions that:  
(1) Propose the use of state or county lands or the 
use of state or county funds, other than funds to 
be used for feasibility or planning studies for 
possible future programs or projects that the 
agency has not approved, adopted, or funded, or 
funds to be used for the acquisition of 
unimproved real property; provided that the 
agency shall consider environmental factors and 
available alternatives in its feasibility or 
planning studies; provided further that an 
environmental assessment for proposed uses under 
section 205- 2(d)(11) or 205 -4.5(a)(13) shall only 
be required pursuant to section 205 -5(b) . . . .  
 40 Aquarium collection under HRS § 188 -31 also allows extraction of 
fish and other aquatic life from freshwater sources.  HRS § 188 -31(a).  We do 
not address freshwater sources because the activities under the permits being 
challenged in this case, based on the parties’ filings and the record on 
appeal, all transpire in marine waters and submerged lands.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 conducted constitute state lands  or are within a conservation 
district and (2) whether aquarium collection constitutes “use.”  
1. Whether Marine Waters and Submerged Lands in Which Aquarium 
Collection is Conducted Constitute State Lands 
  “Land” is not defined by HEPA, so we commence our  
statutory construction by employing “the well -settled canon that 
‘[l]aws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall 
be construed with reference to each other.  What is clear in one 
statute may be called upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in 
another.’”  State v. Bovee , 139 Hawaii 530, 544, 394 P.3d 760, 
774 (2017) (quoting State v. Alangcas, 134 Hawai i 515, 527, 345 
P.3d 181, 193 (2015)); accord HRS § 1–16 (1993).  Chapter 171 of 
the HRS, the chapter that created DLNR and prescribes its 
41authority,  defines “land” as “includ[ing] all interests therein 
and natural resources including water , minerals, and all such 
things connected with land, unless otherwise expressly 
provided.”  HRS § 171 -1 (2011) (emphasis added).  HRS § 171-2 
then defines “public lands” as  
all lands or interest therein  in the State classed as 
government or crown lands previous to August 15, 1895, or 
acquired or reserved by the government upon or subsequent 
to that date by purchase, exchange, escheat, or the 
exercise of the right of eminent domain, or in any other 
manner; including lands accreted after May 20, 2003, and 
not otherwise awarded, submerged lands, and lands beneath 
tidal waters that are suitable for reclamation , together 
                     
 41 See generally  HRS §§ 171- 3 (2011), 171 -4 (2011), 171 -6 (2011), 
171-7 (2011). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 with reclaimed lands that have been given the status of 
public lands under this chapter . . . .  
HRS § 171- 2 (2011) (emphase s added).42 
  Thus, included within the meaning of “land”  and 
“public lands” are “water” and “submerged lands.”  HRS §§ 171 -1, 
171-2.  Based on these  definition s, marine waters and submerged 
lands in which aquarium collection is conducted are included 
within the meaning of “land”  under HEPA.   HRS §§ 171 -1, 171-2. 
  Further, whe n the State acts as a trustee and 
exercises fiduciary duties over certain areas not typically 
considered “state lands,” this court has held that , for HEPA 
purposes,  those areas qualify as state lands.  For example, this 
court held that Hawaiian homelands are “state lands” for HEPA 
purposes because of the State’s  trust obligations with respect 
to those lands and its fiduciary duty to the beneficiaries of 
those lands.  Kepoo v. Watson , 87 Hawaii 91, 97–98, 952 P.2d 
379, 385–86 (1998) .  Similar to the State’s trusteeship to 
Hawaiian homelands, this court has repeatedly reaffirmed that 
                     
 42 On the same note, DLNR’s administrative rules define “[l]and” as 
“all real property, fast or submerged, and all interests therein, including 
fauna, flora, minerals, and all such natural resources, unless otherwise 
expressly provided.”  HAR § 13 -5-2 (effective 1994).  The Land Use 
Commission’s rules define “[l]and” as “all real property in the State 
including areas under water  within the boundaries of the State.”  HAR § 15 -
15-03 (effective 1997).  
  DLNR then defines the phrase “[s]ubmerged lands” as “lands from 
the shoreline seaward to the extent of the State’s jurisdiction.”  HAR § 13 -
5-2. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 the State’s public trust obligations pursuant to article XI, 
section 1 of the Hawaii Constitution extend “to all water 
resources.”  In re Water Use Permit Applications (Waiāhole), 94 
Hawaii 97, 133, 9 P.3d 409, 445 (2000); Kauai Springs, Inc. v. 
Planning Comm’n of the Cty. of Kaua i, 133 Hawaii 141, 172, 324 
P.3d 951, 982 (2014) (“[T] he public trust doctrine applies to 
all water resources  without except ion or distinction.” (quoting 
Waiāhole , 94 Hawaii at 133, 9 P.3d at  445)).  The common law of 
Hawaii also embodies the precept that “navigable waters” and 
“[t]he lands under the navigable waters in and around the 
territory of the Hawaiian Government are held in trust for the 
public uses of navigation .”  King v. Oahu Ry. & Land Co. , 11 
Haw. 717, 725 (Haw. Terr. 1899).  Just as Hawaiian homelands are 
“state lands” for the purposes of HRS § 343 -5(a)(1) because they 
are subject to the State’s statutorily defi ned trust 
obligations, so too are marine  waters and submerged lands, both 
of which are subject to the State’s constitutional and common -
law public trust duties.  See Kepoo, 87 Hawaii at 97– 98, 952 
P.2d at 385– 86; Waiāhole, 94 Hawaii at 133, 9 P.3d at 445.  It 
therefore follows that the State  marine waters and the submerged 
lands in which aquarium collection occurs are “state lands” 
under HEPA. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 2. Whether Marine Waters are Within a Conservation District  
  HEPA environmental review is also triggered when  an 
action “[p]ropose[s] any use within any land classified as a 
conservation district by the state land use commission under 
chapter 205.”  HRS §  343-5(a)(2).  According to HRS § 205- 2(e) 
(Supp. 2012), “[c]onservation districts shall include areas 
necessary for . . . conserving indigenous or endemic 
. . . 
fish[] and wildlife, including those which are threatened or 
endangered,” or “would maintain or enhance the conservation of 
natural or scenic resources. ”  Thus, the legislature  uses the 
term “areas” in defining “conservation districts,” and it does 
not limit what constitutes “conservation districts” to “lands.”  
Id.43   
  Additionally, pursuant to HRS §  343-5(a)(2), the Land 
Use Commission has adopted HAR § 15 -15-20, which provides in 
relevant part the following:  
 §15-15-20  
Standards for determining “C” conservation 
district boundaries.  Except as otherwise provided in this 
chapter, in determining the boundaries for the “C” 
conservation district, the following standards shall apply: 
   . . . . 
(6)  It shall include lands having an elevation below the 
shoreline  as stated by section 205A -I, HRS, [and] 
marine waters . . . . 
                     
 43 Additionally, as discussed in the preceding section, the term 
“lands” includes “submerged lands” and “waters.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 HAR § 15-15-20(6) (effective 1997)  (emphases added).   In 
addition, HAR § 15- 15-22(a)(2) (effective 1997) provides that in 
interpreting district boundaries, “[l] and having a n elevation 
below the shoreline [and] marine waters . . . of the State[]  . . 
. shall be included in the conservation district .”  HAR § 15- 15-
22(a)(2) (effective 1997).  Thus, the legislature and the  Land 
Use Commission, through its statutory rulemaking authority, 
clearly included lands below the shoreline (i.e., submerged 
lands) and marine waters of the State within conservation 
districts.  See HRS § 205- 2(e) (Supp. 2012); HA R § 15-15-20(6); 
HAR § 15-15 -22(a)(2). 
  The inclusion of State marine waters within 
conservation districts designated by the Land Use Commission is 
reinforced by HRS § 190- 1 (2011),  which provides that “[a]ll 
marine waters of the State . . . constitute[] a marine life 
conservation area to be administered by the department of land 
and natural resources subject to this chapter and any other 
applicable laws not inconsistent herewith or with any rules 
adopted pursuant hereto .”44  Consistent with its legislative 
mandate, DLNR has promulgated administrative rules that 
                     
 44 Since 1990, the legislature has defined “state marine waters” “as 
extending from the upper reaches of the wash of the waves on shore seaward to 
the limit of the State’s police power and management authority, including the 
United States territorial sea, notwithstanding any law to the contrary.”  HRS 
§ 190-1.5 (2011). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
53 established subzones within conservation districts.45  A 
conservation district, under DLNR rules, encompasses subzones of 
“[l]ands and state marine waters seaward of the shoreline  to the 
extent of the State’s jurisdiction, unless placed in a 
[protective] or [limited] subzone.”  HAR § 13 -5-13(b)(5) 
(effective 1994) (emphasis added).  Accordingly, lands and State 
marine waters seaward of the shoreline under the State’s 
jurisdiction, in which the aquarium collection practices 
challenged in this case are conducted, are within conservation 
districts classified by the Land Use Commission pursuant to its 
authority under HRS chapter 205 and thus fall within a category 
of land use enumerated in HEPA.  
3. Whether Aquarium Collection is a “Use”  Under HRS § 343 –5 
  We next consider whether aquarium collection is a 
“use” under HRS § 343 -5.  “Use” is also an undefined term under 
HEPA, and this court has previously observed that its ordinary 
meaning “could be construed to apply to any ‘use’ of state or 
county land, no matter what or how benign that ‘use’ may be.”   
                     
 45 DLNR’s rulemaking power originates from the legislature, which 
has authorized DLNR to “establish and from time to time modify the limits of 
one or more conservation districts in each county and may, if it deems 
necessary, declare all waters within any county a conservation district.”  
HRS § 190- 2 (2011).  In addition, the legislature has required DLNR in HRS § 
183C-3(7) (Supp. 1994) to “[e]stablish and enforce land use regulations on 
conservation district lands” and in HRS § 183C-4(b) and (d) (Supp. 1997)  to 
“adopt rules governing the use of land within the boundaries of the 
conservation district” and to establish a nd define zones within the 
conservation district.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
54 Nuuanu Valley Ass’n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 119 Hawai i 90, 
103, 194 P.3d 531, 544 (2008).  Our court declined to adopt such 
a sweeping interpretation, concluding “that the boundaries of 
the meaning of the word ‘use,’ as contemplated by HRS § 343–
5(a)(1), is not unlimited in possibilities.”   Id.  In reaching 
this conclusion, the court noted that, in a previous case, we 
rejected the plaintiff’s argument “that the ‘potential use of’ a 
public highway leading to [a  development]  project” 
“constitute[s] use of state land. ”  Id. (quoting Citizens for 
Prot. of N. Kohala Coastline v. Cty. o f Hawaii, 91 Hawaii 94, 
103 n.8, 979 P.2d 1120, 1129 n. 8 (1999)).  Thus, this court 
concluded in Nuuanu Valley  that merely connecting to an existing 
drainage system and county lines without any construction or 
tunneling beneath state or county lands was not a “use” within 
the meaning of that term in HRS § 343- 5(a)(1).  Id. at 103—04, 
194 P.3d at  544—45. 
  What can be readily gleaned from Nuuanu Valley  is that 
whether a proposed activity constitutes a “use of state or 
county lands” depends on the nature of the activity and the 
extent of the involvement of state or county lands .  Id. at 103, 
194 P.3d at  544.  When the proposed activity utilizes state or 
county lands in a decidedly inconsequential or negligible 
manner, like the mere connection to state or county lands in 
Nuuanu Valley, or when the use is hypothetical, like the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
55 “potential use” of a public highway in Citizens , then the 
activity does not rise to the level of “use” contemplated by 
HEPA.  When, on the other hand, the proposed activity utilizes 
state or county lands in an actual and more substantial way, the 
activity qualifies as a “use” under HEPA.  Compare Nuuanu 
Valley, 119 Hawaii at 103–04, 194 P.3d at 544 –45 (connecting to 
existing county lines was not a “use”), with Kahana Sunset 
Owners Ass’n v. Cty. of Maui , 86 Hawaii 66, 71, 947 P.2d 378, 
383 (1997) (installing a new drainage line beneath a public 
street that would be connected to an existing culvert beneath a 
public highway was a “use”) , Citizens , 91 Hawaii at 103, 979 
P.2d at 1129 (constructing  two underpasses beneath a state 
highway was a “use”) , and Sierra Club v. Office of Planning, 
State of Haw. , 109 Hawai i 411, 415 –16, 126 P.3d 1098, 1102–03 
(2006) (constructing  sewage and water transmission lines by 
tunneling beneath state highways was a “use” ). 
  P ermits for commercial aquarium collection allow for 
the unlimited collection of fish and other aquatic life, and 
each recreational permit authorizes the extraction of close to 
2,000 fish or other aquatic life annually, subject to  the terms 
and conditions of the permits and to certain restrictions set by 
law.  See HAR § 13- 75-14; see supra note 21.  The aquatic life 
collected inhabits “state lands”  and conservation districts , as ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
56 discussed, and are integral components of the State’s reef 
ecosystem.  Thus, aquarium collection utilizes  “state lands”  and 
conservation districts  in an actual and substantial manner.  
Said differently, aquarium collection as allowed under 
commercial and recreational permits cannot be said to fall 
within the narrow spectrum of activities that this court has 
excluded from the meaning of the word “use” in Nuuanu Valley .46  
Accordingly, aquarium collection pursuant to permits issued 
under HRS § 188- 31 qualifies as a “use of state . . . lands”  and 
47as a “use within . . . a conservation district.”  
C. Whether Aquarium Collection  is Exempt under HRS § 343- 6(a)(2) 
  Having determined that aquarium collection under HRS § 
188-31 and DLNR’s permitting scheme  is a HEPA “action” that 
qualifies as a “use of state . . . lands,” we proceed to the 
                     
 46 DLNR argues that, if aquarium collection under HRS § 188 -31 is 
considered a HEPA “action,” all activities “in a government building or by a 
government employee” would be subject to environmental review pursuant to 
HEPA because those activities involve “the  use of state or county lands or 
the use of state or county funds.”  This assertion is without merit because, 
as discussed, not all activities qualify as a “use,” and activities such as 
“turning on the lights” in a government building, a hypothetical that DLNR 
asserts, are unquestionably not within the set of activities that qualify as 
a “use” under Nuuanu Valley . 
 47 As stated, a parent netting one or two fish for recreational use 
would not fall within any of the categories listed in HRS § 343 -5(a).  See 
supra note 31.  The reason is that the nature and magnitude of the  
involvement of marine waters and submerged lands in this type of activity are 
inconsequential and negligible such that this activity would not qualify as a 
“use” of state lands or conservation districts under HRS § 343 -5(a).  It 
follows that, if permits were issued for activities similarly limited in 
nature and magnitude as a parent  collecting one or two fish for recreational 
purposes, the activities under such permits would also not be considered a 
“use” of state and conservation lands.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
57 third part of the analysis: whether aquarium collection is 
exempt from HEPA environmental review.  HRS § 343- 6 requires the 
Environmental Council to adopt, amend, or repeal rules that 
shall “[e]stablish procedures whereby specific types of actions, 
because they will probably have minimal or no significant 
effects on the environment, are declared exempt from the 
preparation of an environmental assessment.”48  HRS § 343- 6(a)(2) 
(2010).  The Environmental Council accordingly adopted 
categories of “actions” in HAR § 11 -200-8(a) that “ may be 
declared exempt by the proposing agency or approving agency from 
the preparation of an environmental assessment provided that 
                     
 48 HEPA defines “[s]ignificant effect” as  
the sum of effects on the quality of the environment, 
including actions that irrevocably commit a natural 
resource, curtail the range of beneficial uses of the 
environment, are contrary to the State’s environmental 
policies or long -term environmental goals as established by 
law, or adversely affect the economic welfare, social 
welfare, or cultural practices of the community and State.  
HRS § 343- 2 (2010). 
  HAR § 11- 200-2 defines “effects” as follows:  
 “Effects” or “impacts” as used in this chapter are 
synonymous.  Effects may include ecological effects (such 
as the effects on natural resources and on the components, 
structures, and functioning of affected ecosystems), 
aesthetic effects, historic effects, cultural effects, 
economic effects, social effects, or health effects, 
whether primary, secondary, or cumulative.  Effects may 
also include those effects resulting from actions which may 
have both beneficial and detrimental effects, even if on 
balance the agency believes that the effect will be 
beneficial.  
HAR § 11-200-2 (effective 1996).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
58 agencies declaring an action exempt under this section shall 
obtain the advice of other outside agencies or individuals 
having jurisdiction or expertise as to the propriety of the 
exemption.”  HAR § 11 -200-8(a) (effective 1996).  These 
categories include the operations, repairs, replacement or 
reconstruction of existing structures; construction and 
modification of certain small facilities or structures; minor 
alterations in the conditions of land, water, or vegetation; 
basic data collection and research activities; construction or 
placement of minor structures accessory to existing facilities; 
interior alterations; demolition of certain structures; certain 
zoning variances; continuing administrative activities; and 
acquisition of land and structures for the purpose of affordable 
housing.  Id. 
  In addition, the Environmental Council decreed by 
administrative rule that “[e] ach agency, through time and 
experience, shall develop its own list of specific types of 
actions which fall within the exempt classes, as long as these 
lists are consistent with both the letter and intent expressed 
in these exempt classes and chapter 343, HRS .”  HAR §  11-200-
8(d).  The authority of the various agencies under HAR § 11- 200-
8(d), however,  is not boundless.  As this court explained in 
Kahana Sunset , the intent of the exemption list in HAR § 11-200 -
8, adopted pursuant to HRS § 343-6(a)(2), is “ to exempt only ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
59 very minor projects from the ambit of HEPA .”  Kahana Sunset 
Owners Ass’n v. Cty. of Maui , 86 Hawaii 66, 72, 947 P.2d 378, 
384 (1997).  Thus, this court later held that, when developing 
lists of the exemptions pursuant to HAR § 11- 200-8(d), an agency 
must preliminarily determine that the action to be declared 
exempt is a very minor project that “will ‘probably have minimal 
or no significant effects on the environment.’”  Sierra Club v. 
Dep’t of Transp.  of the State of Haw. , 115 Hawaii 299, 316, 167 
P.3d 292, 309 (2007).  Our decision in Sierra Club also 
concluded “that not only must the exemption list be developed 
with regard to the letter and intent of HEPA and its 
regulations, but so also must individual exemption 
determinations.”  Id.  This means that individual exemption 
determinations must be determined to “probably have minimal or 
no significant effects on the environment. ”  Id. (quoting HAR § 
11-200-2). 
  Guided by these principles, this court in Sierra Club 
concluded that an agency must make the following determinations 
in deciding whether a proposed activity is exempt from HEPA.  
Preliminarily, the agency must determine whether the action is 
part of a “group of actions” that must be “treated as a single 
action” pursuant to HAR § 11 -200-7 (effective 1985).  
Thereafter, the agency must conduct a four- step analysis: an 
action is exempt from HEPA if (1) it is within an exempt class ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
60 promulgated by the Environmental Council in HAR § 11- 200-8(a) or 
within an exemption category created by the agency itself 
pursuant to its authority under HAR § 11- 200-8(d); (2) the 
relevant exemption category can be applied because the activity 
does not have a significant cumulative impact and it does not 
have a significant impact on a particularly sensitive 
environment, see HAR § 11- 200-8(b); (3) the agency obtained the 
advice of other agencies or individuals having jurisdiction or 
expertise as to the propriety of the exemption, HAR § 11- 200-
8(a); and (4) the action will probably have minimal or no 
significant effects on the environment, HRS § 343- 6(a)(2); see 
also HAR § 11-200-8(d); Sierra Club , 115 Hawai i at 315 —16, 167 
P.3d at 308— 09.  If the action fails to satisfy any of the four 
requirements discussed, it is not exempt from HEPA.  Sierra 
Club, 115 Hawai i at 315— 16, 167 P.3d at 308 —09. 
  As a matter of law, it cannot be concluded that 
commercial aquarium collection, which involves the extraction of 
an unlimited number of fish and other aquatic  life annually, may 
be exempt from HEPA because it does not qualify within any of 
the exemption categories in HAR § 11- 200-8(a).  The most 
relevant exemption-- “[m]inor alterations in the conditions of 
land, water, or vegetation ” under HAR § 11 -200-8(a)(4)-- has no 
application because a permit for extraction of an unlimited 
number of aquatic life  cannot be said to constitute only a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
61 “[m]inor alteration” in the condition of State waters and 
submerged lands.49 
  With respect to recreational aquarium collection, 
which allows each permit holder to extract close to 2,000 fish 
or other aquatic life per year,50 the record is not sufficiently 
developed so as to allow this court to determine whether th is 
“action” may be exempted from HEPA under an exemption category 
in HAR § 11-200 -8(a) or under DLNR’s own exemption list 
promulgated pursuant to HAR § 11-200- 8(d).51  In sum, commercial 
                     
 49 With the Environmenta l Council’s approval, DLNR has promulgated 
its own exemption list pursuant to its authority under HAR § 11 -200-8(d).  
Exemption List for the Department of Land and Natural Resources  (2015), 
http://oeqc.doh.hawaii.gov/Shared%20Documents/Environmental_Council/Exemption
_Lists_By_Department/State_Agencies/DLNR_Comprehensive_Exemption_List_06 -05-
15_Final.pdf.  None of the exemption classes that DLNR adopted applies in 
this case.  The closest relevant exemption under Exemption Class 4--“[m]inor 
alterations in [S]tate waters, including restoration of native species and 
control of invasive weeds, algae, invertebrates, fishes or other invasive 
aquatic organisms”--does not apply because, as discussed, commercial aquarium 
collection cannot be said to constitute a “[m]i nor alteration[] in [S]tate 
waters.” 
  Because we conclude that activities allowed by commercial 
aquarium collection permits do not qualify under any of the exemption 
categories in HAR § 11 -200-8(a) and in DLNR’s own exemption list, it is not 
necessary for this court to apply the other prongs of the exemption framework 
to commercial aquarium collection.  
 50 When the aquarium collector does not collect the maximum amount 
of aquatic animals authorized, the catch could be such that rarer, more 
vulnerable species are specifically targeted.  
 51 A parent collecting one or two fish for recreational use, aside 
from not falling within any of the categories under HRS § 343 -5(a), may also 
be exempt from HEPA.  See supra note 31.  This is because this activity 
arguably falls under the exemption for minor alterations in the conditions of 
land, water, or vegetation, as discussed in this section.  Thus, if permits 
issued under HRS § 188 -31 allow only activities similar in nature and 
magnitude as a parent collecting one or two fish for recreational purposes, 
the activity may also be exempt from HEPA within the framework discussed 
above. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
62 aquarium collection is  not exempted from HEPA, but the 
possibility that recreational aquarium collection as authorized  
under HRS § 188 -31 and DLNR ’s administrative rules may be 
exempted should be explored further by the parties and the 
circuit court upon remand using the analytical framework 
discussed herein . 
D. Discretionary Consent 
  We have determined that aquarium collection is a HEPA 
“action” that qualifies as a use of state lands and that, while 
commercial aquarium collection is  not exempted from HEPA’s 
environmental review requirements, the record is not 
sufficiently developed for this court to determine whether the 
same is true for recreational aquarium collection.  However, 
because aquarium collection has been cast in this case as an 
applicant action, in order for environmental review to be 
required under HEPA, there is an additional inquiry of whether 
issuing a permit for aquarium collection requires “approval of 
an agency.”  HRS § 343 -5(e) (Supp. 2012).52 
                     
 52  In relevant part, HRS § 343 -5(e) provides as follows:  
 (e) Whenever an applicant proposes an action 
specified by subsection (a) that requires approval of an 
agency and that is not a specific type of action declared 
exempt under section 343 -6, the agency initially receiving 
and agreeing to process the request for approval shall 
require the applicant to prepare an environmental 
assessment of the proposed action at the earliest 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
63   “Approval,”  as defined by HEPA,  “means a discretionary 
consent required from an agency prior to actual implementation 
of an action.”  HRS § 343 -2 (2010).  “‘Discretionary consent’  
means a consent, sanction, or recommendation from an agency for 
which judgment and free will may be exercised by the issuing 
agency, as distinguished from a ministerial consent. ”  Id.  DLNR 
contends that it does not issue an “approval” because it does 
not exercise discretion whenever it issues aquarium collection 
permits pursuant to HRS § 188- 31 (2011) and that, therefore, 
HEPA does not apply to aquarium collection. 
                                                                               
(continued . . .) 
 
practicable time to determine whether an environmental 
impact statement shall be required .  . . . 
HRS § 343- 5(e) (emphasis added).  
  In their reply, Petitioners argue that the ICA’s holding 
regarding DLNR’s discretionary authority is not properly before this court 
because DLNR did not cross -file an application for writ of certiorari 
challenging that portion of the ICA’s published opinion.  However, whether 
discretionary authority exists is a “subsidiary question fairly comprised” by 
the issue presented in Petitioners’ application for writ of cert iorari--
whether aquarium collection pursuant to HRS § 188 -31 and DL NR’s 
administrative rules requires HEPA review--because, as explained, in order to 
ultimately resolve the issue presented, this court must determine whether 
DLNR exercises discretionary consent in granting HRS § 188 -31 aquarium 
permits.  Hawai i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 40.1(d)(1) (2016) 
(“The statement of a question presented will be deemed to include every 
subsidiary question fairly comprised therein.”).  In addition, we re ach the 
question of discretionary authority as part of our duty to consider any 
grounds upon which the circuit court’s summary judgment ruling may be 
affirmed.  See supra note 37.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
64   HRS § 188- 31 expressly provides that DLNR, “ upon 
receipt of a written application,  may issue an aquarium fish 
permit, not longer than one year in duration, to use fine meshed 
traps, or fine meshed nets other than throw nets, for the taking 
of marine or freshwater nongame fish and other aquatic life for 
53aquarium purposes. ”  HRS § 188-31(a) ( emphasis added).   “The 
term ‘may’ is generally construed to render optional, 
                     
 53 As stated, HRS § 188 -31 provides the following:  
 (a) Except as prohibited by law, the department, 
upon receipt of a written application, may issue an 
aquarium fish permit, not longer than one year in duration, 
to use fine meshed traps, or fine meshed nets other than 
throw nets, for the taking of marine or freshwater nongame 
fish and other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.  
 (b) Except as prohibited by law, the permits shall 
be issued only to persons who can satisfy the department 
that they possess facilities to and can maintain fish and 
other aquatic life alive and in reasonable health.  
 (c) It shall be illegal to sell or offer for sale 
any fish and other aquatic life taken under an aquarium 
fish permit unless those fish and other aquatic life are 
sold alive for aquarium purposes.  
 The department may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 
for the purpose of this section.  
 (d) For the purposes of this section: 
(1) “Aquarium purposes” means to hold salt water 
fish, freshwater nongame fish, or other aquatic 
life alive in a state of captivity as pets, for 
scientific study, or for public exhibition or 
display, or for sale for these purposes; and  
(2) “Aquarium fish permit” means a permit issued by 
the board for the use of fine mesh nets and 
traps to take salt water fish, freshwater 
nongame fish, or other aquatic life for 
aquarium purposes. 
HRS § 188- 31 (emphases added).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
65 permissive, or discretionary the provision in which it is 
embodied; this is so at least when there is nothing in the 
wording, sense, or policy of the provision demanding an unusual 
interpretation.”  State v. Kahawai , 103 Hawai i 462, 465, 83 P.3d 
725, 728 (2004) (quoting State ex rel. City of Niles v. Bernard , 
372 N.E.2d 339, 341 (Ohio 1978)).  Where “may” and “shall” “ are 
used in the same statute, especially where they are used in 
close juxtaposition, we infer that the legislature realized the 
difference in meaning and intended that the verbs used should 
carry with them their ordinary meanings. ”  State v. Cornelio , 84 
Hawaii 476, 493, 935 P.2d 1021, 1038 (1997) (quoting Gray v. 
Admin. Dir. o f the Court, State of Haw. , 84 Hawaii 138, 149, 931 
P.2d 580, 591 (1997)).  In such instances, “ the close proximity 
of the contrasting verbs ‘may’ and ‘shall’  requires a non-
mandatory, i.e., a discretionary, construction of the term 
‘may.’”  Id. (quoting Gray, 84 Hawaii at 149, 931 P.2d at 591).  
  In HRS § 188- 31, “may” is used in subsection (a), 
where DLNR is given the authority to issue aquarium collection 
permits.  The verb “shall” is then used in subsection (b), which 
provides that “the permits shall be issued only to persons who 
can satisfy the department that they possess facilities to and 
can maintain fish and other aquatic life alive and in reasonable 
health.”  HRS § 188 -31(b).  The verbs “shall” and “may” are both ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
66 used in subsection (c ), which states that “[i] t shall be illegal 
to sell or offer for sale any fish and other aquatic life taken 
under an aquarium fish permit unless those fish and other 
aquatic life are sold alive for aquarium purposes ” and that 
“[t]he department may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 for the 
purpose of this section .”  HRS § 188 -31(c).  Thus, the verbs 
“may” and “shall” are used “in close juxtaposition” in HRS § 
188-31, and the legislature should be presumed to have done so 
deliberately and with full knowledge of the difference between 
the ordinary significations of these verbs.  Cornelio , 84 Hawai i 
at 493, 935 P.2d at 1038.  As such, the use of the verb “may” in 
subsection (a) “render optional, permiss ive, or discretionary” 
DLNR’s statutory authority to iss ue aquarium collection permits 
pursuant to HRS § 188- 31.  Kahawai, 103 Hawai i at 465, 83 P.3d 
at 728. 
  HRS § 188- 31(b) provides further indication that DLNR 
possesses the authority to exercise  discretionary consent in the 
aquarium collection permitting process.  Subsection (b) of HRS § 
188-31 provides that “the permits shall be issued only to 
persons who can satisfy the department  that they possess 
facilities to and can maintain fish and other aquatic life alive 
and in reasonable health.”  HRS § 188 -31(b) (emphasis added).   
Accordingly, HRS § 188-31(b) explicitly allows DLNR to exercise 
its independent judgment in determining whether a permit ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
67 applicant possesses facilities to and can maintain fish and 
other aquatic life alive and in reasonable health.  See HRS § 
343-2 (defining discretionary consent as “ a consent, sanction, 
or recommendation from an agency for which judgment and free 
will may be exercised by the issuing agency, as distinguished 
from a ministerial consent ”).  If DLNR is not satisfied that a  
permit applicant has the ability to comply with the provisions 
of HRS § 188-31(b), DLNR has the statutory discretion not to 
issue an aquarium collection permit.  Not only does DLNR 
exercise its independent judgment pursuant to HRS § 188- 31(b), 
DLNR is also authorized, under HRS § 188-31(c), to adopt 
administrative rules to effectuate the aquarium collection 
permitting scheme.  HRS § 188- 31(c).  As the ICA also 
recognized, the legislative history of HRS § 188 –31 makes DLNR’ s 
discretionary authority clear, as the statute “provides 
safeguards so that the abuse of the privilege of using fine mesh 
nets can be prevented. ”  Umberger v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. 
Resources , 138 Hawaii 508, 518, 382 P.3d 320, 330 (App. 2016) 
(emphasis omitted) (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 586, in 
1953 House Journal, at 675).  Thus, there is no merit to DLNR’s 
argument that it does not possess the authority to exercise 
discretionary consent in the aquarium collection permitting 
process. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
68   DLNR further argues that it does not exercise 
discretion in issuing aquarium collection permits because “[t]he 
application process is on- line and completely automatic.”  
However, the fact that DLNR has chosen not to exercise its 
discretion under the plain and unambiguous language of HRS § 
188-31 does not nullify the statute’s clear directive that DLNR 
is given the authority to exercise discretionary consent.  An 
agency may not defeat the express provisions of a statute simply 
by operating in a manner that does not comport with the 
legislature’s grant  of authority.  See Hyland v. Gonzales , 139 
Hawaii 386, 382, 390 P.3d 1273, 1279 (2017) (concluding that the 
local election board’s interpretation of its regulation must be 
consistent with the act being administered and that the board 
cannot contradict the statute that it is attempting to 
implement).  This would also be contrary to the principle, 
recognized by a majority of this court, that “[a]n agency is a 
creature of the legislature, and the scope of its authority is 
specifically delineated by statute.”   Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. 
Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 136 Hawaii 376, 413 n.14, 363 P.3d 224, 
261 n.14 (2015) (Pollack, J., concurring).  
  To conclude, DLNR’s challenge to the ICA’s holding 
that DLNR has discretionary consent is without merit.  Thus, 
aquarium collection pursuant to permits issued under HRS § 188-
31 is an applicant action that requires agency approval.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
69 E. Summary Judgment 
  The circuit court granted DLNR’s motion for summary 
judgment and, correspondingly, denied Petitioners’ summary 
judgment motion upon concluding that aquarium collection under 
HRS § 188- 31 (2011) is not a HEPA “action.”  This court’s 
framework in reviewing decisions regarding summary judgment is 
as follows: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party.  In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom 
in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
motion. 
Lambert v. Waha , 137 Hawai i 423, 432 n.9, 375 P.3d 202, 211 n.9 
(2016) (quoting Querubin v. Thronas , 107 Hawai i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 
689, 697 (2005)) .  The burden is on the moving party “to show 
the absence of any genuine issue as to all material facts, 
which, under applicable principles of substantive law, entitles 
the moving party to judgment as a matter of law.”  French v. 
Haw. Pizza Hut, Inc. , 105 Hawaii 462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 
(2004) (quoting GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian , 79 Hawaii 516, 
521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (App. 1995)).  Only after the moving 
party satisfies its initial burden would the burden shift to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
70 nonmoving party to “demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to 
general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of 
trial.”  Id. (emphasis omitted) (quoting GECC Fin. Corp. , 79 
Hawaii at 521, 904 P.2d at  535). 
  Because aquarium collection pursuant to commercial and 
recreational permits issued by DLNR  is a HEPA “action,” the 
circuit court erred in granting DLNR’s motion  for summary 
judgment on the basis that aquarium collection is not a HEPA 
“action.”  The circuit court also erred to the extent that it 
denied Petitioners’ summary judgment motion with respect to 
commercial aquarium collection permits because, as discussed, 
the authorized conduct under such permits is an applicant 
“action” under HEPA, is a use of state lands and a use within a 
conservation district, is not exempted from HEPA, and is subject 
to DLNR’s discretionary consent .  Thus, the conduct allowed 
under commercial aquarium collection permits,  issued pursuant to 
HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR’s administrative scheme , is subject to 
HEPA environmental review, and there is no genuine issue of 
material fact as to this issue.  To the extent that the circuit 
court did not grant Petitioners’ summary judgment motion with 
respect to recreational aquarium collection permits, it did not 
err because the record is not sufficiently developed so as to 
allow the circuit court to determine whether activities allowed 
under recreational permits may be exempted from HEPA ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
71 environmental review.  In other words, there was a genuine issue 
of material fact as to whether activities authorized by 
recreational permits are subject to HEPA review.  
  In summary, the circuit court erred in granting DLNR 
summary judgment and in denying Petitioners’ summary judgment 
motion with respect to commercial aquarium collection permits.  
The circuit court did not err in denying Petitioners’ motion for 
summary judgment with respect to recreational aquarium 
collection permits. 
  We note that HRS § 343 -5(g) (Supp. 2012) provides that 
agencies, in preparing an environmental assessment, “ may 
consider and, where applicable and appropriate, incorporate by 
reference, in whole or in part, previous determinations of 
whether a statement is required and previously accepted 
statements.”  HRS 343 -5(g) (Supp. 2012).   A similar authority, 
derived from HRS § 343 -5, exists i n HAR § 11 -200-13(a) 
(effective 1996),  providing “that whenever an agency proposes to 
implement an action or receives a request for approval, the 
agency may consider and, when applicable and appropriate, 
incorporate by reference, in whole or in part, previous 
determinations of whether a statement is required, and 
previously accepted statements. ”  These provisions  alleviate the 
concern that an environmental assessment would necessarily have 
to be prepared whenever an applicant applies for an  aquarium ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
72 collection permit.  Further, “a group of proposed actions may be 
treated by a single environmental assessment or statement,” HRS 
§ 343-6(a)(1) (2010), when “[t]he actions in question are 
essentially identical and a single statement will adequately 
address the impacts of each individual action and those of the 
group of actions as a whole,” HAR § 11 -200-7 (effective 1985).  
Such an approach can assuage concerns about  aquarium  collectors 
not having the resources to comply with HEPA. 
  On remand, the circuit court is directed to grant 
Petitioners’ summary judgment motion to the extent that 
Petitioners are requesting declaratory relief and a prohibitory 
injunction as to commercial aquarium collection pursuant to 
permits issued under HRS § 188- 31 and DLNR ’s administrative 
rules.  Further proceedings are necessary, however,  in order to 
determine whether Petitioners are entitled to declaratory relief 
and a prohibitory injunction as to recreational aquarium 
collection permits.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
  Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment insofar as 
it affirmed the circuit court’s judgment granting DLNR summary 
judgment.  The ICA’s judgment is further vacated to the extent 
that it affirmed the circuit court’s judgment denying 
Petitioners’ motion f or summary judgment with respect to 
commercial aquarium collection permits.  Similarly, the circuit ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
73 court’s judgment is vacated insofar as it granted summary 
judgment to DLNR and denied Petitioners’ summary judgment motion 
with respect to commercial aquarium collection permits.  The 
remaining portions of the judgments of the ICA and the circuit 
court are otherwise affirmed, and this case is remanded to the 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
Paul H. Achitoff and 
Summer Kupau- Odo 
for petitioner s 
 
William J. Wynhoff 
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
