***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND  PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
THOMAS A. RUSSO, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee . 
 
 
SCWC-14-0000986 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14- 0000986; 2DCW-12 -0000873) 
 
DECEMBER 14, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ . 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
  This case arises out of a  2012 incident that occurred 
on the shoulder of Haleakala Highway in Maui County  while Thomas 
Russo was filming police officers conducting a traffic 
enforcement operation .  During Russo’s filming of the traffic 
stop with his cell phone, he was arrested for interfering with 
government operations and other offenses.   Russo was Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000986
14-DEC-2017
08:33 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 subsequently charged with failing to comply with a lawful order 
of a police officer, an offense for which he had not been 
arrested.  Russo has consistently maintained that his filming of 
police activity was protected by the United States and Hawai i 
Constitutions. 
  W e join those jurisdictions that recognize that there 
is a constitutional right of the public to film the official 
activities of p olice officers in a public place.  But because we 
conclude that the record does not support a finding of probable 
cause that Russo failed to comply with a police officer’s order, 
we do not address whether Russo’s constitutional right to access 
and film the traffic stop was infringed in this case.  
Accordingly, we vacate the Intermediate C ourt of A ppeals’ 
summary disposition order and affirm the district court’s order 
that dismissed this case with prejudice.  
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
  On November 20, 2012, Russo was arrested on Haleakala 
Highway by Maui Police Department (MPD) Officers Rusty Lawson 
and John Fairchild for obstructing government o perations , 
resisting a rrest, and harassment.  Russo was later charged by 
complaint with failure to comply with a lawful order or 
direction of a police officer in violation of Hawaii  Revised ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3 1Statutes (HRS) § 291C-23 (2007)  and disorderly conduct in 
2violation of HRS § 711-1101(1)(d) (1993 & Supp. 2003) .   At 
arraignment on January 24, 2013, Russo pleaded not guilty to the 
charges.   
A. Motion to Dismiss 
  On December 27, 2013, Russo filed a motion to dismiss 
the case against him based on the First Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, or, alternatively, on the ground that there 
was no probable cause to support the charges.  In his motion to 
dismiss, Russo contended that this case was “about a police 
officer arresting a journalist covering a news story because the 
officer did not want to be film ed.”  Specifically, Russo 
contended that he was the publisher of Maui Time Publications 
                     
 1 HRS § 291C -23 provides as follows:   
It shall be a petty misdemeanor for any person to wilfully 
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction 
of any police officer invested by  law with authority to 
direct, control, or regulate traffic.  
 2 HRS § 711 -1101 provides, in relevant part, as follows : 
(1) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if, 
with intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a 
member or members of  the public, or recklessly creating a 
risk thereof, the person:  
. . . 
(d) Creates a hazardous or physically offensive 
condition by any act which is not performed under any 
authorized license or permit . . .  . 
The complaint filed by the State of Hawai i alleged the disorderly conduct 
charge as a petty misdemeanor offense  under HRS § 711 -1101(3).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 and engaged in investigative journalism regarding current 
events, the arts, and other news of Maui County.  According to 
Russo, on November 20, 2012, he pulled over onto the shoulder 
while driving along Haleakala Highway to investigate an ongoing 
law enforcement operation.  Russo began filming two police 
officers who were conducting a traffic stop and was arrested for 
obstructing government operations shortly thereafter.   
  In his motion to dismiss, Russo argued that the First 
Amendment to the United States Constitution protects the right 
to take photographs and videos of public places, which includes 
the right to film the activities and operations of police 
officers.  Russo contended that the First Amendment right to 
record police activity is limited only by reasonable time, 
place, and manner restrictions.  Russo submitted that he had 
complied with all police orders given to him by the MPD officers 
at the traffic stop that he was filming, that his recording was 
from a safe distance, and that he did not obstruct the officers 
conducting the stop.  Thus, according to Russo, the case against 
him should be dismissed because his conduct was protected by the 
First Amendment.   
  In the alternative, Russo contended that the case 
should be dismissed for lack of probable cause.  Russo submitted 
that the charge of failure to comply with a lawful order of a 
police officer was unsupported by probable cause because he was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 actually complying with the police officers’ orders and 
directions.  Russo also argued that the statute under which he  
was charged did not apply to his alleged failure to comply with 
the officers’ order  because the law “prohibits a driver from 
ignoring [a police officer’s] traffic directions . . . not an 
officer yelling at someone on the side of a road.”  
Additionally, Russo argued that the disorderly conduct charge 
should be dismissed because he was not “disorderly” or 
“persisting” in disorderly conduct, nor was there any evidence 
that he was “creating a ‘hazardous and/or physically offensive’ 
3condition.”    
  In resp onse, the State argued that Russo “did not 
simply want to record the traffic stop, but wanted to interfere 
with the administration of the stop.”  The State acknowledged 
that other jurisdictions had held videotaping public officials 
to be protected under the First Amendment.   The State submitted , 
however, that this right has limitations and is subject to 
reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions.  The State 
contended that the MPD police officers determined that the area 
                     
 3 Russo further asserted that even if the court found that probable 
cause did exist, the disorderly conduct statute under which he was charged 
was overbroad and void for unconstitutional vagueness,  as well as 
unconstitutional as applied in order to criminalize the filming of police 
officers.  Additionally, Russo asserted that the complaint failed to 
sufficiently and properly allege the essential elements of the disorderly 
conduct charge.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 where the traffic stop was being conducted was not a reasonable 
place to film police because it was not safe, and  Russo’s 
actions in entering and remaining in the traffic stop area were 
therefore not constitutionally protected.  According to the 
State, Russo failed to comply with the directives  to “step 
back,” to “cease interfering  with the traffic stop,”  and to 
“stop resisting arrest.”   Thus, the State submitted that the 
officers exercised proper caution in addressing the situation 
4and probable cause existed to support the charges.    
B. Hearing on Russo’s Motion to Dismiss  
5  At the  hearing on Russo’s motion to dismiss,  the State 
called MPD Officer Rusty Lawso n to testify regarding the events 
leading to Russo’s arrest .  Officer Lawson testified that he had 
been employed by the MPD  for eight and a half years and was at 
that time assigned to the traffic division DUI task force.  On 
November 20, 2012, Officer Lawson was assigned to conduct a 
specific traffic enforcement called “Operation Recon,”  during 
which MPD sought to enforce traffic regulations relating to 
“lifted vehicles, tires extended beyond the fenders, window 
                     
 4 The State also rejected Russo’s argument that the statutes under 
which he was charged were void for vagueness  and unconstitutionally 
overbroad, and that the elements of disorderly conduct were deficiently  
alleged.  The State likewise contended that the charge of disorderly conduct 
was supported by the fact that Russo was consciously attempting to distract 
Officers Fairchild and Lawson and that “Russo wanted to be arrested.”   
 5 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 tints, or any other traffic violations [MPD] could see.”  
Officer Lawson testified that he was the acting supervisor of 
the operation, which involved between five and seven officers, 
and that he and Officer John Fairchild were positioned in the 
same area on the side of Haleakala Highway.   Officer Lawson 
testified that he was conducting a traffic stop for a possible 
window tint violation prior to his interaction with Russo.  His 
unmarked police vehicle was parked on the grassy shoulder of the 
highway, as was Officer Fairchild’s vehicle and the vehicle 
belonging to the individual subject to the traffic stop.   
  At this point in Officer Lawson’s testimony, the State 
played a video recording comprised of three individual clips 
taken by Russo showing the events leading up to Russo’s arrest, 
which had previously been stipulated into evidence by the State 
and the defense.   In the first clip, Russo holds the recording 
6device  and can be heard speaking in the background.  The device 
appears to be taking video from behind the windshield of a 
vehicle parked on the shoulder of Haleakala Highway in which 
Russo is sitting.   
  The video depicts Russo exiting his vehicle and 
walking towards the cars parked in front of him.  The camera 
                     
 6 The record suggests that Russo used a cellular phone to take the 
video recordings. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 pans along Haleakala Highway as Russo narrates that the road is 
“backed up” with traffic.  The camera then focuses on the 
vehicles parked ahead on the side of the highway, and two 
uniformed police officers wearing orange and yellow vests are 
seen walking near one of the vehicles.  Russo continues to walk 
towards these uniformed officers, and one of the officers--
subsequently identified as Officer Fairchild-- can be heard 
asking Russo to turn his hazard lights on.  Ru sso replies, “Sure 
I can do that.”  Officer Fairchild the n walks back towards the 
parked vehicles, and Russo appears to begin walking back towards 
his vehicle.   
  In the second clip, the recording begins with the 
camera pointed towards Russo’s parked car.   The vehicle’s hazard 
lights are on.  Russo appears to begin walking towards the 
vehicles parked ahead, where Officer Fairchild and the second 
uniformed police officer
--identified as Officer Lawson-- are 
standing.   
  In the third and final clip, which app ears to be an 
immediate continuation from the second clip, Russo continues to 
walk towards the vehicles parked ahead.  Russo comes into 
proximity with the closest vehicle, which appears to be an 
unmarked police car.  Officer Fairchild, who is standing next to 
this first unmarked vehicle, sees Russo approaching and appears 
to wave his hand.  As Russo comes closer to the officer, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 officer again appears to wave his hand to indicate the shoulder 
of the highway and states to Russo that the police are pulling 
people over “in this area here.”  Russo then questions Officer 
Fairchild as to why the police are pulling people over, to which 
the officer responds, “Traffic violations.”  Russo asks
 Officer 
Fairchild whether he thinks it is “justifiable to back traffic 
all the way up to Hali imaile,” and they engage in a brief 
dialogue regarding the extent of the surrounding traffic.  T he 
officer again waves his hand along the highway shoulder and 
states to Russo, “We’re pulling peop --cars over in this area 
right here oka y, so please step off to the side I don’t want you 
to get run over.”  Russo responds, “Okay.”   
  At this point, Russo appears to begin walking away 
from Officer Fairchild and towards the second unmarked police 
vehicle, which is parked immediately behind the car subject to 
the traffic stop; Officer Lawson can be seen standing at the 
driver-side window of the vehicle subject to the stop.  As Russo 
approaches the area parallel to the front passenger -side of the 
stopped vehicle, Officer Lawson leaves his position at the 
driver-side window and walks around the front of the vehicle 
towards Russo.  T he following exchange occurs: 
Officer: Excuse me, sir -- 
Russo: Yes sir?  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 Officer: Can you stand back there?  Can you stand back 
there?  Don’t come over here.  There’s a traffic stop being 
conducted.  Can you stand --  can you stand back there?   
As the officer asks Russo to “stand back there,” he points 
backwards in the general direction of Officer Fairchild ’s and 
Russo’s parked vehicle s.   
  In response to Officer Lawson’s request , Russo 
answers, “Uh -- no, I’m [inaudible]. ”  Russo is interrupted by 
the officer, who states, “You’re obstructing a government 
operation.”  Russo responds that he  is “not obstructing at all” 
and appears to walk backwards, away from the officer.  Again 
pointing in the general direction of Russo’s vehicle, Officer 
Lawson states, “Don’t intervene . . . this is a traffic stop . . 
. you need to stand back t here.”   
  Russo can then be heard asking, “Where can I stand?”  
Russo walks a few steps to the right-- away from the highway, and 
towards what appears to be an adjacent field--and asks, “Can I 
stand here . . . this is private property,  right?”  The officer 
appears to indicate that Russo cannot stand there, gesturing 
again in the general direction of Russo’s vehicle and stating, 
“You stand back there, you’re on private property.”  Russo then 
takes several steps back towards the highway, closer to the 
officer, and asks, “Can I stand on public property?”  At this 
point, Russo can be heard tell ing Officer Lawson , “Don’t -- are 
you touching me -- you’re touching me.”   Officer Lawson then ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11 places his right hand on his belt and states, “I’ll arrest you 
for obstructing.”  Russo repeats that he is “not obstructing 
anything” and relays that “[he  has] got video.”   
  Russo begins  walking backwards again, away from the 
officer and towards Russo’s car .  Officer Lawson continues to 
walk towards Russo, repeatedly stating that “there’s a traffic 
stop back here” and asking him to “stand back there .”  Officer 
Fairchild then joins Officer Lawson , and both continue to walk 
towards Russo as he backs away.  As he walks backwards, away 
from the officers, Russo states, “this is more than a traf fic 
stop . . . this is a circus, ” and he repeats that he is not 
obstructing anything.  Officer Lawson responds that he “told 
[Russo] five times” and state s that he will “place [Russo] under 
arrest” for “obstructing government operations.”  Russo then 
identifies himself by name and relates that he is a member of 
the media.  As he continues to walk backwards and as Officer 
Lawson continues approaching him, Russo can be heard stating 
twice, “Don’t touch me, officer.”  Officer Lawson then states, 
“Sir . . . sir, you need to comply,” to which Russo responds, “I 
am complying officer, I am . . . I am.”   
  The camera tilts down towards the ground as a scuffle 
ensues, at which point the video recording suggests that Russo 
is placed under arrest.
  An officer is heard telling Russo, 
“Stop resisting, stop resisting,” and that the officer was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12 “sorry about this .”  Russo replies, “I’m not resisting . . . I 
was walking backwards, just as the video shows, offi cer.”  Russo 
can then be heard stating, “No , no . . . you’re not allowed to 
take my phone.”  At this point, the video footage concludes.  
  After the State played the video, Officer Lawson 
testified that he directed Russo to “step and/or stand back” 
around “five, six, seven times.”   He also testified regarding 
the procedures that the MPD has in place concerning media 
contact.  When asked to describe the MPD ’s policy governing when 
members of the media are permitted to film police activity , 
Officer Lawson suggested that the MPD may in some situations 
require a pre-approved media pass:  
I don’t think it governs as far as filming the police, but 
I believe it’ s a -- I guess a courtesy request of the media 
to contact the police department for, I guess, what they  
call like a media pass.  Any media from the police 
department has to go through our chief.  I cannot make any 
statements of the media.  But if such, they wanted to come 
and give, I guess, a courtesy to these guys or to the media 
to have like a sit -in or like a ride -along, that ’s no 
problem, as long as it ’s cleared with the chief of police.  
Officer Lawson further testified that he was not notified by the 
MPD that the media would be recording the police during 
Operation Recon.   
  Following Officer Lawson’s testimony, the State called 
to the stand the individual subject to the traffic stop that was 
occurring at the time of Russo’s arrest (the witness) .  The 
witness testified that during the traffic stop, she observed 
Russo with a phone but did not know that he was taking a video ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 recording until she was told by Officer Lawson.  The witness 
stated that she did not feel scared during the incident and that 
she never told Officer Lawson that she felt threatened.   
  Also at the motion to dismiss proceeding, the defense 
elicited testimony regarding “national standards of care” 
applicable to filming police officers in public from Mickey H. 
Osterreicher, who was qualified by the court as an expert 
witness in the area of film journalism, photography, and 
journalism.  Osterreicher testified that,  based upon his review 
of the video footage, Officer Lawson’s direction s throughout th e 
encounter were unclear and were not reasonable tim e, place, or 
manner restrictions .  Russo emphasized in his closing argument 
that the orders were too vague to comply with, arguing that 
“Officer Lawson never s[aid], sir, can you move 15 feet away ” 
and instead said only “go over there, go over there.”    
  On July 9, 2014, the district court issued its oral 
ruling, findings of fact (FOFs), and conclusions of law (COLs) 
regarding Russo’s motion to dismiss.  In its FOFs, the court 
found that Russo complied with Officer Fairchild’s request that 
he turn on his hazard lights.  The court also found, however, 
that Russo was instructed multiple times to step back out of the 
area where the traffic stop was occurring.   The court determined 
that Russo did not comply with the order to step back and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 7continued to engage the officers.   In addition, the court 
determined that the instructions to step back were not specific 
as to time, place, or manner as testified to by defense expert 
Osterreicher. 
  In its COLs, the district court concluded that 
probable cause did not exist for the arrest of Russo on either 
charge.  The court determined that HRS § 291C-23 , which sets 
forth the offense of failure to comply with the lawful order of 
a police officer, did not apply to Russo’s conduct .  The court 
reasoned that under HRS § 291C -21 (2007), the provisions of 
Parts III to XIV of the traffic code relating to the operation 
of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon 
highways except where a different place is specifically referred 
to in a given section.
  See HRS § 291C- 21.  Because the offense 
of failure to comply with the lawful order of a police officer 
is codified within P art III of the traffic code, the court 
determined that, pursuant to HRS § 291C- 21, the offense only 
applies to conduct relating to the operation of vehicles upon 
highways.  And, sinc e Russo’s conduct did not involve  operation 
                     
 7 It appears that the district court understood the officers’ 
multiple instructions to stand and/or step back to collectively  be a single 
“lawful direction” or order to do s o.  Thus, although the State and the 
defense have alternatively characterized the question as whether Russo 
violated an “order ” or multiple “orders,” we find it most appropriate to 
consider whether Russo violated the collective order made by Officers Lawson 
and Fairchild to stand and/or step back.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 of a vehicle upon a highway, the court reasoned that the offense 
of failure to comply with a  lawful order of a police officer did 
not apply.   
  With respect to the charge of disorderly conduct, the 
district court concluded that the evidence was enti rely unclear 
as to whether,  by failing to follow the officers’ directions, 
Russo created hazardous conditions posing a risk of physical 
inconvenience or alarm to members of the public within the 
meaning of the disorderly conduct statute.  The court thus  
determined that there was no probable cause to support the 
charge.   
  Regarding Russo’s argument based on the First 
Amendment, the district court concluded that it was Russo’s 
burden to establish that his rights were infringed, and that he 
failed to do so.  The court determined that the case did not 
involve police officers objecting to Russo videotaping, but, 
rather, Russo’s failure to heed their instructions based on 
their view that he was hindering their operations.  The court 
also concluded that Russo had not satisfied his burden of  
demonstrating that the instructions given by the police officers 
were unconstitutionally vague as to time, place,  and manner.  
However, the court determined that it did not have to base its 
decision on the constitutional question in light of its other 
rulings.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16   The district court th us dismissed both charges for 
lack of probable cause and entered a Notice of Entry of Judgment 
And/Or Order (Order of Dismissal ), which dismiss ed both charge s 
with prejudice.  The State timely filed a notice of appeal to 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) from the Order of 
Dismissal.   
C. ICA Proceedings 
  In a summary disposition order (SDO), the ICA 
concluded that the district court erred in dismissing the charge 
8of failure to comply with a lawful order of a police officer.   
The ICA determined that the restrictive language in HRS § 291C-
21 means that, where specific provisions of HRS Chapter 291C, 
Parts III to XIV, relate to the operation of vehicles, “only the 
operation of vehicles upon highways is covered unless a 
different place is specifically referred to in that provision.”  
The failure to comply with a lawful order offense was not 
limited to the operation of vehicles, the ICA reasoned, and 
therefore could be applied to Russo’s conduct a s a pedestrian 
where he interacted with police  officers who were regulating 
traffic.   
                     
 8 Because the State did not challenge the district court’s 
dismissal of the disorderly conduct charge, the ICA did not address it on 
appeal.  The ICA’s SDO can be found at State v. Russo , No. CAAP -14-0000986,
2017 WL 1194000 (Haw. App. Mar. 31, 2017).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17   The ICA next considered whether probable cause 
supported the charge.  The ICA determined  that probable cause 
did exist to support the charge of failure to comply with a 
lawful order of a police officer, relying on the following 
factual findings of the district court: (1) Russo was informed 
by the officers involved in traffic enforcement that he was in 
their area of operations and in danger of being struck by a 
vehicle; (2) Russo was told multiple times to step back out of 
the area of operation by the two officers; and (3) Russo did not 
comply with the officers’ instructions.   
  The ICA  majority  therefore concluded that the district 
court erred in dismissing the charge of failure to comply with a 
lawful order of a police officer  in violation of HRS § 291C-23.  
Accordingly, the ICA vacated the district court’s Order of 
Dismissal and remanded the case for further proceedings.   
  Chief Judge Craig H. Nakamura issued a concurring and 
dissenting opinion in which he agreed with the ICA majority’s 
interpretation of HRS §§ 291C- 21 and 291C- 23, but he disagreed 
that the charge of failure to comply with a lawful order of a 
police officer in this case was supported by probable cause.  
The Chief Judge stated that his review of the video footage 
showed that “although Russo questioned the officers’ authority 
to order him from the scene, he was complying with the officers’ 
order, retreating and walking backward away from the approaching ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18 officers and their area of operation, when the officers arrested 
him.”  Chief Judge Nakamura thus concluded that probable cause 
was lacking because “[t]he video recording shows that Russo did 
not willfully fail or refuse to comply with the officers ’ order 
to stand back or move, ” and that any finding made by the 
district court to the contrary was clearly erroneous.  Thus, 
Chief Judge Nakamura would have affirmed the district court’s 
dismissal of the failure to comply charge on the alternative 
ground that insufficient probable cause existed to support the 
charge.   
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
  Probable cause determinations are reviewed on appeal 
under a de novo standard.  State v. Kaleohano , 99 Hawaii 370, 
375, 56 P.3d 138, 143 (2002) (citing State v. Navas , 81 Hawai i 
113, 123, 913 P.2d 39, 49 (1996)). 
  A court’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
“clearly erroneous” standard.  Id.  “A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, 
the appellate court is left with the definite and firm 
conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has 
been committed. ”  Id. (quoting Dan v. State , 76 Hawaii 423, 428, 
879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994)).  A court’s conclusions of law are 
reviewed under the “right/wrong” standard, which “allows the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19 appellate court to ‘ examine the facts and answer the question 
without being required to give any weight to the trial court ’s 
answer to it.’”  Id. (quoting State v. Lopez , 78 Hawai i 433, 
440, 896 P.2d 889, 896 (1995)). 
  “The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo .”  State v. Arceo , 84 Hawai i 1, 10, 928 P.2d 
843, 852 (1996) (quoting State v. Camara , 81 Hawai i 324, 329, 
916 P.2d 1225, 1230 (1996)). 
  The court “answers questions of constitutional law by 
‘exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of 
the case.’”  State v. Aplaca , 96 Hawai i 17, 22, 25 P.3d 792, 797 
(2001) (quoting State v. Jenkins , 93 Hawai i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 
13, 26 (20 00)).  “Thus, questions of constitutional law are 
reviewed on appeal ‘under the “ right/wrong ” standard.’”  Id. 
(quoting Jenkins, 93 Hawai i at 100, 997 P.2d at 26). 
III.  DISCUSSION 
  In his application for a writ of certiorari, Russo 
argues that the district court correctly dismissed the charge of 
failure to comply with a lawful order of a police officer for 
lack of probable cause and thus the ICA erred in vacating the 
Order of Dismissal.  Russo contends that even if the ICA 
concluded that the district court’s i nterpretation of HRS § ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 9291C-23 was incorrect,  the ICA was obligated to affirm the 
dismissal order on the alternative ground that there was no 
probable cause supporting the complaint against Russo.  
Specifically, Russo submits that there was no proof that he 
willfully failed or refused to comply with a police officer’s 
order.  Russo also argues that the ICA majority erred in not 
considering the merits of his First Amendment argument that he 
has a constitutional right to film police activity, subject to 
reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions.  In addition, 
Russo submits that the district court wrongly concluded that he 
had the burden of proof to establish that the police 
instructions were unreasonable and the command to stand away 
from the traffic stop was too vague to be a reasonable time, 
place, and manner restriction.   
  To  resolve the merits of Russo’s arguments on 
certiorari, we consider whether the ICA correctly concluded that 
the charge of failure to comply with a lawful order of a police 
officer was supported by probable cause.  Because the ICA failed 
to address Russo’s constitutional argument  when it vacated the 
                     
 9 In light of Russo’s conditional acknowledgment of the ICA’s 
interpretation of HRS § 291C -21, we note our agreement with the ICA’s reading 
of the statute.  Pursuant to HRS § 291C -21, when a provision codified within 
Parts III through XIV “relat[es] to the operation of vehicles,” that 
provision must be interpreted to refer only to “the operation of vehicles 
upon highways” unless otherwise specified.  Where the provision is codified 
within P arts III through XIV b ut does not “relat[e] to the operation of 
vehicles,” HRS § 291C -21 does not speak to that provision’s interpretation.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 Order of Dismissal, and because the determination of whether the 
police officers’ order was “lawful” within the meaning of HRS § 
291C-23 depends in part on whether the order comported with the 
state and federal constitutions, we also address the existence 
of a constitutionally- protected right to photograph and film 
police officers in public. 
A. “Lawful Order” and First Amendment Implications  
  A person commits the offense set forth by  HRS § 291C-
23 when the person willfully fails or refuses to comply with 
“any lawful order or direction” of a police officer authorized 
by law to direct, control, or regulate traffic.  HRS § 291C-23  
(emphasis added).  Thus, a necessary predicate to a finding of 
guilt under HRS § 291C-23 is the existence of a “lawful order or 
direction” by a pol ice officer.  Id.   
  At the motion to dismiss proceeding and on appeal, 
Russo has argued that, irrespective of his compliance or alleged 
noncompliance with the officers’ order to “stand over there” or 
“step back,” this order was  not “lawful” within the meaning of 
HRS § 291C-23 because it infringed on his First Amendment right 
to photograph and film police officers in public.  T he State 
appears to acknowledge the existence of this First Amendment 
right, but it con tends that Russo’s acti ons in entering or 
remaining in the traffic stop area  were not constitutionally 
protected and that the officers’ order was a reasonable ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 restriction.  The district court declined to expressly rule on 
First Amendment grounds
, but it concluded  that it was Rus so’s 
burden to demonstrate that the order was unconstitutionally 
vague as to time, 
place, or manner, and that Russo had failed to 
make this showing.  The ICA did not consider any constitutional 
implications of the officers’ conduct when it vacated the 
district court’s dismissal order  and remanded the case for 
further proceedings, despite the fact that Russo had urged the 
ICA to affirm the dismissal on First Amendment grounds.  
  Although not addressed by the ICA, the 
constitutionality of the officers’ order to stand or step back 
is inextricably intertwined with the State’s allegation that 
Russo violated HRS § 291C- 23.  If the order did not comport with 
the federal and state constitutions, the Hawaii Revised 
Statutes, or other principles of law, it was  not “lawful” within 
the meaning of the statute, and HRS § 291C-23 would thus impose 
10no requirement of compliance.   Further, the issuance of a 
lawful order or direction is an essential element of the offense 
set forth in HRS § 291C-23, thereby indicating  that, contrary to 
the district court’s conclusion, it is the State’s burden to 
                     
 10 See, e.g. , State v. Ausmus , 85 P.3d 864, 869 (Or. 2003) (holding 
that in the context of a disorderly conduct statute that prohibited certain 
refusals to “comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse,” the term 
“lawful order” means “an order that is authorized by, and is not contrary to, 
substantive law”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23 prove the existence of a “lawful order” rather than the 
11defendant’s burden to prove that the order was unlawful.   
Accordingly, we address the existence of a First Amendment right 
12to photograph and film the police and its limitations.    
  The First Amendment to the United States Constitution 
states in relevant part that “Congress shall make no law . . . 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of  the press.”  U.S. Const. 
amend. I.  Article I, section 4 of the Hawai i Constitution 
likewise provides that “[n]o law shall be enacted . . . 
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press.”  Haw. Const. 
art. I, § 4.  This court has interpreted the free speech rights 
                     
 11 In the context of other offenses that render unlawful the refusal 
to comply with the order of a court or police officer, Hawai i courts have 
likewise interpreted the issuance of the predicate order to constitute an 
essential element of the charge that  must be prove d beyond a reasonable doubt 
by the State.  See State v. Kalaola , 124 Hawai i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 
(2010) (setting forth that the offense of failure to disperse upon law 
enforcement officer’s order has , as an essential element , that the defendant 
was “ordered by a law enforcement officer to disperse,” which the S tate must 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt); State v. Alvarez , 96 Hawai i 42, 25 P.3d 817 
(App. 2001) (stating that the offense of failure to obey a lawful order 
issued pursuant to familial abuse statute has , as an essential element , the 
defendant’s receipt of the lawful order, which the State must prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt); State v. King , 139 Hawai i 249, 257, 386 P.3d 886, 894 
(2016) (interpreting the “‘lawful order’ element” of the offense of second -
degree burglary under HRS § 708 -811 (2014), determining that no probable 
cause existed to support this element of the charge, and affirming the lower 
court’s dismissal of the case); see also  75 Am. Jur. 2d Trespass  § 191 (2013) 
(observing in context of statutory elements of criminal trespass that “[w]hen  
property is open to the public at the time of an alleged criminal trespass, 
the state has the burden of proving that a lawful order excluding the 
defendant from the premises [was] issued”).  
 12 We also note that Officer Lawson’s testimony at the motion to 
dismiss proceeding regarding MPD’s policy on media contact suggested a lack 
of a clear protocol on photographing and filming police officers in public.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 afforded by the Hawai i Constitution to be at least as expansive 
as those provided by the United States Constitution.  See Crosby 
v. State Dep’t of Budget & Fin ., 76 Hawai i 332, 339 n.9, 876 
P.2d 1300, 1307 n.9 (1994).  Indeed, we have considered that in 
some circumstances, “th is court may find that the Hawai i 
Constitution affords greater free speech protection than its 
federal counterpart.”  Id.; Oahu Publ’ns Inc. v. Ahn , 133 Hawai i 
482, 494, 331 P.3d 460, 472 (2014).  
  Although the First Amendment does not explicitly 
protect the right to film or photograph matters of public 
interest, the United States Supreme Court “ha[s] long recognized 
that its protection does not end at the spoken or written word.”  
Texas v. Johnson , 491 U.S. 397, 404 (1989); see also  Oahu 
Publ’ns Inc., 133 Hawai i at 494, 331 P.3d at 472 (stating that 
“the First Amendment is ‘ broad enough to encompass those rights 
that, while not unambiguously enumerated in the very terms of 
the Amendment, are nonetheless necessary to the enjoyment of 
other First Amendment rights’ ” (quoting Globe Newspaper Co. v. 
Superior Court for Norfolk Cty. , 457 U.S. 596, 604 (1982))).  
The Court has likewise considered that news gathering may 
receive constitutional protection because “without some 
protection for seeking out the news, freedom of the press could 
be eviscerated.”  Branzburg v. Hayes , 408 U.S. 665, 681 (1972); ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 see also Houchins v. KQED, Inc. , 438 U.S. 1, 11 (1978) (“There 
is an undoubted right to gather news ‘from any source by means 
within the law’” (quoting Branzburg , 408 U.S. at 681- 82)).  This 
understanding of the First Amendment serves the core function of 
“prohibit[ing] government from limiting the stock of information 
from which members of the public may draw.”  First Nat’l Bank of 
Boston v. Bellotti , 435 U.S. 765, 783 (1978).  The  
constitutional safeguard extends beyond protection of the press, 
id.; the “First Amendment protects the public’s right of access  
to information about their officials’ public activities.”  Fields 
v. City of Philadelphia , 862 F.3d 353, 359 (3d Cir. 2017) 
(emphasis added).  
  Based on these principles, numerous jurisdictions have 
held that the First Amendment affords individuals the right to 
photograph and film police officers in public places.  In Glik 
v. Cunniffe , for example, the First Circuit Court of Appeals 
held that “filming of government officials engaged in their 
duties in a public place, including police officers performing 
their responsibilities,” is protected by the First Amendment.  
655 F.3d 78, 82 (1st Cir. 2011).  The First Circuit explained 
that “[g] athering information about government officials in a 
form that can readily be disseminated to others serves a 
cardinal First Amendment interest in protecting and promoting 
‘the free disc ussion of governmental affairs.’”  Id. (quoting ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26 Mills v. Alabama, 384 U.S. 214, 218 (1966)).  Promotion of the 
free discussion of government operations is particularly 
desirable in the context of law enforcement officials because it 
may “aid[] in the uncovering of abuses” and “have a salutary 
effect on the functioning of government more generally.”  Id. at 
82-83; see also Gentile v. State Bar of Nevada , 501 U.S. 1030, 
1034-35 (1991) (observing that “dissemination of information 
relating to alleged governmental misconduct” lies “at the core 
of the First Amendment” (quoting Butterworth v. Smith , 494 U.S. 
624, 632 (1990))).   
  Several other federal courts have likewise concluded 
that, in light of these considerations, individuals have a 
constitutionally-protected First Amendment right to photograph 
and film police officers in public.  See Turner v. Lieutenant  
Driver, 84 8 F.3d 678, 690 (5th Cir. 2017) (“We agree with every 
circuit that has ruled on this question: Each has concluded that 
the First Amendment protects the right to record the police.”); 
Smith v. City of Cumming , 212 F.3d 1332, 1333 (11th Cir. 2000) 
(recognizing a “First Amendment right . . . to photograph or 
videotape police conduct” because the amendment “protects the 
right to gather information about what public officials do on 
public property, and specifically, a right to record matters of 
public interest”); Fordyce v. City of Seattle , 55 F.3d 436, 439 
(9th Cir. 1995) (recognizing a “First amendment right to film ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 matters of public interest” and “to gather news” in the context 
of police officer’s alleged assault and battery against 
individual filming the police officers assigned to work a 
demonstration); ACLU of Illinois v. Alvarez , 679 F.3d 583, 595, 
597-98 (7th Cir. 2012) (recognizing that the First Amendment 
protects “[a]udio and audiovisual recording” and “gathering news 
and information, particularly . . . about the affairs of 
government” in the context of civil liberties organization’s 
plan to make audiovisual recordings of police officers and 
disseminate the recordings to the general public). 
  Recently, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals 
considered the right of bystanders to record police officers 
performing their official duties.  Fields, 862 F.3d at 359.  The 
Fields court noted that “to record what there is a right for the 
eye to see and the ear to hear . . . lays aside subjective 
impressions for objective facts.”  Id.  Thus, “to record is to 
13see and hear more accurately.”   Id.  In addition to the 
valuable benefit of recordings to facilitate discussion and be 
broadly distributed, the Third Circuit observed that   
                     
 13 Fields centered on whether there is a constitutional right to 
film police activity in a public place.  We agree with the observation of the 
Fields court that a recording device serves to enhance the accuracy of 
observation that is protected in its own right.  862 F.3d at 359.  This is to 
say that the right to record police is incidental to the broader right to 
access information on the activities of public officials, and where recording 
is constitutionally protected, observation without recording will generally 
be likewise protected . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 the proliferation of bystander videos has spurred action at 
all levels of government to address police misconduct and 
to protect civil rights.   These videos have helped police 
departments identify and discipline problem officers.  They 
have also assisted civil rights investigations and aided in 
the Department of Justice ’s work with local police 
departments.  And just the act of recording, regardless 
what is recorded, may improve policing.  . . . And of 
particular personal concern to police is that bystander 
recordings can exonerate an officer charged with 
wrongdoing.  
Id. at 360 (internal citations and quotation marks omitted).  
The Fields  court underscored that in order for the First 
Amendment ’s protection to have meaning, “the Amendment must also 
protect the act of creating that material. ”  Id. at 358.  
  C ourts that have held that the First Amendment 
protects the right to photograph and film police officers in 
public have also concluded that the right “is not without 
limitations.”  Glik, 655 F.3d at 84.  Rather, the ability to 
film law enforcement officials in the course of performing their 
duties “may be subj ect to reasonable time, place, and manner 
restrictions.”  Id.; see also Turner , 848 F.3d at 690; Smith, 
212 F.3d at 1333; Alvarez, 679 F.3d at 605.  In Glik, the First 
Circuit determined that it need not address the specific 
parameters of what constituted a reasonable time, place, or 
manner regulation because the individual’s “exercise of his 
First Amendment rights fell well within the bounds of the 
Constitution’s protections.”   655 F.3d at 84.  This was so 
because (1) his filming occurred in a public park, (2) he video-
recorded the police officers from a “comfortable remove” and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 “‘neither spoke to nor molested them in any way’ (except in 
directly responding to the officers when they addressed him),” 
and (3) his recording was “peaceful” and “[did] not interf ere 
with the police officers’ performance of their duties.”  Id. 
(quoting Iacobucci v. Boulter , 193 F.3d 14, 25 (1st Cir. 1999)).   
  In Gericke v. Begin , 753 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2014), 
the First Circuit squarely addressed the issue of time, place, 
and manner restrictions that it left open in Glik.  The Gericke 
court first rejected an argument that its holding in Glik did 
not apply to the filming of a traffic stop, holding that “First 
Amendment principles apply equally to the filming of a traffic 
stop and t he filming of an arrest in a public park.”  753 F.3d 
at 7.  However, the court reiterated that this right could be 
limited by “reasonable” time, place, and manner restrictions 
“when the circumstances justify them.”  Id. at 7-8.  The First 
Circuit then specified that a time, place, or manner regulation 
could be issued by law enforcement to an individual filming 
police performing their duties in public “ only if the officer 
can reasonably conclude that the filming itself is interfering, 
or is about to interfer e, with [the officer’s] duties.”  Id. at 
8. 
  We agree with the reasoning of the First Circuit and 
of other federal courts of appeal that have consider ed this 
issue.  The rights to free speech and press serve not only to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30 protect the individual’s right to s elf-expression, but also to 
promote the vital goal of “affording the public access to 
discussion, debate, and the dissemination of information and 
ideas.”  Bellotti , 435 U.S. at 783.  Exercising the 
constitutionally-protected rights to free speech and press plays 
a crucial role in “informing and educating the public, offering 
criticism, and providing a forum for discussion and debate.”  
Id. at 781.  This aspect of the First Amendment is all the more 
critical when the ideas and information sought to be 
disseminated pertain to government officials and law enforcement 
personnel, “who are granted substantial discretion that may be 
misused to deprive individuals of their liberties.”  Glik, 655 
F.3d at 82; see also Gentile, 501 U.S. at 1034-35.  Public 
access to such information serves to guarantee “public oversight 
of law enforcement” and “minimizes the possibility of abuse by 
ensuring that police departments and officers are held 
accountable for their actions.”  Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of 
Honolulu, 138 Hawai i 53, 73-74, 376 P.3d 1, 22-23 (2016) 
(considering accessibility of police officer disciplinary 
records under state public records law).  In light of these 
principles, this court likewise concludes that the “filming of 
government officials engaged in their duties in a public place, 
including police officers performing their responsibilities, ” 
Glik, 655 F.2d at 82, is protected by the First Amendment to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31 United States Constitution and by the independent protections 
afforded by article I, section 4 of the Hawai i Constitution.   
  We also agree that this right is subject to reasonable 
restrictions as to the time, place, and manner of the 
photography or recording.  See Glik, 655 F.2d at 84; Turner, 848 
F.3d at 690; Smith , 212 F.3d at 1333; Alvarez, 679 F.3d at 605; 
Gericke, 753 F.3d at 7-8; Fields, 862 F.3d at 360.  Such 
restrictions may be necessary to ensure that law enforcement 
officials are capable of carrying out their duties and 
maintaining the safety of both the general public and of the 
individual conducting the photography or videography.  We are 
persuaded that the threshold requirement for the issuance of 
time, place, and manner restrictions as set forth by the First 
Circuit in Gericke strikes the appropriate balance between 
ensuring public safety, preserving law enforcement’s efficacy, 
and protecting constitutional free speech and press rights.   
  Thus, we conclude that the constitutionally -guaranteed 
right to photograph or film the activities of police officers in 
public may be limited by time, place, and manner restrictions so 
long as a reasonable officer would conclude that the 
individual’s action is interfering or about to interfere with ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 14the officer’s performance of his or her duties.   See Gericke, 
753 F.3d at 8 ; Fields , 862 F.3d at 360.  If issued, police 
orders pertaining to the time, place, or manner of filming must 
be narrowly tailored to mitigate the actual danger or risk posed 
by the recording and leave open ample alternative channels to 
engage in the protected activity, consistent with established 
15principles of First Amendment jurisprudence.   See  Turner, 848 
F.3d at 690; Alvarez , 679 F.3d at 605, 607; see also State v. 
Bloss, 64 Haw. 148, 160-61, 637 P.2d 1117, 1127- 28 (1981) 
(discussing permissibility of issuing time, place, and manner 
restrictions on constitutionally- protected speech). 
  As a necessary corollary to the requirement that a 
time, place, and manner restriction be narrowly tailored and 
leave open ample alternative channels of photographing or video  
recording, the restriction in this context must also be specific 
and “clear[ly] and unambiguous[ly]” communicated by the officer.  
                     
 14 An order that a reasonable officer would conclude is necessary to 
ensure the safety of all persons involved in a police stop--including the 
safety of the officer-- would be a reasonable restriction so long as it 
satisfie s other constitutional requirements.  In evaluating what safety 
precautions are necessary in the context of a stop conducted near moving 
traffic, the officer may consider the risks posed by those vehicles.   
 15 As an alternative to ad hoc orders that may give rise to claims 
of arbitrary enforcement, law enforcement or other government actors may 
establish a uniform policy of time, place, or manner restrictions that are 
narrowly tailored to prevent interference with legitimate police duties  and 
leave open ample alternate channels for accessing accurate information on  
police activity.  See Gericke, 753 F.3d at 7 (“Such a restriction could take 
the form of a reasonable, contemporaneous order from a police officer, or a 
preexisting statute, ordinance, regulation, or other published restriction 
with a legitimate governmental purpose.”).    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 See State v. Guyton , 135 Hawai i 372, 377- 78, 351 P.3d 1138, 
1143-44 (2015) (quoting LeMay v. Leander , 92 Hawai i 614, 625, 
994 P.2d 546, 557 (2000)) (holding that a court injunction whose 
violation subjects a party to criminal penalties must state its 
terms clearly and unambiguously and “allow a person of ordinary 
intelligence” to understand what acts are prohibited ).  Thus, 
the order or direction must be sufficiently clear and specific 
so that ordinary individuals exercising their constitutional 
rights to free speech can readily identify the conduct that the 
order prohibits.  See id. (observing that requirements of 
particularity and specificity are based in part on the concepts 
of “fairness and due process,” which “dictate that a court order 
must be sufficiently particular and definite so as to clearly 
identify the conduct that it pro hibits”).  Clarity and 
specificity are all the more important in the context of the 
offense charged in this case, as under HRS § 291C- 23, mere lack 
of compliance with a police officer’s verbal “order or 
direction” renders conduct “unlawful” that otherwise may be 
lawful and constitutionally protected. 
  In this case, Russo was engaged in video recording 
Officers Lawson and Fairchild as they conduct ed a traffic stop 
pursuant to a scheduled law enforcement action.  Whether he was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 acting in an individual capacity or as a representative of the 
16media,  Russo’s conduct in videotaping the police officers in 
public was protected by the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 4 of the Hawai i 
Constitution.   
  Officers Lawson and Fairchild were entitled to issue 
directives to regulate the time, place, and manner of Russo’s 
video recording so long as the officers possessed an objectively 
reasonable belief that Russo was interfering or about to 
interfere with the ongoing traffic stop.  Assuming the officers 
so concluded, any orders or commands they delivered were 
required to be clear, specific, and narrowly tailored to 
mitigate the actual danger or risk posed by the recording, and 
the directives were required to leave open ample alternative 
channels to observe the officers’ activities .   
  In light of our dispo sition of other issues, we do not 
determine whether the officers’ order to Russo satisfied these 
requirements.  Rather, we observe that “[i] n our society, police 
officers are expected to endure significant burdens caused by 
                     
 16 As the Glik  court correctly observed, “[i]t is of no 
significance” whether the recording is conducted by “a private individual, 
and not a reporter, gathering information abo ut public officials.”  655 F.3d 
at 83.  The constitutional rights to free speech and press do not “inure[] 
solely to the benefit of the news media; rather, the public’s right of access 
to information is coextensive with that of the press.”  Id.; accord Fields, 
862 F.3d at  359. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 citizens’ exercise of their First Amendment rights,” and, to 
ensure the protections that the First Amendment affords, 
officers may often be expected to show restraint when “they are 
merely the subject of videotaping that memorializes, without 
impairing, their work in public spaces.”  Glik, 655 F.3d at 84. 
B. Russo’s Compliance with the Officers’ Order  
  Probable cause to support a charge is “established by 
‘a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary caution or 
prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong 
suspicion of the guilt of the accused.’”  State v. Atwood , 129 
Hawaii 414, 419, 301 P.3d 1255, 1260 (2013) (quoting State v.  
Chung, 75 Haw. 398, 409-10, 862 P.2d 1063, 1070 (1993)).  
Although the evidence need not be sufficient to support a 
conviction, see id., this court has  concluded that  the 
requirement of probable cause is at least as demanding as the 
preponderance of the evidence standard.  State v. Maganis , 109 
Hawaii 84, 86-88 , 123 P.3d 679, 681- 83 (2005) (rejecting ICA’s 
interpretation of probable cause as requiring a lesser quantum 
of proof than the preponderance of the evidence standard as an 
“unreasonabl[e]” “attempt to ‘water down’” the requirement).  
  In this case, the parties agree that “the best 
evidence is the video itself,”  and the parties stipulated the 
video into evidence.  In its oral ruling on Russo’s motion to 
dismiss, the district court made findings based in large part on ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
36 the video footage of the events leading up to and including 
17Russo’s arrest.   The court determined that Russo was advised by 
MPD that “he was in the area of operations where cars were being 
pulled over” and that “he was in danger of being struck by a 
vehicle.”  The court then found that Russo was “instructed 
multiple times” by Officers Lawson and Fairchild to “ step back 
out of the area of operation ,” but that Russo “ did not comply 
with the instructions to step back and continued to engage the 
18officers.”    
  T he ICA majority  concluded that these findings by the 
district court demonstrated that probable cause existed to 
support the charge against Russo for failure to comply with a 
lawful order of a police officer in violation of HRS § 291C- 23.  
On certiorari to this court, Russo argues that the conclusions 
drawn by the ICA and the district court with respect to his 
compliance are inconsistent with the evidence because the video 
recording clearly and unequivocally shows that he complied with 
the officers’  order to stand and/or step back.   
                     
 17 Because the parties agreed that the video was the best evidence 
of what actually occurred and “the trial court is in no better position to 
intelligently weigh the evidence than the appellate court,”  this court may 
review the video de novo.  Fowler v. Weber , 607 N.W.2d 252, 254 (S.D. 2000) 
(applying de novo review to video evidence).  
 18 In its COLs  with respect to the charge of disorderly conduct , the 
district court likewise concluded that “Russo refu sed to comply with the 
lawful direction of police officers involved in Operation Recon to step out 
of the area of operations.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
37   The video footage stipulated into evidence by the 
parties shows that Russo did, in fact, comply with the officers’ 
order.  When Officer Fairchild instructed Russo to return to his 
vehicle and turn on his hazard lights, Russo complied.  When 
Officer Fairchild waved his hand and directed Russo to “step off 
to the side” to avoid getting “run over,” Russo likewise 
complied--responding, “Okay,” and walking away from the general 
area to which Officer Fairchild had gestured.  When Russo was 
subsequently approached and ordered by Officer Lawson to “stand 
back there,” Russo complied by tak ing a few s teps away from the 
area and asking whether he could  stand on private property.  
When Officer Lawson responded  that he could not  and ordered him 
to “stand back there,”  Russo took  several steps back towards the 
highway and asked, “Can I stand on public property?”  When 
Officer Lawson then threatened Russo with arrest, Russo 
immediately began walking backward s, away from the area and 
towards the general direction to which Officers Lawson and 
Fairchild pointed.  For the remainder of the video, as the 
police officers persisted  in walking towards Russo and 
commanding that he “stand back there,” Russo continue d to walk 
backwards and away from the traffic stop area.  It appears from 
the video recording that Russo only stopped walking backwards  
when he was physically prevented from doing so and arrested by 
the officers.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
38   Although Russo may have continued to engage Officers 
Lawson and Fairchild in conversation and questions during the 
encounter, the video itself plainly demonstrates that Russo 
obeyed their command.  Russo appeared to make a concerted effort 
to comply with the officers’ instructions, and the video shows 
that he walked away or backwards when ordered by the officers to 
19step or stand back.   The parties agreed that the video footage 
was the best evidence of the encounter, and the footage impels 
the conclusion that Russo did, in fact, comply with the 
officers’ order.   Thus, given the evidence in this case, there 
was no probable cause to support the charge of failure to comply 
with a lawful order of a police officer in violation of HRS § 
291C-23.  The facts and circumstances as adduced by the parties 
at the motion to dismiss hearing would not cause a reasonable 
person “to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong 
suspicion ,” Atwood , 129 Hawai i at 419, 301 P.3d at 1260 (quoting 
Chung, 75 Haw. at  409-10, 862 P.2d at 1070), that Russo was 
willfully failing or refusing to comply with any lawful order 
issued by Officers Lawson and Fairchild.  Rather, as stated, the 
                     
 19 We observe that the need for the officers to repeat the order to 
“stand back there” may have stemmed from a lack of specific ity and clarity 
regarding where Russo could, in fact, stand.  As stated, the “order or 
direction” alleged to have been violated must be clearly and unambiguously 
communicated so that an ordinary individual can identify the conduct that it 
prohibits.  See  State v. Guyton , 135 Hawai i 372, 377 -78, 351 P.3d 1138, 1143 -
44 (2015).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
39 video evidence shows that Russo was complying with the officers’ 
20 21order.   Thus, the ICA erred in concluding otherwise.   
IV. CONCLUSION 
  A lthough the district court incorrectly concluded that 
HRS § 291C-23 did not apply to Russo’s conduct and dismissed the 
failure to comply charge on that basis, this court may affirm a 
judgment of the lower court on any ground in the record that 
supports affirmance,  even if that ground was not expressly 
relied upon by the lower court.  State v. Fukagawa , 100 Hawai i 
498, 506-07, 60 P.3d 899, 907-08 (2002).  Here, an alternative 
basis for dismissing the charge applies--namely, that probable 
cause was lacking as to the charge of failure to comply with a 
lawful order of a police officer pursuant to HRS § 291C- 23.  
Although the ICA correctly concluded that the district court 
erred in its interpretation of the statute, the ICA erred to the 
extent that it vacated the district court’s di smissal order and 
remanded for further proceedings after determining that probable 
cause existed to support a charge against Russo under HRS § 
                     
 20 As noted above, because the video footage demonstrates that Russo 
complied with the order given by Officers Lawson and Fairchild, we need not 
address whether the order was “lawful” --that is, whether the order was 
narrowly tailored, left open ample alternative channels to engage in the 
constitutionally -protected activity, and was clearly conveyed using specific 
and unambiguous terms.  
 21 To the extent that the district court’s findings  and conclusions 
are contrary to the video footage’s clear depiction of Russo’s compliance 
with the officers’ order, they are clearly erroneous.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
40 291C-23.  Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s May 1, 2017 Judgment 
on Appeal and affirm the district court’s  July 9, 2014 Notice of 
Entry of Judgment And/Or Order dismissing charges against Russo 
with prejudice for lack of probable cause.  
Jacob K. Lowenthal, 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,  and 
Samuel G. MacRoberts 
for petitioner 
 
Richard K. Minatoya 
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
