***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
GRACE CHEN, 
 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
  
vs. 
 
JONATHAN WILLIAM MAH, D.D.S.;  
JONATHAN MAH, DDS, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
Petitioners/Defendants- Appellants.   
________________________________________________________________
  
SCWC-16-0000712 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
(CAAP-16-0000712; CIV. NO. 12- 1-2495-10) 
 
JANUARY 30, 2020  
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING  AND DISSENTING IN PART AND CONCURRING IN THE 
JUDGMENT, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction 
 This case concerns a compensation dispute based on an oral 
agreement between an independent contractor dentist,  Dr. Grace 
Chen (“Chen”), and the dentist who retained her services, Dr. 
Jonathan Mah 
(“Mah”), and his corporation, Jonathan Mah, DDS, Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000712
30-JAN-2020
09:19 AM*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2 Inc. (“Corporation”) (collectively, “Defendants”).  In sum, 
default and subsequent default judgment as to certain claims 
were entered against Defendants, and a bench trial 
was held 
regarding damages on some remaining claims.  Defendants 
unsuccessfully appealed the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s 
(“circuit court”)1 denial of their motion to set aside entry of
default, and their motion for reconsideration and/or for new 
trial to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) .  See Chen v. 
Mah, CAAP-16-0000712 (App. Mar. 14, 2019) (SDO).  
We hold the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying Defendants’ Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure (“HRCP”) 
Rule 55(c) motion to set aside entry of default  on the grounds 
they failed to satisfy the second and third prongs of the test 
governing HRCP Rule 60(b) motions to set aside default 
judgments .  The three prongs are: (1) the nondefaulting party 
will not be prejudiced by the reopening, (2) the defaulting 
party has a meritorious defense, and (3) the default was not the
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  Although  HRCP 
Rule 55(c), by its plain language, only requires a showing of 
“good cause” to set aside an entry of default, binding precedent
required the circuit court to apply the HRCP Rule 60 (b) standard
to Defendants’ motion.   The circuit court also did not err in 
its other rulings.  
 
 
1The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
3 
 Requiring a movant under HRCP Rule 55(c) to satisfy HRCP 
Rule 60(b) requirements, however, contradicts the plain language 
of the former rule, which only requires “good cause.”  Thus, we 
therefore now hold that HRCP Rule 55(c) motions are governed 
only by t
he “good cause” standard explicitly stated in the rule, 
and that movants seeking to set aside an entry of default 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) need not satisfy the three-prong 
test applicable to HRCP Rule 60(b) motions to set aside default 
judgments.  Our holding is prospective only, however, as trial 
courts were required to follow precedent requiring parties 
seeking to set aside an entry of default pursuant to HRCP Rule 
55(c) to satisfy the three -prong test for HRCP Rule 60(b) 
motions.  Therefore, by announ cing this “new rule,” we must  
avoid unfair prejudice to parties and tria l courts that  have 
relied on binding precedent, and our holding applies only to 
decisions on motions to set aside entries of default after the 
date of this opinion.   See Kahale v. City  and Cty. of Honolulu , 
104 Hawai ʻi 341, 348, 90 P.3d 233, 240  (2004).   
Accordingly, we affirm the  May 3, 2019 j udgment on a ppeal 
entered by the ICA pursuant to its March 14, 2019 s ummary 
disposition order (“SDO”), which affirmed the circuit court’s 
July 6, 2016 final j udgment. 
 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
4 
 II.  Background  
A. Procedural and factual b ackground through the July 13, 2013 
 hearing on Defendants’ motion to set aside entry of d efault  
 
On October 3, 2012, Chen filed a twenty-four page complaint  
against Defendants in circuit court, which included forty -two 
detailed preliminary factual allegations.   In summary,  Chen 
alleged she and Defendants entered into an oral compensation 
agreement in November 20 08 under which the Corporation agreed to 
retain her professional services as an independent contractor 
associate dentist and to com pensate her for treating dental 
patients at its principal place of business according to a 
formula under which she was entitled to be regularly paid 40% of 
the gross income produced to the Corp oration for her dental work 
on patients adjusted or reduced by (1) 40% of the gross income 
not actually collected from her patients or their insurance 
carriers and (2) 50% of th e lab fees incurred by her patie nts 
for her treatment of th em. 
According to the complaint , the Corporation commenced 
paying Chen a couple of months after she started working in late 
2008 based on its collection of income produced from her work, 
adjusted as reflected above, and regularly provided her with 
supportin g documentation describing in detail all adjustments 
for uncollected income and patients ’ lab fees, and this practice 
continued until November 5, 2011.    ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
5 
 The complaint further alleged that several months after 
beginning work, when Chen asked for a written compensation 
agreement or a partnership, and repeated this request several 
times, on each occasion, Mah represented he would have 
partnership documents prepared and provided to her, but this 
never happened.  Chen alleged that when Mah made these 
representations, he misled and lied to her as he had no 
intention of making her a partner as evidenced by him making 
similar representations to other dental associates and not 
making them partners, as she later learned. 
Chen alleged she continued working based on M ah’s 
representations that he would make her a partner, and in fact, 
accelerated and increased her work efforts and hours of work as 
an associate dentist  to favorably impress Mah of her abilities 
and worthiness to be his partner.  The complaint  alleges that, 
by July 2011, Chen had increased her work schedule to four days 
a week while working eight hours per day on weekends and twelve 
hours per day o n Mondays and Tuesdays, and, as a result, Chen 
produced gross income for the Corporation exceeding $1 million 
for both calendar years 2010 and 2011, generating substantial 
income for Defendants consisting of the Corporation’s 60% share 
of her gross income.  Chen alleged  she relied upon and trusted 
Defendants to accurately calculate and timely pay her the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
6 
 correct amounts of money owned to her under 
their compensation 
agreement.  
According to the complaint , after November 5, 2011, 
Defendants suddenly,  and without explanation,  stopped providing 
any calculations and supporting documentation to Chen and her 
compensation payments became erratic and changed to rounded lump 
sums.  Chen alleged that in 2012, Defendants  failed to provide 
her with a 1099 miscellaneous income form for 2011 despite her 
repeated requests and failed  to pay her any compensation since 
June 15, 2012.  According to the complaint, the Corporation paid 
Chen $359,874.18 in 2011, and Defendants had underpaid her 
approximately $200,000 or more in income, but she was unable to 
determine the amount with certa inty without the Corporation’s 
accounting documents.  Chen also alleged the Corporation had 
paid her $92,500 in 2012, but she had bee n underpaid at least 
$45,669.76 through her August 23, 2012 resignation by admission 
of Defendants’ accountant Gloria Thomp son in her unsupported 
September 14, 2012 two -page accounting compilation.  
The complaint further alleged  Mah and his wife had personal 
federal tax liens filed against them for 2005- 2009 for hundred s 
of thousands of dollars in unpaid income tax, with t ax liens 
still pending against them in 2011, and that upon information 
and belief, in October 2011, Mah used portions of the monies 
owed to her to pay these delinquent tax liens.  Chen further ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
7 
 alleged she had made multiple efforts in 2011 and 2012 to meet 
and speak with Mah to obtain an accounting and explanation of 
the above, but Mah repeatedly  evaded her or cancelled meetings 
at the last minute.  Chen also alleged she made repeated demands 
for accounting documents and for payment of the estimated  unpaid 
amounts exceeding $200,000 owed to her, but Defendants failed or 
refused, raising excuses and attempting to charge exorbitant 
copying fees, and providing  only Gloria Thompson’s accounting 
compilation.   
The complaint further alleged that by failing to timely pay 
her, Defendants had prevented Chen from timely filing her 2011 
income taxes and making regular contributions to her own 
retirement plan, thereby causing her to incur a penalty
 in an 
amount to be determined.  Chen also alleged that two days after 
she was coincidentally seated next to Mah on a flight from Hilo 
to Honolulu on August 8, 2012 and complained to Mah about being 
owed substantial funds and not being provided
 accounting 
records, Mah announced 
to all associate doctors he  was closing 
his office and hiring an independent CPA to review all doctors’ 
compensation for 2012 in response to Chen’s  complaint , but 
despite that, Mah and at least one associate dentist continued 
to work out of his office, along with staff.  Chen also alleged 
that on August 10, 20 12, the Corporation’s office manager texted 
all associate doctors that they were  welcome to have their own ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
8 
 CPAs review the data.  Chen submitted a resignation letter on 
August 23, 2012, requesting accounting documents and sums owed 
by August 28, 2012.    
Based on these detailed factual allegations, Chen’s 
complaint asserted causes of action in twelve counts: 
declaratory judgment (Count I), accounting (Count II), breach of 
contract and of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing 
(Count III), conversion (Count IV), fraud (Count V), 
intentional/negligent misrepr
esentation (Count VI), intentional 
infliction of emotional distress (Count VII), unjust enrichment 
(Count VIII), statutory fraudulent transfer (Count IX), common 
law fraudulent transfer (Count X), constructive trust/equitable 
lien (Count XI), and punitive damages (Count XII).    
 Before the complaint was filed  on October 3, 2012, Chen’s 
retained counsel, Dennis King (“King”), sent a demand letter 
dated September 10, 2012,  to Defendants.  The letter demanded 
Defendants immediately pay Chen the delinquent amounts owed to 
her in the amount of $237,268.92 for past due compensation owed 
to her, inclusiv e of attorney’s fees of $4,750,  and that 
Defendants deliver to King’s office accounting and billing 
statements, daily production, worksheets, and lab fees for 
services performed by Chen for the period from January 1, 2011 
to September 10, 2012.   The demand letter stated : “If I do not 
receive the above payment and these records on or before 5 PM on ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
9 
 Saturday, September 15, 2012, I have been instructed to 
immediately file suit against you and your company to recover 
these amounts and any other amounts owed to Dr. Chen after 
obtaining your documents and performing a full accounting of 
your delinquent payments based on the claims, among others, 
described below.”   
Mah and King had several discussions and communications by 
e-mail and regular mail between September 11, 2012 and October 
3, 2012.  During the discussions, King asked Mah if he had an 
attorney as King preferred to speak to Mah’s attorney.   Mah 
indicated, however, he did not have an attorney but had spoken 
to a friend who was an attorney and did not want to incur the 
high expenses of an attorney.  Most of the discussions concerned 
attempts by Mah and King to informally resolve the matter, by 
Chen obtaining Mah’s  documents without pursuing litigation.   
Specifically, on or about September 11, 2012, Mah called 
King in response to the demand letter.   Mah had informed King 
that he did not have an attorney representing him in this 
matter.  Also on September 11, 2012, Mah provided the two-page 
compilation report summary2 purportedly of compensation paid and 
owed to Chen from 2008 through 2012, but it did not include any 
                         
2  An undated report was attached as “Exhibit C” to Defendants’ memorandum 
in opposition to the entry of default judgment, but according to King, 
contained different figures than the one provided to King on September 11, 
2012. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
10 
 information identifying who authored the document, and no backup 
documentation was provided.  In an email dated September 12, 
2012, King request
ed backup documentation and contact 
information for Mah’s CP A.  King also noted that if Mah altered, 
changed, or destroyed relevant documents, Chen would have no 
choice but to assert the spoliation rule against him in any 
ensuing litigation if the matter could not be resolved before 
litigation, but that he “look[ed ] forward to receiving . . . 
[Mah’s] supporting documents and the CPA contact information  
. . . so that this matter can be resolved before 9/15/12.”  
On September 14, 2012, Mah indicated that because he did 
not have duplicates, and because Chen had allegedly previously 
removed accounting records without prior authorization in July 
2012, Mah was not willing to allow the records to be removed 
from the dental office for photocopying, but he would permit 
King and Chen to inspect all accounting data a
t the dental 
office, which was consistent with what Mah allowed all ass ociate 
doctors to do.  Mah indicated, however, any copies made would be 
done at the dental 
office by the office manager at one dollar 
per page.  King responded in an e -mail to Mah that he was not 
authorized to pay one dollar per page for 3, 000 pages of 
documents, that he was only requesting documents for 2011 and 
2012, and that he was willing to accept e- mailed or faxed copies 
of Mah’s accountant’s summary of monthly totals for collectio ns ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
11 
 and non-collection adjustments and lab fees for each month from 
and after January 1, 2011 to the present for Ch en’s billings for 
her services. 
Following this exchange, Mah called King on September 15, 
17, 24, and  28, and October 2, and 3, 2012.3  Mah indicated he 
was in the process of attempting to comply and furnish relevant 
accounting data to King, and King asked Mah why it was taking so 
long.  Mah explained there were voluminous records from 2008 to 
2012; King clarified he was only interested in 2012 despite 
Mah’s explanation that reviewing only one year, 2012, would not 
generate an accurate result.  King then gave Mah a new deadline.  
According to Mah, be cause of the ever -changing deadlines to 
comply with requests, together with King’s assurance s of 
resolving the matter without litigation, Mah felt he was misled 
and confused into believing there was still time to resolve this 
matter informally.  Further, according to Mah, because King made 
assurances during their telephone conversations that Mah and 
Chen would avoid litigation by attempting to 
resolve this matter 
informally, and because King was seemingly reasonable, cordial, 
and professional, Mah, in good faith, trusted King, and was 
under the impression that King was available to mediate and 
assist the parties in resolving this matter.  In addition, 
according to Mah, King never r ecommended to Mah to obtain the 
                         
3  The logs indicate Mah did not contact King after October 3, 2012.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
12 
 assistance or advice of another attorney, or stated that King 
had a duty of loyalty to Chen to act solely in her best 
interests at Mah’s
 expense.   
After their telephone conversation on October 3, 2012, King 
sent an e-mail to Mah that same day, summarizing the 
conversation, and stating that “[t]o date you still have not 
provided the accounting documents initially requested in 
November[] 2011 by Dr. Chen or by her on numerous occasions 
thereafter,” that Mah’s requirement that copies of documents 
cost one dollar per page was unaffordable and unreasonable, that 
“we are at an impasse with regard to you producing the 
accounting documents,” and that  “[r]egrettably because of your 
unwillingness to produce these documents willingly within a 
reasonable time and to pay [Chen] what she is owed, I have 
recommended that Dr. Chen pursue this matter through the courts.  
After you retain counsel, please have y our attorney contact me.”  
According to King, he did not mislead Mah in any way about 
trying to settle the case without litigation and Mah knew on 
their last conversation on October 3, 2012 that the  matter was 
going to proceed to court based on King’s  recommendation and 
that the parties had reached an impasse.   
 The complaint
 was served on Defendants in Hilo, Hawai ʻi on 
October 8, 2012, by serving Mah in both his personal capacity as
well as the registered agent for Corporation.  Mah was also  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
13 
 served with discovery requests on that date.  On October 31, 
2012, Chen promptly filed a
 request for entry of default on the 
complaint, and default was entered against Defendants by the 
circuit court clerk that same day.   Copies of the  clerk’s entry 
of default were served on Defendants by U.S. mail on November 2, 
2012.  
 There was no further activity in the litigation until May 
24, 2013, when Chen filed a motion for default judgment, and a 
hearing was set for July 9, 2013.  The motion 
requested damages 
from Defendants on the following counts only: Counts III (breach 
of contract), IV (conversion), V (fraud by concealment by 
retaining her compensation without accounting), VI (fraud by 
misrepresentation of intention to make Chen a partner), VIII 
(unjust enrichment), and XI (constructive trust/equitable lien).  
 On June 20, 2013, Defendants, t
hrough their attorney, filed 
a motion to set aside the October 31, 2012 entry of default 
(“motion to set aside entry of d efault”) , which was set for a 
hearing on July 18, 2013.  Attached to the motion was a 
declaration by Mah, dated June 18, 2013, alleging , among other 
things, that Mah only “recently  learned” that default against 
Defendants had been filed  on October 31, 2012, that Mah never 
realized King “was adversely taking action against me while 
negotiating a resolution,” and that Mah was misled by King in ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
14 
 his representations to try and settle the case 
without 
unnecessary litigation.      
Defendants also filed an ex parte motion to shorten time 
for hearing their motion to set aside entry of default, asking 
that the hearing on their motion be set for before the July 9, 
2013 hearing date for Chen’s motion for default j udgment.  The 
circuit court denied this ex parte motion on the grounds that  
there was no showing why the motion to set aside entry of 
default was not filed earlier to obviate the need to shorten 
time.  
 At the July 9, 2013 hearing, 
however, the circuit court 
denied Chen’s first mo tion for default judgment without 
prejudice. 
On July 10, 2013, Chen fil ed a memorandum  in opposition to 
Defendants’ motion to set aside entry of d efault.  Attached to 
the memorandum was a declaration by King dated July 10, 2013, 
which stated, among other things
, that since October 3, 2012, 
King had not had any discussions or communications with Mah 
except through the service of court documents.    
At the July 1 8, 2013 hearing on Defendants’ motion to set 
aside entry of default, the circuit court clarified the standard 
it would apply: 
And the entry of default, setting aside requires the 
showing of essentially three things, one, there’s no 
prejudice to the plaintiff, number two, that the defendant 
has a meritorious defense and m
 number three, that the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
15 
 default entered as a result of 
-- did not enter because of 
inexcusable neglect.  
 
The circuit court then inquired for which of Chen’s twelve 
counts Defendants had meritorious defenses.4  Defense counsel 
argued Defendants had meritorious defenses for the fraud claims 
because this was not a fraud, but an accounting case.  
 The circuit court then inquired  what the meritorious 
defense was for Chen’s fraud claim in Count V (fraud by 
concealment by retaining her compensation without accounting).   
Defense counsel responded that, “[b]asically, the accounting 
reflects that [Defendants]  overpaid Chen. ”  According to defense 
counsel, Defendants had nothing to hide, were willing to do the 
accounting, and let the numbers resolve the case.   Defense 
counsel went on to state  that the classification of some of 
Chen’s billings were being bounced b ack by the insura nce 
companies and were not reimbursed because “they were not 
proper.”  According to defense counsel, Chen was expecting 
Defendants to front generic gross amounts without getting 
                         
4  Defendants did not assert separate defenses as to each of the twelve 
counts in their motion to set aside entry of deafult.  Rather, they asserted 
they “have a meritorious defense” as they “den[ied] any monies owed to 
Plaintiff” and “claim[ed] in good faith that Plaintiff was overpaid in 
compensation as documented in the accounting that has been made available to 
opposing counsel”; Defendants had offered for inspection and copying their 
accounting documents and retained an independent accountant to “provide a 
summary of the voluminous accounting data.”   
    
Defendants also alleged they were led to believe that if all of the 
information was turned over, Chen would not take action.  Defendants asserted 
they would not have failed to file an answer had King not misled Defendants 
into believing legal action would not be taken if the accounting documents 
were provided.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
16 
 compensation back, and the crux of the case was going to be 
accounting.  
   
 The circuit court probed further and asked if Mah ever told 
Chen that there was an overpayment requiring an adjustment, to 
which defense counsel responded in the affirmative, citing to 
Exhibit 9 in Chen’s memorandum in opposition to Defendants’ 
motion to set aside entry of default.5  That exhibit was a letter 
informing associates of the Corporation that compensation was 
switching from production- based to collections- based.  The 
                         
5  Exhibit 9 is a June 25, 2012 letter signed by Mah and addressed to the 
“associates” of the Corporation.  It stated:  
 
We are providing this letter to you for inclusion in 
your records regarding the method of disbursement of 
compensation checks.  
 
Prior to July 1, 2012, disbursement of compensation 
checks were based upon estimated production numbers.  This 
meant that the time between the claims being sent out and 
the actual funds that were collected (including necessary 
adjustments) could be between a few days for a simple 
procedure to 90 days or more for more complex procedures.  
 
The growth of the office has resulted in increased 
expenses, staffing costs, and many more transactions that 
are processed.  As a consequence of this, our accountant 
has strongly advised us to implement a change from 
production to a collection method of disbursing 
compensation checks.  
 
What this means is compensation checks will now be 
given out once the money has been collected from the 
insurance companies and patients accordingly.  
 
This change should make a much more streamlined 
process in the office, as well as reduce the number of man 
hours needed.  
 
Be assured that this will in no way mean less 
compensation, but rather change only when payments are 
disbursed.  This change will help keep office expenses 
steamlined [sic].  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
17 . . . . 
 circuit court then asked the defense, “And where does he talk 
about an overpayme nt and then he’s going to now make an 
adjustment?”
  To that inquiry, the following exchange occurred 
with the circuit court: 
MR. KIDANI:  In terms of the overpayment, that came up in 
the audit that was done by the accountant, Thompson.  
 
THE COURT:  When was that done? 
 
MR. KIDANI:  That was done in 2012 when this whole issue 
came up, and this was the information that was being given 
to Mr. King directly from our client.  And that audit 
continued on an ongoing basis through 2012 into 2013.  And 
that was – -
  
 
. . . . 
 
. . . part of the delay of the information that was --  that 
they were waiting for.  
 
THE COURT:  Where in Exhibit 9 . . . does Dr. Mah explain 
that there was an overpayment and now we have to make an 
adjustment, therefore, we’re not going to pay you i n the 
same fashion that we did before?  
 
MR. KIDANI:  That wasn’t in that letter.  
 
. . . . 
 
. . . I think that was what was conveyed by him to all the 
associates.  It wasn’t in this letter.  
 
THE COURT:  Okay, where in his declaration does he talk 
about the timing of when he told Dr. Chen that there was an 
overpayment and he is making an adjustment?  
 
MR. KIDANI:  . . . [S]tarting with paragraph 14 of his 
declaration, he indicated in 2011 and ’12 that he first 
started learning of the overpayment.  And it goes on  into 
15 -- 14, 15, 16.  
 
THE COURT:  Why don’t you just point me to the paragraph 
and the language in Dr. Mah’s declaration attached to your 
motion where he says he informed the plaintiff, Dr. Chen, 
that there was this overpayment so he’s making an 
adjustment.  
 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
18 
 MR. KIDANI:  Okay.  Paragraph 21[6] was when he informed all 
the doctors of the complaint and his investigation started 
and that Gloria Thompson was retained at that point to 
complete the investigation.  It was after Gloria Thompson 
finished that that information was given to Dr. Chen on the 
overpayment.  
 
Defense counsel clarified that Gloria Thompson, the “independent 
CPA” hired by Defendants , finished her final report in April 
2013 after she got all the 2012 numbers.  The circuit court 
noted, however, that the complaint  had been filed in October 
2012 and there had been no audit finished before the lawsuit was 
filed.   
 In response to defense arguments regarding the fraud 
claims, Chen’s counsel argued  Mah’s letter was wr itten 
generically that the reimbursement program would be changing, 
but it did not give notice that it was going to change 
retroactively.  Rather, Chen’s counsel argued  Chen had been 
strung along to continue working with the Corporation, and 
although she had repeatedly asked for her compensation and 
accounting, Mah would keep saying it was coming 
and therefore 
                         
6  Paragraph 21 of Mah’s declaration states:  
 
On or about August 10, 2012, I sent a written message 
to all Associate Doctors.  My message was as follows: 
“Based upon a complaint made by Dr. Chen on August 8, 
concerning improper and inaccurate calculations of doctors 
[sic] compensation.  Dr. Mah has hired an independent CPA 
to review all doctors [sic] compensation for 2012.  Dr. Mah 
considers the doctors [sic] professional compensation a 
serious matter, and for that reason effective immediately, 
the office will be closed to all associate doctors until 
this matter is resolved.  All associate doctors are welcome 
to have their own CPA review the same data.  If  you have 
any questions or concerns please contact Dr. Mah. ” ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
19 
 induced her to keep working
, trusting that the accounting would 
eventually be produced.  Chen’s c ounsel also argued the second 
basis for the fraud claim was Mah’s dangling the  prospect of a 
partnership in front of her while she was being grossly 
underpaid. 
 Defense counsel r eplied that Mah’s testimony would  show 
that partnership was never offered to Chen.   Further, according 
to defense counsel, even if that had occurred, it could not 
serve as a basis for fraud because there was no clear and 
convincing evidence 
suggesting  Mah did anything intentional to 
deceive Chen.  Additionally, as for the accounting, according to 
defense counsel, Chen had access to raw data and so it was not a 
situation in which Mah was trying to hide anything.  According 
to defense counsel, Chen not liking  the results of the audit did 
not constitute fraud.  
 Defense counsel also argued that once the accounting was 
finished, the numbers would not change that substantially, and 
would just show whether Chen was entitled to money or not.  
Turning to  “excusable neglect, ” defense counsel noted that 
prior to the filing of the complaint , Mah had been in discussion 
with King , and therefore both parties were attempting to resolve 
the case without litigation.   Defense counsel argued that Mah, 
although a dentist, was like a layperson from the neighbor 
islands, who “hear[s] things a different way.”   Thus, although ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
20 
 King had stated to Mah in an October 3, 2012 e
-mail that he 
recommended Chen pursue the matter through the courts, this did 
not mean there was an impasse.  
 After hearing the arguments,7 the circuit court ruled 
Defendants did not meet their burden of proof because it was 
“unable to find the existence of a meritorious defense as to 
liability,” and also “unable to find that the default entered as 
a result of any excusable neglect on the part of the 
defendants.”  Specifically, the circuit court stated:  
The court concludes that the defendant did not meet 
the burden of proof under the 
Hawai[ʻ]i case law, the BDM 
case.  The court agrees with the defendant that there 
really is no prejudice [] within the meaning of the 
BDM case
to the plaintiff if default is set aside.  However, with 
respect to meritorious defense as to liability, the court 
is unable to conclude that the record shows that the 
defendant has -- or the defendants have meritorious 
defenses as to liability.  The arguments really go to 
damages which they are not precluded from litigating even 
if they are in default.  The case law permits a defendant 
in default to continue to litigate the question of damages.8 
 
 
As to excusable neglect, there really is an 
insufficient basis in the record to support a finding or 
conclusion that the defendants were excusably negligent in 
failing to respond to the complaint.  It really -- the 
record only shows that the defendant was avoiding his 
obligations under the law to respond to the complaint in a 
timely fashion.  Although the plaintiff[]  did not give the 
defendants much latitude in terms of the 20 days to respond 
to the complaint, the plaintiff moved very quickly after 
the 20 days expired to obtain the entry of default.  So 
there was very little opportunity for negotiation on 
extensions of time or things of that nature, but no 
overtures were made by the defense to the plaintiff to 
                         
7  Defense counsel also argued why Chen would not be prejudiced if the 
default was set aside.  The circuit court agreed.  As those arguments are not 
at issue, they are not detailed here.  
 
8  Because the circuit court found the first prong, that the nondefaulting 
party would not be prejudiced, was satisfied, the arguments regarding this 
prong have not been included.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
21 
 request additional time to respond to the complaint.  So 
plaintiff cannot be faulted, although the court does note 
that the plaintiff[]  moved extremely expeditiously giving 
virtually no time for the defense to have additional 
extensions of time to respond to the complaint. But that 
does not prejudice the plaintiff’s right to pursue the 
default remedies.   
 
So the court is unable to find the existence of a 
meritorious defense as to liability, and the court is 
unable to find that the default entered as a result of any 
excusable neglect on the part of the defendants.  So there 
is no basis for this court setting aside the entry of 
default.   
 
But the court does recognize that the record shows 
the defendants appear to have at least arguments regarding 
-- and potential defenses regarding damages.  So what the 
court will do is deny the motion to set aside the entry of 
default.  However, in denying the motion, the court will 
permit the defendant to file an answer setting forth their 
defenses to the damages claims in this case.  The answer 
must be filed by next Friday, July 26, 2013.  
 
(Emphases added.)  The circuit court entered its order denying 
Defendants’ motion  to set aside entry of default on August 8, 
2013. 
B. Procedural and factual background following the July 13, 
2013 hearing on Defendants’ motion to set aside entry of 
default  
 
 Defendants then filed their answer on July 26, 2013.   The 
answer set forth eight defenses centering around the assertion 
that Chen was not only fully paid, but overpaid by Defendants 
and the insurance companies because she had misrepresented her 
work in billing codes.  According to Defendants, Chen was 
therefore not owed any damages; overpayments should have offset 
any payments and Chen should return overpayments to Defendants; 
Chen should not be allowed equitable relief because she had 
unclean hands for overcharging patients; Chen’s request for ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
22 
 damages (presumabl y for her fraud claim regarding the “dangling” 
partnership offer) was not related to the oral agreement between 
Chen and Defendants regarding compensation for her services
, and 
therefore Chen, was not entitled to any claim for damages based 
on a “pending arrangement” because no consideration was 
exchanged; and there was a lack of clear and convincing evidence 
to support Chen’s claims.  
 On August  19, 2013, the circuit court set a trial for 
September 29, 2014.  However, prior to that date, Chen filed a 
second motion for default judgment (“m otion for default 
judgment”) on August 4, 2014.  Defendants filed their  opposition 
memorandum on August 19, 2014.  A hearing was held on August 27, 
2014.  The circuit court agreed with Chen that liability was not 
at issue because Defendants had defaulted and therefore 
the 
well-pled allegations of the complaint were required to be taken 
as true.9  Therefore, the circuit court also agreed to enforce 
the compensation formula Chen had asserted.  Defendants, 
however, challenged the calculation of damages, and the
 circuit 
                         
9  Once a default is established, a defendant cannot contest the factual 
allegations of a plaintiff’s claim for relief, but the court considers 
whether the unchallenged facts constitute a legitimate cause of action.  10A 
Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice and Procedure  Civ. §
2688.1 (4th ed. 2019).    
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
23 
 court inquired whether it was “required to convene[ ,] at a 
minimum[,] a proof hear ing if not a trial on damages.”10   
 Chen responded that she was required to only present “a 
prima facie case or at least sufficient evidence to pass a 
motion for directed verdict,” and that she had presented 
“substantially more evidence than that.”11  Chen had provided a 
timely expert report by a CPA evidencing her damages.  Chen 
argued Defendants would have to present evidence to refute her 
evidence, but that an expert report attached to De fendants’ 
opposition memorandum had not been produced in discovery and 
should not be able to be relied upon.  The one document 
Defendants had attached to their opposition memorandum that was 
previously produced was Exhibit I, a report by Gloria Thompson.  
Chen argued, however, that Gloria Thompson ’s report was based on 
                         
10  As noted in Dela Cruz v. Quemado , 141 Hawai ʻi 338, 346, 409 P.3d 742, 
750 (2018), the ICA in Hupp v. Accessory Distribs . Inc., 1 Haw. App. 174, 616 
P.2d 233 (App. 1980) interpreted  HRCP Rule 55(b)(2)  to provide discretion for 
courts to order proof of liability hearings before entering default 
judgment.  1 Haw. App. at 179 -180, 616 P.2d at 236 -37 (“trial courts must be 
given leeway in their discretion to require proof of liability in the support 
of a default judgment”).   Hupp held that in such a hearing, the nondefaulting 
party must adduce evidence which would be sufficient at trial to overcome a 
motion for directed verdict.   1 Haw. App. at  180, 616 P.2d at 237.  
 
11  Hawaiʻi appellate decisions have, however, consistently held that even 
when a defendant cannot contest liability after entry of default, the 
defendant may still contest the amount of its liability at proof hearings. 
See Occidental Underwriters of Hawaii, Ltd., v. Am .  Sec. Bank, 5 Haw. App. 
431, 433, 696 P.2d 852, 854 (App. 1985) (“Upon the entry of default, 
[defendant] had lost its standing to contest the fact of its liability, but 
still had standing to contest the amount of its liabili ty.” (citations 
omitted)); Kamaunu v. Kaaea, 99 Hawaiʻ i 432, 439, 56 P.3d 734, 741 (App. 2002)
(requiring trial courts to permit parties in default to contest damages at 
proof hearings).  We affirmed these requirements in Dela Cruz, 141 Hawai ʻi at 
347, 409 P.3d at 751.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
24 
 Defendants’ purported compensation formula, which differed fro m 
the one Chen had pled in her 
complaint, and which also  differed 
from the formula achieved when examining past payments received 
by Chen that were not in dispute; moreover, Defendants did not 
provide any supporting documents.  Accord
ingly, Chen argued “a 
trial would serve no purpose here.”  
 Defendants responded that the compensation formula was 
based on income produced, i.e., amounts collected, not billed.   
When the circuit court asked what the proper amounts asserted by 
Defendants were, Defendants pointed to Exhibits E, F, G, and H, 
which had been produced as Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence R
ule 1006 
“summaries” of the over 5 ,000 pages of financial documents 
originally produced to Chen in response to her request for 
production.   Defendants asserted the summaries were created by 
office staff over the course of four t o five months under Mah’s 
supervision of reconciliations performed by the office.   Chen 
also challenged the admissibility of the exhibits because they 
were newly created documents and she  was not given the 
opportunity to examine Defendants’ numbers; furthe r, Chen 
questioned whether Mah could attest that he made or verified 
each of the entries in the exhibits.  
 The circuit court ultimately concluded it could not 
consider the evidence produced by Defendants in opposition 
because trial “ should not be by ambush .”  Instead, the circuit  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
25 
 court relied on the well- pleaded facts in the complaint and the 
evidence submitted by Chen and granted Chen’s motion for default 
judgment as to Count III (breach of contract) and Count VIII 
(unjust enrichment).  Damages were ordered in the tot al amount 
of $406,392.89; $335,731.68 plus interest was awarded for 
damages for 2011, and $70,661.21 was awarded for damages for 
2012.
  The circuit court denied the motion for default judgment 
as to Count IV (conversion), Count V (f
raud), C ount VI 
(intentional/negligent misrepresentation), and Count XI 
(constructive trust/equitable lien).12  
 Prior to the bench trial  regarding damages on the remaining 
counts of the complaint, on August 13, 2014, Chen filed a motion 
to strike previously unidentifi
ed witnesses, in which she noted 
the circuit court had issued a trial  setting status c onference 
order dated August 19, 2013,  that set forth various trial 
deadlines, including the submission of expert reports by May 30, 
2014 and the final naming of witnesses by July 1, 2014, and that 
Defendants failed to meet these deadlines with their untimely 
August 11, 2014 filing.  At a hearing held on September 10, 
2014, the circuit court denied the motion as to non-expert 
                         
12  This court subsequently ruled in Dela Cruz  that “[i]n future cases, 
when trial courts deny a motion for entry of default judgment, the 
appropriate subsequent course of action is to set aside the default, and 
allow the case to proceed on  the merits.”  141 Hawai ʻi at 347, 409 P.3d at
751.  The circuit court had, however, already awarded damages based on the
breach of contract and unjust enrichment counts.   
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
26 
 testimony, i.e., the court would permit lay 
witnesses to 
testify, but granted the motion as to expert testimony as it had 
previously ordered disclosure by a certain date. 
A bench trial on damages only was then held on September 
30, 2014 through October 3, 2014 on the following four claims: 
Count IV (conversion), Count V (fraud), Count VI 
(intentional/negligent misrepresentation), and Count XI 
(constructive trust/equitable lien).  The remaining unresolved 
claims, Count I (declaratory judgment), Count II (accounting), 
Count VII (intentional infliction of emotional distress), Count 
IX (statutory fraudulent transfer), Count X (common law 
fraudulent transfer), and Count XII (punitive damages) were 
dismissed without prejudice and were not the subject of the 
trial. 
 At trial, the circuit court received testimony from Chen, 
Mah, and people who previously worked for Defendants.  Parties 
submitted their post- trial memoranda on November 7, 2014.   At a 
post-trial hearing held on November 10, 2014,  the circuit court 
summarized its decision and tasked Chen with drafting more 
detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law.   In sum, the 
circuit court denied Count IV (conversion) for Chen’s failure to 
present legal authority; denied 
Count X (constructive 
trust/equitable lien) for insufficiency of the evidence; found 
in favor of Chen as to Count V (fraud), and in so doing found ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
27 
 Mah to not be a credible witness; and also found in favor of 
Chen as to Count VI (intentional/
negligent misrepresentation).  
As to the two claims that it  found in favor of Chen, Counts V 
(fraud) and VI (intentional/negligent misrepresentation), the  
circuit court noted the damages awarded were the s ame damages 
previously awarded to Chen  by it by default judgment for Counts 
VIII (unjust enr ichment)  and III (breach of contract) .  
Accordingly, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of Chen 
and against Defendants in the same amounts indicated previously.  
On July 6, 2016, the circuit court entered its findings of fact  
(“FOF”) and conclusions of law  (“COL”) and final j udgment.  
 On Jul y 18, 2016, Defendants filed a motion for 
reconsideration and/or for new trial, in which Defendants 
asserted five grounds:
 
A.  Defendants have obtained newly discovered evidence 
regarding claims by more than 50 of Plaintiffs former 
patients that will be filed with the Regulated Industries 
Complaints Office of the State of Hawaii Department of 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs. These claims directly impact 
the amount of compensation and “damages” allegedly owed to 
Plaintiff.  
 
B.  An accountant has determined that Dr. Chen was 
overpaid by $161,110.  
 
C.  The Court committed clear legal error by finding a 
fiduciary relationship/duty in the independent contractor 
context.  
 
D.  The Court committed clear legal error by applying the 
law governing an employer/employee relationship to an 
independent contractor.  
 
E.  The Court committed clear legal error by piercing the 
corporate veil in violation of Hawaii Supreme Court 
precedent.  
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
28 
 At a September 6, 20
16 hearing, the circuit court denied 
this motion.  Although the circuit  court expressed concern that 
offsets to Chen’s claims for damages may exist based on 
subsequent remedial measures taken by Defendants to address 
patient complaints against Chen for poor quality of service, 
that defense was never pled by Defendants, and even if it had 
been, Defendants could have brought forth such evidence at 
trial, but failed to do so.  For this reason also, 
the circuit  
court declined to re- open the case to receive such evidence.  
The circuit court also concluded Defendants’ efforts to 
introduce a report by an accountant, William Andersen, showing 
Chen was overpaid, did not constitute grounds for a new trial 
because his testimony had previously been stricken by the 
circuit court for Defendants’ failure to comply with the  circuit 
court’s trial setting order.  Lastly, the  circuit court 
concluded Defendant s’ argument that it had “pierced the 
corporate veil” when it held Mah liable for the acts of 
Corporation did not constitute grounds to grant their motion as 
the complaint was styled against both Mah  and the Corporation.  
C. Appeal to the ICA  
 Defendants timely filed a n otice of a ppeal to the ICA,  and 
presented four points on appeal: 
[1.] The circuit court violated the public policy favoring
resolution of cases on the merits and fai
led to properly 
apply the Hawai[ʻ]i Supreme Court’s test regarding setting 
aside an entry of default.  The record show
s that, although 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
29 
 Dr. Mah and the Company did not timely file an Answer to 
the 
Complaint, Dr. Mah did engage in months of informal 
discovery with Appellee’s counsel, providing documents and 
information requested by Appellee and her counsel.  This 
process went for approximately seven months before Appellee 
filed a Motion for Default Judgment.  
 
[2.] The circuit court erred in excluding substantial 
evidence of liability and/or damages.  
 
[3.] The circuit court erred in denying Dr. Mah and the 
Company’s Motion fo r Reconsideration and/or for New Trial, 
given newly discovery [sic] evidence of Appellee’s 
malpractice, substantial evidence of overpayments to 
Appellee, the improper creation of new law regarding 
fiduciary duties, applying employment law to an independent  
contractor relationship, and improperly piercing the 
corporate veil.  
 
[4.] The circuit court erred by signing scripted findings 
of fact and conclusions of law, a practice that has been 
widely condemned by numerous courts.  
 
 The ICA rejected the Defendants’ challenges.   
As to the first point on appeal, the ICA cited BDM, Inc. v. 
Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 549 P.2d 1147 (1976), which had set 
forth a three-prong test to determine whether to set aside an 
entry of default: 
[A] motion to set aside a default entry or a default 
judgment may and should be granted whenever the court finds 
(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by 
the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a 
meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the 
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  
 
Chen, SDO at 2 (citing BDM, 57 Haw. at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150) .  
The ICA noted that “[i]f a moving party fails to establish any 
prong of the test, it is not an abuse of discretion to refuse to 
set aside the default.”   Id. (citing Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. 
Bartolome, 94 Hawai ʻi 422, 439, 16 P.3d 827, 844 (App. 2000); 
Park v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 271, 281, 859 P.2d 917, 922 (1993); ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
30 
 Dillingham Inves. Corp. v. Kunio V. Yokoyama Tr., 8 Haw. App. 
226, 236, 797 P.2d 1316, 1321 (1990)).   
The ICA concluded the circuit court did not err in denying 
Defendants’ motion to set aside entry of default.  Chen, SDO at 
5.  As to Defendants’ argument that the circuit court erred when 
it concluded Defendants lacked a meritorious defense because it  
focused only on the fraud claim and failed to address the 
remaining eleven claims, the ICA stated the circuit court had 
addressed all of the claims:  
The Circuit Court did not limit its determination to Mah’s 
defenses against the fraud claim but instead stated, in 
general terms, that “[Defendants’] arguments really go to 
damages which they are not precluded from litigating even 
if they are in default.”  While [defense] counsel . . . 
repeatedly limited his argument to the fraud claims, in its 
ruling, the Circuit Court did not limit its ruling to just 
the fraud claim.  
   
Chen, SDO at 3.  
The ICA also concluded Defendants’ argument that their 
failure to answer the complaint  was the result of excusable 
neglect lacked merit.  Chen, SDO at 3.  The ICA observed that  
[t]he Hawai ʻi Supreme Court has recognized that 
circumstances that do not rise to the level of excusable  
neglect include a defendant’s failure to answer  a properly 
served complaint  without any reason, for an improper 
reason, or without seeking the approval or extension from 
the court, as well as circumstances in which there is a 
lengthy delay between the entry of default and the filing 
of the motion to set aside the default.
   
 
Chen, SDO at 3–4  (citations omitted).  The ICA highlighted that 
Defendants had been made fully aware of the nature of Chen’s 
demands and concerns, that an impasse had been reached, and that ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
31 
 litigation was imminent.  Chen, SDO at 4.  Moreover, although 
Mah may have been surprised as to the filing of the complaint 
given the various discussions he had with King  for weeks, Mah 
had not cited any reason for failing to respond to the complaint 
once it had been filed.
  Id. 
As to the second point on appeal, the ICA concluded 
Defendants failed to present arguments in accordance with Hawai ʻi 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (“HRAP”) Rule 28(b)(7)  (2016)13 and 
therefore waived the argument.  Chen , SDO at 6.  In any event, 
the ICA concluded the argument lacked merit because it was well 
within the circuit court’s discretion to strike the testimony of 
Defendants’ witnesses for their failure to comply with  its 
deadline for disclosing witnesses, and Defendants presented  no 
cogent argument to demonstrate the circuit court abused its 
discretion in doing so.  Id.  
As to the third point on appeal, the ICA concluded the 
circuit court did not err when it denied Defendants’ motion for 
                         
13  HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) states in relevant part:  
 
 (b) Opening Brief.  Within 40 days after the filing 
of the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an 
opening brief, containing the following sections in order 
here indicated:  
 
. . . . 
 
(7) The argument, containing the contentions of the 
appellant on the points presented and the reasons t herefor, 
with citations to the authorities, statutes and  parts of 
the record relied on. . . . Points not argued may be deemed 
waived. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
32 
 new trial, as the verdict was not against the manifest weight of 
the evidence.  Chen, SDO at 8– 9 (citing Richardson v. Sport 
Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai ʻi 494, 503, 880 P.2d 169, 178 
(1994); Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawaiʻ i 1, 11, 84 P.3d 509, 519 
(2004)).  Although Defendants contended that,  at trial , there 
was substantial evidence demonstrating they overpaid Chen by 
$161,100, thereby offsetting the damages awarded to Chen, Chen 
had presented testimonial evidence of the compensation formula 
agreed upon with Mah, documentary evidence of past compensation 
and changes to her compensation in November 2011, and other 
evidence regarding Mah’s promises to include her in a 
partnership and Chen’s consequent increased production due to 
those promises; further, the circuit court had found Mah to not 
be credible.  Chen, SDO at 9.  
As to the fourth point on appeal, the ICA noted Defendants 
presented no authority that it was improper or prohibited for a 
court to adopt findings of fact or conclusions of law drafted by 
a party, as the circuit court had directed.  Chen, S DO at 10.  
Additionally, to the extent that the circuit court may have 
erred in entering FOF  34 and COLs  FF, GG, ZZ, and AAA, in which 
the circuit court determined or otherwise implied a fiduciary 
employer-employee relationship existed between Chen and Mah, the 
ICA concluded such a relationship did not serve as the basis for 
the circuit court’s determination of damages on the fraud and ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
33 
 misrepresentation claims.  Id.   According to the ICA, any such 
error was therefore harmless and did not warrant relief.  Chen, 
SDO at 10-11  (citing Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai ʻi 
297, 320 n.28, 
219 P.3d 1084, 1107 n.28 (2009)).  Similarly, Defendants’ 
argument that the circuit court erroneously pierced the 
corporate veil was inapposite to the circuit c ourt’s 
determination that Mah was liable for fraud and 
misrepresentation on the basis of his representations to Chen as 
an agent of Corporation, which exposed him to personal 
liability.  Chen, SDO at 11 (citing Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC 
v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P’ship , 115 Hawai ʻi 201, 228 n.31, 166 P.3d 
961, 988 n.31 (2007)).          
Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s July 6, 
2016 final judgment.  See id. 
D. Application for writ of certiorari  
Defendants timely filed their application for a writ of 
certiorari (“ Application ”) on June 27, 2019  from the May 3, 2019 
judgment on appeal entered by the ICA pursuant to its March 14, 
2019 SDO.
 
Defendants present the following five questions in their 
Application: 
[1.] Did the ICA gravely err in failing to set aside the 
cir
cuit court’s entry of default, where (1) the record 
shows the circuit court failed to analyze all twelve causes 
of action in the complaint regarding meritorious defenses 
and the record contains substantial evidence of a 
meritorious defense to one or more causes of action; and ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
34 
 (2) the circuit court failed to consider the lulling of a 
pro se party into inaction by engaging in months of 
discovery and communications before and after obtaining an 
entry of default, then using a long delay to help justify a 
purported failure to defend the case.  
 
[2.] Did the ICA gravely err in creating new law in 
Hawai[ʻ]i by affirming the circuit court’s finding of a 
fiduciary relationship in an independent contractor 
relationship?   
 
[3.] Did the ICA gravely err in creating new law in Hawaii 
by permitting the circuit court to apply the law regarding 
employers and employees to an independent contractor 
relationship?  
 
[4.] Did the ICA gravely err in allowing the circuit court 
to pierce the corporate veil and hold a shareholder liable 
for the purported acts of a corporation without any 
allegation or finding of alter ego/piercing the corporate 
veil? 
 
[5.] Did the ICA gravely err in adopting scripted findings 
that turned what amounted to an advocate’s trial brief into 
findings of [f]act and conclusions of law?  
  
On certiorari, the parties reiterate the  arguments they had 
presented to the ICA.14 
III.  Standards of Review 
A. Motion to set aside an entry of default  
“The application of HRCP Rule 55 . . . is re viewed for 
abuse of discretion.”  Cty. of Haw . v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 
Hawaiʻi 391, 404, 235 P.3d 1103, 1116 (2010) (citation omitted), 
                         
14  On August 28, 2019, we ordered that the parties submit 
supplemental briefs not exceeding ten pages by September 18, 201 9, addressing 
the following question:  
 
Is a movant filing a motion to set aside entry of default 
under Hawai ʻi Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 55(c) required 
to show (1) that the non -defaulting party will not be 
prejudiced by the reopening, (2)
 that the defaulting party 
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not 
the result of inexcusable neglect or 
a wilful act? 
 
Consistent with their previous submissions, the parties
 answered in the 
affirmative.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
35 
 abrogated on other grounds by Tax Found. of Haw.  v. State, 144 
Hawaiʻi 175, 439 P.3d 127 (2019).
  
B. Motion for reconsideration  
 “The trial court’s ruling on a motion for reconsideration 
is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. ”  Kamaka v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawaiʻi 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008) (citation omitted).  Further, 
[a]s this court has often stated, “the purpose of a motion 
for reconsideration is to allow the parties to present new 
evidence and/or arguments that could not have been 
presented during the earlier adjudicated motion.” 
Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters 
or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should 
have been brought during the earlier proceeding.  
 
Id. (alteration in original) (citation omitted). 
C. Motion for new trial  
Both the grant and the denial of a motion for new trial 
[are] within the trial court's discretion, and we will not 
reverse that decision absent a clear abuse of discretion. 
An abuse of discretion occurs “where the trial court has 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules 
or principles of law or practice to the substantial 
detriment of a party litigant.”  It is also within the 
appellate court's discretion to limit the issues of a new 
trial upon remand.  
 
Costales v. Rosete, 133 
Hawaiʻi 453, 46
5, 331 P.3d 431, 443 
(2014) (alteration in original) (citations omitted). 
IV.  Discussion 
A. Counts remaining on appeal 
 As a preliminary matter, following the  dismissal without 
prejudice of the following claims, the circuit court dismissed 
them with prejudice in its final judgment, and they are ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
36 
 therefore not further discussed in this opinion
: Count I 
(declaratory judgment), Count II (accounting), Count VII 
(intentional infliction of emotional distress), Count IX 
(statutory fraudulent transfer), Count X (common law fraudulent 
transfer), and Count XII (punitive damages).  Also not discussed 
are Count IV (conversion) and Count X
I (constructive 
trust/equitable lien), as the circuit court had ruled against 
Chen on those claims after the bench trial and she did not 
appeal.  Thus, at issue are Count III (breach of contract) and 
Count VIII (unjust enrichment), for which 
the circuit court 
granted Chen a default judgment with damages in the amount of 
$406,392.89, and Count V (fraud) and  Count VI 
(intentional/negligent misrepresentation), for which the circuit 
court awarded the same damages after the bench trial on damages.  
B. Whether t he circuit court erred  in denying Defendants’  HRCP 
Rule 55(c)  motion to set aside entry of default 
  
 1. Standard governing HRCP Rule 55(c) motions   
 
HRCP Rule 55(c) governs the setting aside of an entry of 
default.  HRCP Rule 55(c) provides that “ [f]or good cause shown 
the court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment 
by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in 
accordance with Rule 60(b).”  
The circuit court and the ICA cited to BDM  for the 
proposition that Hawai ʻi courts apply the three- prong test ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
37 
 applicable to HRCP Rule 60(b) motions to determine whether to 
grant a motion to set aside an entry of default filed pursuant 
to HRCP Rule 55(c):
 
[A] motion to set aside a default entry or a default 
judgment may and should be granted whenever the  court finds 
(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by 
the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a 
meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the 
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  
 
Chen, SDO at 2.15   
                         
15  In BDM, this court referred to the “excusable neglect” standard 
governing HRCP Rule 60(b) motions despite the “good cause” language of HRCP 
Rule 55(c) on the premise that the setting aside of a defendant’s default,  
alone, would not allow litigation to proceed, and that the circuit  court 
would also need to grant an extension of time for the defendant to answer the 
complaint, else “an anomalo us situation in which [defendants]  would be forced 
to remain in default but [plaintiff]  would be foreclosed from obtaining entry 
of a default” would result.  5 7 Haw. at 75, 549 P.2d at 1149.  BDM stated 
that the “excusable neglect” standard of HRCP Rule 6(b) governing 
enlargements of time for performing an act “required or allowed to be done at 
or within a specified time” would therefore also have to be considered with 
respect to whether an extension of time to answer the complaint should be 
considered.  57 Haw. at 75 -76, 549 P.2d at 1149.  
 
The premise that an official extension of time pursuant to the 
“excusable neglect” standard would be necessary to allow a circuit court 
defendant to file an answer to the complaint after expiration of the twenty 
days provided for by HRCP  Rule 12(a) (2000) was, however, mistaken.  If 
default has not been requested and entered pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(a), there 
is no HRCP rule rendering  an answer filed after twenty days of service of 
process ineffective. In fact, in our circuit courts, counsel and parties 
often provide the courtesy of informally extending time for answering 
complaints without court involvement, and simply do not request a formal 
entry of default until after the courtesy time has expired.  See Guidelines 
of Professional Courtesy and Civility for Hawai ʻi Lawyers Section 2(a) (2018) 
(“[A] lawyer who manifests professional courtesy and civility [] [a]grees to 
reasonable requests for extensions of time or continuances without requiring 
motions or other formalities.”).  Thus, BDM’s premise for juxtaposing the 
“excusable neglect” standard under HRCP Rule 6(b) and HRCP Rule 60(b) to HRCP 
Rule 55(c) motions to set aside default judgments was in error.   In any 
event, BDM further noted that “[i]t is difficult for us to imagine a case in 
which ‘good cause’ might be found for setting aside an entry of default and 
yet ‘excusable neglect’ for the failure to file the answer, which failure 
occasioned the entry of the default, should not also be found.”  57 Haw. at 
76, 549 P.2d at 1149.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
38 
 Although HRCP Rule 55(c) provides that “ [f]or good cause 
shown the court may set aside an entry of default and, if a 
judgment by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside 
in accordance with Rule 60(b)[,] ” the parties, the circuit 
court, and the ICA all agree Defendants were required to also 
meet the three-prong test applicable to motions to set aside 
default judgments under HRCP Rule 60(b), 
which requires a 
showing that “(1)
 the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced 
by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a 
meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the result 
of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. ”  BDM, 57 Haw. at 76, 
549 P.2d at 1150.   
In BDM, a per curiam opinion, this court stated:  
[D]efaults  and default  judgments  are not favored and that 
any doubt should be resolved in favor of the party seeking 
relief, so that, in the interests of justice, there can be 
a full trial on the merits.  It should be noted that a 
motion to set aside a default entry , which may be granted 
under Rule 55(c)  ‘for good cause shown’, gives the court 
greater freedom in granting relief than is available on a 
motion to set aside a 
default judgment where the 
requirements of  Rule 60(b) must be satisfied. 10 Wright and
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure , Civ. § 2693 at 313 
(1973). ‘Despite these differences, the elements advanced 
in support of a motion under  Rule 55(c)  will be the same 
whether relief is sought from a default entry or from a 
default judgment. ’ Wright and Miller supra, Civ. s  2692 at 
301.  
 
 
In general, a motion to set aside a default entry or 
a default judgment may and should be granted whenever the 
court finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be 
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party 
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not 
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  10 
Wright and Miller, Federal Pract ice and Procedure § 2696 
(1973). The mere fact that the nondefaulting party will be 
required to prove his case without the inhibiting effect of ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
39 
 the default upon the defaulting 
party does not constitute 
prejudice which should prevent a reopening.  
 
Id. (citations omitted).  
Also, in Ala Loop Homeowners , we stated:  
 
Defaults are generally disfavored.  See Rearden Family Trust
v. Wisenbaker ,
 101 Hawaiʻi 237, 254, 65 P.3d 1029, 1046 
(2003) (holding that “ defaults and default judgments are 
not favored and [] any doubt should be resolved in favor of
the party seeking relief
, so that, in the interests of 
justice, there can be a full trial on the merits”) 
(citations omitted). In  BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc. , 57 Haw. 
73, 549 P.2d 1147 (1976), this court held that a party 
seeking to set aside a  default must demonstrate the 
following three factors:  
 
 
In general, a motion to set aside 
a default entry or a default judgment may and 
should be granted whenever the court finds  
(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be 
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the 
defaulting party has a meritorious defense, and 
(3)
 that the  default was not the result of 
inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  
 
123 Hawai ʻi at 42
3, 235 P.3d at 1135 (alteration in original).  
 The ICA has held that a defendant moving to set aside an 
entry of default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) must satisfy the 
three-prong test applicable to  HRCP Rule 60(b) motions, and has 
specifically held that all three prongs must be satisfied for a 
trial court to grant a motion to set aside entry of default.  
See The Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App. 584,  589-91, 
671 P.2d 1025, 1030-31 (1983); Manley v. Mac Farms, Inc., 1 Haw. 
App. 182, 184-85, 616 P.2d 242, 244 (1980); Hupp, 1 Haw. App. at 
177-78, 616 P.2d at 236.  In addition, although  this court has ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
40 
 not actually held that HRCP Rule 55(c) movants must satisfy the 
three prongs, our cases suggested as much in dicta.16   
Despite the language of  HRCP Rule 55(c) allowing 
entries of default to be set aside based only on a showing 
of “good cause,” t rial courts, including the circuit court 
in this case, were required to follow binding precedent, 
which held that parties seeking to set aside an entry of 
default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) must satisfy the three -
prong test for HRCP Rule 60(b) motions.  Therefore, we 
analyze the circuit court and ICA rulings based on the 
standard that the circuit court was required to follow at 
the time of its ruling, which was that Defendants had the 
burden of establishing the following to prevail on their 
motion to set aside entry of default: ( 1) the nondefaulting
party will not be prejudiced by the reopening, (2) the 
defaulting party has a meritorious defense, and (3) the 
default was not the result of inexcusable neglect or a 
wilful act.   In addition, the burden was on Defendants to  
                         
16  Along this line, if lack of “excusable neglect” is a requisite showing 
for a HRCP Rule 55(c) motion, then this clearly contradicts the plain 
language of the rule, which only requires “good cause,” a much lower standard
under Hawaiʻ i law, which basically only requires a showing of “good cause” 
under the circumstances of the situation.  In contrast, we have held that 
ignorance
 of the rules or law cannot be “excusable neglect.”  See Enos v. 
Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc. , 80 Hawaiʻ i 345, 353, 910 P.2d 116, 124 (1996)
(making it difficult for anyone to meet the lack of “excusable neglect” 
requirement of HRCP Rule 60(b) motions ).  Thus, incorporation of this  HRCP 
Rule 60(b) requirement into a  HRCP Rule 55(c) analysis violates the plain 
language of the rule.  
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
41 
 establish that each prong had been satisfied.  See  In re 
RGB, 123 Hawaiʻ i
 1, 17, 229 P.3d 1066, 1082 (2010).  
2.  The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by 
denying Defendants’  HRCP Rule 55(c) motion to set 
aside entry of default 
  
As noted above, t
he circuit court ruled in favor of the 
Defendants on the first prong regarding prejudice to Chen, but 
ruled against the Defendants on the second and third prongs 
regarding meritorious defenses and excusable neglect.  In their 
first question on certiorari, Defendants allege the ICA erred in 
failing to set aside the circuit court’s entry of default 
because: (1) with respect to the second prong, the record shows 
the circuit court failed to analyze all twelve causes of action 
in the complaint regarding meritorious defenses and the record 
contains substantial evidence of a meritorious defense to one or 
more causes of action; and (2)  with respect to the third prong, 
the circuit court failed to apply this court’s stated policy of 
favoring a trial on the merits and failed to consider the 
lulling of a pro se party into inaction by engaging in months of 
discovery and communications before and after obtaining an entry 
of default, then using a long delay to help justify a purported 
failure to defend the case.  
We address the third prong first because it is dispositive.  
To prevail, Defendants had the burden of establishing that their 
default “was not the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
42 
 act.”  Under Hawai ʻi law, ignorance of the rules or law cannot be 
“excusable neglect.”  Enos, 80 Hawaiʻi at 353, 910 P.2d at 124 
(1996). 
Defendants argue this court held that courts are to resolve 
any doubt in favor of the party seeking relief.  See  Rearden 
Family Trust, 101 Hawaiʻi at 254, 65 P.3d at 1046  (“We affirm 
that defaults and default judgments are not favored and that any 
doubt should be resolved in favor of the party seeking relief, 
so that, in the interests of justice, there can be a full trial 
on the merits.” (internal quotation marks and citations 
omitted)).  
Defendants also argue the ICA gravely erred when it 
affirmed the circuit court’s denial of their motion to set aside 
default, as the circuit court failed to consider the “lulling, 
discovery, and ‘lengthy delay’
” in Chen’s filing for default 
judgment.  Importantly, Defendants assert that both before and 
after the complaint was filed, King “engaged in ‘multiple 
follow-up telephone discussions’ with Dr. Mah,” which had the 
“effect of lulling Dr. Mah into believing this dispute would be 
resolved if he simply cooperated with [King].”   
The record , however, does not reflect any continued 
discussions between the parties after the complaint was filed.  
The citations to the record by defense counsel to support the 
assertion that Mah and King had “multiple follow -up telephone ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
43 
 discussions” following the filing of the complaint  do not 
support the defense’s position.   Rather, the citation is to 
King’s declaration regarding the contents of a September 10, 
2012 demand letter, which was s
ent prior to the filing of the 
complaint on October 3, 2012.   
Indeed, as pointed out by Chen and the ICA, the record does 
not reflect any communications between Mah and King after 
October 8, 2012, when the complaint  was served.   See Chen, SDO 
at 4–5 (“Mah has not cited any reason for failing to respond to 
the Complaint  once it had in fact been filed.”  (citation 
omitted)).  Even Mah’s phone logs do not show any conversations 
with King following October 3, 2012.  In sum, according to the 
record, upon service of the complaint on October 8, 2012, all 
non-court related communication between the parties had ceased.   
According ly, even if there had been some informal discovery 
and efforts to avoid litigation before Oc tober 3, 2012, and even 
if all doubts were resolved in favor of Defendants regarding 
Mah’s misunderstanding of the parties’ alleged impasse, 
Defendants fail to identify anything in the record to explain 
why, after the filing of the complaint, Mah continued to be 
“lulled” by King into thinking that litigation could be avoided 
if Mah cooperated with King; there simply was no further 
communication between them.  In other words, although Mah 
asserts he never realized King was adversely taking action ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
44 
 against him while negotiating a resolution, any “negotiations” 
had ceased as of the filing of the complaint.  See Chen, SDO at 
5 (“Mah does not assert that there was any effor t to continue 
these discussions after the C omplaint was filed, and Mah failed 
to seek any extensions from the Circuit Court to, for example, 
obtain more time to resolve the dispute out of court. . . .  Mah 
[did not] file[] the motion to set aside the entry of default 
[until] after Dr. Chen had filed her First Motion for Default 
Judgment, nearly nine months following the filing of the 
Complaint.”).17   
The record reflects that during the pre
-complaint  
discussions, King asked Mah if he had an attorney as King 
preferred to speak to Mah’s attorney, but Mah indicated “he did 
not have [an attorney] but had spoken to a friend who was an 
attorney and did not want to incur the high expenses of an 
attorney.”  
Then, despite service of the complaint  on October 8, 
2012, and prompt notice of the November 2, 2012 entry of 
default, Mah took no action until being s erved with Chen’s May 
24, 2013 motion for default judgment.  Mah
 is not an uneducated 
person lacking resources or access to counsel.  Under the 
circumstances, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
                         
17  Mah’s declaration  dated June 18, 2013, does not supply a different 
timeline of events.  Additionally, it vaguely states that Mah did not learn
until “recently” of the entry of default, even though he was served with 
notice of the entry of default on or about November 2, 2012.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
45 
 ruling the Defendants failed to show that their default “ was not 
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. ”   
Defendants ’ failure to meet this prong is dispositive.18   
C. Prospectively, a HRCP Rule 55(c) motion to set aside entry 
of default is to be evaluated based only on whether there 
has been a showing of “good cause”  
  
 1.  Prospective new standard governing HRCP Rule 55(c) 
 
As explained in Section IV.B.1 above, HRCP Rule 55(c), 
which governs the setting aside of an entry of default provides 
that “[f]or good cause shown the court may set aside an entry of 
default and, if a judgment by default has been entered, may 
likewise set it aside in accordance with Rule 60(b).”  Thus, the 
plain language of HRCP Rule 55(c)  requires only that a party 
                         
18  Defendants’ remaining assertions on certiorari also lack merit.  The 
circuit court also did not abuse its discretion on the second prong regarding
meritorious defense as the circuit court did not limit the hearing on their 
motion to set aside entry of default to a discussion of the fraud claim, as 
they assert; rather, the circuit court invited arguments regarding 
Defendants’ 
alleged meritorious defenses as to all counts.  
Defendants’  assertion that  the circuit court erred in finding Corporation had
a fiduciary duty to provide Chen with documentation to support her 
compensation was not clearly erroneous  under the circumstances
.  Lahaina 
Fashions, Inc. v. Bank of Haw ., 131 Hawaiʻ i 437, 456, 319 P.3d 356, 375 (2014)
(discussing situations that can give rise to a fiduciary relationship).  
Defendants assert the circuit court precluded  evidence of overpayments, 
offsets, and/or set
-offs, but do not identify what specific evidence was 
wrongfully precluded.  Defendants do not explain why it was not within the 
circuit court’s discretion to strike Defendants’  expert testimony for failure
to comply with the August 19, 2013 order setting various trial deadlines.   
Defendants argue improper piercing of the corporate veil when the circuit 
court held Mah personally liable , but fail to address the circuit court’s 
conclusion that Mah’s liability did not stem from his statu s as a 
shareholder.  Even if the circuit court had ruled Mah an alter ego of 
Corporation, however, it does not appear this would have constitute d error.  
See Calipjo v. Purdy, 144 Hawaiʻi 266, 277- 78, 439 P.3d 218, 229 -30 (2019) 
(discussing alter ego factors under 
Hawaiʻi law).  Finally, contrary to 
Defendants’ assertion that the ci rcuit court adopted “scripted findings ,” the
record shows the circuit court provided a detailed oral ruling and then  
ordered King to draft proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law 
consistent with its decision.   
 
 
 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
46 
 show “good cause” to  set aside an entry of default and indicates 
that the setting aside a default judgment is governed by HRCP 
Rule 60(b).   
Our cases have also expressed our policy of disfavoring 
defaults and  default judgment s and of resolving any doubt in 
favor of the party seeking relief, so that, in the interests of 
justice, there can be a full trial on the merits.  BDM, 57 Haw. 
at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150; Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai ʻi at 423, 
235 P.3d at 1135.  And we have specifically noted that a motion 
to set aside a default entry, which may be granted under 
HRCP Rule 55(c)  “for good cause shown ,” gives the  trial court 
greater freedom in granting relief than is available on a motion 
to set aside a default judgment where the requirements of 
HRCP Rule 60(b)  must be satisfied.  BDM, 57 Haw. at 76, 549 P.2d 
at 1150; Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai ʻi at 423, 235 P.3d at 
1135. 
Yet, after this court’s 1976 per curiam opinion in BDM, our 
appellate opinions have held that motions to set aside entries 
of default under HRCP Rule 55(c) must satisfy the three
-prong 
test for HRCP Rule 60(b) motions.  
We acknowledge that under federal law, the “good cause” 
standard governing vacating an entry of default under Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure (“FRCP”)  Rule 55(c) is the same 
standard that governs vacating a default judgment under FRCP ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
47 
 Rule 60(b).  Franchise Holding II, LLC v. Huntington Rests. 
Grp., Inc., 375 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2004).19   Yet, 
notwithstanding their persuasiveness, interpretations  of the 
FRCP by federal courts are by no means conclusive  with respect 
to our interpretation  of any rule within the HRCP.  Kawamata 
Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods. , 86 Hawai ʻi 214, 256, 948 P.2d 
1055, 1097 (1997).  
The discussions regarding HRCP Rule 55(c) in this opinion 
persuade us to overrule our precedent to the contrary and hold 
that HRCP Rule 55(c) motions are governed only by the plain 
language “good cause” standard explicitly stated in the rule.  
Therefore, movants seeking to set aside an entry of default 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) need no longer satisfy the three-
                         
19  Even in federal courts, however,  
 
   [a]lthough the more specific grounds for relief set  
forth in Rule 60(b) [were] frequently  [] regarded as 
included within the concept of “good cause”  for purposes of 
Rule 55(c), the courts ha[d] generally acknowledged that 
“good cause ” is a broader and more liberal standard than 
anything found in Rule 60(b), and that, consequently, 
something less may be required to warrant the opening of an 
entry of default than would be necessary to set aside a 
default judgment.  (Citation omitted.)  Thus, while 
“excusable neglect ” has often been considered a reason for 
inaction sufficient to satisfy the good cause test, several 
courts have recognized that relief may be granted under 
Rule 55(c) even when the neglect giving rise to the default 
cannot, strictly speaking, be characterized as excusable . 
 
William H. Danne, Jr., Annotation, What Constitutes “Good Cause”  
Allowing Federal Court to Relieve Party of his Default Under Rule 55(c) 
of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, 29 A.L.R. Fed. 7, § 2[a] (1976), 
available at 
https://www.westlaw.com/Document/I512442d1136011da931cf6e6a5b3cd63/View
/FullText.html?transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)&VR=3.0&R
S=cblt1.0 (citations omitted).  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
48 
 prong test applicable to HRCP Rul
e 60(b) motions to set aside 
default judgments.   
Good reasons exist to have different standards governing 
HRCP Rule 55(c) motions  to set aside entry of default as 
compared to HRCP Rule 60(b) motion s to set aside default 
judgment.   
First, a  HRCP Rule 55(c) motion seeks to set aside an entry 
of default during a pending litigation in which judgment has yet 
to enter.  In contrast, a HRCP Rule 60(b) motion to set aside a 
default judgment seeks to set aside a judgment  on which not only 
the parties to the lawsuit, but also other members of the 
public, may have relied.   
Second, HRCP Rule 60(b) motions require a showing of a lack 
of “excusable neglect ,” yet HRCP Rule 55(c) motions only require 
“good cause,” which is a much lower standard under Hawai ʻi law, 
as further discussed below
; yet we have held that ignorance of 
the rules or law cannot be “excusable neglect.”  Enos, 80 Hawaiʻi 
at 353, 910 P.2d at 124.  Thus, even if a movant seeking to set 
aside an entry of default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) can 
establish “good cause,” the movant might not be able to meet the 
lack of “excusable neglect” requirement for  HRCP Rule 60(b) 
motions.  Thus, incorporation of this HRCP Rule 60(b) 
requirement into a HRCP Rule 55(c) analysis violates the plain 
language of HRCP  Rule 55(c).  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
49 
 Finally, requiring a party seeking to set aside entry of 
default to satisfy the three- prong test applicable to HRCP Rule 
60(b) motions is in tension with our expressed policy of 
disfavoring defaults  and default judgment and of resolving any 
doubt in favor of the party seeking relief.  In this case, 
Defendants inexplicably waited more than seven months after 
service of the complaint to move to set aside the entry of 
default.  Yet, a plaintiff could move for entry of default 
twenty-one days after service of a complaint.  Even if a 
defendant filed a HRCP Rule 55(c) motion to set aside entry of 
default the very next day, under our current law, the defendant 
would be required to satisfy all three prongs of the
 HRCP Rule 
60(b) test applicable to motions to set aside default judgments.  
This seems unfair.20 
Thus, we th erefore now hold that HRCP Rule 55(c) motions 
are governed only by the “good cause” standard  explicitly stated 
in the rule, and that movants seeking to set aside an entry of 
                         
20  The Chief Justice opines that it is sensible to continue considering 
the HRCP Rule 60(b) factors to HRCP Rule 55(c) because nearly every federal 
circuit, as well as many states, apply them to motions to set aside entry of 
default.  We note, however, that in the federal courts, there is no 
counterpart to HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) (2012) allowing 
involuntary dismissals to 
be set aside for “good cause,” and it appears a plaintiff seeking to 
reinstate claims involuntarily dismissed pursuant to FRCP Rule 41(b) must 
file a motion under FRCP Rule 60(b).  See Link v. Wabash R. Co., 370 U.S. 
626, 630, 632 (1962).  Thus, our rule is different, and we actually erred by 
adopting the HRCP Rule 60(b) standard that contravenes our “good cause” rule.
For all of these reasons, we disagree with the Chief Justice that the 
BDM 
factors are appropriate to consider in determining whether to set aside an 
entry of default.      
   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
50 
 default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c
) need not satisfy the three-
prong test applicable to HRCP Rule 60(b) motions to set aside 
default judgments.   
Our holding  is prospective.  Trial courts were required to 
follow ICA holdings requiring parties seeking to set aside an 
entry of default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) to satisfy the 
three-prong test for  HRCP Rule 60(b) motions .  Therefore, by 
holding that movants seeking to set aside an entry of default 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) need not sati sfy the three -prong 
test, we are announcing a “new rule.”  In announcing this “new 
rule,” we must avoid unfair prejudice to parties and tria l 
courts who have relied on binding precedent.   Therefore, our 
holding applies only to decisions on motions to set a side entry 
of default under HRCP Rule 55(c) after the date of this 
opinion.21  See Kahale, 104 Hawai ʻi at 348, 90 P.3d at 239.
   
2. What constitutes  “good cause”  
In Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai ʻi 144, 44 P.3d 1085 (2002), in the 
context of a Hawai ʻi Family Court Rules (“HFCR”) Rule 59(a) 
motion for a new trial, we stated:   
“Good cause” [] “depends upon the circumstances of the 
individual case, and a finding of its existence lies 
largely in the discretion of the officer or court to which 
[the] decision is committed.”
 
 
                         
21  Our holding also applies to the identical language of Rules 55(c) in
the District Court Rules of Civil Procedure as well as the Hawai ʻi Family 
Court Rules.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
51 
 98 
Hawaiʻi at 154, 44 P.3d at 1095
 (second alteration in 
original) (citation omitted).22  Thus, whether “good cause” 
exists to set aside an entry of default will depend upon the 
circumstances of the individual case, and whether good cause 
exists will “lie[] largely in the discretion of the [] court to 
which [the] discretion is committed.”   
It is not possible 
to provide one definition of “good 
cause,” as standards governing whether “good cause” exists 
depend not only upon the circumstances of the individual case, 
but also upon the specific court rule at issue.  This is because 
in addition to HRCP Rule 55(c) at issue in this case and HFCR 
Rule 59(a) referenced above, there are numerous court rules in 
which the phrase “good cause” appears.”23  Many of these rules 
use the phrase “good cause” in contexts that differ from the 
“good cause” required to set aside an entry of default pursuant 
                         
22  Doe also referred to a Black’s Law Dictionary  entry, stating that 
“[t]he term ‘good cause’ has been defined  to mean ‘ a substantial reason 
amounting in law to a legal excuse for failing to perform an act required by
law.’”  98 Hawaiʻ i at 154, 44 P.3d at 1095 (quoting Good Cause, Black's Law  
Dictionary (6th ed. 1990) ).  We note that Black’s Law Dictionary , however, 
now defines “good cause” as “[a] legally sufficient reason.  Good cause is 
often the burden placed on a litigant (usu. by court rule or order) to show 
why a request should be grant ed or an action excused.”   Good Cause, 
Black’s 
Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019).    
 
23  See, e.g., HRAP Rule 29(b) (2016) (allowing an appellate court to 
further extend time to file a brief only upon “good cause” shown); Rules of 
the Circuit Courts of the 
State of Hawaiʻ i (“RCCH”) Rule 7(e) (2007) (allowing
continuance of a trial date only upon a showing of “good cause”); 
Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Penal Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 5(c)(5) (2014) (allowing a district 
court to continue a preliminary hearing after commence ment “for good cause”);
HRPP Rule 24(e) (2011) (stating that jurors shall be allowed to take notes 
during trial “[e]xcept upon good cause articulated by the court”).   
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
52 
 to HRCP Rule 55(c), and address different policy considerations 
dictating stricter or more lenient definition s of “good cause” 
or differing approaches on how to determine whether “good cause” 
exists depending on the court rule and
 circumstances at issue.24   
The rule most analogous to  HRCP Rule 55(c)’s “good cause” 
language is HRCP Rule 41(b)(2).  HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) provides in 
relevant part that an involuntary dismissal entered “ [f]or 
failure to prosecute or to comply with these rules or any order 
of the court” “may be set aside and the action or claim 
reinstated by order of the court for good cause shown upon 
motion duly filed not later than 10 days from the date of the 
order of dismissal.”  Just as we have stated “defaults and 
                         
24  For example, in the context of HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) (2000), which allows 
for periods of t ime a trial is delayed “for good cause” to be excludable from
the six month period trial must commence, we have stated that “good cause 
means ‘a substantial reason that affords legal excuse,’” that a period of 
delay must have been “unanticipated and not reasonably foreseeable,” and a 
showing of the efforts taken by the government and judiciary to limit delay 
is required to establish “good cause.”  State v. Abregano, 136 Hawai ʻi 489, 
497
-99, 363 P.3d 838, 846 -48 (2015).  Thus, we have required the government  
to establish the existence of “good cause” and have required a “substantial 
reason” when the finding impacts a defendant’s speedy trial rights under HRPP
Rule 48 in a criminal case.  Id.  In contrast, in construing a former court 
rule allowing this court to extend the time for filing the record on appeal 
for “good cause,” we summarily held that “[a]lthough dismissal of an appeal 
for late docketing is within the power of this court, mitigating factors in 
the instant case, such as the trial judge’s delay in disposing of the motion 
to proceed in forma pauperis, justify this court’s grant of an extension of 
time and weigh against a dismissal of the appeal.”  State v. Kicklighter, 57 
Haw. 566, 568, 560 P.2d 1304, 1306 (1977) (citation omitted).  Then, in the 
context of HRCP Rule 26(c) (2004), which allows a court to enter a protective
order regarding discovery for “good cause,” we have adopted a completely 
different approach, balancing an insure r’s need for a person’s health 
information against the injury that might result from the disclosure of that 
health information outside of the litigation.  
Brende v. Hara, 113 Hawai ʻi 
424, 431, 153 P.3d 1109, 1116 (2007).   
 
 
  
 Thus, we have taken different ap proaches to what constitutes “good 
cause” depending on the court rule and the circumstances at issue.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
53 
 default judgments are not favo red and that any doubt should be 
resolved in favor of the party seeking relief,” BDM, 57 Haw. at 
76, 549 P.2d at 1150, we have also stated that “[i]nvoluntary 
dismissals of a complaint with prejudice are not favored, and 
should be ordere
d only in extreme circumstances.”   In re 
Blaisdell, 125 Hawai ʻi 44, 49, 252 P.3d 63, 68 (2011).  Also, in 
the context of an appeal of a HRCP Rule 41(b) dismissal and the 
denial of a motion for reconsideration of that dismissal, w e 
also stated that “ a corporation should be allowed an opportunity 
to secure counsel before permitting an entry of default against 
the corporation or, as in this case, dismissing the action, 
recognizing a ‘preference for giving parties an opportunity to 
litigate claims or defenses on the merits[.]’”   Shasteen, Inc. 
v. Hilton Hawaiian Village Joint Venture, 79 Hawaiʻ i 103, 109, 
899 P.2d 386, 392 (1995) (alteration in original) (citation 
omitted).   
Thus, HRCP Rule 55(c) relates to setting aside an 
“involuntary” entry of default against a  defendant,  while HRCP 
Rule 41(b)(2) relates to its counterpart, the setting aside of 
an involuntary dismissal of a pl aintiff’s claims.  Both  HRCP 
Rules 41(b)(2) and 55(c) require “good cause” to allow the 
setting aside and reinstatement of a plaintiff’s claims or a 
defendant’s defenses.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
54 
 In Ryan v. Palmer, 130 Hawai ʻi 321, 310 P.3d 1022 (
App. 
2013), the ICA addressed HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) in the context of 
reviewing a trial court’s denial of a motion to set aside  an 
involuntary dismissal for failure to file a pretrial statement 
as allowed by RCCH Rule 12(q) (2007) .  Because the language of 
RCCH Rule 12(q) is patterned after HRCP Rule 41(b)(2), the ICA 
applied HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) in its review of the RCCH Rule 12(q) 
dismissal.  See  130 Hawaiʻi at 323, 310 P.3d at 1024.  The ICA 
did not define what would constitute “good cause” for purposes 
of HRCP Rule 41(b)(2), but cited to our case law construing HRCP 
Rule 41(b)(2), including In re Blaisdell and Shasteen .  Id.25   
In In re Blaisdell,  this court  stated, “ [O]ur case law 
informs us that the sanction of dismissal of a complaint with 
prejudice is one of last resort where lesser sanctions would not 
serve the interest of justice,” and “an order of dismissal 
cannot be affirmed absent deliberate delay, contumacious 
                         
25  The Chief Justice posits that the comparison between HRCP Rules 41(b) 
and 55(c) and the application of  HRCP Rule 41(b) cases to define HRCP Rule 
55(c) are inapt because “the phrase ‘good cause’ is used in the context of 
setting aside sua sponte  dismissals of plaintiffs’ actions under Rule 
41(b)[,]” while “under Rule 55(c), a party must satisfy the good cause 
standard to set aside an entry of default that  was entered upon the opposing 
party’s motion. ”  HRCP Rule 41(b) does not, however,  require “good cause” for 
a sua sponte dismissal; rather, it requires “good cause” to set aside a sua 
sponte dismissal, which is the same standard for setting aside an entry  of 
default under HRCP Rule 55(c).  In addition, the Chief Justice posits that 
because In re Blaisdell  and Shasteen were appeals from orders of dismissal, 
not from denials of motions to set aside a dismissal for “good cause,” it is 
unhelpful to review these cases.  The Chief Justice ignores that we address 
the “good cause” factors in these cases because they were cited to by Ryan, 
which addressed a HRCP Rule 41(b) motion requiring “good cause” to set aside 
a dismissal.  Ryan, 130 Hawaiʻi at 323, 310 P.3d at  1024.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
55 
 conduct, or actual prejudice .”  125 Hawai ʻi at 49, 252 P.3d at 68
 
(quoting Shasteen, 79 Hawai ʻi at 107, 899 P.2d at 390 ).  More 
specifically, we stated that in order for a dismissal with 
prejudice based on HRCP Rule 41(b) to not constitute an abuse of 
discretion, there must be deliberate delay of the plaintiff 
causing actual prejudice or contumacious conduct.  125 Hawai ʻi at 
49-50, 252 P.3d at 68- 69.  We noted that “[a]lthough the law 
presumes injury from unreasonable delay, the presumption of 
prejudice is rebuttable upon a showing that actual prejudice did 
not occur.”  125 Hawai ʻi at 49, 252 P.3d at 68 (citation omitted) 
(emphasis added).  We also stated, however, that “[b]ecause the 
interests of justice are best served by resolving a case on its 
merits, absent a clear record of delay or contumacious conduct, 
‘the careful exercise of judicial discretion requires that a 
[trial] court consider less severe sanctions and explain, where 
not obvious, their inadequacy for promoting the interests of 
justice.’”  Id. (second alteration in original) ( quoting 
Schilling v. Walworth Cty.  Park & Planning Comm’n , 805 F.2d 272, 
275 (7th Cir. 1986)) .  
Shasteen, cited by In re Blaisdell, in turn, also stated 
that “a dismissal of a complaint is such a severe sanction, that 
it should be used only in extreme circumstances where there is 
clear record of delay or contumacious conduct and where lesser 
sanctions would not serve the interest of justice.”  79 Hawai ʻi ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
56 (continued. . .)  
 at 107, 899 P.2d at 390 (internal quotation marks, brackets, 
ellipsis, and footnote omitted) (quoting Lim v. Harvis Contr., 
Inc., 65 Haw. 71, 73, 647 P.2d 290, 292 (1982)).   
Thus, although our opinions did not specifically so state, 
these rulings provide guidance regarding the “good cause” 
required to set aside a dismissal under HRCP Rule 41(b)(2), as 
Ryan concerned a HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) motion and relied on In re 
Blaisdell and Shasteen.  Our cases indicate “good cause” exists 
to set aside a dismissal under HRCP Rule 41(b)(2) if there is no 
(1) deliberate delay and/or contumacious conduct; or 
(2) if 
deliberate delay or contumacious conduct exist, there is no 
actual prejudice that cannot be addressed through lesser 
sanctions. 
Accordingly,  by analogy,  these factors should also be 
considered in determining whether “good cause” exists under HRCP 
Rule 55(c).  “Good cause” should exist to set aside an entry of 
default if: (1) the
 defendant did not deliberately fail to plead 
or otherwise defend26 or engage in contumacious conduct;27 or  
                         
26  We note that “deliberate delay” has been construed to not include time 
due to the unavailability of counsel.  Shasteen, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 108, 899 P.2d 
at 391 (“[T]wo of the five continuances were as a result of requests made by 
[the plaintiff] corporation. However, the requests were based on reasons 
directly related to the unavailability of [the plaintiff] corporation’s 
attorney.  Moreover, although [the defendant], in advancing its argument with
respect to delay, contends that ‘[the plaintiff] undertook no genuine effort 
to find successor counsel [where] [h]aving counsel was critical,’ we review 
this contention as it relates to the sec ond factor, contumacious conduct.”) 
(Sixth and seventh alterations in original.)  Thus, the same analysis should 
apply to deadlines missed due to the unavailability of counsel.  As in  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
57 
 (b) if the defendant
 did deliberately fail to plead or otherwise  
defend or engage in contumacious conduct, there is no actual 
prejudice to the plaintiff28 that cannot be addressed through 
lesser sanctions.29  
 We reiterate, however, that whether “good cause ” exists 
will depend upon the circumstances of the individual case.  And 
as indicated in 10A Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice and Procedure Civ. § 2693 (4th ed. 2019), 
appellate courts have demonstrated a marked  deference to 
decisions granting relief against default entries.    
 
 
 
                                                                              
(. . .continued) 
Shasteen, any allegation that a defendant caused unavailability of counsel 
should be evaluated under the “contumacious conduct” prong.   
  
27  In In re Blaisdell, t his court stated that “[w]ithout evidence that 
Blaisdell conducted himself in a willfully defiant manner, his actions did 
not amount
 to what this court considers ‘contumacious conduct. ’”  125 Hawai ʻi 
at 50, 252 P.3d at 69.  This court also noted  that Black’s Law Dictionary  
defined “contumacious conduct ” as “[w
]illfully stubborn and disobedient 
conduct.”  Shasteen, 79 Hawai i at 107 n.7, 899 P.2d at 390 n.7 (alteration in
original) (citing Contumacious Conduct, 
Black’s Law Dictionary  (6th ed. 
1990)).  
   
28  “The mere fact that the nondefaulting party will be required to
prove his case without the inhibiting effect of the default upon the 
defaulting party does not constitute prejudice which should prevent a
reopening.”  BDM , 57 Haw. at 76, 549 P.2d at 1150 (citation omitted). 
 
  
 
29  A trial court must also  state why a lesser sanction is insufficient to
serve the interests of justi
ce.  In re Blaisdell, 125 Hawai i at 50-51, 252 
P.3d at 69- 70.  We have previously stated that a trial court can impose some
lesser sanction, such as an award of attorney’s fees caused by the default, 
as a condition for setting aside the entry of default.  See Dela Cruz , 141 
Hawaiʻi at 346, 409 P.3d at 750.    
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
58 
 V.  Conclusion
 
Based on the reasons explained above, we affirm the ICA’s 
May 3, 2019 judgment on appeal, which affirmed the circuit 
court’s July 6, 2016 final judgment.  
Mark G. Valencia  
(Stephanie M. Segovia 
with him on the briefs),
for petitioner  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
      
      
Dennis W. King,
for respondent   
  
 
  
        
  
        
 
