***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP, 
also known as 
KAMEHAMEHA SCHOOLS, Respondent s/Plaintiffs -Counterclaim 
Defendants -Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
RONALD G.S. AU, Petitioner/Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-16-0000235 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000235; CIV . NO. 13-1 -0420) 
 
MARCH 10, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
 
  Chapter 634J of the Hawaiʻi Revise
d Statutes authorizes 
a court to enter an order declaring a plaintiff to be a 
vexatious litigant in particularly defined circumstances.  The 
circuit court in this case determined that the defendant 
qualified as a “plaintiff”  for the purpose of the vexatious 
litigant statute and that the required circumstances were Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000235
10-MAR-2020
11:33 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 
 demonstrated.  T he Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed the 
circuit court’s ruling.    
  Upon re view of the vexatious litigant statute and its 
legislative history, w e hold that the circuit court and 
Intermediate Court of Appeals erred in determining that the 
defendant in this case qualified as a “plaintiff” and that other 
requirements set forth in th e statute were satisfied .  We also 
hold that a court’s  vexatious litigant determination must be 
supported by findings that set forth, with reasonable 
specificity, the perceived misconduct, including a finding of 
bad faith when applicable.  Finally,
 we conclude that the record 
does not show that the motions underlying the vexatious litigant 
order in this case were made in bad faith.  
 
I. BACKGROUND 
 
 On June 17, 1970, the Trustees of the Estate of 
Bernice Pauahi Bishop (Bishop Estate) leased a parcel of land 
located in Honolulu, Hawai ʻi (the property) , to Kam Wo Wong and 
Lillie Choy Wong as joint tenants for a period of 53 years and 9 
months.  On June 1, 1978, the Wongs assigned their interest in 
the lease to Ronald G.S. Au.  In 2010, Bishop Estate filed a 
complaint against Au alleging he had breached the lease 
agreement and seeking damages and possession of the property.  
Au counterclaimed, alleging, inter alia, that Bishop Estate had ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 
 breached the lease agreement and was engaging in retaliatory 
eviction.  The parties entered into a settlement agreement on 
August 24, 2012 (s
ettlement agreement).  By the terms  of the 
settlement agreement, Au had until a date certain to pay lease 
payments owed to Bishop Estate in the principal amount of 
$62,000.   
  On February 13, 2013, Bishop Estate
 filed a complaint 
against Au in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court),1 alleging that Au had breached the settlement agreement 
by failing to make the required payment by December 31, 2012 , 
and that Au’s breach entitled Bishop Estate to damages, 
termination of the lease, and possession of the property.  On 
August 2, 2013, Au, proceeding pro se, filed a counterclaim, and 
later a first amended counterclaim, which  included claims that 
Bishop Estate had breached the lease and the settlement 
agreement by unreasonably withholding permission t o allow him to 
assign one-half of his lease interest to a third party (the 
lease interest), that the settlement agreement as written was 
void and unenforceable because the parties had agreed that the 
amount would be due December 31, 2013, not December 31, 2012, 
that Bishop Estate had tortiously interfered in Au’s assignment 
                     
 1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided over the proceedings.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 
 of the lease interest in the property to a third party, and that 
Bishop Estate had engaged in a retaliatory eviction.    
  On June 6, 2013, Bishop Estate moved for summary 
judgment of the claims in its complaint, asserting that it was 
entitled to immediate termination of the lease and repossession 
of the property based on Au’s failure to comply with the terms 
of the settlement agreement.  Au opposed the motion , arguing 
that his failure to make payment  on December 31, 2012, was due 
to Bishop Estate tortiously interfering in his assignment of the 
lease interest and that payment was actually  due on December 31, 
2013.  The circuit court granted Bishop Estate’s motion for 
summary judgment and entered  an order on September 18, 2013,  
terminating the lease and awarding Bishop Estate damages in the 
amount of $130,735.40 and possession of the property (summary 
judgment order).  
 
  
On September 25, 2013, Au filed a motion for 
reconsideration of the summary judgment order (motion for 
reconsideration), arguing the court had not considered the 
claims and affirmative defenses in his counterclaim, 
specifically his claim of retaliatory eviction, and that if it 
had, summary judgment would not have been granted in Bishop 
Estate’s favor.  In response, Bishop Estate asserted that each 
argument in the motion for reconsideration had either been ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5 
 raised in Au’s opposition  to the motion for summary judgment or 
was untimely and therefore waived.  The court denied the motion 
for reconsideration on April 30, 2014, stating its decision was 
based on its review of the record and “good cause .”   
  On March 12, 2015, Bishop Estate filed a motion for 
summary judgment on Au’s first amended counterclaim, arguing it 
had not breached the lease by withholding consent to assignment 
of Au’s lease interest because it had an unqualified right to 
withhold consent, and thus it could not have tortiously 
interfered with Au’s assignment of the lease interest 
or 
unreasonably withheld consent .  In opposition, Au maintained 
that Bishop Estate had fraudulently induced his assent to the 
settlement agreement, had breached the lease by refusing to 
permit assignment of his interest in the lease, and had violated 
statutory provisions proscribing unfair and deceptive business 
practices.  At the April 16, 2015 hearing, the court orally 
granted the motion.  In its written order, filed on May 18, 2015 
(counterclaim summary judgment order), 
the court found that Au 
failed to submit evidence that the settlement agreement was 
obtained by fraud or that Bishop Estate had unreasonably 
withheld permission to as sign Au’s interest in the lease.  
  A month before the circuit court issued the 
counterclaim summary judgment order, Au filed a motion to vacate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 
 or set aside the summary judgment order under Hawai i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b) ( Rule 60(b) motion to vacate).2  
Au contended that the $62,000 principal amount due under the 
settlement agreement was for real property taxes  Bishop Estate 
had paid, which had been incorrectly calculated because Bishop 
Estate had failed  to consider  refunds Au  had obtained through 
certain tax appeals.  Bishop Estate  counter ed that any argument 
as to the accuracy of the calculations should have been raised 
during earlier proceedings and was not a basis to reconsider the  
court’s summary judgment order.   
  The  circuit court denied Au’s Rule 60(b) motion to 
vacate at a hearing held on May 13, 2015.   In its oral ruling, 
the court indicated that Au’s motion had been  filed more than 
one year after the entry of the summary judgment order, but the 
court reviewed the merits of the motion, “notwithstanding the 
                     
 2 HRCP Rule 60(b) (2006) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 
On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may 
relieve a party or a party ’s legal representative from a 
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following 
reasons: (1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable 
neglect; (2) newly discovered evidence which by due 
diligence  could not have been discovered in time to move 
for a new trial under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether 
heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), 
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party; 
. . . .  The motion shall be made within a reasonable time, 
and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one year 
after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered or 
taken. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 
 timeliness issue as to when the motion could [or] should have 
been brought.”  The court found that Au’s calculations were not 
reliable because he did not explain them  or identify supporting 
sources, and  that Au did not exercise appropriate diligence as  
he could have raised the issue earlier.  The court’s oral 
findings were set forth in a June 2, 2015 written order.   
However, two weeks before entry of the written order, Au filed a 
motion to reconsider the court’s denial of his Rule 60(b) motion 
to vacate (renewed motion to vacate).  Au proffered declarations 
from his accountant to substantiate his contention that the 
settlement agreement amount of $62,000 was incorrectly 
calculated and to demonstrate the reliability 
of his own 
calculations.  Bishop Estate contended that  the motion was 
untimely, the argument had been waived, and,  in any event,  Au’s 
calculations remained inaccurate.   
  On May 29, 2015, again prior to the entry of the June 
2, 2015 order, Au had filed a motion for reconsideration of the 
counterclaim summary judgment order (motion to reconsider CCSJ 
order).  Au asserted that, because of his argument in the 
renewed motion to 
vacate that  the settlement amount of $62,000 
was based on erroneous calculations, vacatur of the summary 
judgment order entered in favor of Bishop Estate would also ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 
 permit reconsideration of the counterclaim summary judgment 
order. 
  The court entered final judgment on June 12, 2015.  
The final judgment terminated Au’s interest in the property, 
returned possession of the property to Bishop Estate, and 
awarded a monetary judgment against Au in the amount of 
$130,735.40.   
  On June 16, 2015, Au filed a notice of appeal.3  On 
that same day, the court issued an order denying Au’s renewed 
motion to vacate, summarily ruling that its decision was based 
on its review of the motion, memoranda, declarations, and 
exhibits filed in support 
of and in opposition to  the motion.  
Two days later, the court by minute order denied Au’s motion to 
reconsider CCSJ order.  A written order denying the  motion was 
entered on August 19, 2015, again stating only that the decision 
was based on the court’s review of the record.4 
  On June 29, 2015, Au 
filed a motion to vacate the 
final judgment (motion to vacate final judgment).  Au maintained  
                     
 3 This appeal was heard by the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
in CAAP- 15-466.  In an amended summary disposition order entered on December 
22, 2017, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s final judgment and award of 
attorneys’ fees in favor of Bishop Estate.    
 4 On June 26, 2015, Bishop Estate filed a motion for the award of 
costs and a motion for an award of attorneys’  fees, which Au opposed.   On 
August 14, 2015, the circuit court granted in part and denied in part these 
motions. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 
 that the final judgment was premature because it was entered 
before the court’s denial of  his renewed motion to vacate and 
the motion to reconsider CC SJ order .  Since the se motions were 
still pending at the time the court entered final judgment, Au 
contended the judgment could not have been a final, appealable 
judgment because the
 motions presented unresolved , non-
collateral issues.  Au contended  that because the judgment had  
not resolved all issues in the case, his notice of appeal filed 
on June 16, 2015, would be dismissed as premature.  Bishop 
Estate responded that the court was not required to rule on A u’s 
pending motions for reconsideration before entering final 
judgment.5  On August 26, 2015, the court issued an order denying 
Au’s motion.   
  On August 25,
 2015, prior to the court’s denial of his 
motion to vacate final judgment, Au filed a motion for 
correction, modification, or relief from judgment
 under HRCP 
Rule 60(b) (motion for correction).  Au reiterated his argument 
that the entry of final judgment was premature  and asked that 
the court vacate the final judgment of June 12, 2015, and enter 
the August 19, 2015 order in which the court denied Au’s motion 
                     
 5 Bishop Estate argued that, to the extent Au’s pending motions 
were prejudgment motions, the entry of judgment constituted a denial of those 
motions, and to the extent th e motions were post -judgment motions,  the court 
was not required to rule on them before entry of judgment.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 
 to reconsider CCSJ order as a final order.   Au contended this 
was necessary for him to properly appeal the court’s denial of 
his motion.  Bishop Estate responded that the court was not 
required to rule on the motion to reconsider CCSJ before entry 
of final judgment in order for Au to appeal its denial.  Bishop 
Estate also ask ed the court to declare Au a vexatious litigant 
pursuant to Hawai i Revised S tatutes (HRS ) § 634J-7.6  Bishop 
Estate stated that its request was based on  Au’s repeated 
assertion of previously decided arguments, particularly his 
contention that the amount owed under the settlement agreement 
was incorrectly calculated.  During the hearing on September 18, 
2015, Au withdrew his motion for correction.  The court minutes 
do not reflect a ruling on Bishop Estate’s request that Au be 
deemed a vexatious litigant.   
  On December 17, 2015
, Au filed a motion to stay 
enforcement of the final judgment pending determination of the 
amount of a supersedeas bond (motion to stay).   Au argued that 
                     
 6 HRS § 634J-7 (1993) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 
[T]he court, on its own motion or the motion of any party, 
may enter a prefiling order which prohibits a vexatious 
litigant from filing any new litigation in the courts of 
this State on the litigant’s own behalf without first 
obtaining leave of the presiding judge of the court where 
the litigation is proposed to be filed. Disobedience of 
this order by a vexatious litigant may be punished as a 
contempt of court.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 
 the amount of the supersedeas bond should not be set by the 
amount set forth in the final judgment because certain 
attorneys’ fee
s had erroneous ly been awarded because of the 
pending appeal of the amount calculated to be owed under the 
settlement agreement.  Bishop Estate argued in response that Au 
was attempting to relitigate the amount owed under the 
settlement agreement
 and the amount of attorneys’ fees awarded .  
In a subsequent motion, A u proffered a lien on certain real 
property owned by Au and his wife as an alternative to posting a 
bond.   
  Before  the hearing on the se motions, Bishop Estate 
filed a motion to declare Au a vexatious litigant under HRS 
§ 634J-1(2) and (3) based on Au’s repeated assertion of 
arguments that Bishop Estate contended were already resolved.  
Bishop Estate identified seven motions filed by Au that it 
maintained were attempts to relitigate already resolved issues.7  
Au argued in opposition that he, as a defendant in the action, 
could not be declared a vexatious litigant and that in any event 
his motions had never been determined to be frivolous or made in 
bad faith.  Au asserted that Bishop Estate ’s motion was intended 
                     
 7 The seven motions identified by Bishop Estate were Au’s 
(1) motion for reconsideration; (2) Rule 60(b) motion to vacate; (3)  renewed 
motion to vacate; (4) motion to reconsider CCSJ order; (5)  motion to vacate 
final judgment; (6) motion for correction; and (7)  motion to stay.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12  
(continued. . .)  
 only to harass him and asked that the court impose monetary 
sanctions against Bishop Estate under HRCP Rule 11.  After 
hearing arguments, the court granted the motion,  declaring Au a 
vexatious litigant.8   
  The circuit court thereafter issued a written order 
granting the motion (vexatious litigant order).   The court 
concluded Au met HRS § 634J-1’s definition of “plaintiff” 
because he had, through the seven identified motions, sought to 
relitigate the merits of the summary judgment order and thereby 
“maintained” the litigation.   The court also found  that because 
Au’s multiple motions, which had all received adverse rulings, 
sought to relitigate the summary judgment order, Au met the 
definition of a vexatious litigant under either HRS § 634J- 1(2) 
or (3).9  Au filed an  interlocutory appeal challenging the 
vexatious litigant order.   
                     
 8 Before ruling on the vexatious litigant motion, the court orally 
denied Au’s motion to s tay and motion to post supersedeas bond.  The court 
later issued a written order denying the motions on the basis that Au had 
failed to demonstrate that his proffered alternative of a lien on real 
property was an adequate substitute for a bond.  
 9 HRS § 634J-1(2) and (3) (1993) provide as follows:  
 
“Vexatious litigant” means a plaintiff who does any of the 
following: . . .  
(2) After litigation has been finally resolved against the 
plaintiff, relitigates or attempts to relitigate in propria 
persona and in bad faith, either:  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13  
(continued. . .)  
 II. ICA PROCEEDINGS  
  In a Summary Disposition Order
 filed June 28, 2019, 
the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s  interpretation of HRS 
§ 634J-1, holding that Au qualified as a “plaintiff”  because he 
maintained the litigation through the numerous motions he filed 
in this case.10  The ICA also determined that Au met the 
definition of a vexatious litigant under HRS § 634J-1(2), 
concluding that Au sought to relitigate the merits of issues 
that the court had already resolved through his contention  that 
the settlement amount was incorrectly calculated in the seven 
motions identified by Bishop Estate.11   
                                                                  
(. . .continued)  
 
(A) The validity of the determination against the 
same defendant or defendants as to whom the 
litigation was finally determined; or  
(B) The cause of action, claim, controversy, or any 
of the issues of fact or law, determined or concluded 
by the final determination against the same defendant 
or defendants as to whom the litigation was finally 
determined;  
(3) In any litigation while acting in propria persona, 
files, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings, or 
other papers, conducts unnecessary discovery, or engages in 
other tactics that are frivolous or solely intended to 
cause unnecessary delay[.]  
 10 Additionally, the ICA observed in a footnote that “at least for 
the purposes of his counterclaims, Au is a plaintiff as he commenced or 
instituted those claims.”   
 11 The ICA observed that it had recently held in CAAP -15-0000466 
that Au knew or should have known about the incorrectly calculated amount at ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 
   T he ICA held that the circuit court was not required 
to make a specific finding that any of Au’s motions were made in 
bad faith and that bad faith could be inferred from Au’s 
reassertion of the same argument in different motions.12  
Further, the ICA determined,  HRS chapter 634J did not require 
specific findings of fact or conclusions of law to be made.   
  The ICA therefore concluded that the circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion in declaring Au a vexatious litigant 
and affirmed the vexatious litigant order.13 
III.  STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
  
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.  Tax Found. v. State, 144 Hawaiʻ i 175, 185, 
439 P.3d 127, 137 (2019).   
  A  vexatious litigant determination is reviewed under 
an abuse of discretion standard.  Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai ʻi 289, 
294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003).  “[A]n abuse of discretion 
                                                                  
(. . .continued)  
 
the time of the summary judgment motions and therefore it could not provide a 
basis for reconsideration under HRCP Rule 60(b).   
 12 The ICA concluded that the circuit court was entitled to rely on 
a presumption of the correctness of its prior rulings, rejecting Au’s 
argument that the court could not deem him a vexatious litigant on the basis  
of motions that had been appealed.   
 
 13 The ICA found it unnecessary to determine whether Au met the 
definition under HRS §  634J-1(3). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 
 occurs where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to 
the substantial detriment of a party litigant.”   Id. 
(alterations in original) (quoting Ass ’n of Apartment Owners of 
Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai ʻi 97, 119, 58 P.3d 
608, 630 (2002)).   
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Au Does Not Meet the Definition of “Plaintiff” Under HRS 
§ 634J-1. 
  HRS §  634J-7 empowers a court to enter a prefiling 
order prohibiting a vexatious litigant from filing any new 
litigation on the litigant’s  own behalf without first obtaining 
leave of the presiding judge of the court where the litigation 
is proposed to be filed.14  As set forth by HRS § 634J-1, a 
“vexatious litigant” for purposes of HRS § 634J-7 must be a 
“plaintiff.”  HRS § 634J -1 defines “plaintiff” as “the person 
who commences, institutes or maintains litigation or causes it 
                     
 14 As stated, HRS §  634J-7 provides in relevant part as follows:  
  
[T]he court, on its own motion or the motion of any party, 
may enter a prefiling order which prohibits a vexatious 
litigant from filing any new litigation in the courts of 
this State on the litigant’s own behalf without first 
obtaining leave of the presiding judge of the court where 
the litigation is proposed to be filed.  Disobedience of 
this order by a vexatious litigant may be punished as a 
contempt of court.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 
 to be commenced, instituted, or maintained[.]”15  In this case, 
both the circuit court and the ICA determined that HRS § 634J-1 
defined “plaintiff” so expansiv ely that Au was a “plaintiff” for 
purposes of HRS § 634J-1-- even though he was the defendant in 
the case--because he had, by filing the identified seven 
motions, caused the litigation to be maintained.   
This court’s construction of statutes is guided by 
well-settled principles.  See State v. Choy Foo, 142 Hawai ʻi  65, 
72, 414 P.3d 117, 124 (2018); State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻi 383, 
390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009).  We first examine the language 
of the statute itself.  Choy Foo , 142 Hawai ʻi at 72, 414 P.3d at 
124.  If the language is plain and unambiguous, we must give 
effect to its plain and obvious meaning.  Id.   Also, implicit in 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to ascertain 
and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is 
obtained primarily from the language of the statute itself.  Id.   
Finally, when there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or 
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a 
statute, an ambiguity exists.  Id.   When there is ambiguity, the 
                     
 15 HRS § 634J -1 defines “Plaintiff” in full as follows:  
 
“Plaintiff” means the person who commences, institutes or 
maintains litigation or causes it to be commenced, 
instituted, or maintained, including an attorney at law 
acting on the attorney’s own behalf.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 
 meaning of ambiguous words may be sought by examining the 
context or resorting to extrinsic aids to determine legislative 
intent.  Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 114 Hawai ʻi 184, 194, 159 P.3d 143, 153 (2007). 
The relevant language of HRS §  634J-1 states that 
“‘plaintiff’ means the person who commences, institutes or 
maintains litigation or causes it to be commenced, instituted, 
or maintained[.] ”  Looking solely to this language, it is not 
plain or unambiguous that the term “ plaintiff ” refers to any 
party, including a defendant, who maintains litigation by filing 
motions.  Thus, the meaning of the term “plaintiff”  is ambiguous 
as defined by HRS § 634J-1.  It is therefore necessary to 
examine the context and extrinsic aids pertaining to the statute 
to determine whether the legislature intended the definition of 
“plaintiff” in HRS §  634J-1 to broadly encompass parties that 
maintain litigation by filing motions, as the circuit court and 
the ICA determined.    
  According to its  legislative history, HRS chapter 634J 
was enacted in order to statutorily define “vexatious litigant” 
and to require plaintiffs falling within that definition to post 
security in cases where the court determines that the plaintiff 
is a vexatious litigant and there is no reasonable probability 
that the plaintiff will prevail.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 467
, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 
 in 1993 Senate Journal,  at 978.  The chapter’s purpose was to  
reduce the number of frivolous cases being filed in the court 
system.  Id.  The bill was amended in the Senate “to clarify 
that the definition of vexatious litigant is limited to the 
plaintiff.”  Id.  Similarly, t he House Standing Committee Report 
recommended that the final language clarify that “a vexatious 
litigant is a person and a plaintiff”  due to concern that the 
definition of a vexatious litigant could bar certain groups such 
as environmentalists or Native Hawaiians from filing legitimate 
claims.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1178, in 1993 House Journal,  
at 1473.  The legislatu re’s decision to limit the definition of 
a vexatious litigant to plaintiffs strong
ly indicates the 
legislature did not intend the definition of “plaintiff ” to 
encompass all litigants, and particularly not defendants. 
  The context in which HRS § 634J-1 defines “plaintiff” 
is also instructive.  State v. Yokota, 143 Hawai ʻi 200, 205, 426 
P.3d 424, 429 (2018) (“[L]aws in pari materia, or upon the same 
subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each 
other.”).   HRS § 634J-1 defines “defendant” as “ a person 
(including a corporation, association, partnership, firm, or 
governmental entity) against whom litigation is brought or 
maintained, or sought to be brought or maintained. ”  (Emphasi s 
added.)  The ICA concluded that a party is a “plaintiff” for ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 
 purposes of HRS § 634J-1 if that party maintains litigation by 
filing motions.16  Since the definitions of “plaintiff” and 
“defendant” in HRS §  634J-1 are in pari materia, the meaning of 
“maintained” in HRS §  634J-1’s definitio n of defendant must be 
in accordance with the meaning of “maintained” in HRS §  634J-1’s 
definition of “plaintiff.”  Kam v. Noh, 70 H aw. 321, 325, 770 
P.2d 414, 417 (1989 ) (“In the absence of an express intention to 
the contrary, words or phrases used in two or more sections of a 
statute are presumed to be used in the same sense throughout. ”).   
  Thus, because a  defendant is defined as one against 
whom litigation is maintained, and, according to the ICA and the 
circuit court, litigation can be maintained by filing motions, 
then any party that files motions would become a “plaintiff ” and 
any party against whom a motion is filed would become  a 
“defendant.”  Under this interpretation, nearly all litigants 
would simultaneously satisfy HRS §  634J-1’s defini tion of 
“plaintiff” and “defendant ,” eroding the distinction between 
“plaintiff” and “defendant” such that either term simply means 
“litigant.”  When the legislature uses different words in a 
statute, however, the different words
 are presumed to have 
different meanings.  Agustin v. Dan Ostrow Constr. Co., 64 Haw. 
                     
 16 In reaching this conclusion, the ICA relied solely on the 
dictionary definition of “maintain” and did not consider the legislative 
history or the context of the statute.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 
 80, 83, 636 P.2d 1348, 1351 (1981).  The distinction within the 
statute, as well as the legislative history, therefore requires 
that we give different meanings to these different words and 
interpret “plaintiff” in a manner that is not so expansive as to 
swallow the distinction between plaintiffs and defendants, which 
the legislature explicitly sought to preserve.17   
  Based on the foregoing, we hold that HRS §  634J-1’s 
definition of “plaintiff” does not encompass a litigant who 
maintains litigation by filing motions in the litigant’s 
capacity as a defendant.18  The ICA and the circuit court erred 
in ruling to the contrary.   
B. Au Also Would Not Meet the Definition of Vexatious Litigant 
Under HRS § 634J-1(2). 
  Even assuming Au had met the def inition of “plaintiff” 
under HRS § 634J-1, he would not qualify as a “vexatious 
                     
 17 See also Standard Mgmt., Inc. v. Kekona, 98 Hawaiʻ i 95, 105, 43 
P.3d 232, 242 (App. 2001) (holding that trial court erred by expanding HRS 
§ 634J-1’s definition of “plaintiff” to include plaintiffs’ counsel; stating 
that, “Under HRS § 634J –1, only a plaintiff may be deemed a vexatious 
litigant: ‘Vexatious litigant means a plainti ff[.]’” (alteration in 
original)).  The ICA in this case held that, “ To the extent that 
the SMI court determined that a vexatious litigant cannot be a defendant, 
that determination was dicta.”   
 
 18 Although the ICA found that Au was a plaintiff for the purpose of  
his counterclaims, only one of the motions underlying the vexatious litigant 
order was filed by Au in his capacity as a counterclaimant, which 
indisputably was insufficient to support the  order.  I t is thus unnecessary 
to decide whether a counterclaimant  may qualify as a “plaintiff” under HRS 
§ 634J-1.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 
 litigant” under HRS § 634J-1(2).  This subsection defines a 
vexatious litigant as a plaintiff who  
[a]fter litigation has been finally resolved against the 
plaintiff, relitigates or attempts to relitigate in propria 
persona and in bad faith, either:  
 
(A) The validity of the determination against the same 
defendant or defendants as to whom the litigation was 
finally determined; or 
 
(B) The cause of action, claim, controversy, or any of the 
issues of fact or law, determined or concluded by the final 
determination against the same defendant or defendants as 
to whom the litigation was finally determined[.] 
(Emphases added.)  In this case, the circuit court found that Au 
was a vexatious litigant by relying on subsection (2) 
or, in the 
alternative, subsection (3) of § 634J-1.  The ICA agreed that Au 
met the above definition of a vexatious litigant under 
subsection (2) and declined to consider whether Au met the 
definition under subsection (3).   
  
Significantly, HRS § 634J-1(2) is limited in its 
application to plaintiffs who attempt to relitigate issues after 
they have been finally resolved.  Litigation is not finally 
resolved until appellate review of the proceeding is complete
 or 
the period in which the parties may seek review has expired.  
See, e.g., Catron v. Tokio Marine Mgmt., Inc., 90 Hawai ʻi 407, 
412, 978 P.2d 845, 850 (1999) (observing that the case had not 
reached final resolution because appeals were pending); 
Silvestrone v. Edell, 721 So.2d 1173, 1175
 n.2 (Fla. 1998) 
(holding that litigation is concluded upon expiration of time of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 
 appeal or completion of appellate review for purposes of a 
statute of limitations for legal malpractice claims).   
This interpretation is consistent with the statute’s overarching 
purpose of reducing the institution  of frivolous cases seeking 
to relitigate matters that have been finally determined.   
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 467,  at 978.   
Here, the court’s summary judgment order did not “finally 
resolve[]” the litigation against Au because  either the time for 
filing a notice of appeal had not expired or appellate review 
had not been completed when Au filed the relevant motions.19  Au 
could therefore not be deemed a vexatious litigant under HRS 
§ 634J-1(2), even if he had been  a “plaintiff.”  See Part IV.A .  
Accordingly, the ICA erred in concluding that the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion when it determined that Au was a 
vexatious litigant under HRS § 634J-1(2). 
                     
 19 Because HRS § 634J -1(2) requires litigation to be finally 
resolved, the circuit court could not rely on a presumption of the 
correctness of its rulings as a basis for declaring Au a vexatious litigant 
under this subsection, as stated by the ICA.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 
 C. A Finding of Bad Faith Is Required i n Order To Conclude a 
Litigant Is Vexatious Under HRS § 634J-1(2) or (3) . 
  In addition, to  meet the definition of a vexatious 
litigant under either HRS § 634J-1(2) or (3), the plaintiff must 
have acted in bad faith.  These subsections provide that a 
vexatious litigant is a plaintiff who 
(2) [a]fter litigation has been finally resolved against 
the plaintiff, relitigates  or attempts to relitigate in 
propria persona and in bad faith, either: . . . ;  
 
(3) [i]n any litigation while acting in propria persona, files, 
in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings, or other papers, 
conducts unnecessary discovery, or engages in  other tactics that 
are frivolous or solely intended to cause unnecessary delay[.] 
 
(Emphases added.) 
 
  Th e bad faith requirement was carefully considered by 
the legislature when HRS chapter  634J, “Vexatious Litigants,”  
was being enacted.  A House Standing Committee Report indicates 
significant concern that plaintiffs would be deemed vexatious 
merely for filing motions that were repetitive.   
The testimony of the [Hawai ʻi State Bar Association]  
addressed the definition of the term “repeatedly”  as used 
in Paragraphs [634J] -1(2) and (3) of the new chapter 
because it might unfairly bar meritorious claims under this 
proposed legislation.  The HSBA was 
concerned that the term 
“repeatedly ” may be applied to plaintiffs who “repeatedly ” 
relitigate two or three times or plaintiffs who 
“repeatedly ” file motions, pleadings, or other papers that 
appear unmeritorious.  It is not uncommon for litigants, 
especially those litigating pro se, to file more than one 
claim for legitimate reasons or have claims brought in 
state court to be later litigated in federal court, and 
vice versa.   Moreover, it is not uncommon for plaintiffs to 
repeatedly file motions, pleadings,  or other papers due to 
basic unfamiliarity with the judicial process . 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 
 H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1178,  at 1473 (emphases added).  T o 
address this concern, the legislature specified that vexatious 
litigants must have act ed in bad faith. 
Your Committee, therefore, finds that the term “repeatedly ” 
as used in Paragraphs [634J] -1(2) and (3) of the new 
chapter should refer to plaintiffs who relitigate in bad 
faith and who deliberately and intentionally abuse the 
system by bringing claims frivolously or causing 
unnecessary delay.  The passage of this bill is not meant 
to punish litigants that are unfamiliar with the judicial 
process and are earnestly attempting to protect or preserve 
their rights .  Your Committee has therefore amended this 
bill to insert the phrase “in bad faith. ” 
Id. (emphases added).  T he legislative history of HRS chapter 
634J demonstrates that the inclusion of the bad faith 
requirement in HRS § 634J-1(2) and (3) was intended to limit the 
definition of vexatious litigant to those plaintiffs who attempt 
to relitigate in bad faith and who intentionally abuse the 
system by filing frivolous claims or deliberately cause  
unnecessary delay.  That is, t he legislature did not intend to 
punish plaintiffs who earnestly attempt to protect or preserve 
their rights, even when the effort to do so involves the 
repeated filing of motions that appear unmeritorious. 
  In the vexatious litigant order in this case, the 
circuit court found that Au had filed seven motions that sought 
to relitigate the merits of the summary judgment order, and that 
each of those motions had been decided adversely to Au.  The 
court did not conclude orally  or in the written order that any 
of Au’s seven motions were frivolous, unmeritorious, or made in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 
 bad faith--nor was such a finding made at the time the motions 
were denied by the court
.  The court also did not state that it 
was inferring bad faith from the totality of Au’ s conduct during 
the litigation.  
  Despite the circuit court’s lack of findings as to bad 
faith, the ICA  stated that the c ourt could infer bad faith from 
Au’s insistence on re litigating  the same issues in differently 
titled motions.  However, allowing the court to infer bad faith 
from the filing of motions that “relitgat e the merits of the 
issues already disposed of,”  as the ICA did in this case, 
effectively reads  the bad faith requirement out of HRS § 634J-
1(2) and (3).  In doing so, the ICA directly contravened the 
legislature’s purpose of including the requirement that the 
plaintiff be found to have acted  in bad faith before being 
deemed vexatious under HRS § 634J-1.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
1178, at 1473 (“Paragraphs [634J] -1(2) and (3) of the new 
chapter should refer to plaintiffs who relitigate in bad 
faith[.]”). 
  Further, t he ICA’s analysis on this issue was 
predicated on an incorrect interpretation of our caselaw.  In 
concluding that the circuit  court did not have to explicitly 
find that Au acted in bad faith, the ICA stated that bad faith 
does not need to be explicitly stated in a  sanctioning order and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 
 can be inferred from conduct.   (Citing to Bank of Haw aii v. 
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai ʻi 372, 390, 984 P.2d 1198, 1216 (1999) .)  In 
Kunimoto, however, this court held only that where the circuit 
court makes findings that “are tantamount to a specific finding 
of bad faith . . . . [such] findings are sufficient to enable 
[an appellate] court to infer a specific finding of bad faith by 
the circuit court.”  91 
Hawaiʻi at 390, 984 P.2d at 1216 
(emphasis added).  We did not hold that the appellate court 
should scrutinize the record to  determine whether it supports an 
inference that the circuit court made a specific finding of bad 
faith, let alone whether the record supports the making of an 
inference that the circuit court could, hypothetically, have 
made.  Rather, the court in Kunimoto
 simply stated that in cases 
where the circuit court’s findings are equivalent  to a finding 
of bad faith, the appellate court will infer a specific finding 
of bad faith by the circuit court.  
Id. (holding that  the 
circuit court’s findings that the appellants’ conduct 
constituted fraud upon the court, which wa s at best reckless and 
at worst knowing and intentional,  was tantamount to a finding of 
bad faith by the court).   
  Here , the circuit court ’s findings  that Au had filed 
seven motions that sought to relitigate the merits of the 
summary judgment order, and that each of those motions had been ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 
 decided adversely to Au,  are not tantamount to a finding of bad 
faith.20  Cf. id.  Therefore, the ICA erred in concluding that 
the circuit court could have inferred bad faith  from the filing 
of these motions. 
  The ICA also held that the circuit court is not 
obligated to make findings of fact or conclusions of law in 
granting a motion to declare a plaintiff a vexatious litigant 
under HRS § 634J-7.  I t is well established, however,  that 
orders imposing sanctions should “set forth findings that 
describe, with reasonable specificity, the perceived misconduct 
(such as harassment or bad faith conduct), as well as the 
appropriate sanctioning authority .”  Id.; see also  Kawamata 
Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai ‘i 214, 257, 948 P.2d 
1055, 1098 (1997); Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse,  Inc., 79 
Hawai‘i 452, 459, 903 P.2d 1273, 1280 (1995); Kaina v. Gellman, 
119 Hawai i 324, 331, 197 P.3d 776, 783 (App. 2008) (stating that 
a sanctioning order “must inform the party of the authority 
pursuant to which he or she is to be sanctioned”) .  The 
requirement that a court should make findings that state the 
perceived misconduct with reasonable specificity when sanctions 
                     
 20 Additionally, as discussed infra  Part IV.D , a review of the seven 
motions that underlie the vexatious litigant order refutes the contention 
that they were collectively filed in bad faith.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 
 are imposed has been applied in multiple situations, such as 
sanctions for discovery violations, filing a complaint, and 
delay in withdrawing a motion.  Fujimoto v. Au, 95 Hawai i 116, 
153, 19 P.3d 699, 736 (2001) (failure to review court rule 
before filing the complaint); Kawamata Farms, 86 Hawai‘i at 256, 
948 P.2d at 1097 (discovery fraud ); Enos, 79 Hawai‘ i at 460, 903 
P.2d at 1281 ( undue delay in withdrawing motion) .   
  The mak ing of findings regarding the purported 
misconduct, including bad faith, serves multiple important 
purposes.  First, it clearly identifies and explains to the 
sanctioned person the conduct underlying the sanction.
  
Additionally, findings that describe with reasonable 
particularity the perceived misconduct
 facilitate a meaningful 
and more efficient appellate review.  
Kunimoto , 91 Hawai ‘i at 
390, 984 P.2d at 1216.  S pecifying the sanctioning authority, 
including the court’s inherent authority if applicable, is also 
necessary for meaningful appellate review.  Kaina , 119 Hawai i at 
331, 197 P.3d at 783.  Finally, the findings assure both the 
litigants and the court that the decision to impose sanctions 
was the result of reasoned consideration.  See Enos , 79 Hawai‘i 
at 459, 903 P.2d at 1280 (stating that specific findings assure 
litigants and the judge that the decision was the product of 
thoughtful deliberation). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 
   A  prefiling order preventing the litigant from filing 
any new litigation,  or an order during litigation that prohibits 
the filing of documents without leave of the court, is 
indisputably a sanction on that litigant.  See  Black’s Law 
Dictionary 1608 (11th ed. 2019) (defining “sanction” as “a 
provision that gives force to a legal imperative by either 
rewarding obedience or punishing disobedience”) .  Requiring 
trial courts to make findings of fact when declaring a plaintiff 
a vexatious litigant is also war ranted by the fact that such  
determination under HRS chapter 634J, unlike monetary sanctions, 
continues to affect the litigant  in future litigation and 
impairs the litigant’s right to access the judicial system.  
Thus, we hold that a court imposing a vexatious litigant order 
under HRS chapter 634J is required to make findings that set 
forth, with reasonable specificity, the perceived misconduct, 
including a finding of bad faith when applicable, and the 
authority under which the sanction is imposed.21  Cf. Kunimoto , 
                     
 21 In concluding that the circuit court was not required to make any 
specific findings of fact, the ICA relied on HRCP Rule 52.  HRCP Rule 52, the 
ICA observed, provides that “findings of fact and conclusions of law are 
unnecessary on decisions of motions under  Rules 12 or 56 or any other motion” 
unless the motion concerns amendment of a judgment or judgment on partial 
findings.  However, our cases establish the importance of setting forth 
findings of fact in a sanctioning order, regardless of the authority under 
which the sanctions are imposed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 
 91 Hawai i at 390, 984 P.2d at 1216; Kaina, 119 Hawai i at 331, 
197 P.3d at 783.   
  T he circuit court ’s order declaring Au a vexatious 
litigant under HRS § 634J-1(2) or (3) was therefore additionally 
deficient because it failed to specify the perceived misconduct 
that constituted bad faith and the court’s findings were not 
tantamount to a finding of bad faith.  Accordingly, the ICA 
erred in affirming the circuit court’s order  on this basis also.   
D. The Record Does Not Support a Finding of Bad Faith . 
  The circuit court concluded that Au was a vexatious 
litigant because he filed seven motions that sought to 
relitigate the merits of the summary judgment order and each of 
those motions was decided adversely to Au.  In affirming the 
circuit court, t he ICA determined  that Au met the definition of 
a vexatious litigant because, through the seven motions, he 
“continued to relitigate or attempt to relitigate issues of law 
or fact finally determined against him”  in bad faith.  A close 
review of the seven motions under lying the vexatious litigant 
order demonstrates that they do not support the ICA’s inference 
that Au sought to relitigate the merits of the summary judgment 
order in bad faith.  
  Au’s motion for reconsideration was t he first motion 
underlying the vexatious litigant order.  In this motion, Au ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 
 argued that the circuit court did not duly consider the 
contentions in the counterclaim, particularly his argument that 
he was the subject of a retaliatory eviction, before granting 
summary judgment for Bishop Estate.  Bishop Estate maintained 
that Au waived this argument by 
not includ ing it in his 
opposition.  In denying the motion, the court stated only that 
its decision was based on its review of the record and for good 
cause. 
 
 In t he second motion  identified, the Rule 60(b) motion 
to vacate, Au contended that the $62,000 owed to Bishop under 
the settlement agreement was incorrectly calculated.  Bishop 
Estate argued that Au waived this argument by failing to raise 
it in an earlier proceeding.  The court’s order denying this 
motion stated that its decision was based on the untimeliness of 
the motion, the unreliability of Au’s proffered calculations, 
and Au’s waiver of the argument  by not raising it in his 
opposition to Bishop Estate’s motion for  summary judgment.   
  Au’s renewed motion to vacate  the summary judgment 
order, the third motion, sought to correct a  deficiency  in his 
motion to vacate that the court had identified, namely the 
unreliability of his calculations, by proffering a declaration 
from his accountant.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 
   The fourth motion,  Au’s motion to reconsider CCSJ 
order, was filed when the third motion was pending.  Au filed 
this motion apparently on the premise that the court might 
credit the new evidence in his renewed motion to vacate.  Since 
the circuit court had considered , at least in part, the merits 
of the Rule 60(b) motion to vacate in determining that Au’s 
calculations were unreliable, Au’s  motion to reconsider CCSJ 
order also sought to preserve his challenge to the counterclaim 
summary judgment order based upon his submission of  the new 
evidence. 
  
The fifth motion identified was Au’s motion to vacate 
final judgment, which sought this relief because the final 
judgment had been entered while Au’s renewed motion to vacate 
and the motion to reconsider CCSJ order were pending.  Au 
contended that the premature entry of the final judgment would 
result in his notice of appeal being dismissed as premature.  
The motion was clearly an effort to ensure that issues were 
preserved for appeal by  addressing the sequence of events 
involving the timing of the entry of the final judgment. 
  Au’s motion for correction , the sixth motion,
 was 
filed prior to the court’s denial of his motion to vacate final 
judgment.  In this motion, Au asked th e court to vacate the 
final judgment and prepare  a new final judgment so that he  could ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 
 properly seek appeal of the court’s denial of his motion  to 
reconsider CCSJ order.  As with the motion to vacate final 
judgment, Au was attempting to preserve his right to  appeal an 
adverse order.   This motion was withdrawn at the hearing prior 
to its disposition. 
  Finally, the seventh motion was Au’ s motion to stay.  
In this motion, Au argued that enforcement of the judgment 
should be stayed pending the determination of a supersedeas 
bond.  Au maintained that the amount of the supersedeas bond 
should not be set by the amount stated in the final judgment 
because certain attorneys’ fee s were erroneously  awarded and 
because of the pending appeal of the court’s rejection of his 
argument that the amount owed under the settlement agreement was 
incorrectly calculated.  The court ultimately denied Au’s motion 
because it found his proffered alternative security, a lien on 
certain real property, was an inadequate substitute for a 
supersedeas bond.   
  In each of the motions, Au presented arguments that 
were not demonstrably in bad faith  or even frivolous.  Indeed , 
the circuit court made no such finding on any of the motions.  
Although Au did include the rejected argument that the 
settlement agreement was based on an incorrect calculation in 
several of his motions, the mere inclusion of an apparently ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 
 unmeritorious argument within a motion asserting ot her grounds 
for relief does not establish that the motion was made in bad 
faith, or was done with the deliberate intent to delay the 
proceedings.  See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1178, at 1473.  As 
the legislature noted, HRS chapter 634J is not meant to punish 
litigants that are earnestly attempting to protect or preserve 
their rights.22  Id. 
  Considering the seven motions both separately and 
together, the record does not support a finding that Au sought  
to relitigate the merits of the summary judgment order in bad 
faith.   
V. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing  reasons, the ICA’s July 26, 2019 
judgment on appeal a nd the circuit court’s vexat ious litigant 
order are reversed. 
                     
 22 Although a defendant who files a frivolous motion is not subject 
to the vexatious litigant statute, defendants, including self -represented 
defendants, are subject to HRCP Rule 11 and may be sanctioned under its 
provisions in appropriate circumstances.  See  HRCP Rule 11(c). Ronald G.S. Au 
petitioner pro se  
 
Dennis W. Chong Kee 
Christopher T. Goodin
for respondents  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
