***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
KEVIN LORA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-18-0000548 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000548 ; CR. NO. 1CPC- 17-0000561 ) 
 
JUNE 16, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  The defendant in this case was convicted after a jury 
trial that turned on the credibility of the complaining 
witness’s testimony.  This case raises the issue of whether a 
portion of that testimony was properly admitted for the purpose 
of bolstering the credibility of the witness’s account  of the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000548
16-JUN-2020
08:03 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 2 (continued . . .)  incident.  After careful review of the record, we conclude that 
the adduced testimony was not relevant to the witness’s 
credibility.  Further,  we find that the circuit court’s 
erroneous admission of the witness’s t estimony was highly 
prejudicial to the defense and not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  Additionally, we address the circuit court’s 
consideration of the defendant’s request to be sentenced as a 
young adult in order 
to review the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals’ interpretation of the relevant statute and to provide 
guidance in the event the issue arises on remand.   
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Trial 
  
On May 4, 2017, Kevin Lora was indicted in the C ircuit 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) for one count of 
sexual assault in the first degree in violation of Hawai ʻi
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707- 730(1)(a)1 and one count of sexual 
assault in the third degree in violation of HRS § 707-
732(1)(f).2  The jury trial began on March 19, 2018.3   
                     
 1 HRS § 707 -730(1)(a) (2014) provides as follows:  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the 
first degree if:  
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to 
an act of sexual penetration by strong compulsion[.]  
 
 2 HRS § 707 -732(1)(f) (2014) provides as follows:  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 3   The Complaining Witness (CW) testified that she came  
to Hawai‘ i
 for a vacation on May 11, 2016, with her sister and a 
friend, Haley Harlow.  The group stayed at a hotel in Waikīkī 
together for the duration of their trip.  On Friday, May 13, the 
group “hiked Koko Head” around midday , which made the CW’s legs 
and back sore.  The next evening, the group had dinner together 
and then decided to go to an establishment called “
Top of 
Waikiki” to enjoy the view.  While walking there, the group met 
a man named 
“Rob.”  The four proceeded to Top  of Waikiki, where 
the CW had one glass of wine and one serving of rum .  The group 
then attempted to enter a  nightclub downstairs , the CW 
testified, but she and Harlow were unable to get in because they 
were not wearing the proper attire.  Rob remained at the 
nightclub and t he three women  decided to go to “Playbar, ” a 
different nightclub they had visited earlier in their trip.   
  
Before they entered Playbar, t he CW stated, she and 
her sister had “an awkward exchange ,” and the CW left the group 
and returned to their hotel alone.  Once at her hotel room, she 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the 
third degree if:  
. . . . 
(f) The person 
knowingly, by strong compulsion, has 
sexual contact with another person or causes another 
person to have sexual contact with the actor.  
 
 3 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 4 changed into a skirt because of the heat.  She received text 
messages from Harlow and her sister asking her to return to 
Playbar.  She also received a text message from Rob, with whom 
she had exchanged numbers at Top of Waikiki.  Rob asked if she 
was staying in for the rest of the evening, and the CW responded 
that she was but the other two women were at Playbar.  Rob asked 
if she would like to go back to Playbar together, and the CW 
agreed to do so.  The two met up and walked to Playbar together, 
where they rejoined Harlow and the CW’s sister .  The CW believed 
that they arrived at Playbar between 9:30 and 10:00 p.m., but 
she was not certain.   
  Around 11:00 p.m., the CW testified, her sister left 
Playbar and returned to the hotel.  Harlow and the CW remained 
there together until around 1:30 or 2:00 a.m. when Harlow also 
returned to the hotel.  The CW stated that she remained at 
Playbar until around 2:30 a.m. at which time she left to return 
to her hotel.  She had six servings of alcohol while at Playbar.  
She was feeling “a little dizzy” as she left but attributed her 
physical condition to the change in environment between the 
nightclub and the street.  The CW said that she was not feeling 
drunk at that time.    
  Harlow testified that after she left Playbar around 
1:30 a.m., she met a man on the street who came up to her and 
introduced himself as Dominick.  At trial, Harlow identified ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 5 Lora as the man she met that night.  She stated that Lora walked 
her back to her hotel where they exchanged phone numbers.  After 
she returned to her hotel room, Harlow testified, the two 
conversed for a while through text messages.  Harlow asked if 
Lora would come back to her hotel and walk with her to the 
water, and Lora agreed to do so.  The two met up, walked to the 
beach, and sat on the sand by the water.  They talked for a 
while and then started to kiss.  Harlow testified that Lora 
wanted to go further, but she told him she was not interested in 
doing so.  Lora said that he respected that, and they continued 
talking.  Soon after, they were approached by a police officer 
who told them the beach was closed.  They then returned to 
Harlow’s hotel and parted ways near the lobby .  Harlow stated 
that after returning to her room, she exchanged further text 
messages with Lora.  Following  the text message conversation, 
which began at 3:03 a.m. and involved only a few messages, 
Harlow fell asleep. 
  T he CW testified that as she was returning to her 
hotel from Playbar, she was approached just outside her hotel by 
a man who introduced himself as Dominick.  The CW identified 
Lora at trial as the same man.  After briefly engaging in small 
talk, Lora asked the CW if she wanted to walk on the beach with 
him.  The CW stated that she showed Lora her ring and told him  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 6 she was married and not interested.4  According to the CW, Lora  
put his left arm around her back so they were standing close 
together and reached across and pushed his right thumb into her 
arm very hard.  He then told the CW that they were going for a 
walk on the beach.  They began walking toward  the beach, the CW 
testified, and Lora maintained a tight grip on her arms and 
shirt as they walked
, which caused the seams of her shirt to 
rip.  The CW stated that she became fearful and “felt very 
frozen.”  At some point during the walk, the CW stated, Lora 
shifted his grip on her and grasped the side of her neck.  As 
they neared the beach, the CW testified, she began to physically 
struggle against Lora and tried to throw her body weight to the 
ground.5  She stayed on her feet, however, and did not fall.   
  
When they arrived at the beach, she stepped off the 
two-foot tall  seawall onto the shore to try to create distance 
between them.  Lora removed his pants and shoes and followed her 
onto the beach.  The CW stated that she was standing with her 
back facing the seawall and Lora was in front of her.  The CW 
said that Lora then grabbed her hand and placed it on his penis 
over his underwear.   At this point, the CW testified, she raised 
                     
 4 The CW testified that she was engaged at the time of her trip.  
 
 5 The CW testified that on May 15, 2016, she was 5’2” and weighed 
around 238 pounds.  She described Lora as being barely taller than her and 
believed that she outweighed him because he was physically smaller than her.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 7 her voice and began to yell and plead with him.  Lora asked her , 
“So are you going to go down on me now, or should I force you?”  
The CW testified that she was pressed against the seawall, which 
was digging into her lower back , and Lora was in front of her.  
The CW said that she attempted to move away from him and ended 
up lying on her back in the sand on the same level as the 
seawall.  He held her down by her arms and ripped her shirt in 
an attempt to expose her right breast.  The CW stated that while 
she was struggling Lora’s saliva  got on her chest.  Lora was 
pressing down on her arms on the insides of her biceps, the CW 
stated, and he was gripping her so tight that she lost feeling 
in her hands.  She related that it felt like “he w as digging a 
knife into my arms ”; she was telling him to please stop and that 
she did not want to do this.  The CW testified that Lora then 
pushed up her skirt and penetrated her vagina with his penis.  
The CW stated  that she struggled  at first and then went limp.  
During the struggle, the CW testified, she yelled and called out 
hoping that someone might hear her.  The CW also stated that 
Lora headbutted her in the forehead during the struggle.  He 
eventually stopped, the CW stated,  and she believed that he had 
ejaculated .  After Lora  finished, he gathered his clothes and 
sprinted away.   
  T he CW testified that she immediately left the beach 
and made her way back to the street.  She  collapsed on the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 8 ground near a crosswalk and began to cry and call out for help.  
A man approached her and asked if she was okay,  and she told 
him, “No, I’m not okay, I’ve just been raped.”   The man helped 
her get to a nearby police station, which was in sight of where 
she had collapsed on the ground.
   
 
 The man, Larry Macri, testified that he was working at 
a restaurant in Waikīkī at that time.  Macri stated that he got 
off work sometime after 1:00 a.m. on May 15, 2016.  He had 
missed the last bus because he got off work late, so he decided 
to wait at a bench in that area until 4:15 a.m. when the buses 
would start running again.  While he was sitting at the bench, 
Macri saw the CW, who was about fifty feet away, walk from the 
beach toward the crosswalk.  The CW was crying and appeared 
distraught, so he approached her.  Macri testified that the CW’s 
clothes appeared to be intact, and she was wearing pants.  Macri 
helped the CW reach the police station and subsequently gave a 
written statement to a police officer around 4:25 in the 
morning.  Macri stated that from where he was sitting on the 
bench, he “absolutely” would have heard any screaming or yelling 
coming from the area of the beach that the CW had come from, but 
he did not hear screaming or yelling at any time.   
  Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Jon Kawana 
testified that he was working at the Waikīkī substation on May 
15, 2016.  The CW came into the substation around 3:21 a.m., ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 9 accompanied by Macri.  Officer Kawana took the CW’s statement 
and prepared a written report.  In the report, Officer Kawana 
observed that the CW was wearing a shirt and black and white 
pants.  HPD Officer Leslie Garner was also working at the 
Waikīkī substation at that time.  Officer Garner testified that 
officers called for an ambulance to treat the CW immediately on -
site based on the statement she gave.  The CW refused to be 
treated at first, but she ultimately agreed to be taken to the 
hospital.  Officer Garner stated that she took the CW to the 
hospital at 4:21 a.m. 
 
 The CW testified that after being taken to the 
hospital, she was examined by a male doctor.  She identified 
several photographs as being accurate depictions of her at that 
time.  The photographs, which were introduced into evidence, 
depicted the CW wearing a long tank- top shirt and black and 
white pants.  The photographs did not depict any damage to the 
CW’s clothes.   
 
 The deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) asked the CW , 
“What was it like to get examined by [a] male doctor?”  Defense 
counsel objected on relevancy grounds,  and the objection was 
overruled.  The CW began to answer, stating as follows: “It was 
-- the process of what you go through when you come in like this 
is very dehumanizing.  Um, you’re -- you’re standing there in 
your ripped clothes and - -.”  Defense counsel objected again ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 10 that the testimony was irrelevant and asked to approach.  At the 
bench, the DPA  argued that what occurred during the exam, her 
emotional state, and her ability to relate to the doctor and 
give him an accurate medical history were all relevant to the 
case.  The court overruled the objection.  The CW proceeded to 
answer the question as follows : 
 Um, the process of a rape collection kit is very 
dehumanizing.  Um, after experiencing the trauma that I had 
just gone through, I had to stand on a mat and carefully 
remove all of the clothing that I had on, and I could see 
all the sand falling onto this mat.  
 And I had to stand naked in exam room lighting, just 
completely naked, while someone took pictures of me.  I was 
given a gown and a sheet, and I waited for the doctor to 
arrive.   
 He explained to me in probably the most compassionate 
way that he can  that a lot of this will be violating, and 
he apologized upfront for the process.   
 There were, like, a lot of swabs that were taken from 
parts of my body where I know that his saliva had been.  
 There was a vaginal exam, and it’s not the kind like 
you go to the doctor and have one done.  It’s, like, a very 
long time with a man looking at me and taking high def 
pictures of my most personal areas.  It was horrible.  
 
The DPA then asked the CW how long she was at the hospital.  The 
CW responded as follows:  
 I was there until 10:00 the next morning.  I had to 
receive prophylactic injections in case that the defendant 
had diseases.  
 
 I took a pregnancy test.  I was given oral anti -
virals to make sure that I didn’t contract hepatitis or 
HIV, and so for every morning and every night for the next 
30 days, I took a pill that made me extremely sick.  It’s 
better than getting hepatitis, I guess.  
 
The DPA then asked the CW, “When  you look back at this night, . 
. . is there anything that you wish you did differently?”  
Defense counsel again objected on relevancy grounds and the 
objection was overruled.  The CW answered
 as follows : ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 11  I have spent two years thinking and pondering of what 
could have happened differently that night for me, and when 
I first started, my regrets were, I reg[r]et wearing a 
skirt.  I reg[r]et shaking his hand.  I reg[r]et not being 
able to feel fear and act on it in a way that would protect 
me.   
 And as I’ve -- as I’ve grow n in my progress, in my 
healing --   
 
The defense objected for the fourth time  on relevancy grounds 
and the court sustained the objection.   
  
On cross- examination, the CW acknowledged that during 
a police interview with HPD Detective (Det.) David Yamamoto on 
Sunday, May 15, she did not mention the glass of wine that she 
had at Top of Waikiki when she was asked about how much alcohol 
she had consumed that evening.  She stated that she had 
forgotten about the wine at that time and didn’t realize she had 
purchased a glass of wine that night until she reviewed her 
credit card statement sometime after she returned home.  The CW 
also admitted that, when asked about how many drinks she had 
that night during the grand jury proceedings, she had not 
informed the grand jury about either of the drinks she consumed 
at Top of Waikiki that evening.6 
  
Doctor (Dr.) Wayne Lee testified that he conducted the 
CW’s sexual assault examination  at the hospital on the morning 
                     
 6 On redirect examination, the DPA asked the CW what her mental 
state was like during her interview with Det. Yamamoto.  The CW stated that 
she was very tired and scared.  The DPA asked if she intentionally left 
anything out of her statement to Det. Yamamoto, and the CW responded that she 
did not.  The DPA next asked the CW what the grand jury proceeding was like.  
The CW stated that the questions were much more direct and simple, and she 
was not asked to give as many details as she was during the trial.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 12 of May 15, 2016.7  A sexual assault examination begi ns with a 
historical examination, which involves talking with the patient 
and asking them questions about their complaint and
 why they 
came to be examined.  During the historical examination, the CW 
related that she had consumed five drinks prior to the incident.  
Dr. Lee then conducted the physical examination.  He found 
tenderness on the back of the CW’s head, a fain t contusion on 
her lower back, bruises on her lower extremities, and 
lacerations near her vaginal entrance.  He took swabs of areas 
where the CW stated that DNA might be found, including from her 
breasts.  Dr. Lee did not observe any 
injuries on the CW ’s 
shoulders, arms,  forehead,  or neck and did not observe any 
bruises, thumb prints, or other contusions.  Dr. Lee testified 
that if a person’s  neck and arms had been tightly gripped, he 
would expect to see marks or redness in those areas.  Similarly, 
he would expect to see some sort of mark on the forehead if a 
person was headbutted there.  Dr. Lee also testified that the 
lacerations on the CW’s  genitalia were equally consistent with 
consensual sex and non- consensual sex.   
                     
 7 Dr. Lee testified that he graduated from the University of 
Hawaiʻi Manoa in 1970 with a bachelor’s degree in zoology and from the 
University of Texas Medical School, San Antonio, in 1974 with a medical 
degree.  The court found Dr. Lee to be qualified as an expert in the field of 
medicine, with further experience in the examination and treatment of 
patients who present complaints of alleged sexual assault.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 13   HPD criminalist Michelle Amorin, an expert in serology 
and forensic DNA testing, testified that she compared swabs 
collected from the CW’s body during her examination agains t a 
buccal sample collected from Lora.  Amorin testified that sperm 
cells were recovered from the samples taken from the CW’s 
vagina, and she was able to develop a full DNA profile for the 
contributor of the sperm .  Amorin stated that she compared that 
DNA profile to Lora’s profile and excluded him as a source of 
the sperm cells that were recovered during the CW’s sexual 
assault examination.  Amorin also analyzed a sample collected 
from the CW’s right breast and  stated that it matched Lora’s 
profile, with the probability of a false match greater than one 
in eight trillion.   
  
HPD Officer Tricenn Rivera testified that he checked 
the Waikīkī Hyatt hotel (Hyatt)  for surveillance video that 
might have shown the CW around the time of the incident based on 
her description of her walk with Lora.  Officer Rivera stated 
that he was able to view security footage of the area for the 
relevant time frame
, but that the video was not recovered at 
that time because the person authorized to release the footage 
was not available.  Officer Rivera testified to what he saw on 
the video: 
[Rivera:] At [a] certain time[, I] was able to identify 
the 
complainant and a male walk towards the beach, and after a 
few moments, we see the male running northward up the same ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 14 street, and a few  minutes later, we see the female emerge 
from the beach area onto the sidewalk.  
 
[DPA:] And you say a few moments.  When you first see them 
walking, when you see them leaving, are you saying it 
happens in a few moments?   
 
[Rivera:]  It’s actually more than  a couple minutes 
 
. . . . 
 
[DPA:] And what could you see about their body positions 
during the first portion of the video that you watched?  
 
[Rivera: ] So as they’re walking towards the beach on Uluniu 
Ave, they’re walking together, they’re abreast toward the 
beach, and they’re engaged in conversation.  
 
[DPA:] And when you see the next relevant portion, it’s 
only the male wearing similar clothing?  
 
[Rivera:] Correct, and he’s running.  He’s actually 
sprinting up Uluniu Avenue by himself.  
 
[DPA:] And you also see [the CW] reappear in that 
surveillance video?  
 
[Rivera:] Correct.  She emerges from the sidewalk area 
right here, and she appears to be flag –- 
 
[DPA:] Mm-hm. 
 
[Rivera:] She appears to be flagging down a passerbyer. 
 
The officer identified the CW in the footage, but he could not 
positively identify the man she was with .  The man’s clothes and 
build appeared consistent with the description given to him by 
the CW.  Officer Rivera testified that, based on the security 
footage, the man did not appear to be forcing the CW towards the 
beach.  At no point did the CW turn around or pull away, and she 
did not appear in distress.  He stated that it didn’t appear 
that “anything was wrong with these two people.”   
  Det . Yamamoto testified that he was the detective 
assigned to investigate the CW’s complaint.  He stated that he ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 15 first went to the hospital to meet with the CW before 
investigating the scene.  He was not personally involved with 
securing the scene because it had been secured by patrol 
officers before he arrived.  Toy Stech, a technician with the 
Scientific Investigation Section of the HPD, took photographs 
and collected evidence from the scene.  St ech used an alternate 
light source to look for biological evidence at the scene, but 
none was recovered.   
  Det. Yamamoto testified that during the course of his 
investigation, he learned that there was a security video that 
was pertinent to the investigation.  He initially believed the 
video had been retrieved by another officer, but on July 6, 
2017, he discovered that the HPD was not in possession of the 
video.  He contacted the Hyatt at that time but was unable to 
retrieve the video.  The detective explained that he believed 
the video had already been recovered because he recalled being 
shown the video by another officer.  Det. Yamamoto stated that 
he just remembered seeing a video of two people walking and that 
it didn’t show anything in particular.  There were no 
identifying features and he could not tell what the two people 
were wearing.  He did not recall seeing a man sprinting away 
from the scene and stated that if he had, such information would 
have been noted in his closing report.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 16   Det. Yamamoto also testified that he ordered the DNA 
testing of the swabs collected from the CW during her 
examination.  Sometime after the tests were conducted, he 
learned that some of the swabs contained semen and that Lora was 
excluded as the source.   After learning this information, he did 
not take any additional investigative steps or attempt to 
contact the CW.  The detective maintained that although he was 
aware of the information, the official report was not completed 
before his retirement.  He did not know if any other HPD 
personnel had taken investigative action based on the results of 
the DNA tests.   
  Mitch Johnson, director of security at the Hyatt, 
testified that their security video recordings are kept for 
thirty days before being deleted.  He stated that he had 
responded to requests for security footage from the HPD in the 
past and described the procedure that had been established for 
many years. The HPD did not request the security video from the 
hotel until July 6, 2017.   
  During  closing argument , the DPA stated “Can you 
believe [the CW]?  Yes. . . .  Because [the CW] was candid, 
because she was authentic, because she was detailed, and because 
she was supported by the evidence.”  The DPA pointed to the fact 
that “[The CW]  told you about the humiliation that she felt when 
she endured the sexual assault exam, of being stripped of her ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 17 clothes, being photographed like a specimen, being poked and 
prodded by a strange male she had never met before that night.”  
The DPA continued:  
Now, [the CW] was also believable because she was 
consistent.  [The CW] was completely candid in th
e way that 
she testified to everything, the things that made her look 
bad, the things that were embarrassing to her, all of her 
regrets, and the days and weeks and months of wishing that 
she did things differently, that ’s the self- blame.  That ’s 
the self -blame that you saw right in front of you these 
past few days.   
 
  Near the end of argument, the DPA stated that the 
evidence in the case “is [the CW], the rest of it is just there 
to support or not support.  And [the CW] ’s testimony, as the 
jury instructions tell you, by itself can prove guilt. ”   
  D efense counsel argued during closing argument that 
the CW’s account was not credible.  Numerous inconsistencies 
between the CW’s account and the evidence adduced at trial  
undermined the credibility of the CW’s assault allegation , 
counsel argued.  These included the inconsistencies between what 
the CW stated she was wearing and what Macri and Officer Kawana 
observed, the lack of evidence that her clothing was ripped or 
damaged, the inconsistency between her description of how Lora 
forced her down the street and what Officer Rivera and Det. 
Yamamoto observed on the surveillance video, and the 
inconsistency between the marks Dr. Lee observed during his 
examination of the CW and the  marks that he stated he would 
expect to see based on the CW’s account .  Counsel also noted the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 18 (continued . . .)  inconsistency between the number of drinks the CW reported 
consuming to Dr. Lee and her testimony at trial.   
  T he DPA argued on rebuttal that even though “peo ple 
aren’t going to get why [she] didn’t run,” the CW “still went 
through all of this.”  The DPA continued, stating that: 
[The CW] still went through that sexual assault exam.  She 
still endured having to take medication for weeks.  She 
still endured having to fly to Hawaii twice, take time out 
of her life to sit there, relive her assault and be 
attacked for every decision that she made and every action 
she did or didn’t do.  She went through all of that with 
absolutely nothing to gain.  
 
B. Sentencing  
  
The jury found Lora guilty on both counts.  Lora 
requested, and the State opposed, that he be sentenced as a 
young adult defendant pursuant to HRS § 706-667.8  At the 
                     
 8 HRS § 706 -667 (2014) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 
(1) Defined.  A young adult defendant is a person convicted 
of a crime who,  at the time of the offense, is less than 
twenty-two years of age and who has not been previously 
convicted of a felony as an adult or adjudicated as a 
juvenile for an offense that would have constituted a 
felony had the young adult defendant been an adult . 
 
. . . . 
 
(3) Special Term.  A young adult defendant convicted of a 
felony, in lieu of any other sentence of imprisonment 
authorized by this chapter, may be sentenced to a special 
indeterminate term of imprisonment if the court is of the 
opinion that such special term is adequate for the young 
adult defendant’s correction and rehabilitation and will 
not jeopardize the protection of the public.  When ordering 
a special indeterminate term of imprisonment, the court 
shall impose the maximum length of imprisonment, which 
shall be eight years for a class A felony, five years for a 
class B felony, and four years for a class C felony.  The 
minimum length of imprisonment shall be set by the Hawaii 
paroling authority in accordance with section 706 -669.  
During this  special indeterminate term, the young adult ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 19 sentencing hearing, Lora presented statements from family 
members and himself to argue that he fit HRS § 706- 667’s age 
requirement, was in the military, had no prior arrests or 
convictions, and had the love and support of the community.  T he 
circuit court stated that it was “a terribly sad day for all 
concerned.”  The court noted that the CW’s life had been 
“forever changed by what happened that night” and that this was 
“a violent, horrific act .”  The court recognized that Lora 
“vehemently disagree[d] ” with the jury’s verdict and it was 
clear to the court that Lora had the love and support of many in 
the community.  The court further noted that Lora had served in 
the military, engaged in community service, and was married and 
expecting his f irst child.  However, the court stated, Lora had 
taken advantage of the CW and expected to get away with it 
because he was “bigger, badder, stronger.”  “You’re a Marine ,” 
the court stated.  “You take care of business, and [the CW] was 
no match for you.”  T he court then stated as follows:  
[O]ne of th[e] options that [defense counsel] is asking the 
Court to consider is that of youthful offender.  I think 
you technically meet the requirements.  
 But I divide the world into basically two camps.  I 
sentence peopl e every single week.  That’s probably the 
most important decision that judges make.  And I separate 
the world in two: Those people that are violent, and those 
people that aren’t .   
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
shall be incarcerated separately from career criminals, 
when practicable.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 20  And in this particular instance, while [defense 
counsel] has done his best and everybody who cares about 
you has tried to have the Court focus in on your good 
qualities –- and you have them.  But when people are 
watching, it is easy to do the right thing.  But when you 
don’t think people are watching, people do things that no 
one would expect them to do.  And in this particular case, 
that is exactly what the Court thinks you did.  It may not 
typify how you’ve lived the rest of your life.  
 But in an instant, you chose to get out there, trying 
to meet some girls, trying to get some  action, or whatever 
you want to call it, and you preyed upon this woman.  And 
you treated her like a piece of garbage, and you left her 
there on the beach to try to pull together the pieces.  And 
unfortunately, that has blown back on you.  
 So, Mr. Lora, I  give you tremendous credit for being 
here today.  I worry.  I don’t know sometimes when I have 
people released on status whether they’re going to show up, 
especially when they ’re looking at a sentence like this.  
But it’s to your credit.  All right.  
 But now’s the time where the consequences have to be 
imposed.  And for you, Mr. Lora, I am going to deny the 
request for youthful offender sentencing, not that you 
don’t meet the age and other requirements, but I don ’t 
believe that a special term is appropriate in your 
situation . 
 
(Emphases added.)   
 
 Lora was sentenced to an indeterminate term of twenty 
years of imprisonment on the s exual assault in the first degree 
offense and five years of imprisonment on the sexual assault in 
the third d egree offense  with the sentences to run concurrently.  
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (circuit court judgment) 
was entered on June 12, 2018. 
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  Lora appealed from the judgment to the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA), arguing that the circ uit court committed 
five separate errors that required either resentencing or a new 
trial.  First, Lora argued that the court abused its discretion 
by “refusing to sentence Lora as a youthful offender.”  Second, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 21 Lora maintained that the court erred in overruling defense 
counsel’s relevancy objections to the CW’s testimony about her 
examination by Dr. Lee and what she wished she had done 
differently, and additionally that the court’s failure to 
exclude the evidence under Hawai ‘i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
403 was plainly erroneous.9  Third, Lora argued that the circuit 
court committed plain error by permitting testimony about the 
contents of the security video that had not been recovered.  
Fourth, Lora maintained that the State committed prosecutorial 
misconduct in its opening statement, closing argument, and 
rebuttal argument.  Finally, Lora contended that the cumulative 
effect of these errors required a new trial.  
  In a summary disposition order entered on August 30, 
2019, the ICA affirmed the circ uit court judgment.10  The ICA 
determined that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
in sentencing Lora.  
The ICA stated that the circuit court’s 
“division of offenses into ‘two camps’ based on the use of 
violence reflects the circuit court’s consideration of the 
‘protection of the public ,’ as required in HRS §  706-667(3).”    
                     
 9 HRE Rule 403 (2016) provides as follows: “Although relevant, 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed 
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.”  
 10 The ICA’s summary disposition order can be found at State v. 
Lora, No. CAAP- 18-0000548, 2019 WL 4132682 (App. Aug. 30, 2019) (SDO).  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 22   With respect to the CW’s testimony about the 
examination, the ICA concluded that it was “relevant evidence 
for the jury to consider in assessing” her credibility , 
providing potential explanations for her inconsistent testimony 
and “undermin[ing] defense counsel’s portrayal of [the ] CW as a 
liar.”  The ICA exercised plain error review to consider whether 
the evidence should have been excluded under HRE  Rule 403 and 
concluded that the circuit court did not err in permitting the 
CW’s testimony.  The  ICA determined that the CW’s testimony 
about her “regrets” was irrelevant , which the State had 
essentially conceded.  But the ICA concluded that the admission  
of the testimony was  inconsequential because the “CW’s 
statements regarding her regrets were brief” and “neither the 
State nor defense counsel emphasized it or further referred to 
it in closing arguments.”   Accordingly, the ICA concluded that 
the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
  The ICA further determined that the testimony about 
the security video was not erroneously admitted,  and while  the 
DPA made argumentative remarks  during opening statement, there 
was no misconduct during closing argument or rebuttal and the 
improper argument was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  The 
ICA also concluded that although the introduction of the 
irrelevant evidence about the CW’s regrets was erroneous and 
there was some improper argument during the State’s ope ning ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 23 statement, these errors were insubstantial,  and thus there was 
no need to consider their cumulative effect.   
  Lora timely sought certiorari review of the ICA’s 
Judgment on Appeal, contending that the ICA erred in its rulings 
on the points of error raised in his appeal. 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Relevance 
  “We apply the right/wrong standard in reviewing 
challenges to a court’s relevancy decision[.]”  State v. Kony, 
138 Hawai‘ i 1, 8, 375 P.3d 1239, 1246 (2016). 
B. Sentencing 
 
 “[A] sentencing judge generally has broad discretion 
in imposing a sentence.  The applicable standard of review for 
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court 
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its 
decision.”  State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai ʻi 267, 278,
 141 P.3d 
440, 451 (2006) (alteration in original)  (citations omitted).  A 
court abuses its discretion if it has clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.  
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 
839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992) (citing State v. Akina, 73 Haw. 75, 78, 
828 P.2d 269, 271 (1992)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 24 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Admission of the CW’s Challenged Testimony Was Not 
Harmless Error.  
 
1. The Challenged Testimony Was Not Relevant to the CW’s  
Credibility.  
  Evidence is relevant if it has any tendency to make 
the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than 
it would be without the evidence.  HRE Rule 401 (2016).  In this 
case the State argued, and the ICA concluded, that the CW’ s 
response to the question “W hat was it like to be examined by a 
male doctor?” was relevant to her credibility.  The ICA 
emphasized that defense counsel elic
ited testimony as to how 
many drinks the CW reported consuming that evening to Dr. Lee 
and that counsel noted in closing argument the inconsistency 
between the amount the CW  stated to Dr. Lee, police, the grand 
jury, and her testimony at trial.  In conclus ion, the ICA held  
that the CW’s “emotional state during the post -assault 
examination provided a possible explanation for the 
inconsistencies and was thus relevant . . . to support CW’s 
credibility.”   
  It appears the ICA assumed that the testimony 
regarding the physical examination was probative of the CW’ s 
emotional state at the time she reported the number of drinks 
that she consumed to Dr. Lee, and thus it  was relevant to the  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 25 (continued . . .)  credibility of her statements to Dr. Lee.  Preliminarily, we 
note that the CW reported the number of drinks she consumed that 
evening to Dr. Lee during the historical examination , which 
occurred before she under went the physical examination.  Thus , 
any emotional disturbance caused by the physical examination  
could not have affected the credibility of statements the CW 
made during the historical examination
.  The nature of the CW’s 
physical examination and the effect that undergoing it had on 
her emotional state was therefore irrelevant to the credibility 
of statements that the CW made during the historical 
examination.   
  Significantly, t he challenged testimony also does not 
describe the CW’s  emotional state during the historical 
examination.  The question was framed as an inquiry about the 
physical examination : “What was it like  to get examined by [a] 
male doctor?”  Accordingly, the question prompted the CW to 
extensively describe the process she went through when 
undergoing the physical examination.11  Similarly, the follow- up 
                     
 11 The CW’s response, as stated, was as follows:  
 
 Um, the process of a rape collection kit is very 
dehumanizing.  Um, after experiencing the trauma that I had 
just gone through, I had to stand on a mat and carefully 
remove all of the clothing that I had on, and I could see 
all the sand falling onto this mat.  
 And I had to stand naked in exam room lighting, just 
completely naked, while someone took pictures of me.  I was 
given a gown and a sheet, and I waited for the doctor to 
arrive.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 26 question by the DPA again went solely to the physical 
examination: “And how long were you there? ”  The CW’s response  
described not only the length of time the CW was at the 
hospital, but also the injections and medication given while she 
was there and her reactions to medication over the following 
month.12  The emotional effect of the physical examination was 
therefore irrelevant because it could not have affected the 
veracity of statements that were made prior to the physical 
examination.  Since the challenged testimony was not probative 
of the CW’s emotional  state during the historical examination, 
it had no bearing on her credibility at the time that the 
statements in question were  made to Dr. Lee and cannot be 
relevant on that basis.   Thus, the detailed testimony about  the 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
 He explained to me in probably the most compassionate 
way that he can that a lot of this will be violating, and 
he apologized upfront for the process.   
 There were, like, a lot of swabs that were taken from 
parts of my body where I know that his saliva had been.  
 There was a vaginal exam, and it’s not the kind like 
you go t o the doctor and have one done.  It’s, like, a very 
long time with a man looking at me and taking high def 
pictures of my most personal areas.  It was horrible.  
 
 12 As stated above, the CW’s full response was as follows:  
 
 I was there until 10:00 the next morning.  I had to 
receive prophylactic injections in case that the defendant 
had diseases.  
 I took a pregnancy test.  I was given oral anti -
virals to make sure that I didn’t contract hepatitis or 
HIV, and so for every morning and every night for the next 
30 days, I took a pill that made me extremely sick.  It’s 
better than getting hepatitis, I guess.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 27 physical examination was improperl y admitted by the court.13  
Accordingly, the circuit court and the ICA erred in concluding 
that this testimony was relevant to the credibility of 
statements the CW made during the historical examination.  
  Contrary to the State’s contention that the challen ged 
testimony was relevant to the credibility of the CW’s statements 
to Dr. Lee, the dissenting opinion (
dissent) argues that the 
challenged testimony was probative of the CW’s mental state 
during her interview with Det. Yamamoto the following evening.  
Dissent at 2-3.  This position, which the State has never taken 
during the proceedings of this case, is n ot supported by the 
CW’s own testimony  that explained  why certain statements made to 
Det. Yamamoto were inconsistent with her testimony at trial.  
Additionally, the record does not indicate that the CW ever 
referred to the physical examination during the interview or 
indicated that its effects impacted her ability to appropriately 
                     
 13 It is noted that during the redirect examination of the CW, the 
DPA specifically asked what her state of mind was during her interview with 
Det. Yamamoto so that she could explain to the jury why she may have had 
difficulty with the precise details in her statement.  The reasons given by 
the CW did not relate to the physical examination.  The DPA also specifically 
elicited testimony from the CW explaining why her testimony to the grand jury 
did not contain all the details that she testified to at trial.  The DPA did 
not elicit similar testimony with respect to the CW’s mental state during the 
historical examination.  Even assuming the CW was in an emotional state from 
the incident during the historical examination, this condition would not 
provide a basis for admitting evidence of her emotional reactions to the 
physical examination that subsequently occurred.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 28 respond to the detective’s questions.   The dissent’s contention 
is consequentially unsupported by the record.   
  The dissent also makes the argument that because the 
defense maintained that the CW was not truthful in her account 
of the incident, the State was permitted to elicit the detailed 
testimony regarding the physical examination.  Dissent at 3- 4.  
The ICA similarly concluded that the challenged testimony 
“provided relevant evidence for the jury to infer possible 
reasons for a person to voluntarily undergo the examination.”  
However, the CW’s reasons for undergoing the examination were 
irrelevant to the issues in the case.  The nature of the 
physical examination, its length, the manner in which it was 
conducted, and medication taken afterwards  were likewise not 
relevant to the CW’s  account of the incident.  The ICA’s and 
dissent’s analyses indicate that whenever there is a physical 
examination of a complainant following an allegation of a sexual 
assault, the complainant is permitted to provide a detailed 
explanation of the examination and any subsequent treatment 
received  if the complainant’s version of the events is impeached 
by evidence or is challenged in opening statement or closing 
argument.   Thus, although  the testimony regarding the physical 
examination was not otherwise relevant to the issues at trial, 
the ICA and the dissent would hold that it was admissible to 
prove why the complainant underwent the examination or as a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 29 means to bolster the general credibility of the complainant’s 
allegation.  We do not agree that these reasons are proper bases 
for the admission of the testimony regarding  the physical 
examination in this case.   We reject an approach  that would 
permit the admissibility of the impacts of an alleged offense on 
a complaining witness in order to bolster the witness’ s 
credibility after it has been impeached or attacked.14   
  Additionally, the DPA was erroneously permitted to 
introduce other irrelevant testimony.   The DPA asked the CW, 
“When you look back at this night, . . . is there anything that 
you wish you did diff erently?”  Defense counsel objected on 
relevancy grounds and was again overruled.15  The State has 
                     
 14 The dissent cites cases from other jurisdictions to support its 
contention that the CW in this case could testify to the details of the 
medical examination to bolster her credibility after it had been challenged 
by the defense.  Dissent at 4.  Numerous cases have held otherwise, and the 
general rule is to the contrary.  See Kimberly J. Winbush, Admissibility of 
Victim Impact Evidence in Noncapital State Proceedings, 8 A.L.R. 7th Art. 6 
(2016) (stating that impact evidence is “generally considered irrelevant if 
offered during the guilt phase of a  trial unless relevant to a proper 
purpose, such as to impeach a victim’s credibility or establish an element of 
the crime at issue”).    
  In any event, this court has never held that the complainant or 
another witness may testify about the impact of an alleged offense merely to 
bolster the credibility of a complainant whose credibility has been 
impeached, nor do we endorse this proposition.  
 15 The CW testified as follows:  
 
I have spent two years thinking and pondering of what could 
have happened differently that night for me, and when I 
first started, my regrets were, I reg[r]et wearing a skirt.  
I reg[r]et shaking his hand.  I reg[r]et not being able to 
feel fear and act on  it in a way that would protect me.  
And as I’ve -- as I’ve grown in my progress, in my healing 
-- ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 30 implicitly conceded on appeal that this testimony was 
irrelevant, and there is  no dispute that the testimony was 
improperly admitted into evidence.  Thus, although the ICA 
correctly determined that it was error  to admit the CW’s 
testimony about what she wished she had done differently, the 
ICA erred in holding that the CW’s testimony about the physical 
examination was properly admitted.16   
2. The Error s Were Not Harmless Beyond a  Reasonable Doubt.  
  Once it has been determined that testimony was 
erroneously admitted into evidence, the appellate court must 
consider whether the erroneous admission was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  
State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai ‘i 203, 210, 87 
P.3d 275, 282 (2004) (quoting State v. Gano, 92 Hawai‘i 161, 
176, 988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999)).  Errors must be considered in 
light of the entire proceedings, and if there is a reasonable 
possibility that an error  might have contributed to the 
conviction, then it  is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  
Id.   
  In this case, the CW was erroneously permitted to 
testify about what it was like to undergo the physical 
examination and about what she wished she had done differently.  
                     
 16 The ICA also considered whether the challenged testimony should 
have been excluded under HRE Rule 403 and concluded that its admission did 
not constitute plain error.  While it is unnecessary to address this issue, 
we do not agree with the ICA’s analysis.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 31 This court considered the prejudicial effect of similarly 
irrelevant testimony
 in State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai ‘i 442, 60 
P.3d 843 (2002).   
  In Uyesugi, the defendant was charged for the shooting 
deaths of several individuals.  Id. at 446, 60 P.3d at 847.  The 
prosecution adduced testimony about the victims’ backgrounds  
from family members.  Id. at 448, 60 P.3d at 849 .  On appeal, 
this court stated that the admission of the evidence was likely 
prejudicial to defendant but did not constitute plain error.  
Id. at 460-461, 60 P.3d at 861 -862.  We noted that defense 
counsel objected to only a single question involving the 
evidence and there was no reference to the testimony by the 
prosecutor during closing argument.  Id.  Additionally, the 
overwhelming evidence of guilt led the Uyesugi court to conclu de 
that while the admission of the testimony from family members 
may have been error, it did not affect the defendant’s  
substantial rights and therefore did not rise to the level of 
plain error.  Id. at 462, 60 P.3d at 863.   
  In contrast, defense counsel in this case immediately 
objected to the first improper question as being irrelevant and 
was overruled.  Counsel objected again during the course of the 
CW’s answer and requested a bench co nference .  The objection was 
again overruled , and the CW was permitted to provide an 
extensive answer that detailed the process of the physical ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 32 examination.  The subsequent question, wherein the DPA asked the 
CW if there was “anything that you wish you did  differently?” 
was also immediately objected to and overruled.  Subsequently, 
the DPA referred to the improperly admitted testimony about the 
physical examination and the CW’s regrets during closing and 
rebuttal arguments and specifically asserted that it  bolster ed 
the credibility of the CW’s sexual assault allegation.17  The 
DPA’s use of this evidence as a means to bolster the overall 
credibility of the CW’s allegation was clearly improper and 
highly prejudicial to the defense.   
  The CW’s testimony about the details of the 
“dehumanizing” and “horrible” nature of the physical examination  
she underwent, “taking high def pictures of [her] most personal 
areas,” the injections and medication she was given, and her 
reactions to the medication over the following 
month very likely 
created sympathy for the CW and negative feelings against Lora.  
See HRE Rule 403 cmt. (stating that evidence may be prejudicial 
                     
 17 The DPA recounted the following testimony during closing 
argument: “[The CW] told you about the humiliation that she felt when she 
endured the sexual assault exam, of being stripped of her clothes, being 
photographed like a specimen, being poked and prodded by a strange male she 
had never met before that night.”  The DPA relied on the other erroneously 
admitted testimony as well, arguing that “[the CW]  was completely candid in 
the way that she testified to everything, the things that made her look bad, 
the things that were embarrassing to her, all of her regrets, and the days 
and weeks and months of wishing that she did things differently, that’s the 
self-blame.”  During rebuttal argument, the DPA again relied on the CW’s 
testimony about the physical examination, arguing as follows: “[The CW] still 
went through that sexual assault exam.  She still endured having to take 
medication for weeks.”  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 33 if it engenders juror prejudice, hostility, or sympathy).   The 
CW’s testimony about what she wished she had done differently 
was similarly inclined to provoke sympathy for the CW and 
hostility toward Lora.   
 
 It is clear that the erroneously admitted testimony 
was presented in such a way as to cause the jury to believe it 
was appropriate for their consideration when determining Lora’s 
guilt.  Uyesugi , 100 Hawai ‘i at 46
1-62, 60 P.3d at 862-63.  The 
admission of this testimony, the manner in which it was 
presented by the DPA, and the reliance upon it during closing 
argument all demonstrate that this error was highly prejudicial.  
See id.   
  Turning to the record as a whole, this is  distinctly 
not a case where there is a “wealth of overwhelming and 
compelling evidence tending to show the defendant guilty beyond 
a reasonable doubt.”  State v. Rivera
, 62 Haw. 120, 128 , 612 
P.2d 526, 532 (1980).  As the DPA stated in closing argument, 
the evidence of Lora’s guilt “is the CW,” all the other evidence 
merely supported or undermined her testimony.   The jury’s 
verdict rested on it accepting the CW’s account as true , and the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 34 erroneously admitted testimony was specifically used to bolster 
the credibility of her account .18   
  In cases when a defendant’s conviction turns on a 
jury’s determination as to credibility , the potential for 
prejudice is “particularly evident ” where the error concerned 
the credibility of the testimony of the witness on which the 
case turned; in such circumstances we have held that the error 
is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  
See State v. 
Underwood, 142 Hawai ‘i 317, 329, 418 P.3d 658, 670 (2018) ( “When 
a conviction is largely dependent on a jury’s determination as 
to the credibility of a complainant’s testimony, we have held 
that the evidence of the offense is not so ‘overwhelming’ that 
it renders the prosecutor’s improper statements harml ess beyond 
a reasonable doubt.” ); see also  State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai ‘i 83, 
97, 26 P.3d 572, 586 (2001) (holding that the prosecutor’s 
improper attack on the defendant’s credibility during closing 
argument was not harmless when guilt turned on the credibility 
                     
 18 The dissent acknowledges that the CW’s testimony was central to 
the State’s case, but it contends that the corroborating evidence 
demonstrates the admission of the challenged testimony was harmless.  Dissent 
at 5-7.  However, several portions of the CW’s account of the incident were 
not corroborated by other evidence in the record.  For example, the CW’s 
description at trial of Lora’s use of physical force was inconsistent with 
Dr. Lee’s expert opinion that visible marks would have been left on her body 
from many of the actions she attributed to Lora, which the doctor stated that 
he did not observe and  would have expected to see during the physical 
examination.  The CW’s description of the forceful manner in which she and 
Lora walked from her hotel to the beach was  inconsistent with the testimonies 
of Officer Rivera and Det. Yamamoto as to what the security footage showed.  
There were also additional inconsistencies regarding the clothing worn during 
the incident and the description of the CW’s  shirt being ripped.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 35 of the defendant’s testimony) ; State v. Pitts, 146 Hawai ‘i 120, 
133, 456 P.3d 484, 497 (2019) (holding that error was not 
harmless when evidence of defendant’s guilt was not 
overwhelming).  Additionally, even the presence of some 
corroborating evidence will not militate against a finding of 
harmful error when the case essentially turns on credibility.  
Underwood, 142 
Hawai‘i at 328 –29, 418 P.3d at 669 –70 (“Although 
testimony from other witnesses and physical evidence indicated 
the surrounding circumstances were generally consistent with 
CW’s account of events, only the statements of CW herself 
directly described the actual acts constituting the two 
offenses.”).
   
  Based on the foregoing reasons and our review of the 
record as a whole, we are not left with a firm conviction that 
there is no reasonable possibility the errors might have 
contributed to Lora’s conviction.  Thus, the admission of the 
challenged testimony was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,  
and the conviction must be vacated.19  State v. Nofoa , 135 
Hawai‘i 220, 229, 349 P.3d 327, 336 (2015). 
                     
 19 In light of our ruling as to the challenged testimony, we need 
not consider whether the alleged misconduct by the DPA during opening 
statement, closing argument, and rebuttal closing argument may have also 
contributed to Lora’s conviction.  Additional ly, we also do not decide 
whether the officers’ testimonies about what they saw on the security video 
recording was erroneously admitted or whether the cumulative effect of the 
errors in this case would require that Lora be granted a new trial.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 36 B. The Circuit Court Erred by Effectively Excluding All 
Defendants Convicted of Offenses Involving Violence from 
Sentencing Under HRS § 706-667. 
  HRS §  706-667(1) defines a young adult defendant as a 
person convicted of a crime who, at the time of the offense, is 
less than twenty-two years of age.  Additionally, the defendant 
must not have been previously convicted of a felony as an adult 
or adjudicated as a juvenile for an offense that would have 
constituted a felony had the defendant been an adult.  HRS 
§ 706-667(1).  Defendants that meet this definition may be 
sentenced to a special indeterminate term of imprisonment if the 
sentencing court “is of the opinion that such special term is 
adequate for the young adult defendant ’s correction and 
rehabilitation and will not jeopardize the protection of the 
public.”  HRS § 706- 667(3).  By its plain language, the statute 
is applicable to any offense except the offenses of murder and 
attempted murder.  HRS § 706-667[(4)] (“This section shall not 
apply to the offenses of murder or attempted murder.”); see also  
Int’l Sav. & Loan Ass ’n, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 Hawai i 197, 201, 921 
P.2d 117, 121 (1996) (noting that the inclusion of a specific 
matter in a statute implies the exclusion of another when the 
contrast between the matter expressed and the one not mentioned 
leads to an inference that the latter was not intended to be 
included within the statute).  It is also well  settled that 
“[u]nder the rule of lenity, [a penal] statute must be strictly ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 construed against the government and in favor of the accused.”  
State v. Woodfall, 120 Hawai i 387, 396, 206 P.3d 841, 850 
(2009) (first alteration in original); State v. Kalani , 108 
Hawaii 279, 288, 118 P.3d 1222, 1231 (2005) (quoting State v. 
Shimabukuro, 100 Hawai i 324, 327, 60 P.3d 274, 277 (2002)). 
Lora met HRS § 706-667(1)’s definition of a young 
adult defendant and was not convicted of murder or attempted 
murder.  Accordingly, as the circuit court stated, he was 
eligible to be sentenced to a special term under HRS § 
706-667(3).  The circuit court decided that it would not 
sentence Lora under HRS § 706-667 and stated its reasons for 
doing so on the record, a course we have long “urged and 
strongly recommended” that sentencing courts take.  State v. 
Lau, 73 Haw. 259, 263, 831 P.2d 523, 525 (1992) (noting that 
although the sentencing court is not obligated to state its 
reasons for imposing sentence, it is firmly recommended that it 
do so, particularly when sentencing a young adult defendant).  
Specifically, the court stated that it “divide[s] the world into 
basically two camps[:] . . . . [t]hose people that are violent, 
and those people that aren’t.”  The court thereafter concluded 
that it did not believe a special term was appropriate in Lora’s 
case and denied his request to be sentenced as a young adult 
defendant.  In its review of this decision, the ICA stated that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 38 (continued . . .)  the “circuit court’s division of offenses into ‘two camps’ based 
on the use of violence reflects the circuit court’s 
consideration of the ‘protection of the public’ as required in 
HRS § 706- 667(3).”   
  However, it is clear from HRS §  706-667’s plain 
language that the statute is applicable to any offense except 
murder and attempted murder.  HRS §
 706-667(2)-[(4)].  The 
statute does not distinguish between violent and non-violent 
offenses and, other than the limitation imposed by HRS § 706-
667[(4)], the nature of the offense does not restrict the 
application of the statute.  The relevant considerations set 
forth in HRS § 706
-667(3) are whether a special term will be 
adequate for the young adult defendant’s correction and 
rehabilitation and whether a special term
 would jeopardize the 
protection of the public.  Categorically excluding defendants 
convicted of a crime involving violence from being sentenced as 
a young adult would be contrary to the express provisions of the 
statute and is inconsistent with this court ’s policy of 
interpreting such statutes as being inclusive of a more 
favorable sentencing alternative  in the absence of contrary 
language.20  See State v. Casugay- Badiang, 130 Hawaii 21, 33, 
                     
 20 Although  the ICA concluded that the circuit court’s categorical 
division of offenses simply reflected the court’s consideration of the 
“protection of the public,” the court’s categorical approach precludes an 
individualized assessment of the risk posed to the protection of the public ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39 305 P.3d 437, 449 (2013) (“Therefore, it ap pears that the 
legislature did not intend to exclude [young adult sentencing 
under] HRS § 706 –667 as a sentencing alternative to [the offense  
of methamphetamine trafficking in the second degree]. ”); State  
v.
 Medeiros, 146 Hawai
i 1, 3, 454 P.3d 1069, 1071 (2019)
(“[T]he legislature intended for the benefits of [a 
deferred plea under] HRS Chapter 853 to be broadly 
available to defendants, except where clearly articulated, 
deliberate 
exceptions apply.”); State v. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai i 409, 414, 70 
P.3d 635, 640 (2003) (holding that the court did not exceed its
legal authority in granting the defendant’s motion for a 
deferred no contest plea when the statute did not expressly 
exclude offenses involving “substantial bodily  injury” ). 
In this case, it appears the circui t court denied 
Lora’s request for sentencing as a young adult  by relying  on the 
nature of the offense as a determinative factor.  But  
categorically excluding defendants convicted of offenses  
involving violence would exclude numerous offenses that are not 
excepted from the statute, such as sexual assault offenses 
involving forcible compulsion, robbery involving force, and 
assaults resulting in substantial or serious bodily injury.  The 
(. . . continued)  
from sentencing a particular defendant to a special term, which is what is 
required by HRS § 706-667(3).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 40 (continued . . .)  categorical approach the court used in this case is contrary to 
the plain language of the statute, which excludes only murder 
and attempted murder.  Therefore, by
 deciding whether to 
sentence Lora as a young adult defendant based on whether or not 
the offense involved violence, the court disregarded a principle 
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party 
litigant.  See State v. Klie, 116 Hawai i  519, 525– 26, 174 P.3d 
358, 364–65 (2007) (holding that the district court disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial 
detriment of the defendant by denying defendant’s motion for a 
deferred acceptance of no contest based on erroneous statutory 
interpretation).   
  We need not decide, however, whether the circuit court 
abused its discretion in not sentencing  Lora as a young adult 
defendant because the errors we have already discussed require 
that the conviction be vacated.  See supra Part IV.A .  We 
consider the issue only because we find it necessary to correct 
the ICA’s interpretation of HRS §  706-667 and to  provide 
guidance if the issue should arise again on remand.21  See Omori 
                     
 21 The dissent maintains that the circuit court did not rely on the 
violent nature of the offense in concluding that Lora would not be sentenced 
as a young adult under HRS § 706 -667 because the court made other statements 
related to the circumstances of the case at the sentencing hearing.  Dissent 
at 8-9.  The court’s recitation of other matters that were germane to this 
case at the sentencing hearing does not alter the fact that, in considering 
whether to sentence Lora as young adult, the court explained that it divided 
the world into camps: those who are violent, and those who are not.  Further, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 41 v. Jowa Hawai i Co., 91 Hawaii 146, 981 P.2d 703 (1999) 
(certiorari granted for the sole purpose of clarifying the ICA’s 
interpretation of a statute); see also Sentinel Ins. Co. v. 
First Ins. Co. of Hawai i, 76 Hawai i 277, 297, 875 P.2d 894, 914 
(1994) (“We now address issues that we anticipate will arise on 
remand[.]”). 
V. CONCLUSION  
  Accordingly, the ICA’s October 2, 2019 Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s June 12, 2018 Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence are vacated, and this case is remanded 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
the court’s statements that did not  relate to the violent nature of the 
alleged crime concerned mitigating factors such as Lora’s military service 
and family ties.  The reference to such factors underscores that the court’s 
determination as to the applicability of HRS § 706 -667 turned on its 
categorization of the offense.  The ICA’s express approval of a “division of 
offenses into ‘two camps’ based on the use of violence” is plainly 
inconsistent with HRS §  706-667.  (Emphasis added.)   Kevin A. Lora, pro se, on the 
application, Emmanuel V. Tipon on
the brief 
for petitioner  
 
Stephen K. Tsushima
for respondent  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
