 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________ ---o0o--
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  I. INTRODUCTION 
    
          
        
         
        ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND  PACI FIC  REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-13-0001285 15-JUN-2020 09:41 AM 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI   
-
STATE  OF
  HAWAIʻI,   
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
  
 
vs.  
 
JOSHUA  R.D.  WILLIAMS,  
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.  
SCWC-13-0001285  
 
CERTIORARI   TO  THE  INTERMEDIATE
  COURT  OF  APPEALS  
(CAAP-13-0001285;  CR.  NO.  12-1-0425)  
 
June  15,  2020  
McKENNA,   POLLACK,  AND  WILSON,  JJ.,  
WITH  NAKAYAMA,  J.,  DISSENTING,  IN  WHICH  RECKTENWALD,  C.J.  JOINS  
 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  WILSON,  J.  
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Joshua R.D. Williams 
(“Williams”) was charged with the attempted murder in the second 
degree of David Quindt, Jr. (“Quindt”). 
On certiorari, we conclude the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (“circuit court”) erred by precluding Williams            
 
 2            
              
         
         
          
     
  
        
             
          
 
          
   
         
         
                                                 
          
         
      
          
             
         
         
          
        
       
          
         
         
          
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from testifying to the jury about what he believed Quindt said 
to him that caused him to act in self-defense. By so doing, the 
circuit court prohibited Williams from presenting state of mind 
evidence relevant to his self-defense claim, thus violating his 
due process right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to 
present a complete defense.1 
II. BACKGROUND 
The attempted murder charge arose from an altercation 
between Williams and Quindt on the night of March 12, 2012. The 
primary disputed issue at trial was whether Williams acted in 
self-defense. 
A. Pre-Trial: Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence 404(b) Notice of 
Prior Bad Acts 
Prior to trial, Williams filed a Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 404(b)2 notice of prior bad acts 
1 Our holding makes unnecessary consideration of Williams’ second 
issue, concerning whether Williams waived his initial aggressor claim. 
2 HRE Rule 404(b) provides: 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible 
to prove the character of a person in order to show that he 
acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be 
admissible where such evidence is probative of any other 
fact that is of consequence to the determination of the 
action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, 
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or 
absence of mistake or accident. In criminal cases, the 
proponent of evidence to be offered under this subsection 
shall provide reasonable notice in advance of trial, or 
during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on good 
cause shown, of the date, location, and general nature of 
any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial.            
 
 3           
          
          
            
           
            
    
          
        
            
            
 
        
         
   
           
        
 
      
           
           
          
           
          
            
          
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(“notice”). Williams sought to present to the jury Quindt’s 
statements to him, in which Quindt told Williams about Quindt’s 
violent past. Williams proffered the statements as relevant to 
his claim that he feared for his life during the altercation. 
The notice stated that “[d]uring the 2-3 week time period prior 
to the date of the incident” Quindt would “boast and brag” about 
the following seven acts: 
a. Doing time for the crime of murder in California[;] 
b. That he did hard time in California; 
c. That he knows how to fight because of the time he 
spent in jail and that he had to learn to fight to 
survive; 
d. That he knows about gang-bangers and gang-members; 
e. That he has experience with violence from spending 
time in jail; 
f. That he “got away” with murder by beating the charge 
- because someone else took credit for it; 
g.  That  h e  did  the  crime  but  got  off  on  a  technicality.  
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaiʻi (“St ate”) then 
filed a motion in limine, opposing admission of the evidence. 
In its motion, the State sought to preclude “an allegation that 
[Quindt] has been arrested for murder and was incarcerated on 
murder charges” and “[a]ny and all references to David Quindt as 
being [a] ‘[h]ard criminal’, ‘gang banger’, or any other similar 
references.” The State contended that “[s]uch evidence is . . . 
irrelevant because it does not go to David Quindt’s credibility 
as to the instant offense that Defendant is charged with.”            
 
 4          
        
              
             
            
             
        
           
          
          
            
           
          
   
        
         
            
            
            
           
         
          
                                                 
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
At the hearing on Williams’ notice and the State’s 
motion, defense counsel explained that the statements included 
in the notice “have to do with my client’s state of mind and the 
things that were in his head as a result of statements made by 
Mr. Quindt that caused him to then be concerned for his personal 
safety. So they go directly to his state of mind.”3 
The State objected to Williams testifying that Quindt 
told him Quindt was convicted of murder. The State further 
objected to Williams revealing to the jury that Quindt claimed 
he was subsequently exonerated of murder; according to the State 
such evidence would “create a lot of confusion for the jury[.]” 
The State argued that it would be too prejudicial and too 
confusing to the jury for Williams to present the proffered 
statements. 
The circuit court granted the government’s request and 
thus prevented Williams from offering his chosen testimony to 
the jury. The circuit court ordered Williams not to testify to 
the jury that Quindt would boast and brag about having done time 
for the crime of murder in California; nor could he testify that 
Quindt would boast and brag about having done hard time in 
California; and Williams was precluded from offering in his 
defense his eyewitness testimony that Quindt told him “he knows 
3 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.            
 
 5               
         
        
            
            
          
           
          
          
           
           
            
    
         
               
           
          
     
          
       
        
         
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
how to fight because of the time he spent in jail and that he 
had to learn to fight to survive[.]” 
Instead, the circuit court curtailed the testimony the 
defendant could offer in his own defense. As to statement (a), 
that Quindt would boast and brag about having done time for the 
crime of murder in California, and statement (b), that Quindt 
would boast and brag about having done hard time in California, 
the circuit court concluded that the statements were “one and 
the same.” Thus, the circuit court prohibited Williams from 
telling the jury that Quindt would boast and brag about having 
done time for the crime of murder, and Williams was not 
permitted to explain to the jury that Quindt told him he did 
hard time in California. 
In reference to statement (c), that Quindt “knows how 
to fight because of the time he spent in jail and that he had to 
learn to fight to survive,” the circuit court did not explain 
why it prohibited Williams from informing the jury that Quindt 
learned to fight “to survive.” 
As to statement (d), the circuit court ruled that the 
defense could not reference Quindt’s familiarity with “gang-
bangers and gang-members” because the statement was “too 
general.” The circuit court rejected defense counsel’s position 
that Williams interpreted the term “gangbanger” as “something            
 
  
6             
           
       
        
          
        
           
      
       
          
           
            
        
          
 
          
         
           
          
         
            
             
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
beyond just . . . minor gang activity” but rather as “something 
a little bit more serious and involv[ing] more violence.” 
The circuit court also prevented Williams from 
offering statement (e), that Quindt “has experience with 
violence from spending time in jail.” The circuit court 
concluded without explanation that the statement was “too 
general.” The circuit court did not elaborate as to why 
statement (e) was too general. 
The circuit court also excluded as irrelevant 
statement (f), that Quindt would boast and brag about getting 
away with murder, and statement (g), that Quindt would boast and 
brag that he “got off on a technicality[.]” According to the 
circuit court, exoneration “is irrelevant to violent conduct” 
because the “question is what [Williams] believed this man could 
do.” 
In sum, the circuit court would not permit Williams to 
testify fully about what Quindt told him, which Williams 
contended caused him to fear Quindt and to use violence to 
protect himself. In place of his proffered testimony about 
Quindt’s statements to him, the circuit court ordered Williams 
to testify only that Quindt said he was convicted of murder and 
that “[Quindt] knows how to fight. He learned how to fight in 
jail.”            
 
 7     
          
      
      
          
           
        
      
          
            
            
            
         
             
          
       
       
            
            
            
           
             
          
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
A three-day jury trial commenced on January 17, 2013. 
1. The State’s Case in Chief 
Quindt testified as follows: 
On March 10, 2012, Williams was renting a room from 
Quindt. Williams and his son moved in with Quindt approximately 
three weeks prior to the altercation. 
Before the altercation, Quindt felt “tired,” 
“exhausted,” and “frustrated.” His planned tasks for the day 
were taking up more time than he anticipated. Quindt had been 
working on a tattoo for Williams that took longer than expected. 
Quindt was also scheduled to perform a piercing for a friend of 
Williams following the tattoo appointment. Quindt and Williams 
went to Williams’ friend’s house to do the piercing. On the way 
to Williams’ friend’s house, Quindt picked up Williams’ son and 
dropped him off at Quindt’s home. 
When they arrived at Quindt’s home, Quindt’s 
frustration grew. Quindt waited in the car for two to three 
minutes while Williams took his son into the home. Quindt felt 
frustrated because he was doing a favor for Williams by doing a 
piercing for his friend, and he asked Williams to hurry because 
he wanted to “get home and rest and work on some drawings [for 
tattoos].” Quindt also had previously had back surgery and 
“long, strenuous sitting” hurt his back.            
 
 8          
          
           
          
            
             
             
            
          
       
         
          
           
          
           
          
            
   
         
              
                                                 
            
             
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
When Williams returned to the car, Quindt and Williams 
began arguing about the wait. Williams “got irritated, started 
kind of yelling at [him].” Quindt told Williams, “please don’t 
disrespect me.” As Quindt drove down the street, Williams 
jumped out of the vehicle. Quindt then stopped the vehicle and 
told Williams to get back in the car. Quindt did not push 
Williams to the ground while trying to get him back into the car 
and did not throw him into the car. Williams reentered the 
vehicle to sit in the right passenger backseat, which Quindt 
thought “was a little weird.” 
Once Williams returned to the backseat of the car, 
Quindt became more upset on the drive because Williams began 
talking on his phone to his ex-girlfriend.4 Quindt told Williams 
that he should not be speaking with his ex-girlfriend because 
Williams had a restraining order against her. Quindt had been 
helping Williams with his custody case, and he told Williams, 
“You’re going to mess your case up of getting custody for [your 
son.]” 
Quindt and Williams were yelling and swearing at each 
other. Quindt told Williams to “get the fuck out of my house.” 
4 Quindt testified on cross-examination that he was not sure if 
Williams spoke with his girlfriend or merely told Quindt that he was trying 
to talk to her.            
 
 9            
         
         
             
            
          
           
      
          
            
            
          
    
           
              
           
             
              
         
   
                                                 
             
                
             
                *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Williams said “I’ll get out. You can keep everything that’s 
there, the food, all the stuff, clothes.” 
While driving, Quindt felt Williams hit him on the 
side of his face. At first, Quindt thought he had been punched, 
but then he felt blood running down his neck.5 Williams had 
struck Quindt with a knife. Quindt then “started fighting, 
gassing the car, hitting the brake, gassing the car, trying to 
throw [Williams] off balance.” 
Quindt continued to drive the car until he reached the 
Waianae Mall parking lot. Quindt then put the vehicle in park, 
jumped out, and ran in front of it into the headlights. 
Williams was on his phone, and Quindt overheard Williams calling 
his mother. 
Quindt then attempted to call 911 to get help to take 
him to the hospital, but when he tried to dial 911, the blood on 
the telephone’s screen prevented him from doing so. Quindt went 
to the car and told Williams, “[I]f I die, you’re going to get 
in more trouble. I need you to take me to the hospital.” 
Williams then drove Quindt to Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health 
Center. 
5 Quindt testified that his injuries were: a stab wound through his 
nose and out through his top lip, a 3-4 inch laceration on his left arm, a 
laceration extending from the right side of his face down to his Adam’s 
apple, and cuts on his fingers and on his chest from fighting with Williams.            
 
 10          
           
              
           
             
     
         
             
            
            
       
           
          
          
          
   
       
         
           
           
        
             
         
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Quindt told Williams “don’t worry, I won’t get you 
into trouble” because he was “afraid for [his] life.” Quindt 
never told Williams to get rid of the knife or to make up a 
story of being attacked. After arriving at the health center, 
Williams said he was going to get rid of the knife and ran 
toward the ocean. 
Before Williams struck him, Quindt did not threaten to 
kill or hurt Williams. On the day of the incident, Quindt was 
carrying a folded knife in his back pants pocket. Quindt did 
not take out his knife or threaten Williams with it. 
Quindt never directly mentioned to Williams that 
Quindt had been convicted of a murder. According to Quindt, 
Williams may have overheard him discussing the conviction with a 
member of the Hawaiʻi Innocence  Project. Quindt explained that, 
although he had been convicted of murder, he was later 
exonerated. 
During cross-examination,
 the circuit court gave a 
limiting instruction to the jury concerning the statements the 
court admitted from Williams’ notice of prior bad acts. The 
circuit court explained to the jury that it could only use 
evidence concerning Quindt’s murder conviction and his learning 
how to fight in jail to evaluate Williams’ state of mind. On 
cross-examination, Quindt denied that he spoke to Williams about 
the murder conviction. But, after his memory was refreshed by a            
 
 11           
            
       
         
        
             
           
        
        
           
          
            
           
       
        
           
           
          
         
         
            
     
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
transcript of what he previously told a detective, Quindt agreed 
that he was “up front” with Williams about his criminal history. 
After Quindt’s testimony, the State also introduced 
testimony by Ernest Robello, a detective with the Honolulu 
Police Department. Detective Robello testified that Williams 
initially told him that he and Quindt went to a beach park and 
had a confrontation with three unknown men, one of whom stabbed 
Quindt. After Detective Robello confronted Williams about 
discrepancies in his statement, Williams explained that Quindt 
suggested that they come up with a story and admitted to 
striking Quindt. Initially, Williams claimed he threw the knife 
in the ocean and it was not recoverable, but later stated that 
he hid the knife near Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center. 
Detective Robello testified that Williams stated he 
struck Quindt “in self-defense.” Williams told Detective 
Robello that “he thought that Mr. Quindt was reaching for his 
back pocket,” and that he knew Quindt “normally carries a knife 
in that pocket.” Detective Robello explained that he asked 
Williams whether striking Quindt was “kind of a preemptive 
strike” and whether Williams “stabbed [Quindt] with the intent 
to kill him before he could kill you.” Williams answered “yes” 
to both questions. 
Detective Robello also testified that Williams shared 
with him some of Quindt’s criminal history . According to            
 
 12          
           
             
            
    
         
         
           
          
             
           
             
             
            
         
          
            
          
            
             
             
         
             
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Detective Robello, Williams stated that “the night before the 
stabbing, during an argument between the two of them, he said 
that Mr. Quindt had said that he had been incarcerated. He had 
killed somebody in the past and gotten away with it.” 
2. The Defense’s Case 
Williams testified in his own defense at trial in 
compliance with the restrictions placed upon his testimony by 
the trial judge. He explained that his relationship with Quindt 
was adversarial, with Quindt being the “[a]lpha male.” Williams 
said that he did not spend much time with Quindt but when he 
did, they “would kind of butt heads.” Williams elaborated that 
Quindt “would tell me things to do, and if I did them a 
different way, he would, I guess, bash me down on it.” Williams 
testified that when Quindt and he got into a “few arguments”, he 
would “scare” Williams because Quindt was “really jumpy.” 
According to Williams, Quindt “lost his temper very easily” and 
“[w]hen he’d lose his temper, he would want to fight.” Williams 
stated, “I don’t really like confrontation that much myself, and 
I’m usually the type to just walk away from things.” Quindt, 
however, was “more the type to instigate a fight and push for a 
fight.” Williams said that a few times “it came very close to 
an actual altercation” but “[t]here was never actually physical 
blows thrown.” By the 17th or 18th day of living with Quindt, 
he was getting “second thoughts” and was “getting scared.”            
 
 13         
            
          
        
            
                 
          
          
             
             
                
         
          
           
           
          
          
          
        
           
            
           
          
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Williams testified that he also feared Quindt because, 
in the past, Quindt on several occasions had “nonchalantly . . . 
bragg[ed] about an alleged attempted murder that he committed.” 
According to Williams, Quindt “directly [spoke to Williams] 
about the murder charge. He bragged about it multiple times. . 
. . In my eyes, I just -- I was frightened by it really in the 
long run.” Williams testified that this knowledge affected his 
state of mind: “Anytime an altercation would happen, anytime 
that he would lose his temper, it was the first thing in my 
mind, was that that had happened and that he bragged about it. 
So it was, I guess, a touchy subject or it -- it alarmed me.” 
Williams testified that, on the date of the incident, 
he attempted to avoid a confrontation with Quindt when they 
began arguing in the car. Williams explained that when he 
returned to Quindt’s car after settling his son in for the 
night, he noticed that Quindt was “really upset.” Williams 
stated that Quindt “started yelling at [him] asking what took 
[him] so fucking long” and Quindt exclaimed that Williams “was 
disrespectful for never appreciating his suggestions and just 
cursing at [him] and yelling at [him].” Williams explained that 
he does not like confrontation, and that when he is being yelled 
at or called names, his coping mechanism is to pull “[himself] 
from that situation, turn [his] back, walk away, whatever, just 
to get away from the situation. Some people count to 10. [He]            
 
 14            
            
    
        
            
            
           
            
              
             
              
          
             
            
             
           
          
            
         
             
          
         
            
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
walk[s] away.” In an effort to avoid the confrontation with 
Quindt, Williams jumped out of the car as Quindt slowed to a 
stop sign. 
After jumping out of Quindt’s car, Williams claimed 
“next thing I know, I’m on the ground, and [Quindt] had came 
[sic] up from behind me and pushed me about shoulder length with 
both hands onto the pavement.” Williams said that Quindt was 
yelling at him again, “fuck this shit, let’s do it, you know, 
it’s time to fight. Do you think I’m afraid of you?” Williams 
said that Quindt also yelled, “you think I’m afraid of you? I 
learned how to fight in jail I’m not afraid of you. Let’s do 
this, let’s throw.” According to Williams, Quindt was “getting 
in a fight stance.” Williams told Quindt he did not want to 
fight, turned his back to Quindt, and started to walk away. 
Quindt came up behind Williams and said “if you don’t get in the 
truck, I’ll make you get in the fucking truck,” then pushed 
Williams toward the car. Quindt pushed Williams into the 
backseat of the car. After Williams was in the car, Williams 
stated that Quindt drove “erratically.” During this time, 
Quindt told him “I’ve done nothing but try to help you out, why 
have you been so disrespectful?” Williams described Quindt as 
“screaming at me, flustered face, really expressive, and just 
kind of overall scary.” Williams said that his voice may have 
risen but that he was trying to “calm the situation down.”            
 
 15          
            
            
              
              
             
          
           
            
              
          
            
           
           
   
           
          
              
              
             
            
 
 
        
            
              
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Williams testified that he attempted to jump out of 
the car again, but the child safety locks were engaged and he 
could not open the doors or the windows. Williams stated that 
“[a]s I’m doing this, I look up and [Quindt is] looking at me in 
the rear-view mirror, and he kind of smiles at me. The only way 
I can explain it would be like a sardonic smile, like ha-ha, I 
got you, you know, you’re not getting anywhere.” Williams 
explained at this point he was thinking “holy shit, I’m trapped, 
I’m stuck in this guy’s truck. He’s murdered before. He’s 
yelling at me, screaming at me. What am I going to do?” 
Williams testified that at one point during the drive, Quindt 
looked at Williams and said, “when I stop this truck, I’m going 
to fucking kill you.” Williams explained that after Quindt made 
this statement, he was afraid based on his knowledge that Quindt 
had murdered before: 
The main thing that kept going through my mind was that 
[Quindt] brags about killing people, and I didn’t know if 
he was for real about it. I didn’t know if he was joking 
about it. I didn’t know if he would actually kill me. I 
didn’t know anything at that point. I was scared. I was 
petrified. In my mind, I really thought I was going to 
die. 
Williams testified that, after Quindt made the threatening 
statement, Quindt turned down a dark road and “he says I’m going 
to kill you, and he goes like this, like he nods, like he was 
assuring himself or something.”            
 
 16               
           
              
           
            
           
            
   
 
       
             
           
              
           
           
           
           
             
             
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fearing  that  his  life  was  in  danger,  Williams  
testified  that  he  then  decided  to  strike  Quindt:   “I  was  scared,   
and  I  stabbed  him.   I  -- I  took  the  knife  out  of  my  pocket,  and  
I  stabbed  him.   I  didn’t  aim.   I  didn’t  try  to  hit  a  certain  
area.   I  just  went  around  the  seat  of  the  truck,  and  I  stabbed.”    
Williams  explained  that  when  he  decided  to  use  the  knife  to  
strike  Quindt,  he  was  “petrified”  because  he  thought  Quindt  
would  kill  him:  
I was petrified. I had never been so scared. I -- there 
wasn’t really much time from when he threatened me to we’re 
in a dark street now and he’s -- he’s going to kill me. 
There was -- besides terror, I don’t think I was thinking 
anything besides I can’t let him stop this truck. It’s my 
only possibility -- he said when he stops this truck, he’s 
going to fucking kill me, and I can’t let him stop the 
truck. 
After the altercation, Williams panicked because he 
had just struck his friend, and he feared for his life as well 
as Quindt’s. Quindt pulled into the Waianae Mall parking lot 
and both men left the car. Williams got out of the car by 
pressing the button by the driver’s seat that rolled down the 
back passenger window, then opened the door from the outside. 
Williams testified that he put the truck between him and Quindt 
as a “barrier,” then threw up. Williams described his feelings 
as “distraught” and that he had “just stabbed my friend. I was 
very scared for his life, for mine.” He then called his mother, 
and he told her that Quindt was hurt, that Quindt and Williams            
 
 17              
   
         
          
            
            
            
           
        
   
        
              
           
         
           
           
                
             
           
         
                                                 
             
                
               
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
were going to the hospital, and he asked her to come to the 
hospital.6 
Despite his panic, Williams sought to aid Quindt. 
Williams saw that Quindt was “bleeding really badly from his 
neck” and testified that he took off his shirt and “wrapped it 
around [Quindt’s] neck and told him to put pressure on it.” 
According to Williams, he told Quindt that he needed to go to 
the hospital. Williams testified that he then drove Quindt to 
the Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center while “crying 
hysterically.” 
Williams explained he initially lied to police because 
Quindt had told him to do so. Williams stated that, on the way 
to the health center, Quindt told him “don’t tell the police 
what happened, don’t worry, dude, don’t worry, nothing’s going 
to happen, don’t tell the police.” According to Williams, after 
arriving at the health center, Quindt told him “get the knife 
and go get rid of it and come back up here and get cleaned up . 
. . and get ready for the police. Don’t tell them what 
happened[.]” Williams hid the knife and returned to the health 
center where he met with police officers. 
6 Williams’ mother testified that, when she picked up the call from 
Williams, “he just kept saying mom and -- and I -- I’m -- I’m scared, I’m 
scared. He was very hysterical. I had a very hard time understanding what 
he was saying.”            
 
 18         
            
          
          
             
            
       
        
           
          
       
            
              
             
          
              
            
            
               
          
 
    . . . . 
 
           
               
            
             
      
 
   
         
           
      
           
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross examination, the State asked Williams about 
his intent when he struck Quindt. Williams agreed that he told 
Detective Robello that he had “stabbed [Quindt] with the intent 
to kill him before [Quindt] could kill [Williams].” Williams 
explained that he felt that way “[a]t the time that I gave that 
statement.” He also testified that he had seen a weapon on 
Quindt earlier in the evening. 
On redirect, Williams described in more detail his 
state of mind at the time of the altercation. Williams 
explained that he thought that he needed to attack Quindt 
because he thought Quindt would kill him: 
I was thinking I need to do something to prevent him from 
killing me, like he threatened to do to me. He said he was 
going to kill me. I didn’t think of killing him. I 
thought of maiming him. I thought of just incapacitating 
him so he couldn’t try to kill me. I was locked in the 
back of his truck. I didn’t want to give him the 
opportunity to open my door and have an advantage over me. 
I -- I didn’t want to kill him. I don’t know why I said 
that, but I didn’t want to kill him. 
The only thought I can really remember was live, that I 
have to live. I have a son that I love dearly, and I was 
scared. The only thing I could think of was do something 
first. He said he would kill me when he stopped the truck, 
don’t let him stop the truck. 
3. Jury Instructions 
The circuit court instructed the jury on self-defense. 
The circuit court instructed the jury on the justified use of 
deadly force in self-defense as follows: 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another person is 
justified if the defendant reasonably believes that deadly 
force is immediately necessary to protect himself on the            
 
 19          
         
        
          
        
         
          
 
    
         
          
        
     
       
          
         
        
           
         
          
        
          
         
    
      
       
          
         
        
        
       
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
present occasion against death or serious bodily injury. 
The reasonableness of the defendant’s belief that the use 
of protective deadly force was immediately necessary shall 
be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in 
the defendant’s position under the circumstances of which 
the defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably 
believed them to be when the deadly force was used. 
4. Verdict and Sentencing 
The jury found Williams guilty as charged. The 
circuit court sentenced Williams to imprisonment for a term of 
life with the possibility of parole. 
C. Intermediate Court of Appeals 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed 
Williams’ conviction. The ICA held the limitations imposed on 
Williams’ proffered statements by the circuit court “did not 
materially impair Williams’ claim of self-defense.” According 
to the ICA, the evidence permitted by the circuit court was 
equivalent to Williams’ proffered statements. Because the ICA 
considered the evidence admitted by the circuit court to be 
equivalent to Williams’ excluded proffered statements, the ICA 
determined that any error in the court’s limitations “did not 
materially impair his claim of self-defense and was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
D. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
Williams raises the following issues on appeal: 
Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the circuit 
court did not err in limiting and/or excluding the 
proffered evidence under (HRE) 404(a)(2) and 404(b) because 
under its rationale (1) the proffered HRE 404(a)(2) 
evidence was not probative because it constituted 
unsubstantiated hearsay; (2) and error in limiting and/or            
 
 20        
      
       
         
 
    
 [D]ifferent  standards  of  review  must  be  applied  to  
trial  court  decisions  regarding  the  admissibility  of  
evidence,  depending  on  the  requirements  of  the  particular  
rule  of  evidence  at  issue.   When  application  of  a  
particular  evidentiary  rule  can  yield  only  one  correct  
result,  the  proper  standard  for  appellate  review  is  the  
right/wrong  standard.   However,  the  traditional  abuse  of  
discretion  standard  should  be  applied  in  the  case  of  those  
rules  of  evidence  that  require  a  “judgment  call”  on  the  
part  of  the  trial  court.  
 
         
           
           
         
          
 
 
State  v.  Richie,  88  Hawaiʻi  19,  37,  960  P.2d  1227,  1245  (1998)  
(internal  quotation  marks,  citations,  and  footnotes  omitted).   
“The  trial  court  abuses  its  discretion  when  it  clearly  exceeds  
the  bounds  of  reason  or  disregards  rules  or  principles  of  law  or 
practice  to  the  substantial  detriment  of  a  party  litigant.”   
Samson  v.  Nahulu,  136  Hawaiʻi  415,  425,  363  P.3d  263,  273  (2015) 
(internal  quotation  marks  and  citations  omitted).   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
excluding any of the proffered evidence constituted 
harmless error because substantively equivalent evidence 
was introduced that satisfied Williams’s HRE 404(b) 
request; and (3) Williams waived the HRE 404(a)(2) issue. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
In  State  v.  West,   95  Hawaiʻi   452,  456-57,   24  P.3d  648,  
652-53  (2001),  this  court  stated:  
(Quoting  
Kealoha  v.  Cty.  of  Hawaii,  74  Haw.  308,  319-20,  844  
P.2d  670,  676  (1993)).   Rulings  made  pursuant  to  HRE  Rule  404  
require  a  “judgment  call”  and  we  therefore  apply  the  abuse  of  
discretion  standard:  
Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 403, which require 
a “judgment call” on the part of the trial court, are 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion. HRE 404 represents a 
particularized application of the principle of HRE 403, and 
we will employ the same abuse of discretion standard of 
review.            
 
 21   
          
    
 
 A  person   charged  with  a  crime  has  a  fundamental  right  
to  present  a  defense;  the  right  to  defend  oneself  has  been  
deemed  fundamental  to  a  fair  trial  under  the  Fourteenth  
Amendment  to  the  United  States  Constitution  and  under  article  I,  
section  5  of  the  Hawaiʻi   Constitut ion.   Chambers  v.  Mississippi,  
410  U.S.  284,  302  (1973)  (holding  that  the  exclusion  of  evidence   
critical  to  the  defense  and  the  denial  of  an  opportunity  to  
cross-examine  a  witness  denied  the  defendant  a  trial  “in  accord  
with  traditional  and  fundamental  standards  of  due  process”  and  
stating  that  “[f]ew  rights  are  more  fundamental  than  that  of  an  
accused  to  present  witnesses  in  his  own  defense”);  State  v.  
Matafeo,  71  Haw.  183,  185,  787  P.2d  671,  672  (1990)  (“The  due  
process  guarantee  of  the  Federal  and  Hawaii  constitutions  serves  
to  protect  the  right  of  an  accused  in  a  criminal  case  to  a  
fundamentally  fair  trial”).    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. A defendant has a constitutional due process right to 
present a complete defense. 
Central  to  the   protection  afforded  by  due  process  “is  the  
right  to  be  accorded  ‘a  meaningful  opportunity  to  present  a  
complete  defense.’”  (emphasis  added,  citation  omitted)  (quoting  
California  v.  Trombetta,  467  U.S.  479,  485  (1984)).   It  is  “a  
right  to  [a]  day  in  court,”  and  “include[s],  as  a  minimum,  a  
right  . . .  to  offer  testimony[.]”   Rock  v.  Arkansas,  483  U.S.                                                              
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
           
            
         
            
              
           
             
           
            
         
           
        
           
            
             
         
        
            
        
 
  
    (continued . . .)  In  evaluating  the  weight  and  credibility  of  a  witness’s  
testimony,  you  may  consider  the  witness’s  appearance  and  
demeanor;  the  witness’s  manner  of  testifying;  the  witness’s  
intelligence;  the  witness’s  candor  or  frankness  or  lack  thereof;  
the  witness’s  interest,  if  any,  in  the  result  of  this  case;  the  44, 51 (1987) (quoting In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257, 273 (1948)); 
see State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 259, 492 P.2d 657, 660 
(1971). Logically, the accused’s right to call witnesses 
includes “a right to testify himself, should he decide it is in 
his favor to do so. In fact, the most important witness for the 
defense in many criminal cases is the defendant himself.” Rock, 
483 U.S. at 52. The right to “call[ ] witnesses is incomplete 
if [the defendant] may not present himself [or herself] as a 
witness.” Id.; see State v. Loher, 140 Hawaiʻi 205 , 216, 398  
P.2d 794, 805 (2017) (holding that restricting a defendant’s 
decision whether to take the stand to assert a defense would 
violate various state and federal constitutional guarantees). 
Thus, a defendant’s right to present his version of the events 
in his own words is “basic in our system of jurisprudence[.]” 
In re Oliver
, 333 U.S. at 273. A defendant who chooses to 
testify gives the jury an opportunity to consider the 
defendant’s credibility based on the defendant’s manner and 
demeanor.7 See State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai‘i 271,  302, 260  P.3d 
350, 381 (2011) (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring).8 
7  With  regard  to  the  credibility  of  witness  testimony,  the  jury  in  
this  case  was  instructed  as  follows:  
22            
 
 23         
         
        
        
          
          
            
          
         
           
            
            
                                                                                                                                                             
    
 
          
            
       
          
         
         
           
          
 
             
            
         
 
        
        
         
          
       
 
               
           
           
           
           
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. The circuit court erroneously prohibited Williams from 
presenting evidence relevant to his state of mind and 
therefore violated his constitutional right to due process. 
The circuit court prevented Williams from offering his 
own version of facts relevant to his self-defense claim, which 
violated his constitutional right to present a complete defense. 
Williams was unable to testify that his fear for his life arose 
from Quindt’s statements to him that: Quindt knows about gang-
bangers and gang-members; he has experience with violence from 
spending time in jail; Quindt got away with murder by “beating 
the charge” because someone else took credit for it; and he did 
the crime but got off on a technicality. Williams was also 
(. . . continued) 
witness’s relation, if any, to a party; the witness’s temper, 
feeling, or bias, if any has been shown; the witness’s means and 
opportunity of acquiring information; the probability or 
improbability of the witness’s testimony; the extent to which the 
witness is supported or contradicted by other evidence; the 
extent to which the witness has made contradictory statements, 
whether in trial or at other times; and all other circumstances 
surrounding the witness and bearing upon his or her credibility. 
8 If a court seeks to exclude relevant evidence it must find the 
probative nature of the evidence to be substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice or another listed factor: 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading 
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of 
time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. 
HRE Rule 403. The circuit court failed to apply HRE Rule 403 to its 
exclusion of Quindt’s testimony. Thus, the probative value of the 
constitutionally significant testimony of Williams as to his state of mind 
was ruled inadmissible by the circuit court without weighing its probative 
value against any prejudice to the government arising from admission of 
Quindt’s statements as they were made to Williams.                                                            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
          
             
   
      
        
             
            
              
       
             
        
              
         
         
          
 
           
            
             
 
               
            
                 
           
           
           
              
              
    
             
            
              
 
     (continued . . .) precluded from testifying to the jury that Quindt told him that 
Quindt did hard time in California and had to learn to fight to 
survive. 
Williams sought to introduce Quindt’s proffered 
statements as state-of-mind evidence evincing fear Quindt would 
take his life. In so doing, Williams sought to justify his use 
of deadly force in his own defense.9 Williams’ state of mind 
when he struck Quindt was an essential element of his defense.10 
The circuit court’s curtailment of the defendant’s 
testimony as to his state of mind at the time he committed the 
offense bespeaks a misapprehension of the discretion available 
to the court. It is for the jury to evaluate the strength of 
the defendant’s claim of self-defense with full opportunity to 
observe a defendant’s complete presentation of the evidence that 
allegedly caused the accused to act in self-defense.11 
9 Williams sought to introduce evidence of Quindt’s statements as 
evidence of “another fact that is of consequence[,]” HRE Rule 404(b), namely, 
as evidence that he reasonably feared for his life when he acted in self-
defense. 
10 The use of deadly force in self-defense “is justifiable . . . if 
the actor believes that deadly force is necessary to protect himself against 
death [or] serious bodily injury . . . .” HRS § 703-304. “In evaluating the 
reasonableness of a defendant’s belief that deadly force was necessary for 
self-protection, the evidence must be assessed from the standpoint of a 
reasonable person in the defendant’s position under the circumstances as the 
defendant subjectively believed them to be at the time he or she tried to 
defend himself or herself.” State v. Lubong, 77 Hawaiʻi 429, 433, 886 P.2d 
766, 770 (App. 1994). 
11 The Dissent usurps the role of the jury by evaluating how the 
jury would weigh and reject Williams’ testimony. The Dissent concludes that 
the jury would not have found Williams credible even if he were permitted to 
24                                                                                                                                                              
    
 (. . . continued)            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
          
         
            
         
           
         
        
       
       
 
              
             
             
            
            
 
          
           
           
           
         
          
    
 
    
  
           
          
              
               
          
             
          
            
           
              
             
 
     (continued . . .) 
25 To that end, the details of the proffered statements 
of Quindt to Williams excluded by the circuit court convey 
additional support for Williams’ self-defense that is absent in 
the altered version devised by the court. Learning to fight “to 
survive” has a different implication from simply learning to 
fight in jail. By removing the phrase “to survive” from 
Williams’ proffered statement, the circuit court filtered out a 
key characterization of Quindt’s statement to Williams that 
supported Williams’ apprehension that Quindt would willingly 
engage in a brutal fight.12 
pu
rsue his strategic choice as to how to testify. Under this view, the jury 
would not have believed his claim to have been frightened when Quindt told 
him he learned to “fight to survive”; instead, the jury would have found 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Williams believed Quindt was less likely to 
use force because Quindt would only attack if he were attacked first: 
Put differently, the testimony that Quindt told Williams he had 
to learn to fight to survive implies that Williams knew Quindt 
would fight back to protect himself if attacked by another, not 
that Williams should fear Quindt would attack him first. The 
circuit court therefore ruled within its discretion when it 
excluded this language based on its conclusion that the language 
would confuse the jury. 
Dissent at 13-14. 
12 The Dissent concludes that a statement made by defense counsel 
during opening statement was an adequate substitute for Williams offering 
such testimony at trial. Id. at 13. In her opening statement, Williams’ 
counsel told the jury that Quindt told Williams he had to learn to fight to 
survive. Respectfully, the Dissent’s proposition connotes that evidence can 
be introduced during an opening statement . . . and condones reference to 
evidence during closing argument that is excluded from introduction during 
the evidentiary phase of the trial. The straightforward impropriety of a 
court requiring, encouraging, or causing the defendant to rely upon the 
opening statement to introduce evidence to the jury is settled. Cf. State v. 
Nofoa, 135 Hawaiʻi 220, 227-30, 349 P.3d 327, 334-37 (2015) (holding that it            
 
 26         
           
          
      
           
           
          
          
          
        
         
         
           
          
          
       
          
         
                                                                                                                                                             
    
 
             
             
            
         
            
            
              
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In addition, the single statement selected by the 
circuit court that “[Quindt] knew how to fight and learned how 
to fight in jail” conveys a different, truncated message than 
the multiple excluded statements constituting Williams’ 
proffered testimony: Quindt learned how to fight to survive “in 
jail”; Quindt did “time for the crime of murder in California”; 
Quindt “did hard time in California”; and Quindt “has experience 
with violence from spending time in jail.” The multiple 
statements of Quindt to Williams excluded by the circuit court 
are relevant to Williams’ apparent belief regarding Quindt’s 
fixation on intimidating Williams with his alarming past; the 
exclusion of the statements also deprived Williams of the 
opportunity to have the jury judge his credibility to expound on 
the multiple conversations he contended caused him to fear for 
his life at the time he used force against Quindt. 
In addition to curtailing Williams’ testimony, the 
circuit court wholly excluded the statement made by Quindt to 
Williams that he knew about gang-bangers and gang-members. 
(. . . continued) 
was error for the court to instruct the prosecutor that evidence could be 
offered to the jury during the state’s rebuttal argument). Here, the trial 
court not only relegated the defense to a strategy legally impossible to 
achieve—namely, the admission of evidence during opening statement—the court 
thereafter instructed the jury to disregard the evidence. The jury was 
instructed that “[s]tatements or arguments made by lawyers are not evidence. 
You should consider their arguments to you, but you are not bound by their 
memory or interpretation of the evidence.”            
 
 27            
        
           
           
            
            
            
           
        
           
          
         
       
        
   
        
        
         
          
                                                 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
According to the circuit court, it would be unclear to a 
factfinder what Williams meant by the term “gangbangers” 
because, for example, a gang member is not necessarily a violent 
person. Again, the purpose of the evidence was misperceived by 
the circuit court. Williams did not seek to communicate to the 
jury the meaning of “gangbangers.” He sought to explain to the 
jury what gangbangers meant to him when the term was used by 
Quindt. As defense counsel explained in response to the court’s 
characterization of the term gangbanger, “when [Williams] hears 
that term, he thinks it’s something beyond just, you know minor 
gang activity, and it involves something a little bit more 
serious and involves more violence.” The evidence describing 
Quindt’s bragging about knowing “gangbangers” could have 
provided a specific, probative example of Quindt’s alleged 
proclivity towards violence.13 
The circuit court also reached the conclusion that 
Williams’ testimony that Quindt bragged about killing with 
impunity and escaping accountability due to a “technicality” was 
irrelevant. The circuit court appears to have concluded that 
13   Contrary  to   the  circuit  court’s  understanding  of  the  term,  
“gangbanger”  can  connote  a  particularly  violent  subset  of  gang  membership.   
The  Oxford  English  Dictionary  defines  a  gangbanger  as:   “A  member  of  a  
criminal  or  street  gang,  esp.  one  who  engages  in  gang  violence;  a  gangster.”  
Gangbanger,  Oxford  English  Dictionary  (Jan.  18,  2018),  
http://www.oed.com.proxy.seattleu.edu/view/Entry/370323?redirectedFrom=gangba
nger#eid/  (emphasis  added).              
 
 28           
         
            
          
         
         
       
           
          
          
         
           
           
         
          
         
          
        
           
                                                 
           
             
             
             
         
              
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
since Williams was able to testify that Quindt bragged about 
killing people and about committing an alleged attempted murder, 
it would not be reasonable to assume the jury’s verdict might be 
affected by the excluded testimony. If so, the conclusion 
depreciated the probative value of the excluded facts to 
Williams’ claim of life-threatening fear. As a defendant 
accused of attempted murder, claiming self-defense, Williams’ 
defense was not complete without being able to inform the jury 
through his testimony that the complainant told him he murdered 
and got away with it due to a technicality. 
Indeed, the State introduced evidence to the jury that 
Quindt did not commit murder, telling the jury that Quindt was 
exonerated of murder. In so doing, the probative value of 
Williams’ testimony that Quindt bragged about getting away with 
murder based on a technicality was heightened.14 The probative 
value of Williams’ testimony significantly increased. Left with 
the knowledge that Quindt was exonerated of murder, the jury 
might reasonably have concluded that Williams falsely testified 
when he claimed that Quindt bragged about killing people. 
14 Quindt’s statement, that he escaped accountability for a murder 
due to a technicality, is manifestly relevant pursuant to HRE 401 because it 
makes it “more probable” that Williams acted in self-defense. HRS § 626-1, 
Rule 401. Pursuant to HRE Rule 403, the probative value of Quindt’s 
statement “substantially outweighed” the unlikely possibility that it would 
cause confusion of the issues or mislead the jury. HRS § 626-1, Rule 403.                                                             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
          
         
        
          
         
       
            
           
             
         
          
            
         
              
            
             
          
              
      
 
      
        
        
           
            
          
           
 
   
 
           
             
             
          
 
     (continued . . .) However, with the additional evidence omitted by the 
circuit court that Quindt claimed to have killed people and 
escaped accountability based on a technicality, the jury might 
have reasonably believed that Williams thought Quindt believed 
he could kill Williams and escape accountability. Moreover, the 
testimony of Quindt was corroborative of evidence elicited from 
him through cross-examination that it was Quindt—not Williams— 
who had murderous intent. Quindt conceded he was in an angry 
mood, that he carried a knife that evening, that Williams jumped 
from the car and was ordered back in the car by Quindt,15 that 
Williams called his mother immediately after Quindt was injured, 
and that Williams took him to the Waianae Coast Comprehensive 
Health Center to receive treatment for his injury.16 
15 The Dissent fails to acknowledge evidence supporting Williams’ 
claim that he feared Quindt would drive him to an isolated location and kill 
him. Instead, having reviewed all the evidence Williams was permitted to 
present at trial, the Dissent finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the jury 
would conclude Williams’ defense amounted to the incredible proposition he 
was afraid Quindt would try to kill him as Quindt was driving and Williams 
was seated in the back seat: 
Moreover, despite Williams’s extensive self-defense 
testimony, certain undisputed facts call into question Williams’s 
credibility and render harmless the exclusion of further 
testimony. First, Quindt was driving his vehicle in the driver’s 
seat when Williams attacked him from the back seat. It is 
difficult to imagine a scenario where Quindt could have reached 
into the back seat, while driving, and killed Williams. 
Dissent at 21. 
16 The Dissent concludes that the trial strategy of defense counsel 
and the defendant as to the content of defendant’s state of mind testimony 
supporting his self-defense claim is subject to alteration by the court. Id. 
at 13-14. Respectfully, no precedent identifies a consideration sufficient 
29            
 
 30                                                                                                                                                              
    
 
                
             
           
            
          
              
           
             
         
          
             
          
               
           
            
            
            
          
          
           
              
              
               
              
           
 
            
          
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The  significance  of  the  defendant’s  right  to  speak  
directly  to  his  peers  about  the  exact  allegedly  life-threatening   
words  spoken  to  him  by  the  complaining  witness  is  ignored  by  the  
Dissent  in  its  conclusion—beyond  a  reasonable  doubt—that  police  
officer  testimony  is  a  constitutionally  available  substitute  for  
the  testimony  of  the  defendant.   The  Dissent   adopts  the  
proposition
  that  Detective  Robello’s  rendition  of  what  Williams  
told  Quindt  is  a  legitimate  substitute  for  Williams’  testimony;  
the  testimony  of  a  prosecution  witness  is  deemed  a  substitute  
for  Williams’  right  to  offer  the  same  testimony  directly  to  the  17 
(. . . continued) 
to outweigh the right of the defendant to testify as to what was said to him 
by the complaining witness that caused the defendant to act in self-defense. 
Indeed, the United States Supreme Court rejected the proposition that the 
court had discretion to edit a defendant’s testimony in support of her self-
defense claim notwithstanding that the testimony was hypnotically refreshed. 
Rock, 483 U.S. at 60. Per a statute prohibiting the use of posthypnosis 
testimony, the Supreme Court of Arkansas crafted testimony for the defendant 
permitting only her recollection of the events prior to her hypnosis. The 
Arkansas court excluded the defendant’s testimony remembered through hypnosis 
because the court deemed unreliable any memory allegedly restored by 
hypnosis. Id. at 47-48. The United States Supreme Court rejected the 
Arkansas Supreme Court’s proposition that “any testimony that cannot be 
proved to be the product of prehypnosis memory is unreliable[.]” Id. at 58. 
It held that the unreliability of memory allegedly restored through hypnosis 
did not render it “so immune to the traditional means of evaluating 
credibility that it should disable a defendant from presenting her version of 
the events for which she is on trial.” Id. at 61. 
Unlike the hypnotically induced testimony in Rock, the testimony of 
Williams bore no sign of mistruth—no indication of untrustworthiness other 
than the opposing testimony of Quindt. Williams’ testimony was directly 
relevant to the critical issue as to his state of mind when he allegedly 
acted in self-defense. There was no need so overarching to his right to 
present his defense in his own words to empower the judge to decide the words 
he should use to defend himself before the triers of fact, nor to completely 
exclude statements made to him that bore on his self-defense claim. 
17 The Dissent finds beyond a reasonable doubt that any error 
arising from the circuit court’s exclusion of Williams’ testimony was 
harmless. Dissent at 22.            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
  
             
         
           
    
         
          
  
       
           
         
         
           
           
     
       
             
           
           
         
          
           
          
          
        jury. Respectfully, substituting prosecution witness testimony 
for the testimony of the accused, as to what was said to the 
accused by the complaining witness that engendered the accused 
to act in self-defense, renders the right to present evidence a 
mere pretense. 
C. The circuit court’s errors in altering and excluding 
Williams’ state of mind evidence were not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
The violation of Williams’ constitutional due process 
right to present a complete defense was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt because there is “a reasonable possibility that 
the error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.” State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawaiʻi 493, 505, 193 P.3d 
409, 421 (2008) (quoting State v.
 Peseti, 101 Hawaiʻi 172, 178, 
65 P.3d 119, 125 (2003)). 
The improper
 exclusion and alteration of Williams’ 
testimony as to his state of mind at the time he stabbed Quindt 
deprived Williams of evidence that he acted in self-defense as a 
result of his life-threatening fear of Quindt. Faced with a 
credibility contest with Quindt, the most important witness in 
Williams’ defense was Williams. See DePetris v. Kuykendall, 239 
F.3d 1057, 1062–63 (9th Cir. 2001) (“There is simply no denying 
that the most important witness in the defense of [the 
defendant] was [the defendant] herself. The trial court not 
only excluded [essential evidence], but worse still, it 
31            
 
 32        
           
           
           
            
           
            
          
      
        
         
           
           
          
          
        
         
             
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prevented  [the  defendant]  from  testifying  fully  in  her  own  
behalf  about  why  she  did  what  she  did—this  in  a  case  where  proof  
of  the  defendant’s  state  of  mind  was  an  essential  element  of  the  
defense.”).    
The circuit court prevented Williams from presenting 
his fully contextualized testimony as to his state of mind when 
he struck Quindt—in a case in which Williams’ defense was based 
entirely on whether the jury believed that he feared that his 
life was in peril. The exclusion of such essential testimony is 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Calbero, 
71 Haw. 115, 124–25, 785 P.2d 157, 161 (1989) (quoting State v. 
Williams, 21 Ohio St.3d 33, 36, 487 N.E.2d 560, 562-63 
(1986))(holding that the defendant’s testimony reciting 
statements of the rape complainant about prior sexual 
experiences were proffered for an “important purpose, which is 
to negate the implied establishment of an element of the crime 
charged. For this reason, the probative value of the testimony 
outweighs any interest the state has in its exclusion”); Fowler 
v. Sacramento Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 421 F.3d 1027, 1042 (9th 
Cir. 2005) (holding that the erroneous preclusion of cross-
examination of the victim “alone strongly supports a finding 
that the error was not harmless” because the case came down to a 
“credibility contest” between the victim and the defendant).            
 
 33   
  
      
         
         
           
         
          
           
       
   
      
 
  
      
 
           
    
    
 
/s/ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
V. CONCLUSION 
Williams’ fundamental due process right to present a 
complete defense was violated. The circuit court excluded 
evidence relevant to Williams’ fear of Quindt, putting Williams 
at a significant disadvantage in proving his use of violence was 
a justified act committed in self-defense. Accordingly, the 
ICA’s judgment on appeal and the circuit court’s judgment of 
conviction and sentence are vacated. The case is remanded to 
the circuit court for a new trial. 
Taryn  R.  Tomasa 
for
  Petitioner  Sabrina S. McKe
nna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
James  M.  Anderson 
for
  Respondent   
    /s/ Michael D. Wils
on 