***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAII 
 
---
o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
NINO ABRIGO,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-17-0000087 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17 -0000087; CASE  NO. 1DTA-16-01924) 
 
JUNE 28, 2019 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
  An exception to the evidentiary rule against hearsay 
typically allows  public records to be admitt ed into evidence to 
prove the truth of their contents, as such documents are 
generally presumed to be accurate and reliable.  The rule 
contains two exc
lusions, however, that collectively prohibit 
using the public record 
exception to admit observational and Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000087
28-JUN-2019
11:06 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 investigative police reports against defendants in criminal 
cases.  These exclusions ensure that law enforcement personnel 
testify in person when the contents of their police reports are 
sought to be admitted as evidence in a trial , thereby allowing 
the defendant an opportunity to confront and cross- examine 
police officers regarding statements in their reports.   
  However, another hearsay exception in our evidentiary 
rules permits the previously recorded recollections of a witness 
to be read into evidence when the witness is unable to 
sufficiently recall the subject matter of the statements to 
testify fully and accurately at trial.  Applied literally , this 
second exception would appear to provide a path to circumvent 
the prohibition on the use of observational and investigative 
police reports against defendants in criminal cases.  This path 
of circumvention oddly would only occur when the law enforcement 
official who prepared or signed- off on the report testifies to 
insufficient recollection of the events underlying the report to 
be subject to meaningful cross-examination.   Such a situation 
occurred in this case, resulting in the defendant being  
convicted on the sole basis of a police report authored by a law 
enforcement officer who testified at trial that he could no 
longer remember the material facts underlying the defendant’s  
arrest. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3   We now hold that records excluded by the public 
records exception cannot be read into evidence based on an 
alternative evidentiary ground.  This is to say that litigants 
may not utilize another hearsay exception 
as a back door to 
bypass the restrictions contained in the public records hearsay 
exception.  Accordingly, we vacate the defendant’s conviction  
and remand the case for further proceedings
. 
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND  
A. Trial 
 
 On May 26, 2016, the State filed a criminal complaint 
against Nino Abrigo in the Hawai‘i District Court of the First 
Circuit (district court), charging him with operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1).1  Abrigo pleaded 
not guilty, and a bench trial commenced on August 1, 2016.2 
 
 The only witness called by the State was Officer Aaron 
Ostachuk of the Honolulu Police Department.   Due to a series of 
                     
 1 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) (2007) provides as follows:  
A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle under 
the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or 
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: (1) While 
under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to 
impair the person’s normal mental faculties or ability to 
care for the person and guard against casualty[.]  
 2 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 continuances, Officer Ostachuk’ s testimony was delivered on 
three separate days over the course of five months.  
1. August 1, 2016 
  On the first day that he testified, Officer Ostachuk 
related that he first encountered Abrigo at approximately 3:00 
a.m. on May 15, 2016, while  on traffic patrol in the Dillingham-
Kalihi area of the island of Oahu.   The officer s tated that he 
saw the vehicle drive n by Abrigo commit two traffic violations; 
first, the vehicle drift ed across the broken white lines that 
separated its lane from other  lanes going the same direction,  
then the vehicle swerve d back to straddle the solid yellow lines 
separating the lane from oncoming traffic.  Officer Ostachuk 
testified that he initiated a traffic stop of the vehicle based 
on these infractions.   
 
 When he approached the driver -side window, Officer 
Ostachuk stated, he noticed that Abrigo’s eyes were “red, 
watery, and glassy” and the smell of alcohol was emanating from 
inside the vehicle.  Abrigo complied with his request to exit 
the vehicle, the officer explained, and agreed to take the 
standard field sobriety test (SFST) .3 
                     
 3 The parties stipulated that  
Officer Ostachuk was trained and qualified pursuant to the 
standards of National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, also known as NHTSA, as well as Honolulu 
Police Department, also known as HPD, to administer and 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5   Officer Ostachuk testified that Abrigo followed  his 
instructions during the first part of the SFST, the horizontal 
gaze nystagmus test (HGN).   Officer Ostachuk explained that 
after he administered the HGN, he placed Abrigo in the starting 
position for the “walk-and-turn” test--the second part of the 
SFST--and explained the instructions, t elling Abrigo not to 
start walking until he was told to begin.4  While the officer was 
relating the instructions, he testified, Abrigo began to sway 
from side to side.  Abrigo also start ed to walk before being 
told to do so, the officer stated.   Although Abrigo complied 
when he was told to begin walking, t he officer said, he 
exhibited several clues of intoxication: he stopped three times, 
he missed seven heel -to-toe steps, he raised his arms four 
times, and he did not take the correct number of steps.   
Additionally, Officer Ostachuk stated that Abrigo stepped to the 
side seven times , then clarified that because “there  [was] no 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
evaluate the standardized field sobriety test, which is 
comprised of three different exercises, being the 
horizontal gaze nystagmus, also called HGN, the walk -and-
turn, and the one -leg stand, but that the officer would not 
testify as to whether any nystagmus was observed when the 
HGN test was administered, and that the officer would not 
give an expert opinion as to whether the defendant passed 
or failed any portion or the entirety of the standardized 
field sobriety test.  
 4 Officer Ostachuk testified that he instructed Abrigo to walk nine 
“heel to toe” steps in a straight line with his arms at his side, then turn 
around and walk nine steps back-- all without stopping.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 straight line . . . long enou gh to use”  at the location where he 
administered the SFST, he based this assessment on Abrigo’s 
failure to “step[] one foot in front of another in a straight 
line.” 
  When Abrigo reached the “turn” part of the test, he 
was able to execute it, Officer Ostachuk testified.  But when 
asked to describe Abrigo’s turn , the office r said, “I do not 
recall.  It was[] nothing out of the ordinary or I would note it 
down.”  Shortly thereafter, the trial was continued because it 
was late in the day.  Although the transcr ipt indicates trial 
was initially scheduled to continue on October 19, 2016, 
proceedings did not recommence until December 15, 2016
, for 
reasons undisclosed in the record. 
2. December 15, 2016 
  When the State resumed its direct examination of 
Officer Ostachuk on Dec ember 15, 2016, the officer stated that  
Abrigo was off-b alance when completing the turn portion of the 
walk-and -turn test because “[h]e had his knees slightly bent.”   
He explained that he interprets a person bending their knees as 
indicating “that they can’t keep themselves upright in an up --in 
the standing position, and they use that bending in order to 
regain themselves.”   Officer Ostachuk then testified that he 
explained the instructions for the “one-legged stand ” test, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 third part of the SFST, and administered it.5  He described 
several clues of intoxication that he said Abrigo exhibited  
during this test, including swaying , raising his arms, hopping  
after losing his balance, and putting  his foot down. 
  On cross- examination, defense  counsel questioned 
Officer Ostachuk about his memory of Abrigo’s traffic 
violations, and the officer testified that he could not remember 
the specific details.  Specifically, he s tated that he could not 
remember how far or for how long Abrigo crossed over the broken 
white line or straddled the solid yellow line.
  Officer Ostachuk 
also testified that he could not remember his  exact reason for 
pulling Abrigo over without looking at the report that he 
created that documented his interaction with Abrigo.6 
  Wh en asked whether he “independently remember[ed] 
giving [Abrigo] the instructions” to the SFST, Officer Ostachuk 
answered, “ [I]t’s not something off the top of my head I 
remember specifically, . . . I just remember these-- this is what 
I instruct people to do. ”  The defense then asked Officer 
Ostachuk if he remembered “why [he] checked off the box 
                     
 5 Officer Ostachuk testified that he instructed Abrigo to keep his 
arms at his side, keep his feet together, raise one leg six inches above the 
ground, and count to thirty.  
 6 The record does not contain the document referenced in Officer 
Ostachuk’s testimony.  Defense counsel referred to the document as a 
“report,” while the prosecutor referred to it as an “SFST form.”  For the 
sake of clarity, this opinion uses the more general “report” term.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 ‘starting too soon’”  in his report,  and he responded that he 
could not remember.  
  Nor could Officer Ostachuk independently recall why he 
marked the box i n his rep ort indicating that Abrigo could not 
keep his balance during the walk- and-turn test.  When asked 
directly if he could remember his reasoning, the officer 
responded, “No.  It’s just something that I observed at the 
time, and I checked off the box.”  When as ked whether his 
testimony was “just based on that box being checked off” on his 
report, he answered, “That’s correct.”  
  D efense counsel then asked , “Do you actually remember 
[that] h[e]  stop[ped]  walking?  Or was that testimony based on 
what is contained in the report?”  The court, sua sponte , did 
not allow the witness to answer because it said that the 
question was misleading.  Outside of Officer Ostachuk’s 
presence, the court clarified that it viewed the question as 
“blur[ing the] distinctions” between Officer Ostachuk’s “memory 
four months ago when he testified and today.”  The “crux of the 
case,” the court stated, was “not what he remembers today,” but 
rather whether Officer Ostachuk was “testifying based on a 
present memory” or “just parroting what was  in a report ” on 
August 1 when he testified on direct examination. 
  After Officer Ostachuk reentered the courtroom, 
defense counsel inquired at length as to whether his testimony ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 on August 1 regarding the SFST had been based on his memory at 
the time or simply reviewing his report.  Officer Ostachuk 
repeatedly replied that he did not recall what had been asked 
and what he had testified to during the August 1 examination, 
nor what he had remembered at that  time.  When defense counsel 
inquired into his present recollection, Officer Ostachuk stated 
that he did not have independent memory regarding any aspect of 
the SFST and could testify only based on what was written in his 
report.  The trial was then continued again for reasons that are 
not reflected in the record.  
3. December 30, 2016 
 
 On December  30, 2016 , the defense resumed its cross-
examination of Officer Ostachuk.   The officer once more  
testified that he could not independently recall any details 
about Abrigo’s performance on the SFST .  He acknowledged that 
his testimony was solely based on looking at his report and the 
annotations it contained.7  As to Abrigo ’s performance during the 
one-legged stand test, Officer Ostachuk again said that he did 
not recall whether he had had an independent recollection of 
Abrigo’s performance  when he had testified on August 1. 
                     
 7 Officer Ostachuk stated, “I don’t remember exactly the things I 
annotated in my report him doing.  I just remember giving the SFST and then 
annotating the stuff in my report  that he did .” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10   Defense counsel moved to strike Officer Ostachuk’s 
testimony about the SFST , arguing that the officer lacked 
independent recollection about the tests  and therefore  could not 
be effectively cross-examined.  The court denied the motion and 
said that it would “not put on the record now, in the officer’s 
presence, the reasons for that because he would still be 
testifying.”  
  During re -direct examination,  the State asked Officer 
Ostachuk whether “the clues that [he] marked off on the SFST 
sheet reflect what [he] observed at the time that [he] actually 
administered the SFST,” but the court sustained an objection by 
the defense.   The State then elicited testimony indicating that 
Officer Ostachuk had  a recollection of “other things that 
happened that day ” that were not in his report.  Specifically , 
Officer Ostachuk recalled having  a conversation with Abrigo, 
that Abrigo was cordial and cooperative, and the type of car 
that Abrigo was driving.   After Officer Ostachuk’s testimony 
concluded, the State rested.  The defense did not present any 
evidence.  
  The court  proceeded to find Abrigo guilty as charged.   
Although the court found that the officer had “very limited 
recollection” when he testified on Dece mber 15, 2016, and 
“almost no recollection” when he testified on December 30, 2016, 
it concluded that his testimony on August 1, 2016 , “was a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11 product of then- present recollection.”  The court also concluded 
that the defense had had an opportunity to effectively cross-
examine the officer.  Abrigo was sentenced to 72 hours of 
community service and was required to complete a substance abuse 
assessment class and pay court fees.  Abrigo filed a timely 
appeal. 
B. ICA Proceedings  
 
 On appeal, Abrigo argued that the court had erred in 
denying his motion to strike Officer Ostachuk’s testimony , which 
was inadmissible because the officer did not have a present 
recollection throughout the trial regarding the events to which 
he testified.  Abrigo contended that eve n assuming Officer 
Ostachuk had present recollection of administering the SFST when 
he testified on August 1, 2016, he indisputably lacked such 
recollection when he was cross-examined at the continued trial.  
This did not afford him a meaningful opportunity to cross -
examine Officer Ostachuk regarding his testimony, Abrigo argued, 
and it thus violated his  rights to confrontation and cross-
examination under the Hawaii Constitution.  Without this 
erroneously admitted testimony, Abrigo concluded, there was no 
evidence to support his conviction of OVUII. 
 
 In response, the State argued that even if Officer 
Ostachuk lacked the present recollection required to testify 
regarding the SFST, the officer’s statements in his report were ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12 themselves admissible under Hawai i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
802.1(4), the past recollection recorded exception to hearsay.  
Abrigo countered 
in reply that Officer Ostachuk’s testimony was 
inadmissible under the past recollection hearsay exception 
because (1) the State did not establi
sh an adequate foundation 
to satisfy this exception, (2) admitting contents of a police 
report would contradict and nullify the public records and 
business records exceptions to hearsay, (3) the contents of 
Officer Ostachuk’s report did not have adequate i ndicia of 
reliability, and (4) Officer Ostachuk’s testimony violated 
Abrigo’s rights to confrontation and cross -examination under the 
state and federal constitutions. 
 
 The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) held that it 
was clear that Officer Ostachuk’s testimony regarding Abrigo’s 
performance on the SFST was not from his present recollection.  
However, the ICA concluded that Officer Ostachuk’s testimony was 
nonetheless admissible under the past recollection recorded 
exception.  Relying on State v. Bloss, 3 Haw. App. 274, 649 P.2d 
1176 (1982), the ICA determined that Officer Ostachuk’s report 
satisfied the past recollection recorded exception because it 
was “a record concerning Abrigo’s OVUII charge of which Officer 
Ostachuk once had personal knowledge but at trial had 
insufficient recollection to enable him to testify fully and 
accurately.”  And the SFST form accurately reflected Officer ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 Ostachuk’s knowledge of the tests , the ICA held, because the 
officer testified that he filled out the form at the same time 
that he administered the tests and regularly made accurate 
records of the same kind.  
  T he ICA also  held that Officer Ostachuk’s testimony 
did not violate Abrigo’s right to confrontation or cross-
examination because “a witness who appears at trial and  
testifies satisfies the confrontation clause, even though the 
witness claims a lack of memory that precludes them from 
testifying about the subject matter of their out-of -court 
statement.”  (Quoting State v. Delos Santos, 124 Hawai i  130, 
145, 238 P.3d 162, 177 (2010).)  Thus, the ICA affirmed the 
judgment of conviction.   Abrigo filed a timely application for a 
writ of certiorari, which we granted.  
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
 The admissibility of evidence requires different 
standards of review depending on the particular rule of evidence 
at issue.  State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai i 390, 403
-04, 56 P.3d 
692, 705-06 ( 2002); State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai i 229, 246, 925 P.2d 
797, 814 (1996).  “[W]here the admissibility of evidence is 
determined by application of the hearsay rule, there can be only 
one correct result, and ‘the appropriate standard for appellate 
review is the right/wrong standard.’”  State v. Moore, 82 Hawai‘i ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 202, 217, 921 P.2d 122, 137 (1996) (quoting Kealoha v. Cty. of 
Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 670, 675 (1993)). 
III. DISCUSSION  
  Abrigo a
rgues that the ICA erred in holding that 
Officer Ostachuk’s testimony regarding the contents of his 
report was admissible under the HRE Rule 802.1(4) past 
recollection recorded hearsay exception.8  He contends that the 
past recollection recorded hearsay exception must be interpreted 
to exclude statements contained in police reports to avoid 
effectively nullifying the law enforcement records exclusion in 
the separate HRE Rule 803(b)(8) public records hearsay 
exception.9   
A. The Public Records and Past Recollection Recorded Hearsay 
Exceptions 
  
The HRE Rule 803(b)(8) public records hearsay 
exception allows for the admission of certain “[r] ecords, 
reports, statements, or data compilations, in any form, of 
                     
8 Although the d istrict court did not admit Officer Ostachuk’s 
testimony under the past recollection recorded exception, the ICA did not err 
in considering the State’s alternate grounds for admissibility.  Our caselaw 
states that “where the decision below is correct it mu st be affirmed by the 
appellate court even though the lower tribunal gave the wrong reason for its 
action.”  State v. Pacquing, 139 Hawai i  302, 313 n.19, 389 P.3d 897, 908 n.19 
(2016) (quoting State v. Taniguchi, 72 Haw. 235, 239, 815 P.2d 24, 26 
(1991)).  Accordingly, we review the district court’s admission of the 
officer’s testimony under the past recollection recorded exception.  
 9 Given our disposition of this issue, we need not reach Abrigo’s 
alternative contention that the foundational requirements for the admission 
of Officer Ostachuk’s report under the HRE Rule 802.1(4) past recollection 
recorded hearsay exception were not met in this case.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 public offices or agencies .”10  The provision has three distinct 
subsections, the latter two of which are relevant in this case.  
The second subsection, HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(B),  permits the 
admission of public records setting forth “matters observed 
pursuant to duty imposed by law as to which matters there was a 
duty to report, excluding, however, in criminal cases matters 
observed by police officers and other law enforcement 
personnel.”  The third, HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(C), allows for the 
admission of public records containing “ factual findings 
resulting from an investigation made pursuant to authority 
granted by law
,” but only “ in civil proceedings and against the 
government in criminal cases .” 
                     
 10 HRE Rule 803(b)(8) provides as follows:  
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even 
though the declarant is available as a witness:  
. . . .  
(b) Other exceptions.  
. . . . 
(8) Public records and reports. Records,  
reports, statements, or data compilations, in 
any form, of public offices or agencies, 
setting forth (A) the activities of the office 
or agency, or (B) matters observed pursuant to 
duty imposed by law as to which matters there 
was a duty to report, excluding, however, in 
criminal cases matters observed by police 
officers and other law enforcement personnel, 
or (C) in civil proceedings and  against the 
government in criminal cases, factual findings  
resulting from an investigation made pursuant  
to authority granted by law, unless the sources  
of information or other circumstances indicate 
lack of trustworthiness.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16   This court outlined the contours of these  two 
subsections in State v. Davis, a criminal case in which we 
considered the admissibility of a technician’s sworn statements 
indicating that, based on the technician’s expert interpretation 
of data produced by an accuracy test, an Intoxilyzer was working 
properly when it measured a defendant’s breath sample.  140 
Hawai‘i 252, 254, 400 P.3d 453, 455 (2017).  In analyzing whether 
the out- of-court statements should have been admitted pursuant 
to HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(B), we noted that the phrase “matter s 
observed” could be interpreted as “ encompassing all ‘records 
describing an almost endless variety of acts, events, and 
conditions in the world observed and depicted by public 
officials.’”  Id. at 257 -58, 400 P.3d at 458- 59 (quoting 
Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. Kirkpatrick, Evidence § 8.50, 
at 910 (5th ed. 2012)) .  This court determined, however, that 
the phrase was intended to have a “narrower meaning” than its 
literal application: it was meant to apply only to “information 
that is concrete and simple in nature” such as “routine 
recordations not resu lting from analysis or judgment.”   Id. at 
258, 400 P.3d at 459 (quoting Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence Manual § 803-3[8][D], at 8-44 (2016 -2017 ed.)).  Thus, 
under Davis , HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(B) allows the admission of 
public records containing simple, non- evaluative information 
about matters observed by public officials.  However, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17 provision expressly excludes from its reach any such data 
contained in a law enforcement report when it is offered in a 
criminal case. 
  By contrast, this court stated that public records 
containing “conclusions or opinions that flow from a factual 
investigation” are properly evaluated under HRE Rule 803(b)(8)’s 
third subsection, which governs public records setting forth 
“factual findings resulting from an investigation made pursuant 
to authority granted by law.”   Id. (quoting Beech Aircraft Corp. 
v. Rainey, 488 U.S. 153, 164 (1988)).  Under this separate 
provision, such records are admissible in a criminal case only 
when offered against the government-- and not against the 
defendant.  Id. at 260 n.18, 400 P.3d at 461 n.18.  This is true 
irrespective of whether the document is authored by law 
enforcement.  See id.  Because the statement in Davis that the 
Intoxilyzer was correctly calibrated was an “interpretive 
conclusion” based on the technician’s evaluation of data 
collected through the accuracy test, this court held that it was 
not a “matter observed” governed by HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(B), but 
rather a “factual finding” that was inadmissible against the 
 defendant under 
HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(C).   Id. at 260, 400 P.3d at 
461.   11
                     
 11 Because Davis held that the  statements were not “matters 
observed,” we did not address whether the technician qualified as a “police 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18   In sum, HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(B) excludes observations  by 
law enforcement personnel in public record reports when offered 
in a criminal case.  And HRE Rule 803(b)(8)(C) excludes 
evaluative public record reports regardless of the author when 
offered against the defendant in a criminal case.  The two 
provisions operate together to prohibit the use of the public 
records exception to admit law enforcement reports against the 
defendant in a criminal case, be they purely observational, 
evaluative, or some combination of the two .12  Yet the HRE Rule 
802.1(4) past recollection recorded hearsay exception would on 
its face offer a loophole capable of circumventing  this 
exclusion in certain circumstances. 
  HRE Rule 802.1(4) makes admissible a statement 
“previously made by [a testifying] witness[]” in a “memorandum 
or record” if the evidence demonstrates th at the witness (1) 
once had knowledge of the events underlying the record, (2) has 
insufficient recollection of the events at trial, (3) made the 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
officer [or] other law enforcement personnel” for purposes of the exception.  
Davis, 140 Hawai‘i at 257 n.13, 400 P.3d at 458 n.13. 
 12 Officer Ostachuk’s report is a “report made by a law enforcement 
official in an on -the-scene investigation” --the precise type of  document that 
is covered by the law enforcement exclusion within the HRE Rule 803(b)(8) 
public records hearsay exception.  United States v. Hernandez -Rojas, 617 F.2d 
533, 535 (9th Cir. 1980).  We thus need not classify the individual 
statements it contains as observational or evaluative, as they are 
inadmissible against Abrigo under the public records hearsay exception in any 
event. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19 record when the event was fresh in the witness’s mind, and (4) 
13accurately recorded the events in the memorandum or record.   
Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 802.1-5[2], 
at 8-18 (2018-2019 ed.).   The text of the past recollection 
recorded exception would therefore appear to allow the use of 
law enforcement reports against the defendant in a criminal 
case--which is specifically prohibited under the public records 
exception--but 
only when the official who prepared or signed the 
document testifies to a lack of sufficient memory to be fully 
and accurately cross- examined on the matters  in the report.  
B. Hawai ‘i Casela
w Indicates t hat the Contents of Records 
Excluded by the Public Records Exception Cannot Be Read into 
Evidence Through Another 
Hearsay Exception  
 
 Hawai‘i caselaw offers guidance as to how this apparent 
conflict should be resolved.  This court addressed a similar 
attempt to circumvent the public record exception’s restrictions 
                     
 13 HRE Rule 802.1(4) provides as follows:  
The following statements previously made by witnesses who 
testify at the trial or hearing are not excluded by the 
hearsay rule:  
. . . . 
(4) Past recollection recorded.  A memorandum or 
record concerning a matter  about which the witness 
once had knowledge but now has insufficient 
recollection to enable the witness to testify fully 
and accurately, shown to have been made or adopted by 
the witness when the matter was fresh in the witness ’ 
memory and to reflect that knowledge correctly.  If 
admitted, the memorandum or record may be read into 
evidence but may not itself be received as an exhibit 
unless offered by an adverse party.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 in Davis.  A s explained, the State sought in Davis to enter a 
technician’s statements regarding the accuracy of an 
Intoxilyzer.  140 Hawai i at 254, 400 P.3d at  455.  The State 
argued that even if the technician ’ s statements were not 
admissible under the public records hearsay exception, the HRE 
Rule 803(b)(6) business records hearsay exception w as an 
alternative ground through which the document could be admitted.  
Id. at 265, 400 P.3d at 466.  On review, this court held that 
“[a]lthough ordinarily the proponent of hearsay is entitled to 
‘shop around’ among the exceptions, the public records except ion
 
preempts” the business record exception as it applies to public 
records and “foreclose s access to business records 
admissibility.”  Id. (quoting Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence Manual § 803-3[6][F], at 8-41 (2016 -2017 ed.) (some 
alterations omitted).  We therefore held that “records excluded 
by [the public records exception] cannot be admitted through the 
‘back door’ as a business record
.”  Id. (citing United States v. 
Weiland, 420 F.3d 1062, 1074 (9th Cir. 2005); United States v. 
Orellana-Blanco, 294 F.3d 1143, 1149 (9th Cir. 2002); United 
States v. Cain, 615 F.2d 380, 382 (5th Cir. 1980)); see also 
State v. Hammell
, 917 A.2d 1267, 1271 (N.H. 2007) (holding the 
identically worded New Hampshire public records exception cannot 
be circumvented using the business record exception because 
doing so would enable “ an end run around one of the very ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 purposes for which [the public records exception] was 
promulgated”--namely, the exclusion of police records when 
offered against the defendant in
 a criminal case).   
  Thus, this court’ s precedent strongly suggests that 
public records that are inadmissible under the hearsay exception 
specifically governing such records may not be read into 
evidence at trial under an alternative hearsay rule.  The past 
recollection recorded exception would serve as no less a “back 
door” to the admission of documents that the public records 
exception specifically prohibits than the business record 
exception, and it would stand to reason that it would likewise 
be “preempt[ed]” and “foreclose[d]” when applied to public 
records.  Davis, 140 Hawai i at 265, 400 P.3d at 466 (quoting 
Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 803-3[6][F], at 8-41 
(2016-2017 ed.)
. 
C. Other Jurisdictions Have Declined to Admit Police Reports 
Through Hearsay Exceptions Other t han the Public Records 
Exception, Including as Recorded Past Recollections  
  
When faced with the precise question at issue in this 
case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
applied much the same reasoning employed in Davis to the federal 
equivalents of the public records and past recollection recorded 
hearsay exceptions.   In United States v. Pena-Gutierrez, the 14
                     
 14 Federal cases interpreting the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) 
serve as “persuasive au thority in interpreting similar provisions of the 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 court considered the admission of an Immigration and 
Naturalization Service report containing statements made by an 
undocumented person about his attempt to cross the border while 
hidden in the defendant’s car.  222 F.3d 1080, 1084 -85 (9th Cir. 
2000).  Relying on an earlier case that had analyzed the 
admission of public records under the federal equivalent of the 
business records hearsay exception, the Ninth Circuit held that 
the trial court had erred by admitting the report under the past 
recollection recorded hearsay exception, explaining  that law 
enforcement reports are admissible “if at all, only under  the 
public-records exception. ”  Id. at 1087 (citing United States v. 
Orozco, 590 F.2d 789, 793 (9th Cir. 1979)).  The court went on 
to find the report inadmissible under the public records hearsay 
exception because , much like Officer Ostachuk’s report in the 
present case, it was an “on-the-scene investigative report of a 
crime” falling squarely within the law enforcement exclusion .  
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
[HRE].”  State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawaii 354, 383 n.5, 227 P.3d 520, 549 n.5 
(2010) (citing State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai i 472, 478, 927 P.2d 1355, 1361 
(1996)).  At least one scholar has also noted the tension between the federal 
equivalents of these provisions, stating that there is a “serious question” 
about the admissibility of police reports under the past recollection 
recorded exception.  Professor Michael H. Graham, one of the nation’s leading 
scholars on evidence, cautions that courts should be “extremely reluctant” to 
admit police reports under the past recollection recorded exception because 
Congress has had the opportunity to amend the exclusion for police 
observations and has consistently declined “to credit the accuracy of 
documents prepared by law enforcement personnel purporting to recount 
criminal investigations.”  7 Michael H. Graham, Handbook of Federal Evidence  
§ 803:5 (8th ed. 2017).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23 Id. (quoting United States v. Wilmer, 799 F.2d 495, 501 (9th 
Cir. 1986); see also United States v. Hernandez- Rojas, 617 F.2d 
533, 535 (9th Cir. 1980) (“[T]he subjective report made by a law 
enforcement official in an on- the-scene investigation . . . 
lack[s] sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness because [it is] 
made in an adversary setting [and is] likely to be used in 
 litigation.”).
  Courts of a number of other jurisdictions have 
similarly stated that hearsay in public records may not be 
admitted through the back door of another hearsay exception, 
suggesting that the document must comply with the restrictions 
built into the public records exception to be admissible.  See 
Air Land Forwarders, Inc. v. United States, 172 F.3d 1338, 1345 
(Fed. Cir. 1999); United States v. Brown, 9 F.3d 907, 911 (11th 
Cir. 1993); Fischer v. State, 207 S.W.3d 846, 860 (Tex. Ct. App. 
2006).  The caselaw of 
a number of courts across the country 15
                     
 15 While some courts  have reached a different conclusion as to the 
admissibility of police reports under the past recollection recorded 
exception, these cases either ignore  the legislative history of  the exclusion 
for police observations or surmise that an officer’s presence at trial 
resolves any cross -examination concerns.  See United States v. Hayes, 861 
F.2d 1225, 1230 (10th Cir. 1988)  (tax payment records compiled by an Internal 
Revenue Service agent admitted as a business record because there was no 
evidence that the records were untrustworthy); United States v. Picciandra, 
788 F.2d 39, 44 (1st Cir. 1986)  (undercover drug enforcement agent report 
admitted under the past recollection recorded exception because it had 
“indicia of trustworthiness”); United States v. Sawyer, 607 F.2d 1190, 1193 
(7th Cir. 1979)  (revenue agent’s report admitted under the past recollection 
recorded exception because the agent was available for cross -examination).   
As discussed infra, both the legislative history of the public records 
hearsay exception and Hawai‘i law regarding the availability of a witness for 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 thus suggests a similar conclusion to our own--that is, that the 
public record hearsay exception offers the sole hearsay 
framework under
 which the admissibility of law enforcement 
reports may be admitted at trial. 
D. The History of the Public Records Hearsay Exception Supports 
Prohibiting the Admission of Police Reports T hrough Other 
Exceptions 
  Th e conclusions of the Davis  and Pena-Gutierrez  courts 
are unsurprising in light of the history of the public records 
hearsay exception.  When considering the identical federal rule 
after which our exception was modeled, the United States Court 
of Appeals for the Second Circuit in United States v. Oates 
recounted that “an overriding concern of the Advisory Committee 
was that the rules be formulated so as to avoid impinging upon a 
criminal defendant’s right to confront the witnesses against 
him.”  560 F.2d 45, 68 (2d Cir. 1977).  The court explained 
that the language of the public records exception was amended 
during the drafting process to add the exclusion for “matters 
observed by police officers” to protect a defendant’s 16
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
cross-examination  strongly weigh in favor of prohibiting the admission of 
police reports as recorded past recollections.  
 16 When enacting the Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence, the legislature 
adopted the public records hearsay exception contained in the F RE verbatim, 
though the federal rule has since been amended nonsubstantively.  
See Oates, 
560 F.2d at 66- 67 (setting forth FRE Rule 803(8) as it was worded in 1977).  
The legislative history of  the federal rule is thus especially persuasive in 
interpreting our own public records hearsay exception.  See
 Fitzwater, 122 
Hawai‘i at 383 n.5, 227 P.3d at 549 n.5.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 confrontation rights.  Id.  at 69.  Significantly, the Second 
Circuit noted, the Senate attempted to limit the application of 
the exclusion by adding a proposed provision that “would have 
rendered the exclusion .  . . ineffective in the event the author 
of the report was ‘unavailable’ to testify.”  Id. (citing S. 
Rep. No. 1277 (1974)).  However, as detailed by the Oates court, 
the “attempt to emasculate” the exclusion was unsuccessful, and 
the unavailability provision was removed by the Committee of 
Conference.   Id. (citing H.R. Rep. No. 1597 (1974) (Joint 
Explanatory Statement of the Committee of Conference)).  17
  Expanding on the legislative history of the proposed 
provision, the Second Circuit stated that after the Committee of 
Conference submitted its final version of the rules to the 
Senate and the House of Representatives, Representative William 
Hungate presented the Committee’s official report to the House.   
Id. at 70.  During his presentation, Representative Hungate 18
                     
 17 Both the Federal and  Hawai‘i Rules of Evidence consider a witness 
who does not have sufficient recollection to testify about the substance of a 
prior statement unavailable for purposes of hearsay analysis.  See  FRE Rule 
804(a)(3); HRE Rule 804(a)(3).  Thus, the reading into evidence of a police 
report authored by an officer who is unable to remember the substance of the 
events it details would fall squarely within the proposed unavailability 
limitation that was specifically rejected by the original drafters of the 
public records exception. 
 18 Representative Hungate was the Chairman of the House Judiciary 
Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, presided over hearings regarding the 
proposed Federal Rules of E vidence, was a floor manager for the legislation, 
and was a member of the Committee of  Conference appointed to resolve the 
differences between the versions of the rules approved by the House and 
Senate.  Oates
, 560 F.2d at 69- 70. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26 explained that the Committee “rejected the Senate’s attempt to 
create a new hearsay exception which would have permitted 
admission of police reports authored by officers unavailable to 
testify.”  Id.  Representative Hungate told the House that “[a]s 
the rules of evidence now stand, police and law enforcement 
reports are not admissible against defendants in criminal 
cases.”  Id. (quoting 120 Cong. Rec. H12254 (daily ed. Dec. 18, 
1974)) (emphasis added).  Thus, the Oates court concluded that 
“it was the clear intention of Congress to make evaluative  and 
law enforcement reports absolutely inadmissible against 
defendants in criminal cases,” and “it must have been the 
unquestionable belief of Congress that the language of [Federal 
Rule of Evidence] 803(8)(B) and (C) accomplished that very 
result.”  Id. at 73.   
  The Second Circuit further noted that the legislative 
history specifically addressed the admission of police reports 
through exceptions other than the public records hearsay 
exception.  Id.  As the court related, Representative Elizabeth 
Holtzman expressed
 concern that a catchall hearsay exception 
would open “a ‘back door’ to [admission of]  police reports and 
negate[] the conference committee’s prior prohibition against 
admission of such evidence.”  Id. at 71 (quoting 120 Cong. Rec. 
H12255-56 (daily ed. Dec. 18, 1974)).  The Oates court thus 
determined that the exclusion of police reports “applies with ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 equal force to the treatment of such reports under any of the 
other exceptions to the hearsay rule” because the admission of 
such reports under another except ion “would serve to deprive the 
accused of the opportunity to confront his accusers as 
effectively”  as the drafters intended.   Id. at 78 (emphasis 
added).   19
  T he history of the public record exception clearly 
demonstrates that it was intended to render all police reports 
“absolutely inadmissible against defendants in criminal cases. ”  
Id. at 73.  Indeed, Representative David Dennis, who first 
introduced the exclusion for police observations, explained that 
the purpose of the exclusion was to “g ive the defendant the 
chance to cross examine [the police officer], rather than just 
reading [the officer’s] report into evidence.”  Jack B. 
Weinstein & Margaret A. Berger, 4 Weinstein’s Evidence  § 803(8), 
at 803-22 (1996).  Th is precise result of reading the contents 
of a police report into evidence occurs when the police report 
is admitted through the past recollection recorded hearsay 
exception.  See HRE Rule 802.1(4) (“ If admitted, the memorandum 
or record may be read into evidence but may not itself be 
                     
 19 The dissent characterizes our position as “rel[ying] heavily on 
the Second Circuit’s analysis in Oates.”  Dissent at 5.  But it is the 
legislative history of the federal public records hearsay exception that 
provides guidance for our holding, and this court has long recognized that 
“the history of the federal rule is highly persuasive as to the purpose of 
the Hawai‘ i rule.”  Cvitanovich -Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai ‘i 128, 147, 254 P.3d 
439, 458 (2011). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 received as an exhibit unless offered by an adverse party. ”).  
Thus, the legislative purpose of the public records hearsay 
exception would be vitiated if the State could use the past 
recollection recorded exception as a “back door” to admitting 
police reports.  See  United States v. Blackburn,  992 F.2d 666, 
671 (7th Cir. 1993) (“[I]f a document prohibited under [the 
public records exception] can come into evidence under [the 
business records exception], then the [public records 
exception’s] restrictions are rendered nugatory.”) .   
E. Admitting Police Reports as Recorded Past Recollections 
Produces Illogical Results 
  In addition to being unsupported by precedent and 
contrary to the intent of our evidentiary rules, admitting 
police reports through the past recollection recorded hearsay 
exception leads to irrational  results.  The HRE Rule 803(b)(8) 
hearsay exception for public records and its exclusions apply 
regardless of whether the declarant is available to testify.  
Thus, admitting police reports under the HRE Rule 802.1(4) past 
recollection recorded hearsay exception, which applies only when 
a testifying declarant has “insufficient recollection to enable 
the witness to testify fully and accurately,” creates an 
illogical dichotomy.  Document s that are wholly inadmissible 
both when the authoring official is absent, and thus subject to 
no cross- examination,  and when the author testifies from ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 personal knowledge and is subject to full cross- examination , 
would be deemed admissible only when the author has insufficient 
recollection to testify fully and accurately about the events 
underlying the reports, making the official subject to only 
cross-examination that is ineffective at ascertaining the truth.  
Such a distinction is not rationally justified, and it is 
contrary to statements by multiple courts that the public 
records exception was “intended to bar the use of law 
enforcement reports as a substitute for the testimony of the 
officer.”  United States v. Sawyer, 607 F.2d 1190, 1193 (7th 
Cir. 1979).  
  The dissent argues that this extremely limited cross-
examination is sufficient to satisfy any concerns the drafters 
may have had about the introduction of police reports.  Dissent 
at 8-9, 13 n.4.  This contention is plainly refuted in this case 
and decidedly incorrect as a general principle.   A police 
officer’s pro forma taking of the stand , as occurred here, does 
not eliminate the danger that the law enforcement exclusion in 
the public records exception  was intended to address: a 
defendant being denied the right to cross -examine a police 
officer about the substance of the officer’s  report.  Such 
reports are inherently less reliable than other witness 
recollections that are recorded soon after the events they 
recount, for police reports are created in an adversarial ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30 setting for the primary purpose of substantiating a criminal 
charge against the defendant.  Only through meaningful cross-
examination can a defendant test the accuracy of a police 
officer’s account of events that took place in this context, and 
this cannot occur when an officer testifies to a lack of memory 
and simply recites the contents of the report to the factfinder.   
  The State in this case was essentially able to use 
Officer Ostachuk’s report as a substitute for his testimony.  
When the defense counsel attempted to cross- examine the officer 
about the SFST he conducted, the officer could not testify to 
any information about Abrigo’s performance that was not 
contained in his report-- a document that was prepared for the 
specific purpose of building a case against Abrigo.  Because of 
the officer’s lack of memory, Abrigo did not have a meaningful  
opportunity to challenge any of the officer’s observations and 
conclusions regarding the clues of intoxication that Abrigo 
allegedly displayed.  That is, the State convicted Abrigo on 
nothing more than a police report without affording him an 
adequate opportunity to challenge the officer’s observations .  
Abrigo’s ostensible ability to question  the officer ’s general 
credibility and methodology was a hollow substitute for cross -
examination on the officer’s actual basis for arresting Abrigo 
and charging him with a crime , and the process plainly did not 
offer any assurances of the report’s reliability .   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31   T he dissent argues that our interpretation could 
adversely affect an OVUII prosecution by precluding  the 
introduction of a police officer’s report when the  officer is 
unable to recall the details of the  driver’s SFST performance 
months after a stop.  Dissent at 3.  But the administrative 
difficulty of providing a prompt trial does not justify 
dispensing with the assurances of reliability inherent in 
meaningful cross-examination.  Moreover, the same result could 
occur in any trial in which a police report is admitted under 
the past recollection recorded hearsay exception, irrespective 
of the seriousness of the charges or the strength of the 
evidence against the defendant.  A defendant could be convicted 
of a major felony offense on the sole basis of a report authored 
by a police officer who is the only witness to the alleged 
crime, all without any opportunity to challenge the substance of 
the report through in- court cross- examination.  The injustice of 
an interpretation of our evidentiary rules that would allow a 
defendant to be convicted solely on the basis of a police report 
being read into evidence is manifest, and we are thus obliged to 
reject it.   See HRE Rule 102 (providing that the “rules shall be 
construed to,” inter alia , “secure fairness in administration” 
and to promote the “ growth and development of the law of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 evidence to the end that the truth may be ascertained and 
proceedings justly determined ” (emphasis added)).  20
  T he dissent also responds by quoting a passage from a 
treatise on evidence that argues that it is impractical to 
expect law enforcement officials to recall specific, detailed 
information such as “ serial or license numbers, makes of cars, 
detailed descriptions of objects at crime scenes, or precise 
details about physical layout. ”  Dissent at 1 1 (quoting 
Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. Kirkpatrick, Evidence § 8.51 
21(5th ed. 2012)).   As an initial matter, this court has not yet 
                     
 20 “In any event, such a reading would contravene the doctrine of 
‘constitutional doubt,’ which dictates that, ‘where a statute is susceptible 
of two constructions, by one of which grave and doubtful constitutional 
questions arise and by the other of which such questions are avoided, our 
duty is [to] adopt the latter.’” State v. Jess, 117 Hawai ‘i 381, 399 –400, 184 
P.3d 133, 151– 52 (2008) (quoting In the Interest of Doe, 96 Hawai ‘i 73, 81, 26 
P.3d 562, 570 (2001)).  Under our current 
caselaw, the admission of a 
witness’s prior out -of-court statements does not violate a defendant’s 
confrontation and cross -examination rights even when the witness is 
completely unable  to remember the subject matter of the prior statement.  See  
State v. Fields, 115 Hawai ‘i 503, 517, 168 P.3d 955, 969 (2007).  However, the 
continuing viability of this precedent has been called into doubt by o
ur more 
recent holding that the confrontation clause of the Hawai ‘i Constitution is 
“satisfied” only by “sufficient and meaningful” cross -examination .
  State v. 
Nofoa, 135 Hawai‘ i 220, 230- 31, 349 P.3d 327, 337 -38 (2015).  It is thus 
noteworthy that, in addition to all of the stated reasons underlying our 
analysis, our holding is consistent with our duty to adopt an evidentiary  
interpretation that avoids addressing a grave constitutional question.  That 
is, by concluding  that Officer Ostachuk’s report was inadmissible on the 
basis of our evidentiary rules, we render it  unnecessary to  address Abrigo’s 
contention that the officer’s near -total lack of recollection violated his 
constitutional right to confront  and cross -examine the witnesses against him.  
 21 The treatise on which the dissent relies also  counsels that the 
exclusion of law enforcement reports in the public records hearsay exception 
should not be used to exclude various public records for which another 
“narrow and specific” hearsay exception applies  in the rare instance in which 
they are authored by police.  Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. Kirkpatrick, 
Federal Evidence § 8:90 (4th ed. 2018).  These include the “vital statistics” 
of birth, death, or marriage that are typically admissible under the federal 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 addressed the extent to which the law enforcement exclusion in 
the public record exception bars the admission of purely routine 
observational data.  See Davis, 140 Hawai‘i at 259 n.15, 400 P.3d 
at 460 n.15 (declining to reach the issue).  Assuming such 
informational data c annot be admitted through this route or by 
properly authenticated documentary evidence, see HRE Rule 901, a 
police report or any other document, photograph, or object may 
be used to refresh an officer’s memory both before testifying 
and while on the stand.  See HRE Rule 612.  Only when the 
officer’s recollection of the events underlying the report is so 
inadequate that reviewing the report or other refreshing item is 
unable to bring these details to mind and other means are not 
available would the admissibility of routine observational data 
under HRE Rule 803 require consideration.  This rare scenario 
cannot drive the result of our analysis when the alternative --
depriving the defendant of meaningful cross-examination of a 
                                                                              
(. . . continued)  
 
equivalent of HRE Rule 803(b)(9)  and a certificate indicating the absence of 
a public record that is usually admissible under the federal equivalent of 
HRE Rule 803(b)(10).  Id.  Although we need not now decide the full extent of 
law enforcement records excluded by the public records hearsay exception, the 
treatise’s position is consistent with the longstanding maxim of statutory 
interpretation that, “where there is a ‘plainly irreconcilable’ conflict 
between a general and a specific statute concerning the same subject matter, 
the specific will be favored.”  Richardson v. City & Cty . of Honolulu, 76 
Hawai‘i 46, 55, 868 P.2d 1193, 1202 (1994) (quoting Mahiai v. Suwa, 69 Haw. 
349, 356– 57, 742 P.2d 359, 366 (1987)).  Thus, the more specific inclusion of 
vital statistics would likely control over the more general exclusion of law 
enforcement reports included in the public record exception.  
Similarly, the 
more specific exclusion of law enforcement reports takes precedence over the 
more general inclusion of a witness’s recorded past recollections.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 significant State’s witness--is the outcome of the dissent’s 
position.  To hold that reading the contents of the police 
report is admissible in this case
, in which the witness was the 
only source of evidence against the defendant, would establish  a 
precedent for trials to be determined on the basis of police 
reports and not testimony, ultimately compromising the 
fundamental rights of defendants and the ability of factfinders 
to accurately determine the issues before them.   
 
 Thus, we now formally hold that police reports may not 
be admitted against a defendant in a criminal case under the HRE 
Rule 802.1(4) past recollection recorded 
hearsay exception.  We 
conclude that Officer Ostachuk’s report could not have been 
admitted under the public records exception, and thus the past 
recollection recorded exception could not serve as a “back door” 
to read the report into evidence.  Accordingly, the ICA erred in 
holding that the content of Officer Ostachuk’s report was 
admissible.22  Because Officer Ostachuk’s testimony was the only 
evidence presented by the State, Abrigo’s conviction cannot 
stand. 
                     
 22 In holding that Officer Ostachuk’s testimony was admissible under 
the past recollection recorded exception, the ICA relied  on State v. Bloss, 3 
Haw. App. 274, 649 P.2d 1176 (1982).  In Bloss, the ICA held that a police 
officer could read a parking citation that he issued into evidence under the 
past recollection recorded exception.  Id.  at 278, 649 P.2d at 1179.  Bloss  
did not evaluate the legislative intent of the public records exception, nor 
did it discuss the public records exception at all.  We thus overrule Bloss  
to the extent that it may be read to allow such a record to be admitted under 
the past recorded recollection exception.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 IV. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s judgment on appeal 
is vacated, the judgment of conviction is vacated, and the case 
is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. 
Susan Arnett 
Taryn R. Tomasa 
for petitioner 
 
Brian R. Vincent 
For respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
