                                                                 
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-30070 28-FEB-2014 07:46 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
COLLEEN P. COLLINS, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
JOHN A. WASSELL, Respondent/Defendant-Appellee.
 
                                                            
SCWC-30070
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 30070; FC-D NO. 07-1-0206)
 
FEBRUARY 28, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND McKENNA, JJ., WITH ACOBA, J.,
CONCURRING SEPARATELY, AND POLLACK, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
In June 2000, Colleen Collins and John Wassell gathered
 
at a park with their friends, families, and a minister, for the
 
apparent purpose of getting married. 
After the wedding ceremony,
 
the couple began having second thoughts about the marriage
 because of its financial implications. Specifically, they
 believed that Collins and her two daughters would be better able
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to afford college tuition if Collins was listed as a single
 
parent on financial aid applications. Thus, the couple requested
 that the minister not submit the completed license and
 certificate of marriage to the State Department of Health. The
 minister returned the form to Collins and Wassell, and they
 subsequently wrote to the State Department of Health stating that
 they were not getting married. 
Following a one-week honeymoon, Collins and Wassell
 
began living together. They each maintained individual financial
 accounts, but also shared a joint bank account. The couple
 deposited monetary gifts from their wedding into the joint
 account and they each agreed to deposit funds into the account. 
Collins made regular monthly deposits to the joint account. 
Collins also deposited funds from the sale of her separately
 owned townhouse and a tax refund into the joint account. Funds
 from the joint account were used to pay off the mortgage on
 Wassell’s separately owned house, and for the couple’s shared
 utility and grocery bills. The couple legally married in January
 2005, after Collins no longer needed financial aid to fund her
 daughters’ college educations.
 
In 2007, Collins filed for divorce against Wassell, and
 
argued that she was entitled to an equalization payment for her
 contributions during the period of premarital cohabitation. 
Wassell, however, maintained that an equalization payment was not
 warranted because he and Collins had agreed that they would each
 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
maintain separate financial identities until the time of their 
legal marriage. The family court agreed with Wassell and determined that the couple did not form a premarital economic partnership within the meaning of Helbush v. Helbush, 108 Hawai' i 
508, 122 P.3d 288 (App. 2005).
1 The Intermediate Court of 
Appeals affirmed the divorce decree entered by the family court, and Collins sought review in this court. 
For the reasons set forth below, we now affirm the rule 
set forth in Helbush, that, in dividing and distributing property of a married couple pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
section 580-47, premarital contributions are a relevant consideration where the parties cohabited and formed a premarital economic partnership. We further hold that the family court clearly erred in concluding that Collins and Wassell did not form a premarital economic partnership. We therefore vacate the judgment of the ICA and the family court’s divorce decree and remand to the family court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Because our resolution of these two issues is dispositive, we do not consider Collins’s arguments that: (1) in the absence of a premarital economic partnership the family court should have nevertheless considered her premarital contributions; 
1
 As discussed further infra, the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
determined in Helbush that “a ‘premarital economic partnership’ occurs when,
prior to their subsequent marriage, [two people] cohabit and apply theirfinancial resources as well as their individual energies and efforts to andfor the benefit of each other’s person, assets, and liabilities.”  108 Hawai 'i 
at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. 
-3­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and (2) premarital contributions are a valid and relevant
 
consideration warranting deviation from partnership principles.
 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
A. Family Court Proceedings
 
On August 8, 2007, Collins filed a complaint for
 
divorce against Wassell, alleging that their marriage was
 
irretrievably broken. In her position statement, Collins stated
 that she should be awarded an equalization payment for her
 contributions during the couple’s premarital cohabitation:
 
Cohabitation occurred on June 18, 2000 when
[Wassell] moved into [Collins’s townhouse].  [Wassell]
did not pay [Collins’s] mortgage at that time although
he was receiving rent from his house.  From the time
 of cohabitation until the date of marriage, the
parties had a joint financial relationship where
[Collins] paid off the mortgage in the marital house,
previously owned by [Wassell] and continued to pay
into the joint account from where joint bills were
paid.  Although[] marriage did not occur until 2005
equalization is due [Collins] for the amount of:
$74,122.00 . [Collins] is further entitled to her
prorata rental equity due to [Wassell’s] sole use of
the marital home during separation.
 
(Emphasis added). 
After Wassell filed an answer, he filed a motion for
 
partial summary judgment, requesting that the family court
 
determine the following: (1) the couple was married on
 January 19, 2005; (2) the couple agreed after their wedding
 ceremony on June 19, 2000, that they would not file their
 marriage license and would not be married; (3) the purpose of the
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
couple not filing their marriage license was to allow Collins to
 
complete financial aid forms as a single parent; and (4) the
 couple’s “arrangement, whereby the partners would cohabitate but
 keep their finances separate while maintaining their single
 status . . . in lieu of a traditional marriage indefinitely and
 expressly for [Collins’s] personal financial interest” was a
 valid and enforceable premarital agreement. 
Collins filed an opposition to Wassell’s motion arguing
 
that pursuant to the ICA’s decision in  Helbush , she and Wassell
 
had formed a premarital economic partnership after their 2000
 wedding ceremony. The family court granted the motion in part,
 determining that Wassell’s and Collins’s date of marriage (DOM)
 was January 19, 2005, but denied the motion as to the remaining
 issues. 
Wassell argued in his position statement the following:
 
[Collins] argues for deviation from the
Partnership Model division based upon DOM [(]January
19, 2005) valuations.  [Collins’s] argument is based
upon a June 18, 2000 marriage ceremony which she put
on for show.  Although [Wassell] thought that the
marriage was taking place, at the post-ceremony
reception [Collins] told [Wassell] that she did not
want the marriage for financial reasons.  [Collins’s]
daughters were about to attend prestigious colleges[.]
. . .  [Collins] would need financial aid to pay for
the $30,000 plus annual cost.  If [Collins] was
married the financial aid available would be less.
  
[Collins] wanted to keep their finances separate so
she could complete the financial aid forms showing her
separate individual income and expenses.  [Wassell]
agreed not to be married on June 18, 2000 and to keep
their finances separate.
It is [Wassell’s] position that there was no
joint financial relationship from June 18, 2000, as
[Collins] contends.  It is [Wassell’s] position that
they loved each other and wanted to live together.
  
When they lived together as gestures of their love
 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
they bought each other meals, and shared their living
arrangements and helped each other in various ways.
 
A one-day trial was held on the division of the
 
parties’ marital estate. Collins and Wassell were the only two
 
witnesses to testify and they testified in relevant part as
 follows.
 
Collins testified that, on June 18, 2000, she and
 
Wassell had a wedding ceremony with their friends, families, and
 a minister. After the ceremony, the couple signed the marriage
 license, but neither Collins nor Wassell mailed the marriage
 license to the State Department of Health because Collins “was
 afraid that [her] daughters would lose a lot of financial aid
 that they were receiving for college.” Specifically, Collins was
 concerned that the colleges would consider both her and Wassell’s
 incomes in determining financial aid awards for her daughters if
 she were married. Wassell told Collins that he thought her
 daughters should pay their own way through college. Collins did
 not believe that it was Wassell’s responsibility to help pay for
 her daughters’ college educations. 
Collins further testified that, following their
 
honeymoon, for a few weeks the couple moved back and forth
 between Collins’s separately owned townhouse and Wassell’s
 separately owned house. Wassell then moved into Collins’s
 townhouse. Wassell moved all of his furniture into the
 townhouse, but left some appliances in his house. While the
 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
couple was living at the townhouse, Wassell did not pay any part
 
of the mortgage nor did he pay rent to Collins. Collins paid for
 all of the townhouse’s utilities. Collins acknowledged that
 Wassell may have done small things around the townhouse, but
 testified that he did not make any major repairs. While Wassell
 was living in Collins’s townhouse, he was able to rent out his
 house. 
Collins testified that, even though they were not
 
legally married between June 2000 and January 2005, she and
 Wassell conducted their finances as if they were married. 
Specifically, Collins testified that although she and Wassell
 agreed to maintain their individual bank accounts, they also
 agreed to contribute to a joint bank account, which would be used
 to pay for shared living expenses. The monetary gifts the couple
 received at their wedding ceremony, totaling $1,120, were
 deposited into this joint account. Collins regularly deposited
 between $500 and $700 a month into the joint account. Collins
 also deposited a personal income tax refund totaling $1,043.60
 into the joint account. According to Collins, Wassell made a few
 contributions to the account. 
Collins sold the townhouse in 2001, at which point the
 
couple moved into Wassell’s house. The money from the sale of
 Collins’s townhouse, totaling $23,020.74, was deposited into the
 joint account. On the same day that deposit was made, $4,239.59
 from the joint account was used to pay off the mortgage on
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Wassell’s house. Funds from the joint account were also used to
 
pay for the utilities of Wassell’s house, the couple’s groceries,
 and gas for Collins’s and Wassell’s vehicles. Collins and
 Wassell continuously cohabited until their separation on
 January 1, 2007. Collins testified that, as of 2004, all of her
 friends thought that she was married. 
Wassell testified that he made repairs and improvements
 
to Collins’s townhouse, such as replacing a water heater,
 painting, and fixing the plumbing, louvered windows, and an
 outdoor clothesline. Wassell acknowledged that Collins had paid
 approximately $4,200 to pay off the mortgage on his house, and
 testified that, after they were separated in 2007, he offered to
 repay Collins the money. 
With regard to the marriage license that was signed but
 
never submitted to the State Department of Health, Wassell
 testified that Collins wanted to remain single for purposes of
 completing the financial aid forms. Wassell further testified
 that he and Collins therefore agreed to have separate finances. 
According to Wassell, that agreement lasted until January 19,
 2005, when he and Collins were officially married. At that
 point, Collins no longer needed to submit financial aid
 applications. 
Wassell also testified that he made deposits into the
 
joint account, which was previously held in his name only. 
Wassell explained that he and Collins set up the joint account so
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that they could both have access to its money, and so that bills
 
could be paid automatically from the account. 
Wassell indicated that he (1) paid Collins $1,000 on
 
April 17, 2001, (2) paid for the propane, internet, and telephone
 bills with funds from his separate bank account, and (3) paid for
 food between ninety and ninety-five percent of the time that he
 and Collins went out to eat. 
The family court made the following relevant findings
 
of fact:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . .
 
16.	 Ms. Collins believed that if she were to marry
Mr. Wassell and disclose financial information
 
reflecting her change in financial status to the
two colleges, she would likely be unable to
afford the resulting tuition, with the
consequence that her daughters would not be able
to attend those colleges.
 
17.	 In order to avoid that consequence, Ms. Collins
and Mr. Wassell agreed that they would not mail
their marriage license and certificate to the
Department of Health, and that each of them
would maintain separate financial identities, so
that Ms. Collins could continue to qualify for
the financial aid she needed to send her
 daughters to their schools of choice.
 
18.	 Ms. Collins believed that the financial
 
responsibility for sending her daughters to
college was hers alone, and that Mr. Wassell did
not share in that obligation, and for his part,
Mr. Wassell did not believe he was obligated to
assist Ms. Collins with the financial burden
 
arising from her daughters’ college education. 
. . . .
 21.	 Mr. Wassell owned a residence in Hawaiian
 
Paradise Park, and Ms. Collins owned a townhouse
in Pacific Heights.
 
22.	 For a time, the couple went back and forth
between the two residences, then settled on
living in Ms. Collins’[s] townhouse.
 
23.	 Mr. Wassell’s house in Paradise Park was rented
 
out during some portion of the time that the
couple lived in Ms. Collins’[s] townhouse.
 
24.	 The rent that Mr. Wassell received from the
 
rental of his residence in Hawaiian Paradise
 Park was not shared with Ms. Collins.
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
25.	 Mr. Wassell did not pay rent to Ms. Collins
during the period that the couple was living in
Ms. Collins’[s] townhouse.
 
26.	 Shortly after the apparent marriage in June of
2000, Ms. Collins’[s] name was added to an
account that Mr. Wassell had at CU Hawaii FCU,
and the account thereafter remained a joint
account.
 
27.	 The couple agreed that the joint account would
be used for household expenses; both were to
deposit funds in the account.
 
28.	 The couple received wedding gifts and gifts of
cash at their apparent wedding in June, 2000;
the cash gifts were deposited into the joint
credit union account.
 
29.	 Following her addition to the joint account, Ms.
Collins made regular monthly deposits, typically
in the amount of $500.00, into the joint
account.
 
30.	 Mr. Wassell made few, if any, deposits into the
joint account during the years 2000 through
2007.
 
31.	 The funds in the joint account were used
primarily for household expenses, i.e. food and
household utilities.
 
. . . .
 47.	 On the date of the legal marriage on January 19,
2005, Ms. Collins was owed a debt by Mr. Wassell
in the amount of $4,239.59, which had been
incurred when Ms. Collins used her funds to pay
off the balance of Mr. Wassell’s mortgage in
December, 2001.
 
. . . .
 67.	 On the [date of marriage (DOM)], [Collins] was
owed a debt with a [net market value (NMV)] of
$4,239.59 by [Wassell] (for the mortgage payoff
on the HPP property).  On the [date of the
conclusion of the evidentiary part of trial
(DOCOEPOT)], this debt remained unpaid, and thus
unchanged in value.  The DOM NMV of this debt is
 [Collins’s] Category 1 asset.
. . . .
 
As relevant here, in its third conclusion of law, the
 
family court stated that “[b]etween the dates of June 18, 2000,
 
and January 19, 2005, the parties did not participate in an
 ‘economic partnership’ within the meaning of
 Helbush [], and the
 
division of their marital assets by the court must therefore be
 based upon the date of their legal marriage.” In summary, the
 family court analyzed this issue as follows. 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The family court explained that, under Helbush,
 
cohabitation alone is insufficient to establish an economic
 
partnership. Specifically, the family court explained that
 “there must be a commingling of finances, assets, and energies
 sufficiently comprehensive to establish a ‘partnership.’” The
 family court stated that “there is no such thing, for these
 purposes, as a ‘partial partnership.’” In this regard, the
 family court explained that “[p]arties who are emotionally
 involved with one another and who are cohabiting must inevitably
 [commingle] their energies and finances to some extent — the
 exigencies of normal life and collective activity could scarcely
 allow it to be otherwise.” Thus, the family court observed,
 “some measure of such commingling is to be expected in every
 instance of cohabitation, and does not by its mere existence rise
 to the level necessary to establish a Helbush ‘economic
 partnership.’” 
The family court then evaluated whether Collins and
 
Wassell had “committed their energies and their assets to one
 another’s purposes to the extent necessary to warrant a
 conclusion that they were engaged in a relationship akin to that
 found in a business partnership.” The family court stated that
 although Collins and Wassell “quite explicitly commingled a
 portion of their funds for housekeeping purposes,” they also
 “simultaneously maintained distinct separate financial
 identities.” 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The family court explained that the most obvious
 
example of Collins’s and Wassell’s separate financial identities
 
was the couple’s conscious decision not to make their first
 marriage legal “for the express purpose of maintaining separate
 financial identities.” The family court noted that Collins and
 Wassell had two motives in agreeing not to be married. First,
 Collins sought to take full advantage of the financial aid
 available to her, and, second, Wassell “could refrain from
 shouldering any share of that not insignificant burden.” The
 family court stated that “[f]ar from reflecting the parties’
 intention to ‘apply their financial resources to and for the
 benefit of each other’s persons, assets, and liabilities,’” these
 facts reflected “the parties’ express intention not to do so.” 
(Citation and ellipsis omitted). 
The family court specifically noted that Collins
 
represented in her financial aid applications that she was
 single, and that Collins and Wassell signed a letter to the State
 Department of Health representing that they had decided not to be
 married. The family court further noted that both Collins and
 Wassell maintained separate individual checking, savings, and
 retirement accounts, and life insurance policies, and that
 Collins and Wassell each appeared to hold title to their own
 vehicle. 
With respect to the joint account, the family court
 
observed that Collins was the primary, if not the exclusive,
 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contributor to the account, and that Collins’s monthly deposits
 
were “obviously insufficient to pay the living expenses of two
 adults.” The family court concluded that the “joint account no
 doubt reflected a measure of financial cooperation by the
 parties, but it seems wholly inadequate to carry the weight of
 establishing an economic partnership between them.” 
Based on its findings and conclusions, the family court
 
divided the marital estate and concluded that under a strict
 application of marital partnership principles, Collins would owe
 Wassell an equalization payment of $11,807.85. However, because
 Wassell had wasted assets after the family court’s express order
 to the contrary, the court concluded that Collins was entitled to
 a deviation in the amount of $17,238.05. Accordingly, the family
 court ordered Wassell to pay a final equalization payment of
 $5,430.20, the difference between the deviation and Collins’s
 equalization payment. 
The family court filed its divorce decree, and Collins
 
appealed. 
B. ICA Appeal
 
On appeal, Collins argued that the family court
 
incorrectly valued the parties’ financial contributions on the
 
date of marriage.
2 Instead, Collins argued, the family court
 
2
 Collins challenged Findings of Fact Nos. 17, 18, and 67, which are
 
set forth above, as well as several Findings of Fact (Nos. 68, 70, 71, 73-76,
78-80, and 82) that valued various assets as of the date of marriage. She
 also challenged Conclusion of Law No. 3, and the family court’s decision.  The
 
(continued...)
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
should have concluded that Collins and Wassell formed a
 
premarital economic partnership on the date of their wedding
 ceremony, and should have calculated the value of the parties’
 assets and any equalization payments based on that date. Collins
 asserted that the majority of the family court’s findings
 supported a conclusion that the parties had formed a premarital
 economic partnership. Collins argued that the family court’s
 finding that the parties initially agreed not to become legally
 married in order to avoid negative financial aid consequences for
 Collins’s daughters did not void this premarital economic
 partnership. 
A majority of the ICA affirmed the family court’s
 
divorce decree. The ICA “decline[d] to overturn” the family
 court’s determination that Collins and Wassell had not formed a
 premarital economic partnership, noting that the factors the
 family court cited in support of its decision “were relevant to
 evaluating the parties’ intent and the degree to which they
 applied their resources and efforts ‘to and for the benefit of
 each other’s person, assets, and liabilities.’” In addition, the
 ICA concluded that the family court’s decision was based on
 
2(...continued)
ICA concluded that Findings of Fact 17, 18, and 67 were not clearly erroneous,
and that the remaining challenged factual findings were not erroneous because
the family court determined that Collins and Wassell had not entered into a
premarital economic partnership.  The ICA therefore concluded that the date of
 marriage was the relevant date for valuing Wassell’s assets, dividing the
couple’s assets, and equalizing the parties’ obligations.  Collins’s
 
application does not separately address these findings of fact. 
   
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factual findings supported by substantial evidence. The ICA
 
further concluded that because no premarital economic partnership
 was formed, it did not need to address Collins’s argument that
 the family court erred in using the date of marriage in valuing
 Wassell’s assets, dividing the parties’ assets, and equalizing
 the parties’ obligations. 
In a dissenting opinion, Judge Reifurth stated that the
 
family court erred in failing to utilize the analysis required by
 
Helbush in determining that Collins and Wassell had not formed a
 
premarital economic partnership. Judge Reifurth noted that the
 family court’s analysis focused on Collins’s and Wassell’s
 attempt to maintain separate “financial identities,” which he
 argued was not solely determinative of whether a premarital
 economic partnership was formed. Specifically, Judge Reifurth
 explained that:
 
The ultimate issues are whether, and the extent to
which, prior to the [date of marriage], the parties
applied their financial resources and individual
energies for each other’s person, assets, and
liabilities, not whether, and the extent to which, the
parties created joint bank accounts or added both of
their names to their cars’ titles.  Thus, the thrust
of the Family Court’s inquiry must be to consider the
nature and degree of such application, and it must do
so adequately.
. . . .
 I would vacate the Family Court’s conclusion of law
no. 3 [] that no premarital economic partnership was
formed because the court took into consideration
 multiple irrelevant factors without considering
multiple relevant factors that focus less on the form
of the relationship and more on the day-to-day reality
of how it worked, when making its decision.
 
(Footnote omitted). 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Standard of Review
 
A. Family Court Decisions
 
The family court’s [findings of fact] are reviewed on
appeal under the “clearly erroneous” standard.  A
 [finding of fact] is clearly erroneous when (1) the
record lacks substantial evidence to support the
finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in
support of the finding, the appellate court is
nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction
 that a mistake has been made.  “Substantial evidence”
 is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion. 
On the other hand, the family court’s [conclusions of
law] are reviewed on appeal de novo , under the
right/wrong standard. [Conclusions of law],
consequently, are []not binding upon an appellate
court and are freely reviewable for their correctness.
 
Kakinami v. Kakinami , 127 Hawai' i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 
(2012) (citations omitted).
 
IV. Discussion
 
In her application, Collins raises the following
 
question: whether the family court misapplied the premarital
 
cohabitation rule set out in Helbush in concluding that Collins
 
and Wassell had not entered into a premarital economic
 partnership. We now affirm the rule set forth in Helbush, that,
 in dividing and distributing property pursuant to HRS § 580-47,
 premarital contributions are a relevant consideration where the
 parties cohabited and formed a premarital economic partnership. 
We further hold that the family court erred in concluding that
 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Collins and Wassell did not form a premarital economic
 
partnership.3
  
A. An overview of Hawai' i’s property division scheme 
In Hawai' i, “[t]here is no fixed rule for determining 
the amount of property to be awarded each spouse in a divorce action other than as set forth [in] HRS § 580-47.” Kakinami, 127 
Hawai'i at 136-37, 276 P.3d at 705-06 (citing Tougas v. Tougas, 
76 Hawai' i 19, 26, 868 P.2d 437, 444 (1994)). Under HRS § 580­
47, the family court has wide discretion to divide marital property according to what is “just and equitable.” Tougas, 76 
Hawai'i at 26, 868 P.2d at 444 (citing Gussin v. Gussin, 73 Haw. 
470, 479, 836 P.2d 484, 489 (1992)). 
As this court has explained, when the directive of the
 
court is to do what is just and equitable, each case must be
 decided upon its own facts and circumstances. Gussin, 73 Haw. at
 
479, 836 P.2d at 489 (citing Carson v. Carson, 50 Haw. 182, 183,
 436 P.2d 7, 9 (1967)). Of course, this discretion is not without
 limitation. A grant of discretion means that “the court has a
 range of choice, and that its decision will not be disturbed as
 long as it stays within that range and is not influenced by any
 
3
 In her application, Collins also raises two additional questions:
 
(1) whether the rule set forth in Helbush precludes the family court from
considering premarital contributions in the absence of a premarital economic
partnership; and (2) assuming that the parties did not enter into a premarital
economic partnership, did the ICA gravely err in not considering whether
Collins’s premarital contributions were a valid and relevant consideration
warranting deviation from the marital partnership categories.  Insomuch as we
 
conclude that the family court erred in finding that Collins and Wassell did
not form a premarital economic partnership, we do not consider these
additional arguments.
 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
mistake of law.” Gussin, 73 Haw. at 479, 836 P.2d at 489
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). “To the extent
 
that a certain degree of uniformity, stability, clarity or
 predictability of family court decisions can be attained, while
 at the same time preserving the wide discretion mandated by HRS
 § 580–47, judges are compelled to apply the appropriate law to
 the facts of each case and be guided by reason and conscience to
 attain a just result.” Id. at 486, 836 P.2d at 492 (internal
 
quotation marks omitted). 
Consistent with the wide discretion bestowed on the
 
family court, HRS § 580-47 provides that upon granting a divorce,
 the family court may “make any further orders as shall appear
 just and equitable . . . finally dividing and distributing the
 estate of the parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether
 community, joint, or separate[.]” HRS § 580-47(a). Section 580­47 further provides that in making these orders, the family court
 shall consider the respective merits of the parties, the relative
 abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will
 be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for
 the benefit of the children of the parties, the concealment of or
 failure to disclose income or an asset, any violation of a
 restraining order by either party, and all other circumstances of
 the case. HRS § 580-47(a). 
Cases in this jurisdiction have “created a framework
 
based on partnership principles that provides further guidance
 
-18­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for family courts to use in dividing property upon divorce.” 
Kakinami , 127 Hawai' i at 137, 276 P.3d at 706. In Gussin, this 
court rejected the notion that the division and distribution of
 
the estates of parties must commence at uniform starting points. 
73 Haw. at 486, 836 P.2d at 492. This court held that the
 concept of uniform starting points “restrict[ed] the family
 courts’ discretion in the equitable division and distribution of
 parties’ estates.” Id. The court specifically rejected the
 
ICA’s “rebuttable presumptions” that bound a judge to presume
 specific percentage splits in the division of each category of
 property. Id. at 481, 836 P.2d at 490. This court instead
 
determined that “the ‘partnership model of marriage’ provides the
 necessary guidance to the family courts in exercising their
 discretion and to facilitate appellate review.” Id. at 486, 836
 
P.2d at 492. Specifically, the court noted:
 
This court has accepted the “time honored proposition
that marriage is a partnership to which both partners
bring their financial resources as well as their
individual energies and efforts.”  The ICA has also
 acknowledged that, in divorce proceedings regarding
division and distribution of the parties’ estate,
“partnership principles guide and limit the range of
the family court’s choices.”
 
Under general partnership law, “each partner is
entitled to be repaid his contributions to the
partnership property, whether made by way of capital
or advances.”  Absent a legally permissible and
binding partnership agreement to the contrary,
“partners share equally in the profits of their
partnership, even though they may have contributed
unequally to capital or services.”  Hawaii partnership
law provides in relevant part as follows:
 
Rules determining rights and duties of partners. The
rights and duties of the partners in relation to the
partnership shall be determined, subject to any
agreement between them, by the following rules:
 
-19­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(a) Each partner shall be repaid the partner’s
contributions, whether by way of capital or advances
to the partnership property and share equally in the
profits and surplus remaining after all liabilities,
including those to partners, are satisfied; and must
contribute towards the losses, whether of capital or
otherwise, sustained by the partnership according to
the partner’s share in the profits.
 
Id. at 483-84, 836 P.2d at 491 (citations omitted).
 
In Tougas, this court again endorsed the “partnership
 
model” and noted that the family court can utilize the following
 
five categories of net market values as guidance in divorce
 cases:
 
Category 1.  The net market value (NMV), plus or
minus, of all property separately owned by one spouse
on the date of marriage (DOM) but excluding the NMV
attributable to property that is subsequently legally
gifted by the owner to the other spouse, to both
spouses, or to a third party.
 
Category 2.  The increase in the NMV of all property
whose NMV on the DOM is included in category 1 and
that the owner separately owns continuously from the
DOM to the DOCOEPOT [date of the conclusion of the
evidentiary part of the trial].
 
Category 3.  The date-of-acquisition NMV, plus or
minus, of property separately acquired by gift or
inheritance during the marriage but excluding the NMV
attributable to property that is subsequently legally
gifted by the owner to the other spouse, to both
spouses, or to a third party.
 
Category 4.  The increase in the NMV of all property
whose NMV on the date of acquisition during the
marriage is included in category 3 and that the owner
separately owns continuously from the date of
acquisition to the DOCOEPOT.
 
Category 5.  The difference between the NMVs, plus or
minus, of all property owned by one or both of the
spouses on the DOCOEPOT minus the NMVs, plus or minus,
includable in categories 1, 2, 3, and 4.
 
76 Hawai' i at 27, 868 P.2d at 445 (citation omitted). 
The court in Tougas further noted that the NMVs in
 
Categories 1 and 3 are the parties’ “capital contributions” that
 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
are, pursuant to general partnership law, returned to each
 
spouse. Id. (citations omitted). Categories 2 and 4 are the
 
“during-the-marriage increase in NMVs of the Categories 1 and 3
 Properties owned at DOCOEPOT[,]” which similar to partnership
 profits, are generally to be shared equally. Id. Thus, these
 
cases establish that the “partnership model is the appropriate
 law for the family courts to apply when exercising their
 discretion in the adjudication of property division in divorce
 proceedings.” Id. at 28, 868 P.2d at 446.
 
B.	 Premarital contributions are a relevant consideration in
 
dividing the marital estate
 
This case presents an issue of first impression for
 
this court, i.e., whether premarital contributions made during a
 
period of cohabitation are a relevant consideration in dividing
 property pursuant to HRS § 580-47. A long line of ICA cases has
 concluded that premarital contributions are relevant in dividing
 the marital estate. For the reasons set forth below, we also
 hold that premarital contributions may be considered by the
 family court in dividing the martial estate when the parties
 entered into a premarital economic partnership and cohabited
 prior to marriage.
 
The proposition that parties may enter into an economic
 
partnership prior to marriage first appears to have been
 recognized in Raupp v. Raupp, 3 Haw. App. 602, 609 n.7, 658 P.2d
 329, 335 n.7 (1983). In Raupp, the ICA noted that “[w]here the
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
parties first commenced an economic partnership and later 
married, it may be appropriate to obtain [an itemized description and value of all property owned by each party] as of the time they commenced their economic partnership,” in dividing the martial estate upon divorce. Id.; see also Higashi v. Higashi, 
106 Hawai' i 228, 241, 103 P.3d 388, 401 (App. 2004) (noting that 
the economic partnership begins on the earlier of the date of marriage or the date the parties first commenced their economic partnership that continued when they married). Raupp and Higashi 
therefore stand for the general proposition that premarital circumstances may be relevant in distributing property upon divorce if the couple formed an economic partnership prior to marriage. 
In Malek v. Malek, 7 Haw. App. 377, 379, 768 P.2d 243,
 
246 (1989), the ICA held that the family court properly
 considered contributions made by one spouse to the other spouse’s
 separate property during the couple’s premarital cohabitation and
 subsequent marriage. In Malek, the only major asset involved in
 the divorce was the husband’s lease of a two-acre parcel of land
 with a house on it. Id. at 378, 768 P.2d at 246. During a
 
sixteen-month period of premarital cohabitation, the couple lived
 together on this property. Id. at 379, 768 P.2d at 245. 
Although the husband provided all of the financial support for
 the couple, and the wife was unemployed, the wife assisted in
 upgrading the house. Id. at 379, 768 P.2d at 246. The family
 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court valued the husband’s lease at $92,000 when the couple began
 
living together, $113,000 when the couple married, and $115,000
 when the couple separated in contemplation of divorce. Id. at
 
378, 768 P.2d at 245. As part of its property division, the
 family court awarded the wife five percent (i.e., $6,650) of the
 property’s value on the date of marriage. Id.
 
On appeal, the husband argued that the family court
 
could not consider anything that happened before the couple was
 legally married in distributing property pursuant to HRS § 580­47. Id. at 380, 768 P.2d at 246. The ICA rejected this 
argument, concluding that the “family court’s discretion when dividing and distributing property and debts in divorce cases is not so restricted.” Id. The ICA held that “[w]hen the parties 
thereafter divorced, the family court, in the exercise of its duty to divide and distribute property in divorce cases, allowably considered their respective contributions to [the] separate property during both their premarital cohabitation and subsequent marriage.” Id.; see also Hussey v. Hussey, 77 Hawai' i 
202, 206, 881 P.2d 1270, 1274 (App. 1994) (defining premarital separate property as “property owned by each spouse immediately prior to their marriage or cohabitation that was concluded by their marriage”) (emphasis added)), overruled on other grounds by State v. Gonsales, 91 Hawai' i 446, 984 P.2d 1272 (App. 1999). 
Thus, pursuant to Malek, in making an equitable distribution of property pursuant to HRS § 580-47, the family court may consider 
-23­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contributions made to specific assets during a period of
 
premarital cohabitation. 7 Haw. App. at 379-80, 768 P.2d at 246.
 
Relying on Malek, 7 Haw. App. at 380, 768 P.2d at 246, 
the Helbush court concluded that where premarital cohabitation matures into marriage, the family court is generally allowed to consider the respective contributions of each spouse during both the premarital economic partnership and subsequent marriage in dividing and distributing property pursuant to a divorce. 108 Hawai'i at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. The Helbush court explained 
that “a ‘premarital economic partnership’ occurs when, prior to their subsequent marriage, [two people] cohabit and apply their financial resources as well as their individual energies and efforts to and for the benefit of each other’s person, assets, and liabilities.” Id. The Helbush court therefore concluded 
that the family court is allowed to consider premarital contributions of each spouse in dividing the marital estate when the couple formed an economic partnership and lived together prior to marriage.
4 
We now affirm the holding of Helbush that premarital
 
contributions are a relevant consideration when the parties
 entered into a premarital economic partnership during a period of
 
4
 To be clear, the rule set forth in Helbush applies only to
 
situations in which a relationship ultimately culminates in marriage, and does
not address circumstances where cohabitation does not result in marriage.  See
 
Maria v. Freitas, 73 Haw. 266, 274, 832 P.2d 259, 264 (1992) (holding that
“[a] person who is not legally married does not qualify for the positive legal
consequences of marriage” (citation omitted)).
 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
cohabitation. See Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 514-15, 122 P.3d at 
294-95. 
Our conclusion in this regard is consistent with HRS
 
§ 580-47 and our adoption of partnership principles, which, as
 
noted above, provide guidance for family courts in dividing
 property upon divorce. The family court is vested with wide
 discretion in “finally dividing and distributing the estate of
 the parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community, joint,
 or separate.” HRS § 580-47(a). In making a division and
 distribution of property, HRS § 580-47(a) identifies certain
 enumerated factors which the family court shall consider,
 including the respective merits of the parties, the relative
 abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will
 be left by the divorce, and “all other circumstances of the
 case.” HRS § 580-47(a) (emphasis added). Contributions made by
 either spouse after the couple entered into a premarital economic
 partnership are therefore included within “all [the] other
 circumstances of the case” which the family court is required to
 consider in determining an equitable distribution of the marital
 estate.
5 HRS § 580-47(a).
 
5
 The dissent argues that applying the test set forth above “may
 
lead to challenges of otherwise valid prenuptial agreements.”  Dissenting
 
opinion at 17.  As the dissent points out, however, Collins and Wassell did
not enter into a premarital agreement.  Dissenting opinion at 19.  Moreover,
where a couple has formed a premarital economic partnership, they are fully
able to control the disposition of property acquired during the premarital
period by executing a valid premarital or postmarital agreement. See HRS
 
§ 572D-3 (2006) (“Parties to a premarital agreement may contract with respect
to . . . [t]he rights and obligations of each of the parties in any of the
(continued...)
 
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.	 The family court erred in determining that a premarital
economic partnership was not formed
 
The family court determined that Collins and Wassell
 
did not form a premarital economic partnership because they
 
maintained “distinct separate financial identities,” and were
 therefore not “engaged in a relationship akin to that found in a
 business partnership.” Collins argues that, in evaluating
 whether she and Wassell entered into a premarital economic
 partnership, the family court did not adequately consider the
 nature and degree to which she and Wassell applied their
 resources, energies, and efforts for each other’s benefit, and
 that the family court relied on irrelevant factors, such as the
 parties’ admitted use of separate financial accounts, Collins’s
 filing financial aid applications as a single parent, and the
 parties’ letter to the Department of Health stating their
 intention not to be legally married. For the reasons set forth
 below, the family court erred in determining that Collins and
 Wassell did not enter into a premarital economic partnership.
 
As stated above, a premarital economic partnership is
 
formed when, “prior to their subsequent marriage, [two people]
 cohabit and apply their financial resources as well as their
 individual energies to and for the benefit of each other’s
 
5(...continued)
property of either or both of them whenever and wherever acquired or
located[.]”); HRS § 572-22 (2006) (“All contracts made between spouses . . .not otherwise invalid because of any other law, shall be valid.”).  A valid premarital or postmarital agreement must be enforced by the family court. 
 See 
Epp v. Epp , 80 Hawai 'i 79, 86, 905 P.2d 54, 61 (App. 1995). 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
person, assets, and liabilities.” Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 515, 
122 P.3d at 295. Whether a premarital economic partnership has 
been formed depends upon the intention of the parties. See, 
e.g., Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 
286, 302, 141 P.3d 459, 475 (2006) (“[W]hether an agreement creates a partnership or not depends upon the intention of the parties.” (Brackets in original and citation omitted)). Absent an express agreement, in evaluating whether the parties intended to form a premarital economic partnership, the family court must consider the totality of the circumstances, including both the economic and non-economic contributions of the parties. See 
Cassiday v. Cassiday, 68 Haw. 383, 387, 716 P.2d 1133, 1136 (1986) (“[M]arriage is a partnership to which both partners bring their financial resources as well as their individual energies and efforts.”); see also LeMere v. LeMere, 663 N.W.2d 789, 797 (Wis. 2003) (noting that marriage is “an equal partnership, in which the contributions of the spouse who is primarily engaged in child-rearing and homemaking are presumptively valued equally with those of the income-earning spouse”). In making this determination, relevant considerations may include, but are not limited to, joint acts of a financial nature, the duration of cohabitation, whether — and the extent to which — finances were commingled, economic and non-economic contributions to the household for the couple’s mutual benefit, and how the couple 
-27­   
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
treated finances before and after marriage.6 See, e.g., In re
 
Marriage of Clark, 71 P.3d 1228, 1230 (Mont. 2003) (concluding
 
that trial court did not err in considering premarital
 contributions where one spouse made improvements to the home and
 surrounding property of the other spouse); Floyd v. Floyd, 436
 S.E.2d 457, 459 (Va. Ct. App. 1993) (“[A] trial court may
 properly consider the parties’ premarital contributions, both
 monetary and nonmonetary, insofar as those contributions affected
 the value of the marital property but that cohabitation alone —
 absent a showing of its impact on marital property values — is
 not an appropriate consideration.”); Wall v. Moore, 704 A.2d 775,
 777 (Vt. 1997) (affirming the family court’s determination that
 it could consider the non-monetary and monetary contributions of
 the parties during their 11-year premarital relationship when
 dividing the couple’s assets upon divorce); Hendricks v.
 Hendricks, 784 N.E.2d 1024, 1028 (Ind. Ct. App. 2003) (concluding
 that trial court did not abuse its discretion in considering
 premarital contributions where spouse worked part-time, paid rent
 on couple’s home, and started business with other spouse). 
ICA cases applying the rule enunciated in Helbush have
 
therefore properly focused on both the financial and non-
financial aspects of the parties’ premarital relationship. See,
 
6
 The dissent argues that this test is “nearly unlimited” and
 
provides “no guidance” to the family court.  Dissenting opinion at 13.
Respectfully, the test to be used in evaluating whether a premarital economic
partnership has been formed must be flexible in order to accommodate the range
of factual circumstances presented to the family court.
 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
e.g., Chen v. Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai' i 346, 279 P.3d 11 (App. 
2012); Aiona-Agra v. Agra, No. 30685, 2012 WL 593105 (App. Feb. 
23, 2012) (SDO); Doe v. Roe, No. 28596, 2010 WL 2535138 (App. June 23, 2010) (mem. op.); Gordon v. Gordon, Nos. CAAP-12­0000806, CAAP-12-0001096, 2013 WL 6231721 (App. Nov. 29, 2013) (mem. op.) (upholding family court’s determination that a couple entered into a premarital economic partnership by jointly contributing capital and labor to real estate investments, and living in a relationship which culminated in marriage). 
For example, in Chen, Hui Z. Chen married Thomas J. 
Hoeflinger in 1995. 127 Hawai' i at 350, 352, 279 P.3d at 15, 17. 
Chen began living with Hoeflinger in 1992. Id. at 352, 279 P.3d 
at 17. The family court concluded that the couple entered into a premarital economic partnership when Chen “was employed at a hospital and she utilized her income to pay for the household expenses such as food and supplies to which [Hoeflinger] also contributed when [Chen’s] income was insufficient.” Id. at 359, 
279 P.3d at 24 (brackets in original). The family court further noted that Chen and Hoeflinger also enjoyed “all of the conjugal benefits as if they were husband and wife.” Id. On appeal, 
Hoeflinger contended that the family court erred in finding that he and Chen formed a premarital economic partnership. Id. at 
358, 279 P.3d at 23. Specifically, Hoeflinger argued that there was no premarital economic partnership because Chen did not contribute to or enhance the parties’ assets. Id. at 359 n.11, 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
279 P.3d at 24 n.11. The ICA rejected these arguments, noting 
that “[w]hen Chen paid for food and supplies for the benefit of
 Hoeflinger, it enhanced and supported Hoeflinger.” Id. 
In Aiona-Agra, the family court also determined that
 
Heather Aiona-Agra (Wife) and Jayson Javier Agra (Husband) formed
 a premarital economic partnership. 2012 WL 593105, at *3. On
 appeal, Husband argued that the record “fail[ed] to evidence a
 single ‘financial resource’ from [Wife] prior to their
 marriage[.]” Id. The ICA rejected this argument and concluded
 
that Husband’s position “ignore[d] the fact that the partnership
 model considers more than just monetary contributions to the
 partnership.” Id. The ICA determined that “the unchallenged
 
findings of fact establish that Wife contributed some ‘individual
 energies and efforts’ to the construction of the home and Husband
 lived rent-free with Wife and with Wife’s family, as a direct
 benefit of his relationship with Wife.” Id. Accordingly, the
 
ICA concluded that the family court did not err in finding that
 
-30­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Husband and Wife had formed a premarital economic partnership.7
 
Id.
 
In sum, these cases properly recognize that the family
 
court, in determining whether a premarital economic partnership
 
was entered into, must consider both the financial and non-
financial contributions of the parties during the premarital
 relationship. 
Here, the undisputed facts establish that Collins and 
Wassell formed a premarital economic partnership in 2000. In this regard, it is undisputed that following the wedding ceremony in 2000, the couple began living together. The couple continued to live together until they were legally married in 2005. Collins testified that, as of 2004, all of her friends thought that she was married. During this time, Collins and Wassell applied “their financial resources as well as their energies and efforts to and for the benefit of each other’s person, assets, and liabilities.” Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. 
7 In contrast, in Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *7, the ICA affirmed the
 
family court’s determination that no premarital economic partnership was
formed.  There, the couple had cohabited for approximately one year before
they married.  Id. at *1.  Two days prior to their date of marriage, the
husband purchased property in Kamuela.  Id. at *7.  Upon divorce, the family
court awarded the husband a capital contribution credit for the property.  Id.
 
at *1.  The family court concluded that “[s]imply cohabitating together does
not automatically transform a relationship into a premarital economic
partnership[.]”  Id. at *7.  The family court further made unchallenged
findings that there was no credible evidence that the wife had contributed
financially toward the purchase of the property, had worked to enhance its
value prior to the date of marriage, or had participated in its upkeep prior
to the date of marriage. Id.  The ICA therefore affirmed the family court’s
determination and noted that there was “no clear error in the family court’s
ruling.”  Id. 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Specifically, upon returning from their honeymoon, the
 
couple first lived in Collins’s townhouse. Collins thereby
 
applied her resources to the partnership by allowing Wassell to
 live in her townhouse rent-free. See Aiona-Agra, 2012 WL 593105,
 
at *3 (noting that it was relevant to the inquiry as to whether a
 premarital economic partnership was formed that one spouse lived
 rent-free with the other spouse’s family). Wassell, in turn,
 applied his energies and efforts to and for the benefit of the
 partnership by helping to make improvements to the townhouse,
 including installing a new water heater, painting some rooms, and
 making other small repairs. In addition to receiving the benefit
 of living in Collins’s townhouse rent-free, Wassell further
 benefitted from Collins’s contributions because he was able to
 rent out his separately owned house. 
The parties’ utilization of the joint bank account
 
further demonstrates the existence of a premarital economic
 partnership. Wassell created the joint account by adding
 Collins’s name to what had been his separate account. Following
 the 2000 wedding ceremony, the couple deposited cash gifts
 totaling more than $1,100 into the joint account. Collins also
 deposited proceeds from the sale of her townhouse totaling more
 than $23,000 into the joint account, and later deposited a tax
 refund of more than $1,000 into the account. The couple agreed
 that they would each deposit funds into the account, and that the
 funds would be used for household expenses. Collins made regular
 
-32­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
monthly deposits to the account, and the funds were used to pay 
off the mortgage on Wassell’s house, and to pay for household expenses, including groceries and household utilities.
8 
See Chen, 127 Hawai' i at 352, 359, 279 P.3d at 17, 24 (noting 
that a premarital economic partnership was formed when one spouse purchased food and supplies for the benefit of the other spouse during their premarital cohabitation). 
To the extent the family court noted that Collins’s
 
monthly contribution into the joint account was insufficient to
 cover the parties’ monthly expenses, the family court failed to
 recognize that the remainder of Collins’s and Wassell’s joint
 living expenses were presumably covered by one or both of the
 parties. Indeed, in addition to using funds from the joint
 account to pay for groceries and the utilities for Wassell’s
 house, evidence offered at trial indicated that Wassell
 occasionally bought groceries, and that, when the couple ate out,
 Wassell paid the bill between ninety and ninety-five percent of
 the time. 
After nearly five years of living together, the couple
 
legally married. Notably, nothing appears to have materially
 
8
 The dissent argues that we place “undue reliance” on the joint 
bank account.  Dissenting opinion at 15.  As explained above, in addition to
the joint account, the manner in which Collins and Wassell handled their realproperty and covered their mutual expenses further demonstrated that they hadformed a premarital economic partnership.  Moreover, in determining whether apremarital economic partnership has been formed, the relevant inquiry iswhether the parties have applied “their financial resources as well as theirindividual energies and efforts to and for the benefit of each other’s person,assets, and liabilities.”   Helbush, 108 Hawai 'i at 515, 122 P.3d at 295.  For 
all the reasons set forth above, that standard was plainly satisfied here. 
-33­        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
changed in the couple’s day-to-day relationship or how they 
managed their financial affairs. Indeed, Collins expressly testified that she and Wassell maintained separate bank accounts both before and after their legal marriage in 2005. It therefore appears that, even after they were legally married, the couple cohabited in Wassell’s house and continued to use the joint account as they had during their premarital relationship, i.e., as a common fund into which both made deposits and from which withdrawals were made to pay for communal expenses. Because Collins and Wassell applied “their financial resources as well as their energies and efforts to and for the benefit of each other’s person, assets, and liabilities,” Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 515, 
122 P.3d at 295, the family court erred in determining that Collins and Wassell had not entered into a premarital economic partnership. 
The family court further erred in relying on its 
finding that Collins and Wassell “maintained distinct separate financial identities.” Specifically, the family court noted that the couple maintained separate checking and savings accounts. However, the fact that Collins and Wassell each maintained separate financial accounts does not, in and of itself, support the family court’s ultimate determination that no premarital economic partnership was formed. See, e.g., Epp, 80 Hawai' i at 
93, 905 P.2d at 68 (noting that marital partners’ pattern or practice of conducting some or all of their property and 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
financial affairs as if they were not marital partners is not a 
basis for deviating from the partnership model). In focusing on “separate financial identities,” the family court failed to address whether the parties’ individual financial accounts were used to pay collective expenses. Put another way, the holding of funds in separate accounts is not dispositive when the parties’ respective financial resources, energies, and efforts are otherwise applied for each other’s mutual benefit. See Helbush, 
108 Hawai' i at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. 
Finally, the family court erroneously focused on
 
Collins’s representation on her daughters’ financial aid
 applications that she was single and the letter to the Department
 of Health signed by Collins and Wassell that indicated that they
 decided not to be married. Specifically, the family court
 appeared to suggest that it was inconsistent for Collins to
 assert that she and Wassell had entered into a premarital
 economic partnership after she stated on financial aid
 applications that she was single. 
First, it should be noted that Collins’s
 
representations on financial aid applications and to the
 Department of Health that she was unmarried were factually
 accurate, because Collins and Wassell were not, in fact, married
 until January 19, 2005. Indeed, it would have been inaccurate
 for Collins or Wassell to represent to financial aid
 representatives that they were married. Thus, Collins did not
 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
misrepresent her legal status on the financial aid applications
 
and the couple did not misrepresent their legal status in the
 letter to the Department of Health. 
Second, these representations are not necessarily
 
inconsistent with an intent to form a premarital economic
 partnership. Although Collins and Wassell agreed not to become
 legally married in 2000, that does not mean that they agreed they
 would not be economic partners. To the contrary, they
 immediately began behaving like the legally married couple that
 they eventually became. Again, the relevant inquiry is whether
 the parties intended to apply their resources, efforts, and
 energies for each other’s benefit before ultimately marrying. 
The funding source for Collins’s daughters’ college tuition is
 but one aspect of the couple’s financial circumstances, and
 Collins’s interest in receiving financial aid as a single parent
 is not sufficient to override the parties’ apparent intent to
 engage in a premarital economic partnership in all other aspects
 of their financial lives. Furthermore, it appears that both
 parties benefitted financially from these representations —
 Collins was able to send her daughters to the colleges of their
 choice, and Wassell presumably benefitted from funds that
 otherwise would have paid for college expenses. 
The family court’s valuation and division of Wassell’s
 
house illustrates why the court’s application of the principles
 set forth in Helbush failed to ensure a fair and equitable
 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
property distribution in this case. Collins argued that Wassell 
should be awarded the house, which he separately owned, but that she was entitled to an equalization payment for that property. As noted above, during the period of premarital cohabitation, Wassell lived rent-free in Collins’s townhouse, Wassell collected rent from his house, Collins used the proceeds from the sale of her separately owned townhouse to pay off the mortgage on Wassell’s house, and the couple eventually cohabited in Wassell’s house prior to their legal marriage. According to Collins, the value of the house more than doubled during that period. The family court nevertheless valued the property on the date of marriage and awarded it solely to Wassell. Under the principles set forth above, Wassell’s house should have been valued at the time that the premarital economic partnership began. Otherwise, Wassell is allowed to retain all of the appreciation attributable to Collins’s and Wassell’s joint efforts prior to marriage. See Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. 
While the family court is given broad deference to 
weigh the evidence and to determine credibility, see Booth v. Booth, 90 Hawai' i 413, 417, 978 P.2d 851, 855 (1999) (holding 
that “the family court assesses and weighs all valid and relevant considerations to exercise its equitable discretion in distributing marital property”), the family court here applied incorrect legal principles when considering the nature and degree to which the parties applied their financial resources, energies, 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and efforts for each other’s benefit. See Helbush, 108 Hawai' i 
at 515, 122 P.3d at 295. Under the circumstances of this case — 
particularly where the family court relied solely on the parties’ financial identities, failed to adequately consider the nature and degree to which the parties applied their financial resources, energies, and efforts for the benefit of each other, and weighed against the parties that they truthfully stated their marital status to third parties — the family court erred in determining that Collins and Wassell did not form a premarital economic partnership. 
V. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s
 
judgment, the family court’s Conclusion of Law No. 3, Findings of
 Fact No. 47, 67, 68, 70, 71, 73-76, 78-80, and 82, and the
 Decision, and the property-division and equalization provisions
 in the Divorce Decree. We remand to the family court to make a
 division and distribution of property in light of Collins’s and
 Wassell’s premarital economic partnership.
 
Joy A. San Buenaventura
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Andrew S. Iwashita 
for respondent 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
-38­