 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
MATTHEW K. WILLIAMS, 
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-16-0000630 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16 -0000630; 1PC141000589) 
 
JUNE 30, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, Mc KENNA, AND WILSON, JJ.
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE CHANG, FOR POLLACK, J., RECUSED 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J.  
 
  Petitioner/Defendant -Appellant  Matthew Williams 
(“Williams”) was convicted of four counts of sexual assault 
following a jury trial.  At trial, the prosecutor introduced to 
the jury incriminating statements, alleg edly made by Williams, 
without previously disclosing them to the defense during Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000630
30-JUN-2021
09:09 AM
Dkt. 79 OP 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 discovery as required by Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(“HRPP”) Rule 16(b) (1) (2016).1  The prosecutor also introduced 
statements, incriminating to the defendant, allegedly made by 
the complaining witness despite the court’s motion in limine 
ruling barring their introduction .  Finally, the prosecutor 
engaged in improper, unnecessarily lurid questioning of defense 
witnesses to inflame the passions of the jury.  The cumulative 
impact of the prosecutor ’s misconduct deprived Williams of a 
fair trial  and was, therefore , not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.   
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1  HRPP Rule 16(b) (1) provides, in relevant part:  
 
(b) Disclosure by the Prosecution.  
 
 (1) Disclosure of Matters Within Prosecution's    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Possession.  The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant   
or the defendant' s attorney the following material and   
information within the prosecutor's possession or control:  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  . . . .  
(ii) any written or recorded statements and the  
substance of any oral statements made by the   
defendant, or made by a co -defendant  if intended to  
be used in a joint trial, together with the names and 
last known addresses of persons who witnessed the  
making of such statements;  
 
(iii) any reports or statements of experts, which  
were made in connection with the pa rticular case or  
which the prosecutor intends to introduce, or which  
are material to the preparation of the defense and  
are specifically designated in writing by defense  
counsel, including results of physical or mental  
examinations  and of scientific tests, experiments, or 
comparisons[.]   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3   (continued . . .)  I. BACKGROUND 
A. Indictment and Pretrial Proceedings 
Williams was indicted on April 9, 2014, on one count 
of sexual assault agai nst a minor in the first degree, in 
violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 707 -730(1)(c)  
(2014),2 and three counts of sexual assault against a minor in 
                         
2  HRS § 707 -730(1) provides, in relevant part:  
 
(1)  A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 first degree if:  
  
 . . . .  
 
 (c)  The person knowingly engages in sexual    
 penetration with a person who is at least fourteen   
 years old but less than sixteen years old; provided   
 that: 
 
  (i)  The person is not less than five years   
  older than the minor; and  
 
  (ii)  The person is not legally married to the   
  minor[.] 
 
HRS § 702 -206(2) (2014) provides, in relevant part:  
(a)  A person acts knowingly with respect to his 
conduct when he is aware that his conduct is of that 
nature. 
 
(b)  A person acts knowingly with respect to 
attendant circumstances when he is aware  that such 
circumstances exist.  
HRS § 707 -700 (2014) (modified 2016), then extant, provided in 
relevant part:  
 
“Sexual penetration” means:  
 
(1)  Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio, 
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of any 
part of a  person’s body or of any object into the 
genital or anal opening of another person’s body; it 
occurs upon any penetration, however slight, but 
emission is not required.  As used in this   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 the third degree, in violation of HRS § 707 -732(1)(c)  (2014) in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”).3  Prior 
to trial, the government notified the defense in writing of its 
intention to call Alexander J. Bivens, Ph.D. (“Dr. Bivens”) as 
an “expert witness on the dynamics of sexual abuse to the 
incident for which [Williams was] ch arged.”  By letter dated 
October 20, 2014, the defense requested, pursuant to HRPP Rule 
                         
(continued . . .)  
definition, “genital opening” includes the anterior 
surface of the vu lva or labia majora; or  
 
(2)  Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not the actual 
penetration has occurred.  
 
For purposes of this chapter, each act of sexual 
penetration shall constitute a separate offense.  
 
3  HRS § 707 -732(1), provides in relevant part:   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
(1)  A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the   
third degree if:  
 
 . . . . 
 
 (c)  The person knowingly engages in sexual contact   
 with a person who is at least fourteen years old but   
 less than sixteen years old or causes the min or to   
 have sexual contact with the person; provided that:  
 
  (i)  The person is not less than five years   
  older than the minor; and  
 
  (ii)  The person is not legally married to the   
  minor[.]  
HRS § 707 -700 (2014) (modified 2016), then exta nt, provides in 
relevant part:  
 
“Sexual contact” means any touching, other than acts of 
“sexual penetration”, of the sexual or other intimate parts 
of another, or of the sexual or other intimate parts of the 
actor by another, whether directly or through t he clothing 
or other material intended to cover the sexual or other 
intimate parts.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 16(b)(1)(iii),4 that the prosecutor provide the defense with a 
report containing Dr. Bivens’ conclusions and opinions, notes 
and/or records of what he had reviewed and done in this case, 
and pleadings and orders in other cases in which Dr. Bivens had 
testified or served as an exp ert witness.   In response, the 
prosecutor provided the defense with over 500 pages of articles 
consisting of the studies and literature Dr. Bive ns would be 
relying upon for his expert testimony.   The defense filed a 
motion to compel discovery or, in the alternative, to exclude 
testimony of Dr. Bivens, on the basis that the prosecutor failed 
to provide the defense with a written report from Dr. Biv ens in 
accordance with Rule 16(b) (1).5 
  Williams filed two motions in limine on January 20, 
2016 to exclude the testimony of Dr. Bivens and to exclude 
testimony from the complaining witness, T.Y., consisting of out -
of-court statements that Wi lliams sexual ly assaulted him.   
                         
 4  Although defense counsel did not cite HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii) in 
his October 20, 2014 letter, defense counsel’s Opening Brief suggests  that he 
was requesting an expe rt report pursuant to HRPP Rule 16. 
 
5  While it is true that the prosecutor did not provide the defense 
with a report of Dr. Bivens’ anticipated expert testimony, there is no 
evidence that such a report existed to disclose in the first place.  
Therefore, it is not clear that the State violated HRPP Rule 16(b) (1)(iii).  
We note that the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 16(a)(1)(G), unlike 
HRPP Rule 16(b) (1)(iii), provides:  “At the defendant’s request, the 
government must give to the defendant a writte n summary of any testimony that 
the government intends to use under Rules 702, 703, or 705 of the Federal 
Rules of Evidence during its case -in-chief at trial.” The Hawai‘i Penal Rules 
Committee should consider whether a similar amendment would be appropria te to 
address situations like the one in this case.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6   The circuit court held a hearing on Williams’ motions 
in limine on April 11, 2016.6  The court denied the defense’s 
motion as to Dr. Bivens’ testimony, but granted the motion as to 
the alleged out -of-court statements T.Y. made to S.S.  and C.O., 
T.Y.’s friends from school.  The court stated that T.Y.’s 
alleged statements would be excluded and “[u]nless the 
government can come up with a hearsay exception, we litigate the 
matter outside the presence of the jury” and the court would 
“generally” not allow the statements.   In seeking clarification, 
the prosecutor asked the court, “[w]ith respect to the actual 
statements made, will the court permit these witnesses to 
testify to any changes in behavior that these witnes ses observed 
in their fri end?”  The trial judge responded, “I think that they 
can testify to what is relevant in terms of what they saw and -- 
what they saw and h eard, not meaning statements.”   
  The prosecution filed its witness list and amended 
witness list, which did not identi fy the subject matter to which 
the prosecution’s witnesses would be testifying; at no time 
prior to trial did the prosecutor disclose to the defense 
Williams’ out -of-court oral stateme nts to T.Y.’s father 
(“C.Y.”).   
  Williams identified eleven witnesses i n his filed 
witness list that included himself, his wife, his two children, 
                         
6  The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 six non-family character witnesses to testify as to Williams’ 
“nonviolent and non -aggressive character, honesty and integrity” 
and “the absence of any indications of sexual devianc y or 
behaviors that are consistent with the allegations against him ,” 
and one non -family witness to testify as to her observations of 
T.Y.  Of the eleven witnesses listed by the defense in its 
witness list, in addition to  the defendant, the court permitted  
six witnesses  to testify.   Of those six witnesses, three were 
the defendant’s family members and three were non -family 
members, including two non -family character witnesses .  The four 
excluded witnesses were all male non-family character witnesses.     
B. Trial Proceedings 
1. Opening Statements 
  Several times during her opening statement, the 
prosecutor referenced out -of-court communications T.Y. allegedly 
had with his friends.  The defense initially objected on the 
grounds of hearsay and that the statements we re precluded by the 
defense’s motion in limine:   
[DEFENSE]:  Judge, these are the alleged statements to two 
of his friends which you said is [sic] not coming in . 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  I’m not going into the contents of the 
statement, your Honor.  I’m just going  to say that he 
talked to two of his friends.  That’s it.  
 
THE COURT:  Okay . 
 
[DEFENSE]:  Well, talked about what?  I mean, it’s 
irrelevant if he talked to his friends.  And tell them 
what?  It’s basically suggesting something that she can’t 
go into and we  can’t go into.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 [PROSECUTOR]:  I’m not bringing in -- even with the 
witnesses, when they testify on the stand, they’re very 
aware that they’re not to go into what [T.Y.] told them, 
the exact statement.  I’m just going to say that he 
disclosed to two frien ds. 
 
[DEFENSE]:  Disclosed what?  
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  What this man did to him.  
 
[DEFENSE]:  Judge, that’s absolutely forbidden.  
 
THE COURT:  How are you going to say it, he talked to two 
friends?  
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  That he told two close friends what this man 
did to him. 
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Hearsay involves actual statements.  
 
. . . . 
 
THE COURT:  But their argument is that it comes very close 
to suggesting to the jury that he told them exactly what 
happened.  I think you can -- I think you can put forth, if 
you’re going to bring it out, that he talked to two friends  
-- 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Okay.  About the incident.  
 
THE COURT:  -- but that’s about it.  
 
[DEFENSE]:  Judge, I object.  It still creates an inference 
that he talked to them about this event, and we can’t 
examine him without opening the door.   And she should not 
be allowed to.  Talked to them about what?  
 
THE COURT:  Your objection is preserved.  Let’s move on.  
 
 Several minutes later, the prosecutor again referenced 
out-of-court communications T.Y. allegedly had with his friend, 
S.S., via a disappearing message on a computer application:  
One of [T.Y.’s] friends will tell you about how she and 
[T.Y.] sat in [T.Y.’s] room the night she learned about 
what happened.  She will tell you how [T.Y.] could not look 
at her, how [T.Y.] could not say what happened.  He could 
only write it, and write it he did.  Using his computer, he 
sent her a message.  
 
 The defense objected, this time alleging  that the 
prosecutor had not previously disclosed the statements to the  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 defense during discovery, as required by HRPP Rule 16(b) (1).7  
During a bench conference, the prosecutor stated, “we don’t have 
[the message] either.  It’s one of those messages that 
disappears.  It’s like through social media but I guess it just 
disappears after  you log off, so we don’t have it either.  I 
don’t know the contents of the message.”8  The court sustained 
the objection in the presen ce of the jury and instructed , 
“Ladies and gentlemen, the last assertion by the State about an 
alleged computer message i s stricken from the re cord.  You will 
disregard it.”   
  The defense denied that any sexual contact occur red 
between T.Y. and Williams.   The defense contended that the 
charges were based on fabrications T.Y. made up in retaliation 
against Williams’ minor da ughter, J.W., for rejecting  his 
                         
7  The record reflects the following exchange  during a bench 
conference :  
 
[DEFENSE]:  Judge, we’re hearing about this message for the 
first time.  It’s never bee n disclosed to us.   
  
THE COURT:  The computer message?  
 
[DEFENSE]:  Yes.  Never been disclosed.  
 
8  Given that the prosecution did not have a written or recorded 
copy of the computer message, it is not clear that the  State violated HRPP 
Rule 16(b)(1)(i), which requires disclosure of “ the names  . . . of persons 
whom the prosecutor intends to call as witnesses in the presentation of the 
evidence in chief, together with any relevant written or recorded 
statements [.]”  (Emphasis added .)   
Regardless, the court  sustained the defense’s objection on the 
grounds of nondisclosure, stating, “Okay. If it wasn’t -- if the fact that a 
computer message was created was not divulged, I think it’s fair for the 
defense to object. I’m going to sustain that objection.  I’ll str ike that last 
statement refer ring to the computer message.” (emphasis added ).  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 romantic interest in her.   The defense stated that J.W., who was 
two years older than T.Y., “had moved on ” and that T.Y.’s and 
J.W.’s friendship had ended.  According to the defense, because 
there was no physical evidence or  other witnesses, the case 
boiled down to credibility:  whether the jury believed Williams 
or T.Y.  
2. Dr. Bivens ’ Expert Witness Testimony 
The State’s expert witness, Dr. Bivens, is a licensed 
clinical psychologist with a private practice on Kauaʻi.  Before 
testifying, Dr. Bivens was informed that T.Y. was male and in 
his early teenage years, but attested that “[o]ther than that  
. . . I don’t know anything else about anything that’s been 
alleged or anythin g about this particular case.”   Dr. Bivens  
testified that victims of sexual abuse who are under the age of 
sixteen typically do not disclose the abuse “for a very long 
time,” a concept  known as “delayed reporting.”   Dr. Bivens 
explained  that many of these victims do not want to disclose 
abuse due to “embarrassment and shame ,” “fear of harming the 
people around them” such as upsetting their parents or getting 
the abuser in trouble, fear of being blamed, or fear of losing 
the relationship with  the abuser.   Dr. Bivens testified that 
male children in p articular may delay reporting out of “concern 
that they might be accused of being gay or be teased for being  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 gay[,]” and often have “the most difficult time disclosing 
[sexual abuse].”    
3. Previously Barred and Undisclosed Testimony  
  At trial, T.Y. testifi ed that Williams sexually abused 
him on two occasions:  the first incident occurring on or about 
March 9, 2012 to and including March 26, 2012; and the second 
incident occurring on or about May 1, 2012 t o and including June 
11, 2012.   T.Y. testified that h e told two friends, C.O. and 
S.S., ab out the two incidents of abuse.    
  During S.S.’s testimony, the prosecutor asked S.S. to 
describe the “sudden change in [T.Y.]’s relationship with 
[J.W.]”  S.S. responded that she asked T.Y. why he and J.W. were 
not “hanging out anymore” when they “used  to be together all the 
time.”  The defense objected  on hearsay grounds .  During a bench 
conference, the prosecutor claimed that S.S.’s testimony bore on 
T.Y.’s credibility.   The prosecutor argued: 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Right.  And so [T.Y.] -- [T.Y.] wasn’t able 
to verbalize what happened to him, so instead he just typed 
it on the computer .  And these instant messages, we don’t 
have them because it disappeared, but I can have [S.S.] 
explain the nature of the program that they we re using at 
the time that -- so I’ve never seen these messages.  No one 
has them, the disclosure, so I’m not going to go into 
specifically what [S.S.] wrote but that she did -- this is 
the way in which she learned about what happened to him, 
which also goe s to explain the changes that she observed in 
[T.Y.]. 
 
 Although the court had previously  sustained --during 
the prosecutor’s opening statement --the defense’s objection  to 
the prosecutor’s reference to the computer message s, stricken  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 the reference from the record, and instructed the jury to 
disregard the reference , the court now allowed S.S. to respond 
to the prosecutor’s question about why T.Y. was no longer 
friends with J.W. , without describing what T.Y. said in the 
messages: 
[PROSECUTOR]:  But [S.S.] can explain the computer, the 
program that they were using to communicate.  I won’t have 
her go into specifically what she read but just that this 
was the method in which she learned about what happened to 
[T.Y.]. 
 
THE COURT:   All right.  
 
[DEFENSE]:  I think w hat you previously said is the limit 
to which they can go.  We had no idea about any of this.  
It was never disclosed to use.  If the prosecutor knew 
about it, she had a duty to tell us.  It certainly does get 
into contents, and I think that they were obli gated to 
produce them.  
 
THE COURT:  Well, the objection -- I think what the defense 
is saying, they continue to object.  So I’ll let you ask 
her, I asked him about it, and he didn’t answer me and he 
typed something.  That’s it.  Okay?   
 
 The prosecutor as ked S.S., “Without telling us exactly 
what he wrote, if you can describe at that time [T.Y .]’s 
emotional state when you f irst asked him this question.”   S.S. 
then told the jury :  
I specifically remember him having this sort of distant 
stare and just recall ing it, and immediately when he 
started thinking about it, he turned around, and he didn ’t 
want me to see it.  But he didn't want to tell me at first, 
so I kept pestering him.  
And eventually he  told me to go on this messenger app  
called Recall.  It doesn ’t work anymore because they closed 
down the program, but basically he had to type to me  
through this messenger app when I ’m standing right behind 
him and receiving the messages through my own computer 
because he couldn ’t physically talk to me about it.  And he 
would tell me the story through that, and I could just feel 
the atmosphere around us.  It was so heavy and dark, and he  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 didn’t say a word for at least ten minutes after he wrote 
everything out.  
 The prosecutor then asked, “After that night when you 
and [T.Y.] were both sitting at your computers, did you have an 
idea of who was involved and what had happened to [T.Y.]?”   S.S. 
responded:  
Yes.  Well, he specifically told me what happened , so I was 
just -- I couldn ’t really take in all the information 
because it just didn ’t seem like it happened.  Like, I 
couldn’t believe it, but I -- I know that he wasn’t lying, 
obviously.  He would tell me the truth.  And it was just 
bizarre that he wouldn’t like talk to [J.W.], and that made 
a lot of sense after that.   
(Emphases added.)  
   The prosecutor also elicited previously undisclosed 
testimony from C.Y., T.Y.’s father , about Williams .  When asked 
by the prosecutor about his interactions with the Williams 
family, C.Y. recalled a “kind of an odd incident” during which  
Williams kept asking C.Y. about T.Y.:   
[Williams] insisted on me going down to their house in Laie 
to look at a roofing problem because I’m a roofing 
contractor.  And I said, “I’ll meet you down there.”  And 
he goes, “No, no, I’m going to ride with you.”   And this is 
from Kaneohe.  And I said, “Well, I have other estimates to 
do down in Kahuku.  Why don’t you just meet me down there.”  
And he goes, “No, I need to ride with you.”  I said, “All 
right.”  And in 40 years of roofing, I’ve never taken a 
potential customer on that kind of a jaunt.  So we got down 
to the house, and all the way down all he could talk about 
was [T.Y.].  
 
(Emphasis added.)  
 The defense objected, and argued that the prosecution 
had violated HRPP Rule 16(b) (1)(ii) by failing to disclose  the 
substance of Williams’ oral statements prior to trial:     
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 [DEFENSE]:  Judge, if there are any statements of my client 
that are being attributed to him now, it’s certainly the 
first time we’re hearing about them.  We made a request for 
discovery of any  statements which were made by my client.  
We have no idea what these statements are.   
 
 The prosecutor argued that she did not know 
specifically what Williams said to C.Y. beyond generally talking 
about T.Y.   The court rejected the prosecutor’s justifica tion 
and noted that Williams’ statement to C.Y.  was encompassed by 
HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(ii)’s language requiring disclosure of “ any 
written or recorded statements and the substance of any oral 
statements made by the defendant .”  Citing HRPP Rule 16, the 
court ultimately sustained the objection as to anything Williams 
said during the car ride with C.Y.:  
[PROSECUTOR]:  Judge, I don’t have any statements either 
other than [C.Y.] is just telling us about the last 
incident that he had with Mr. Williams and going f or a ride 
and him talking about [T.Y.].   I don’t know specifically 
anything that pertains to this case other than that he 
wanted to talk about [T.Y.].  
 
[DEFENSE]:  Then it’s irrelevant.  
 
THE COURT:  Well, I don ’t know.  It’s an admission, but 
Rule 16 does require that -- 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  If it’s any written or recorded statements, 
your Honor.  
 
THE COURT:  -- and the substance of any oral statements 
made by the defendant  together with the names and last 
known addresses.   So if there ’s an objection, under Rule  16 
I'm going to have to --  
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  He has an opportunity to cross -examine the 
witness, your Honor.  
 
THE COURT:  Well, we’re talking about a Rule 16 problem, 
and if there ’s an objection, I don ’t think I have much 
choice but to at this point bar it . 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Even if it’s not exculpatory, your Honor, 
the State didn’t violate --  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15  
THE COURT:  The current Supreme Court is going to come down 
very hard on these.  We just got a murder conviction 
overturned on a very complicated murder for one statem ent 
that the prosecutor asked about.  That was it.  Actually, 
that was the ICA, but it’s because they are being very 
strict. 
 So I’m going to -- there’s been an objection, so you 
can’t go into these statements unless you’ve disclosed at 
least the substance  of them.  
  
[PROSECUTOR]:  So I can’t go into the statement, but I can 
go into the car ride without whatever he had to talk about?  
 
THE COURT:  Yeah. 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Okay.  
 
(Emphases added.)  
 
 Despite the court’s ruling sustaining the defense’s 
objection t o C.Y.’s testimony about his conversation with 
Williams, the prosecutor continued questioning C.Y. about the 
conversation , the defense objected two more times, and the court 
sustained  both objections .  However, the court did not instruct 
the jury to disreg ard the answers given by Williams, or 
otherwise provide the jur y with a curative instruction.  
4. Cross-examination of Defense Witnesses 
The defense called three female non -family character 
witnesses to the stand:  two --Malia Kaʻai-Barrett and Laura 
Morgan--to testify as to Williams’ “nonviolent and non -
aggressive character, honesty and integrity” and “the absence of 
any indications of sexual deviancy or behaviors that are 
consistent with the allegations against him;” and one --Autumn 
Butler--to testify as to T. Y.’s relationship with J.W . and  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 T.Y.’s motive to fabricate his  allegations against Williams.   
During cross -examination of Kaʻai-Barrett, Butler, and Morgan, 
the prosecutor asked all three witnesses their opinion about 
Williams’ alleged conduct: “sucking a child’s penis is not 
something you would expect to see in public; right?”   The 
defense objected in only one instance, and th e court sustained 
the objection as being beyond th e scope of direct examination.  
5. Jury Instructions 
At the close of all evidence, the circuit court 
instructed the jury that “[t]rial procedures are governed by 
rules.  When a lawyer believes that the rules re quire it, it is 
his or her duty to raise an objection.  It is my responsibility 
to rule on such objections.  You must not consider objections 
made by lawyers in  your deliberations.”   The circuit court also 
instructed the jury that it “must disregard entire ly any matter 
which th e Court has ordered stricken.”  
6. Closing Arguments 
  During her closing argument, the prosecutor accused 
the defense witnesses, who were mostly family members, of 
collaborat ing to create false testimony.   The prosecutor claimed 
that the  defense witnesses had two years to collaborate and 
figure out what they were going to say in court .  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 7. Motion for Judgement of Acquittal or New Trial 
  The jury found Williams guilty on all counts .  
Williams moved for a judgment of acquittal or a new trial o n the 
basis of prosecutorial misconduct and insufficiency of the 
evidence.   The circuit court9 denied Williams’ motion.   On 
September 14, 2016, the circuit court sentenced Williams to a 
mandatory twenty -year term of incarceration and denied Williams’ 
motion for bail pending appeal.  
C. Appellate Proceedings 
1. ICA Appeal 
  Williams appealed his conviction to the ICA , 
contending  that:  the prosecutor committed misconduct before and 
during trial  that violated Williams’ constitutional right to a 
fair trial ; the circu it court erred by permitting testimony of 
out-of-court statements; the circuit court erred by permitt ing 
Dr. Bivens to testify; the circuit court erred by denying 
Williams’  Motion for Judgment of Acquittal and Motion for a New 
Trial on the grounds of insuf ficient evidence  of the dates of 
the offenses ; and the circuit court erred by limiting the number 
of character witnesses permitted to testify in Williams’ 
defense.  The ICA affirmed Williams’ conviction, holding that 
the only instance of prosecutorial misc onduct occurred when the 
                         
9  The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided at the hearing on the Motion 
for Judgement of Acquittal or New Trial and at sentencing .  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 prosecutor failed to disclose Williams’ alleged statements to 
C.Y. to the defense prior to trial.   State v.  Williams , 146 
Hawai‘i 116, 117, 456 P.3d 189, 190 (App. 2020).  However, the 
ICA held the misconduct to be  harmless error.  Id.   
2. Certiorari Application 
Williams filed an application for writ of certiorari 
with this court on May 1, 2020 .  In his application, Williams  
alleged that the ICA erred by concluding that the prosecut or’s 
misconduct did not deprive him of a fair trial .  Williams 
contended the ICA also erred by affirming circuit court rulings 
that: permitted improper  and previously undisclosed evidence --
including out -of-court statements made by the complaining 
witness and the substance of out -of-court statements made by 
Williams--to be presented at trial; limited the number and type 
of witnesses who could testify on Williams’ behalf; and 
concluded there was sufficient evidence upon which to  sustain 
Williams’ conviction.   Williams’  application for writ of 
certiorari was gra nted. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Motion for A New Trial 
The granting or denial of a motion for new trial is within 
the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be 
disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion.  It is well -
established that an abuse of discr etion occurs if the trial 
court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 State v. Austin , 143 Hawaiʻi 18, 29, 422 P.3d 18, 29 (2018) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted).  
  “As a general matter, the granting or denial of a 
motion for new trial is within the sound discretion of the trial 
court and will not be disturbed absent a cle ar abuse of 
discretion.”  State v. Kim , 103 Hawai‘i 285, 290, 81 P.3d 1200, 
1205 (2003).  “The trial court abuses its discretion when it 
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant.”  Id. (citing State v. Furutani , 76 Hawai‘i 172, 
178–79, 873 P.2d 51, 57 –58 (1994)).  
B. Admissibility of Evidence 
Different standards of review must be applied to trial 
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence 
depending on  the requirements of the particular rule of 
evidence at issue.  When application of a particular 
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the 
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong 
standard.  However, the traditional abuse of di scretion 
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of 
evidence that require a “judgment call ” on the part of the 
trial court.  
  
Kealoha v. Cty . of Haw., 74 Haw. 308, 319 -20, 844 P.2d 670, 676 
(1993). 
C. Prosecutorial Misconduct 
  “Allegations of p rosecutorial misconduct are reviewed 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which 
requires an examination of the record and a determination of 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 complained of might have contributed to the conviction.”  State 
v. Pacheco , 96 Hawai‘i 83, 93, 26 P.3d 572, 582 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).   
  If there is a reasonable possibility that the 
prosecutorial misconduct might have contributed to the 
conviction, the miscond uct is not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt and the defendant is entitled to a new trial.  Pacheco, 96 
Hawai‘i at 93, 26 P.3d at 582.  “In order to determine whether 
the alleged  prosecutorial misconduct  reached the level of 
reversible error, the appellat e court considers the nature of 
the alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative 
instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence 
against defendant.”  State v. Conroy , 148 Hawai‘i 194, 201, 468 
P.3d 208, 215 (2020) (internal brackets o mitted) (quoting State 
v. Agrabante , 73 Haw . 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992)).  
D. Sufficiency of Evidence 
  In reviewing a challenge to the sufficiency of the 
evidence, “[e]vidence adduced in the trial court must be 
considered in the strongest light for th e prosecution[.]”   State 
v. Kalaola , 124 Hawai‘i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(quoting  State v. Richie , 88 Hawai‘i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998)). “The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established 
beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether the re was substantial 
evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.”   Id.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 III.  DISCUSSION 
A. Prosecutorial Misconduct Was Not Harmless Beyond a 
Reasonable Doubt.   
  The constitutions of the United States and the State 
of Hawaiʻi guarantee every individu al accused of a crime the 
fundamental right to a fair trial.  See U.S. Const. amend. VI; 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 14.  “Prosecutorial misconduct may provide 
grounds for a new trial if the prosecutor ’s actions denied the 
defendant a fair trial.”  State v. Pase ne, 144 Hawai‘i 339, 364, 
439 P.3d 864, 889 (2019) (quoting Agrabante , 73 Haw . at 198, 830 
P.2d at 502).  In reviewing whether prosecutorial misconduct 
deprived the defendant of a fair trial, we consider three 
factors:  “(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of 
a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the 
evidence against the defendant.”  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 364, 439 
P.3d at 889.   “Misconduct requires vacating a conviction when, 
in light of these factors, ‘there is a reason able possibility 
that the error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.’”  State v. Underwood , 142 Hawai‘i 317, 325, 418 P.3d 
658, 666 (2018)  (emphasis added)  (quoting State v. Rogan , 
91 Hawai‘i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) ).  When no single 
error or prejudicial remark constitutes prosecutorial 
misconduct, “the cumulative weight of such errors may create an 
atmosphere of bias and prejudice which no remarks by the trial  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22   (continued . . .)  court could eradicate.”  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 364, 439 P.3d at 
889 (quoting State v. Kahalewai , 55 Haw. 127, 129, 516 P.2d 336, 
338 (1973)).   
  In the present case, the cumulative effect of the 
prosecutor’s misconduct deprived Williams of a fair trial.  
Applying the three factors to determine whether the violation of  
Williams’ right to a fair trial is harmless, we conclude that it 
was not.  See, e.g., State v. Conroy , 148 Hawai‘i 194, 204, 468 
P.3d 208, 218 (2020).  
1. Nature of the conduct 
  Under the first factor --the nature of the prosecutor’s 
misconduct --“we consider ‘the nature of the challenged conduct 
in relation to our criminal justice system generally and the 
special role of the prosecutor specifically.’”  Pasene, 144 
Hawai‘i at 365, 439 P.3d at 890 (quoting Underwood , 142 Hawai‘i 
at 325, 418 P.3d at 666).  In thi s case, the nature of the 
misconduct committed by the prosecutor included  her:  
(1) failure to disclose out -of-court statements made by the 
defendant; (2) introduction at trial of out-of-court statements 
made by the complaining witness that had been barred  pretrial by 
the defense’s motion in limine; and (3) improper and lurid 
questioning of witnesses at trial.10   
                         
10  We also note that the prosecutor, during her clo sing argument, 
accused defense witnesses of collaborat ing to create false testimony.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 a. The prosecutor’s failure to disclose statements 
made by Williams violated HRPP Rule 16(b) (1) and 
constituted prosecutorial misconduct.  
  HRPP Rule  16(b)(1)(ii) requires disclosure of “any 
written or recorded statements and the substance of any oral 
statements made by the defendant” prior to trial .  We have 
recognized the importance of the pretrial disclosure process, 
stating,  “An essential component  of the basic tools is the 
process of discovery, which promotes fairness in our adversary 
system.”   State v. Pitts , 146 Hawai‘i 120, 136, 456 P.3d 484, 500 
(2019) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).     
  In the present case, at trial, C.Y., the complaining 
witness’ father, testified about an out -of-court conversation he 
had with Williams during a long car ride where “all [Williams]  
could talk about was [T.Y.]”   This constituted a violation of 
HRPP 16(b)(1)(ii), which requires disclosure of “ the substance 
of any oral statements made by the defendant ” prior to trial.   
Despite the court sustaining the defense’s continued objection s, 
the prosecutor continued questionin g C.Y. about the 
conversation.   As the defense argued in its opening statement, 
this case hinged on whether the jury believed T.Y. or Williams.   
Williams’ interactions with T.Y. and the nature of their 
relationship were critical to Williams’ claim that no sexual 
                         
(continued . . .)  
Because this issue is not necessary to the resolution of this case, we 
decline to consider whether it constitutes harmless error.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 contact occurred .11  Evidence that Williams had a fixation on or 
an inappropriate level of interest in  T.Y. might have prompted 
the jury to believe that Williams harbored inappropriate 
feelings toward T.Y. that he later acted upon , by committing the 
offenses alleged by T.Y .  Thus, the prosecutor’s violation of 
HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)( ii) and questioning of C.Y. that elicited 
testimony about  previously undisclosed statements by Williams 
constituted misconduct.  
b. The prosecutor’s introduction of out -of-court 
statements that had previously been barred by the 
defense’s motion in limine const ituted 
prosecutorial misconduct.   
This court has expressed concerns about prosecutorial 
misconduct in cases where the defendant’s credibility is 
particularly important.  In Underwood , this court stated that  
“[t]he potential for prejudice is particularly e vident 
where . . . the improper comments specifically concerned the 
credibility of the testimony on which the case turned.”  142 
Hawai‘i at 329, 418 P.3d at 670; see also Conroy, 148 Hawai‘i at 
204, 468 P.3d at 218 (“Prosecutorial misconduct affecting the 
issue of defendant’s intent was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
                         
11  Seven of the  ten witnesses on William s’ witness list (not 
including Williams) were identified to testify  about their “personal 
observations of and interactions with [T.Y.] ,” T.Y.’s relationships with 
various members of the Williams’ family, and T.Y.’s “motive to fabricate his  
allegations” aga inst Williams.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 doubt where the only witness to the altercation were the 
defendant and the [complaining witness].”).  
Here, the prosecutor introduced out -of-court 
statements made by T.Y. via computer message that had been 
barred pretrial .12  Evidence of T.Y.’s messages explaining to 
S.S. the alleged abuse was material to Williams’ guilt and/or 
punishment.  T.Y.’s messages to S.S. allegedly revealed abuse 
and thus greatly undermined Williams’ credibility and 
corroborated the credibility of the only other witness who could 
testify as to whether the acts did or did not occur: T.Y.  The 
effect of its introduction may have imparted to the jury that 
because T.Y. told S.S. about the alleged abuse, he was credible.  
Thus, the prosecutor’s introduc tion of out-of-court statements 
that were barred by the court’s motion in limine ruling 
constituted misconduct.   
                         
12  As discussed above, see supra note 7 and accompanying text, when 
the prosecutor first referenced the computer messages in her opening 
statement, the defense objected on the grounds that the message s had not be en 
previously disclosed.  The court sustained the objection, citing the 
prosecution’s failure to discl ose the messages to the defense , though  it is 
not clear that the prosecution’s nondisclosure of the computer messages 
violated HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(i).  See supra note 8.  However, the court later 
permitted the prosecutor to question S.S. about the computer messages during 
direct examination, over the defense’s objections.  
Regardless, the defense’s lack of knowledge about the comp uter 
messages did not preclude the messages from being covered by the scope of the 
pretrial motion in limine: the content of the computer messages clearly fell 
within those statements covered by the motion, which sought to bar all out-
of-court statements m ade by T.Y. alleging that Wi lliams sexually assaulted 
him.  In granting the defense’s motion, the court  stated that T.Y.’s alleged 
statements would be excluded , that “[u]nless the government can come up with 
a hearsay exception, we litigate the matter outs ide the presence of the 
jury,” and that the court would “generally” not allow the statement s.  Thus, 
the prosecutor’s introduction of the evidence of the computer messages 
constituted a violation of the motion in limine.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 c. The prosecutor’s lurid and inflammatory cross-
examination of defense witnesses constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct.  
  “We have recognized that prosecutors ‘should not use 
arguments calculated to  inflame the passions or prejudices of 
the jury[,]’ as ‘[a]rguments that rely on  . . . prejudices of 
the jurors introduce into the trial elements of irrelevance and 
irrationali ty that cannot be tolerated.’”  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 
370, 439 P.3d at 895 (alterations in original) (quoting Rogan, 
91 Hawai‘i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239).  Even when the statements 
are not calculated to inflame the passions or prejudices of the 
jury, when  the likely result is that the jury will be inflamed, 
the statements are prejudicial.  Id. (holding that the 
prosecutor’s reference to Charles Manson “may lead the jury to 
react based on emotion, rather than in an objective way, and 
threatens to introduce an atmosphere of bias and prejudice as 
the jury enters deliberation” (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted) ).  
  Here, the prosecutor’s questioning of defense 
witnesses --asking whether sucking a child’s penis was something 
they expected to see in public--was improper .  The prosecutor’s 
questioning emphasized the lurid nature of the accusations and 
was likely to elicit an emotional response from the jury.  The 
questions were rhetorical and called for immaterial information.   
Because the prosecutor’s  questioning of defense witnesses was  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 calculated to inflame the passions or prejudices of the jury it 
constituted  misconduct.   
2. The promptness or lack of a curative instruction 
  With regard to the second factor --the promptness of 
the court’s curative instr uctions--we consider:  
[T]he extent to which a trial court’s instruction to the 
jury minimized or eliminated the prejudicial effect of 
misconduct.   When a court promptly addresses the 
impropriety, a prosecutor’s improper remarks are generally 
considered cu red by the court’s instructions to the jury, 
because it is presumed that the jury abided by the court’s 
admonition to disregard the statement.  
 
Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 365, 439 P.3d at 890 (internal citations, 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted)  (quoting  Underwood , 142 
Hawai‘i at 327, 418 P.3d at 668).  
  To determine whether the circuit court’s instructions 
to the jury cured the risk of prejudice to the defendant, we 
evaluate “whether the cumulative effect of prejudicial conduct 
going to the issue of gui lt is so strong that it overcomes the 
presumption that the curative remarks of the court have rendered 
the prejudicial remarks harmless.”  State v. Pemberton , 71 Haw. 
466, 476, 796 P.2d 80, 85 (1990).  The Pemberton  court held that 
although a prosecutor’s improper statements and questioning of a 
witness are typically cured by instructions to the jury to 
disregard them in reaching a verdict, sometimes the improper 
conduct can create an atmosphere of bias and prejudice that “no 
remarks by the trial court coul d erase.”  Id. (internal  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 quotation marks and citation omitted).  The Pemberton  court held 
that the cumulative effect of the prejudicial conduct in that 
case was so pervasive that it overcame the presumption that 
limiting instructions by the circuit court c ould render the 
prejudicial remarks harmless.  Id.  (“[T]he fact that defense 
counsel was repeatedly forced to object and the court repeatedly 
forced to sustain those objections and to issue cautionary 
instructions is likely to have had the reverse effect of 
focusing the jury’s attention on that evidence and the fact that 
it was being suppressed.”).  
  Similarly, in State v. Underwood , where the prosecutor 
told the jury that “defense counsel tried to get the complaining 
witness to make up some story,” we hel d that a jury instruction 
failed to cure the prejudicial effect of the prosecutor’s 
statement because: (1) “the instruction did not address the 
problematic nature of the prosecutor’s statements” ; and (2) “the 
instruction was general in nature and was deliv ered to the jury 
along with a large number of other standard instructions before 
closing arguments began.”  142 Hawai‘i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669.  
  In the instant case, the circuit court’s general 
limiting instruction delivered at the close of evidence fail ed 
to cure the prejudicial effect of the prosecutor’s introduction 
of out-of-court statements not produced to the defense prior to 
trial.  See Pemberton , 71 Haw. at 475 -76, 796 P.2d at 84 -85.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 The jury heard the prosecutor elicit testimony from C.Y. 
describing Will iams’ unusual interest in T.Y.   Although defense 
counsel objected and the court advised the prosecutor during a 
bench conference that the objection would be sustained, the 
court did not sustain the o bjection in front of the jury.   
Thereafter, the prosecutor immediately returned to questioning 
C.Y. about the same  subject in front of the jury.   Defense 
counsel objected again and the court sustained the objection, 
but the court neither struck the testimony, nor g ave a curati ve 
instruction to the jury.  
  Two days later, the circuit court provided the jury 
with a general instruction, stating,  
Trial procedures are governed by rules.  When a 
lawyer believes that the rules require it, it is 
his or her duty to raise an objection.  It is my 
responsibility to  rule on such objections.  You 
must not consider objections made by lawyers in 
your deliberations.  . . . You must disregard 
entirely any matter which th e court has ordered 
stricken.  
 
 As in Underwood , where a general instruction given 
much later amidst var ious other instructions was not curative, 
142 Hawai‘i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669, here also, the circuit 
court’s general instruction was not curative.  Also, because the 
instruction was not promptly given when the prejudice occurred, 
and was instead provided at the close of evidence with a barrage 
of other instructions, the jury would not have known the  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 evidence or objections to which the court was referring.  
Additionally, the prejudicial effect of C.Y.’s testimony and the 
prosecutor’s continued questioning o n subject matter the court 
had sustained an objection to may have imparted to the jury that 
T.Y.’s testimony was corroborated by C.Y., and, therefore, that 
T.Y. was more credible than Williams.  Thus, we cannot conclude 
that the court’s general instruction  cured the risk of prejudice 
to Williams.  
  The circuit court’s specific instructions to the jury 
regarding T.Y.’s computer messages to S.S. also failed to cure 
the prejudicial effect of the prosecutor’s improper use of those 
statements.  The circuit court  had ruled at the pretrial hearing 
on the defense’s motion in limine that the State could not 
introduce out -of-court statements made by T.Y.   Yet, the 
prosecutor referred to T.Y.’s computer messages during her 
opening statement, even though the statements contained in those 
messages were barred by the defense’s motion in limine .13  The 
court struck  from the record and instructed the jury to 
disregard  the prosecutor’s reference to the computer message s.  
But despite the court’s ruling during the prosecutor’s opening 
statement and the defense’s continued objections, the prosecutor 
later introduced the same evidence of T.Y.’s computer messages 
during her direct examination of S.S.   
                         
13  See supra note 12 and accompanying text.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31   Prejudice caused by a prosecutor’s willful violation 
of a court’s ruling on a m otion in limine  is not necessarily 
overcome by a later limiting instruction.  Pacheco, 96 Hawai‘i at 
98, 26 P.3d at 587.  In Pacheco, the defense filed a motion in 
limine that sought to exclude at trial any evidence of the 
defendant’s prior convictions.  Id. at 88, 26 P.3d at 577.  
Although the court granted the motion, the prosecutor referenced 
defendant’s prior convictions during cross -examination and in 
closing arguments.  Id. at 98, 26 P.3d at 587.  We held that the 
prosecutor’s “willful violation of th e circuit  court’s in 
limine ruling constituted prosecutorial  misconduct,”  and because 
the circuit court failed to give a curative instruction during 
cross-examination or closing arguments when the  statements were 
made, the prejudicial effect could not be o vercome.  Id. 
  In Pacheco, the prejudice caused by the prosecutor ’s 
improper presentation of evidence in willful violation of the 
court’s motion in limine ruling was not overcome because the 
court failed to provide a prompt curative instruction.  Id. at 
98, 26 P.3d at 587.  We face a similar situation here .  As in 
Pacheco, despite the court’s  pretrial motion in limine  ruling, 
the prosecutor twice presented prejudicial evidence about T.Y.’s 
computer messages to the jury : first, when she  referenced the 
messages in her opening statement , and again, when she 
questioned S.S. about  the messages during direct examination.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 Because the jury heard that T.Y. told S.S. about the alleged 
abuse from both the prosecutor and S.S., and the court’s only 
curative instruction  to the jury was that the message was 
“stricken” the first time it was introduced , after which it was 
again introduced and remained introduced as evidence, we cannot 
conclude that the prejudicial effect was overcome by a curative 
jury instruction.  See Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 371, 439 P.3d at 
896 (“Attempts to refer to evidence that has been specifically 
excluded by the circuit  court . . .  undermine[s]  the integrity  
of the criminal  justice system.”).    
With T.Y.’s and Williams’ credibility a central issue, 
the improper introduction of previously barred evidence of 
T.Y.’s computer  messages might have left the jury with the 
impression that T.Y. was more credible than Williams.  If the 
jury believed that T.Y. had previously told others about the 
alleged abuse, testimony on  T.Y.’s computer messages 
corroborated and bolstered T.Y.’s testimony.  And with Williams’ 
relationship with T.Y. another important issue, the improper 
introduction of undisclosed statements by Williams  evincing his 
interest in T.Y. might have led the jury to disbelieve his claim 
that no sexual contact occurred.  Finally, there was no curative 
instruction delivered by the court to address  the prosecutor’s 
blatantly lewd question --“sucking a child's penis is not  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 something you  would expect to see in public, would you? ”--posed 
to three defense witnesses  on cross -examination .   
We therefore conclude that the circuit court’s 
limiting instructions, and lack thereof, did not cure the 
prejudicial effect of the prosecutor’s misconduct.  
3. Strength or weakne ss of the evidence against Williams    
  “In considering the final factor, reviewing courts 
weigh the evidence supporting the defendant’s conviction.”  
Underwood , 142 Hawai‘i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669.  “When evidence 
is so overwhelming as to outweigh the inf lammatory effect of the 
improper comments, reviewing courts will regard the impropriety 
as ultimately harmless.”  Id. (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted).  But “[w]hen it cannot be said beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the same result would have been reached 
absent the improper conduct . . . the defendant’s conviction 
must be vacated.”  Id.  Critically , we noted that “[w]hen a 
conviction is largely dependent on a jury ’s determination as to 
the credibility of a complainant ’s testimony, [] the evide nce of 
the offense is not so overwhelming that it renders the 
prosecutor ’s improper statements harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.”  Id. at 325, 418 P.3d at 670 (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted).  Where the complaining witness’ account 
of the events is countered only by the defendant, the potential 
for prejudice is especially heightened when prosecutorial  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 conduct affects the defendant’s credibility.  Id. (noting that 
the defendant’s conviction was “ultimately dependent on the 
jury’s assessment  of [the complaining witness’] credibility” 
because “only the statements of [the complaining witness] 
herself directly described the actual acts constituting the two 
offenses”).  
  In this case, it cannot be said that the prosecutor’s 
use of undisclosed an d previously barred evidence and 
inflammatory questioning of witnesses “did not contribute to the 
jury’s determination of guilt.”  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 371, 439 
P.3d at 896.  As in Underwood , here, T.Y., the complaining 
witness, was the only witness othe r than the defendant who could 
describe the actual acts constituting the offenses.  Thus, 
T.Y.’s testimony constituted the most significant evidence 
against Williams.  The evidence against Williams was not so 
overwhelming that it rendered the prosecutor’s misconduct --
improperly referencing and introducing evidence that had been 
excluded by the defense’s pretrial motion in limine, improperly 
introducing statements by Williams that had not been previously 
disclosed to the defense, and improperly subjecting de fense 
witnesses to inflammatory questioning --harmless.  Because there 
is a reasonable possibility that the prosecutor’s misconduct 
might have contributed to Williams’ conviction, the misconduct 
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35   After considering the inflammatory nature of the 
prosecutor’s miscondu ct, the lack of prompt curative 
instructions from the circuit court, and the relative weight of 
the evidence supporting Williams’ conviction, we find that the  
cumulative effect of the prosecutor’s mis conduct created an  
“atmosphere of bias and prejudice” that deprived Williams of a 
fair trial .  Pasene, 144 Hawai‘i at 364, 439 P.3d at 889.  The 
circuit court erred in denying Williams’ motion for a new trial 
based on prosecutorial misconduct, and the ICA erred in 
concluding that the prosecutor’s misconduct was harmless.  
B. The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion When It 
Limited the Number of Witnesses Who Could Testify on 
Williams’ Behalf.  
Williams alleges the circuit court abused its 
discretion by li miting the number of witnesses permitted  to 
testify on Williams’ behalf .  When a decision to allow a witness 
to testify is  based on Hawai‘i Rules of Evidence (“ HRE”) Rule 403  
(2016),14 it “require[s] a ‘ judgment call ’ on the part of the 
trial court, [and is ] reviewed for an abuse of discretion. ”  
Richie, 88 Hawai‘i at 37, 960 P.2d at 1245 (quoting State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai‘i 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996)).  “An abuse of 
                         
14  HRE Rule 403 states, “ Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
consider ations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of 
cumulative evidence. ” 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36   (continued . . .)  discretion occurs when the decisionmaker exceeds the bounds of 
reason or disregards rule s of principles of law or practice to 
the detriment of a party.”  State v. Vliet , 95 Hawai‘i 94, 107, 
19 P.3d 42, 55 (2001)  (quoting In re Water Use Permit 
Applications , 94 Hawai‘i 97, 183 , 9 P.3d 409, 495 (2000 )).     
  In the present case, the circuit co urt did not abuse 
its discretion in limiting the number of defense witnesses.  The 
defense sought to call ten witnesses other than the defendant, 
seven of  whom were non -family members.   Of the six witnesses 
permitted to testify, three were the defendant’s family members 
and three were non -family members.   Of the three non -family 
witnesses , two testified as to Williams’ good character,15 and 
all were women.   All four witnesses excluded by the court were 
male non-family character witnesses.      
Williams raises  particular concern before this court 
that no male non-family character witnes ses were permitted to 
testify.   However, defense counsel did not voice this  specific  
concern at trial when defense witnesses were being finalized .16  
                         
15  The third female non -family witness was Autumn Butler, a friend 
of J.W.’s (Williams’ daughter) who also knew T.Y., who was permitted to 
testify that T.Y. was jealou s of J.W. 
 
16  For example, the circuit court permitted one character witness to 
testify as to Willia ms’ interaction with children.   The defense selected 
Malia Kaʻai-Barrett, a female non -family member who had observed Williams with 
kids through his involve ment with the Hawaiʻi Youth Opera Chorus.   If the 
defense wished to have a male non -family character witness, it could have 
selected a potential witness who, according to the defense’s witness l ist, 
had also observed Williams “regularly interacting with ch ildren” and who knew  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 And the record does not evinc e a basis to conclude that gender 
was a factor relevant to character testimony , or that the 
court’s exclusion of these witnesses was based on their gender.17  
In fact, at trial, defense counsel  conceded , “We probably don’t 
need the boy,” while referring  to one of the male non -family 
character witnesses18 that Williams now argues the circu it court 
arbitrarily excluded.   Defense counsel also posited that the 
testimony of a second  male non -family witness19 would largely 
mirror that of the first male non -family wi tness: 
[DEFENSE]:  [ ] There are actually two [male non -family 
witnesses], but they’re basically going to testify that 
there were many opportunities for Mr. Williams to have 
molested them or engaged in inappropriate behaviors with 
them.  And that didn’t ha ppen, and they’ve basically 
received no information or no reports that that ever 
happened.  
 
 Significantly, these concessions by defense counsel 
occurred before the circuit ruled , on relevance grounds,  that it 
                         
(continued . . .)  
Williams through New Hope Church, in lieu of Ka ʻai-Barrett.   However, the 
defense did not propose this person as a witness.  
 
17  Defense counsel did argue that it was important to have “a couple 
of” non-family witnesses to “corroborate”  the test imony of the family 
witnesses.   The defense was concerned that the prosecutor would imply to the 
jury that the family witnesses “ha[d] a motive to lie” simply because 
“they’re related to Mr . Williams and they love him.”   However, the defense 
did not specify that they wanted male non-family witnesses to testify, and, 
as noted above, several female non -family witnesses testified at trial.  
 
18  According to the defense’s witness list, this proposed witness 
was the son of a family friend who had “been i n and out of the [Williams] 
house ev er since he was a little boy.”  
 
19  According to the defense’s witness list, this proposed witness 
was a friend of Williams’ son “who spent significant time in the Williams’ 
family home including time alone with [Williams ] and occas ions when [T.Y.] 
was present.”   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 would not permit the first male non -family wit ness to testify.    
As defense counsel identified  his list of proposed character 
witnesses, the c ircuit court primarily expressed  concern over 
the growing number of witnesses and that the character evidence 
was “becoming cumulative.”     
  Under HRE Rule  403, it is within the court’s 
discretion to exclude the “needless presentation of cumulative 
evidence.”  “In order for evidence to be considered ‘cumulative’ 
for HRE [Rule] 403 purposes, it must be substantially the same 
as other evidence that has already be en received.”  State v. 
Pulse, 83 Hawai‘i 229, 247, 925 P.2d 797, 815 (1996) (citing Aga 
v. Hundahl , 78 Hawai‘i 230, 241, 891 P.2d 1022, 1032 (1995)) .  
Thus, it was within the court’s discretion to exclude cumulative 
evidence by limiting the number of witn esses who were all 
testifying as to the same character traits.  Aga, 78 Hawai‘i at 
241, 891 P.2d at 1033 (finding it was not an abuse of discretion 
to exclude the deposition testimony of a second doctor regarding 
the decedent’s alleged hallucinations becau se such testimony did 
not “offer a different opinion” than that already presented at 
trial and “could be considered cumulative evidence”); see also 
U.S. v. Dredd , 833 F. App’x 79, 81 (9th Cir. 2020) (noting that 
the trial court “has latitude to exclude cum ulative character 
witnesses”).    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 Here, five of the six non-family character  witnesses 
the defense sought to call would have testified as to Will iams’ 
“honesty and integrity.”   All six witnesses would have testified 
as to Williams’ “nonviolent and non -aggressive character” and 
“the absence of any indications of sexual deviancy or behaviors” 
consistent with  the allegations in this case.   Nothing in the 
record indicates the four excluded witnesses would have offered 
a “different opinion” on Williams’ character  than that attested 
to by the witnesses the court permitted to testify ; they would 
have testified as to the same character traits in different 
interpersonal settings.20  The court’s exclusion of these 
witnesses did not prevent the defense from supporting th e 
character of the defendant, nor did it prevent testimony that 
would supply a fact not available from other witnesses.  Because 
the testimony of the four excluded witnesses would have been 
“substantially the same as other [character] evidence ” offered 
at trial, Pulse, 83 Hawai‘i at 247, 925 P.2d at 815, the circuit 
court’s exclusion of these witnesses was not an abuse of 
discretion . 
                         
20  For example, two of the excluded  male non -family character 
witnesses, along with Laura Morgan, who was permitted to testify, were listed 
as “long time famil y friend[s]” of the Williams es.  Another excluded male 
non-family character witness was Willi ams’ “professional colleague.”   All of 
these witnesses would have offered similar opinion testimony as to Williams’ 
character.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
40 C. Sufficient Evidence Existed to Convict Williams . 
“This court will not overturn a conviction by a jury 
if viewing the evidence  in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, there is substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact.”  Tetu, 139 Hawai‘i at 226, 386 
P.3d at 863 (quotation marks and brackets omitted).  
“Substantial evidence is credible evidence w hich is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable [a person] of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.”  State v. Matavale , 
115 Hawai‘i 149, 158, 166 P.3d 322, 331 (2007).   
   In the present case, there was substantial evidence 
to convict W illiams.  The jury heard testimony from T.Y. that 
Williams sexually assau lted him while he was a minor.   State 
witnesses S.S. and C.O. also testified as to their observations 
of T.Y.’s emotional, nervous, and fidgety behavior when T.Y. 
told them about the alleged assault.   C.Y. testified as to the 
changes in T.Y.’s behavior, including the decline in his 
academic performance, during and after the alleged time frame 
that the abuse occurred.  Although William s denied committing 
the assault  and several defense witnesses testified as to his 
good reputati on it is within the jury’s purview to believe one 
witness over another.  See State v. Jhun , 83 Hawai‘i 472, 483, 
927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996) (“In a jury trial, the jury is the 
trier of fact and, thus, is the sole j udge of the credibility of  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
41 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Gary W. B. Chang the witnesses and the weight of the evidence.”).  Thus, in 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable for the 
prosecution, substantial evidence supported Williams’ 
conviction.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
  For the foregoing reasons, the ICA ’s March 3, 2020 
judgment on appeal is vacated, the circuit court’s order denying 
Williams’ motion for a new trial is vacated, and the case is 
remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.   
 
Eric A. Seitz, 
(Della Au Belatti, 
Gina Szeto-Wong, 
Jonathan M.F. Loo, and 
Kevin A. Yolken, with him  
on the briefs) for 
petitioner/defendant-appellant  
 
Sonja P. McCullen for 
respondent/plaintiff-appellee
  