     ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-10-0000109 12-FEB-2014 
09:25 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
JOSEPH D. VILLIARIMO,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-10-0000109
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-10-0000109; FC-CR. NO. 08-1-0035(4))
 
February 12, 2014
 
ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.; WITH NAKAYAMA, J.,
CONCURRING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold that the Family Court of the Second Circuit
 
1
(the court)  abused its discretion in denying the request for a
continuance made by Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee Joseph D.
 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
         
   
         
       
            
          
         
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Villiarimo (Villiarimo). The court failed to give reasons for
 
its decision to deny the continuance, making the denial
 effectively unreviewable on appeal. Moreover, in probation
 modification or probation revocation hearings, courts should
 apply a “good cause” standard for determining whether a
 continuance should be granted, in recognition of the nature of
 probation hearings. Lastly, for purposes of determining whether
 a defendant has “inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial
 requirement imposed as a condition of the [probation] order . . .
 
2
[,]” Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-725(3) (Supp. 2004) ,
courts should consider (1) whether the probationer’s actions were intentional, and (2) whether the probationer’s actions, if intentional, were a deliberate attempt to circumvent the court’s probation order, considering the goals of sentencing the defendant to probation. 
I.
 
Villiarimo applied for a writ of certiorari
 
(Application) from the May 8, 2010 Judgment of the Intermediate
 Court of Appeals (ICA), filed pursuant to its March 28, 2013
 
HRS § 706-625(3) provides:
 
(3) The court shall revoke probation if the defendant has
inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
imposed as a condition of the order or has been convicted of a
felony. The court may revoke the suspension of sentence or
probation if the defendant has been convicted of another crime
other than a felony.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
2
 2         
        
          
See         
 3
 Aloha House is a private, nonprofit corporation established in
 
1977 for the purpose of providing outpatient and residential treatment for
persons addicted to alcohol and/or other drugs. 
http://www.aloha-house.org/about.html.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Summary Disposition Order (SDO). This court granted certiorari
 
review of the ICA’s affirmation of the order revoking
 Villiarimo’s probation and re-sentencing him.
 
A.
 
On January 30, 2009, Villiarimo entered a no contest
 
plea to a charge of sexual assault in the third degree, and the
 court sentenced him to five years of probation, that included 149
 days of incarceration. In May 2009, Villiarimo entered into a
 three-month stay at the Aloha House residential dual diagnosis
 treatment program following a mental health or drug-related
 “episode” that required him to be stabilized.
3 At Aloha House,
 
he was prescribed the medications Wellbutrin and Seroquel. By
 October 2009, Villiarimo was living in “regular housing” and at
 some point started using crystal methamphetamine. He testified
 that “[a]s soon as [he] started using again, [he] didn’t take
 [his] medication anymore.”
 
After Villiarimo tested positive for methamphetamine
 
use, in violation of his probation, Villiarimo’s probation
 officer (the officer), filed a written motion for modification of
 the terms and conditions of Villiarimo’s probation on October 30,
 
3
         
          
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2009 (First Motion).4 A hearing regarding this First Motion for
 
modification was held on November 2, 2009. That same day, the
 
court filed a mittimus committing Villiarimo to jail, “effective
 immediately” for a period of eight days. On November 13, 2009,
 the court entered an order modifying Villiarimo’s probation for
 “inexcusably fail[ing] to refrain from use . . . [of] illegal
 drug[s] . . . as directed by the court or probation officer.”
 
According to Villiarimo’s testimony at a later hearing,
 
discussed below, during the time prior to the First Motion,
 Villiarimo had “detoxed [from meth] on [his] own at [his] house”
 after he was found “guilty for relapsing” but still did not take
 his medication. During his eight-day stay in jail, he was not
 given his prescribed medication. The jail offered Haldol to him,
 but Villiarimo did not take it because he experienced adverse
 effects from it in the past.
5 Villiarimo was apparently
 
discharged from jail on November 10, 2009.
 
B.
 
On December 7, 2009, the officer filed a second written
 
motion, requesting a modification of the terms and conditions of
 Villiarimo’s probation and for revocation of Villiarimo’s
 probation, pursuant to HRS § 706-625 (Second Motion). She
 
4
 There is no transcript of the First Motion proceedings in the
 
record.
 
5
 The foregoing testimony was given at the evidentiary hearing
 
concerning the Second Motion.
 
4
         
      
         
         
       
        
        
          
         
    
       
      
        
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
alleged that Villiarimo: (1) failed to report to a probation
 
officer on November 30, 2009, in violation of Condition 2 of the
 terms and conditions of probation; (2) failed to maintain mental
 health treatment services on November 19, 2009 by not attending a
 preliminary interview for a treatment program, in violation of
 Special Condition J; and (3) failed to participate in the sexual
 offender treatment program, because he was suspended from the
 program on November 30, 2009 for excessive absences and failure
 to accept responsibility, in violation of Special Condition P. 
On December 16, 2009, Villiarimo’s counsel moved for a
 
mental examination to determine whether Villiarimo was fit to
 proceed under HRS § 704-404.
6 On December 22, 2009 the court
 
suspended proceedings for an examination of Villiarimo’s fitness. 
After all three of Villiarimo’s examiners opined that he was not
 fit to proceed, the court found Villiarimo unfit to proceed,
 
6 HRS § 704-404 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) W
henever the defendant has filed a notice of intention
to rely on the defense of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect excluding responsibility, or there is
reason to doubt the defendant’s fitness to proceed, or
reason to believe that the physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect of the defendant will or has become an
issue in the case, the court may immediately suspend all
further proceedings in the prosecution.
 
. . .
 
(
2) Upon suspension of further proceedings in the
prosecution, the court shall appoint three qualified
examiners in felony cases and one qualified examiner in
nonfelony cases to examine and report upon the physical and
mental condition of the defendant.
 
5
         
      
         
        
        
         
        
          
          
         
         
        
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7
suspended the proceedings under HRS § 704-406(1),  and committed 
him to the custody of the Director of Health on March 11, 2010. 
That same day, Villiarimo was admitted to Hawai
'i State 
Hospital (HSH). He was started on antipsychotic medication as 
well as medication for Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) in mid-March. On April 6, 2010, he was transferred from Unit H, the admission unit, to Unit S for further psychosocial care. Also on that day, Dr. Joan H. Fukumoto (Dr. Fukumoto) became Villiarimo’s attending psychiatrist. After the unit transfer, Villiarimo did not exhibit any overt mood or psychotic symptoms, or any aggressive behavior. 
On April 9, 2010, Villiarimo was evaluated for trial
 
competence with the use of the Revised Competency Assessment
 Instrument (R-CAI). The results suggested that Villiarimo
 possessed the capacity to proceed. On April 16, 2010, Dr.
 Fukumoto wrote a letter to Ms. Janice Futa, prosecuting attorney,
 requesting a three member panel examination of Villiarimo’s
 fitness to proceed, reporting the R-CAI results and her own
 
7 HRS § 704-406(1) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) If the court determines that the defendant lacks fitness
to proceed, the proceeding against the defendant shall be
suspended, except as provided in section 704-407, and the
court shall commit the defendant to the custody of the
director of health to be placed in an appropriate
institution for detention, care, and treatment . . . . If
the court is satisfied that the defendant may be released on
conditions without danger to the defendant or to the person
or property of others, the court shall order the defendant’s
release, which shall continue at the discretion of the
 court . . . .
 
6
         
 
       
           
         
        
         
       
     
    
       
         
        
       
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
findings on Villiarimo’s fitness. After three examiners opined
 
Villiarimo was fit to proceed, the court resumed proceedings on
 August 16, 2010.
 
C.
 
On September 30, 2010, the court held an evidentiary 
hearing on the officer’s Second Motion. At the hearing, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (the State) called 
the officer as its witness. On cross-examination, Villiarimo’s counsel asked the officer if she had an opinion on whether Villiarimo was “decompensating” in October 2009.
8 However, the 
court only allowed the officer to testify to what she saw after inquiring whether the officer knew the “medical” meaning of decompensation: 
MS.  HUDSON  [(defense  counsel)]:  And  did  you  see  a
change  in  his  behavior  more  like  decompensation
starting  in  lake  October?
 
THE  C OURT: 
Are you s[ay]ing that in a technical sense?
 
MS.  H UDSON: 
I’ll say it in the –- yes, in a technical sense.
 
THE  C OURT: 
Decompensation is a medical term. Do you know
 
what that means from a medical point of view?
 
[The  o fficer]:  
Well, not –- if you define it for me.
 
THE  C OURT:  N
o, she’s asking whether you have an opinion
about whether he had any decompensation.
 [The  o
fficer]: We
ll, he wasn’t -­
THE  COURT: Listen, you are not a trained medical
professional. Do you know the definition of that term
 
8
 “Decompensation” is a psychiatric term meaning the “failure of
 
defense mechanisms resulting in progressive personality disintegration.”
Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary 475 (32d ed. 2012).
 
7
         
   
     
           
          
        
           
          
           
          
        
         
       
    
           
            
       
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as used by doctors ?
 
[The officer]: Not in that sense .
 
THE COURT: Well, I don’t think you’re in a position to offer
an opinion about it. You can describe what you saw .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Following the officer’s testimony, Villiarimo’s counsel
 
requested a continuance for the purpose of calling a physician
 
from HSH:
 
MS.  HUDSON:  Yes, your honor. And actually at this point, I
think it would be helpful to have one of the Hawai 'i State 
Hospital doctors, and I had not subpoenaed at this point.
Perhaps I could do that via video. But I think it’s important – or going to be important to present the evidence(inaudible) on fitness. I think its particularly relevantabout whether he could comply with the terms and conditions. 
THE  C
OURT:  
Well, [we’re] here for the hearing today.
 
MS.  H UDSON:  
I understand, your Honor.
 
THE  C OURT:  
So if you want to take a break -- I’m just going
 
to take a short break. You can talk with [] your client,
but we’re going to finish this hearing today.
 
After the court’s effective denial of the request for a
 
continuance, Villiarimo testified. He reported that he had not
 
been able to meet his probation requirements because his
 “organization wasn’t there anymore.” He explained that he had
 decompensated during his eight-day stay in jail because during
 that stay, he was not given Seroquel, his prescribed medication.
9
 
Villiarimo added that when he left jail he did not take his
 medication because “at that point . . . [he] was already
 
9
 Villiarimo stated that he knew the meaning of “decompensation” due
 
to his stay in HSH.
 
8
         
       
       
         
           
        
         
          
        
        
        
 
   
       
    
       
        
        
       
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
decompensating[;]” he “wasn’t in [his] right mind” and
 
“thought . . . that [he] didn’t need the medication when [he]
 actually did.” He related that while decompensating, he “felt
 completely scattered,” his “thoughts were racing,” he “was
 hearing voices,” he was “anxious all the time,” and he “wasn’t
 getting any sleep.” 
After Villiarimo concluded his testimony, Villiarimo’s
 
counsel again requested a continuance having Dr. Fukumoto as the
 witness to be called:
 
THE  COURT: Does the defense have further evidence or
 
w
itnesses?
 
MS.  HUDSON:  
Well, again, your Honor, I would like to
ask for a continuance because I think if – I’m
 
actually not sure – let me ask the Court this: There
 was a report from the State Hospital from his
treatment team that suggested a plan for him when he
was released from State hospital to come back to Maui.
I’m wondering if the Court got that or -­
THE  COURT:  
I don’t have it in front of me.
 
MS.  HUDSON:
 It was addressed to the Court. It’s dated
 
July -­
MS.  MENDES  [(Prosecuting  attorney)]:
 Your Honor, to
the issue of violating, this is not relevant.
 
THE  COURT:
 I think you’re right.
 
MS.  HUDSON:
 I’m just asking if the Court -­
THE  COURT:
 Do you have further evidence or witnesses?
 
MS.  HUDSON:
 Y
es, I would like to call Dr. Fukumoto
from the State hospital, and obviously I haven’t
(inaudible).
 
THE  COURT:  Well, then your motion is denied.
Anything else ?
 
MS.  HUDSON:
   No,  your  Honor.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
9
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court again denied the request for a continuance.
 
The State asked that Villiarimo be sentenced to five years of
 
incarceration, arguing that he had already been given “a huge
 chance the first time by modifying his probation” but Villiarimo
 “decided on his own he wanted to go take drugs” and that “he
 chooses [sic] not to go [to his appointments] and take [his]
 meds” even though “[h]e’s had many people in places that he could
 have gone to for help.” 
Villiarimo’s counsel responded that while Villiarimo
 
did not meet the terms and condition of his probation, the
 
failure was not inexcusable. She emphasized that at the time of
 
the violations, Villiarimo was decompensating and did not
 
understand his mental health problems. 
However, the court concluded that “[Villiarimo] 
inexcusably failed to perform General Condition 2, report to his probation officer; Special Condition J, failure to follow through with the co-occurring disorder treatment . . . [a]nd Special Condition P, failure to follow through with the Hawai' i Sex 
Offender Treatment Program . . . .” Villiarimo’s probation was revoked and he was sentenced to five years in prison. The court stated that “in this case the defendant was given really very good opportunities to rehabilitate himself, if that was possible, at least twice. . . . And yet he apparently chose to stop taking his medication and go out and use illegal drugs, and then he lost 
10
         
          
      
         
       
         
         
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
it after that . . . . But at some point he has to take
 
responsibility for his behavior.” 
II.
 
A.
 
1.
 
On October 28, 2010, Villiarimo filed a notice of
 
appeal to the ICA. In his Opening Brief, he argued that the
 court abused its discretion in denying his request for a
 continuance to obtain the testimony of Dr. Fukumoto and in
 revoking his probation where the evidence presented did not
 indicate that he willfully and inexcusable failed to comply with
 the conditions of his probation. Villiarimo made the arguments
 that follow.
 First, Villiarimo asserted that he satisfied the test
 
adopted by the ICA in State v. Lee, 9 Haw. App. 600, 856 P.2d
 1279 (1993), to determine whether a continuance should be
 granted. The test stated:
 
In moving for a continuance based on the unavailability of a
witness, the movant must generally show that:
 
due diligence has been exercised to obtain the attendance of
the witness, that substantial favorable evidence would be
tendered by the witness, that the witness is available and
willing to testify, and that the denial of the continuance
would materially prejudice the defendant.
 
Lee, 9 Haw. App. at 604, 856 P.2d at 1282 (citing 
United States v. Walker, 621 F.2d 163, 168 (5th Cir. 1980));
 United States v. Harris, 436 F.2d 775, 776 (9th Cir. 1970)).
 
11
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Due diligence in obtaining Dr. Fukumoto was exercised,
 
according to Villiarimo, because defense counsel requested a
 
continuance twice during the hearing; the first time immediately
 after the officer testified, which was when the issue of
 Villiarimo’s mental competence was raised. Villiarimo averred
 that Dr. Fukumoto’s testimony would have offered substantial
 favorable evidence because she could have explained Villiarimo’s
 diagnosis, treatment plan, discharge plan, and prognosis, and
 offered her medical opinion on the effect of methamphetamine on
 Villiarimo and whether he was able to conform his conduct while
 he was on probation. Villiarimo noted that these were all
 matters pertinent to whether he inexcusably failed to comply with
 the conditions of his probation. 
Villiarimo argued that Dr. Fukumoto was available and 
willing to testify because in a letter she stated that she was available if there were “further questions.” Additionally, Villiarimo asserted that the denial of the continuance materially prejudiced him, denying him of his constitutional right to present a defense and right to compulsory process in violation of the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, section 14 of the Hawai' i State Constitution. 
Second, Villiarimo alleged that the evidence did not
 
support the finding that the violations were wilful and
 inexcusable. According to Villiarimo, he “never stabilized after
 
12
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
his relapse because the jail failed to give him any medication”
 
but “had the jail provided [him] with medication, he would have
 stabilized and been able to comply with the conditions of [his]
 probation.” Thus, Villiarimo maintained that the court erred in
 using his relapse as the basis to conclude that he inexcusably
 and wilfully failed to comply with the conditions of his
 probation. 
2.
 
In its Answering Brief, the State argued, first, that
 
the court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion for
 a continuance because Villiarimo failed to meet all of the
 factors established in Lee. In the State’s view, the defense had
 “ample” time to issue a subpeona or arrange for video testimony
 because four months before the hearing, Villiarimo’s counsel
 received a copy of Dr. Fukumoto’s letter, which included
 Villiarimo’s diagnosis.
 
Second, the State maintained that the court correctly
 
concluded that Villiarimo wilfully and inexcusably failed to
 perform conditions of his probation. According to the State,
 Villiarimo did not appear impaired at the hearing in regard to
 the First Motion for modification on November 2, 2009, and
 Villiarimo did not lack substantial capacity to conform his
 conduct to the requirements of his probation. Additionally, the
 State asserted, Villiarimo voluntarily chose to take drugs, and
 
13
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
voluntary intoxication is a “gratuitous” defense, not a
 
constitutionally protected defense to criminal conduct. 
B.
 
The ICA affirmed the court’s decision in an SDO on
 
March 28, 2013. State v. Villiarimo, No. CAAP-10-0000109, 2013
 
WL 1284875, at *1 (App. Mar. 28, 2013) (SDO). Citing the Lee
 test, the ICA concluded that there was no abuse of discretion by
 the court in denying the continuance. Id. at *1-2. The ICA did
 
not elaborate on its reasoning. Id. The ICA further concluded
 
that the court did not abuse its discretion in deciding that
 Villiarimo inexcusably failed to comply with the conditions of
 his probation. Id. at *2. According to the ICA, in light of the
 
principles of voluntary intoxication that “‘a mental disability
 excusing criminal responsibility must be the product of
 circumstances beyond the control of the defendant,’” id. (quoting
 State v. Freitas, 62 Haw. 17, 20, 608 P.2d 408, 410 (1980)), and
 that voluntary intoxication is not a defense to criminal conduct,
 id. (citing State v. Souza, 72 Haw. 246, 249, 813 P.2d 1384, 1386
 (1991)), the ICA stated that “Villiarimo’s voluntary
 intoxication . . . and the psychosis[,] . . . which was a direct
 consequence of the voluntary intoxication[,] . . . cannot be a
 defense to his willfulness, as an indicator of his culpability,
 in violating the conditions of probation[.]” Id. Additionally,
 
the ICA noted that “where the relapse ultimately was the admitted
 
14
         
          
       
        
     
      
      
     
       
      
       
       
        
          
      
       
       
       
       
        
 
        
      
  
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
cause of [Villiarimo’s] psychotic disorder under which [he] took
 
the actions that violated his conditions of probation, that
 relapse was properly considered by the [court] in the [hearing].” 
Id. at *1.
 
III.
 
Villiarimo raises three points of error in his
 
Application to this court: 
1. The ICA gravely erred in holding that the court
did not abuse its discretion in denying Villiarimo’s
request for a continuance to obtain the testimony ofDr. Fukumoto , Villiarimo’s treating psychiatrist from
Hawai'i State Hospital, because: (1) during the
hearing, the State introduced evidence that Villiarimowas experiencing psychiatric issues while onprobation; (2) when Villiarimo was taken into custodyfor the [Second M]otion, the proceedings weresuspended because Villiarimo had been found unfit toproceed, and (3) Dr. Fukumoto would have beenavailable to testify via video at a later date. 
2. The ICA gravely erred in holding that the court did
not clearly err in “consider[ing]” Villiarmimo’s prior
use of illicit drugs to revoke his probation“notwithstanding that the same taking of illicit drugswas also the basis for a previous revocationproceeding” in violation of the double jeopardy anddue process clauses of the United States and Hawai 'i 
State Constitutions. [ 10
]
3
. There was insufficient evidence to support that
Villiarimo willfully and inexcusably failed to comply
with probation conditions .
 
(Emphases added.)
 
IV.
 
In his Application, Villiarimo cites State v. Mara, 98
 
Hawai'i 1, 41 P.3d 157 (2002), in support of his position that 
10
 In light of the disposition set forth herein, this question need
 
not be reached.
 
15
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the court erred in denying his request for a continuance. In 
Mara, this court held that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying the defendant’s request for a continuance because according to the circuit court the defendant failed to show that “the witness sought was available and willing to testify or that the denial of a continuance would materially prejudice [him].” Mara, 98 Hawai' i at 9, 14-15, 41 P.3d at 165, 
170-71. Villiarimo alleges that, as in Mara, his request for a continuance to obtain a witness arose in the midst of the hearing; unlike in Mara, however, Villiarimo’s witness was available and willing to testify and the denial of his request for a continuance did in fact result in material prejudice against him. 
Villiarimo explains that Dr. Fukumoto was available and
 
willing to testify because the case records and files that the
 court took judicial notice of included a letter by Dr. Fukumoto
 in which she stated that she was available for “further
 questions.” From this statement and the fact that as an employee
 of HSH, Dr. Fukumoto routinely testifies in court proceedings,
 Villiarimo contends that the doctor expressed her availability
 and willingness to testify. 
Villiarimo also relates that denying the request for a
 
continuance materially prejudiced him because it deprived him of
 his fundamental rights to present a defense, to compulsory
 
16
         
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
process, to effective assistance of counsel, and to due process
 
of law.11 He asserts that the testimony of Dr. Fukumoto was
 
necessary to present his defense because the court prohibited the
 officer from testifying on Villiarimo’s decompensation, and
 Villiarimo’s testimony alone could not substantiate medically
 when he became mentally incompetent or what caused his
 incompetence. 
He maintains that Dr. Fukumoto would have been able to
 
testify on Villiarimo’s treatment plan, his prognosis, and the
 effect of methamphetamine on him and the duration of those
 effects. Her testimony would have provided “substantial and
 favorable evidence” directly related to “whether [Villiarimo] was
 legally responsible for his conduct and whether involuntary
 intoxication was an issue.” 
Using the Lee test, the State asserts that there was no
 
abuse of discretion because Villiarimo failed to show material
 prejudice. Specifically, the State explained that since
 voluntary intoxication is not a defense, “[Villiarimo] did not
 suffer manifest injustice or material prejudice because his
 defense [was] based on alleged mental illness [ ] caused by his
 voluntary taking of . . . methamphetamine.” 
11
 In light of the proposed disposition, these constitutional issues
 
need not be reached.
 
17
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
V.
 
The grant or denial of a continuance is in the 
discretion of the trial court, and the court’s ruling “will not 
be disturbed on appeal absent showing of abuse of that 
discretion.” State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai 'i 229, 239, 925 P.2d 797, 
807 (1996) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). “An 
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party-litigant.” Keahole Def. Coalition, Inc. v. Bd. of Land and 
Natural Res., 110 Hawai' i 419, 436, 134 P.3d 585, 602 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
VI.
 
In reviewing whether a trial court has abused its 
discretion in denying a request for continuance, we have recently emphasized the importance for trial courts to consider the circumstances of the case and to explain their reasoning. In State v. Cramer, 129 Hawai' i 296, 299 P.3d 756 (2013), this court 
concluded that the circuit court abused its discretion in denying the petitioner’s motion for substitution of counsel and a continuance of petitioner’s sentencing hearing. 129 Hawai' i at 
304, 299 P.3d at 764. There, the circuit court cited only “untimeliness” as the reason for denying the request and did not 
18
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
offer any additional explanation for its decision. Id. at 302,
 
299 P.3d at 762. The record also disclosed that neither the
 
circuit court nor the witnesses at the initial hearing would be
 inconvenienced by the request. Id. Additionally, the State did
 
not take a position on the motion, and there was no apparent
 prejudice to the State. Id. Lastly, there had been only one
 
prior continuance in the proceeding. Id. Under these
 
circumstances, the majority concluded that the circuit court
 abused its discretion, because in denying the motion, the court
 should have balanced the petitioner’s rights against
 countervailing governmental interests. Id.
 
Similarly, in the instant case, as set forth supra, the 
court’s responses to each of Villiarimo’s requests for a continuance were seemingly perfunctory. The court simply indicated that it wanted to complete the hearing in one day, and reiterated its denial after Villiarimo’s testimony was complete. Where the court does not provide any justification for its decision, an appellate court cannot properly review whether the court “clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice . . . .” Keahole Def. 
Coalition, 110 Hawai' i at 436, 134 P.3d at 602. Thus, on 
appellate review, it is impossible to determine whether the court considered the various interests involved. 
19
         
      
         
         
          
       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VII.
 
A.
 
The appropriate standard for determining whether to
 
grant a continuance in a probation revocation or modification
 
proceeding should be the “good cause” standard. Pursuant to this
 test, a defendant must demonstrate that he or she has “good
 cause” for requesting the continuance. Wright & Miller, 3B Fed.
 Prac. & Proc. Crim. § 832 (4th ed.). Such a standard takes into
 account both “the request or consent of the prosecution or
 defense . . . [and] the public interest in [the] prompt
 disposition of the case.” Id. 
Moreover, the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State 
of Hawai' i (RCCSH) requires a showing of good cause in motions 
for a continuance.
12 Court rules are analogous to statutes, and 
therefore “have the force and effect of the law.” See, e.g., 
State v. Arceo, 84 Haw. 1, 29, 928 P.2d 843, 871 (1996). This court has not had the occasion to review RCCSH Rule 7(e), but has reviewed the standard of good cause in regard to the denial of continuances in other respects. 
12
 RCCSH Rule 7(e) states, in relevant part:
 
A motion for continuance of any assigned trial date, whether
or not stipulated to by respective counsel, shall be granted
only upon a showing of good cause , which shall include a
showing that the client-party has consented to the
continuance.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
20
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawai'i appellate courts have considered the scope of 
the term “good cause” in a variety of contexts. See, e.g., Doe 
v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i 144, 154, 44 P.3d 1085, 1094 (2002) (applying 
a “good cause” standard to a motion for a new family court 
trial). In construing the “good cause” standard, this court has stated “[a]s a general rule, ‘good cause’ means a substantial reason; one that affords a legal excuse.” See State v. Senteno, 
69 Haw. 363, 368, 742 P.2d 369, 373 (1987) (citing State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 267, 625 P.2d 1040, 1042 (1981)). In State v. Diaz, for example, this court considered good cause in the context of a bail forfeiture statute. 128 Hawai' i 215, 225­
27, 286 P.3d 824, 834-36 (2012). The court forfeited the petitioner’s bail after he failed to appear at his arraignment. Id. at 219, 286 P.3d at 828. Diaz noted that under HRS § 804-51, 
“‘“good cause” why execution should not be issued upon the judgment of forfeiture “may be satisfied by the defendant . . . by . . . providing a satisfactory reason for his or her failure to appear when required . . . .’” Id. (quoting HRS § 804-51). 
Because at the time of the arraignment, the petitioner was in custody in California for an unrelated criminal matter, id. at 226, 286 P.3d at 835, this court believed there was “no indication that the petitioner broke his recognizance intentionally, with the design of evading justice or without a sufficient cause of reasonable excuse.” Id. at 226-27, 286 P.3d 
21
         
      
         
          
    
 
      
         
          
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 835-36. Considering the purposes of bail and “the
 
circumstances of [the] case[,]” this court concluded that “good
 cause was established for setting aside the forfeiture judgment.”
 Id.
 
A showing of good cause is also required to obtain a
 
continuance in motor vehicle administrative hearings, as
 
13
 established by HRS § 291E-38(j),  the successor to HRS § 286­
259(j) (repealed 2000).14 In Farmer v. Administrative Director 
of Courts, 94 Hawai' i 232, 11 P.3d 457 (2000), this court applied 
the HRS § 291E-38(j) “good cause” standard with respect to denial of a continuance of a driver’s license revocation hearing before the Administrative Driver’s License Revocation Office. 94 Hawai'i at 237, 11 P.3d at 462. In that context, this court held 
that “‘good cause’ is defined as ‘a substantial reason amounting in law to a legal excuse for failing to perform an act required by law.’” Id. (quoting Robison v. Administrative Director of the 
13 HRS § 291E-38 states in relevant part:
 
For good cause shown, the director may grant a continuance
either of the commencement of the hearing or of a hearing
that has already commenced.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
14
 HRS § 286-259(j) stated in relevant part:
 
For good cause shown, the director may grant a continuance
either of the commencement of the hearing or of a hearing
that has already commenced.
 
22
         
         
        
         
          
         
     
           
              
             
              
               
             
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Court, 93 Hawai' i 337, 342, 3 P.3d 505, 508 (App. 2000) (other 
citations omitted)). 
B.
 
The “good cause” standard for granting continuances is
 
far more apropos in the probation modification or revocation
 
hearing context than the Lee test applied by the ICA. In support
 of the Lee test, the ICA cited to a number of propositions
 indicating that continuances that delay trial are disfavored,
 including a quote from a federal case stating that 
“An attorney cannot reasonably expect a court to alter its
calendar, and disrupt a scheduled trial to which witnesses
have been subpoenaed and to which the adverse party is
ready, simply by the filing by counsel of a last minute
motion for continuance. All weight of authority is contrary
to such wishful speculations.”
 
Id. at 603, 856 P.2d at 1282 (emphasis added) (quoting United
 
States v. Chapel , 480 F.Supp. 591, 594 (D. Puerto Rico 1979)).15
  
In Lee, the defendant had moved for a continuance on the day of
 trial, and “witnesses, summoned to appear at trial, had been
 waiting all morning to testify . . . .” Id. at 604, 856 P.2d at
 
1282. Thus, it was in the interest of avoiding undue delay and
 inconvenience at trial that the ICA applied the Lee test. This
 court has affirmed these concerns, stating that “[i]n deciding
 
15
 Walker and Harris, the other federal court cases cited by Lee, did
 
not involve probation proceedings. The test is now also used by the Sixth and
 
Seventh circuits. See, e.g. , United States ex rel. Searcy v. Greer , 768 F.2d
906, 913 (7th cir. 1985); United States v. Phillips , 630 F. 2d 1138, 1144 (6th
Cir. 1980). A similar test has been adopted by the Fourth and Tenth Circuits.
See, e.g. , United States v. Dowlin , 408 D.3d 647, 663 (10th Cir. 2005); United
States v. Clinger , 681 F.2d 221, 223 (4th Cir. 1982).
 
23
         
      
          
            
        
      
          
        
        
          
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether to order a continuance following a change in
 
court-appointed counsel for an indigent defendant, the court may
 consider, as a factor, the need to adhere to an orderly court
 calendar.” State v. Torres, 54 Haw. 502, 506, 510 P.2d 494, 497
 
(1973). 
A probation modification or revocation hearing is a
 
substantially different type of proceeding, where the concerns
 prompting the ICA to adopt the Lee test are not present. HRS §
 706-625(1) provides that the court may “reduce or enlarge the
 conditions of probation,” after a hearing, upon “application of a
 probation officer, the prosecuting attorney, the defendant, or
 its own motion[.]” HRS § 706-625(2) sets out the procedures for
 such a hearing, wherein:
 
The prosecuting attorney, the defendant’s probation officer,
and the defendant shall be notified by the movant in writingof the time, place, and date of any such hearing, and of thegrounds upon which action under this section is proposed.The prosecuting attorney, the defendant’s probation officer,and the defendant may appear in the hearing to oppose orsupport the application, and may submit evidence for thecourt’s consideration . The defendant shall have the right
to be represented by counsel. For purposes of this sectionthe court shall not be bound by the Hawai 'i rules of 
evidence , except for the rules pertaining to privileges. 
(Emphases added.) 
The procedures for modification or revocation of the
 
terms and conditions of probation is intended to afford
 
flexibility to the court. The Commentary to HRS § 706-625
 provides that “[t]his section . . . allows the court to relax or
 
24
         
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
increase the conditions of probation. Such power is essential if 
the disposition is to remain flexible.” (Emphasis added.) See 
also, State v. Pali, 129 Hawai' i 363, 370, 300 P.3d 1022, 1030 
(2013) (“HRS § 706-625 concerns violations of probation and vests 
discretion in the court to decide what constitutes a violation and what remedy should apply.”); State v. Sumera, 97 Hawai' i 430, 
439, 97 P.3d 557, 566 (2002) (“[P]robation allows the court the flexibility to modify probationary conditions or to revoke probation altogether and sentence a defendant to the maximum indeterminate prison term if the defendant does not comply with the terms of probation.”). 
With this discretion comes a certain degree of 
procedural flexibility, evidenced by, among other things, the fact that the court is not bound by the Hawai' i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) in a modification or revocation proceeding.
16 HRS § 706­
625(2). Thus, such a proceeding is distinguishable from the rigors of a trial, where the court may need to consider the exigencies created by the presence of a jury. It is apparent that in articulating its test for continuances, Lee did not contemplate probation hearings, where no jury will ever be waiting to start or to complete the trial. 
16
 The court would still be bound by the HRE rules pertaining to
 
privileges. HRS § 706-625(2).
 
25
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A “good cause” standard would be consistent with the
 
concept of flexibility underlying the court’s discretion to
 
modify or revoke probation. That standard maintains procedural
 fairness during such hearings, by requiring that the defendant
 have a “substantial reason” or a “legal excuse” for requesting a
 continuance. This would prevent undue delay due to the whims of
 the defendant, while still preserving the perogatives of a court
 in managing its calendar. 
As this case illustrates, the stakes are often high 
during probation revocation or modification hearings. “When the court revokes probation, it may impose on the defendant any sentence that might have been imposed originally for the crime of which the defendant was convicted.” See HRS § 706-625(5). Thus, 
a revocation proceeding is akin to the initial sentencing hearing. See State v. Durham, 125 Hawai' i 114, 125, 254 P.3d 425 
(2011) (“‘[T]he question of whether the defendant should be sentenced to imprisonment or to probation is no less significant than the question of guilt.’”) (quoting Commentary on HRS § 706­604(2) (Supp. 2006)). Consequently, the same procedural protections should be afforded as in any sentencing, including ensuring that the defendant is able to convey sufficient information to the court so that a fair and just decision may be made. HRS § 706-625(2) (“The prosecuting attorney, the defendant’s probation officer, and the defendant may appear in 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the hearing to oppose or support the application, and may submit 
evidence for the court’s consideration.” (emphasis added)); see also Durham, 125 Hawai' i at 123, 254 P.3d at 434 (holding in the 
context of a probation revocation hearing that “‘[i]n any system which vests discretion in the sentencing authority, it is necessary that the authority have sufficient and accurate information so that it may rationally exercise its discretion.’” (quoting State v. Lau, 73 Haw. 259, 262, 831 P.2d 523, 525 (1992))). 
A defendant then should be allowed a fair opportunity
 
to supplement or controvert the State’s evidence at the
 revocation hearing. Cf. HRS 706-604(2) (“The court shall furnish
 
to the defendant or the defendant’s counsel and to the
 prosecuting attorney a copy of the report of any pre-sentence
 diagnosis or psychological, psychiatric, or other medical
 examination and afford fair opportunity, if the defendant or the
 prosecuting attorney so requests, to controvert or supplement
 them.” (emphases added)). Thus, it is critical to recognize
 situations where a substantial reason exists for the defendant’s
 continuance request and to consider the request accordingly.
 
VIII.
 
Applying the good cause standard to the instant case,
 
it is evident that Villiarimo provided a “substantial reason” or
 “legal excuse”, see Senteno, 69 Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 373, for
 
27
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the proceedings to be temporarily suspended to obtain Dr.
 
Fukumoto’s testimony. The issue of Villiarimo’s mental health
 was raised in the testimony of the officer; however, as she was
 not a “trained medical professional” the court prohibited her
 from testifying as to whether Villiarimo was decompensating
 during the time of the probation violations at issue and thus did
 not intentionally violate the terms of his probation. 
Villiarimo’s testimony was the only testimony on decompensation
 at the proceeding, but he could not medically substantiate the
 cause of the decompensation and its likely effect on his
 behavior.
 
Dr. Fukumoto’s testimony could have informed the court
 
of whether Villiarimo’s condition affected his conduct during the
 time of the violations, and if not, the reason why it did not. 
This testimony would have been directly relevant to Villiarimo’s
 defense that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that
 he wilfully and inexcusably failed to comply with the terms and
 conditions of his probation. See State v. Quelnan, 70 Haw. 194,
 
767 P.2d 243 (1989) (holding that a defendant has the right to
 “present a potentially meritorious defense” at a probation
 hearing). Therefore, Villiarimo had “good cause” for requesting
 a continuance to obtain Dr. Fukumoto’s testimony. Because this
 testimony was at the heart of Villiarimo’s defense to the
 probation violations, the court’s error in failing to grant a
 
28
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
continuance for Villiarimo to obtain Dr. Fukumoto’s testimony was
 
not harmless. Consequently, the court abused its discretion in
 denying Villiarimo’s request for a continuance.
 
IX.
 
For purposes of remand, the court’s ultimate decision
 
to revoke Villiarimo’s probation is briefly discussed. HRS §
 706-625(3) specifies that “[t]he court shall revoke probation if
 the defendant has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial
 requirement imposed as a condition of the [order setting forth
 the terms and conditions of probation.]” 
A.
 
As noted, Villiarimo had alleged at the probation
 
hearing that his failure to satisfy the probation terms and
 conditions occurred as a result of his mental health issues, and
 were therefore excusable. The court did not accept this defense,
 and the ICA upheld the court’s decision on the basis that
 “Villiarimo’s voluntary intoxication . . . and the psychosis 
. . . cannot be a defense to his wilfulness, as an indicator of
 culpability, in violating [] the conditions of his probation.” 
Villiarimo, 2013 WL 1284875, at *2. 
“Inexcusable” has not been defined in the statute, but
 
the plain meaning of “inexcusable” is “being without excuse or
 justification.” Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 597
 
(10th ed. 1993) (emphasis added). This court has considered the
 
29
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
significance of the term “inexcusably” in HRS § 706-625 on
 
several occasions. For example, in State v. Nakamura, 59 Haw.
 378, 581 P.2d 759 (1978), this court characterized “inexcusably”
 as a “wilful and deliberate attempt . . . to circumvent the
 order of the court.” 59 Haw. at 381, 581 P.2d at 762. The
 defendant was sentenced to five years probation, with the
 condition that he remain at a drug rehabilitation program until
 he was clinically discharged. 59 Haw. at 378, 581 P.2d at 761. 
Upon release from the correctional facility, the defendant went
 home to visit his mother prior to entering the rehabilitation
 program. Id. at 379, 581 P.2d at 761. The drug rehabilitation
 
program rejected him on this basis, and this court determined
 that the program’s rejection was arbitrary. Id. at 380, 581 P.2d
 
at 762. In considering whether the defendant had “inexcusably
 failed to comply” with the condition of probation, Nakamura held
 that “[t]he defendant’s enrollment at [the program], following
 this brief visit [to his mother], was made impossible by [the
 program’s] arbitrary rejection.” Id. As such, Nakamura
 
concluded that “[t]here was no wilful and deliberate attempt on
 his part to circumvent the order of the court.” Id. at 381, 581
 
P.2d at 762. 
In State v. Wong, 73 Haw. 81, 829 P.2d 1325 (1992), the
 
defendant argued that a willful or intentional failure to comply 
30
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
with a term of probation was required before a defendant’s
 
probation could be revoked. 73 Haw. at 82, 829 P.2d at 1326. In
 that case, the defendant was convicted of sexual abuse and
 sentenced to fifteen consecutive weekends of incarceration and
 five years probation, and as a condition of his probation he was
 to submit to treatment in a residential or outpatient mental
 health program until clinically discharged. Id. at 82-83, 829
 
P.2d at 1326. While on probation, the defendant was arrested for
 the offense of Abuse of Household Member and was convicted of
 Driving Under the Influence. Id. 
The State filed a motion to revoke probation, and at 
the hearing the defendant told the court that he had been accepted into a residential drug and alcohol treatment program at the Hawai' i Addiction Center (HAC). Id. The court decided not 
to revoke his probation, but instead resentenced him to a new term of probation with the additional condition that he maintain residential treatment in HAC until clinically discharged. Id. 
HAC then terminated the defendant from the program when it found out about his original sexual abuse conviction, and the State filed another motion for revocation, alleging that the defendant had failed to maintain treatment at HAC, although apparently not through any willful or intentional act of his own. Id. 
Wong then construed Nakamura, and held that in addition
 
to the defendant’s wilfulness, Nakamura had also considered the
 
31
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
rehabilitative and protective objectives of probation when making
 
its decision as to whether the defendant’s violation was
 “inexcusable.” Id. at 85, 829 P.2d at 1327. In so concluding,
 
Wong read HRS § 706-625 in conjunction with HRS § 706-606 (Supp.
 1991), which provides the sentencing objectives that a court
 should consider when deciding whether to impose probation. Id.
 
at 86, 829 P.2d at 1328 (citing HRS § 1-16 (1985)) (providing
 that “[l]aws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter,
 shall be construed with reference to each other.”). As a result,
 Wong held that while a defendant’s wilfulness is an indicator of
 culpability, the court should also consider the legislature’s
 protective and rehabilitative purposes, as set forth in HRS §
 706-606, in considering whether a defendant’s violation of
 probation was “inexcusabl[e].” Id. at 86-87, 829 P.2d at 1328. 
Under this standard, Wong held that the court could
 
consider the defendant’s dangerousness in considering whether his
 probation violation was inexcusable. Id. at 87, 829 P.2d at
 
1328. Underlying Wong’s holding was the notion that a
 construction of “inexcusable” to mean only “wilful” would “mak[e]
 it impossible for the court to revoke probation where there
 exists no appropriate rehabilitative programs in the community or
 where the defendant poses an unreasonable threat of harm to the 
32
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
community, so long as the defendant has not intentionally
 
violated any terms of probation.” Id.
 
In Quelnan, this court based its decision to revoke the
 
defendant’s probation on two grounds, one of which was that the
 defendant had misrepresented his employment status and source of
 income to his probation officer. 70 Haw. at 198, 767 P.2d at
 246. The officer testified at the probation hearing that the
 
defendant had reported that he was employed as a driver at Sida
 Taxi, but had not worked there for a number of months. Id. The
 
officer further testified that the defendant’s taxi driver’s
 license had expired, he had been denied a reissuance, and that he
 continued as a taxi driver by picking up some fares
 independently. Id. at 201, 767 P.2d at 247. 
Quelnan held that “there [was] serious doubt as to
 
whether [the d]efendant inexcusably failed to comply with the
 change in employment status condition of probation.” Id.
 
(citation omitted). This court observed that “[a]rguably, but
 for [the d]efendant’s failure to gain reissuance of his taxi
 driver’s license, [the d]efendant would still be gainfully
 employed with Sida as a taxi driver. Based on the record, the
 sole reason [the d]efendant was denied reissuance was due to his
 then pending gambling indictment, which was later dismissed.” 
Id. 
33
         
       
          
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Quelnan went on to note that “[the d]efendant’s
 
employment status during his probationary period did not evidence
 
conduct wilfully and deliberately subversive of exemplary
 probationary behavior[,]” and that “[i]n essence, [the
 d]efendant’s overall whereabouts was readily ascertainable, and
 known to the probation department.” Id. at 201, 767 P.2d at 247­
48. Thus, the defendant’s failure to report his change in
 
employment status was found to be excusable. Id. 
B.
 
Based on this court’s prior case law, it appears that
 
the most appropriate definition of “inexcusably” in HRS § 706­625(3) is a “willful and deliberate attempt . . . to circumvent
 the order of the court.” Nakamura, 59 Haw. at 381, 581 P.2d at
 
762. This standard requires both an intentional act on the part
 
17
 of the defendant (“willful” ), and a deliberate attempt by him
or her to circumvent the probation order, taking into
 consideration the significance of the defendant’s action with
 respect to the court’s order and goals of probation (“to
 circumvent the order of the court”). See id.; see also State v.
 
Huggett, 55 Haw. 632, 639, 525 P.2d 1119, 1124 (1974) (remanding 
17
 Black’s Law Dictionary defines “willful” as “[v]oluntary and
 
intentional , but not necessarily malicious.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1737 (9th
 
ed. 2009) (emphasis added).
 
34
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for a rehearing to enable the court to determine whether
 
“considering the totality of the circumstances, [the defendant’s]
 post-sentencing conduct was wilfully and deliberately subversive
 of exemplary probationary behavior.”). The cases described above
 appear to generally consider these two factors when determining
 whether a defendant’s probation should be modified or revoked. 
Thus, in this case, on remand, the court should consider, with
 respect to each violation, whether (1) Villiarimo’s actions were
 intentional, and (2) whether his actions, if intentional, were a
 deliberate attempt to circumvent the court’s probation order,
 considering the goals of sentencing the defendant to probation.
 
X.
 
In light of the foregoing, for purposes of continuance
 
requests at probation modification and revocation hearings, the
 “good cause” standard applies. Inasmuch as Villiarimo satisfied
 the “good cause” standard in his request for a continuance, the
 court abused its discretion in denying his request. Further, in
 determining whether, pursuant to HRS § 706-625(3), Villiarimo
 “inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
 imposed” by the probation order, the court must apply the test
 articulated herein. Therefore the ICA’s May 8, 2013 judgment on
 appeal affirming the court’s September 30, 2010 order of 
35
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
revocation of probation and resentencing is vacated, and the case
 
remanded for further proceedings. 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
for petitioner
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 Artemio C. Baxa,
for respondent
36
 