          
       
     
       
       
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-27897 29-MAY-2012 
12:32 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,

 
vs.

 
LLOYD PRATT, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.

 
NO. SCWC-27897

 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(ICA NO. 27897; CR. NO. HC 04-147)
(ICA NO. 27898; CR. NO. HC 04-169)
(ICA NO. 27899; CR. NO. HC 04-229)

 
MAY 29, 2012

 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND DUFFY, JJ.,
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING,
WITH WHOM MCKENNA, J., JOINS

 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.

 
Article XII § 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution provides: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence,cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua 'a 
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to theright of the State to regulate such rights. 
Haw. Const. art. XII, § 7. Over the course of several cases,
 
           
       
            
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
this court has interpreted this provision, along with statutory

 
sources of protections, in order to define the scope of the legal

 privilege for native Hawaiians to engage in customary or

 traditional native Hawaiian practices when such practices

 conflict with State statutes or regulations. The court has

 examined the privilege in the civil context, considering the

 right to enter private land to gather traditional plants (Kalipi
 
 v. Hawaiian Trust Co., Ltd., 66 Haw. 1, 656 P.2d 745 (1982)), the right to contest the State’s sale of “ceded” lands (Pele Defense Fund v. Paty (“PDF”), 73 Haw. 578, 837 P.2d 1247 (1992)), and the right to participate in county-level Planning Commission hearings regarding land use (Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawaii County Planning Comm’n (“PASH”), 79 Hawai' i 425, 903 P.2d 1246 
(1995)). The court has also examined this privilege in the criminal context. In our most recent case on this topic, State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i 177, 970 P.2d 485 (1998), we held that a 
criminal defendant asserting this privilege as a defense to criminal charges must satisfy, “at minimum”, the following three-prong test: (1) the defendant must be “native Hawaiian” according to the criteria established in PASH
1
, (2) the claimed right must
be “constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional
 native Hawaiian practice,” and (3) the conduct must occur on
 
1

 PASH defines “native Hawaiians” as “descendants of native 
Hawaiians who inhabited the islands prior to 1778[.]” PASH, 79 Hawai 'i 425, 
449, 903 P.2d 1246, 1270 (1995). 
2

           
        
           
            
              
   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
undeveloped property. Id. at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-94. In

 
that case, we held that Hanapi had not satisfied this test, so

 
the court’s analysis stopped there. Id. at 187, 970 P.2d at 495. 
Today’s case picks up where Hanapi left off, and

 
requires the court to articulate the analysis the courts must

 undertake when a defendant has made the “minimum” showing from

 Hanapi
citations. 
The defendant in this case, Lloyd Pratt, received three

 
2
 when he was found residing in a closed area of Nâ Pali 
State Park on the island of Kaua' i. 
Pratt filed a motion to 
dismiss the charges, asserting as a defense that his activities were constitutionally-protected native Hawaiian practices, and citing Hanapi. The District Court of the Fifth Circuit (“trial 
3
court”) denied his motion , held trial, and subsequently found Pratt guilty on all three charges. Pratt appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”); the ICA affirmed Pratt’s conviction. State v. Pratt, 124 Hawai' i 329, 243 P.3d 289 (App. 
2010). Pratt applied for a writ of certiorari, and we granted his application to clarify the law surrounding the assertion of native Hawaiian rights as a defense in criminal cases.
4 
I. BACKGROUND

 
2

 The three cases (numbers 27897, 27898, and 27899) were
 
consolidated into one case.
 
 
3

 The Honorable Frank D. Rothschild presided.
 
 
4

 Pratt’s application for writ of certiorari presented a second
 
question regarding the binding effect of a concession on appellate courts.
Because the court is able to decide the case without resolving that question,
the question is not discussed.
 
 
3

           
         
      
          
          
          
         
       
        
      
 
          
            
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Pratt was cited for violating Hawai' i Administrative 
Rules (“HAR”) § 13-146-4 on July 14, July 28, and September 28 of 
2004, when he was found in a closed area of the Kalalau Valley in the Nâ Pali Coast State Wilderness Park on Kaua' i. HAR § 13-146­
4, Closing of Areas, states in pertinent part: 
The board [of land and natural resources] or its authorized
representative may establish a reasonable schedule of
visiting hours for all or portions of the premises and close
or restrict the public use of all or any portion thereof,
when necessary for the protection of the area or the safety
and welfare of persons or property, by the posting of
appropriate signs indicating the extent and scope of
closure. All persons shall observe and abide by the
officially posted signs designating closed areas and
visiting hours.
 
 
HAR § 13-146-4(a) (1999). 
A. Trial Proceedings

 
On September 21, 2005, Pratt filed a motion to dismiss 
arguing that the activity for which he received his citations is 
constitutionally privileged as a native Hawaiian practice.5 At a 
hearing on Pratt’s motion, the defense presented two witnesses: Pratt, and Dr. Davianna Pomaika' i McGregor, a professor of Ethnic 
Studies at the University of Hawai' i, Mânoa. The prosecution 
presented one witness: Wayne Souza, the Parks District Superintendent for Kaua' i for the Department of Land and Natural 
Resources. 
Pratt testified that he was born in Waimea to parents 
from O'ahu and the island of Hawai' i. He presented a family tree 
5

 In Hanapi, the court explained that “[t]he preferred method for a
 
defendant to raise a constitutional right in a criminal prosecution is by way
of a motion to dismiss.” Hanapi at 184, 970 P.2d at 492.
 
 
4

           
          
           
           
    
         
         
         
          
         
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
and testified that he is 75% native Hawaiian. Pratt named 
Kupihea as a family line, though that name does not appear on his family tree. The defense then presented its Exhibit 4, a book published by the State of Hawai' i called “An Archaeological 
Reconnaissance Survey: Na Pali Coast State Park, Island of Kaua'i.” The book lists a land grant sold to the Kupihea family 
for part of the ahupua' a for the Kalalau Valley. Pratt testified 
that this is his family’s land, and that this is where he spends time in the Park. 
Pratt learned huna, which he described as a native

 
Hawaiian “spiritual living style” from two elders. Pratt is a

 kahu, which he translated as a minister, healer, or medicine man.

 In addition to healing people, Pratt described his practice of

 healing land:

 
It’s actually putting back into order again. But it was
 
 
there by my ancestors because it has mana 6 in it. It’s to
 
 
clean up the rubbish that is in there, meaning it broke up
7
the  mana  that  is  on  the  heiaus , and especially because my
a
ncestors are all buried on it. They’re the caretakers to
it.
 
 
Pratt testified that he has practiced such healing in the Kalalau

 
Valley approximately each month for over thirty years, and that

 he is responsible for the Kalalau Valley because his ancestors

 are buried there. 
6

 “Mana” means “Supernatural or divine power.” Mary Kawena Pukui &
 
Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 235 (rev. ed. 1986).
 
 
7

 A “heiau” is defined as “a Pre-Christian place of worship, shrine;
 
some heiau were elaborately constructed stone platforms, others simple earth
terraces. Many are preserved today.” Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 64.
 
 
5

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Pratt said that he takes offense when people say he

 
“camps” in Kalalau Valley because he actually lives there. Pratt

 
testified that he has to spend the night in the valley to fulfill

 his responsibilities because hiking in to the valley takes eight

 to ten hours, and he needs two days to recuperate from the

 difficult hike. The defense offered a photograph as its Exhibit

 2, which shows the area where Pratt lived. Pratt explained that
 
 he cleared the area in the picture of trash, brush, and overgrown

 java plum trees, an invasive species that prevents native plants

 from growing. He planted hasu, watercress, bananas, and twelve
 
 coconut trees. Exhibit 2 shows several tarps, which Pratt said

 covered his living area; it also shows a green hose, which Pratt

 used to water his plants. Pratt said that he knew of a

 government program whereby a private citizen can work with the

 DLNR to take care of the parks; he unsuccessfully applied to work

 with this program in Kalalau Valley in the early 1990s. 
Dr. Davianna Pomaika' i McGregor is a tenured professor 
at the University of Hawai' i where she teaches classes on 
Hawaiians, land tenure use in Hawai' i, race relations, and 
economic change in Hawaii’s people. She has taught the course on Hawaiians since 1974. Dr. McGregor testified as an expert in the area of customary and traditional native Hawaiian practices, as well as the source of protection of native Hawaiian rights. 
Through her research, Dr. McGregor has developed a list

 
6

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
of the following six elements essential to traditional and

 
customary native Hawaiian practices: (1) the purpose is to

 fulfill a responsibility related to subsistence, religious, or

 cultural needs of the practitioner’s family; (2) the practitioner

 learned the practice from an elder; (3) the practitioner is

 connected to the location of practice, either through a family

 tradition or because that was the location of the practitioner’s

 education; (4) the practitioner has taken responsibility for the

 care of the location; (5) the practice is not for a commercial

 purpose; and (6) the practice is consistent with custom. In

 preparation for her testimony, Dr. McGregor interviewed Pratt and

 determined that his daytime activities in Kalalau Valley meet

 these requirements of a traditional and customary practice. She

 testified that Pratt’s activities are subsistence-related because

 he planted food plants, that they are religious because he

 performs ceremonies on the heiau, and that they are cultural

 because he learned them from the previous generations. Based on

 her interview with Pratt, Dr. McGregor believed that Pratt’s

 activities satisfied every element of her test: Pratt learned the

 practices from elders, his ancestors lived in Kalalau Valley, he

 took responsibility for the Valley, his purpose was not

 commercial, and his practices were consistent with custom. Dr.

 McGregor further opined that Pratt’s residence in the valley is a

 traditional practice because it was necessary to fulfill his

 
7

           
        
        
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
responsibilities to the land. McGregor testified that she 
believed these practices to be protected by Hawai' i law. 
Mr. Wayne Souza, the Parks District Superintendent for 
Kaua'i for the Department of Land and Natural Resources (“DLNR”), 
testified for the prosecution. He stated that the purpose of the park regulations is to limit the number of people permitted in the park for health and safety reasons, and to protect vulnerable park resources. Souza testified that controlling the number of visitors is necessary because the self-composting toilets fail when too many people visit. The regulations also limit the number of people who visit in order to keep the area “low density” to provide a wilderness experience, and to protect plant and animal life. He testified that the park is home to native plant communities and native sea birds. Souza also testified that the State has established a curatorship program to manage cultural and archaeological resources, like the heiau in Kalalau Valley. Under the program, a curator works with the DLNR and the State Historic Preservation Division to manage the sites. 
Following the hearing, the parties submitted briefing

 
on the issue of the native Hawaiian practices defense. In its

 brief, the State conceded the following:

 
In this case, based on Dr. Davianna Pomaikai McGregor’s
testimony, the State does not dispute that the activities
described are traditional and customary Native Hawaiian
practices.
 
 
The State argued that, even if Pratt’s conduct is a native

 
8

           
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Hawaiian practice, Pratt’s right to engage in this practice is

 
subject to the State’s right to regulate. The State maintained

 that it is entitled to enforce its regulations restricting

 visitation of Kalalau Valley to protect the health and safety of

 the public, and to preserve the natural environment. The State

 also cited the curatorship program as an effort by the State to

 reconcile competing interests in managing the Park.

 
In his brief, Pratt contended that his motion to

 
dismiss should be granted because he satisfied the three prongs

 of the Hanapi test.
8 Alternatively, Pratt argued that, while the

 
State may regulate even customary and traditional practices, the

 State has the burden to prove that the regulation is reasonable

 and allows for the practice of native Hawaiian rights to the

 extent feasible. Pratt suggested that if the court applies a

 balancing test, that test should only permit the State to

 regulate if it shows that it would be “infeasible” to permit the

 native Hawaiian practice; Pratt argued that because the State has

 not made such a showing, the defense stands as a bar to

 conviction.

 
The trial court recognized that there was no dispute

 
regarding whether Pratt satisfied the three prongs of the Hanapi

 test, but determined that further analysis was required. The

 trial court noted that the constitutional provision at issue

 
8

 Pratt also briefed a defense under the Federal Religious Freedom
 
Restoration Act (“RFRA”), but that defense is not before this court.
 
 
9

           
         
       
        
          
        
        
      
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
explicitly states that the privilege is “subject to the right of

 
the State to regulate such rights”; therefore the court

 determined that when a defendant claims a native Hawaiian

 privilege as a defense to criminal charges, the court must

 consider the State’s interests in regulating the conduct. The

 trial court found that the State has a strong interest in

 controlling the Park, and that Pratt could exercise his rights

 within the boundaries of the law by obtaining permits to be in

 the park or applying to the curatorship program. In sum, the
 
 court found: 
that the State has a valid interest in protecting and
preserving this valuable asset [the park], which means,
among other things, controlling the amount of traffic, the
length of stay for any one person, and the types of
activities that are consistent with this stewardship. This
 
 interest when balanced against the rights expounded by Mr.
Pratt weigh in favor of the State.
 
 
The trial court denied Pratt’s motion to dismiss, and allowed the

 
case to proceed to trial. 
At trial, the parties stipulated to the essential facts

 
sufficient to establish that Pratt had violated the Closed Areas

 regulation. The stipulation also permitted the trial court to
 
 treat the testimony from the hearing on the motion to dismiss as

 the testimony offered at trial. The document states the

 following:

 
The STATE OF HAWAII and Defendant LLYOD [sic] PRATT
stipulate that the following facts are true, accurate and correct.
On  July  14,  2004,  July  28,  2004  and  September  28,  2004,
Lloyd  Pratt  was  camping  in  Kalawao  [sic]  State  Park.
At  each  of  the  times  that  Lloyd  Pratt  was  camping  the
Kalalau  State  Park  location  where  he  was  camping  was  a  closed
area[.]
 
 
10

           
           
         
        
           
           
            
            
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Prior to each of the times when Lloyd Pratt camping [sic] in
Kalalau State Park signs were posted stating that locations where
Lloyd Pratt was camping was [sic] a closed area.
Immediately  prior  to  each  of  the  times  when  camping,  Lloyd
Pratt,  [sic]  both  saw  the  signs  and  had  actual  knowledge  that  the
locations  in  Kalalau  State  Park  where  he  was  camping  was  [sic]  a
closed  area.
 
 
And  that  all  times  relevant,  the  entirety  of  Kalalau  State
Park  was  located  in  the  County  of  Kauai,  State  of  Hawaii.
Additionally,  the  STATE  OF  HAWAII  and  LLYOD  [sic]  PRATT
stipulate  that  the  testimony  contained  in  the  November  4,  2005
transcript  of  proceedings  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been  given  at
trial  and  that  any  objections  and  rulings  thereon  shall  be  deemed
to  have  been  as  set  forth  in  that  transcript.   This  stipulation
shall  not  constitute  a  waiver  of  any  of  the  objections  to  or
claims  of  error  that  either  the  STATE  OF  HAWAII  or  LLYOD  [sic]
PRATT  may  choose  assert  [sic]  with  respect  to  any  rulings  on
objections  or  other  orders  of  court  as  set  forth  in  said
transcript.
 
 
In its closing argument the State reiterated its

 
position that if its regulations are reasonable, then the native

 
Hawaiian privilege does not exempt anyone from compliance with

 those regulations. Pratt presented multiple defenses: he
 
 reiterated his position that he had satisfied the Hanapi test,

 and he presented several other defenses, arguing that a

 conviction would violate the Federal Religious Freedom

 Restoration Act (“RFRA”), the ex post facto clauses of the

 federal and state constitutions, the rule of lenity, and stare

 decisis.
9

 
The trial court convicted Pratt of violating the Closed

 
Areas regulation. The trial court’s order included the following
 
 Findings of Fact (“FOF”) and Conclusions of Law (“COL”):

 
[FOF] 13. Based on the testimony elicited at the November 4
 
 
9

 Pratt does not pursue the RFRA, ex post facto, or stare decisis
 
claims in his application for writ of certiorari, thus, this opinion does not
fully articulate these arguments. Pratt’s argument as to the rule of lenity
is reviewed in Section III.B., infra.

 
11

           
          
          
        
          
         
   
  
         
          
        
  
          
      
         
          
          
         
        
          
  
  
         
         
     
  
          
        
           
        
      
      
      
          
        
      
      
          
       
          
         
         
           
       
        
          
       
        
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
hearing and concessions made by the State in its brief, the
Court finds that Mr. Pratt is [1] a native Hawaiian, [2]
that he carried out customary or traditional native Hawaiian
practices in Kalalau at the time of the camping, and [3]
that this exercise of rights occurred on undeveloped or less
than fully developed land.
 
 
[. . .]
 
 [FOF] 16. At trial, the parties stipulated that the
evidence and issues offered at the hearing on the Motion to
Dismiss were deemed to have been introduced at trial.
 
 
[. . .]
 
 [COL] 4. The rights of Native Hawaiians to engage in
customary or traditional Native Hawaiian practices, carried
out on land that was undeveloped or less than fully
developed, is not an absolute right, but is a right that
needs to be balanced against the interest of the State of
Hawaii in keeping the Kalalau State Park a wilderness area,
protecting the area for all to enjoy, conserving park
resources and providing for the health and safety of all who
visit the area.
 
 
[. . .]
 
 [COL] 6. DLNR Code LNR 13-146-04 is a reasonable
 
 
regulation, both on its face and as applied to the
heretofore described activities of Lloyd Pratt.
 
 
[. . .]
 
 [COL] 8. The defendant satisfied all three prongs of the
affirmative defense as set forth in State v. Hanapi .

 
[COL] 9. Case and statutory law all suggest that even with
such a showing (under Hanapi), the Court must “reconcile
 
 competing interests,” or stated another way “accommodate
 
 competing...interests” and only uphold such rights and
 
privileges “reasonably exercised” and “to the extent
 
 feasible” and “subject to the right of the State to regulate
 
 such rights.” See Article XII, section 7, Hawaii
Constitution; Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawaii
County Planning Commission , 79 Hawaii 425 (1995).
 
 
[COL] 10. The Court must balance the competing interests of
Mr. Pratt’s attempts to exercise certain Hawaiian native
[sic] rights by setting up a residence and [heiau] in the
Kalalau Valley with the State’s interest in keeping this a
wilderness area for all to enjoy and be safe in.
 
 
[COL] 11. The Court finds that the State has a valid
 
 
interest in protecting and preserving this valuable asset,
which means, among other things, controlling the amount of
traffic, the length of stay for any one person, and the
types of activities that are consistent with this
stewardship. This interest when balanced against the rights
expounded by Mr. Pratt weigh in favor of the State.
 
 
12

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
The court sentenced Pratt to 60 hours of community service, and

 
stayed the sentence pending this appeal. 
B. The ICA’s November 18, 2010 Opinion

 
Pratt appealed his conviction to the ICA. The three 
ICA judges produced three separate published opinions. State v. 
Pratt, 124 Hawai' i 329, 243 P.3d 289 (App. 2010). Though they 
based their opinions on different reasoning, Judges Fujise and 
Leonard both concluded that Pratt’s conviction should be affirmed. Chief Judge Nakamura concurred in part, but dissented from the portion of the opinion affirming Pratt’s conviction. On December 17, 2010, the ICA filed its Judgment on Appeal. On March 15, 2011, Pratt filed a timely application for writ of certiorari. This court accepted Pratt’s application on April 21, 2011 and heard oral argument on May 19, 2011. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW

 
Pratt asserts a constitutional right. “We answer 
questions of constitutional law by exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.” Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i at 182, 970 P.2d at 490 (quoting 
State v. Mallan, 86 Hawai' i 440, 443, 950 P.2d 178, 181 (1998)) 
(internal quotations marks and citations omitted). 
13

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
III. DISCUSSION

 
A.		 The Court Will Not Exercise Plain Error Review To Invalidate

 
The Parties’ Stipulation At Trial.

 
In this case, as in any criminal case, the burden of

 
proof falls on the prosecution to prove each element of the crime

 
for which the defendant is charged. It is only after the
 
 prosecution meets this burden that any offered affirmative

 defense becomes relevant. In this case, Pratt stipulated to all

 the essential facts necessary to warrant conviction. Therefore,
 
 this court must affirm the judgment below convicting Pratt,

 unless Pratt can prove his defense that the privilege for native

 Hawaiian practices applies in his case.

 
The dissent argues that the court should exercise plain 
error review to invalidate Pratt’s conviction on grounds not raised by counsel, namely, that the court may not accept the stipulation agreed upon by Pratt and the prosecution in this case. The dissent reasons that because there is no on-the-record colloquy in which Pratt waives his right to have the prosecution prove each element of the offense for which he was charged, and because Pratt and defense counsel contradicted the stipulation on record, the case must be remanded for a new trial. Dissent at 20-22. The dissent cites as authority State v. Murray, 116 Hawai'i 3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007), a case which had not been decided 
at the time of Pratt’s trial. 
We respectfully disagree with the dissent’s position

 
14

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
for several reasons. First, we note that the timing of the

 
stipulation and Pratt’s testimony indicate that the stipulation

 reflected a tactical decision not to dispute whether the

 prosecution satisfied its burden to secure conviction. The first

 step of Pratt’s defense was to file a motion to dismiss, grounded

 in his affirmative defense that his activities in the park were

 protected as traditional and customary native Hawaiian practices,

 and that such protection precluded conviction. The District

 Court held a hearing on Pratt’s motion on November 4, 2005. It

 was during this hearing that Pratt testified that he had not seen

 any “Closed Area” signs in the park. Following further briefing
 
 on the defense, the court issued an order denying Pratt’s motion

 on March 10, 2006, and the case was scheduled for trial. Prior

 to trial on April 12, 2006, the parties executed a stipulation to

 satisfy the essential facts of the offense, thus narrowing the

 issues for trial to Pratt’s several affirmative defenses. Pratt

 signed the stipulation, as did defense counsel and the

 prosecution. 
The dissent would negate the parties’ April 2006

 
stipulation, in part due to Pratt’s November 2005 testimony that

 he did not see any of the posted signs in the park. However, the
 
 subsequent stipulation indicates that, at trial, the defense made

 a tactical decision to focus its energy on affirmative defenses,

 
15

           
           
            
            
             
            
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
rather than disputing the prosecution’s prima facie case.10 The

 
dissent would also negate the stipulation because the record does

 
not include any physical evidence of the signs. However, the
 
 absence of evidence to prove an element to which the opposing

 party has stipulated is to be expected; having executed the

 stipulation, the prosecution did not present its case in chief at

 trial.

 
The dissent cites State v. Murray as authority for 
discarding the stipulation. In Murray, the defendant was on trial for Abuse of a Family or Household Member. 116 Hawai' i at 
5, 169 P.3d at 957. More specifically, prosecutors sought conviction under a subsection of the statute for defendants convicted of a “third or any subsequent offense that occurs within two years of a second or subsequent conviction.” Id. In 
a motion in limine, defense counsel stipulated to the prior abuse convictions; this stipulation was read aloud to the jury at trial. Id. On writ, the court considered whether this 
stipulation was in error because it was “made solely by counsel.” Id. at 6, 169 P.3d at 958. The court concluded that Murray was entitled to a new trial because his counsel was not permitted to make this stipulation without Murray’s consent. Id. at 14, 169 
10

 The dissent cites Briones v. State , 74 Haw. 442, 848 P.2d 699
 
(1993), for support of its argument that declining to refute the charges can
not be tactical because it did not have an “obvious basis” in benefitting
 
 Pratt. Dissent at 12-13 n.4. Respectfully, this argument takes a myopic view
 
 of Pratt’s case. From the very beginning, Pratt sought to establish a
constitutional privilege to camp or reside in Kalalau Valley without a permit.
 
 
16

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
P.3d at 966. For support, the court cited State v. Ibuos, 75

 
Haw. 118, 121, 857 P.2d 576, 578 (1993) for the proposition that

 “A knowing and voluntary waiver [. . .] must come directly from a

 defendant, either in writing or orally.” Id. at 10, 169 P.3d at

 
962 (emphasis added). The court explained the requirement that
 
 the waiver be on the record, reasoning that “[w]ithout such a

 record it is difficult to determine whether the defendant

 personally waived such a right.” Id. at 12, 169 P.3d at 964. 
This main concern informing Murray is not present in

 
Pratt’s case because Pratt is on the record as personally

 admitting to the essential facts supporting conviction. The

 record in this case contains a written stipulation, signed by

 Pratt himself. With respect, we do not believe that the court

 should exercise plain error review to retroactively apply Murray

 when the concern addressed by Murray is not a factor. See, e.g.,

 
State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 515, 849 P.2d 58, 74 (1993)

 (“This court’s power to deal with plain error is one to be

 exercised sparingly and with caution. . . .”). Furthermore, the
 
 contradictions on the record from Pratt’s testimony were offered

 prior to the stipulation, and the fact that the record does not

 contain evidence of the signs is not unexpected, as the

 prosecution secured Pratt’s admission before having an

 opportunity to present its case in chief. For these reasons, we
 
 disagree with the dissent, and give effect to the parties’

 stipulation.

 
17

           
          
             
             
             
            
           
             
         
             
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
B.		 The Courts Below Did Not Err In Utilizing A Balancing Test
Or In Concluding That The Balancing Test In This Case Favors
The State.

 
The first question presented by Pratt’s application

 
requires the court to consider whether it was proper for the

 
trial court and ICA to undertake a balancing test after Pratt

 satisfied the three-factor Hanapi test.
11 We hold that it was,

 
as explained below.

 
1.		 The Privilege For Native Hawaiian Practices Requires
The Finder Of Fact To Balance Competing Interests.

 The privilege afforded for native Hawaiian practices,

 
as expressed in our State constitution and statute, is not

 absolute. The language of the provisions protecting customary

 native Hawaiian practices display a textual commitment to

 preserving the practices while remaining mindful of competing

 interests. For example, the constitutional language protecting

 the right to traditional and customary practices is qualified by

 the phrase “subject to the right of the State to regulate such

 rights.” As a second example, HRS § 7-1, a statute protecting
 
 gathering rights, provides that native Hawaiians may gather

 traditional plants, but specifically exempts from protection the

 
11

 Pratt also argues that the rule of lenity precludes conviction. 
The rule of lenity is a rule of statutory construction. State v. Shimabukuro ,
100 Hawai 'i 324, 327, 60 P.3d, 274, 277 (2002) (“Where a criminal statute is
ambiguous, it is to be interpreted according to the rule of lenity.”). Pratt 
does not argue that the regulation under which he was convicted is ambiguous,but rather that the constitutional privilege is ambiguous. Pratt does not cite, and the court was unable to find, any authority for applying that ruleof statutory interpretation to constitutional affirmative defenses. The court therefore agrees with the conclusion of the trial court and ICA that the ruleof lenity does not apply in Pratt’s case. 
18

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
gathering of these items for commercial purposes. 
In our previous cases, this court has interpreted the 
constitutional and statutory language as requiring consideration 
of the facts and circumstances surrounding the conduct. Chief Justice Richardson explored this balance in Kalipi v. Hawaiian Trust Co., Ltd., 66 Haw. 1, 656 P.2d 745 (1982). The plaintiff in that case, William Kalipi, owned a taro patch in the Manawai ahupua'a and an adjoining houselot in Ohia ahupua' a, on the island 
of Moloka' i. Kalipi, 66 Haw. at 3, 656 P.2d at 747. He lived in 
a nearby ahupua' a called Keawenui. Id. For years, Kalipi and 
his family had entered Manawai and Ohia to gather ti leaf, bamboo, kukui nuts, kiawe, medicinal herbs, and ferns. Id. at 4, 
656 P.2d at 747. When the Hawaiian Trust Company refused him the access to which he was accustomed, Kalipi brought suit alleging that he had a right to enter the property to gather the items as he wished. Id. Chief Justice Richardson’s opinion acknowledged 
the tension between modern concepts of land ownership and native Hawaiian gathering rights. He explained that “any argument for the extinguishing of traditional rights based simply upon the possible inconsistency of purported native rights with our modern system of land tenure must fail.” Id. at 4, 656 P.2d at 748. 
Similarly, the court implicitly recognized that the bare assertion of this privilege is inadequate to defeat all property rights. That is, the two conceptions of property must coexist somehow, and the court saw its task as: 
19

           
         
        
         
          
         
  
        
          
          
          
          
           
          
          
                    
      
     
        
         
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
to conform these traditional rights born of a culture which
knew little of the rigid exclusivity associated with the
private ownership of land, with a modern system of land
tenure in which the right of an owner to exclude is
perceived to be an integral part of fee simple title.
 
 
Id. at 7, 656 P.2d at 749. The court in Kalipi “struck” a

 
“balance” in its interpretation of HRS § 7-1, which at the time

 of the Kalipi opinion stated:

 
Where the landlords have obtained, or may hereafter obtain,
allodial titles to their lands, the people on each of their
lands shall not be deprived of the right to take firewood,
housetimber, aho cord, thatch, or ki leaf, from the land on
which they live, for their own private use, but they shall
not have a right to take such articles to sell for profit.
The people shall also have a right to drinking water, and
running water, and the right of way. The springs of water,
running water, and roads shall be free to all, on all lands
granted in fee simple; provided, that this shall not be
applicable to wells and water-courses, which individuals
have made for their own use.
 
 
Id., HRS § 7-1 (1976).12 In construing this statute, the court

 
articulated two standards: one for developed land, and one for

 
undeveloped land. Id. at 8, 656 P.2d at 750. The court held

 
that there is no right to exercise native Hawaiian practices on

 developed land because it “would so conflict with understandings

 of property, and potentially lead to such disruption, that we

 could not consider it anything short of absurd and therefore

 other than that which was intended by the statute’s framers.” 
Id. at 8-9, 656 P.2d at 750. Second, for undeveloped land, the
 
 court instructed that land use should be determined on a case by

 case basis, and that traditional rights “should in each case be

 
12

 The current version of the statute includes two small
 
 
modifications: the word “housetimber” is now written as “house-timber,” and
 
 
the word “water-courses” is now written as “watercourses.” HRS § 7-1 (2009).
 
 
20

           
         
          
         
         
           
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
determined by balancing the respective interests and harm once it 
is established that the application of the custom has continued in a particular area.” Id. at 10, 656 P.2d at 751 (emphasis 
added). In Kalipi’s case, the court did not proceed to the balancing test because it held that the statutory provisions he cited did not protect the rights of non-residents of an ahupua' a. 
Id. at 9, 12, 656 P.2d at 750, 752. 
Kalipi also cited HRS § 1-1 as a source of his right of

 
entry. At the time of Kalipi’s case, that statute provided:
 
 
The common law of England, as ascertained by English and
American decisions, is declared to be the common law of the
State of Hawaii in all cases, except as otherwise expressly
provided by the Constitution or laws of the United States,
or by the laws of the State, or fixed by Hawaiian judicial
precedent, or established by Hawaiian usage. . . .
 
 
HRS § 1-1 (1955).13 The court determined that this provision 
sought to permit native Hawaiian practices “which did not 
unreasonably interfere with the spirit of the common law.” 66 Haw. at 10, 656 P.2d at 751. The court again held that the practice must be considered on a case by case basis. This court has since read Kalipi as “merely informing us that the balance of interests and harms clearly favors a right of exclusion for private property owners as against persons pursuing non-traditional practices or exercising otherwise valid customary rights in an unreasonable manner.” PASH, 79 Hawai' i at 442, 903 
P.2d at 1263 (emphasis added). 
13

 This exact statute remains in effect. HRS § 1-1 (1999).
 
 
21

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Following Kalipi, the next main case to consider native 
Hawaiian rights was Pele Defense Fund v. Paty (“PDF”), 73 Haw. 
578, 837 P.2d 1247 (1992). In that case, PDF, a non-profit corporation whose stated purpose is to perpetuate Hawaiian religion and culture, challenged the constitutionality of a land transfer in which the State traded public land, including the Wao Kele 'O Puna Natural Area Reserve, in exchange for land that had 
been privately held. Id. at 584, 837 P.2d at 1253. PDF 
asserted, among other claims, that the transfer violated Article XII, § 7 of the State constitution because it denied access into Wao Kele ' O Puna for PDF members who wished to exercise their 
traditional practices. Id. at 613, 837 P.2d at 1268. In 
analyzing this claim, this court first distinguished the residency requirement holding of Kalipi because Kalipi’s claims had been based on a claim of ownership, while PDF’s claims were constitutional and founded in custom. Id. at 618-19, 837 P.2d at 
1271. After determining that the constitutional provision at issue was intended to protect “the broadest possible spectrum of native rights,” the court held that it may protect rights that extend beyond the ahupua' a of residence because the purpose of 
Article XII, § 7 was to reaffirm “all rights customarily and traditionally held by ancient Hawaiians.” Id. at 619-20, 837 
P.2d at 1271-72 (emphasis in original). The court limited practices on others’ ahupua' a to situations “where such rights 
have been customarily and traditionally exercised in this 
22

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
manner.” Id. at 620, 837 P.2d at 1272. The court remanded, and
 
 
wrote that in addition to proving that the practice is

 
traditional and customary, PDF must also show that it meets “the

 other requirements of Kalipi.” Id. at 621, 837 P.2d at 1272. 
In a subsequent case, PASH, this court identified the 
“other requirements” as referring to the requirements that the land be undeveloped and that the activity cause no actual harm. PASH, 79 Hawai' i 425, 439-40, 903 P.2d 1246, 1260-61. The 
question presented in PASH was whether Public Access Shoreline Hawai'i, a public interest organization, had standing to 
participate in a contested land use case hearing regarding a proposed development on the island of Hawai' i. Id. at 429, 903 
P.2d at 1250. This court held that the group had standing to participate in such a hearing, and proceeded to articulate the constitutional analysis for the case on remand. Id. at 435, 903 
P.2d at 1256. First, the court noted that the constitutional protection is not absolute; it only protects the “reasonable” exercise of native Hawaiian rights. Id. at 442, 903 P.2d at 
1263. Then, the court pointed out that the constitution gives the State the “power to regulate the exercise of customarily and traditionally exercised Hawaiian rights,” and that the same provision obligates the State to protect the exercise of those rights “to the extent feasible.” Id. at 450 n.43, 903 P.2d at 
1271 n.43. 
A common thread tying all these cases together is an

 
23

           
 
       
            
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
attempt to balance the protections afforded to native Hawaiians 
in the State, while also considering countervailing interests. In the criminal context, one countervailing interest of particular importance, and explicitly stated in the constitutional provision, is “the right of the State to regulate such rights.” In the first case examining the native Hawaiian privilege as a defense to a criminal conviction, State v. Hanapi, Alapai Hanapi was convicted of trespass after he entered his neighbor’s land to observe the restoration of the Kihaloko and Waihilahila fishponds. 89 Hawai' i 177, 178, 970 P.2d 485, 486 
(1998). Hanapi argued that his trespass was constitutionally protected because he went to the property to “perform our religious and traditional ceremonies of healing the land” and “to make sure that restoration was done properly.” Id. at 181, 970 
P.2d at 489. The court articulated the three-point test, holding that a criminal defendant asserting this privilege as a defense to criminal charges must, “at minimum”, prove the following: (1) the defendant must be “native Hawaiian” according to the criteria 
14
 
established in PASH , (2) the claimed right must be

“constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional native

 Hawaiian practice,” and (3) the conduct must occur on undeveloped

 property. Id. at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-94. The court affirmed

 
14

 PASH defines “native Hawaiians” as “descendants of native 
Hawaiians who inhabited the islands prior to 1778[.]” PASH, 79 Hawai 'i 425, 
449, 903 P.2d 1246, 1270 (1995). 
24

           
           
        
      
      
      
          
        
      
      
          
       
          
         
         
           
       
        
          
       
        
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Hanapi’s conviction, holding that Hanapi did not satisfy his

 
burden to prove that he was engaged in a traditional practice

 while on his neighbor’s land. Id. at 187, 970 P.2d at 495.

 
2.		 In Balancing Interests, The Court Must Consider The
Totality Of The Circumstances.

 All four of the Judges to consider Pratt’s case have

 
agreed that once a criminal defendant satisfies the three-prong

 showing required by Hanapi, there remains a balancing test before

 the defendant’s assertion of the native Hawaiian privilege

 negates any possible criminal conviction. They have, however,
 
 differed in their views of what factors the test should consider. 
The trial court reached the following conclusions of law in its

 articulation of the balancing test:

 
[COL] 9. Case and statutory law all suggest that even with
such a showing (under Hanapi), the Court must “reconcile
 
 competing interests,” or stated another way “accommodate
 
 competing...interests” and only uphold such rights and
 
privileges “reasonably exercised” and “to the extent
 
 feasible” and “subject to the right of the State to regulate
 
 such rights.” See Article XII, section 7, Hawaii
Constitution; Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawaii
County Planning Commission , 79 Hawaii 425 (1995).
 
 
[COL] 10. The Court must balance the competing interests of
Mr. Pratt’s attempts to exercise certain Hawaiian native
[sic] rights by setting up a residence and [heiau] in the
Kalalau Valley with the State’s interest in keeping this a
wilderness area for all to enjoy and be safe in.
 
 
[COL] 11. The Court finds that the State has a valid
 
 
interest in protecting and preserving this valuable asset,
which means, among other things, controlling the amount of
traffic, the length of stay for any one person, and the
types of activities that are consistent with this
stewardship. This interest when balanced against the rights
expounded by Mr. Pratt weigh in favor of the State.
 
 
Thus, it appears that the trial court considered the defendant’s

 
stated intention, balanced against the State’s offered

 
25

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
legislative prerogatives. 
At the ICA, Judge Leonard’s opinion concluded that the

 
balancing test in this case weighed in favor of the State, in

 
part because there was no evidence that the State’s regulation

 was unreasonable. Pratt at 356, 243 P.3d at 316. This

 
articulation of the balancing test necessarily places a burden of

 proof on the defendant to show unreasonableness of the

 regulation. Judge Fujise likewise placed the burden of proof on
 
 the defendant, but articulated the test as requiring the

 defendant to show the reasonableness of his conduct under the

 circumstances. Id. at 357, 243 P.3d at 317. Chief Judge
 
 
Nakamura contended that the State carries the burden of proof to

 show that the defendant’s conduct resulted in actual harm. Id.

 
at 363-64, 243 P.3d at 323-24. 
We respectfully decline Chief Judge Nakamura’s

 
articulation of the test, finding the test to be too narrow. The

 facts of this case provide apt illustration. The harm against
 
 which the park’s regulation seeks to protect is the harm caused

 by too many visitors in Kalalau Valley; by definition, one person

 could never cause that harm. But this does not mean that the

 government may not seek to protect against overuse. In fact,
 
 user permits are a common and effective government tool in

 situations where outlawing the threatening activity is not

 necessary, but where the government seeks to control against

 overuse of a limited resource. 
26

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
We likewise reject the other ICA Judges’ articulations 
of the test because of this court’s practice of applying totality 
of the circumstances tests, as opposed to legal presumptions, in the context of native Hawaiian rights. For example, in Kalipi, the plaintiff asserted that HRS § 1-1 established certain native Hawaiian customary rights as the law of the State. Kalipi at 9, 
656 P.2d at 750. In response, the defendants contended that any rights that may have been retained had been abrogated by an early case suggesting that HRS § 7-1 contained an exhaustive list of native Hawaiian rights, and that all other customary practices could be freely regulated by the State. Id. Finding the 
plaintiff’s contention too broad and the defendants’ too narrow, this court rejected both views, stating, “[r]ather, we believe that the retention of a Hawaiian tradition should in each case be determined by balancing the respective interests and harm once it is established that the application of the custom has continued in a particular area.” Id. at 10, 656 P.2d at 751 (emphasis 
added). This court has since interpreted Kalipi as “informing us that the balance of interests and harms clearly favors a right of exclusion for private property owners as against persons pursuing non-traditional practices or exercising otherwise valid customary rights in an unreasonable manner.” PASH, 79 Hawai' i at 442, 903 
P.2d at 1263. 
Likewise, in PDF, the court acknowledged the balancing

 
requirement implicit in the constitutional language, writing that

 
27

           
            
        
         
            
         
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
the provision both “reaffirm[ed] customarily and traditionally

 
exercised rights of native Hawaiians, while giving the State the

 power to regulate these rights.” PDF at 619, 837 P.2d at 1271

 
(emphasis added). Then, after determining that non-residence was
 
 not a bar to plaintiffs’ claims of a native Hawaiian right, the

 court wrote, 
If it can be shown that Wao Kele 'O Puna was a traditional 
gathering area utilized by the tenants of the abutting
ahupua 'a, and that the other requirements of Kalipi are met
in this case, then PDF members such as Ms. Naeole may have a
right to enter the undeveloped areas of the exchanged landsto exercise their traditional practices. 
Id. at 621, 837 P.2d at 1272 (emphasis added). In using the word
 
 
“may”—as opposed to “must”—the court left room for the courts to

 implement the constitutional language by considering all the

 circumstances of the case on remand.

 
The importance of considering the totality of

 
circumstances is also reflected in this court’s discussion of

 developed and undeveloped lands in Hanapi. There, the court

 reiterated PASH’s holding that it is “always ‘inconsistent’ to

 permit the practice of traditional and customary native Hawaiian

 rights on such [developed] property. In accordance with PASH,

 however, we reserve the question as to the status of native

 Hawaiian rights on property that is ‘less than fully developed.’” 
Hanapi at 187, 970 P.2d at 495 (quoting PASH at 450, 903 P.2d at

 1271). The court refused to validate a bright-line test whereby
 
 native Hawaiian practices on undeveloped lands are always

 permitted.

 
28

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
The dissent argues against utilizing a totality of the

 
circumstances test in this context, in part because “settled

 
criteria” already exist. Dissent at 30. It further argues that

 a totality of the circumstances test is “imprecise” and “invites

 consideration of matters beyond the benchmarks.” Dissent at 30. 
We disagree with each of these points. First, as explained
 
 above, we read the cases cited in this opinion as underscoring

 the importance of the court’s careful judgment in resolving cases

 involving traditional and customary native Hawaiian rights; we do

 not read them as providing a limited set of “settled criteria” to

 evaluate in every case. Second, we do not share the dissent’s
 
 concerns that the court should avoid utilizing a totality of the

 circumstances test because it is “imprecise.” Rather, we note
 
 that it is the very flexibility ensured by this test that makes

 it appropriate to use in this context. Review of this

 jurisdiction’s cases involving native Hawaiian practices shows

 how varied the scenarios are in which native Hawaiian rights

 arise. Because the constitutional provision at issue applies in

 several contexts, and because we cannot anticipate which factors

 may be relevant in all contexts, we decline to articulate a test

 that could preclude consideration of important factors.

 
In applying the totality of the circumstances test to

 
the facts of this case, the balancing of interests weighs in

 favor of permitting the park to regulate Pratt’s activity, his

 argument of privilege notwithstanding. 
29

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Souza testified that the regulation serves several

 
important purposes. The DLNR manages the park so “people can
 
 
have a wilderness type of experience.” He described the Kalalau

 Valley as “one of the most scenic areas,” and noted that it is

 “rich in cultural resources,” including native plant communities

 and native sea birds. He testified that the DLNR requires

 visitors to obtain permits in an effort to limit visitors for

 health and safety reasons, and to protect park resources. One

 concern is that the self-composting toilets fail when they are

 overused, another is that they must keep the area “low density”

 to protect the fragile ecosystem.

 
The record also shows that Pratt has an interest in

 
going to Kalalau Valley. As the ICA wrote, “Pratt clearly cares
 
 for and feels a spiritual connection to Kalalau and the ancient

 Hawaiians that once occupied the valley.” Pratt at 311, 243 P.3d

 
at 351. Pratt is a kahu; he has studied native Hawaiian

 practices and goes to the valley as part of his practice. 
However, according to his testimony, his actions in

 
Kalalau Valley go beyond stewardship. Pratt testified that he

 took care of some of the heiau, but also that he established a

 residence in Kalalau Valley, and cleared entire areas of the

 valley in order to replant them with other species. He undertook

 this work without consultation with the DLNR, and without an

 effort to comply with the DLNR’s permit requirements. Aside from

 an unsuccessful application to work with the DLNR in the 1990s,

 
30

           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
Pratt did not show any attempts to engage in his native Hawaiian

 
practice within the limits of state law. 
In this case, the trial court did not err in

 
considering all of the facts and circumstances surrounding

 Pratt’s activities, and then balancing the parties’ interests.

 While Pratt has a strong interest in visiting Kalalau Valley, he

 did not attempt to visit in accordance with the laws of the

 State. Those laws serve important purposes, including

 maintaining the park for public use and preserving the

 environment of the park. The outcome of this case should not be

 seen as preventing Pratt from going to the Kalalau Valley; Pratt

 may go and stay overnight whenever he obtains the proper permit. 
He may also apply to the curatorship program to work together

 with the DLNR to take care of the heiau in the Kalalau Valley. 
The trial court did not err in determining that Pratt’s interest

 in conducting his activities without a permit did not outweigh

 the State’s interest in limiting the number of visitors to

 Kalalau Valley; Pratt’s activities, therefore, do not fall under

 constitutional protection.

 
As always in a criminal case, the prosecution bears the

 
burden of proving the defendant guilty of the charged offense. 
In this case, Pratt admitted to violating the regulation at

 issue: he stipulated that he was in a closed area of Kalalau

 State Park on the three dates of his citations. Therefore, this

 
31

           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
 
court must affirm Pratt’s convictions for violating HAR § 13-146­
4.

 
IV. CONCLUSION

 
As explained above, we affirm the December 17, 2010

 
Judgment of the ICA, which affirmed the District Court of the

 Fifth Circuit’s June 16, 2006 Judgments convicting Pratt of

 violating HAR § 13-146-4. 
Daniel G. Hempey for petitioner/
defendant-appellant /s
Tracy Murakami and JakeDelaplane, DeputyProsecuting Attorneys, forrespondent/plaintiff-appellee / Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ James E. Duffy, Jr. 
David Kimo Frankel and Ashley K.
Obrey of the Native HawaiianLegal Corporation for amicuscuriae Native Hawaiian LegalCorporation 
32

 