_______________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
      ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29550 14-FEB-2014 
01:49 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
—--oOo--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
ENRICO CALARA, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-29550
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29550; CR. NO. 08-1-0977)
 
FEBRUARY 14, 2014
 
ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.; WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,
CONCURRING & DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
 
I. Introduction
 
In this appeal, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Enrico Calara
 
challenges multiple evidentiary determinations by the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”).1 Calara was
 
convicted of sexual assault in the fourth degree, in violation of
 
The Honorable Reynaldo D. Graulty presided.
 1           
          
         
        
       
        
    
           
        
       
         
          
      
          
        
        
          
       
        
          
        
        
           
  
           
             
            
           
           
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 707-733(1)(a) (1993),  for
allegedly fondling the breast of the Complaining Witness (“CW”),
 
his adult niece, while she slept. 
On certiorari, Calara presents
 
five questions:
 
1. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that Calara’s
right to present a complete defense was not violated when
the circuit court precluded him from introducing evidence of
the complainant’s drug pipe and by cross-examining the
complain[an]t about her drug use for the purposes of
attacking her perception and recollection.
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred in deciding the issue of
whether the circuit court erred in admitting the police
detective’s testimony that probable cause was established to
arrest Calara for sexual assault in the fourth degree under
the plain error standard of review and in failing to hold
that the testimony was irrelevant and improper.
3. Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
admission of CW’s statement to [her aunt,] Theresa Nishite
 as an “excited utterance” was harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt.
 4. Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
evidence of Calara’s prior statements uttered in January
200[7] and February 200[7] to establish his intent were
relevant.
 5. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court’s failure to provide a limiting instruction at
the time of CW’s testimony regarding Calara’s alleged prior
statements and as part of the final charge to the jury was
not plain error.
 
We conclude that the second question presented requires
 
vacating Calara’s conviction and remanding his case for a new
 
trial. We hold that the circuit court abused its discretion by
 admitting the testimony of a police detective, a long-time
 
HRS § 707-733(1)(a) provides, “A person commits the offense of sexual
 
assault in the fourth degree if: . . . [t]he person knowingly subjects another
person to sexual contact by compulsion or causes another person to have sexual
contact with the actor by compulsion[.]” HRS § 707-700 (1993) defines
 “compulsion” as “absence of consent, or a threat, express or implied, that
places a person in fear of public humiliation, property damage, or financial
loss.”
 
2
 2           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
veteran of the Sex Crimes Detail, that probable cause existed for
 
arresting Calara. Such testimony was inadmissible under State v.
 Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48 (1990), State v. Morris, 72
 
Haw. 527, 825 P.2d 1051 (1992), State v. Ryan, 112 Hawai' i 136, 
144 P.3d 584 (App. 2006), and State v. Baron, 80 Hawai' i 107, 905 
P.2d 613 (1995), because the testifier was imbued with an aura of 
expertise due to his experience, and because the testimony implied that the CW’s version of the events was truthful and believable, thus invading the province of the jury. This opinion briefly addresses the remaining questions presented to aid the circuit court on retrial. 
With regard to the first question presented, we hold that 
the circuit court should have conducted a Hawai' i Rules of 
Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 104 hearing to determine whether there was admissible evidence concerning the CW’s alleged drug use and its effect upon her perception. With regard to the fourth question presented, we hold that the circuit court should have excluded Calara’s earlier statements that he wanted to “take” the CW because the statements were, at their core, character evidence used to show action in conformity therewith, and were not admissible under an HRE Rule 404(b) exception. As such, it is not necessary to reach the fifth question presented, whether a limiting instruction should have accompanied the admission of the 
3
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
statements. Lastly, because we remand this case for a new trial,
 
we need not, and do not, reach the third question presented:
 whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the circuit court’s
 error in admitting the CW’s statements to her aunt as an excited
 utterance was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
II. Background
 On June 23, 2008, Calara was charged by Complaint with
 
“knowingly subject[ing the CW] to sexual contact by compulsion or
 [causing the CW] to have sexual contact with [him] by compulsion,
 thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault in the Fourth
 Degree, in violation of Section 707-733(1)(a) of the Hawaii
 Revised Statutes.”
 
The charges stemmed from an incident in the early morning
 
hours of March 13, 2007 in which the CW, Calara’s adult niece
 temporarily staying with the Calara family, accused Calara of
 entering her bedroom at night and fondling her breast without her
 consent. Calara, on the other hand, denied that he sexually
 assaulted the CW, testifying that he was in his bedroom all night
 when the incident allegedly occurred.
 
A. Pre-Trial Motions in Limine
 
1. Drug Pipe
 
Relevant to the first question presented, in a Notice of
 
Intent to Use Evidence, Calara signaled his intent to introduce
 
4
           
         
          
          
              
         
     
          
          
        
           
           
              
             
          
            
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at trial the following “evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts
 
involving” the CW:
 
d. When packing up the Complainant’s personal belongings on
or about March 14, 2007, Mrs. Calara discovered a pipe in
the room the Complainant had been using. Mrs. Calara called
 HPD to do a test on the pipe. The pipe had a bulb[o]us end
 and smelled “funny.” Previously, this room had only been
used by [Calara’s] nine-year old daughter.
 
The State filed its Motion in Limine to exclude evidence of the
 
CW’s prior bad acts. The circuit court heard the pre-trial
 motions on December 2, 2008 and precluded the admission of the
 pipe into evidence, concluding the following:
 
I  think  the  evidence  is  so  remote,  so  tangential  and
so  unreliable  as  to  whether  or  not  this  is  [the  CW’s]  pipe
and  whether  she  smoked  it  on  March  –- the  early  morning
hours  of  March  13th,  that  the  court  should  not  allow  this.
 
It’s  more  prejudicial  than  probative  and  it  is  really
 
very  –- shall  I  use  the  word  –- flimsy  evidence  that  right
now,  based  on  what  you’ve  presented,  that  this  was  her  pipe
and  that  she  used  it  on  or  about  the  date  of  the  alleged
offense  so  that  it  has  relevance  to  the  allegations  in  this
 
case.
  
Defense counsel then requested a HRE Rule 104 hearing to call
 Mrs. Calara to testify that she found the pipe within the CW’s
 belongings, to call the CW to testify as to whether she used the
 drug pipe on March 13, 2007, and, if so, whether drug use
 affected her perception of the incident, arguing as follows:
 
At the 104 hearing I’d be prepared to present my client’s
wife as a witness to testify exactly where she found [the
pipe], in what belongings, because the only person using
that room for four months was the complainant. No one used
 the room after she left until they packed up her things.
And it was found in her things. . . . It’s clear [the pipe]
 belonged to her. At -- I think a 104 hearing is at least
necessary to clarify that she was not under the influence -­or did not use that item on the date of this incident and
 affecting her perception.
 
5
           
           
           
            
           
            
          
            
          
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court denied the request as follows:
 
The court’s ruling is that the 104 hearing is not going to
be able to establish who used the pipe, when it was used,
and therefore it has no relevance to the case. And the fact
 that it involves marijuana, or at least -- I don’t know what
 it involves, what kind of drug. We don’t know. Only that
 it smelled funny -- is more prejudicial than probative. I
 don’t know what smelled funny means. . . . And a 104
 hearing is not going to cure [the problem of what substance
was in the pipe] because the HPD did not do a test on the
pipe.
 
2. Police Testimony Regarding Probable Cause
 
Relevant to the second question presented, Calara’s Motion
 
in Limine also sought to exclude “references by HPD officers, to
 
the effect that ‘all elements’ were met for an arrest/crime as
 irrelevant under HRE 403 and because such legally conclusive
 language invades the province of the jury.”
 
The circuit court granted Calara’s motion in limine and
 
further ruled as follows:
 
With  regard  to  legally  conclusive  language  as  to  HPD
saying  all  elements  of  the  crime  were  met,  the  court  is
going  to  grant  the  request.   However,  the  court  is  going  to
allow  the  prosecution  to  ask  the  question  whether  or  not  in
the  police  officer’s  mind  probable  cause  was  met  for  an
arrest  to  be  made.
 
And  the  reason  for  the  court’s  ruling  is  to  avoid  any
confusion  in  the  jury’s  mind  as  to  whether  or  not  the
standard  of  conviction  is  somehow  less  than  proof  beyond  a
reasonable  doubt,  which  includes  proving  all  the  elements  of
the  offense  and  not  the  standard  for  the  arrest  of  any
individual.
 
3. January and February 2007 Statements
 
Relevant to the fourth question presented, in a Notice of
 
Intent to Use Evidence, the State signaled its intent to
 introduce at trial the following two statements “pursuant to
 
6
           
         
         
      
          
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b), as evidence of [Calara’s]
 
intent, motive, modus operandi and lack of mistake or accident 
. . . [but] not . . . to prove the character of the defendant or
 to show [Calara] acted in conformity with these other acts”:
 
5. In January 2007 in Hawai ‘i, [Calara] made sexual 
advances towards [the CW]. [Calara] said that he just
wanted to grab and take [the CW].
6. In February 2007 in Hawai ‘i, [Calara] again told [the
CW] that [Calara] wanted to take her. 
Calara filed a Motion in Limine to exclude the January and
 
February 2007 statements as “unfairly prejudicial under HRE 404
 and irrelevant under HRE 403. . . .” 
The circuit court denied Calara’s motion in limine to
 
exclude the statements, stating the following:
 
That  the  two  events  in  question  in  January  and
February  2007,  two  prior  events  in  question,  [are]  fairly
close  in  time  to  the  date  of  the  alleged  offense  on  March
13,  2007.
 
And  in  the  court’s  view  what  it  goes  to  show  is  the
state  of  mind  of  the  defendant  at  the  time.   It  is  apparent
from  these  statements  that  [the  CW]  became  the  object  of
[Calara’s]  desire,  and  when  you  –- sexual  desire,
 
inappropriate  as  it  was.   The  fact  that  she  rebuffed  him,
 
again,  I  would  agree  goes  to  the  issue  of  lack  of  consent.
And  the  intent  I  think  is  also  demonstrated  by  the
proffer  that  was  made,  and  the  court  does  agree  that  the
prejudice  –- prejudice  to  the  defense  and  to  the  defendant
 
is  low.   It  doesn’t  mean  that  he  assaulted  her  prior  to  the
events  of  March  13,  2007,  only  what  his  state  of  mind  was,
what  his  intent  [was].
I  don’t  think  it’s  a  question  so  much  of  modus
operandi  as  much  as  it  is  lack  of  consent,  state  of  mind,
and  the  fact  that  it  shows  that  he  had  some  sexual  interest
 
perhaps  in  the  complaining  witness.
 
7
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Trial
 
1. Testimony of the CW
 
Trial commenced on December 3, 2008. The State called the 
CW to testify first. She testified that she returned to Hawai‘ i 
from the mainland in December 2006 with her two-and-a-half-year­
old daughter and six-month-old son and stayed with Calara, his wife Debra, and their three children. She stayed for three months in a bedroom formerly occupied by the Calaras’ youngest child, a nine-year-old girl. 
The CW testified that in January 2007, Calara 
“expressed an interest to develop a physical relationship” when
 he told her “he wanted to . . . grab and take [her].” The CW
 understood this statement to mean “he wanted to have sex.” The
 CW testified she was not interested because “he was married to my
 aunt and [the CW was] not attracted to him.” She testified that
 she told Calara “that wasn’t possible.” The CW testified that
 again in February 2007, Calara told her “[h]e wanted to take
 [her],” which she understood to mean “he wanted sex,” and she
 again told him she was not interested and “blew him off and
 ignored him.” The CW testified that she did not know whether
 Calara was “serious” when he made both the January and February
 2007 statements. She also stated that she liked talking with her
 aunt Debra on a daily basis, and if Calara was not serious, she
 
8
            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did not want to “make a big deal out of it” or hurt Debra’s
 
feelings. 
The CW testified that during the early morning hours of
 
March 13, 2007, she was asleep in a bedroom that she shared with
 her two children. She awoke when she “felt something cold on
 [her] breast.” She determined it was Calara’s hand, which was
 “massaging” and “manipulating” her bare breast. The CW testified
 that she screamed and Calara “jumped back and . . . kept saying
 I’m sorry” and that he did not “know what [he] was thinking”
 three to four times. After about five to ten minutes of standing
 in the room and apologizing, Calara left the room. The CW
 testified she stayed up all night, in shock, and got out of bed
 later that morning at 6:00 a.m. to prepare for an 8:00 a.m.
 meeting with a First to Work counselor. The CW stated that she
 felt “very upset and betrayed and violated.”
 
Calara and Debra drove the CW to her First to Work
 
appointment. The CW did not recall confronting either of them
 with what had happened earlier that morning. The First to Work
 counselor was the first person to whom the CW disclosed what had
 happened. The CW then called her other aunt, Theresa, to pick
 her up from the First to Work appointment. She then disclosed the
 incident to Theresa. The CW also disclosed to Debra what had
 happened and was upset that Debra did not believe her. After
 
9
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this conversation, the CW gave a statement to Honolulu Police
 
Department (“HPD”) Officer Enrico Domingo, and met with HPD
 Detective Fred Denault, with whom she identified Calara from a
 photographic line-up. The CW and her children then moved to
 Theresa’s house.
 
2. Testimony of Theresa Nishite
 
The State then called Theresa Nishite (Debra’s sister and
 
the CW’s aunt). Theresa testified that she picked the CW up from
 her First to Work appointment at around 11:00 a.m. or 12:00 p.m.,
 and that the CW was “crying the whole time,” “obviously very
 distraught,” and “very upset.” When asked by the State what the
 CW told Theresa, defense counsel objected on the ground of
 hearsay, and the State countered that the statement to be
 elicited was an excited utterance. The court sustained the
 objection as “needing more foundation.” Theresa then testified
 that the CW’s face was “all red and she had tears coming down her
 face” and was “gasping” and “having hard time talking” because
 she had been crying and “was in some kind of trouble.” The
 circuit court decided to admit the statement as an excited
 utterance, reasoning as follows:
 
[I]t  seems  to  me  that  (unintelligible)  of  the
startling  event  or  incident  and  that  this  was  the  first
opportunity  that  [the  CW]  had  to  tell  somebody  about  it.
 
She  did  not  discuss  it  with  anybody  else  from  the  time  that
the  incident  allegedly  occurred  of  2:30  in  the  morning.
She  testified  that  she  –- previously  testified  that
she  woke  with  the  intention  of  taking  the  bus  but  that  she
 
10
           
           
          
          
        
          
          
          
          
         
        
         
         
  
 
           
        
  
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accepted the offer to drive her to the DHS office from the
Calaras, and it was at that particular point that she saw
her Aunt Theresa that she began to engage in this emotional
outburst.
 
And  the  court  does  believe  that  the  sufficient
 
foundation  has  been  laid  and  that  she  made  these  utterances
 
while  still  under  the  stress  of  the  excitement  caused  by  the
event  or  condition.
 
The “excited utterance” eventually elicited from Theresa was the
 
following:
 
(Unintelligible) said that she went to sleep and that
[Calara] had come into her bedroom and had touched her under
her shirt and her kids were in the room and (unintelligible)
while she was talking she was crying so she kind of
(unintelligible) to kind of continue on but to the gist of
it she just had mentioned that [Calara] had touched her
while she was (unintelligible) –- when she was sleeping.
 
3. Testimony of Officer Enrico Domingo
 
The State then called HPD Officer Enrico Domingo, who
 
testified that the CW made a walk-in complaint, made a statement,
and identified Calara as the person who touched her. 
 
4. Testimony of Detective Fred Denault
 
The State then called Detective Fred Denault, who testified
 
that he interviewed the CW and showed her a photographic line-up,
 from which she picked out Calara as the person who touched her. 
Then the following exchange occurred with regard to “probable
 cause” for arresting Calara:
 
Q  [The  State]:  So after you conducted the lineup, did you
h
ave probable cause to enri –- arrest Enrico Calara for
 
misdemeanor sexual assault?
 
A  [Denault]:  Yes.
 
Q
: And why is that?
 
A: W
ell, based on the -­
[Defense  counsel]:  Objection, Your Honor. Um, lack of
 
foundation and irrelevant.
 The  court:  I’ll overrule the objection. You may proceed.
 
11
           
         
        
  
 
   
         
         
        
         
       
       
        
        
   
   
         
        
              
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q  [The  State]:
 So after you conducted the photo lineup, did
you have probable cause to arrest Enrico Calara for
misdemeanor sexual assault?
 
A:  Y
es.
 
Q:
 A
nd why?
 
A: Based on the complaint written by the complaining
witness which included the offenses of sex assault in the
 fourth degree which involve sexual contact to another person
without consent, and I affirmed her statement with her that
 day while conducting the photographic lineup, and she
positively identified the suspect as Enrico Calara via
photograph, and that then his identity was then confirmed
regarding the possible suspect involved in this case there
was probable cause established.
Q: Thank you.
And when you say you affirmed her statement, was that
the written statement that she had given Officer Domingo?
A: Yes. I brought the report with me and then I had her
review the statement to confirm that what’s –- what she had
 written in that was the events that she was alleging.
 
The State then rested. 
5. Testimony of Debra Calara
 
The defense called as its first witness Debra Calara,
 
Calara’s wife, who testified that she and her teenage son were
 
both working during the early morning hours of March 13, 2007 and
 were not home.
   
6. Testimony of Kristy Calara
 
The defense called as its second witness Calara’s eighteen­
year-old daughter, Kristy Calara. She testified that the night
 of the alleged incident, she had gone to her room around 9:00
 p.m. and was still there and awake during the early morning hours
 of March 13, 2007. Her bedroom was diagonally across from the
 CW’s bedroom. She testified that she, Calara, the Calaras’ nine­year-old daughter, and the CW and her children were home, but
 
12
           
          
         
          
   
         
       
        
         
       
          
       
     
           
        
       
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Debra and the Calaras’ teenage son were at work. She testified
 
that she did not hear Calara’s or the CW’s doors open or the CW
 
scream at around 2:30 or 2:45 in the morning. 
7. Testimony of Calara
 
The defense called Calara to testify last. Calara denied
 
looking the CW up and down and stating to her that he wanted to
 “take her” in January and February 2007. He also testified that
 he had been in his bedroom from 9:00 p.m. on March 12, 2007 to
 6:00 a.m. the following morning. He testified that he stayed in
 his bedroom all night and denied touching the CW’s breast. 
  
The jury returned a guilty verdict. 
Calara timely appealed. 
C. Appeal
 
On appeal, Calara raised the following points of error,
 
which are similar to the questions presented on certiorari:
 
1. The circuit court erred by precluding the defense from
introducing evidence of [the CW’s] pipe used to ingest drugs
and from cross-examining her as to her drug use to attack
her perception and recollection.
2. The circuit court erred in admitting Detective Denault’s
testimony that probable cause was established to arrest
Enrico Calara for sexual assault in the fourth degree.
3. The circuit court erred in admitting [the CW’s]
statement to Theresa Nishite as an “excited utterance.”
 4. The circuit court erred in admitting evidence of Enrico
Calara’s prior statements uttered in January 200[7] and
February 200[7] to establish his intent.
5. The circuit court plainly erred in failing to provide a
limiting instruction at the time of [the CW’s] testimony
regarding Enrico Calara’s alleged prior statements and as
part of the final charge to the jury.
 
The ICA concluded that Calara’s appeal was “without merit”
 
and affirmed his judgment of conviction and probation sentence. 
13
           
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
State v. Calara, No. 29550 (App. Feb. 14, 2013)(SDO) at 2, 7. As
 to Calara’s first point of error, the ICA concluded that the
 circuit court properly ruled that “the evidence is so remote, so
 tangential and so unreliable” as to whether the pipe belonged to
 the CW and as to whether she smoked it around the time of the
 incident that it was properly excluded and was more prejudicial
 than probative. Calara, SDO at 3. Citing State v. Sabog, 108
 
Hawai'i 102, 109-11, 117 P.3d 834, 841-43 (App. 2005), the ICA 
further held, “[T]he circuit court did not foreclose Calara from cross-examining CW regarding possible drug use on the day of the event.” Id. Under Sabog, reasoned the ICA, “Calara was entitled 
to cross-examine CW as to whether any drug use affected her perception and recollection of the incident.” Id. 
As to Calara’s second point of error, the ICA stated, 
“Calara did not object to this testimony at trial,” and “Calara has not demonstrated that his substantial rights were affected by Denault’s testimony.” Calara, SDO at 3-4. The ICA then 
distinguished three cases cited by Calara, Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48; Morris, 72 Haw. 527, 825 P.2d 1051; and Ryan, 112 
Hawai'i 136, 144 P.3d 584, from the instant case on the basis 
that “all involved witnesses offering opinions on victim-
complainants’ credibility.” Calara, SDO at 4 (footnote omitted). 
14
           
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ICA further noted, “Denault’s testimony, on the other hand,
 
explained the events that led to Calara’s arrest.” Id.
 
As to Calara’s third point of error, the ICA agreed with
 
Calara that the circuit court should not have admitted Theresa’s
 testimony about what the CW told her of the incident as an
 excited utterance, because the CW’s statements “were too remote
 from the alleged sexual assault[,]” “neither spontaneous nor
 impulsive[,]” and “the result of reflection.” Calara, SDO at 5. 
Nevertheless, the ICA held that the circuit court’s error “was
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because it was cumulative of
 CW’s and Denault’s testimony at trial.” Id. (citation omitted).
 
As to Calara’s fourth point of error, the ICA held that
 
Calara’s January and February 2007 statements were admissible as
 “relevant to understanding [Calara’s] state of mind, as well as
 CW’s lack of consent,” and that their probative value was not
 substantially outweighed by danger of unfair prejudice,
 confusion, or misleading the jury. Calara, SDO at 6.
 
As to Calara’s fifth point of error, the ICA cited HRE Rule
 
105 to support its conclusion that Calara should have requested a
 limiting instruction. Calara, SDO at 7. The ICA also held that
 
“Calara did not demonstrate the circuit court’s failure to sua
 sponte provide a limiting instruction regarding CW’s testimony
 impair[ed] his substantial rights.” Id. (citation omitted).
 
15
           
  
           
        
       
         
          
      
         
         
  
 
    
      
        
  
         
         
        
  
  
  
            
          
            
        
             
            
        
            
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Discussion
 
A. Police Testimony Regarding Probable Cause
 
As it forms the basis for our remand, Calara’s second
 
question presented is addressed first. Calara’s second question
 
presented is
 
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred in deciding the issue of
whether the circuit court erred in admitting the police
detective’s testimony that probable cause was established to
arrest Calara for sexual assault in the fourth degree under
the plain error standard of review and in failing to hold
that the testimony was irrelevant and improper.
 
As a preliminary matter, defense counsel did object to Denault’s
 
probable cause testimony, as the following transcript excerpt
 demonstrates:
 
Q  [The  State]:  So after you conducted the lineup, did you
h
ave probable cause to enri – arrest Enrico Calara for
 
misdemeanor sexual assault?
 
A  [Denault]:  Yes.
 
Q:  A
nd why is that?
 
A: W
ell, based on the -­
[Defense  counsel]:  Objection, Your Honor. Um, lack of
 
f
oundation and irrelevant.
 
The  court: 
I’ll overrule the objection. You may proceed.
 
Q  [The  State]: So after you conducted the photo lineup, did
you have probable cause to arrest Enrico Calara for
misdemeanor sexual assault?
 
A:
 Y
es.
 
The ICA should not have reviewed the admissibility of Denault’s
 
probable cause testimony under the plain error standard.3
 
Even if it could be said that defense counsel’s objection did not 
properly preserve the error ( i,e., because the basis for the objection
differed from the point of error raised on appeal), under a plain error
standard of review, Denault’s probable cause testimony nevertheless affected
Calara’s substantial rights. Ryan, 112 Hawai ‘i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589 (“We
also conclude that the error in permitting the officers to testify about the
CW’s credibility in accusing [the defendant] affected [the defendant’s]substantial rights.”) The Ryan line of cases is discussed in greater detail
further in this section. 
16
 3           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Further, the ICA did not adequately distinguish Batangan,
 
Morris, and Ryan from the instant case. The ICA stated only that
 
those cases “all involved witnesses offering opinions on victim-
complainants’ credibility.” Calara, SDO at 4. That distinction
 
is not entirely true. In those cases, the expert witnesses (or
 those witnesses with an aura of expertise) did not directly
 “offer[] opinions” about a victim-complainant’s credibility, yet
 their testimony had that effect. Those cases are discussed in
 greater detail, next. 
In Batangan, 71 Haw. at 555, 799 P.2d at 50, an expert
 
witness (a clinical psychologist with a subspecialty in the
 treatment of sexually abused children) testified that he
 interviewed the complainant (a very young child) and explained
 “how he evaluates whether a child is telling the truth about
 being sexually assaulted.” The expert then “implicitly testified
 that Complainant was believable and that she has been abused by
 Defendant.” Id. (emphasis added). Even though the expert witness
 “did not explicitly say that Complainant was ‘truthful’ or
 ‘believable,’” we held, “there is no doubt in our minds that the
 jury was left with a clear indication of his conclusion that
 Complainant was truthful and believable.” 71 Haw. at 563, 799
 P.2d at 54.
 
17
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In Morris, 72 Haw. at 529, 825 P.2d at 1052, an expert
 
witness, who “had no physical evidence [of chronic sexual abuse]
 
whatsoever,” opined that the child complainant was chronically
 sexually abused. This court held his opinion “had to have been
 based on the child’s statements to others. This is one of those
 cases like Batangan where, although the expert witness does not
 say that the child is truthful, or that he believes the child,
 the clear implication of his testimony is just that, and the
 admission of that testimony in this case was reversible error.” 
Id. (emphasis added).
 
In Ryan, this court extended Batangan’s expert witness 
holding to situations in which non-experts (here, responding police officers) implicitly concluded a complaining witness was 
credible. 112 Hawai‘ i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589 (“The Hawai‘ i 
Supreme Court’s reasons for condemning the expert’s testimony in 
Batangan applies to the officers’ testimony in Ryan’s case.”) This was because “[t]he emphasis on the officers’ training and experience in domestic violence cases served to give the officers an aura of being experts in evaluating the truthfulness of statements made by an alleged victim in domestic violence cases.” Id. Also, in Ryan (like in Batangan and Morris), the responding 
officers gave no direct opinion supporting the complainant’s credibility, yet this court held that their testimony had that 
18
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
effect. The deputy prosecutor “did not directly ask [the
 
responding officers] for their opinion on whether the CW had told
 them the truth.” Id. Rather, the “questions posed to the
 
officers were couched in terms of whether they had any reason or
 evidence that would cause them not to believe the CW’s
 allegations against [the defendant].” Id. This court held,
 
“[G]iven the DPA’s repeated questioning on this subject and the
 context in which the questions were asked, the only purpose
 served by the questioning was to inject into the trial the
 officers’ opinion that the CW’s allegations were true. . . . 
Viewed in context, the effect of the officers’ testimony was the
 same as a direct expression of their opinion that the CW had told
 them the truth.” Id. (emphasis added).
 
Similarly, in Baron, 80 Haw. at 116, 905 P.2d at 622, we
 
concluded that the screening prosecutor’s testimony that she
 decided to bring charges against the defendant meant the
 screening prosecutor “impliedly found the complainant’s
 allegations to be truthful.” We noted that, in a case concerning
 the credibility of the complainant, “the testimony of the
 [screening prosecutor] unfairly influenced the jury.” Id. 
In short, Hawai‘ i appellate courts have held that such 
implicit conclusions about a complaining witness’s testimony should be precluded. See Batangan, 71 Haw. at 558, 799 P.2d at 
19
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
52 (“[C]onclusory opinions that abuse did occur and that the 
child victim’s report of abuse is truthful and believable is of no assistance to the jury, and therefore, should not be admitted. Such testimony is precluded by HRE Rule 702.”)(emphasis added); 
Ryan, 112 Hawai‘ i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589 (“Accordingly, under 
the circumstances of this case, we hold that the family court 
abused its discretion in permitting [the responding officers’] testimony.”); Baron, 80 Haw. at 116, 905 P.2d at 622 (“[W]e hold that the trial court abused its discretion by not precluding the testimony of [the screening prosecutor].”). 
Preclusion is necessary because this type of testimony 
invades the province of the jury by usurping its power to make credibility determinations. See Batangan, 71 Haw. at 559, 799 
P.2d at 52 (“The expert’s use of words such as ‘truthful’ and ‘believable’ is not talismanic. But where the effect of the expert’s opinion is ‘the same as directly opining on the truthfulness of the complaining witness,’ such testimony invades the province of the jury.”)(citation omitted; emphasis added); 
Ryan, 112 Hawai‘ i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589 (“We conclude that the 
officers’ testimony, which was tantamount to an expression of 
their opinion that the CW had been truthful in accusing [the defendant], impermissibly invaded the province of the jury.”)(citation omitted; emphasis added). 
20
           
        
         
  
  
   
         
         
        
         
       
       
        
        
   
   
         
        
              
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Admission of this type of testimony provides grounds for
 
vacating a conviction. See Morris , 72 Haw. at 529, 825 P.2d at
 
1052 (“[T]he admission of [implicit expert testimony that the
 
complainant was truthful or believable] in this case was
 reversible error. . . . Accordingly, we 
vacate the judgment below
 
and remand the case for a new trial.”)(emphases added); Baron, 80
 Haw. at 116, 905 P.2d at 622 (“The prejudice to Appellant is
 patently clear and warrants a reversal in this case. We
 therefore vacate the guilty verdicts and remand the case to the
 circuit court for a new trial.”)(emphases added).
 
In the instant appeal, like in Batangan, Morris, Ryan, and
 
Baron, Denault did not directly testify that he found the CW
 credible, but his testimony had that effect. He testified to the
 following:
 
Q  [BY  THE  STATE]:  So after you conducted the photo lineup,
did you have probable cause to arrest Enrico Calara for
misdemeanor sexual assault?
 
A  [BY  DENAULT]: Yes.
 
Q: And why?
 
A: Based on the complaint written by the complaining
witness which included the offenses of sex assault in the
 fourth degree which involve sexual contact to another person
without consent , and I affirmed her statement with her that
 
day while conducting the photographic lineup, and she
positively identified the suspect as Enrico Calara via
photograph, and that then his identity was then confirmed
regarding the possible suspect involved in this case there
was probable cause established.
Q: Thank you.
And when you say you affirmed her statement, was that
the written statement that she had given Officer Domingo?
A: Yes. I brought the report with me and then I had her
review the statement to confirm that what’s – what she had
 written in that was the events that she was alleging .
 
21
           
        
          
        
         
          
         
  
          
          
         
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Denault, a 26-year veteran of HPD assigned to the Sex Crimes 
Detail, was imbued with “an aura of expertise” like the responding officers in Ryan. Thus, when he testified that his decision to arrest Calara was based on his assessment that the CW’s allegations provided him with probable cause, such testimony “was tantamount to an expression of [his] opinion that the CW had 
been truthful in accusing” Calara. Ryan, 112 Hawai‘ i at 141, 144 
P.3d at 589. 
Further, the circuit court’s contemplated cure for admitting
 
such testimony does not appear on the record and would not change
 
this result. At the hearing on the motions in limine, the
 circuit court explained that it would allow the testimony under
 the following circumstances:
 
With regard to legally conclusive language as to HPD
saying all elements of the crime were met, the court is
going to grant the [defense’s] request [to exclude legally
conclusive language]. However, the court is going to allow
the prosecution to ask the question whether or not in the
police officer’s mind probable cause was met for an arrest
to be made.
 
And the reason for the court’s ruling is to avoid any
confusion in the jury’s mind as to whether or not the
standard of conviction is somehow less than proof beyond a
reasonable doubt, which includes proving all the elements of
the offense and not the standard for the arrest of any
individual .
 
The jury was not provided with any instruction regarding the
 
difference between probable cause and proof beyond a reasonable
 doubt. Therefore, as Calara argued, in addition to Denault’s
 testimony invading the province of the jury by bolstering the
 
22
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
CW’s credibility, there was also a possibility that the jury
 
overly weighted the probable cause testimony in its reasonable
 doubt determination, and this may have contributed to Calara’s
 conviction. 
The ICA also concluded that Denault’s testimony merely 
“explained the events that led to Calara’s arrest.” Calara, SDO 
at 4. However, this court previously rejected a similar argument in Ryan. In that case, the State argued that the responding officers’ opinions “were directed more toward the completeness of 
the police investigation.” 112 Hawai‘ i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589. 
We disagreed, because “[t]he defense did not attack the actions 
of [the responding officers] or the thoroughness of the HPD’s investigation.” Id. Similarly, in this case, Calara never 
attacked the probable cause determination. We concluded in Ryan, “The context in which the officers were questioned convinces us that the officers’ testimony was directed at whether they believed the CW was truthful in her allegations and not at the thoroughness of their investigation.” Id. So, too, was 
Denault’s testimony that the CW’s statement provided him with probable cause to arrest Calara: his statement implied he believed the CW’s allegations. 
In short, Denault’s probable cause testimony should have
 
been precluded under Batangan, Morris, Ryan, and Baron. The
 
23
           
  
          
         
        
       
        
    
          
          
        
           
           
              
             
          
            
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
admission of the probable cause testimony was an abuse of
 
discretion. Therefore, we vacate the ICA’s judgment on appeal,
 vacate the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and probation
 sentence, and remand Calara’s case to the circuit court for
 retrial. 
We address the remaining issues raised by Calara to the
 
extent necessary to resolve this appeal and to assist the circuit
 court on retrial.
 
B. Preclusion of Evidence of Drug Pipe
 
On certiorari, Calara’s first question presented is
 
1. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that Calara’s
right to present a complete defense was not violated when
the circuit court precluded him from introducing evidence of
the complainant’s drug pipe and by cross-examining the
complain[an]t about her drug use for the purposes of
attacking her perception and recollection.
 
In his Notice of Intent to Use Evidence, Calara signaled his
 
intent to introduce at trial as “evidence of other crimes,
 wrongs, or acts involving” the CW a pipe found in the room
 occupied by the CW by Mrs. Calara. His counsel requested a HRE
 Rule 104 hearing as follows:
 
At the 104 hearing I’d be prepared to present my client’s
wife as a witness to testify exactly where she found [the
pipe], in what belongings, because the only person using
that room for four months was the complainant. No one used
 the room after she left until they packed up her things.
And it was found in her things. . . . It’s clear [the pipe]
 belonged to her. At -- I think a 104 hearing is at least
necessary to clarify that she was not under the influence -­
or did not use that item on the date of this incident and
 
affecting her perception .
 
24
           
           
           
            
           
            
          
            
          
             
 
      
         
        
          
        
           
   
          
        
          
        
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court denied the request as follows:
 
The court’s ruling is that the 104 hearing is not going to
be able to establish who used the pipe, when it was used,
and therefore it has no relevance to the case. And the fact
 that it involves marijuana, or at least -- I don’t know what
 it involves, what kind of drug. We don’t know. Only that
 it smelled funny -- is more prejudicial than probative. I
 don’t know what smelled funny means. . . . And a 104
 hearing is not going to cure [the problem of what substance
was in the pipe] because the HPD did not do a test on the
pipe.
 
The circuit court erred in deciding that a HRE Rule 104
 
hearing was not necessary. HRE Rule 104 provides, in relevant
 
part:
 
Preliminary questions.
(a) Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a
witness, the existence of a privilege, or the admissibility
of evidence shall be determined by the court, subject to the
provisions of subsection (b). In making its determination
the court is not bound by the rules of evidence except those
with respect to privileges.
(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact. When the relevancy of
evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of
fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the
introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of
the fulfillment of the condition. . . .
 
The circuit court focused solely on the pipe evidence in denying
 
the HRE Rule 104 hearing, finding the evidence inadmissible as
 irrelevant because the pipe had not been tested. The effect of
 the denial of the HRE Rule 104 hearing was broader, however, in
 that it precluded any evidence of drug use as potentially
 relevant to the CW’s 
perception  of the alleged event. As such,
 
the circuit court’s decision was inconsistent with Sabog, 108
 
Hawai'i at 111, 117 P.3d at 843, which held a defendant is 
25
           
          
        
       
          
       
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
entitled to cross-examine a witness concerning the witness’s
 
“drug use and addiction at or near the time of the incident to
 the extent that it affected [the witness’s] perception or
 recollection of the alleged event. . . .” A HRE Rule 104 hearing
 would have allowed the circuit court to determine whether there
 was any evidence relevant to the issue of the CW’s purported drug
 use as affecting her perception. 
C. Excited Utterance
 
On certiorari, Calara’s third question presented is
 
3. Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
admission of CW’s statement to Theresa Nishite as an
 
“excited utterance” was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
We agree with the ICA that the CW’s statement to Theresa Nishite
 
was not an excited utterance and should not have been admitted
 into evidence. Calara, SDO at 5. As we are remanding this case
 
for retrial based on the circuit court’s admission of Denault’s
 probable cause testimony, we need not, and do not, reach the
 issue of whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
 admission of the statement as an excited utterance was harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
D. January and February 2007 Statements
 
On certiorari, Calara’s fourth question presented is
 
4. Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
evidence of Calara’s prior statements uttered in January
200[7] and February 200[7] to establish his intent were
relevant.
 
26
           
  
 
          
            
         
       
          
           
         
          
         
            
           
   
         
           
           
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The two prior statements Calara uttered in January and February
 
2007 were that he wanted to “take” the CW, statements which the
 CW believed indicated Calara’s sexual interest in her. Via
 motion in limine, Calara sought to have the statements excluded
 as “unfairly prejudicial under HRE 404 and irrelevant under HRE
 403. . . .” The circuit court denied the motion in limine as 
follows: 
That  the  two  events  in  question  in  January  and
February  2007,  two  prior  events  in  question,  [are]  fairly
close  in  time  to  the  date  of  the  alleged  offense  on  March
13,  2007.
 
A
nd in the court’s view what it goes to show is the
state of mind of the defendant at the time. It is apparent
from these statements that [the CW] became the object of
[Calara’s] desire, and when you –- sexual desire,
 inappropriate as it was. The fact that she rebuffed him,
 again, I would agree goes to the issue of lack of consent.
And the intent I think is also demonstrated by the
proffer that was made, and the court does agree that the
prejudice –- prejudice to the defense and to the defendant
 is low. It doesn’t mean that he assaulted her prior to the
events of March 13, 2007, only what his state of mind was,
what his intent [was].
I don’t think it’s a question so much of modus
operandi as much as it is lack of consent, state of mind,
and the fact that it shows that he had some sexual interest
 perhaps in the complaining witness.
 
In short, the circuit court admitted the statements under HRE
 
Rule 404(b) for the purpose of showing Calara’s state of mind or
 intent, and the CW’s lack of consent.   None of these purposes
 
supported the admission of the statements under HRE Rule 404(b),
 however. Instead, the statements, at their core, tended to prove
 the character of Calara in order to show action in conformity
 therewith, and should have been excluded. 
27
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRE Rule 404(b) states, in relevant part
 
Other  crimes,  wrongs,  or  acts.   Evidence  of  other  crimes,
 
wrongs,  or  acts  is  not  admissible  to  prove  the  character  of
a  person  in  order  to  show  action  in  conformity  therewith.
  
It  may,  however,  be  admissible  where  such  evidence  is
probative  of  another  fact  that  is  of  consequence  to  the
determination  of  the  action,  such  as  proof  of  motive,
opportunity,  intent,  preparation,  plan,  knowledge,  identity,
modus  operandi,  or  absence  of  mistake  or  accident.  .  .  .
 
“[W]hen evidence of other crimes, wrongs, and acts is offered by
 
the prosecution, the problem for the trial court is one ‘of
 classifying and then balancing[, if necessary]. . . the
 prejudicial impact of the evidence [with] its probative worth.” 
State v. Castro, 69 Haw. 633, 644, 756 P.2d 1033, 1041
 (1988)(first set of brackets in original; second set of brackets
 added). “If its purpose is only ‘to show some propensity to
 commit the crime at trial, there is no room for ad hoc balancing. 
The evidence is then unequivocally inadmissible[.]’” Id. See
 
also Addison M. Bowman, Hawai' i Rules of Evidence Manual (2012­
2013) at 4-49 (“[I]f a fact of consequence other than character cannot be identified, then the evidence has no legitimate probative value.”) 
In this case, the statements were not probative of any other
 
fact that was of consequence to Calara’s case. Specifically,
 they were not probative of Calara’s state of mind or intent, or
 the CW’s lack of consent. Reviewing the record, it is clear that
 Calara’s defense was he did not do the act; he testified that he
 
28
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remained in his bedroom all night and did not enter the CW’s
 
bedroom, where she alleged the sexual assault took place. The
 CW’s consent was never at issue. Therefore, the circuit court
 abused its discretion in admitting the January and February 2007
 statements to show the CW’s lack of consent. 
The district court also abused its discretion in admitting 
the January and February 2007 statements to show Calara’s state of mind or intent. Intent is “the state of mind with which an 
act is done. . . .” State v. Torres, 85 Hawai' i 417, 422, 945 
P.2d 849, 854 (App. 1997)(citation omitted). “Because mens rea 
is an element of the prosecution’s case-in-chief, in most criminal cases, the intent inferences of rule 404(b) require 
analytical rigor.” Bowman, Hawai' i Rules of Evidence Manual 
(2012-2013) at 4-53. “Without the necessity that arises when a 
mental defense is interposed to a criminal charge, admission of ‘other crimes’ to prove intent is strongly suspect because intent, although elemental, is subsumed within the charged acts and typically stands or falls with the proof of them.” Id. 
In this case, Calara did not put his intent in issue in the
 
way a defendant arguing that a touching was due to mistake,
 accident, or some other innocent explanation would. Again,
 Calara’s defense was that he was not in the CW’s room, so the
 touching simply did not occur. Thus, Calara’s case can be
 
29
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
distinguished from two factually similar cases in which the
 
defendant’s prior sexually inappropriate comments were properly
 admitted under HRE Rule 404(b) to show intent: Torres, 85
 
Hawai'i 417, 945 P.2d 849, and State v. Mars, 116 Hawai' i 125, 170 
P.3d 861 (App. 2007). 
In Torres, 85 Hawai' i at 418-19, 945 P.2d at 850-51, the 
defendant was convicted of sexual assault in the first degree for having inserted his finger into his nine-year-old niece’s vagina while he was bathing her. On appeal, the defendant claimed that the circuit court abused its discretion in admitting evidence regarding four prior bad acts, one of which was evidence that the defendant told the complainant “to find a place to make love[.]” 
85 Hawai' i at 422, 945 P.2d at 854 (brackets in original). The 
ICA concluded that the statement was relevant and probative to 
show the defendant’s motive and intent to later sexually assault the complainant in the bathtub. Id. The defendant had testified 
at trial that “he ‘had no bad intentions’ when he agreed to bathe Complainant and wash her vagina. He also vehemently denied ever digitally penetrating her vagina.” Id. The complainant, on the 
other hand, testified that when she and the defendant were alone at home, the defendant told her to put her leg up in the bath, inserted his finger in her vagina, at which point, the Complainant said, “Ouch,” and the defendant told her not to tell 
30
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
anybody. 85 Hawai' i at 419-20, 945 P.2d at 851-52. The ICA 
stated, “In this case, it was undisputed that Defendant washed 
Complainant’s vagina. However, there was a dispute regarding who prompted the bath and what occurred during the bath. Consequently, evidence of why Defendant bathed Complainant-­i.e., Defendant’s motive, purpose, and intent for washing Complainant’s vagina-- were undoubtedly relevant to prove a fact of consequence, that Defendant “knowingly subjected [Complainant] 
to sexual penetration[.]” 85 Hawai' i at 422, 945 P.2d at 854 
(emphasis in original). 
In Mars, 116 Hawai' i at 128, 170 P.3d at 864, a defendant 
was convicted of three counts of sexual assault in the first 
degree for having had oral and anal sex with a fifteen-year-old boy while both were in a bathroom. On appeal, the defendant argued that the circuit court abused its discretion in admitting the following prior statements the defendant made to the fifteen­year-old boy: (1) that the boy should “pull up [his] pants and not show [his] underwear because there were ‘perverts’ in the area”; (2) that “he should be careful about his underwear because the intermediate school students ‘liked them’”; (3) that the boy was “largely hung and a lot of people would like that”; and (4) 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the boy “had too much hair down there.” 116 Hawai' i at 129, 
170 P.3d at 865. 
At trial, the fifteen-year-old boy testified that the 
defendant entered the bathroom while the boy was in the Jacuzzi, 
indicated that he wanted to have sex with the boy (as the two had 
done before), and the boy complied. 116 Hawai' i at 130, 170 P.3d 
at 866. The defendant, on the other hand, testified that he had 
the runs and needed to use the nearest bathroom (the one that, unbeknownst to the defendant, was occupied by the boy at the 
time). 116 Hawai' i at 131, 170 P.3d at 867. The defendant 
testified that he entered the unlocked bathroom, sat on the 
toilet, then saw the boy’s head peek out of the Jacuzzi. Id. 
The defendant denied sexually assaulting the fifteen-year-old boy. Id. The ICA concluded that the reasoning in Torres was 
directly applicable to the defendant’s case. 116 Hawai' i at 141, 
170 P.3d at 877. It held the defendant’s comments were relevant to show the defendant’s motive, purpose, and intent when he joined the fifteen-year-old boy in the bathroom when the assaults took place, and were thus admissible under HRE Rule 404(b). Id.
 This case is distinguishable from Torres and Mars. In
 
Torres and Mars, both defendants denied sexually assaulting the
 complaining witnesses, and both defendants offered explanations
 
32
           
          
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for why they were in the bathroom with the complaining witnesses. 
In doing so, they put at issue their motive and intent for being
 in the location where the sexual assaults took place. Therefore,
 prior inappropriate sexual statements made by both defendants to
 the minor complaining witnesses were admissible under HRE Rule
 404(b) as “probative of another fact that is of consequence to
 the determination of the action,” i.e., countering the
 defendants’ innocent explanations as to why they were alone with
 their bathing and vulnerable minor complaining witnesses, and
 tending to show that they knowingly touched the complaining
 witnesses. 
No similar circumstances exist in this case, where Calara
 
did not concede that he was in the CW’s bedroom for some innocent
 reason when the alleged touching occurred, such that evidence of
 the prior statements would be probative of a fact of consequence,
 i.e., the state of mind or intent tending to explain his presence
 in her bedroom and tending to explain the touching. Therefore,
 the circuit court abused its discretion in admitting the January
 and February 2007 statements under HRE Rule 404(b) as bearing on
 Calara’s state of mind or intent.
 
E. The Absence of a Limiting Instruction
 
On certiorari, Calara’s fifth question presented is
 
5. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court’s failure to provide a limiting instruction at
 
33
           
        
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the time of CW’s testimony regarding Calara’s alleged prior
statements and as part of the final charge to the jury was
not plain error.
 
Our holding that the January and February 2007 statements should
 
not have been admitted under HRE Rule 404(b) obviates the need to
 reach the issue of whether the circuit court should have issued a
 limiting instruction to the jury as to the purposes for which
 those statements were to be used.
 IV. Conclusion
 We hold (1) that the circuit court abused its discretion by
 
admitting the testimony of the police detective that probable
 cause existed for arresting Calara because such testimony was
 inadmissible under Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48; Morris, 72
 
Haw. 527, 825 P.2d 1051; Ryan, 112 Hawai' i 136, 144 P.3d 584; and 
Baron, 80 Hawai' i 107, 905 P.2d 613; (2) that the circuit court 
should have conducted a HRE Rule 104 hearing to determine whether 
there was admissible evidence concerning the CW’s alleged drug use and its effect upon her perception; (3) that the circuit court should have excluded Calara’s earlier statements that he wanted to “take” the complaining witness because the statements were, at their core, character evidence used to show action in conformity therewith, and were not admissible under an HRE Rule 404(b) exception; as such, (4) it is not necessary to reach the issue of whether a limiting instruction should have accompanied 
34
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the admission of the statements; and (5) because we remand this
 
case for a new trial, we need not, and do not, reach the issue of
 whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the circuit court’s
 error in admitting the CW’s statements to her aunt as an excited
 utterance were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We vacate the
 ICA’s Judgment on Appeal, vacate the circuit court’s judgment of
 conviction and probation sentence, and remand this case to the
 circuit court for retrial.
 Jason Z. Say 
for petitioner
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Stephen K. Tsushima
for respondent 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
35
 