_*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o---   
________________________________________________________________ 
 
JASON KAWAKAMI, 
Individually and on behalf of all others similarly situated,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff -Appellant/Cross -Appellee 
 
vs. 
 
KAHALA HOTEL INVESTORS, LLC, dba KAHALA HOTEL AND RESORT  
Respondent/Defendant -Appellee/Cross- Appellant.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-11-0000594 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-11 -0000594; CIVIL NO. 08- 1-2496) 
 
JUNE 29, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J.  
 
This class  action concerning Hawaii’s hotel and 
restaurant service charge law  returns to us for the second time.  
See Kawakami v. Kahala Hotel Inv’rs, LLC , 134 Hawaiʻi 352, 341 
P.3d 558 (2014).  Its return presents us once again with the  
task of interpr eting Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 481B-14 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-11-0000594
29-JUN-2018
07:58 AM_*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
2 
 (2000).1  For the reasons explained below, we vacate the  
Intermediate Court of Appeals ’ affirmance of the circuit court’s  
grant of judgment as a matter of law (JMOL) and reinstate the 
circuit court’s earlier g rant of partial summary judgment to 
plaintiff Jason Kawakami as to the defendant Kahala Hotel and  
Resort’s liability under HRS § 481B-14 .  We also reinstate the 
jury’s special verdict in favor of Kawakami on legal causation 
and the amount of damages  in the trial on damages  that followed 
the grant of partial summary judgment.  We remand to the circuit 
court for determination of additional damages and fees under 
Hawaii’s statute governing unfair or deceptive acts or 
practices.  HRS Chapter 480.  
I. Background 
Jason Kawakami (Kawakami)2 held his wedding reception 
at the Kahala Hotel and Re sort (the hotel) in July 2007.3  The 
                     
 1 In 2007, the statute required that any hotel or restaurant “that 
applies a service charge for the sale of food or beverage services . . . 
shall distribute the service charge directly to its employees as tip income 
or clearly disclose to the purchaser of the services that the service charge 
is being used to pay for costs or expenses other than wages and tips of 
employees.”  HRS § 481B -14.  The statute’s requirements were later extended 
to hotels that apply a service charge for porterage services.  HRS § 481B -14 
(2015).  
 
 2 Kawakami is the class representative.  Except where the context 
requires, when we refer to him, we refer also to the class.   
 
 3  For more extended recitations of the facts, see our prior 
opinion, Kawakami, 134 Hawa iʻi at 354–56, 341 P.3d at 560 –62, and the two  
unpublished opinions of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA).  Kawakami v. 
Kahala Hotel Inv ’rs, LLC (Kawakami I ), CAAP-11-0000594, 133 Hawai ʻi 451, 330 
P.3d 389 (App. March 25, 2014) (mem.) , vacated, 134 Hawaiʻ i 352, 341 P.3d 558 
(continued . . .) _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
3 
 hotel collected a 19% service charge on the purchase of food and 
beverages for his reception, but the hotel failed to distribute 
100% of the funds from the service charge directly to its 
service employees as tip income.  Instead, the hotel retained 
15% of those funds as what it termed “the management share,” 
then reclassified those funds and used them to pay for the 
banquet employees’ “wages.”  The “event agreement,” a contract 
used by the hotel for large group events, contained no 
disclosure that a portion  of the service charge would be  
diverted to the hotel , rather than directly distributed to the 
banquet employees as tip  income.  A section  of the event 
agreement, titled “Service Charge and Tax ,” stated only that 
“[a]ll food and beverage prices are subject to a 19% service 
charge.”  No other disclosure was made to Kawakami that a 
portion of the service charge w ould not be directly distributed 
to the banquet employees as tips.   
Kawakami filed a lawsuit on behalf of himse lf and 
other customers who paid a service charge to the hotel in 
connection with the purchase of food or beverages.  He claimed 
the hotel’s conduct was an unfair or deceptive act or practice 
(UDAP) under HRS § 481B -14 and HRS § 480 -2.  Kawakami moved for 
summary judgment “ on liability ” because the undisputed facts 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
(2014); Kawakami v. Kahala Hotel Inv ’rs, LLC (Kawakami II), CAAP 11-0000594,  
136 Hawaiʻ i 543, 364 P.3d 251  (App. Dec. 23, 2015)(mem.)  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
4 
 established that the hotel violated HRS § 481B -14 and HRS § 480 -
2.  The circuit court granted summary judgment as to liability 
only, not remedies or damages, ruling that under HRS § 481B -14 
the hotel had “a duty to disclose” to Kawakami th at a portion  of 
the service charge would become the property of the hotel rather 
than paid to its employees as tip income .4  A jury trial to 
determine damages followed.  The jury found that the hotel was 
the legal cause of injury to the plaintiff class an d awarded 
$269,114.73 to the class , correspond ing to the amount of the  
combined service charges retained by the hotel as “the 
management share.”    
A little more than a month after the verdict, the 
hotel renewed i ts prior motions for JMOL, which had been denied 
by the circuit court.  This time the circuit court granted the 
motion for JMOL on the theory there had been insufficient 
evidence the plaintiffs suffered injury as a result of the 
hotel’s violation of HRS § 481B-14.  The circuit court stated 
that it was “struggling to understand how the Management’s Share 
. . . constitutes financial or economic loss or harm to 
Plaintiffs.”  The court focused on the apparent lack of an 
economic loss to the plaintiffs  relating  to the hotel’s failure 
to distribute the funds from the service charge in the manner 
                     
 4 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided over  the circuit court 
proceedings.    _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
5 
 required by the statute .  That failure, the court stated , “did 
not cause Plaintiffs to pay any additional sums over and above 
their contractual obligation to pay the serv ice charge or any 
other additional compensation.”  Yet, the court observed, the 
“jury awarded as damages to Plaintiffs a sum that appears to be 
equal to the amount of the Management’s Share of the service 
charge.”   
On appeal the  ICA vacated  the circuit court’s order 
granting Kawakami’s motion for summary judgment  and held instead 
that summary judgment should have been granted in favor of the 
hotel.  The ICA reasoned that because the hotel ultimately 
distributed the management share of the service charge as  wages, 
its actions were in compliance with the language of HRS § 481B -
14 and no disclosure to Kawakami was required.  Kawakami  I, mem. 
op. at 4-5. 
On certiorari in Kawakami I , we rejected the ICA’s 
reasoning.  Instead, we recognized “the well -settled duty  of 
hotels and restaurants ” under the statute  “to either distribute 
the entirety of the service charge directly to non -management 
banquet employees who served the consumers as ‘tip income,’ or 
to disclose its practice of withholding the service charge[.]”  
Kawakami I, 134 Hawai ʻi at 357, 341 P.3d at 563; id. 
(characterizing this statutory duty as assisting “a well -
informed consumer” in choosing whether t o leave a tip  for the _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
6 
 employees as a reward for their service).  We held that under 
HRS § 481B-14, 
a hotel or restaurant that applies a service charge for food or 
beverage services must either distribute the service charge 
directly as tip income to the non -management employees who 
provided the food or beverage services, or disclose to its 
customers that the service charges are not being distributed as 
tip income. 
 
Kawakami I, 134 Hawai ʻi at 354, 341 P.3d at 560.  Accordingly, we 
vacated the ICA’s judgment on appeal and remanded to the ICA.  
We directed the ICA to address  on remand  Kawakami’s argument 
that the circuit court erred when it granted JMOL to the hotel 
on the theory that Kawakami suffered no injury as a result of 
the hotel’s actions.  Id. at 360, 341 P.3d at 566.  
On remand from our decision in Kawakami I , the ICA 
affirmed the circuit court’s grant of JMOL to the hotel because, 
in the ICA’s view, Kawakami “failed to establish that he was 
injured, financially or otherwise , as a result of Kahala Hotel’s 
deceptive trade practices[.]”  Kawakami  II, mem. op. at 1.  The 
ICA ackno wledged that a plaintiff alleging an unfair or 
deceptive act or practice need not show strictly “economic loss” 
in order to satisfy the consumer “injury” requirement of HRS § 
480-13(b).  Kawakami  II, mem. op. at  3.  The ICA nonetheless 
concluded that Kawakami failed to establish that he was injured 
even by the “less stringent standard” of non -economic injury.  
Id.  With respect to Kawakami’s alternative claim of a contract -
based injury, the ICA rejected that claim largely on the grounds _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
7 
 that “the required disclosure under HRS § 481B –14 need not take 
the form of a written provision in an event contract, nor must 
it necessarily occur before parties enter into the contract,” 
and therefore there was no breach of contr act.  Kawakami  II, 
mem. op. at 5.  See also id., mem. op. at 4 (stating  that 
“benefit-of -the-bargain damages are only available when there 
has been a breach of contract .”).  As a result, the ICA affirmed 
the circuit court’s grant of JMOL.   
On certiorari, Kawakami argues that the ICA erred by 
holding that no contract -based or UDAP-based injury occurred.  
He also argues that the ICA erred in affirming the circuit 
court’s order denying plaintiffs’ motion in limine no. 1, which 
sought to preclude the admission of certain evidence.   
II.  Standards of Review  
A.   Motions for Judgment as a Matter of Law  
“It is well settled that a trial court’s rulings on 
motions for judgment as a matter of law are reviewed de novo.  
When we review the granting of a motion for judgment as a matter 
of law, we apply the same standard as the trial court.  A motion 
for judgment as a matter of law may be granted only when after 
disregarding conflicting evidence . . . and indulging every 
legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence in the 
non-moving party’s favor, it can be said that there is no 
evidence to support a jury verdict in his or her favor.”  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
8 
 Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawaiʻi 1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514 -15 (2004) 
(internal citations  and braces  omitted).   
B.   Motions in Limine  
Because “the granting or denying of a motion in limine 
is within the trial court’s inherent power to exclude or admit 
evidence, we review the court’s ruling for the abuse of 
discretion standard.”  State v. Kealoha , 95 Hawaiʻi 365, 379,  22 
P.3d 1012, 1026 (App. 2000)(internal citations omitted).  
However, when the trial court’s order granting a motion in 
limine is an evidentiary decision based upon relevance, the 
standard of review is the right/wrong standard.  Ass’n of Apt. 
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd. , 100 Hawaiʻi 97, 
110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002).  
C.   Statutory Interpretation  
Appellate courts review questions of statutory 
interpretation de novo.  Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui , 109 Hawaiʻi 198, 
208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 (2005).  “When construing a statute, our 
foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the 
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily 
from the language contained in the statute itself.”  Id. 
(internal citations omitted).  
III.  Discussion   
We consider first the issue of Kawakami’s contract -
based damages, then the issue of Kawakami’s UDAP-based damages, _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
9 
 and finally the issue whether  Kawakami’s motion in limine  no. 1 
was properly denied  by the circuit  court.  
A.  Kawakami and the Class Sustained Contract -based Damages 
  “Contract law is designed to enforce the expectancy 
interests created by agreement between the parties [.]”  Ass’n of 
Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Directors 
v. Venture 15, Inc. , 115 Hawaiʻi 232, 291, 167 P.3d 225, 284 
(2007)(citation omitted) ; Restatement (Second) o f Contracts § 
347 (Am. Law Inst. 1981) cmt. a  (stating that c ontract-based 
damages ordinarily center on  “the injur ed party’s expectation 
interest”).  See also  Joseph M. Perillo, Calamari and Perillo on 
Contracts § 14-4 (6th ed. 2009) (“Our legal system starts with 
the premise that the expectation interest (perhaps better called 
‘the performance interest’) of contracting parties is the 
primary interest deserving protection.”); Daniel Friedmann, The 
Performance Interest in Contract Damages , 111 Law Q. Rev. 628, 
629 (1995)(“The essence of contract is performance.  Contracts 
are made in order to be performed.”).5   
  Once a court concludes a breach of contract has 
occurred, the court ordinarily “ enforces the broken promise by 
                     
 5 The expectation interest is one of three interests generally 
recognized in the law of contracts; the other two are the reliance interest 
and the restitution interest.  Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 344 
(explaining that judicial remedies under the Res tatement “serve to protect 
one or more” of three interests of a promisee, the “expectation interest,” 
the “reliance interest,” and the “restitution interest”); id. (explaining the 
distinctions between the three interests).  See also Restatement (Third) of 
Restitution and Unjust Enrichment (Am. Law Inst. 2011) .  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
10 
 protecting the expectation that the injured party had when he 
made the contract.”  Restatement (S econd) of Contracts § 344 
cmt. a.  Thus, contract damages generally attempt  to give the 
injured party “the benefi t of the bargain” by awarding a sum of 
money that will, to the extent possible, put the injured party
 
“in as good a position as he [or she] would have been in had the 
contract been performed.”  Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 
347 cmt. a; id.  at § 344(a).  Because contract damages are 
primarily based on the injured party’s expectation interest 
(also called performance interest)  and give  the injured party 
the benefit of the bargain embodied in the contract, the amount 
of damages will depend on the nature of the bargain.  Cf.  
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 549 cmt. 1  (Am. Law Inst. 
1977)(“The damages necessary to give the plaintiff the benefit 
of the bargain that he has made with the defendant will depend, 
first of all, upon the nature of the bargain.”).  
1. The statutory requirements  of Hawaii’s hotel and 
restaurant service charge law are incorporated as 
implied terms into the event agreement or other contract  
between the purchaser  and the hotel  or restaurant , and 
those requirements set the purchas ers’ expectation 
interest  in the contracts  
When a hotel or restaurant  applies a service charge 
for the sale of food or beverage services,  the requirements of _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
11 
 HRS § 481B–146 govern and are incorporated as implied terms into 
the contracts between the hotel or restaurant  and the purchasers 
of the food and beverage services.  That is because a “ contract 
is presumed to include all applicable statutes and settled law 
relating to its subject matter.”  Gabriel v. Island Pac. Acad., 
Inc., 140 Hawaiʻ i 325, 336, 400 P.3d 526, 537, cert. dismissed , 
138 S. Ct. 499 (2017) .  See also id. (explaining that 
“[c]ontracting parties are presumed to contract in reference to 
the existing law, and to have in mind all the existing laws 
relating to the contract, or to the subject matter thereof.”  
(citation omitted)).    
The requirements of HRS § 481B –14 are, then,  implied 
terms in the relevant  contracts.  Id. (“All existing applicable 
or relevant statutes . . . at the time a contract is made become 
a part of it and must be read into it just as if an express 
provision to that effect were inserted therein, except where the 
contract discloses a contrar y intention.” (quoting 17A Am. Jur. 
2d Contracts § 363 )); Quedding v. Arisumi Bros. , 66 Haw. 33 5, 
338, 661 P.2d 706, 709 (1983)( stating that “it is a general rule 
that the existing law is part of a contract where there is no 
                     
 6 For the period relevant to this class action, the statute 
required that any hotel or restaurant “that applies a service charge for the 
sale of food or beverage services . . . shall distribute the service charge 
directly to its employees as tip income or clearly disclose to the purchaser 
of the services that the service charge is being used to pay for costs or 
expenses other than wages and tips of employees.”  HRS § 481B -14.  
 _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
12 
 stipulation to the contrary.”  (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted)); 11 Williston on Contracts  § 30:19 (4th 
ed.)(Supp. 2017)(the provisions of existing law “ are regarded as 
implied terms of the contrac t, regardless of whether the 
agreement refers to the gover ning law. ”).   
HRS § 481B –14’s requirements set the expec tancy or 
performance interest for  the purchasers of food or beverage 
services to which a hotel or restaurant applies a service 
charge.  Under the statute, those purchasers are entitled to 
expect that the service charge will be distributed directly  and 
entirely to service employees as tip income.  That expectancy  
interest can be overcome or negated only if  the hotel or 
restaurant clearly discloses to those purchasers that the hotel 
or restaura nt follows a pattern of distributing the proceeds of 
a service charge in a way  that diverges from t he distribution 
pattern specified by the statute.   Id.; Kawakami I , 134 Hawaiʻi 
at 360, 341 P.3d at 566 ( explaining that “absent disclosure, 
consumers are misled into believing the service charges are 
being used as a gratuity to employees who provide the services 
for which customers believe they are tipping. ”). 
Here, it is undisputed that the hotel neither 
distributed the proceeds from the service charges directly and 
entirely to the service employees as tip income, nor clearly 
disclosed that it failed to do so.  See HRS § 481B –14. _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
13 
 2. A hotel or restaurant’s violation of  the implied terms 
imposed by HRS § 481B –14 is a breach of contract  
The requirements and expectation s imposed by the 
implied terms incorporated into contracts  from HRS § 481B –14 are 
clear.  In Kawakami I , we held that under HRS § 481B -14, 
a hotel or restaurant that applies a service charge for food or 
beverage services must either [a] distribute the service charge 
directly as tip income to the non -management employees who 
provided the food or be verage services, or [b] disclose to its 
customers that the service charges are not being distributed as 
tip income. 
 
Kawakami I, 134 Hawai ʻi at 354, 341 P.3d at 560 (emphasis and 
material in braces added); see also Gurrobat v. HTH Corp. , 133 
Hawaiʻi 1, 18, 323 P.3d 792, 809 (2014) (stating in a related 
context that “HRS § 481B –14 required Defendants to either 
distribute one-hundred percent of the service charge to 
employees as ‘tip income’  or disclose their retention of a 
portion of the service charge to customers .” (emphasis added) ); 
id. at 17, 323 P.3d 792, 808 (“ Defendants were required to 
distribute one-hundred percent of service charge income to non-
management service employees who provid ed the services for which 
customers believed they were tipping. ” (emphasis in original)).   
  In essence, HRS § 481B –14 gives legal force and form  
to the ordinary consumer expectation that service charges are to 
be distributed in their entirety to service p ersonnel and not 
diverted to other uses by the hotel or restaurant .  HRS § 481B –
14 authorizes a departure from the di stribution pattern based on _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
14 
 the ordinary consumer expectation only where the hotel or 
restaurant “clearly disc lose[s]” that its pattern of 
distributing service charges  diverges from the p attern specified 
by the statute.  Id.   As noted, t hose two “either/or” 
alternatives, incorporated into contract s governed by  HRS § 
481B–14 as implied terms , set the expectancy interest of 
purchasers of the relevant services.  As we stated in Kawakami 
I, in enacting HRS § 481B –14, the legislature : 
specifically sought  to meet consumer expectations  ‘that service 
charges applied to the sale of food and beverages by hotels and 
restaurants are levied in lieu of voluntary gratuity, and are 
distributed to the employees providing the service ’; an 
expectation that resulted in ‘ most consumers not tipping for 
services over and above the amounts they pay as a service 
charge.’   
 
Kawakami I, 134 Hawai ʻi at 358, 341 P.3d at  564 (quoting S. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3077, in 2000 Senate Journal, at 1287  
(emphasis added, braces omitted )).  By enacting HRS § 481B –14, 
the legislature intended to require hotels and restaurants  ‘to 
meet consumer expectations’ that the service charge will be 
distributed to service personnel in lieu of a voluntary 
gratuity, not dedicated  to some other pu rpose or diverted to 
some other party .  Thus, the statute  aims to structure the 
relevant transactions such  that a hotel or restaurant’s  pattern 
of distributing proceeds  from service charges to its service 
employees will accord with normal consumer expectations.  The 
statute accomplishes that aim by setting up a baseline _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
15 
 distribution pattern for service charges , together with  a means 
by which a hotel or restaurant can escape being bound by that 
baseline by clearly disclosing to the purchaser that it does not 
follow the baseline distribution pattern.   Id.; see also 
Kawakami I, 134 Hawai ʻi at 354, 341 P.3d at 560 ; Gurrobat , 133 
Hawaiʻi at 18, 323 P.3d at  809.   
  If a hotel or restaurant  neither follows the specified 
service charge distribution pattern nor clearly discloses  that 
it does not, it violates the contract’s implied terms , thereby 
breaching the contract , and the purchaser “receives something 
substantially less or different from that for which he or she 
bargained.”  Willist on on Contracts  § 63:3 (4th ed.) (discussing 
material breach of a contract).   The benefit of the bargain for 
a purchaser such as Kawakami is  that 100%  of the service charge 
paid by the purchaser to the hotel as a service charge goes 
directly to the service personnel as tip income  in lieu of a 
voluntary gratuity .   
  Here, the hotel  failed to  perform its contractual 
obligation, mandated by  the implied te rms, to follow the  
baseline distribution pattern.7  Nor did the hotel  opt out of the 
                     
 7 Thus, we agree with Kawakami’s argument that the statute -based 
implied terms of the contract were breached resulting in a violation of 
Kawakami’s expectation interest.  By the same token, we reject Kawakami’s 
alternative damages theory that the contract itself was a void or illegal 
agreement.  The contract  itself was not illegal; it was simply a valid 
(continued . . .) _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
16 
 implied terms requiring the baseline distribution pattern by 
following the statutorily -required route of clearly disclosing  
to Kawakami or the members of the class the fact that the hotel  
follows a different distribution pattern .8  Instead, the hotel  
retained for itself a percentage of the service charge, an 
amount that, had the purchaser been given the benefit of his 
bargain, would have been distributed entirely to the  service 
personnel who assisted at his wedding reception .   
3. Giving Kawakami  the benefit of the bargain requires the 
hotel to pay in damages  the portion of the service 
charge that was retained by the hotel rather than 
distributed to the service employees  
  A party “who sustains a loss by the breach of another 
is entitled to compensation that will ‘ actually or as precisely 
as possible compen sate the injured party.’”  Hi Kai Inv., Ltd. 
v. Aloha Futons Beds & Waterbeds, Inc. , 84 Hawaiʻi 75, 80–81, 929 
P.2d 88, 93–94 (1996) (citation omitted) .  The nature of the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
contract whose implied terms were breached by the hotel resulting in damages 
to Kawakami. 
        
 8  The hotel admits it never disclosed to purchasers that its 
practice was to retain a portion of the proceeds from the service charge 
rather than “distribute the service charge directly to its employees as tip 
income[.]”  HRS § 481B –14.  The ICA was therefore mistaken in rejecting 
Kawakami’s breach of contract argument on the basis that “ the required 
disclosure under HRS § 481B –14 need not take the form of a written provision 
in an event contract, nor must it necessarily occur before parties enter into 
the contract[.]”  Kawakami  II, mem. op. at 5.  The issue of the exact form or 
timing the disclosure must take under HRS § 481B –14 was not before the ICA, 
since the hotel failed to make the required  disclosure in any form or at any 
time.  
  
 _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
17 
 “loss” and the measure of the damages will depend in part on the 
party’s expectation or performance interest and the nature of 
the bargain.  3 E. Allen Farnsworth,  Farnsworth on Contracts  § 
12.20 (3rd ed. 2004)(“It is a principle of the law of contracts 
that damages should be based on the injured party’s lost 
expectation.”); cf . Restatemen t (Second) of Torts § 549 cmt. l 
(“Benefit of the bargain . The damages necessary to give the 
plaintiff the benefit of the bargain that he has made with the 
defendant will depend, first of all, up on the nature of the 
bargain.”).  However, t he interests on which the law of 
contracts rests, including the expectation interest, “are not 
inflexible limits on relie f[.]”  Restatement ( Second) of 
Contracts § 344 cmt. a.  Where justice requires , a court may 
fashion relief for the injured party even if the relief does not 
“correspond precisely ” to the interest at issue.  Id.    
  Here, Kawakami had a statutory and contr actual right 
to expect that the service charge he paid to the hotel would be 
distributed directly and entirely to the service personnel as 
tip income and not retained in part by the hotel.  HRS §  481B-
14.  The extent to which the hotel failed to deliver 100% of  the 
proceeds from the service charge to the service employees in the 
manner required by the statute and the implied terms represents 
the extent of the breach.  See Zanakis- Pico v. Cutter Dodge , 
Inc., 98 Hawai ʻi 309, 319, 47 P.3d 1222, 1232 (2002)( “‘benefit -_*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
18 
 of-the-bargain’ damages . . .  are preconditioned on the breach 
of a contract.”); Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 
235(2)(“When performance of a duty under a contract is due any 
non-performance is a breach. ”); id., § 236 cmt. a (“ Every breach 
gives rise to a claim for damages  . . . ”).  The extent to which 
the hotel failed to deliver all the proceeds from the service 
charge in the manner required by the statute and the implied 
terms is also  the measure of damages.   Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 347 (a)(explaining that “the injured party has a 
right to damages based on his expectation interest as measured 
by . . . the loss in the value to him  of the other party’ s 
performance caused by its failure or deficiency [.]” (emphasis 
added)).     
  The hotel’s retention of 15% of the proceeds from the 
19% service charge violated HRS §  481B-14, the implied terms of 
contracts subject to the statut e, and Kawakami’s expectancy (or  
performance) interest.  It is true, as the circuit court 
observed in granting the JMOL, that Kawakami and the class did 
not appear to suffer any additional out- of-pocket loss as a 
result of the hotel’s failure to distribute 100% of the service 
charge proceeds directly to the service personnel as tip income.  
That failure, the co urt noted, “ did not cause Plaintiffs to pay 
any additional sums over and above their contractual obligation 
to pay the service charge or any other additional compensation.”  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
19 
 As the court explained, it was “struggling to understand how the 
Management’s Shar e of the service charge constitutes financial 
or economic loss or harm to the Plaintiffs.”  The court was 
puzzled by the fact that the “ jury awarded as damages to 
Plaintiffs a sum that appears to be equal to the amount of the 
Management’s Share of the serv ice charge. ”  However, viewed in 
light of the class’s expectancy or performance interest, the 
jury award reflects the fact that  “the injured party has a right 
to damages based on his expectation interest as measured by . . 
. the loss in the value to him  of the other party’ s performance 
caused by its failure or deficiency [.]”  Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 347(a)  (emphasis added ).     
  The hotel contends  that Kawakami’s complaint does n ot, 
in fact, challenge the event contracts themselves.  However, 
Kawakami specifically alleged that he paid the hotel a 19% 
service charge, and that “the final bill” for his reception 
banquet services failed to disclose that the service charge was 
not distributed in its entirety to service employees .  He 
attached a copy of the final bill as an exhibit to the 
complaint.  He alleged that the hotel “did not distribute all of 
the service charge to the employees who provided that service” 
but instead retained a portion of Kawakami’s  service charge for 
itself, and that the hotel had  “a policy and practice of 
retaining for itself a portion of those service charges .”  In _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
20 
 addition, Kawakami alleged that  the hotel’s actions “are in 
direct violation of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes  § 481B-14.”  He 
alleged as well that the hotel’s conduct constituted unfair or 
deceptive acts or practices  in violation of HRS § 480-2.   
  To satisfy Hawai ʻi Rule of Civil Procedure  (HRCP) 
8(a)(1),9 “the complaint must contain either direct allegations 
on every material point necessary to sustain a recovery on any 
legal theory , even though it may not be the theory suggested or 
intended by the pleader, or contain allegations from which an 
inference fairly may be drawn that evidence on these material 
points will be introduced at trial.”   Marsland v. Pang , 5 Haw. 
App. 463, 475, 701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985) (emphasis added , citation 
omitted);  In re Genesys Data Technologies, Inc. , 95 Hawaiʻi 33, 
41, 18 P.3d 895, 903  (2001)(“ Hawaii’s rules of notice pleading 
require that a complaint set forth a short and plain statement 
of the claim that provides defendant with fair notice of what 
the plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which the claim 
rests.”).  
  Kawakami’s complaint put t he hotel on notice that 
Kawakami alleged the hotel repeatedly violated the requirements 
of HRS § 481B-14, that the violations constituted unfair or 
                     
 9  “Claims for relief .  A pleading which sets forth a claim for 
relief, whether an original claim, counterclaim, cross -claim, or third -party 
claim, shall contain (1) a short and plain statement of the claim showing 
that the pleader is entitled to relief, and (2) a demand for judgment for the 
relief the pleader seeks.”  HRCP 8(a).  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
21 
 deceptive acts or practices, that the final bill contained 
evidence of the violations, and that Kawakami suffered damages 
as a result.   In addition, as the attorneys for the class 
asserted in the motion for class certification, “Defendant 
entered into form contracts with the class members for banquets, 
events, meetings, room service and other events in which 
Defendant added a pre- set ‘service charge’ to customers’ bills 
for food and beverage provided by the hotel and/or its 
restaurants.”  “In this case, the same contract forms  were used 
for all members.”  “There are also common questions of fact 
relating to the service charge charged to Plaintiff and the 
putative Class members, in terms of the Hotel’s policy of 
distribution and the content of the Hotel’s contract form .” 
  Accordingly, we hold that the allegations i n the 
plaintiffs’ complaint gave the hotel fair notice that the 
hotel’s pattern and practice of violating HRS § 481B-14 was at 
issue “on any legal theory. ”  Marsland, 5 Haw. App. at 475, 701 
P.2d at 186; see also Yap v. Wah Yen Ki Tuk Tsen Nin Hue of 
Honolulu, 43 Haw. 37, 39 (Haw. Terr. 1958)(“Under our rules, a 
complaint is good if it contains a short and plain statement of 
the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief. 
(H.R.C.P., Rule 8 [a][1].) The rules do not require a statement 
of a cause of action .” (emphasis added) ); Hall v. Kim , 53 Haw. 
215, 221, 491 P.2d 541, 545 (1971)(explaining that it “is not _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
22 
 necessary to plead under what particular law the recovery is 
sought” and emphasizing “the principle that the purpose of 
pleading is to facilitate a proper decision on the merits.” 
(citations omitted)).  See also Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. 
K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P’ ship, 115 Hawaiʻi 201, 216  n.17, 166 P.3d 
961, 976 n.17 (2007)(stating that appellant failed to directly 
raise the cause of action of fraudulent inducement, but noting 
that pleadings are liberally construed, and a “liberal reading 
of Appellant’s misrepresentation and nondisclosure claims shows 
that Appellees should have been on notice of Appellant’ s 
fraudulent inducement claims and ‘ the grounds upon which the 
claim rests.’ ” (citation omitted)). 
4.  Disposition of the judgments below in light of 
Kawakami’s contract -based damages   
 
  We now apply the principles of contract law  explained 
above to the various judgments entered below , beginning with the 
JMOL.  We review de novo  a trial court’s rulings on motions for 
judgment as a matter of law.  Miyamoto , 104 Hawaiʻi at 6, 84 P.3d 
at 514.  Given that Kawakami suffered a legally-cognizable 
injury through the hotel’s breach of contract, we vacate the 
circuit court’s grant of JMOL (as well as the ICA’s affirmance 
of it), as that grant and its affirmance were predicated on the 
courts’ mistaken view that Kawakami had not shown  any evidence 
of a cognizable injury.   _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
23 
   The circuit court  granted partial summary judgment to 
Kawakami on the liability issue  prior to  the damages trial .  
Subsequent to the jury’s award of damages, the circuit court 
reversed its prior denial s of the hotel’s motions for  JMOL and 
granted JMOL to the hotel, ruling  that Kawakami failed to 
establish the hotel’s liability.   Because we hold the JMOL was 
improperly granted and accordingly vacate it, we now consider 
the validity of the prior grant of partial summary judgment to 
Kawakami on the liability issue.  “This court may affirm a grant 
of summary judgment on any ground app earing in the record, even 
if the circuit court did not rely on it. ”  Reyes v. Kuboyama , 76 
Hawaiʻi 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) .  The circuit 
court’s grant of summary judgment to Kawakami as to liability 
was predicated on the court’s conclusion  that HRS § 481B -14 
imposes on hotels and restaurants a statutory “duty to disclose”  
to purchasers if the hotel or restaurant fails to follow the 
distribution pattern specified in the statute.   See Kawakami  I, 
134 Hawai ʻi at 357, 341 P.3d at 563 (recognizing “ the well -
settled duty of hotels and restaurants to either distribute the 
entirety of the service charge directly to non -management 
banquet employees who served the consumers as ‘tip income,’  or 
to disclose its practic e of withholding the service charge so 
that a well- informed consumer may choose to leave a tip for the 
employees as a reward for their service. ”).  However,  our _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
24 
 analysis of the principles of contract law , articulated above,  
shows that the statutory duty was also a contractual duty whose 
breach by the hotel rendered it liable for contract -based 
damages.  For that reason we affirm (on different  though related 
grounds) the circuit court’s grant of partial summary judgment 
as to the hotel’s liability to Kawakami.   
  Finally, w e reinstate the  jury’s findings on legal 
causation and the amount of damages.  The special verdict asked 
two questions.  The first was,  “Did the defendant’s failure to 
disclose to plaintiffs that not all of the service charge was to 
be distributed directly to its employees as tip income legally 
cause injury to plaintiffs?”  The jury’s answer was “yes.”  As a 
matter of law and undisputed fact , that answer is correct .  
Under the implied terms of those contracts , a hotel or 
restaurant is  contractually required  either to follow the tip 
distribution pattern specified by the statute or to clearly 
disclose to the purchasers of food or beverage services  that it 
does not.  Here, i t is undisputed that the hotel did neither, 
and that failure caus ed injury to the class . 
  The special verdict also asked, “What are the total 
damages for the entire plaintiff class?”  The jury’s answer was 
“$269,114.73.”  The total service charges collected by the hotel 
for the relevant period amounted to $1,697,884.73.  The amount 
actually distributed to service employees as tip income was _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
25 
 $1,428,770.00.   The total of the “management’s share” was 
$269,114.73.10  In other words , the jury awarded for  damages a 
sum exactly e qual to the “management’s share” of the combined 
service charges;  that is,  the jury  awarded to Kawakami and the 
class that portion  of the total service charges collected that 
the hotel diverted to its own use rather than distribut ing 
directly as tip income . 
  Our analysis of the relevant principles of contract 
law above led us to hold that Kawakami’s  damages for breach of 
contract based on his expectation interest are properly  measured 
by the 15% of the total 19% service charge which the hotel 
retained for itself rather than directly distributing as tip 
income to service employees .  The jury in the damages trial 
considered the factual evidence regarding the total service 
charges collected over the relevant period.  The jury awarded 
$269,114.73 to the class, corresponding to the amount of the 
combined service charges retained by the hotel as “the 
management share.”   That amount is 15% of the total 19% service 
charge and corresponds to the amount retained by the hotel.   The 
jury’s award is supported by substant ial evidence.  Mehau v. 
                     
 10 The total distributed as tip income to service employees, added 
to the total of the “management’s share,” equals the total service charges 
collected by the hotel.  However, the total “management’s share” is not 
precisely equal to 15% of the combined total service charges collected 
because for some events the hotel imposed a 20% service charge as opposed to  
the usual 19% service charge.  _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
26 
 Reed, 76 Hawaiʻ i 101, 112 –13, 869 P.2d 1320, 1331 –32 (1994)(“The 
jury’s verdict need only be supported by substantial evidence, 
more than a scintilla, to be sustained by an appellate court.”)  
Having vacated the circuit court’s grant of JMOL to the hotel 
subsequent to trial, we reinstate  the damages awarded at trial, 
in the amount awarded, albeit on the ground that the amount 
equals Kawakami’s damages for the hotel’s breach of contract.  
We turn now to the question of whether Kaw akami and the class 
also sustained damages under the Hawai ʻi statute forbidding 
unfair or deceptive practices (UDAP), HRS Chapter 480. 
B.  Kawakami and th e Class S ustained  Damages under the Unfair or 
Deceptive Acts or Practices  (UDAP) Statute. 
  To recover damages for a violation of the UDAP 
statute’s prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices , 
a consumer must prove (1) either that the defendant violated the 
UDAP statute (or that its actions are deemed to violate the UDAP 
statute by another statute), (2) that the consumer was injured 
as a result of the violation, and (3)  the amount of damages  
sustained as a result of the UDAP violation .  HRS § 480 -2(d) 
(Supp. 2006);11 HRS § 480 -13(b)12 (Supp. 2006); Compton v. 
                     
 
11  HRS § 480 -2(d) provides that “[n]o person other than a consumer, 
the attorney general or the director of the office of consumer protection may 
bring an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or practices [UDAP] 
declared unlawful by this section.”  Here, it is undisputed that Kawakami  and 
the class were “consumers” within t he meaning of HRS chapter 480.  In 
(continued . . .) _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
27 
 Countrywide Fin. Corp, 761 F.3d 10 46, 1053 (9th Cir. 
2014)(citing Davis v. Wholesale Motors, Inc., 86 Hawaiʻi 405, 
417, 949 P.2d 1026, 1038 (App. 1997)).   
  The first element for a UDAP claim is established if 
the act or practice in question is either proven to be a 
violation of HRS § 480 –2 or deemed to be a violation (“ declared 
unlawful” ) under HRS § 480 –2.  HRS § 480 –13(a)(noting that any 
consumer injured by an unfair or deceptive act or practice that 
is “forbidden or declared unlawful by section 480 -2” may “sue 
for damages sustained by the consumer[. ]”).  Here, the UDAP 
statute declares that vio lations of Hawaii’s hotel and 
restaurant service charge law are deemed unlawful under HRS § 
480–2.  HRS § 481B- 4 (“Any person who violates this chapter 
shall be deemed to have engaged in an . . . unfair or deceptive 
act or practice in the conduct of any trade or commerce within 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
addition, there is no dispute that the hotel’s acts or practices occurred in 
trade or commerce.  HRS § 480 -2(a). 
 
12 HRS § 480 -13(b) allows a consumer to sue for damages based on any 
violation of HRS § 480 -2 and provides for treble damages and attorney’s fees.  
It provides in relevant part : 
  
(a) Any consumer who is injured by any unfair or deceptive 
act or practice forbidden or declared unlawful by 
section 480 -2: 
 
(1) May sue for damages sustained by the consumer,  and, if 
the judgment is for the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall 
be awarded a sum not less than $1,000 or threefold 
damages by the plaintiff sustained, whichever sum is the 
greater, and reasonable attorney’s fees together wi th 
the costs of suit . . .    _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
28 
 the meaning of section 480- 2.” (emphases added) ); HRS § 481B-14 
(containing Hawaii’s hotel and restaurant service charge law ).  
See also Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel Ltd. , 122 Hawaiʻi 423, 427, 
228 P.3d 303, 307 (2010) (“Pursuant to HRS § 481B –4, any person 
who violates chapter 481B, including § 481B –14, ‘shall be deemed 
to have engaged in an unfair method of competition and unfair or 
deceptive act or practice in the conduct of any trade or 
commerce within the meaning of section 480 –2.’” (emphasis 
added)). 
  The second element of a UDAP violation requires injury 
to the consumer caused by such a violation.  See HRS § 480-
13(b).  The UDAP statute does not expressly d efine the term 
“injury.”  See  Zanakis–Pico v. Cutter Dodge, Inc., 98 Hawai ʻi  
309, 316, 47 P.3d 1222, 1229 (2002) (“HRS chapter 480 define s 
neither ‘injury’ nor ‘damages[.]’ ”).  However,  we construe the 
UDAP injury requirement broadly.  Davis, 122 Hawaiʻi at 430, 228 
P.3d at 310 (explaining that “ as a remedial statute, chapter 480 
must be construed liberally. ”).  “As a general matter, ‘injury’ 
means a ‘judicially- cognizable injury, that is, a harm to some 
legally- protected interest. ’”  Flores v. Rawlings Co., LLC, 117 
Hawaiʻi 153, 167, 177 P.3d 341, 355 (2008) (construing the injury 
requirement for a UDAP claim under HRS § 480 –13(b)).  Here, the 
second UDAP element is satisfied because the hotel caused harm 
to Kawakami’s legally -protected expectation or perf ormance _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
29 
 interest, which was a term implied in the contract from the 
statute.  Because the requirements of HRS § 481B –14 were 
incorporated as an implied term in the event agreement (or other  
relevant contract ) between the hotel and the purchasers, a 
violation of the statute is also a breach of the implied term,  
and that breach caused harm to Kawakami’s  legally-protected 
interest.  
  The third element of a UDAP violation is proof of the 
amount of damages.  Here, the requisite proof of the amount of 
damages was  supplied by proof at the trial on damages of the 
“management’s share” of 15% of the combined service charges – - 
found by the jury to amount to $269,114.73 -- which was diverted 
by the hotel to its own use rather than distributed directly and 
entirely to the service employees as tip income.  Because the 
hotel did not clearly disclose that its distribution pattern 
differed from the baseline set by the statute, the hotel 
violated both HRS § 481B- 14 and the implied terms of its 
contract with Kawakami, causi ng damage in an amount that was 
proved at trial.   
  A violation of Hawaii’s hotel and restaurant service 
charge law,  HRS § 481B -14, is deemed to also be an “ unfair or 
deceptive act or practice in the conduct of any trade or _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
30 
 commerce within the meaning of [HRS] section 480 -2”;13 the injury 
to Kawakami’s legall y-protected interest was caused by the 
hotel’s breach of contract ; and the amount of damages was proved 
at trial.  Because Kawakami has met the elements for a UDAP 
claim, we remand to the circuit court for an award of treble 
damages and attorney’s fees.   HRS § 480- 13(b)(1). 
C.  The Circuit Cou rt Properly Denied  Kawakami’s Motion in 
Limine No. 1. 
 Less than two weeks before the trial on damages, 
Kawakami moved in limine for an order barring the admission of 
any evidence of damages other than the sums representing the 
full 19% paid by consumers for their service charge.  He 
contended that any other evidence concerning damages would be 
irrelevant, immaterial, and unnecessarily confusing, including 
any evidence that the hotel diverted 15% of the proceeds to 
itself.  Kawakami’s theory was that the entire service charge 
was “
illegal,” not just the 15% diverted by the hotel to its own 
                     
 13  HRS § 481B -4 (“Any person who violates this chapter shall be 
deemed to have engaged in an . . . unfair or deceptive act or practice in the 
conduct of any trade or commerce within the meaning of section 480 -2.” 
(emphases added)).  When a statute deems a violation of the statute to also 
be a violation of HRS §  480-2, the “deeming” satisfies the first element of a 
UDAP claim (conduct) but not the second element (requiring injury to the 
consumer caused by the conduct).  Cf. Davis, 122 Hawaiʻ i at 439, 228 P.3d at 
319 (explaining in the context of a claim for unfair method of competition  
(UMOC) that “although the deeming language of HRS § 481B –4 eliminates the 
requirement that a plaintiff prove that a defendant ’s conduct that violates 
chapter 481B (including HRS § 481B– 14) constitutes an unfair method of 
competition, it does not purport to modify the causation requirement of HRS § 
480–13.”); Gurrobat , 133 Hawaiʻ i at 23, 323 P.3d at 814 (interpreting the 
causation element for a UMOC claim based on a violation of HRS § 481B –4, and 
stating that “a plaintiff need only prove an injury that flows from that 
which makes defendants’ acts unlawful.” (citations omitted)).   _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
31 
 use.  Kawakami anticipated that the hotel would argue that the 
damages were limited to the 15% of the service charge “based on 
their [sic] theory that this is the proper measure of damages.”  
Kawakami argued that any evidence regarding the 15% was 
irrelevant.  The  trial court denied Kawakami’s motion .  The ICA 
affirmed the trial court’s ruling.  Kawakami  II, mem. op. at  6. 
We review a n evidentiary decision based upon rele vance 
under the right/wrong standard.  Ass’n of Apt. Owners of Wailea  
Elua, 100 Hawai ʻi at 110, 58 P.3d at 621 .  “‘Relevant evidence ’ 
means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any 
fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action 
more probable or less probable than it would be without the 
evidence.”  Hawai ʻi Rule of Evide nce Rule (HRE) 401 (emphasis 
added); State v. Kupihea , 80 Hawaiʻi 307, 314, 909 P.2d 1122, 
1129 (1996)(“evidence  is relevant if it possesses a legitimate 
tendency to establish a controverted fact ” (internal quotation 
marks omitted )).   
The hotel was entitled to present evidence relevant to 
its theory that Kawakami’s economic injury was  limited to the 
15% of the total service charge not paid to those employees who 
were servers at his event.  The fact that the hotel retained 15% 
of the total service charges tended to make the hotel’s theory 
of damages more likely and was therefore relevant.   _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
32 
   Moreover, Kawakami’s  motion in limi ne no. 1 is akin  to 
a motion for partial summary judgment regarding damages.  In 
general, such a motion must be served and filed no less than 50 
days before the date of the trial .  HRCP Rule 56(a).  The 
practice of framing a motion for partial summary judgment as a 
motion in limine in order to avoid the time limitation of HRCP 
Rule 56 has been rightly rejected
.  “The use of motions in 
limine to summarily dismiss a portion of a claim has been 
condemned, and the trial courts are cautioned not to allow 
motions in limine to be used as unwritten and unnoticed motions 
for summary judgment or motions to dismiss .”  75 Am. Jur. 2d 
Trial § 44 (2018).  Id. (explaining that motions in limine 
should not be used “ as a sweeping means of testing issues of 
law.”).  As we have stressed, a circuit court may properly deny 
a motion in limine where the motion is  “akin to a motion for 
summary judgment or other dispositive motion.”  O’Grady v. 
State, 140 Hawai ʻi 36, 53 n.16, 398 P.3d 625, 642 n.16 (2017); 
see also Kuroda v. Kuroda , 87 Hawaiʻi 419, 427, 958 P.2d 541, 549 
(App. 1998)(stating that “a motion in limine is not an 
authorized method for presenting issues involving genuine issues 
of fact (in contrast to stipulated facts, questions of law, and 
matters of discretion) to the court for decision. ”).  We hold 
the circuit court did not err in denying Kawakami’s mo tion in 
limine no. 1. _*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***_  
 
33 
 IV. Conclusion 
  For the foregoing  reasons, we vacate the circuit 
court’s grant of jud gment as a matter of law (JMOL) and the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals ’ affirmance  of the JMOL.  Having 
vacated the JMOL, we  reinstate the circuit court’s earlier grant 
of partial summary judgment to Kawakami (as to liability) .  We 
also reinstate the jury’s special verdict on legal causation and 
the amount of damages  in the trial on damages  that followed the 
grant of partial su mmary judgment , as the special verdict is 
supported by substantial evidence .  We remand to the circuit 
court for determination of treble  damages and reasonable  
attorney’s fees and costs under Hawaii’s  statute governing 
unfair or deceptive acts or practices .  HRS § 480 -13(b)(1).  
 
James J. Bickerton          /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
John F. Perkin    
Brandee J.K. Faria   /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
Bridget G. Morgan 
Kristina M. Hanson   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
for petitioners     
      /s/ Richard W. Pollack   
     
David J. Minkin    /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
Lisa W. Cataldo    
for respondent 
                   
