***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF 
HAWAII, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
MARLIN L. LAVOIE,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-15-0000643 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000643; CR. NO. 13-1- 0236(3)) 
 
NOVEMBER 22, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
 
  T he circuit court in its pretrial order in this case 
excluded evidence of “other bad acts” committed by the 
defendant.  At trial, however, the court ruled that the 
defendant, by questioning a State’s witness about a single 
instance of separation between the defendant and the decedent, 
opened the door to the defendant’s prior acts of abuse.  Over 
objection, the court admitted into evidence five instances of Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000643
22-NOV-2019
09:11 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 
 prior abuse that were not shown to be followed by a period of 
separation between the defendant and the decedent.  The prior 
misconduct in this case was admitted to rebut the affirmative 
defenses of lack of penal responsibility and extreme mental and 
emotional distress.  In an unsuccessful appeal to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals, the defendant argued that the 
circuit court erred in admitting the prior incidents of abuse, 
failed to properly limit consideration o f the prior misconduct 
evidence, and omitted a requisite jury instruction on merger.  
  On certiorari, we review the “opening the door” 
doctrine and determine whether the circuit court correctly ruled 
that the door was opened in this case.  We also address,  in the 
context of a limiting instruction,  the crucial difference 
between a defendant’s state of mind to commit an offense and a 
defendant’s mental condition as it applies to the affirmative 
defenses of lack of penal responsibility and extreme mental and 
emotional distress.  Finally, we consider whether the crimes of 
felon in possession and place to keep are continuous crimes, 
necessitating a merger instruction in this case.   
  Based upon our review, we conclude that the five prior 
acts of abuse were erroneously admitted.  We also hold that the 
circuit court erred by not submitting a merger instruction to 
the jury because the crimes of felon in possession and place to 
keep are continuous crimes and the determination of merger must ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3 (continued . . .)  
 be made by the trier of fact.  Accordingly, we vacate the 
convictions in this case and remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.   
I. BACKGROUND AND CIRCUIT COURT PROCEEDINGS 
  On March 20, 2013, Malia Kahalewai was fatally shot at 
the Kawela Barns Apartments on the island of Moloka i.  Kahalewai 
was the longtime girlfriend of M arlin L. Lavoie, with whom she 
lived in Honouliwai Valley, and the couple had four children 
together.  
  
Lavoie was charged by complaint in the District Court 
of the Second Circuit with  the following offenses: murder in the 
second degree in violation of Hawai i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-701.5;1 carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a 
separate felony in violation of HRS § 134- 21(a);2 ownership or 
possession prohibited of any firearm in violation of HRS § 134-
7(b);3 and place to keep loaded firearms other than pistols and 
                     
 1 HRS § 707-701.5 (1993) provides in pertinent part: “Except as 
provided in section 707 -701, a person commits the offense of murder in the 
second degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of 
another person.” 
 2 HRS § 134-21(a) (2011) provides in pertinent part:  
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on the 
person or have within the person’s immediate control or 
intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged in 
the commission of a separate felony, whether the firearm was 
loaded or not, and whether operable or not.  
 3 HRS § 134-7(b) (2011) provides in full:  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 
 revolvers in violation of HRS § 134-23(a).4  An amended complaint 
was subsequently filed in the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (circuit court).5 
A. Motion to Determine Fitness to Proceed and Penal 
Responsibility 
 
  Lavoie moved for an examination of his fitness to 
proceed and penal responsibility pursuant to HRS § 704
-404 (1993 
& Supp. 2008).  A three-doctor panel examined Lavoie, and the 
examiners filed their reports with the court on October 17, 
2013.  At a hearing, Lavoie stipulated that he was fit to 
proceed.6   
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
No person who is under indictment for, or has waived indictment 
for, or has been bound over to the circuit court for, or has been 
convicted in this State or  elsewhere of having committed a 
felony, or any crime of violence, or an illegal sale of any drug 
shall own, possess, or control any firearm or ammunition 
therefor.  
 4 HRS § 134-23(a) (2011) provides in pertinent part:  
Except as provided in section 134 -5, all firearms shall be 
confined to the possessor’s place of business, residence, or 
sojourn; provided that it shall be lawful to carry unloaded 
firearms in an enclosed container from the place of purchase to 
the purchaser’s place of business, residence, or sojourn, or 
between these places upon change of place of business, residence, 
or sojourn . . . .  
 5 The amended complaint removed a charge of terroristic threatening 
in the first degree in violation of HRS § 707 -716(e) (Supp. 2011) that was 
included in the initial complaint and added a misdemeanor count of abuse of 
family or household member in violation of HRS § 709-906 (1993 & Supp.  2012) 
and a misdemeanor count of assault in the third degree in violation of HRS § 
709-712(1)(a) (1993).  Both of the added offenses were later dismissed 
without prejudice. 
 6 The motion and trial proceedings were presided over by the 
Honorable Joseph Cardoza.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 
   On May 15, 2015, a hearing was held on motions in 
limine, at which time the court granted the defense ’s motion to 
preclude the use of any prior bad acts at trial .  The motion in 
limine was granted without objection by the State although the 
prosecutor stat ed that, “should the door be opened” through 
cross-examination by the defense or in the defense’s case -in-
chief, it would ask for the court’s reconsideration.   The 
court’s written order excluded testimonial and documentary 
evidence relating to Lavoie’s prior criminal history and “bad 
acts” committed by Lavoie  that included  allegations of any 
crimes of violence.   
B. Trial 
  The State called Nicole Aea, a friend of Kahalewai, 
who testified that she was with Kahalewai in the hours leading 
up to the shooting at their mutual friend Barbara Haliniak’s 
apartment.  Aea testified that Kahalewai had been alternating 
between staying with Haliniak and Haliniak’s neighbor, Victoria 
Toledo.  Aea stated that, when Lavoie arrived at Haliniak’s 
apartment on the evening of the shooting, she was with Kahalewai 
and her two friends Maile Manintin
 and Leilani Mollena in 
Haliniak’s bedroom.  Manintin later testified that, when they 
were told that Lavoie was in the house, they shut off the lights 
in the bedroom and closed the door.  She said that Lavoie came ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 
 into the room by pushing the door open while one of her friends 
was still holding on to the doorknob.    
  Lavoie asked Kahalewai to talk to him alone and to 
come home, Aea said, but Kahalewai repeatedly told him no.  Aea 
stated that Lavoie t
old Kahalewai that their children missed her 
and continued to ask her to talk to him, to which Kahalewai kept 
responding, “ no, go away.”   After five to ten minutes of Lavoie 
begging Kahalewai to come with him, his eyes started to tear- up 
and he became “clearly upset and sad ,” Aea testified.    
  Eventually, Aea stated, she and Kahalewai left the 
bedroom and went out to the porch.  Aea indicated that they were 
joined by Manintin and Mollena.  Aea testified that while the 
four were socializing, Lavoie was at the bottom of the porch 
still teary-eyed and continuing to ask Kahalewai to come home.  
Lavoie recounted in an interview with Detective (Det.) Jeffrey 
Mahoney, recorded the morning after the shooting, that when they 
were on the porch Kahalewai would reply only by calling him  
names and saying things such as  “I no love you, I no like be 
with you,” “go be with a guy,” and  “fuck you faggot, fuck, I no 
love you faggot, you ugly.”   Manintin testified that she heard 
Lavoie say to Kahalewai “why no like me, you no love me, we have 
a family .  . . we got family toge ther, just come home.”   Aea 
said that the conversation ended when Kahalewai told Lavoie “you 
should find a guy because this bitch not going to take care of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 
 you anymore.”  Lavoie told Det. Mahoney that this made him 
“freak[] out” and “[he] just snapped.”  
  Lavoie stated in the interview that he asked 
Kahalewai, “[T]hat’s what you think I am?” and then went to his 
car and retrieved  his rifle.  Aea testified that when Lavoie 
came back to the porch, he said,  “[Y]ou gonna leave me, ” and 
shot her once in the chest from close range.  Kahalewai was 
transported to the Moloka i General Hospital where she was 
pronounced dead shortly thereafter.7 
 
 During the police interview, Lavoie  said that after 
the shooting, he immediately “freaked out” and ran away.  He 
stated that he returned to his vehicle with his rifle,
 drove to 
his home, and hid the rifle in bushes on his neighbor’s 
property.  Lavoie told 
Det. Mahoney that his father, who was at 
home when he returned
, advised him to turn himself into the 
police.8   
  During  his interrogation, Lavoie admitted to Det.  
Mahoney that he shot Kahalewai.  Lavoie told Det.  Mahoney that 
he had bipolar disorder, and on the night of the shooting he 
snapped because Kahalewai’s comments made him “depressed, but 
not pissed off.”  He said that he did not plan to go to 
                     
 7 An autopsy determined that the cause of death was a single 
gunshot wound to the chest.  
 
 8 Det. Greg Katayama testified that Lavoie turned himself in the 
morning after the shooting.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 
 Haliniak’s house to kill her, but “[d]arkness took over [him]” 
and he “just lost [his] mind.”9   
  During defense counsel’s cross -examination of Aea, 
counsel requested a bench conference to notify the court that 
his questioning of Aea might elicit information on what “could 
be conceivably construed as a prior bad act” addressed in 
Lavoie’s motion in limine.   Defense counsel stated that he 
intended to question Aea about “[Kahalewai] leaving [Lavoie] in 
the aftermath of arguments for some period of time.”  The 
prosecutor did not object but stated that such questions would 
open the door to why she would leave and what the arguments were 
about.  Defense counsel responded by saying, “That may be the 
case.” 
  Defense counsel asked Aea the following:  
Q. We were talking about the arguments that [Lavoie] and 
[Kahalewai] would get into over the course of their 
relationship.  After some of those arguments, you’re aware 
that [Kahalewai] would leave [Lavoie], leave the family, 
and go stay at friends’ houses.  Correct?   
A. Yeah, for a couple of days.  
Q. Okay.  Sometimes even for like a week or two.  Right?  
A. Barely.  Maybe once in a great, great while, depending 
on how big the argument was before.  
Q. One time she left for Oahu.  Correct?  
                     
 9 Det. Mahoney testified that he did not detect Lavoie to be under 
the influence of alcohol or drugs during the interview.  Det. Mahoney spent 
five to six hours with Lavoie from the start  of the interview through 
transport back to Wailuku cellblock, and in that time, Lavoie did not say 
that he was hearing voices or seeing anything on the night of the shooting.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 
 A. Yes. 
Q. And she stayed away for like maybe a week and a half, 
two weeks with your friend [Jamie Maikui]?  
. . .  
A. Yeah. 
Q. Okay.  On the night in question, [Kahalewai] had been 
apart from [Lavoie] for approximately four days.  Correct?  
A. Yes. 
Q. And you knew that for at least the last two days prior 
to the shooting, [Lavoie] had been looking around for 
[Kahalewai].  Right?  
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay.  But [Kahalewai] wanted to stay out that night 
because you guys had planned to do a girls night on the 
20th.  Right?  
A. Yeah. 
Q. Okay.  And there was a bachelorette party--your 
bachelorette party, right, that she had been attending over 
those four days?  
A. Yeah. 
Q. And you knew that [Lavoie] was upset that [Kahalewai] 
had been away for those four days.  Right?  
A. Yeah. 
  Following defense counsel’s cross -examination of Aea, 
the prosecutor requested a bench conference and asserted that, 
because the defense asked about past arguments, “the door has 
been open for us to ask the nature of those arguments.”  The 
prosecutor stated that the testimony would show that “at least 
some of these arguments involved a prior abuse, and [Kahalewai] 
leaving to get away from the defendant.”  Defense counsel 
objected, arguing that the door had not been opened and that Aea ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 
 had no personal knowledge of the reasons behind the various 
separations between Kahalewai and Lavoie.  The prosecutor sought 
to introduce evidence of a prior incident from February 2007 in 
which Lavoie threatened Kahalewai with a gardening pick in the 
presence of Aea.  Defense counsel objected to the introduction 
of this incident on the grounds 
that it was more prejudicial 
than probative given how temporally remote it was to the 
shooting. 
  The trial court allowed the evidence, finding that the 
door “perhaps” had been opened not just for Aea but other 
witnesses as well.  Specifically, the trial court responded to 
defense counsel as follows: 
 
Because your line of questioning has suggested that 
[Kahalewai]’s departure caused a reaction which caused him 
to lose control of his thoughts and his actions, or 
ultimately it’s going to be for the trier of fact to 
determine whether or not, from the defendant’s standpoint, 
if he’s been inflicting abuse on [Kahalewai], whether it 
would be reasonable, from his standpoint, to  then become 
upset or enraged by her departure, such that it would mean 
that the-- that defense would be a viable one.  And then 
there’s the whole 704 issues.  
  The prosecutor then asked Aea about arguments between 
Lavoie and Kahalewai that she had witnessed.  Aea testified that 
Lavoie and Kahalewai had “normal fights, there was no shock they 
were grumbling; they’d fight, she dig out, she’d come back.”  
These arguments were mostly about Kahalewai wanting more space 
to “hang out with friends, [and] do her own  thing,” Aea said.  
Aea agreed that the type of argument the couple was having on ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11 
 the night of the shooting appeared to be “nothing new.”  When 
questioned about the February 2007 incident,  Aea testified, over 
defense objection, that she witnessed Lavoie “grumbling” with 
Kahalewai before he picked up a  gardening pick and  said “nobody 
going to find you, you guys.”  There was no testimony that 
Kahalewai left Lavoie after this incident. 
  The State sought to admit other instances of abuse by 
Lavoie through Hali niak’s sister , Alexis Haliniak (A. Haliniak).  
Before she took the stand, defense  counsel requested a bench 
conference where he requested a proffer from the State as to 
what A. Haliniak would be testifying about and how her testimony 
would relate to the opening of the door.  The prosecutor 
responded that it sought to introduce testimony about two prior 
incidents of Lavoie’s abuse: one where A . Haliniak  saw Lavoie 
choke Kahalewai; and another where she witnessed Lavoie yell at 
and allegedly threaten Kahalewa
i during a poker game.  Lavoie  
objected on the basis that these incidents were not relevant 
because there was no indication that 
they had any connection to 
“[Kahalewai] separating herself from [Lavoie], and that [Lavoie] 
react[ed] violently to that separation.”   
  The court sustained Lavoie’s  objection as to the poker 
game incident because of the vagueness of Lavoie’s behavior 
proffered by the State.  As to A. Haliniak ’s testimony regarding 
the incident of alleged choking, the court ruled that the door ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12 
 had been opened and the incident held “significant probative 
value concerning the reasonableness of the explanation” for 
Lavoie’s emotional distress.  The trial court further ruled that  
the reasonableness of the explanation, on one hand, trying 
to cope with the loss of a partner is one thing.  Causing 
the loss of a partner by acts of physical abuse, and then 
saying you’re overwhelmed by that may be viewed entirely 
different by the trier of fact.  And that may not be viewed 
as reasonable.  So I think the door has been opened to 
that.   
  A. Haliniak then testified that two to four months 
prior to October 2012, she witnessed Lavoie choking Kahalewai 
until “the color on [Kahalewai]’s face was turning a little 
pinkish red.”  Lavoie only stopped after her boyfriend 
threatened to call the police, A. Haliniak testified.   Again, 
there was no testimony that Kahalewai left Lavoie after the 
incident.   
 
 The State called Jamie Maikui, a close friend of 
Kahalewai, to testify about a domestic violence incident that 
occurred between Lavoie and Kahalewai on March 16, 2013-- the 
event that led to the separation before the shooting.  Maikui 
testified that while she and Kahalewai were driving, they saw 
that Lavoie was following them in his car.  T hey pull ed into a 
church parking lot and lit a cigarette, Maikui said, at which 
point Lavoie approached the car; Kahalewai rolled  the window 
down to pass him a cigarette.  Maikui testified  that Lavoie then 
opened the door with his spare key.   Maikui  stated that she  
tried to drive away, but that Lavoie held on to the car until ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 
 (continued . . .)  she stopped.  She testified that after the car stopped, Lavoie 
punched her three times and elbowed Kahalewai in the face in the 
process of taking the keys from the ignition.   
  The State also attempted to question Maikui regarding 
incidents when she had witnessed Lavoie “do anything physical or 
threatening to [Kahalewai] before. ”  After prof fering that 
Maikui would testify about the gardening pick incident that Aea 
had testified about and an incident four to five years before 
the shooting where, as Maikui was driving by, she saw Lavoie 
punch Kahalewai, the court excluded the testimony over concerns 
about the time frame
.  The prosecutor told the court that there 
were further witnesses that he could bring in rebuttal to show a 
continuing pattern of abuse followed by Kahalewai leaving Lavoie 
but always returning.   
  
The State also called as a witness Victoria Toledo.10  
Toledo testified that, on the day of the shooting,  Lavoie came 
                     
 10 Prior to Toledo taking the stand, defense counsel stated in a 
bench conference that he anticipated Toledo would testify regarding an 
encounter with Lavoie that Toledo would claim occurred on the day of the 
shooting.  Counsel explained, however, that the prosecutor had disclosed that 
Toledo had told the prosecutor, in an interview at which there were no other 
witnesses present, that the encounter with Lavoie had occurred several days 
before the shooting.   
  Defense counsel requested that the court preclude the State from 
calling Toledo as a witness if the prosecutor was going to rem ain the State’s 
lead attorney, as defense counsel would be forced to call the prosecutor as a 
witness in the defense case.  In response, the prosecutor suggested that at 
defense counsel’s request, he would make a representation on the record 
before the jury as an officer of the court.  Defense counsel agreed to the 
prosecutor’s proposed procedure.  Both the State and defense questioned 
Toledo regarding the inconsistency of her accounts, but she maintained that 
she had only ever given one version of events.  Thus, in accordance with the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 
 to her apartment and asked her boyfriend if Kahalewai was 
“fooling around on him.”  She told Lavoie that Kaha lewai was not 
fooling around on him, Toled o stated, but Lavoie responded “[i]f 
I can’t have her no one will.”  Toledo acknowledged on cross -
examination that she disliked Lavoie because he had killed her 
friend, and that she did not relate her story to the police 
because, despite saying they would follow up, they
 never 
contacted her.11   
Dr. Kohn, a neurologist, psychiatrist, and 
psychotherapist was called to testify by the defense
.12  Dr. Kohn 
diagnosed Lavoie with bipolar disorder and testified that “as a 
component of that mental disorder, [Lavoie] has been psychotic 
on a recurring or continuous basis.”  In his medical opinion,  
Dr. Kohn stated, on March 20, 2013, Lavoie suffered a 
“dissociative episode in which, faced with this experience that 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
agreed-upon procedure, a t the completion of Toledo’s testimony, the 
prosecutor stated in open court the following:  
 
[P]ursuant to our bench conference, as an officer of the 
court, Your Honor, I would like to put on record that on 
July 18, 2014, in a telephone conversation with [] Victoria 
Toledo, I recall her saying that Marlin Lavoie told her, 
“If I can’t have Malia, nobody else will,” and that the 
conversation took place a few days before the shooting.   
 11 At the close of t he State’s case -in-chief, the parties stipulated 
that prior to March 20, 2013, Lavoie was previously convicted of a felony.   
 
 12 Dr. Kohn testified that he was board certified in neurology by 
the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology and taught psychiatry at the 
University of Chicago Medical School.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 
 was unmanageable for him, he could not think clearly.”13  Dr. 
Kohn found that there were several “factors that contributed to 
[Lavoie]’s inability to unders tand what was happening to him and 
to manage his feelings and actions.”  These factors included 
brain injury from repeated trauma, his family history of mental 
illness, his history of being sexually  abused as a child, and 
his history of psychiatric treatment.14  Dr. Kohn testified that 
these factors, compounded with Lavoie’s bipolar disorder , 
“prevented him[] from controlling himself from understanding 
what was happening and behaving in a way that would have been 
expected of him.”  As a result, Dr. Kohn opin ed, Lavoie lacked 
substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements 
of the law.  Dr. Kohn testified that Lavoie “had awareness that 
what he was doing was wrong and bad but wasn’t able to stop 
himself.”   
  
Additionally, Dr. Kohn opined that Lavoie was under 
the influence of an extreme mental or emotional disturbance 
                     
 13 Dr. Kohn also testified that Lavoie told him that he was hearing 
voices at the time.   
 14 Dr. Kohn testified that Lavoie experienced three instances of 
sexual abuse as a child: once by his babysitter, and the other two incidents 
involving “older teenagers that [Lavoie] was riding bikes with in the 
neighborhood.”  Dr. Kohn stated that Lavoie tol d him that his mother said to 
“get over it,” and his father “was similarly unsupportive.”  He further 
testified that Lavoie’s mother had undergone a psychiatric hospitalization 
and was diagnosed as being schizophrenic.  As an adult, Dr. Kohn testified, 
Lavoie had been institutionalized in the Alaska Psychiatric Institute for 
manic episodes with psychosis.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16 
 (EMED) at the time of the shooting.  Dr. Kohn testified that 
Lavoie’s mind was “dominated by intense emotion in a way that 
altered his usual process of thought and interfered 
substantially with his ability to reason. ”  This was brought 
about by two main factors, Dr Kohn stated: first, Lavoie “was 
distraught over [Kahalewai’s] absence” and “was in the middle of 
a reaction to separation and loss ” that caused him to be 
depressed and suicidal;  and second, Lavoie was “unable to manage 
his feelings in reaction to [Kahalewai’s] provocations ,” 
including when she mocked him with sexual taunts in front of 
others, showing 
“her contempt rather than compassion for the 
history that he’d revealed to her.”   While Dr. Kohn testified 
that Lavoie and Kahalewai had a “mutually abusive” relationship, 
he said that those prior instances of violence were consistent 
with his opinion.   
  The defense then called Dr. Marvin 
Acklin, who was 
qualified as an expert in forensic psychology.15  Dr. Acklin 
diagnosed Lavoie with “bipolar disorder type 1 versus disruptive 
mood disorder,” and borderline personality disorder and 
“perhaps, anti-
social personality traits.”   Several factors were 
                     
 15 Dr. Acklin testified that he was board certified in psychology, 
clinical psychology, and forensic psychology.  He stated that he was a 
professor of psychology at Loyola University of Chicago before becoming a 
faculty member at the John A. Burns School of Medicine at the University of 
Hawaii in the department of psychiatry.  In addition to his academic 
experience, he also testified that he maintained an independent practice in 
psychology.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17 
 important in his diagnosis, Dr. Acklin testified : Lavoie’s 
“extensive mental health history,” his family’s history of 
mental illness, the tests that Dr. Acklin had conducted on 
Lavoie, the accounts of Lavoie’s relationship with Kahalewai, 
the sexual abuse that Lavoie experienced as a child, and 
Lavoie’s history of head trauma.   
  Dr. Acklin further testified that Lavoie had three 
psychiatric “treatment episodes”: one in Alaska when Lavoie was 
18, one in 2008 or 2009, and one after the shooting.  Dr. Acklin 
stated that Lavoie was admitted to the Alaska Psychiatric 
Institute and was believed to be suffering from “some form of 
psychosis with paranoid delusions.”  Lavoie was prescribed 
Haldol, a “commonly used antipsychotic medication ,” both after 
the Alaska hospitalization and after the shooting, Dr. Acklin 
explained.  Dr. Acklin concluded that at the time of the 
shooting Lavoie was aware that what he was doing was wrong, but 
he was not able to stop himself; that is, he “lacked substantial 
capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the 
law.”16   
  Dr. Acklin also concluded that at the time of the 
shooting, Lavoie was under the influence of EMED 
as he was in a 
                     
 16 Dr. Acklin indicated that Lavoie would not have “lacked 
substantial capacity to control his actions” if he had a plan to kill 
Kahalewai.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18 
 state of desperation because he believed that Kahalewai was 
abandoning him.  Dr. Acklin testified that Lavoie’s feeling of 
abandonment was a “primary factor” in his emotional disturbance, 
but public shame also played a role.  Kahalewai ’s leaving and 
the “traumatizing break up” constituted a reasonable explanation 
for Lavoie’s EMED, Dr. Acklin explained.   
  In addition, Dr. Acklin testified that Lavoie’s 
relationship with Kahalewai involved “emotional turmoil” and was 
“unstable,” “stormy,” and abusive .  He noted two particular 
instances of physical abuse: first, the incident on March 16, 
2013, when Lavoie elbowed Kahalewai in the face; and second, a 
2008 conviction for abusing Kahalewai.  Dr. Acklin also 
testified on cross-examination that Lavoie wrote a note after 
his 2008 conviction that “could be constr ued as a threat to kill 
himself.”17  Dr. Acklin stated that the threat did not influence 
his ultimate opinion in the case .   
                     
 17 Before testifying about the note, the court instructed the jury 
that the “evidence is being offered in relation to the --or in connection with 
the expert’s opinion, and it may be considered only on the issue of the 
defendant’s intent and for no other purpose.”  On rebuttal, the State called 
Rochelle Tempo, an employee at Molok ai Alternatives to Violence to testify 
about the note and other oral statements that Lavoie made at that time.  The 
defense objected on the grounds that the evidence had already been admitted 
through Dr. Acklin
 and further testimony about the statements would be 
cumulative and prejudicial.  The prosecutor responded that the statement had 
not previously been admitted for substantive purposes and that it was now 
attempting to do so.  The court overruled the objection and instructed the 
jury that the evidence, if believed, was to be “considered only on the issue 
of the defendant’s intent to commit the offenses charged in this case.”   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19 
   Lavoie  called Dr. Martin Blinder, who was qualified as 
an expert in the fields of “psychiatry, forensic psychiatry, and 
mental state at the time of the offense.”18  Dr. Blinder 
diagnosed Lavoie with having post- traumatic encephalopathy 
caused by “head/brain injury due to multiple blows,” post -
traumatic stress disorder as a result of being sexually abused 
and physically assaulted throughout his lifetime, and 
schizophrenic spectrum disorder.  At the time of the shooting, 
Dr. Blinder testified, Lavoie experienced a dissociative episode
 
and therefore had no useful judgment over his decision- making 
process.19   
  
Dr. Blinder stated that the main stressor that 
contributed to Lavoie’s dissociative episode was the pattern of 
inconsistency in his relationship with Kahalewai; in the months 
leading up to the shooting, the relationship was “hot and cold.”  
Lavoie’s “psychic survival depend[ed] on remaining connected to 
[Kahalewai], so [he went] through months and years of these 
increasing stressors rather than going out the door, ” Dr. 
Blinder testified.  And finally, Dr. Blinder said, “it reache[d] 
                     
 18 Dr. Blinder testified that he was a licensed psychiatrist, was 
the chief of private inpatient psychiatric services at the University of 
California H ospital in San Francisco, and taught at University of California 
at Hastings law school for 17 years before his retirement.   
 19 Dr. Blinder testified that the fact Lavoie had a gun in his car 
that night was not necessarily reflective of a plan to commit the shooting.  
Dr. Blinder stated that Lavoie told him that the rifle was in the car because 
he was planning to sell it.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 
 the point where after years of this, [Lavoie] flipped out.”  
This culminated in gaps i n Lavoie’s memory on the night of the 
shooting, particularly after Kahalewai’s friends began laughing 
at him, Dr. Blinder testified.  As a result of Lavoie’s 
dissociative episode, Dr. Blinder concluded, Lavoie knew the 
difference between right and wrong but lacked substantial 
capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law.   
  After the defense rested its case, the State re called 
Haliniak during its rebuttal case.  During her rebuttal 
testimony, Haliniak testified about two additional incidents 
between Lavoie and Kahalewai.  
Before she  was called, the 
parties and the judge had a bench conference where defense 
counsel objected to the admission of the two incidents.  T he 
prosecutor argued that the incidents rebutted  the notion that 
the shooting came from a psychiatric disorder and showed an 
abusive relationship rather than a mental disorder.  The court , 
in overruling Lavoie’s objection,  noted that defense  counsel 
elicited opinions as to both the EMED and a lack of penal 
responsibility defenses, so the prosecution could be rebutting 
either.   
 
 The first incident, Haliniak said, occurred while she 
and Kahalewai were playing poker in Haliniak’s  house.  Haliniak 
testified that Lavoie was sleeping upstairs at the time and came 
downstairs after the poker game awoke him.  He “was very upset ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 
 that [Kahalewai] didn’t wake him up to play ,” punched the beam 
that supported the porch,  and tried to grab Kahalewai’s arm 
while yelling at her in  a “very loud, angry tone ,” Haliniak 
stated.   
  Haliniak also testified about an incident in the 
spring of 2012 when  Haliniak stated  she was picking  up Kahalewai 
from school and Lavoie confronted Kahalewai.  Haliniak said that 
Kahalewai told Lavoie that she did not want to talk to him so he 
grabbed her and head- butted her .  Haliniak testified that 
Kahalewai then got into Haliniak ’s van and the two drove off 
while Lavoie was telling Kahalewai not to go with her .   
  The State also recalled Maikui to testify about a 
previously excluded incident in 2007 or 2008 when she saw Lavoie 
punch Kahalewai in his car.  The defense objected that the 
incident was “extremely remote in time in relation to the 
[shooting],” prejudicial, and not probative.  The court 
overruled the objection, stating that the incident would be 
admitted because, during Lavoie’s  case-in-chief, there was “a 
significant amount of testimony concerning the [E]MED 
[defense].”  Maikui then testified that in 2007 or 2008, as she 
was driving by, she saw Lavoie punch Kahalewai in the arm.  
Maikui said that she turned her c ar around and took Kahalewai 
away from the scene.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 
   There was no testimony that Kahalewai had separated 
from Lavoie after any of the incidents about which Haliniak or 
Maikui testified.   
  The State also called D r. George Choi and D r. Tom 
Cunningham from the court- ordered panel that had examined 
Lavoie.  Both doctors were admitted as experts in the field of 
forensic psychology.20  Based on his evaluation of Lavoie, Dr. 
Choi diagnosed him with substance abuse induced mood disorder.  
He testified that his opinion was based on the inconsistencies 
in Lavoie reporting his psychiatric symptoms to different people 
over time and Lavoie’s tendency to over -report psychiatric 
symptoms.  Dr. Choi stated that Lavoie’s ability to control 
himself on the night of the shooting was impaired and his 
ability to know right from wrong in that moment was “moderately” 
impaired, but that Lavoie was not “substantially” impaired in 
his capacity to know right from wrong or
 conform his conduct to 
the law.   
  
Dr. Cunningham opined that Lavoie was “malingering, 
exaggerating symptoms, or inventing them completely.”  Lavoie 
did not lack substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness 
of his conduct, Dr. Cunningham testified, nor did he lack 
                     
 20 Dr. Choi testified that he was a licensed psychologist and had a 
private psychology practice.  Dr . Cunningham stated  that he was licensed in 
psychology and had worked at the Hawai i State Health Department as a 
psychologist since 1988.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23 
 substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements 
of the law.  Dr. Cunningham said that he came to this conclusion 
because of “inconsistencies in the record” such as Lavoie’s 
“auditory hallucinations.”  In Dr. Cunningham’s opinion, Lavoie 
was very angry when he shot Kahalewai.21   
  
The State also called Dr. Valli Kalei K anuha to 
testify as an expert in the field of domestic violence.  Dr. 
Kanuha stated that, in general, when there is an intimate 
relationship between a male and female, a man may abuse a woman 
because societal norms make the man think that he is the one in 
charge of the relationship and the woman should do what the man 
wants.  Dr. Kanuha testified that batterers often view 
themselves as the victims and that  it is common for a batterer 
to cry or beg when the partner threatens to leave the 
relationship.   
 
 At the conclusion of the evidence, the court 
instructed the jury that if it found that the State proved all 
elements of the charged offenses beyond a reasonable doubt, then 
                     
 21 Dr. Cunningham did not believe that Lavoie’s family history of 
mental illness was a significant consideration, did not consider Lavoie’s 
abuse by his father to be significant to his analysis, did not mention 
Lavoie’s history of being sexually abused in his report, and did not consider 
it relevant that Lavoie was placed on suicide watch from March 22 through 
April 17, 2013 and again on August 5, 2013.  In addition, Dr. Cunningham 
acknowledged that he did not review medical records of Lavoie’s head injuries 
although they were provided to him.  Dr. Cunningham also opined that Lavoie’s  
anger was exacerbated by drinking during the day, although he acknowledged on 
cross-examination that there was no evidence in any of the police reports 
that Lavoie was intoxicated.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 
 the jury must consider whether Lavoie was criminall y responsible 
for his conduct.22  The court’s instruction about prior bad acts 
stated the following: 
During this trial, you have heard evidence that the 
defendant at other times may have engaged in or committed 
crimes, wrongs or acts.  This evidence, if believed by you, 
may be considered only on the issue of defendant’s intent 
to commit the offenses charged in this case.  Do not 
consider this evidence for any other purpose.  You must not 
use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant, 
at other time
s, may have engaged in or committed other 
crimes, wrongs or acts, that he is a person of bad 
character and, therefore, must have committed the offenses 
charged in this case.  
  The court instructed the jury that an EMED defense to 
murder has two elements: (1) that Lavoie was under the influence 
of EMED; and (2 ) there was a reasonable explanation for the EMED 
as determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person under 
the circumstances that Lavoie believed them to be.  In addition, 
the court instructed the jury that Lavoie’s “self-control or 
lack of it at the time of the offense is a significant factor in 
determining whether he was under the influence of 
[EMED].”  
Lavoie objected to this instruction, arguing that it 
unnecessarily highlighted and isolated self-control.   
  
The court also instructed the jury as to the elements 
of the offenses of possession of a prohibited firearm (felon in 
                     
 22 The court instructed the jury that “[t]he defendant is not 
criminally responsible for his conduct if, at the time of the offense and as 
a result of a physical or mental disease, disorder or defect, the defendant 
lacked substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his 
conduct or to conform his conduct to the  requirements of the law.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 
 possession) and place to keep loaded firearms (place to keep).  
As to the felon in possession offense, the jury was  instructed 
that to convict Lavoie of this offense they must find that he 
knowingly possessed the firearm on March 20, 2013.  As to the 
place to keep offense, the jury was informed  that to convict 
Lavoie of this offense they must find that he intentionally 
possessed the loaded firearm on March 20, 2013, in a place other 
than in a place of business, residence, or sojourn.  The court 
did not provide, nor did the parties request, a merger 
instruction.   
 
 Lavoie was found guilty as charged on all the 
offenses.  On August 13, 2015, the circuit court denied Lavoie’s 
Motion to Compel State to Dismiss Count 3 or 4 Due to Merger.  
The court ruled that there was no merger of the offenses
 because 
the felon in possession offense was committed prior to Lavoie 
leaving his home on March 20 and the place to keep offense 
occurred when the firearm was being transported to the scene of 
the shooting; thus, no merger instruction was required.   
  Lavoie was sentenced to a life sentence with the 
possibility of parole in Count 1, twenty years in prison in 
Count 2, and ten years in prison each in Count 3 and Count 4.  
The court ordered that Counts 1 and 2 be served concurrently,  
and Counts 3 and 4 be served consecutively to each other and 
consecutively to Counts 1 and 2.  Lavoie appealed from the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26 
 judgment of conviction and sentence to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA).   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  
The ICA in its Memorandum Opinion first addressed 
Lavoie’s objection to the lack of a jury instruction defin ing 
EMED.  The ICA concluded that State v. Haili , 103 Hawai i 89, 79 
P.3d 1263 (2003), was dispositive because it held that EMED was 
not defined by the legislature, and thus 
the courts need not 
define it in their jury instructions.  Further, the ICA stated 
that while HRS § 707- 702(2) does not refer to self- control, 
Hawaii courts have repeatedly recognized that it is a 
significant factor in EMED determinations.23   
  Turning to the merger instruction, the ICA 
acknowledged that “Hawai i case law indicates that felon- in-
possession and place- to-keep charges are often intertwined, in 
turn necessitating a merg er instruction.”   However, t he ICA 
agreed with the circuit court that the felon in possession 
offense was completed before Lavoie left his house on March 20, 
                     
 23 HRS § 707-702(2) (1993 & Supp. 2003) provides as follows:  
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the first 
and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which reduces 
the offense to manslaughter or attempted manslaughter, that the 
defendant was, at the time the defendant caused the death of the 
other person, under the influence of extreme mental or emotional 
disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation.  The 
reasonableness of the explanation shall be determined from the 
viewpoint of a reasonable person in the circumstances as the 
defendant believed them to be.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 
 2013, and the place to keep offense was committed when the 
firearm was placed in Lavoie’s car .24  Thus, the ICA held that 
the circuit court did not err in failing to give a merger 
instruction.   
  
The ICA also found no error in the circuit court’s 
limiting instruction about the use of prior bad acts.  The ICA 
concluded that the jury instruction limited the jury’s use of 
Lavoie’s prior bad acts in compliance with Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b), which permits prior bad acts if such 
evidence is probative of intent
.  The ICA relied on State v. 
Maelega, 80 Hawai i 172, 907 P.2d 758 (1995), and held that the 
prior bad acts were relevant to rebut Lavoie’s EMED defense 
because such acts were probative of his intent.   
  Finally, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s 
determination that Lavoie opened the door to allow the State to 
elicit testimony of Lavoie’s prior bad acts.   The ICA stated 
that the defense’s cross-examination question s about arguments 
                     
 24 The ICA quoted an unpublished ICA memorandum opinion stating that  
 
[Place to keep] is not defined as a continuing course of 
conduct; it is a prohibition against transporting firearms.  
Once the person takes the firearm out of a place of 
business, residence, or sojourn-- but for certain 
exceptions--the offense is complete.  The fact that the 
offense may continue beyond this point does not  change the 
character of the offense.  
 
  See State v. Lavoie, NO. CAAP- 15-0000643, 2018 WL 4613329 (Haw. 
App. Apr. 23 2018) (quoting State v. Stangel, No. CAAP- 13-0003941, 2015 WL 
836928 (Haw. App. Feb. 26, 2015)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 
 between Lavoie and Kahalewai during the course of their 
relationship opened the door because the questions were relevant 
to Lavoie’s EMED defense.  The ICA concluded that the circuit 
court did not err in ruling that the defense’s line of 
questioning suggested that the separation between Lavoie and 
Kahalewai caused Lavoie to lose self- control, and that the jury 
would have to determine whether it was reasonable for Lavoie to 
lose self-control if his abuse led to the separation.   
  
The ICA accordingly affirmed the judgment of the 
circuit court.25  Lavoie timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari, which this court accepted.
   
III. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
A. Conclusions of Law 
  Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard of review.  Maria v. Freitas , 73 Haw. 266, 
270, 832 P.2d 259, 262 (1992) .   
B. Jury Instructions 
  The propriety of jury instructions is a question of 
law reviewed de novo using the following standard: whether, 
“when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
                     
 25 Lavoie also raised other issues on appeal that were rejected by 
the ICA but not raised on certiorari review; these issues are not discussed.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 
 misleading.”  State v. Bovee, 139 Hawai i 530, 537, 394 P.3d 760, 
767 (2017) (quoting State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawaii 76, 79, 156 
P.3d 1182, 1185 (2007)).   
C. Prior Bad Acts 
 
 The admissibility of evidence requires different 
standards of review depending on the particular rule of evidence 
at issue.  State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai i 53, 62, 175 P.3d 709, 
718 (2008); State v. Pulse , 83 Hawai i 229, 246, 925 P.2d 797, 
814 (1996). 
“Prior bad act” evidence under  [HRE] Rule 404(b) . . . is 
admissible when it is 1) relevant and 2) more probative 
than prejudicial.  A trial court ’s determination that 
evidence is “relevant” wi thin the meaning of  HRE Rule 401  
. . . is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review.  
However, a trial court ’s balancing of the probative value 
of prior bad act evidence against the prejudicial effect of 
such evidence under  HRE Rule 403  . . . is reviewed for 
abuse of discretion.  An abuse of discretion occurs when 
the court clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law to the substantial 
detriment of a party litigant.  
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai i 90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168 
(2010) (alterations in original).   
IV. DISCUSSION 
  Lavoie first argues that the evidence of prior bad 
acts was inadmissible because it did not rebut an EMED defense 
or a defense of lack of penal responsibility.  Because such 
evidence is inadmissible, Lavoie contends, he could not have 
opened the door to admission of 
the prior bad acts.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30 
   A defendant can be relieved of penal responsibility if 
the defendant proves that “at the time of the conduct as a 
result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect the 
person lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the 
wrongfulness of the person’s conduct or to conform the person’s 
conduct to the requirements of t he law.”  HRS §  704-400(1) 
(1993).26   
  Additionally, HRS § 707 -702(2) provides that EMED is a 
mitigating affirmative defense in a prosecution for murder that 
applies when the defendant was, at the time the defendant caused 
the death of another person, und er the influence of extreme 
mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable 
explanation.  The reasonableness of the explanation shall be 
determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the 
circumstances as the defendant believed them to be.   If this 
defense is proved, it reduces the offense of murder to 
manslaughter.  Id.   
                     
 26 HRS § 704 -400(1) provides as follows:  
 
(1) A person is not responsible, under this Code, for 
conduct if at the time of the conduct as a result of 
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect the 
person lacks substantial capacity either to 
appreciate the wrongfulness of the person’s conduct 
or to conform the person’s conduct to the 
requirements of law.   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31 
 A. Lavoie’s Prior Bad Acts  
1. Lavoie Did Not “Open the Door ” to Prior Instances of Abuse 
  Lavoie argues that the circuit court improperly ruled 
that he opened the door to prior acts by cross- examining Aea 
about prior instances in which Lavoie and Kahalewai separated.   
  “The ‘opening the door’ doctrine is essentially a rule 
of expanded relevancy . . . .”  State v. James, 677 A.2d 734, 
742 (N.J. 1996).  “Under th is doctrine, when one party 
introduces inadmissible evidence , the opposing party may respond 
by introducing [] inadmissible evidence on the same issue. ”  
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997)27; 
see also State v. Dvorak, 295 S.W.3d 493, 502 (Mo. Ct. App. E.D. 
2009) (the doctrine applies after one party introduces 
inadmissible evidence) .  Admissible evidence therefore does not 
‘open the door’ to otherwise inadmissible evidence.   State v. 
Middleton, 998 S.W.2d 520, 528 (Mo. 1999) (“A p arty may not, 
however, introduce inadmissible evidence to rebut inferences 
                     
 27 The “opening the door doctrine” is also sometimes referred to as 
the doctrine of “curative admissibility.”  In Fukusaku, we stated that   
[a]lthough  the Prosecution cites no authority, its argument 
appears to be based on the doctrine of “curative 
admissibility,” also known as “opening the door” or 
“fighting fire with fire.” Under this doctrine, when one 
party introduces inadmissible evidence, the opposing party 
may respond by introducing his own inadmissible evidence on 
the same issue.   
 
85 Hawai i at 496, 946 P.2d at 67 (1997).  The Fukusaku court referred to the 
doctrines of “opening the door” and “curative admissibility” interchangeably.  
We will also do so in this opinion, although it is noted that not all 
jurisdictions treat the doctrines with a singular meaning.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 
 raised by the introduction of admissible evidence during cross-
examination.”).   
  Here, during cross- examination,  Aea was asked whether 
she was “aware that [Kahalewai] would leave [Lavoie], leave the 
family, and go stay at friends’ houses” after arguments between 
Kahalewai and Lavoie.  Aea responded that she was aware of the 
past arguments and separations.   On redirect, Aea clarified that 
the arguments leading to the separations generally involved 
Kahalewai’s desire to socialize with her friends, which was 
typically not possible because there was neither internet nor 
phone service at the home that she shared with L avoie in 
Honouliwai Valley.   
 
 Based on defense counsel’s questioning , the circuit 
court admitted into evidence s ix prior incidents of abuse that 
it had previously ruled inadmissible, reasoning that the door 
had been opened by Aea’s testimony.  First, Aea testified that 
six years prior to the shooting, she witnessed Lavoie threaten 
Kahalewai with a gardening pick.  There was no testimony, 
however, that this incident resulted in Kahalewai leaving Lavoie 
for any period of time.  Second, Alexis testified that she saw 
Lavoie choke Kahalewai roughly eight to ten months before the 
shooting.  Again, there was no testimony that Kahalewai left 
Lavoie as a result of this incident.  Testimony regarding two 
more incidents of abuse that occurred in the year prior to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 
 shooting was elicited from Haliniak, including a time when 
Lavoie punched a beam and yelled at Kahalewai while trying to 
grab her arm and an instance in which Lavoie head- butted 
Kahalewai.  There was no testimony that either of these 
incidents resulted in Kahalewai leaving Lavoie.  And Maikui 
testified during the State’s re buttal that six years before the 
shooting, she saw Lavoie punch Kahalewai in the arm.  Once 
again, the witness did not testify that this incident resulted 
in Kahalewai leaving Lavoie.   
  Each of these  instances garnered objections from 
defense counsel, who argued that, because there was no clear 
connection between the instances of abuse and the arguments 
between Lavoie and Kahalewai that led to the previous 
separations, the testimony was irrelevant and unfairly 
prejudicial.  Only the March 16, 2013 incident that led to the  
separation between Lavoie and Kahalewai immediately preceding 
the shooting was not objected to.  Because this incident did 
result in a separation, defense counsel appears to have 
implicitly conceded that it was relevant to the reasonableness 
of Lavoie’s EMED resulting from the separation.    
  As stated, the opening the door doctrine generally 
does not allow a party to admit evidence that is otherwise 
inadmissible to rebut an opponent’s relevant and admissible 
evidence.  Clark v. State,  629 A.2d 1239, 1244 (Md. 1993).  This ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 
 court previously addressed a similar issue in State v. Fukusaku, 
85 Hawai i 462, 496, 946 P.2d 32, 66 (1997).  In Fukusaku, the 
trial court ruled that expert testimony about positive luminol 
and phenolphthalein test r esults indicating the presence of 
blood in some areas of a defendant’s apartment was inadmissible 
because, in the absence of secondary confirmation tests, the 
luminol and phenolphthalein tests were not relevant .28  Id.  On 
cross-examination, defense counsel elicited testimony from the 
expert about the absence of blood on any of the cushions in the 
defendant’s apartment.  Id.  The State argued that the defense 
had opened the door to the previously inadmissible positive test 
results by questioning the expert about blood samples.  Id.   The 
circuit court ruled that the defense had not opened the door.  
Id.   
  This court, in affirming the circuit court, concluded 
that general testimony about the nonpresence of blood samples--
which was admissible on its own-- did not open the door to 
testimony about the inadmissible positive test results.  Id.  at 
497, 946 P.2d at 67.  This court construed the State’s argument 
as an appeal to the doctrine of “curative admissibility,” under 
                     
 28 The tests at issue could generate false positive reactions, could 
not distinguish between animal blood and human blood, and could not determine 
how long the blood had been at the scene.  Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i at 496, 946 
P.2d at 66.  No evidence was offered that the tests were likely to render 
false negatives.  Id.  at 497, 946 P.2d at 67.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 
 which “when one party introduces inadmissible evidence, the 
opposing party may respond by introducing his own inadmissible 
evidence on the same issue.”  Id.  We noted that this doctrine, 
often referred to as “fighting fire with fire,” is subject to 
abuse and “most jurisdictions have limited its use to situations 
in which the originally submitted evidence creates significant 
prejudice.”  Id. (citing 1 Wigmore on Evidence § 15, at 741- 42 & 
n.6 (1983)).  This court then ruled that, because the testimony 
elicited by defense counsel regarded negative test results, 
which had not been shown to be unreliable and which the trial 
court expressly ruled were not covered by its exclusion order, 
the testimony was admissible.  Id.   We therefore concluded that 
“even if we were to adopt the doctrine of curative 
admissibility, it would not be applicable to the present case.”  
Id.   
  Parallels may be drawn between Fukusaku  and the case 
at hand.  Here, the circuit court’s ruling on Lavoie’s motion in 
limine specifically 
excluded evidence involving allegations of 
prior violence in much the same manner as the 
trial court ’s 
order in Fukusaku  excluded evidence of positive test results.  
And, like the negative test results in Fukusaku , evidence of 
previous arguments between Lavoie and Kahalewai that led to 
separations and did not involve violent acts by Lavoie were not 
within the ambit of the court’s order.  Thus, as in Fukusaku, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
36 
 Lavoie “introduced admissible evidence, not inadmissible 
evidence,” and the doctrine of curative admissibility is simply 
inapplicable to the present case.29  Id.   
  T he State cites authority from other jurisdictions for 
the proposition that the door may also be opened to inadmissible 
evidence when a party offers admissible evidence that is false 
or misleading if considered in isolation
.30   
  As an initial matter, this court may have implicitly 
rejected the rule the State argues for in Fukusaku , in which the 
State appeared to contend that the defendant had presented 
incomplete and misleading testimony by focusing on the lack of 
blood on the cushions in his apartment while not acknowledging 
that the luminol and phenolphthalein tests had indicated that 
                     
 29 Our discussion of the “opening the door” d octrine addresses the 
situation in which inadmissible evidence is offered in response to the 
introduction of admissible evidence.  The doctrine has also been applied to 
authorize the introduction of evidence that would otherwise have been 
irrelevant in order to respond to admissible evidence that generates an 
issue.  See, e.g., Clark, 629 A.2d at 1242– 43.  Because we conclude in this 
case that the testimony about prior incidents of abuse is inadmissible, see 
infra Part IV.A.2 and Part IV.A.3,  it is not necessary to consider adoption 
of this variant of the curative admissibility doctrine or of the doctrine 
itself because even if we were to do so, “it would not be applicable to the 
present case.”  See Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i at 497, 946 P.2d at 67.   
 
 30 See, e.g., Valadez v. Watkins Motor Lines, Inc., 758 F.3d 975, 
981 (8th Cir. 2014) (holding that a party may open the door to inadmissible 
evidence to the extent that the inadmissible evidence “clear[s] up [a] false 
impression” or “clarify[ies] or c omplete[s] an issue opened up by [opposing] 
counsel”) (last alteration in original); United States v. Osazuwa, 564 F.3d 
1169, 1175 (9th Cir. 2009) (same); United States v. Brown, 921 F.2d 1304, 
1307 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (same); State v. Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 56 (2001) 
(same).  The ICA, in an unpublished memorandum opinion, has adopted such a 
rule.  See State v. Awana, No. 27145, 2007 WL 1139407 at *14 (Haw. App. Apr. 
13, 2007) (“As an evidentiary principle, the ‘opening the door’ doctrine 
allows the admission of otherwise inadmissible evidence, including hearsay, 
to qualify, explain, or limit testimony or evidence previously elicited.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
37 
 blood may have been present elsewhere in the apartment.  
85 Hawai‘i
 at 496, 946 P.2d at  66.  Additionally, such a rule 
would not apply here even if this court were to adopt it because 
no aspect of 
Aea’s testimony was shown to be false or 
misleading.  Aea testified generally on cross-examination about 
Lavoie and Kahalewai’s prior arguments 
that led to periods of 
separation, which generally involved Kahalewai’s desire to 
socialize with her friends.  No ne of the incidents of abuse 
elicited over defense objection contradicted or clarified Aea’s 
testimony because it was never shown that the incidents had any 
relation to the separation-causing arguments about which Aea had 
testified.  
Thus, because there is no indication that Aea’s 
testimony was likely to convey a false impression, it is 
unnecessary for this court to consider a situation in which 
admissible evidence is so mi
sleading that it would justify the 
admission of otherwise inadmissible evidence to correct it.31   
  W e have held that admissible evidence-- here, Aea’s 
testimony about Lavoie and Kahalewai’s previous arguments that 
led to periods of separation and did not clearly involve 
incidents of abuse-- generally does not open the door to 
inadmissible evidence, see  85 Hawai ‘i at 496, 946 P.2d at 66, and 
                     
 31 Because the opening the door doctrine does not apply here, we 
decline to address Lavoie’s contention that the door may on ly be opened 
during the defendant’s case -in-chief.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
38 
 no possible exception to this rule applies.  Thus, the 
admissibility of the testimony regarding Lavoie’s prior bad acts 
must be evaluated on its own merit, and not in relation to Aea’s 
testimony.   
2. The Prior Bad Acts Were Inadmissible to Rebut Lavoie’s EMED 
Defense
 
  The circuit court ruled that evidenc e of Lavoie’s 
prior bad acts was admissible to rebut Lavoie’s EMED defense.  
The circuit court reason ed that a central issue in the case was 
whether Lavoie was experiencing EMED when the shooting occurred, 
and, if so, whether the EMED Lavoie experienced was a reasonable 
response to, inter alia, Kahalewai having left him.  The court 
stated that “[c]ausing the loss of a partner by acts of physical 
abuse, and then saying you’re overwhelmed by that . . . may not 
be viewed as reasonable.”  Thus, the court ruled that the prior 
incidents “carrie [d] significant probative value concerning the 
reasonableness of the explanation.”   
  This court’s decision in State v. Castro is highly 
informative in deciding the present issue.  In Castro , the 
defendant was convicted of attempted murder and assault in the 
second degree after he tried to kill his estranged girlfriend.  
69 Haw. 633, 639-42, 756 P.2d 1033, 1039-40  (1988).  At trial, 
the defendant asserted that he was under the influence of EMED 
and that there was a reasonable explanation for his EMED at the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
39 
 time the offense was committed.  Id. at 641, 756 P.2d at 1040.  
The trial court admitted testimony about several prior incidents 
when the defendant committed acts of violence against the victim 
to demonstrate the defendant ’s “intent, preparation, plan, 
knowledge, and modus operandi ” regarding the attempted murder.  
Id. at 644, 756 P.2d at 1042 .   
  On review, this court vacated the conviction, holding 
that, when the identity of the perpetrator is not in doubt, 
there is very little justification for admitting evidence of a 
defendant’s prior bad acts under HRE Rule 404(b) to demonstrate 
the defendants plan, preparation, knowledge, or modus operandi.  
Id. at 645, 756 P.2d at 1042.  We held that, even if the prior 
acts had some “incremental probative value” with regard to the 
defendant’s state of mind when the offense was committed, they 
were nonetheless inadmissible under HRE Rule 403 because their 
relevancy was far outweighed by their potential for unfair 
prejudice.  Id. at 645, 756 P.2d at 1042.  This court explained 
that the prior bad acts were not needed to prove intent because 
“there was much more from which an inference of intentional 
conduct could be drawn in the evidence of the offense for which 
the defendant was being tried.”  Id. at 644, 756 P.2d at 1042.   
  Instead of following this court’s precedent in Castro, 
the ICA relied on State v. Maelega  in affirming the circuit 
court.  In Maelega, this court held that the circuit court did ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
40 
 not abuse its discretion in admitting evidence of a defendant’s 
past abuse of his wife.  80 Hawai i 172, 184, 907 P.2d 758, 7 70 
(1995).  The State introduced instances of abuse to show that 
the defendant was trying to control or discipline his wife at 
the time of the offense and that he had not lost self-control 
under EMED.  Id. at 175 n.3, 907 P.2d at 761 n.3.   
  Th e circuit court concluded, and we agreed,  that the 
prior bad acts were probative to rebut both prongs of EMED; the 
acts “tend[ed] to show that [Maelega] acted with self -control at 
the time that he allegedly killed his wife” and that “even if 
[Maelega] did not act with self- control, then there was no 
‘reasonable explanation’ for his extreme mental or emotional 
disturbance.”  Id. at 184, 907 P.2d at 770.  This court relied 
on the trial court’s findings of fact that (1) “very little time 
[] elapsed between the prior act evidence and the [] charged 
offense,” (2) there was a “great need” for the evidence to 
scrutinize the rel
ationship between the defendant and the 
victim, and (3) the prior acts  were not “of the nature which 
will rouse the jury to overmastering hostility.”  Id. at 183 -84, 
907 P.2d at 769-70 (emphases omitted).    
  Here, as in Castro , the evidence of Lavoie’s prior 
abuse had little, if any, probative value as to his state of 
mind at the time of the shooting or to its reasonableness.  
Lavoie’s EMED defense stemmed from the stress that he felt after ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
41 
 Kahalewai said she would leave him, cou pled with Kahalewai’s 
insults and references to his childhood sexual trauma 
immediately prior to the shooting.  The evidence of his prior 
abuse of Kahalewai was not probative of the presence or 
reasonableness of Lavoie’s EMED because the witnesses testifyi ng 
to the incidents did not link the abuse to Kahalewai leaving 
Lavoie.  Absent such a link , Lavoie’s prior bad acts were not 
relevant to the reasonableness of Lavoie’s EMED at the time of 
the shooting.   
  Unlike in Maelega , the State did not establish a 
direct link between Lavoie’s prior bad acts and the killing 
because the State did not provide any direct testimony 
indicating that the incidents of abuse were  evidence that was 
incompatible with EMED in this case.  Id. at 175 n.3, 907 P.2d 
at 761 n.3.  Further, the court in Maelega relied in part on the 
fact that “very little time” had elapsed between the prior bad 
acts evidence and the charged offense; in fact, all of the 
instances of abuse occurred within four months of the incident.  
Id. at 174, 183, 907 P.2d at 760, 769.  The instances of 
Lavoie’s abuse, by contrast, date as far back as six years 
before the offense.   
  Out of the six prior instances of abuse that the State 
elicited, only one-- the March 16 incident that led to the 
separation that immediately preceded the shooting-- was linked to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
42 
 a separation between Lavoie and Kahalewai.  In the absence of 
evidence that the other instances of abuse were a motivating 
factor in Kahalewai’s leaving, the incidents had  no bearing on 
whether Lavoie was extremely emotionally disturbed as a result 
of the separation and, if so, whether that disturbance was a 
reasonable reaction.  Thus, these prior acts were not relevant 
to rebut an EMED defense.   
  Even if this court were to hold that these instances 
of abuse had some slight relevancy to Lavoie’s EMED defense and 
were thus admissible under HRE Rule 404(b), they should 
nonetheless have been excluded under HRE Rule 403.  When prior 
bad acts are relevant to prove a fact of consequence, “ the trial 
court is still obliged to exclude the evidence ‘if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury.’”  
Castro, 69 Haw. at 643, 756 P.2d at 1041 (quoting HRE Rule 403).  
Thus, were we to conclude that the incidents of abuse were a 
motivating factor that led Kahalewai to separate from Lavoie-- a 
fact for which there is no clear evidence in the record-- the 
incidents would still be of only marginal probative value 
because they represent only one reason out of many for 
Kahalewai’s dissatisfaction.  Indeed, Aea testified that the 
separations were primarily caused by other factors, including 
Kahalewai’s desire for “space,” to “hang out with friends,” and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
43 
 to “do her own thing,” which was made particularly difficult 
given the remote location and lack of phone and internet service 
in the home she shared with Lavoie.   
  On the other hand, evidence of the prior abuse had a 
great potential for unfair prejudice to Lavoie because there is 
a danger that a jury would consider the instances of abuse as 
propensity evidence, inferring that because Lavoie had committed 
abuse in the past, he was acting in the same manner when he shot 
Kahalewai.  Such an inference is expressly prohibited under HRE  
Rule 404(b).  Further, given the justifiable stigma attached to 
domestic abusers in the eyes of the public, evidence that Lavoie 
had committed domestic abuse was highly likely to “rouse the 
jury to overmastering hostility” towards him.  State v. Ren
on, 
73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266, 1273 (1992).  As we held in 
Castro, the testimony should have been excluded even if it bore 
some slight relevance as to the presence or reasonableness of 
Lavoie’s EMED because it was far more prejudicial than it was 
probative.   
3. The Prior Bad Acts Were Inadmissible to Rebut Lavoie’s Lack 
of Penal Responsibility Defense 
  At several points during the trial in this case, the 
circuit court suggested that Lavoie’s prior bad acts were 
potentially relevant to rebut his lack of penal responsibility 
defense.  This court has not foreclosed the use of prior bad ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
44 
 acts evidence to rebut a lack of penal responsibility defense.  
See State v. Morishige, 65 Haw. 354, 365, 652 P.2d 1119, 1127-28 
(1982) (affirming the admission of expert testimony of the 
defendant’s criminal history to show that the defendant had an 
“anti
-social personality” rather than a mental disorder) .   
  Here , however, the prior bad acts had no probative 
value to rebut Lavoie’s lack of penal responsibility defense 
because, unlike in Morishige , the incidents were not introduced 
through expert testimony to refute a diagnosis of a mental 
disorder or lack of capacity, and there was accordingly no 
showing that the abuse was inconsistent with any aspect of 
Lavoie’s lack of penal responsibility defense.  We expressly 
noted in Morishige that the testimony was not offered to show 
propensity, but rather was “ elicited to rebut a clinical 
psychologist called by the defense who testified the defendant 
was suffering from an acute mental disorder that ‘prevented him 
from knowing right from wrong ’ and ‘from conforming his behavior 
to the requirements of the law. ’”  Id. at 364-65, 652 P.2d at 
1127.  In this case, testimony regarding Lavoie’s prior bad acts  
may have been admiss
ible had the State first elicited it from 
the defense’s expert witnesses on cross -examination for the 
purpose of demonstrating that the underlying bases of the 
experts’ diagnoses of Lavoie were incomplete or did not support ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
45 
 32their conclusions.   See  HRE Rule 704.  In fact, the State did 
so during its cross- examination of Dr. Acklin, questioning 
whether he was aware of the specific instance of abuse that 
precipitated the separation immediately prior to the shooting. 
Alternatively, the instances may have been referenced through 
the testimony of the State’s own experts as a basis for their 
contrary diagnoses.    33 
  T he acts of abuse did not serve to rebut Lavoie’s  
experts’ diagnoses , however.  Several of the instances of abuse 
were introduced during the State’s case-in-chief, before 
Lavoie’s experts testified.  Moreover, there was never any  
showing that the instances of abuse were inconsistent with the 
defense’s or the State’s experts’  diagnoses.  Indeed, Dr. Acklin 
testified that the instance of abuse that caused the separation 
immediately preceding the shooting and the other prior instances 
of abuse of which he was aware were wholly consistent with his 
                     
 32 The State itself acknowledged the distinction between offering 
prior misconduct to challenge the underlying bases of the expert opinions and 
its use for other purposes when the State distinguished between its initial 
proffer of the note during the cross -examination of Dr. Acklin and its 
subsequent proffer to admit the note incident for substantive purposes during 
the testimony of Tempo on rebuttal.   
 
 33 In either case, the evidence would have been subject to HRE Rule 
403 balancing, and, if admitted, a limiting instruction restricting its use 
to the evaluation of the reliability of the expert witnesses’ testimony.  
When the note was introduced on cross -examination of Dr. Acklin, the court 
informed the jury that it was being offered “in connection with the expert’s 
opinion,” but nevertheless instructed the jury that it was to consider the 
evidence on the substantive issue of “the defendant’s intent” rather than the 
reliability of Dr. Acklin’s testimony.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
46 
 diagnosis.  And the State’s own expert witnesses gave no 
indication that the 
past instances of abuse figured into their 
conclusion that Lavoie did not suffer from a mental disorder or 
lack substantial capacity.  Without such a link, the past 
incidents of abuse had no probative value to rebut Lavoie’s lack 
of penal responsibility defense.34  Instead, they served only as 
an argument that Lavoie was “by propensity a probable 
perpetrator”--a use this court expressly condemned in Morishige.   
65 Haw. at 364, 652 P.2d at 1127 (citation omitted).    
  T he admission of the prior instances of abuse on the 
issue of Lavoie’s la ck of penal responsibility defense had a 
great potential to confuse or unfairly prejudice the jury 
against Lavoie.  For example, the jury may have considered 
whether Lavoie had a mental disorder or had substantial capacity 
during the prior incidents and as
sumed that Lavoie was in the 
same condition on the night of the shooting.  Such an inference 
would lack an evidentiary basis, and it would likely be an 
inference of propensity prohibited under HRE Rule 404(b).  And, 
as stated, the justifiable stigma attached to domestic abusers 
in the eyes of the general public had the potential to engender 
                     
 34 Were we to conclude that the instances of abuse in this case were 
relevant to rebut Lavoie’s lack of penal responsibility defense, the same 
reasoning would allow the introduction of all of a defendant’s prior bad acts 
through lay witnesses any time a lack of penal responsibility defense is 
raised.  Such a rule would be contrary to the plain text of HRE Rule 404(b) 
and the circuit court’s own initial ruling on Lavoie’s motion in limine.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
47 
 anger against Lavoie, leading the jury to decide the case on the 
basis of his character rather than the applicable factual and 
legal issues.  Renon, 73 Haw. at 38, 828 P.2d at 1273.  Thus, 
even assuming arguendo that the prior instances of abuse were 
admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to rebut Lavoie’s lack of penal 
responsibility defense, they should have been excluded under HRE 
Rule 403 because their marginal probative value was 
substantially outweighed by the danger that the jury would 
improperly misuse the prior acts.  Accordingly, the circuit 
court erred in admitting the prior incidents of misconduct, and 
the ICA erred in affirming these rulings of the circuit court. 
4. Admission of the Prior Bad Acts Was Not Harmless Beyond a 
Reasonable Doubt 
 
 In considering whether the erroneous admission of 
evidence of a defendant’s prior bad acts warrants setting aside 
a defendant’s conviction, this court considers whether the error  
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  State v. Kazanas, 138 
Hawai‘i 23, 43, 3
75 P.3d 1261, 1281 (2016).  An error is not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if, upon review of the record 
as a whole, there is a reasonable possibility that the error 
might have contributed to the defendant’s conviction.  State v. 
Souza, 142 Hawaii 390, 402 , 420 P.3d 321, 333 (2018); State v. 
Wilson, 144 Hawai i 454, 465 , 445 P.3d 35, 46 (2019); State v. 
Torres, 144 Hawai i 282, 291 , 439 P.3d 234, 243 (2019).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
48 
   This is not a case “[w]here there is a wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to” disprove the 
defendant’s EMED and lack of penal responsibility affirmative 
defenses.  Cf. State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai‘i 8, 27, 904 P.2d 893, 
912 (1995) (quoting St ate v. Nakamura, 65 Haw. 74, 80, 648 P.2d 
183, 187 (1982)).  Lavoie presented three highly qualified 
expert witnesses that testified that, in their professional 
opinion, Lavoie met the requirements for the lack of penal 
responsibility defense.  Two of the expert witnesses also 
concluded that he was experiencing EMED at the time of the 
shooting.    35
  Further, there was significant reason for the jury to 
potentially doubt the State’s own experts who presented contrary 
testimony.  Dr. Choi acknowledged that Lavoie suffered from a 
mental disorder and that his ability to control himself and to 
know right from wrong on the night of the shooting was 
“moderately” impaired.   Dr. Choi simply disputed that the 
impairment was sufficiently severe to qualify as “substantial.”  
And Dr. Cunningham stated that he did not include in his report 
a range of factors that the other experts found highly relevant 
to their diagnoses, including Lavoie’s family mental illness 
history, Lavoie’s abuse by his father, Lavoie’s history of being 
                     
 35 Indeed, even the State in its closing argument described Dr. 
Acklin as the most experienced and the most prepared of the expert witnesses.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
49 
 sexually abused, and that Lavoie was placed on suicide watch 
following the shooting.   
  On this evidentiary record, there is a clear 
possibility that any impermissible inferences that the jury made 
from the wrongfully admitted prior instances of abu
se colored 
their evaluation of Lavoie’s defenses of lack of penal 
responsibility and EMED.  Additionally , the jury’s verdict may 
have been influenced by resentment engendered by the wrongfully 
admitted prior instances of domestic abuse.  In either 
circumstance, there is a “reasonable possibility”  that the 
circuit court’s error  in admitting the incidents of prior abuse 
may have contributed to Lavoie’s conviction.  Souza, 142 Hawai i 
at 402, 420 P.3d at 333.  Th e error was accordingly not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.   
5. The Circuit Court Improperly Instructed the Jury on the Use 
of the Prior Bad Acts 
  
Lavoie also argues that the limiting instruction that 
the circuit court gave regarding the use of the prior acts 
improperly allowed the jury to consider the prior misconduct on 
issues for which it was not relevant.36  As stated , the court’s 
instruction provided as follows: 
                     
 36 While it is unnecessary in light of our disposition to resolve 
whether the limiting instructions were plainly erroneous, we address their 
propriety to provide guidance to the trial court on remand.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
50 
 During this trial, you have heard evidence that the 
defendant at other times may have engaged in or committed 
crimes, wrongs or acts.  This evidence, if believed by you, 
may be considered only on the issue of defendant’s intent 
to commit the offenses charged in this case.  Do not 
consider this evidence for any other purpose.  You must not 
use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant, 
at other times, may have engaged in or committed other 
crimes, wrongs or acts, that he is a person of bad 
character and, therefore, must have committed the offenses 
charged in this case.   
  The court gave some variation of this instruction four 
times throughout the trial: when the State rested its case- in-
chief, during the cross- examination of Dr. Acklin,37 during the 
direct-examination on rebuttal of Rochelle Tempo, and 
immediately prior to t he State’s closing argument.   
  The instruction was an incorrect statement of the 
matters on which the circuit court had ruled the prior bad acts 
were relevant.  The court ruled that the prior acts of abuse 
were admissible to rebut Lavoie’s EMED and lack of penal 
responsibility affirmative defenses.  A defendant’s intent, 
however--
as distinguished from other aspects of the defendant’s 
state of mind--is not a relevant consideration with respect to 
either defense.  This is because a jury does not consider an 
EMED or lack of penal responsibility defense unless and until it 
has first determined that the State has proven all the elements 
of the charged offense beyond a reasonable doubt, including that 
                    
 
 37 Although the circuit court’s language varied somewha t in the 
limiting instruction that it gave during Dr. Acklin’s testimony, the 
instruction still informed the jury that it was permitted to use the acts to 
determine the defendant’s intent.  See supra note 33.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
51 
 the defendant acted with the requisite intent.  See  Hawai‘i 
Standard Jury Instruction Criminal (HAWJIC) 7.07 (“Before you 
may consider this affirmative defense, you must first determine 
whether the prosecution has proven all elements of [the charged 
offense] beyond a reasonable doubt.”); HAWJIC 9.08 (“If and only 
if you unanimously find that all the elements of [the murder 
charge] have been proven by the prosecution beyond a reasonable 
doubt . . . then you must consider whether, at the time 
defendant caused the death, he/she was under the influence of 
[EMED] for which there is a reasonable explanation.”).  In other 
words, by the time the jury considers whether the elements of an 
EMED or lack of penal responsibility defense are met in a murder 
trial, it has already determined that the defendant acted 
intentionally or knowing ly in causing the death of another 
person.  See HRS § 707- 701.5.   
  The circuit court appears to have merged Lavoie’s 
“intent” with his mental condition generally, aspects of which 
were relevant to his EMED and lack of penal responsibility 
defenses.  As discussed, whether Lavoie was under the influence 
of EMED or a mental disorder that resulted in a lack of 
substantial capacity were elements of the respective affirmative 
defenses.  However, neither of these considerations fall within 
the plain meanin
g of the term “intent”.  See Black’s Legal 
Dictionary 964 (11th ed. 2019) (“[T]he mental resolution or ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
52 
 determination to do [an act].”).38  Further, the court ruled with 
respect to the EMED defense that the bad acts were probative not 
only of whether Lavoie was under the influence of EMED but also 
the separate issue of whether EMED was a reasonable reaction 
given the circumstances.  Even were we to construe intent to 
refer to Lavoie’s general mental condition, the reasonableness 
of the explanation for the EMED was an objective inquiry under 
the circumstances as Lavoie believed them to be-- separate from 
Lavoie’s subjective mental state at the time of the offense.  
Accordingly, the court’s instruction informing the jury that it 
could consider the prior bad acts to show Lavoie’s intent  was 
problematic in multiple respects.39   
                     
 38 HRS § 702 -206 (1993) provides as follows:  
 
Definitions of states of mind.  (1) “Intentionally.”  
(a)  A person acts intentionally with respect to his 
conduct when it is his conscious object to engage in such 
conduct. 
(b)  A person acts intentionally with respect to attendant 
circumstances when he is aware of the existence of such 
circumstances or believes or hopes that they exist.  
(c)  A person acts intentionally with respect to a result  
of his conduct when it is his conscious object to cause 
such a result.   
 
 39 The circuit court may have derived the language of its 
instruction from HRE Rule 404(b), which permits the use of evidence of other 
crimes, wrongs, or acts to prove a “fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action, such as . . . intent.”  The enumerated examples 
of facts of consequence included in HRE Rule 404(b) are not exhaustive, 
however, and the limiting instruction should have been tailored to the 
specific determination to which the court deemed the prior bad acts were 
relevant.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
53 
 B. The Circuit Court Was Not Required to Give a Jury Instruction 
Defining EMED  
  Lavoie argues that the EMED instructions  given to the 
jury did not properly define EMED and unnecessarily highlighted 
and isolated self-control so as to effectively create an 
additional element to prove the defense.   The circui t court 
provided the jury with the following instruction:  
Extreme mental or emotional disturbance has two elements.  
These elements are: One, that the defendant was, at the 
time he caused the death of the other person, under the 
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance.  And 
two, there was a reasonable explanation for the extreme 
mental or emotional disturbance.   
  In addition, the court instructed the jury that, “The 
question of the defendant’s self control or the lack of it at 
the time of the offense is a significant factor in deciding 
whether he was under the influence of extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance ” (self-control instruction).   
  
In State v. Haili, the defendant similarly argued that 
circuit courts must provide the jury with a definition of EMED.  
103 Hawai i 89, 107, 79 P.3d 1263, 1281 (2003).  We  rejected the 
defendant’s argument and obser ved that the Hawai i Legislature 
has not defined EMED, and accordingly “the circuit courts need 
not define the term when instructing the jury; instead, the jury 
is to give the phrase its plain meaning.”   Id. at 108, 79 P.3d 
at 1282; see also Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai i 91, 148, 969 P.2d 
1209, 1266 (1998) (noting that the jury instructions given did ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
54 
 (continued . . .)  not include the legal definitions of “defraud” or “deceit,” and 
presuming that the jury accordingly applied the commonly 
understood meaning of those terms ).  We thus concluded that the 
circuit court correctly refused to define EMED.  Haili, 103 
Hawaii at 109, 79 P.3d at 1283.    
  Additionally, the circuit court  provided the jury with 
a self-control instruction in Haili that was identical to the 
one given in this case.  See  id. at 107, 79 P.3d at 1281.  We 
held that the circuit court did not err in providing the jury 
with a self-control instruction because self-control is a 
“significant, even determining, factor in deciding whether the 
[defendant] was under the influence of an extreme emotional 
disturbance such t
hat [the defendant’s ] conduct would fall under 
HRS § 707–702(2).”  Id. at 108, 79 P.3d at 1282 (quoting State v. 
Matias, 74 Haw. 197, 204, 840 P.2d 374, 378 ); see also State v. 
Perez, 90 Hawai‘ i 65, 74, 976 P.2d 379, 388  (1999).   
  We thus conclude that the circuit court’s EMED 
instructions in this case were not prejudicially insufficient.40  
See Haili, 103 Hawai i at 108, 79 P.3d at 1282.    
                     
 40 Lavoie contends that the following instruction should also have 
been submitted to the jury:  
 
An extreme mental or emotional disturbance is the emotional 
state of an individual, who has an extreme emotional 
reaction to an unusual and overwhelming stress as a result 
of which there is a loss of self -control and reason is ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
55 (continued . . .)  
 C. The Circuit Court Should Have Given a Merger Instruction 
  Lavoie contends that the circuit court plainly erred 
in not providing the jury with a merger instruction because the 
same factual incident comprised both the felon in possession and 
place to keep offenses,  the acts occurred at the same time,  and 
they were committed with the same intent.   
  Generally, “ [w]hen the same conduct of a defendant may 
establish an element of more than one offense, the defendant may 
be prosecuted for each offense of which such conduct is an 
element.”  HRS §  701-109(1) (1993).  A “defendant may not, 
however, be convicted of more than one  offense if . . . [t]he 
offense is defined as a continuing course of conduct and the 
defendant’s course of conduct was uninterrupted, unless the law 
provides that specific periods of conduct constitute separate 
offenses.”41  HRS § 701-109(1)(e).  Thus, this court has 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
overborne  by intense feelings, such as passion, anger, 
distress, grief, excessive agitation or similar emotions.   
(Emphasis added.)  Lavoie’s proposed instruction incorrectly indicated 
requirements for an EMED defense that are not included in HRS § 707 -702(2).  
Specifically, Lavoie’s  proposed instruction requires a showing that the 
defendant had been exposed to “an extremely unusual and overwhelming stress.”  
As we stated in State v. Seguritan , “No such provision appears in the 
statute.”  70 Haw. 173, 174, 766 P.2d 128, 129 (1988).  A dditionally, the 
proposed instruction denotes an emotional state that “as a result of which 
there is a loss of self -control and reason is overborne,” which is also not a 
statutory requirement.  Thus, the circuit court was not required to provide 
the jury with Lavoie’s proposed EMED instruction.   
 
 41 The purpose of this statute is to “limit the possibility of 
multiple convictions and extended sentences when the defendant has basically ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
56 
 concluded that only one crime is committed when “(1) there is 
but one intention, one general impulse, and one plan, (2) the 
two offenses are part and parcel of a continuing and 
uninterrupted course of conduct, and (3) the law does not 
provide that specific periods of conduct constitute separate 
offenses.”  State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai i 17, 38, 881 P.2d 504, 525  
(1994).   
  Whether a particular criminal offense can be charged 
as a continuous offense  is a question of law.  State v. Decoite, 
132 Hawai i 436, 442, 323 P.3d 80, 86 (2014) (Pollack, J., 
dissenting); see also Hoey, 77 Hawai i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525 
(“It is possible for kidnapping and robbery charges against a 
defendant to merge, pursuant to HRS § 701 -109(e)[.]”).  
Accordingly, “[a]n offense that may be charged as a continuing 
offense permits culpable acts to be charged as separate offenses 
or as a continuing offense .”  Decoite, 132 Hawaii at 442, 323 
P.3d at 86 (Pollack, J., dissenting) (emphasis omitted).   
  The test for whether a crime can be charged as a 
continuous offense is whether the statute precludes charging an 
offense as a continuous offense, and whether the element(s) of 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
engaged in only one course of criminal conduct directed at one criminal 
goal.”  HRS § 701- 109 cmt.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
57 
 the offense may constitute a continuous, unlawful act or series 
of acts, however long a time the act or acts may occur.  See i d. 
at 438, 323 P.3d at 82 (majority opinion)  (citing State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai i 1, 18 -19, 928 P.2d 843, 860-61  (1996)); State 
v. Apao, 95 Hawai i 440, 447, 24 P.3d 32, 39 (2001) (holding that 
a crime may be charged as a continuing offense if, inter alia, 
“the offense is not defined in such a manner as to preclude it 
from being proved as a continuous offense ”); State v. Temple, 65 
Haw. 261, 267 n.6, 650 P.2d 1358, 1362 n.6 (1982) (“ A continuing 
offense is a continuous, unlawful act or series of acts set on 
foot by a single impulse and operated by an unintermittent 
force, however long a time it may occupy . . . .” (emphasis 
omitted)); State v. Martin, 62 Haw. 364, 371-72, 616 P.2d 193, 
198 (1980) (holding that theft was a continuous offense because 
the language of the theft statute reflected a legislative intent 
to prohibit continuing conduct “since two elements of t he 
pertinent crime . . . involve conduct that can extend beyond 
isolated moments”).    42
                     
 42 Our case law has recognized several offenses that could be 
charged as continuous offenses.  See, e.g., State v. Yokota, 143 Hawai i 200, 
207, 426 P.3d 424, 431 (2018) (holding that forgery could be charged as a 
continuous offense); State v. Stenger, 122 Hawai i 271, 289, 226 P.3d 441, 459 
(2010) (holding that theft by deception is a continuous offense); 
State v. 
Rapoza, 95 Hawai i 321, 329, 22 P.3d 968, 976 (2001) (holding that attempted 
murder in the second degree could be charged as a continuous offense); Hoey, 
77 Hawai i at 38, 881 P.2d at 525 (holding that robbery is a continuous 
offense); Martin, 62 Haw. at 369, 616 P.2d at 197 (holding that theft is a 
continuous offense).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
58 
   I f the statute provides that distinct acts constitute 
separate offenses, then conduct may not be charged as a 
continuous offense.  For example, in the context of sexual 
assault, the legislature has prescribed that “each act of sexual 
penetration shall constitute a separate offense.”  HRS  § 707-700 
(2014 & Supp. 2016); see  also Arceo, 84 Hawai i at 16, 928 P.2d 
at 858 (“Multiple sex acts do not merge into a single contin uing 
offense because the defendant can be convicted and punished for 
each separate act.”  (emphasis omitted)).   Thus, this test 
involves two prongs: first, whether the statutory language 
prohibits charging the offense as a continuous offense, and 
second, whether an element of the offense can “extend beyond 
isolated moments.”  Martin, 62 Haw. at  371-72, 616 P.2d at  198.   
In State v. Matias, the defendant was convicted of 
felon in possession and place to keep.  102 Hawai i 300, 75 P.3d 
1191 (2003).  We vacate d the defendant’s convictions because the 
circuit court failed to provide a merger instruction to the 
jury.  Id. at 306, 75 P.3d at 1197.  As we would later explain, 
both offenses arose out of the same elemental conduct, “i.e., 
what the defendant 
did with the object, namely, ‘possess[ed] 
it.’”  State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawaii 76, 83, 156 P.3d 1182, 1189 
(2007) (alteration in original) (quoting Matias , 102 Hawaii at 
303, 306, 75 P.3d at 1194, 1197).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
59 
 Accordingly, in vacating the felon in possession and 
place to keep convictions and remanding for a new trial for 
failure to instruct the jury on merger, the Matias  court 
concluded that these statutes did not preclude the charging of 
these offenses as continuous offenses.  I mplicit in the court’s 
holding was the conclusion that the statutes are comprised of 
elements--namely, the element of possession--that may extend 
beyond isolated moments.
   
The ICA subsequently followed our holding in Matias in 
State v. Padilla.  As in Matias, the defendant in Padilla was 
convicted of felon in possession and place to keep, and the 
convictions were vacated because the circuit court failed to 
provide a merger instruction to the jury.  Padilla , 114 Hawaii 
507, 508, 518, 164 P.3d 765, 766, 776 (App. 2007) .   
Here, Lavoie was also convicted for violating the 
felon in possession (HRS §  134-7(b)) and place to keep (HRS 
§ 134-23(2)) statutes, neither of which excludes charging the 
offense as continuous.  HRS §  134-7(b) prohibits a person 
convicted of a felony from “own[ing], possess[ing], or 
control[ling] any firearm.”  HRS § 134-23(a) provides that “all 
firearms shall be confined to the possessor’s place of business, 
residence, or sojourn.”  Unlike the statute at issue in Arceo , 
the Hawai i legislature has not set forth language in either 
statute that defines specific periods of conduct as separate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
60 
 offenses.  Additionally, the elements of each offense involve 
possession, which can continue longer than a single point in 
time.  Martin , 62 Haw. at 371, 616 P.2d at 198 (“[E]xercise of 
control over [] property . . . involve[s] conduct that can 
extend beyond isolated moments.”).  
Thus, the offenses of felon in possession and place to 
keep may be charged as continuous offenses, and the  jury was 
required to determine whether there was “one intention, one 
general impulse, and one plan,” and whether the two offenses 
merged.  Matias, 102 Hawai i  at 305, 75 P.3d at 1196 ; Hoey, 77 
Hawaii at 38, 881 P.2d at 525.   
We have previously recognized that the jury is tasked 
with making the factual determination of whether two offenses 
merged.  In Matias, the defendant was arrested after a police 
officer found Matias in his friend’s car with a loaded handgun 
under his seat.  102 Hawai i at 303, 75 P.3d at  1194.  We  held 
that the defendant was entitled to a merger instruction because 
it was clear that the basis for the jury’s guilty verdicts on 
both counts “arose out of the same factual circumstances.”  Id. 
at 306, 75 P.3d at 1197.  We sta ted that  
it is common -sensical that a defendant charged in 
connection with the same incident with the offenses of 
place to keep . . . and [felon in possession] . . . would, 
in virtually every instance, be entitled to a merger 
instruction, pursuant to HRS [§] 701-109(1)(e), because 
both offenses would intrinsically arise out of the same 
conduct and attendant circumstances.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
61 
 Matias, 102 Hawai i at 306 n.10, 75 P.3d at 1197 n.10.   
  Similarly, in Padilla , the defendant was arrested for 
firing a gun from his car and a subsequent search of his truck 
revealed a loaded pistol in the truck bed.  114 Hawai i at 511, 
164 P.3d at 769.  Relying on Matias , the ICA found that the 
circuit court committed plain error in failing to give a merger 
instruction because “[a]ll factual is sues involved in [] 
determin[ing] [whether there was one intention, one general 
impulse, and one plan] must be decided by the trier of fact .”  
Id. at 517, 164 P.3d at 775 (emphasis omitted) (citing Matias, 
102 Hawai
i at 305, 75 P.3d at 1196).   
  Here, both the felon in possession and place to keep 
offenses were charged as having occurred on the same date, and 
the court’s instructions on the elements of these offenses 
specified that date.  Whether Lavoie’s conduct constituted 
“separate and distinct culpabl e acts or an uninterrupted 
continuous course of conduct” was a question of fact that was 
required to be determined by the jury.  Matias , 102 Hawai i at 
306, 75 P.3d at 1197 (internal citations omitted).  And, the 
jury should also have been required to determine whether Lavoie 
had one intention, one general impulse, and one plan to commit 
both offenses.  The circuit court’s  failure to instruct the jury 
to make these determinations was prejudicial and plainly ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
62 
 erroneous.  See Matias, 102 Hawai i at 306, 75 P.3d at 1197; 
Padilla, 114 Hawai i at 517, 164 P.3d at 775.    
  The ICA, in affirming the circuit court, determined 
that the two offenses arose from separate and distinct factual 
circumstances: it found that the felon in possession offense was 
completed before Lavoie left his home on the day of the 
shooting, while the place to keep offense was separately 
committed when Lavoie placed the firearm in his car.  Thus, the 
ICA held that no merger inst
ruction was required.  This holding 
is incorrect for two reasons.  First, the ICA, in reaffirming 
its own unpublished decision in State v. Stangel, held that a 
place to keep offense cannot be a continuous offense because it 
“is not defined by statute as a continuing course of conduct.”  
(Citing No. CAAP- 13-0003941, 2015 WL 836928, at *9 (Haw. App. 
Feb. 26, 2015).)  As discussed, this analysis is incorrect under 
our law and also contrary to Matias  and Padilla, which 
determined that these crimes may be punished as continuing 
offenses.43   
  Second, the ICA erred in affirming the circuit court’s 
improper fact finding.  In this case, the jury was responsible 
for determining whether the place to keep and felon in 
possession offenses were factually separate and dis
tinct and 
                     
 43 To the extent that Stangel holds that a place to keep offense 
cannot be a continuous offense, it is overruled.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
63 
 (continued . . .)whether “there [was] but one intention, one general impulse, and 
one plan,” not the court.  The circuit court found that the 
felon in possession offense “had been committed before the 
defendant had ever left his home” while the place to keep 
offe
nse “occur[red] with the firearm being loaded and then 
transporting it in a place other than his place of business, 
residence, or sojourn.”  Trial courts are not tasked with making 
factual findings regarding when each offense occurred or whether 
the defendant’s conduct constitutes “an uninterrupted continuous 
course of conduct” ; the jury must make such determinations.  
Matias, 102 Hawai i at 306, 75 P.3d at 1197.   
  The circuit court has the duty and ultimate 
responsibility to instruct the jury on the proper and relevant 
law.  State v. Adviento, 132 Hawai i 123, 137, 319 P.3d 1131, 
1145 (2014).  The circuit court failed to do so in this case by 
omitting a merger instruction.  Failure by the circuit court to 
submit a merger instruction constituted plain error and was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   Frisbee , 114 Hawaii at 84, 
156 P.3d at 1190; Matias, 102 Hawaii at 306, 75 P.3d at 1197.   44
                     
 44 Additionally, as discussed supra  note 10, Lavoie requested that 
the State be precluded from calling Victoria Toledo as a witness because the 
prosecutor had disclosed that Toledo had previously told him (the prosecutor) 
that an alleged encounter she had with Lavoie occurred several days prior to 
the shooting and not on the day of the shooting as she testified.  Instead, 
the prosecutor was permitted as “as an officer of the court” to make the 
following unsworn statement to the jury: “[O ]n July 18, 2014, in a telephone 
conversation with [] Victoria Toledo, I recall her saying that Marlin Lavoie 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
64 
 V. CONCLUSION 
  Accordingly, the ICA’s June 6, 2018  Judgment on Appeal 
and the circuit court’s August 13, 2015 Judgment , Conviction and 
Sentence are vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
Matthew S. Kohm 
for petitioner 
 
Emlyn H. Higa 
(Renee I. Delizo with him 
on the briefs) 
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
told her, ‘If I can’t have Malia, nobody else will,’ and that the 
conversation took place a few days before the shooting.”   
  However, the prosec utor proceeded to rely on Toledo’s testimony --
including her statement that the encounter occurred the same day as the 
shooting--during the trial.  On redirect examination of Dr. Cunningham, for 
example, the prosecutor asked what his opinion would be “if th e defendant 
. . . had previously told someone at about noon that same day that if I can’t 
have her, nobody will.”   
  We note that the manner in which the prosecutor corrected the 
record in this case--an unsworn statement made to the jury in open court--is 
problematic.  For instance, the jury in a criminal trial is specifically 
instructed that statements and remarks by counsel are not evidence.  See 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai‘i 465, 480, 24 P.3d 661, 676 (2001).  Lavoie has 
not raised the flawed nature of this procedure on appeal, and it is not 
necessary for this court to resolve whether it warrants plain error review in 
light of our disposition of this case.  Nevertheless, this matter is brought 
to the attention of the court and counsel so that the procedu
re used at the 
trial is not repeated.   
