 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-22-0000364 30-SEP-2026 08:01 AM Dkt. 40 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 ________________________________________________________________ ---o0o---
NAVATEK CAPITAL INC.,  individually and derivatively on  
behalf of Nominal Defendant PacMar Technologies LLC,   
fka Martin Defense Group, LLC, fka Navatek LLC,  
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,   
  
vs.   
MARTIN KAO,   
Petitioner/Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellant,  
 
and  
 
PACMAR TECHNOLOGIES, LLC,  
fka Martin Defense Group, LLC, fka Navatek LLC,  
Respondent/Nominal Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee.  
 ________________________________________________________________ 
SCWC-22-0000364  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-22-0000364; CASE NO. 1CCV-20-1511)  
 
SEPTEMBER 30, 2026  
 
McKENNA,  ACTING C.J.,  EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., AND  
CIRCUIT JUDGE  COSTA, IN PLACE OF DEVENS, C.J., RECUSED, AND   
CIRCUIT JUDGE COPELAND, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, ACTING C.J.  
I. Introduction 
In this appeal, we address whether a motion to vacate an 
arbitration award should have been granted. Hawaiʻi Revised 
Statutes (“HRS”) § 658A-23(a)(3) provides , in relevant part : 
(a) Upon motion to the court by a party to an arbitration 
proceeding, the court shall vacate an award in the 
arbitration proceeding if: 
 . . . . 
(3) An arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing 
upon showing of sufficient cause for postponement 
. . . so as to prejudice substantially the rights 
of a party to the arbitration proceeding[.] 
 . . . . 
Martin Kao (“Kao”) contends the a rbitrator refus ed to postpone 
an arbitration proceeding despite the existence of “sufficient 
cause for postponement ,” with the cause being the filing of 
criminal charges against him. 
The parties to the arbitration , the arbitrator, and the 
lower courts all applied the test l aid out in Keating v. Office 
of Thrift Supervision , 45 F.3d 322 (9th Cir. 1995) , to determine 
whether there was “sufficient cause for postponement. ” Keating 
says that in determining whether to stay a civil proceeding due 
to pending criminal charges, a court is to consider the 
following five factors: 
(1) the interest of the plaintiffs in proceeding 
expeditiously with this litigation or any particular aspect 
of it, and the potential prejudice to plaintiffs of a 
delay; (2) the burden which any particular aspect of the 
proceedings may impose on defendants; (3) the convenience 
of the court in the management of its cases, and the 
efficient use of judicial resources; (4) the interests of 
persons not parties to the civil litigation; and (5) the 
2  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 interest of the public in the pending civil and criminal 
litigation.  
45 F.2d at 324  (citation omitted) (“ Keating  factors”).  
But the Keating factors are based on federal 
constitutional principles , which are much less protective of a 
defendant ’s right against self -incrimination. We therefore 
instead set out three factors grounded on Hawaiʻi constitutional 
principles , more fully explained below, for courts to consider 
in determining whether to stay a civil proceeding based on the 
actual or anticipated institution of criminal charges : (1) 
whether the constitutional risk to defendant is concrete and 
imminent; (2) prejudice from a delay; and (3) whether there is a 
less restrictive alternative. 
Applying this new standard, we hold that “sufficient cause 
for postponement” was still lacking under the circumstances . 
Hence, there was no error in denying the motion for vacatur. We 
also hold that there was no error in refusing to set aside the 
arbitrator’s award of punitive damages. 
Subject to the analysis in this opinion, w e therefore 
affirm the Intermediate Court of Appeals ’ (“ICA”) August 29, 
2025 judgment on appeal. 
II. Background 
A. Factual Background 
Steven Loui (“Loui”) founded Navatek Ltd. in 1979 and led 
it for approximately forty years. The majority of its business 
3  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
 
 stemmed from classified government contracts with the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (“DARPA”) of  the United States 
Department of Defense (“DOD”) as well as  other partners in 
academia and scientific fields. Because the work involved 
classified information, Navatek Ltd. was required to obtain a 
facility security clearance (“FCL”) from the Defense 
Counterintelligence and Security Agency (“DCSA”).   
Kao joined Navatek Ltd. as its Chief Financial Officer in 
2008 and later became its Chief Executive Officer (“ CEO”) in 
2012. In June 2018, Loui formed Navatek Capital Inc. (“NCI”), 
which became the sole owner of Navatek Ltd. In August 2018, 
Navatek Ltd. converted to a limited liability company and its 
corporate name changed to Navatek LLC (“Navatek”). NCI owned 
one hundred percent of Navatek until August 31, 2018. Around 
that time, Loui decided to step away from the company and 
believed he had found a worthy successor in Kao. 
On March 1, 2019, Loui, through NCI, transferred a ninety-
nine percent interest in Navatek’s future profits and losses to Kao, while retaining a one  percent interest. Kao  paid no cash 
for this interest. On the same day, NCI and Kao, as sole members of Navatek, executed an operating agreement (“Operating 
Agreement”  or “Agreement” ), under  which Kao became sole manager 
of Navatek from March 2019 through November 2020. Kao  was 
advised to retain his own attorney during negotiations, but he 
4  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  falsely represented he was an attorney and held law degrees from 
the University of California, Los Angeles  and New York 
University.  
Section 8 of the Operating Agreement is  a  “Covenant Not to 
Breach” and lists consequences for violating that covenant, including disassociation and damages:  
8.1 Covenant Not to Breach. Each Member hereby 
covenants and agrees that the Members have entered into 
this Agreement based on their mutual expectation that all 
Members will continue as Members and carry out the duties 
and obligations undertaken by them hereunder and that, 
except with the consent of the Members, each member hereby 
covenants and agrees as follows: 
 . . . . 
(e) Not to commit a breach of any material 
covenant contained in this Agreement or default on any 
material obligation provided for in this Agreement if such 
breach or default continues for thirty (30) days after the 
date such Member has been given notice of such breach or 
default by the Management Committee or any other Member. 
8.2  Consequences of Violation of Covenants.  If a 
Member (a “Breaching Member”) attempts to take any or has 
taken any action in breach of Section 8.1 (a “Breach”), the 
Company shall continue and such Member shall be subjected 
to this Section 8.2. In such an event, the following shall occur:  
(a) The Breaching Member shall immediately be 
disassociated and thereby cease to be a Member, shall have 
no further power to act as a Member of the Company and 
shall become an Assignee as if he were the recipient of a 
prohibited Transfer of his Units under Section 7.3; 
 . . . . 
(c)  The Breaching Member shall be liable for 
damages, without requirement of a prior accounting, to the Company for all costs and liabilities that the Company or 
any Member may incur as a result of the Breach[.]  
(Emphasis added. ) 
Section 12.2 identifies the law govern ing the Agreement: 
12.2 Governing Law.  This Agreement is intended to be 
performed in the State of Hawai[‘]i and shall in all 
respects be governed by and construed in accordance with, 
the laws of the State of Hawai [‘]i, including as to all 
matters of construction, validity, and performance but 
5  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 without giving the effect to the conflict of law provisions 
thereof. 
(Emphasis added. ) 
Section 12.22 addresses mediation and arbitration: 
12.22 Mediation and Arbitration.  The parties, at the 
option of any party, to try in good faith to settle any 
difference arising out of or relating to the terms or 
conditions or subject matter of this Agreement by mediation 
and that, if the agreement cannot be reached by mediation, to submit the difference to binding arbitration. Any 
arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the rules 
for Arbitration of Disputes of the Dispute Prevention and 
Resolution, Inc. (“DPR”) or its successor. The award of the 
arbitration shall be final and binding, and judgment upon the award may be entered in any court having jurisdiction 
thereof. This procedure shall be the exclusive means of 
settling any dispute that may arise under this Agreement. 
All fees and expenses of the arbitrator and all other 
expenses of the arbitration, except for the fees and expenses of each party’s attorneys and witnesses, shall be 
shared equally by the parties thereto. Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the DPR’s Arbitration Rules, 
Procedures and Protocols or in applicable  law or elsewhere, 
and pursuant to the Uniform Arbitration Act, as codified in 
Hawai[ʻ]i Revised Statutes § 658A, as amended, the parties 
and arbitrator shall be bound by the following:  
. . . . The arbitration shall be conducted in such a 
manner that the decision will be rendered no more than one 
hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of the 
dispute to DPR .  
(Emphasis added. ) 
 In spring 2020, Kao fraudulently obtained more than $12.8 
million in Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) funds on behalf 
of Navatek and transferred approximately $2 million to himself.   
After becoming aware of the PPP loans, Loui confronted Kao on 1
The PPP was authorized by Congress in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Security Act, Pub.L.No. 116-136, 134 Stat.281 (2020), to provide 
emergency financial assistance to the millions of Americans who were 
suffering from the economic effects caused by the COVID -19 pandemic through 
forgivable loans to small businesses for job retention and other specified 
resources. 
6 1  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
   
  July 23, 2020, and warned him that illegal activities by Navatek 
executives could result in debarment from federal contract s and 
invalidation of Navatek’s FCL. After Kao refused to turn over 
the PPP loan applications, Loui, on advice of legal counsel, 
reported the matter to the United States Department of Justice 
(“DOJ”). 
On July 27, 2020, Kao changed the name of the company from 
Navatek to Martin Defense Group, LLC (“MDG”) .2 
On August 6, 2020, federal investigators interviewed Loui. 
Loui said he did not believe MDG was suffering financially as a 
result of the COVID -19 pandemic and that the employee headcounts 
Kao reported for Navatek were inaccurate. Federal investigators 
also interviewed the former payroll and benefits manager at 
Navatek, who confirmed that the number of employees Kao reported 
as being employed by Navatek was overstated . 
On September 29, 2020, the DOJ filed a criminal complaint 
against Kao, charging him with two counts of bank fraud, in 
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1344(2), and five counts of money 
laundering, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1957.3 
2 MDG has undergone several name changes since the company’s formation. 
For ease of reference, we will refer to the company as MDG throughout this 
opinion. 
3 The following additional offenses were also asserted : (1) directly and 
indirectly making federal campaign contributions as a federal government 
contractor, in violation of 52 U.S.C. § 30119; (2) making political 
contributions in the name of other persons or entities, in violation of 52 
(continued . . .) 
7  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 B. Procedural Background 
1. Initial Circuit Court Proceedings 
In light of the federal criminal complaint, NCI, 
individually and derivatively on behalf of nominal defendant 
MDG, filed a civil complaint against Kao and MDG in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”) on November 9, 
2020. The complaint sought Kao’s disassociat ion from NCI as 
well as damages based on breach of fiduciary dut y, fraud, and 
gross negligence . NCI also requested injunctive relief to 
obtain access to the books and records of MDG and to compel 
Kao’s disassociation as MDG’s controlling voting member pursuant 
to section 8.2(a) of the Operating Agreement. 
On November 18, 2020, an official from the U.S. Navy sent 
MDG a letter advising that it would commence proceedings to 
determine whether to suspend or debar MDG from contracting with 
the federal government. 
On November 20, 2020, NCI, MDG, and Kao stipulated that 
Daniel Brunk (“Brunk”) would replace Kao as the CEO and sole 
manager of MDG and that NCI would receive access to MDG’s books 
and records. Short of complete disassociation, NCI and Kao 
agreed not to exercise their ownership interests in MDG or 
transfer their respective ownership interests in NCI and MDG. 
U.S.C. (. . . continued ) 
 § 30122; and (3) engaging in self -dealing by improperly using company 
funds for personal gain. 
8  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  To enforce the stipulation and to protect MDG’s current and 
possible future contracts with the federal government , on 
December 31, 2020, MDG filed a motion for a Voting Trust 
Agreement and an order compelling Kao to execute an Amended 
Operating Agreement. On January 5, 2021, the circuit court 
granted the motion to compel Kao to execute the Amended 
Operating Agreement. The Amended Operating Agreement 
memorialize d Kao’s resignation as CEO and sole manager of MDG 
and designate d Brunk as the new CEO and sole manager but 
did not modify sections 8, 12.2, and 12.22 of the initial 
Operating Agreement. The Voting Trust Agreement , which Kao 
signed, required Kao to relinquish control of voting rights 
related to his ownership in MDG . 
Despite MDG’s efforts to distance itself from Kao and 
reduce his access and control over the company, the DCSA 
invalidated MDG’s FCL on January 21, 2021, preventing it from 
winning new government contracts. 
On March 10, 2021, Kao filed a motion to dismiss or, in the 
alternative, to compel arbitration and stay the civil case. 
On March 16, 2021, the U.S. Navy issued a decision 
declining to suspend MDG from working with the federal 
government for the time being. 
On March 25, 2021, NCI, MDG, and Kao executed an “Agreement 
to Participate in Binding Arbitration” for an arbitrator to 
9  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  “determine all issues submitted to arbitration” and “grant any 
and all remedies . . .  determine[d]  to be just and appropriate 
under law.”   
Attorney J erry M. Hiatt was selected as the arbitrator 
(“Arbitrator”) . 
2. Arbitration Proceedings 
On May 6, 2021, a federal grand jury returned an indictment 
charging Kao with three counts of wire fraud, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1343, and four counts of money laundering, in violation 
of 18 U.S.C. § 1957.  
Despite having earlier moved to compel arbitration, on May 
24, 2021, Kao requested that the Arbitrator stay the arbitration 
pending resolution of his criminal case. He argued that the 
arbitration timeline and discovery process would cause him 
significant prejudice, compromising his  rights  against self-
incrimination  and to due process and a fair trial under the U.S.  
and Hawaiʻi  Constitutions.   
The parties cited Keating, 45 F.3d at 324, as controlling 
whether Kao’s motion should be granted. The Arbitrator 
conducted a remote hearing on Kao’s motion to stay on May 27, 
2021. After hearing argument s, the Arbitrator orally denied the 
motion. Kao’s counsel then suggested but did not request that 
the Arbitrator consider bifurcating the arbitration proceedings 
between liability and damages . The Arbitrator responded he was 
10  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 open to considering bifurcation. On June 6, 2021, the 
Arbitrator entered a written order denying Kao’s motion to stay , 
citing Keating. 
The parties then proceeded to arbitration. The Arbitrator 
heard seven days of testimony from approximately fifteen 
witnesses and received hundreds of exhibits. 
On the first day of the arbitration hearing, the parties 
stipulated to extend the deadlines for post -hearing briefs and 
the final arbitration award beyond the 120 -day limit set forth 
in section 12.22 of the Operating Agreement.4 
On the second day , DCSA revalidated MDG’s FCL to active 
status. But NCI’s expert witness, Steven Shaw, who had served 
as the U.S. Air Force’s suspension and debarment official for 
sixteen years, testified that a federal contractor like MDG 
faces a significant risk of suspension or debarment if it fails 
to oust a principal owner who is suspended or debarred, like 
Kao. Shaw opined that the Voting Trust Agreement mitigated this 
risk, but because Kao was still the principal owner and a 
superseding indictment remained possible, MDG would still be 
exposed to suspension or debarment, regardless of whether Kao 
There were four stipulations and orders extend ing the pre-hearing and 
post-hearing deadlines with the parties’ consent, including an agreement to 
extend the deadline for the final arbitration award from September 1, 2021 to 
November 29, 2021. 
11 4  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
     
  
   was making the high -level decisions. Shaw opined that 
disassociating Kao from MDG would put MDG in a better position. 
On the third day, Brunk testified that the biggest threat 
facing MDG when he joined was a possible suspension from 
government contracting, which would eliminate MDG’s revenue and 
render the company insolvent within two weeks. Although the 
Navy had declined to suspend MDG on March 16, 2021, Brunk 
explained that, unless Kao was disassociated, MDG still faced 
the risk of suspension if new developments arose in his criminal 
case. 
On the fourth day , the parties disputed whether the 
Arbitrator had the authority to determine MDG’s valuation and 
Kao’s capital account for purposes of calculating monetary 
damages. NCI indicated an expert report was necessary and 
suggested a bifurcation to allow it additional time to obtain an 
expert witness. But, departing from his earlier suggestion , Kao 
opposed bifurcation . The Arbitrator then ruled the issues were 
properly before him and within his authority to decide . 
On the sixth da y, the Arbitrator raised the issue of 
punitive damages sua sponte. 
On the last day, the Arbitrator confirmed that Kao would 
not be testifying based on his right against self -incrimination. 
The Arbitrator indicated he would not draw any adverse 
inferences based on Kao’s decision not to testify . 
12  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Arbitrator issued his final arbitration award 
(“Arbitration Award”) on November 23, 2021 , in favor of NCI and 
MDG, and calculated the total amount of damages, plus attorneys’ 
fees and costs, as follows: 
CATEGORY AMOUNT 
Special Damages $2,268,805.40 
Punitive Damages $4,537,610.80 
MDG Attorneys’ Fees and Costs $1,608,046.77 
NCI Attorneys’ Fees and Costs $1,117,646.72 
TOTAL FINAL AWARD $9,532,109.82 
Less Present Value of Capital Account $(1,986,490.00) 
Less Setoff Against Capital Account $(1,419,838.02) 
Total Credits Against Final Award $(3,406,328.02) 
TOTAL FINAL AWARD STILL DUE $6,125,781.80 
Because of Kao’s pattern of misconduct and fraud, the Arbitrator 
awarded prejudgment interest in favor of MDG at the statutory rate of ten percent on the $6,125,781.80 due.  
In awarding punitive damages, the Arbitrator considered the 
purpose of such damages, the facts of th e case, the harm done to 
MDG and NCI, the harm done to MDG’s employees , “and the truly 
shocking misuse of [federal] tax dollars . . . to fund . . . 
Kao’s reckless fraud.” Citing Exxon Shipping Co . v. Baker , 554 
U.S. 471, (2008), the Arbitrator determined the case had all of 
the earmarks of exceptional blameworthiness, justify ing a 
substantial award of punitive damages. The Arbitrator noted 
Kao’s conduct was clearly egregious, intentional, and motivated 
by greed. 
In determining the amount of punitive damages, the 
Arbitrator noted that Kao had personally valued his net worth at 
13  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  $40,500,000.00  as of March 4, 2019,  and $77,936,764.00  as of 
September 14, 2020,  in his own signed personal financial 
statements. While recognizing that the financial  statements may 
have been grossly exaggerated given Kao’s history of fraud, the 
Arbitrator found they reflected Kao’s own valuation of his net 
worth and were probative of how he personally valued the gains 
he received from MDG.  
3. Circuit Court Proceedings 
On December 7, 2021 , NCI filed a motion with the circuit 
court to confirm the Arbitration Award. MDG filed a joinder. 
On February 18, 2022, Kao filed a motion to vacate the 
arbitration award. A remote hearing on the motions took place 
on April 1, 2022. 
The parties disputed the meaning of “sufficient cause” “to 
postpone.” NCI argued “sufficient ca use” was equivalent to 
“good cause,” while Kao’s counsel argued it was a lower 
standard. 
With respect to Keating’s applicability, Kao conceded the 
case was not controlling, because it was not decided under 
Hawaiʻi law, but nevertheless argued it should apply because the 
Arbitrator and the parties so stipulated. 
As to punitive damages, NCI and MDG asserted that, under 
the parties’ a greement to participate in binding arbitration, 
14  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
DPR’s rules, and HRS § 658A -21(a),5 the Arbitrator had the 
authority to decide all issues and award all remedies, including 
punitive damages . They asserted punitive damages against Kao 
were warranted based on the tort claims of fraud, breach of 
fiduciary duty, and gross negligence. Citing HRS § 658A -21(e),6 
Kao asserted the Arbitrator failed to specify the factual and 
legal bas es justifying and authorizing the punitive damages 
award and also that there was an abs ence of evidence of Kao’s 
net worth. Kao also contended that the arbitration involved 
only a breach of contract claim, for which punitive damages are 
not permitted. 
The circuit court orally denied Kao’s motion to vacate. It 
concluded that the Arbitrator had adequate grounds to award 
punitive damages and that Kao had not shown “sufficient cause ,” 
which it deemed equivalent to “good cause ,” to vacate the 
Arbitration Award. 
5 HRS § 658A -21(a) (2016) provides: 
(a) An arbitrator may award punitive damages or other 
exemplary relief if such an award is authorized by law in a 
civil action involving the same claim and the evidence 
produced at the hearing justifies the award under the legal 
standards otherwise applicable to the claim. 
6 HRS § 658A -21(e) (2016) provides: 
(e) If an arbitrator awards punitive damages or other 
exemplary relief under subsection (a), the arbitrator shall 
specify in the award the basis in fact justifying and the 
basis in law authorizing the award and state separately the 
amount of the punitive damages or other exemplary relief. 
15  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
    
 
 On April 27, 2022, the circuit court entered a written 
order denying Kao’s motion to vacate. On the same day, it also 
entered its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order 
granting NCI’s motion to confirm the Arbitration Award as well 
as MDG’s joinder. The circuit court entered its final judgment 
on April 28, 2022. 
4. ICA Proceedings 
The ICA  vacated in part and affirmed in part the circuit 
court’s final judgment. Navatek Cap. Inc. v. Kao, NO. CAAP-22-
0000364, 2025 WL 2157693, at *3  (Hawaiʻi App. July 29, 2025) 
(SDO). The ICA vacated because, with the exception of the 
punitive damages issue, the circuit court had not addressed various bases on which Kao had moved to vacate the Arbitration 
Award; these bases  are not at issue on certiorari.  
But relevant to this certiorari proceeding, t he ICA 
concluded that (1) the Arbitrator did not abuse his discretion 
in denying Kao’s motion to stay; ( 2) the circuit court did not 
err in deferring to the Arbitrator’s application of Keating; (3) 
the circuit court’s denial of Kao’s motion to vacate did not 
violate HRS § 658A -23(a)(3) ; and (4) the circuit court did not 
err in finding that the Arbitrator did not exceed his authority 
in awarding punitive damages . Id. at *2-3. 
16  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 5. Certiorari Proceedings 
We granted Kao’s certiorari application challenging the 
Arbitrator’s denial of his motion to stay and to set aside the 
punitive damages award . We also ordered supplemental briefing 
on the following questions: 
1. What constitutes “sufficient cause for postponement” 
under HRS § 658A -23(a)(3)? 
2. What factors should be considered in deciding whether a 
civil proceeding in Hawai ʻi should be stayed due to 
pending criminal charges based on Article I, Section 10 
of the Hawaiʻi Constitution? 
III. Standard of Review 
A. Appellate Review of a Motion to Vacate Arbitration Award 
Appellate review of a motion to vacate  [] does not 
involve review of an arbitrator’s findings of fact or 
conclusions of law. Rather, it involves review of a 
circuit court’s factual findings and conclusions of law as 
to whether the statutorily outlined grounds for vacatur 
exist.  
Nordic PCL Constr., Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawaiʻi 29, 42, 358 
P.3d 1, 14 (2015).  
B. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
We review a trial court’s findings of fact under the 
clearly erroneous standard.  
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite 
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is 
left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the 
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. A 
finding of fact is also clearly erroneous when the record 
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. We have 
defined ‘substantial evidence’ as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  
Hawaiʻi appellate courts review conclusions of law de 
novo, under the right/wrong standard. Under the 
right/wrong standard, this court examines the facts and 
17  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 answers the question without being required to give any 
weight to the trial court’s answer to it.  
Nordic, 136 Hawaiʻi at 41, 358 P.3d at 13 . 
C. Judicial Review of Arbitration Awards 
Where a party challenges an arbitration award, the 
following precepts are applicable. First, because of the 
legislative policy to encourage arbitration and thereby 
discourage litigation, arbitrators have broad discretion in 
resolving the dispute. Upon submission of an issue, the 
arbitrator has authority to determine the entire question, including the legal construction of terms of a contract or 
lease, as well as the disputed facts. In fact, where the 
parties agree to arbitrate, they thereby assume all the 
hazards of the arbitration process, including the risk that 
the arbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact.  
Second, correlatively, judicial review of an 
arbitration award is confined to the strictest possible limits. An arbitration award may be vacated only on the [six] grounds specified in HRS § [658A –23] and modified and 
corrected only on the three grounds specified in HRS § [658A–24]. Moreover, the courts have no business weighing 
the merits of the award.  
 Third, HRS §§ [658A –23 and - 24] also restrict the 
authority of appellate courts to review judgments entered by circuit courts confirming or vacating the arbitration 
awards.  
Id. (cleaned up). 
Judicial review of arbitration awards remains limited 
to the statutory grounds for confirmation, vacatur, 
modification, and correction. See  HRS § 658A –28(a)(3)– (5) 
(Supp. 2010) (permitting appeal from an order confirming or 
denying confirmation of an award, an order modifying or 
correcting an award, or an order vacating an award).  
 
. . . [I]n reviewing an arbitration award, [] courts 
are powerless to correct an arbitrator’s findings of fact even if clearly erroneous, or an arbitrator’s rulings on 
the law, even if wrong.  
Nordic, 136 Hawaiʻi at 41-42, 358 P.3d at 13 -14 (cleaned up) . 
18  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 D. Statutory Interpretation 
Our standard of review for statutory interpretation is 
well-established. “The interpretation of a statute is a 
question of law which [the appellate] court reviews de novo.” 
Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp. , 120 Hawaiʻi  181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009) (cleaned up). Our construction of statutes is 
guided by the following principles:  
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory -
interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of  meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
When there is ambiguity in a statute, “the meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context 
with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.” 
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in 
determining legislative intent, such as legislative 
history, or the reason and spirit of the law.  
State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawaiʻi 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 
(2009)  (cleaned up).  
IV. Discussion 
A. The circuit court correctly a dopted the “good cause” 
standard to define “sufficient cause” in HRS § 658A -
23(a)(3) , but wrongly deferred to the Arbitrator’s 
application of Keating. 
Kao argues the Arbitrator misapplied the Keating  factors in 
denying his motion to stay, leaving him defenseless against 
NCI’s and MDG’s claims and with no other option  but to invoke 
19  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 his right against self -incrimination under the U.S. and Hawaiʻi 
Constitutions. 
Preliminarily, t he parties agreed that the Keating factors 
controlled, both at the arbitration and throughout the judicial 
proceedings below. Courts cannot review the legal conclusions 
of arbitrators. Here, we review the circuit court’s conclusion 
of law regarding whether “sufficient cause for postponement” 
existed to require vacatur under HRS § 658A -23(a)(3) . 
And party stipulations  as to questions  of law are  not 
binding, and our courts are not relieved from the obligation to 
review questions of law de novo.   Hawaiian Ass ’n  of Seventh-Day 
Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawaiʻi 36  at  46, 305 P.3d 452  at  462 
(2013)  (cleaned up). So we are not bound by the parties’ 
stipulation that Keating  controls  the analysis of whether there 
was “sufficient cause for postponement” for a vacatur pursuant 
to HRS § 658A-23(a)(3).  
We therefore address what standard applies.  Here, neither 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(3) nor HRS § 658A-1 defines “sufficient cause  
for postponement.”  At the April 1, 2022 hearing on Kao’s motion 
to vacate, the parties debated whether  the “good cause” standard 
applies to  HRS § 658A-23(a)(3). NCI argued that the Arbitrator 
correctly found no “good cause” to postpone the arbitration 
proceeding  after applying the Keating  factors. Kao  countered 
that “sufficient cause” is  a lower standard than “good cause,” 
20  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
    
 which he claimed to have satisfied. In its oral ruling and in 
its written order denying the motion to vacate, the circuit 
court concluded there was an insufficient showing of “good 
cause” to grant the motion for vacatur. 
In statutory interpretation, “[w]hen a term is not 
statutorily defined, this court may resort to legal or other 
well-accepted dictionaries as one way to determine its ordinary 
meaning.” Est. of Roxas v. Marcos, 121 Hawaiʻi 59, 66, 214 P.3d 
598, 605 (2009)  (cleaned up).  
One definition of “sufficient cause” in Black’s  Law  
Dictionary  is “good cause.”  Black’s  Law  Dictionary  1739 (12th 
ed. 2024). In turn, “good cause” is defined as:  
A legally sufficient reason. Good cause is often the burden 
placed on a litigant (usu. by court rule or order) to show 
why a request should be granted or an action excused. The 
term is also used in employment -termination cases. – Also 
termed good cause shown ; just cause ; lawful cause ; 
sufficient cause. 
Black’s Law Dictionary 275 (12th ed. 2024) ( emphasis added). 
In other words, the terms “sufficient cause” and “good 
cause” are interchangeable. 
HRS § 658A -15(c) (2016) also supports the interpretation 
that “sufficient cause” in HRS § 658A -23(a)(3) is the same as 
“good cause.” HRS § 658A -15(c) states that “for good cause 
shown,” an “arbitrator may adjourn the hearing from time to time 
as necessary but shall not postpone the hearing to a time later 
than that fixed by the agreement to arbitrate” absent the 
21 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
    
 
       
  
    
parties’ consent. Thus, HRS § 658A -15(c) is a statute on the 
same subject matter as HRS § 658A -23(a)(3) that can be read in 
pari materia with the latter. Hence, “sufficient cause” is 
interchangeable with “good cause .” 
For these reasons, the circuit court did not err in 
applying the “good cause” standard to define “sufficient cause” 
in  HRS § 658A-23(a)(3).  But the circuit court erred in 
determining whether “good cause” existed by deferring to the 
Arbitrator’s application of the Keating  factors.   Rather, the 
circuit court was independently applying the requirements under 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(3).     
As noted, party sti pulation s as to question s of law are not 
binding and our courts are not relieve d from the obligation to 
review questions of law de novo . Wong, 130 Hawaiʻi at 46, 305 
P.3d at 462. The five-factor test in Keating,45 F.3d at 324, 
is grounded in an analysis of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. But this court provide s criminal 
defendants with greater protection s under the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution’s article I, section 10 privilege against self -
incrimination than federal courts do under the Fifth Amendment. 
See State v. Garces , 158 Hawaiʻi 532 at 535, 595 P.3d 108 at 111 
(2026). We therefore decline to adopt the Keating factors. 
First, an explanation of Keating. The civil proceeding in 
Keating involved an administrative law matter that resulted in 
22  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 an order that banned  Charles Keating, Jr.,  from the federally 
insured banking industry and directed him to pay restitution. 
Keating, 45 F.3d at 324. Keating claimed his due process rights 
were violated, in part, because “the pending criminal 
proceedings forced him to invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege 
during the . . . hearing, depriving him of an opportunity to 
testify on his own behalf.” Keating, 45 F.3d at 324. The 
timeline of the parallel proceedings was  summarized as follows:  
The [Office of Thrift Supervision (“OTS”)] hearing began 
eleven months after the notice of charges issued. The notice issued on August 9, 1990. The hearing took place in 
Los Angeles from July 1 to 3 and July 8 to 12, 1991. On 
July 12 the OTS hearing was suspended for nine months. The 
state trial began on Aug. 4, 1991, resulting in conviction 
on Dec. 4, 1991. Keating was then indicted on federal charges on Dec. 12, 1991. On March 24, 1992, two of the 
four OTS charges were severed because they concerned the 
transactions on which the federal indictment was based. The 
OTS hearing on the remaining two charges resumed in 
Phoenix, Arizona on April 27, 1992. The hearing concluded 
on May 1, 1992. Keating ’s federal criminal trial began six 
months later, on November 2, 1992.  
Keating, 45 F.3d at 325. 
The Ninth Circuit noted that after the federal indictment, 
the OTS successfully moved to sever two of the four 
administrative counts that overlapped with the federal 
indictment. Keating, 45 F.3d at 325. But Keating claimed there 
was still significant overlap between the subject matter of the 
remaining administrative counts and the federal criminal trial, 
23  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
 
     
   which made it necessary to invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege.7 
Keating, 45 F.3d at 325. The administrative law judge (“ALJ”) 
determined that any burden on Keating was far outweighed by the 
public interest in a speedy resolution of the case. Keating, 45 
F.3d at 325. 
The Ninth Circuit affirmed, concluding that any remaining 
overlap between the administrative and criminal proceedings did 
not make the ALJ’s refusal to stay the administrative proceeding 
an abuse of discretion. Keating, 45 F.3d at 325-26. According 
to the Ninth Circuit, “[n]ot only is it permissible to conduct a 
civil proceeding at the same time as a related criminal proceeding, even if that necessitates invocation of the Fifth 
Amendment privilege, but  it is even permissible for the trier of 
fact to draw adverse inferences from the invocation of the Fifth Amendment in a civil proceeding .” Keating, 45 F.3d at 326 
(emphasis added) (citing Baxter v. Palmigiano, 425 U.S. 308, 318-19  (1976). The Ninth Circuit then ruled that despite the 
potential implication of Keating’s Fifth Amendment rights,  the 
ALJ did not abuse his discretion in deciding that the balance 
favored proceeding with the hearing. Keating, 45 F.3d at 326.  
 As can be seen, in Keating, the Ninth Circuit  embraced the 
United States Supreme Court’s decision in Baxter, 425 U.S. 308.   
The Ninth Circuit did not identify the federal criminal charges against 
Keating. See Keating, 45 F.3d at 322. 
24 7  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
   
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 8 Baxter clearly holds that the Fifth Amendment does not forbid 
adverse inferences against parties to civil actions who raise 
the Fifth Amendment right against self -incrimination. 425 U.S. 
at 318. 
In direct contrast to Baxter and Keating is this court’s 
opinion in Kaneshiro v. Belisario , 51 Haw. 649, 466 P.2d 452 
(1970).8 In Belisario , this court expressly held that even in 
civil cases, there can be no comment on or adverse inference 
drawn against a party who asserts their right against self -
incrimination; we grounded this holding in part on article I, 
section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution . 51 Haw. at 654, 466 P.2d 
at 455. Therefore, in contrast with the United States Supreme 
Court’s interpretation of the Fifth Amendment, this court holds 
that Article I, Section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution protects a 
criminal defendant’s right against self -incrimination , even in 
civil proceedings. 
This principle against adverse inferences is also reflected in Rule 513 
of the Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (“HRE”)(1980), which provides in relevant 
part: 
Comment upon or inference from claim of  
privilege; instructions.   
  
(a) Comment or inference not permitted. The claim of a  
privilege, whether in the present proceeding or upon a  
prior occasion, is not a proper subject of comment by judge  
or counsel. No inference may be drawn therefrom.  
(Emphasis added.) 
25  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  This difference is probably why the five Keating  factors 
actually show minimal concern for a criminal defendant’s right 
against self-incrimination:  
(1) the interest of the plaintiffs in proceeding 
expeditiously with this litigation or any particular aspect 
of it, and the potential prejudice to plaintiffs of a 
delay; (2) the burden which any particular aspect of the 
proceedings may impose on defendants; (3) the convenience 
of the court in the management of its cases, and the 
efficient use of judicial resources; (4) the interests of 
persons not parties to the civil litigation; and (5) the 
interest of the public in the pending civil and criminal 
litigation. 
Keating, 45 F.3d at 324. 
Under Keating, the first consideration is the plaintiff ’s 
interest in proceeding expeditiously and potential prejudice to 
the plaintiff. The third factor focuses on the court’s 
convenience . The fourth considers the interest s of those that 
are not parties to the civil litigation. The fifth considers 
the interest of the public. Only the second factor even touches 
on a defendant’s right against self -incrimination. 
We therefore reject Keating. In light of our robust 
protection of the Article I, Section 10 right  against self-  
incrimination, we hold that in addressing whether to stay a 
civil proceeding pending the actual or anticipated institution 
of criminal charges, Hawaiʻi courts should instead evaluate three 
factors: (1) whether the constitutional risk to defendant is 
concrete and imminent; (2) prejudice from  a delay; and (3) 
whether there is a less restrictive alternative.  
26  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
     
   
 
 
 
 The first factor takes into account the extent to which the 
privilege against self -incrimination is implicated, the degree 
of factual overlap between the civil and criminal cases, and the 
status of the criminal proceeding. 
The second factor focuses on the hardship and expense of 
the nonmovant due to postponement, whether the parties have 
previously consented to postponement, whether postponement might 
foreclose the nonmovant from presenting relevant evidence, and 
the public’s interest in the prompt disposition of the case. 
The third factor asks whether there is a more tailored 
solution available, including a shorter delay or bifurcation of 
the proceedings. 
These considerations are non -exclusive and the second 
factor allows consideration of “prejudice” t o those other than 
the criminal defendant . But the second factor should not be 
weighed heavily in favor of the interests of others in light of 
the greater protections afforded to criminal defendants under 
the Hawaiʻi Constitution . 
B. Applying the new test, Kao failed to satisfy the 
“sufficient cause for postponement” standard in HRS § 658A -
23(a)(3) 
Kao argues he was unable to testify in his own defense 
during the arbitration because he feared his testimony could be 
used against him in the parallel federal criminal trial arising 
from the same underlying facts . He argues he was therefore 
27  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 forced to invoke his right against self-incrimination. Even 
though the Arbitrator indicated he was not drawing adverse 
inferences based on Kao’s refusal to testify, he contends that 
he was unable to present his own testimony in his defense.  He 
therefore asserts the circuit court erred by denying his motion for vacatur because the Arbitrator refused to stay the 
proceedings despite this  “sufficient cause for postponement.”   
We now apply the factors we have set out to address Kao’s 
assertio ns. To repeat, the three factors are (1) whether the 
constitutional risk to defendant is concrete and imminent; (2) 
prejudice from a delay; and (3) whether there is a less 
restrictive alternative. 
The first factor weigh s in favor of Kao. As noted above, 
the constitutional risk was concrete and imminent because Kao’s 
civil and criminal cases ar ose from the same underlying facts . 
The second factor weigh s in favor of NCI. The parties had 
already stipulated to delay the arbitration proceedings four 
times, and NCI and MDG pointed out many reasons why they would 
have experienced hardship and expense if the arbitration 
proceedings were postponed. 
For example, b y May 27, 2021, MDG’s FCL had been 
invalidated for about five months, despite the Amended Operating 
Agreement and the Voting Trust Agreement, which removed Kao as 
CEO and sole manager and reduced his access and control over the 
28  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 company. Without an FCL, MDG could not win government 
contracts, shutting off new revenue streams. 
Although the Navy suspension and debarment official 
declined to suspend MDG from government contracting on Ma rch 16, 
2021, averting immediate insolvency, the decision was without 
prejudice. Hence, MDG continued to face the risk of suspension 
if new developments , such as a potential superseding indictment , 
occurred during Kao’s federal criminal proceedings while he 
remained principal owner of MDG. 
Further, MDG was under financial pressure to repay about 
$10 million in PPP loans, $2 million of which had already been 
transferred to Kao’s personal bank account. Since NCI held a 
one-percent interest in MDG’s future profits and losses, valued 
at $2.5 million, it too faced financial loss if MDG defaulted on 
the loans or became insolvent. 
In addition, MDG had already lost ninety key employees from 
a total workforce of 170. 
For these reasons, NCI and MDG had extremely strong 
interest s in proceeding expeditiously with arbitration to ensure 
Kao’s disassociation from the company, stem the loss of 
employees, and revalidate its FCL. In addition, the public’s 
interest in the prompt disposition of the civil case was high, 
due to the gravity of the allegations against Kao that involved 
the public fisc. 
29  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
  The third factor also weighs  in favor of NCI. In terms of 
less restrictive alternatives, although Kao  had earlier 
suggested bifurcation, when NCI’s counsel later requested 
bifurcation, Kao  sharply opposed it.      
All in all, we hold that Kao failed to make a “showing of 
sufficient cause for postponement ” under HRS § 658A -23(a)(3). 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err by denying Kao’s motion 
for vacatur. 
C. The ICA did not err in affirming the circuit court’s order 
confirming the Arbitrator’s punitive damages award. 
Kao also argues on certiorari that HRS § 658A -21(e) limits 
the Arbitrator’s authority to award punitive damages because 
there was no l egal basis to authoriz e such an award. Kao’s 
contention lacks merit . 
Kao does not dispute that HRS § 658A-21(a) granted  the 
Arbitrator discretion to award punitive damages. Nor does he 
contest the validity of the Operating Agreement or the Agreement 
to Participate in Binding Arbitration, which states that “the Arbitrator shall determine all issues . . . and may grant all 
remedies that the Arbitrator determines to be just.” Kao claims 
that the Arbitrator exceeded his authority by awarding punitive 
damages because section 8.2(c) of the Operating Agreement does 
not specially list  punitive damages as damages MDG “may incur.” 
But as stated by the ICA, “[t]he Operating Agreement does not 
30  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
    expressly limit the Arbitrator’s authority with respect to the 
award and/or remedies it can issue.” Navatek, 2025 WL 2157693 , 
at *1 n.4. 
HRS § 658A -21(a) does not require arbitrators to award 
punitive damages, but it grant s them discretion to do so. 
Accordingly, the Arbitrator did not exceed his authority under 
HRS § 658A -23(a)(4). 
Kao also contends the Arbitrator lacked a factual basis to 
award punitive damages under HRS § 658A -21(e), given the lack of 
evidence regarding his net worth. This argument also lacks 
merit. The Arbitrator did have evidence of Kao’s net worth from 
his financial statements. 
In any event, i n reviewing an arbitration award, a court 
lacks authority to correct an arbitrator’s findings , even if 
clearly erroneous, or an arbitrator’s conclusions of law , even 
if wrong. See Nordic, 136 Hawaiʻi at 42, 358 P.3d at 14 
(citations omitted). A court’s review is limited to whether 
statutory grounds for vacatur exist under HRS § 658A -23(a). 
Here, there was no ground for vacatur of the punitive damages 
award. 
V. Conclusion 
For these reasons, w e affirm the ICA’s August 29, 2025 
judgment on appeal , subject to the analysis in this opinion , and 
31  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     remand to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with the ICA’s SDO and judgment on appeal . 
Keith M. Kiuchi    
for  petitioner  
Martin Kao             
     
David M. Louie, Jessie   
W. Schiel, Nicholas R.     
Monlux, and Timothy  T.    
Silvester  
for respondent         
Navatek Capital Inc.   /s/  Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/  Todd W. Eddins  
/s/  Lisa M. Ginoza   
/s/ Brian A. Costa  
/s/ Rebecca A. Copeland  
32 