                                                                 
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-28904 15-DEC-2011 
08:18 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
DANIEL TAYLOR, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
                                                         
NO. SCWC-28904
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 28904; CR. NO. 07-1-0253)
 
DECEMBER 15, 2011
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.,
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
In 2006, Daniel Taylor pled guilty in the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawai 'i to conspiracy to 
traffic in Native American cultural items that were obtained in 
violation of the Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). The items were native Hawaiian artifacts that had been repatriated to Kanupa Cave on the island of Hawai
'i, and that were subsequently taken from the cave by ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Taylor and an accomplice. Approximately a year later, a State of 
Hawai'i grand jury indicted Taylor for Theft in the First Degree 
in violation of Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 708-830(1) and 
708-830.5(1)(a), quoted infra, with regard to the same events. Taylor moved to dismiss the indictment on various grounds. The 
1
 and Taylor appealed.
 circuit court denied Taylor’s motion,
In the Intermediate Court of Appeals, Taylor argued,
 
inter alia, that the evidence presented to the grand jury failed
 to establish that the artifacts were “property of another” as
 required under HRS § 708-830(1). 
Taylor further argued that his
 
prosecution in state court was barred by HRS § 701-112, quoted
 infra, because he was previously convicted in federal court for
 conspiracy to traffic in Native American cultural items, i.e.,
 the Kanupa Cave artifacts.
 
The ICA affirmed, holding that the evidence was
 
sufficient to support the indictment and noting that
 “specification of the actual owner of the property for purposes
 of this theft charge is not required and only evidence that the
 property was not that of Taylor is required.” State v. Taylor,
 
No. 28904, 2011 WL 661793, at *9-10 (App. Feb. 23, 2011) (mem.
 op.). The ICA further held that HRS § 701-112 did not bar
 Taylor’s theft prosecution, because theft in the first degree
 requires proof of facts not required for the federal conspiracy
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
-2­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
We note that the ICA’s Memorandum Opinion and Judgment on Appeal2
purported to affirm the circuit court’s December 13, 2007 “Order Granting Ex
Parte Motion to Certify Order Denying Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss Indictment
and Second Motion to Dismiss for Interlocutory Appeal Pursuant to H.R.S.
§ 641-17.”  Taylor, 2011 WL 661793, at *10.  However, Taylor’s Notice of
Interlocutory Appeal appealed from the circuit court’s November 14, 2007 order
denying his motion to dismiss the indictment.  Moreover, Taylor’s opening
(continued...)
-3-and trafficking offenses, and the primary purposes behind the
state and federal offenses differed.  Id. at *3-4.
In his application for a writ of certiorari, Taylor
raises the following two questions:
1. . . . Does the State establish that an item is
“property of another” simply by proving that the
defendant did not own it, or must the State prove
something more to establish that an item is an article
of value that someone other than the defendant
possesses or has some other interest in and therefore
within the statutory definition of “property of
another”?
2.
 . . . Does the offense of first-degree theft, as
alleged against [Taylor] in this matter, require proof
of a fact that the federal offense of conspiracy, as
it was proven to convict [Taylor], did not require?
We conclude that the ICA erred in stating that “only
evidence that the property was not that of Taylor [was] required”
to establish that the artifacts were the “property of another.” 
However, we hold that the State nonetheless presented sufficient
evidence to the grand jury to find probable cause that the
property taken was “property of another.”  We further hold that
Taylor’s prosecution in state court is not barred by HRS § 701-
112 because the theft charge requires proof of a fact not
required for his federal conspiracy offense, and the purposes
behind the state and federal statutes differ.  Accordingly, we
affirm the judgment of the ICA.2 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal, including a transcript of the grand jury
 
proceeding and transcripts of the proceedings before the circuit
 court on Taylor’s first motion to dismiss. The record also
 contains copies of documents from Taylor’s federal prosecution,
 including the charging document, Taylor’s plea agreement, and
 transcripts of proceedings before the federal district court.
 
A. Proceedings in federal district court
 
On March 24, 2006, the United States charged Taylor by
 
information with Conspiracy to Traffic in Native American
 
cultural items in violation of 18 United States Code (U.S.C.)
 § 371, quoted infra, and Trafficking in Native American cultural
 
3
items in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1170(b),  which imposes
2(...continued)
brief to the ICA presented argument solely as to that order. 
In addition, the
ICA’s memorandum opinion concluded that the circuit court properly denied
Taylor’s motion to dismiss the indictment. Id. at *9. Neither Taylor’s
opening brief nor the ICA’s memorandum opinion asserted that the circuit court
erred in granting Taylor leave to file an interlocutory appeal. See id. 
Accordingly, we view the reference in the ICA’s judgment to the
circuit court’s December 13, 2007 order as a clerical error.  We thus affirm
 
the ICA’s judgment, which, as corrected by this opinion, affirmed the circuit
court’s November 14, 2007 order denying Taylor’s motion to dismiss the
indictment.
 
3
 18 U.S.C. § 1170(b) (1994), concerning illegal trafficking in
Native American human remains and cultural items, provides: 
Whoever knowingly sells, purchases, uses for profit,
or transports for sale or profit any Native American
cultural items obtained in violation of the Native
 American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act shall
be fined in accordance with this title, imprisoned not
more than one year, or both, and in the case of a
second or subsequent violation, be fined in accordance
with this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or
(continued...)
 
-4­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
sanctions for violations of NAGPRA, discussed infra.
 
That same day, the federal government filed a
 
Memorandum of Plea Agreement (Plea Agreement) in which Taylor
 
agreed to plead guilty to conspiring to sell, use for profit, and
 transport for sale and profit Native American cultural items,
 which were obtained in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1170(b), in the
 time period “by and including June 2004.”
4 In exchange for
 
Taylor’s guilty plea, the federal government dismissed the
 trafficking charge against Taylor and agreed not to seek
 additional charges related to the taking and selling of Native
 American cultural items from about June 2004 through August 2004. 
Taylor was subsequently found guilty on the conspiracy count.
 
In the Plea Agreement, Taylor admitted the following
 
facts, outlining “what happened in relation to the charge to
 which [Taylor pled] guilty:”
 
a. From a precise earlier date unknown but by
and including June 2004, in the District of Hawaii,
[Taylor] did knowingly and willfully conspire and
agree with others both known and unknown, including
with his co-defendant, JOHN CARTA, to commit offenses
against the United States, namely, to sell, use for
profit, and transport for sale and profit Native
American cultural items obtained in violation of
 [NAGPRA], to wit: Native Hawaiian artifacts that had
 been repatriated and re-buried at Kanupa Cave located
on the island of Hawaii, violations of [18 U.S.C.
§§ 371 and 1170(b)].
 
b. In 2000, JOHN CARTA had a conversation with
an individual identified by initials as M.F., who
informed him of the existence of a cave containing
 
3(...continued)
both.
 
4
 The Plea Agreement was incorporated into the record on appeal as
an exhibit to Taylor’s motion to dismiss.
 
-5­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Native Hawaiian artifacts. According to M.F., the
cave was located on the Kawaihae side of the island of
 Hawaii.
 
c. Subsequently, but at some precise date prior
to June 16, 2004, [Taylor] and JOHN CARTA agreed to
find the cave with the understanding that they would
sell any artifacts they discovered for a profit.
 
d. On or about June 16, 2004, [Taylor] and
JOHN CARTA acted on their agreement to find the cave.
On or about June 17, 2004, [Taylor] and JOHN CARTA
obtained directions from M.F. and found the cave,
later identified as Kanupa Cave. They pushed aside a
rock sitting across the cave’s entrance and entered.
[Taylor] and JOHN CARTA discovered a number of items
wrapped in woven lauhala baskets and black cloth.
They unwrapped the items and determined they were
Native Hawaiian artifacts, including items such as
wooden bowls, a gourd, a holua sled runner, a spear,
kapa, and cordage. Several of the artifacts contained
 labels indicating they belonged to the J.S.
Emerson Collection, which was a collection of
artifacts taken from Kanupa Cave in the late 1800’s
and sold to museums, including the Bishop Museum in
Honolulu, Hawaii. These items were repatriated and
re-buried at Kanupa Cave in November 2003.
 
e. [Taylor] and JOHN CARTA removed approximately
157 artifacts from Kanupa Cave.
 f. [Taylor] sold or attempted to sell artifacts
obtained from Kanupa Cave for a profit as follows:
 
(i) On or about June 17, 2004, [Taylor]
contacted a collector and attempted to sell to
that collector a palaoa taken from Kanupa Cave
for $40,000.
 
(ii) On or about June 26, 2004, [Taylor]
sold a piece of kapa from Kanupa Cave to a
tourist for $150.
 
(iii) On or about July 11, 2004, [Taylor]
sold a fisherman’s bowl and cover taken from
 Kanupa Cave to a collector for $2,083.
 
iv. [sic] On or about July 13, 2004, [Taylor]
had posted for sale on the internet a kupee
taken from Kanupa Cave for $5,600.
 
g. [Taylor] knew the artifacts belonged to the J.S.
Emerson Collection. To conceal the fact that some of
 the artifacts belonged to a well-known collection,
[Taylor] removed the J.S. Emerson Collection labels
from these artifacts.
 
On June 12, 2007, the federal district court filed its
 
-6­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
HRS § 708-830(1) (1993) provides:5
A person commits theft if the person . . .[o]btains or
exerts unauthorized control over property.  A person
obtains, or exerts control over, the property of
another with intent to deprive the other of the
property.
HRS § 708-830.5(1)(a) (1993) provides:  “A person commits the6
-7-offense of theft in the first degree if the person commits theft . . . [o]f
property or services, the value of which exceeds $20,000[.]”judgment, adjudicating Taylor guilty and sentencing him to, inter
alia, eleven months of imprisonment followed by one year of
supervised release.  
B.Proceedings in circuit court
1.Grand jury proceedings
On May 23, 2007, the State sought a grand jury
indictment against Taylor for Theft in the First Degree in
violation of HRS §§ 708-830(1 )5 and 708-830.5(1)(a).   The State
presented the testimony of one witness:  Abraham Kaikana, a
special agent with the Office of the Attorney General.  Agent
Kaikana testified that he had reviewed reports from both the
state and federal investigations in Taylor’s case, interviews
from the federal investigation, and Taylor’s memorandum of plea
agreement with the federal government.  Agent Kaikana also
testified that he interviewed various individuals in relation to
Taylor’s case.6
With regard to the artifacts, Agent Kaikana testified
that a surveyor named Joseph Swift Emerson “was shown Kanupa Cave
at one time in the 1800s and he took artifacts out of that cave***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
7Agent Kaikana testified that Taylor acknowledged in his memorandum
of plea agreement that he “saw Emerson tags on the items when he went into the
cave[,]” and that he removed the tags “[t]o hide or conceal the sale of these
items[.]” 
8Agent Kaikana did not explain to the grand jury what “Hui Malama”
or “OHA” were, although the latter was presumably a reference to the Office of
Hawaiian Affairs.  NAGPRA identifies Hui Malama I Na Kupuna O Hawai# i Nei as a
“nonprofit, Native Hawaiian organization incorporated under the laws of the
State of Hawaii by that name on April 17, 1989, for the purpose of providing
guidance and expertise in decisions dealing with Native Hawaiian cultural
issues, particularly burial issues.”  25 U.S.C. § 3001(6) (1990).  NAGPRA
identifies the Office of Hawaiian Affairs as an entity “established by the
constitution of the State of Hawaii.”  25 U.S.C. § 3001(12); see also Haw.
Const. art. XII, § 5 (establishing the Office of Hawaiian Affairs); HRS
chapter 10 (concerning the Office of Hawaiian Affairs).  NAGPRA further
defines a “Native Hawaiian organization” as “any organization which – (A)
serves and represents the interests of Native Hawaiians, (B) has as a primary
and stated purpose the provision of services to Native Hawaiians, and (C) has
expertise in Native Hawaiian Affairs, and shall include the Office of Hawaiian
Affairs and Hui Malama I Na Kupuna O Hawai# i Nei.”  25 U.S.C. § 3001(11).
-8-and then he sold part of that to the Bishop Museum and the
Peabody [Essex] Museum in Massachusettes [sic].”  Agent Kaikana
testified that J.S. Emerson would put tags or labels on the items
he collected “to document them for future use.”   Some of the7
items taken by J.S. Emerson were “eventually repatriated from
both the Bishop Museum and the Peabody Essex [Museum]” and were
“reburied” at Kanupa Cave.  The groups involved with the reburial
included “Hui Malama, . . . OHA, [the] State, and the Bishop
Museum.”8  
Agent Kaikana also testified that Taylor and his wife
“own or owned an antique shop” in Captain Cook, Hawai# i, where
“they would sell, buy, [and] trade, [] antiquities.”  Agent
Kaikana testified that he interviewed and reviewed the federal
government’s interview of two witnesses who identified artifacts
from the “J.S. Emerson Collection” in Taylor’s shop.  Agent***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Kaikana also testified regarding the recovery of Kanupa Cave 
artifacts from Taylor’s home after the federal government executed a search warrant on Taylor’s home and shop. Agent Kaikana testified that other Kanupa Cave artifacts, including a palaoa and k
upe'e, bearing J.S. Emerson and Bishop Museum labels 
were recovered in a Tupperware container at the Pu 'uhonua o 
Honaunau National Park on the island of Hawai 'i. The agent 
testified that it appeared that they had been “dumped” there. Finally, Agent Kaikana testified that he met with an appraiser, who valued the items Taylor had taken from Kanupa Cave, including the palaoa and k
upe'e, from $800,000 to $1.2 million. The grand 
jury returned a true bill. 
On May 24, 2007, the grand jury’s indictment was filed,
 
charging Taylor with Theft in the First Degree in violation of
 HRS §§ 708-830(1) and 708-830.5(1)(a). The indictment provided:
 
On or about the 17th day of June, 2004, in the
County of Hawaii, State of Hawaii, [] TAYLOR, did
obtain or exert unauthorized control over the property
of another, to wit: artifacts from Kanupa Cave,
having a value which exceeds Twenty Thousand Dollars
($20,000), with intent to deprive the other of the
property, thereby committing the offense of Theft in
the First Degree in violation of [HRS §§ 708-830(1)
and 708-830.5(1)(a)].
 
2. Taylor’s motions in circuit court
 
On July 24, 2007, Taylor filed a motion to dismiss the
 
indictment. Taylor argued, inter alia, that “the artifacts
 
predicating the State’s indictment are not the ‘property of
 
-9­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9
another’ under HRS § 708-800”  and that the indictment charged
Taylor for an offense that he already had been prosecuted for in
 
federal district court in violation of HRS § 
701-112.10 The State
 
argued, inter alia, that it was only required to prove that the
 property belonged to someone other than Taylor. The State also
 argued that the instant prosecution was not barred by HRS § 701­112 because the two-pronged exception set forth in HRS § 701­112(1)(a) was met in this case. The State contended that the
 offense of theft in the first degree “require[d] proof of a fact
 not required by the former prosecution in the [federal district
 court], namely that the value of the property exceeds $20,000[,]” 
and that “the law defining each of the offenses is intended to
 
9 HRS § 708-800 (1993) defines “property of another” for purposes of
HRS § 708-830(1) as “property which any person, other than the defendant, has
possession of or any other interest in, even though that possession or
interest is unlawful; however, a security interest is not an interest in
property, even if title is in the secured party pursuant to the security
agreement.”
 
10 HRS § 701-112 (1993) provides, in pertinent part:
 
When behavior constitutes an offense within the
 
concurrent jurisdiction of this State and of the
United States or another state, a prosecution in any
such other jurisdiction is a bar to a subsequent
prosecution in this State under any of the following
circumstances:
 
(1) The first prosecution resulted in an
acquittal which has not subsequently been set
aside or in a conviction as defined in section
 701-110(3), and the subsequent prosecution is
based on the same conduct, unless: 
(a) The offense for which the defendant is
subsequently prosecuted requires proof of
a fact not required by the former offense
and the law defining each of the offenses
is intended to prevent a substantially
different harm or evil[.]
 
-10­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prevent a substantially different harm or evil.”
 
On August 30, 2007, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Taylor’s motion to dismiss. Regarding Taylor’s “property of
 
another” argument, the circuit court indicated that it thought HRS
 chapter 6E, concerning historic preservation, applied and ordered
 the parties to provide a supplemental memorandum on the topic. At
 the conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court took the matter
 under advisement. The State subsequently filed a supplemental
 memorandum in opposition to the motion to dismiss in which it
 argued that the artifacts were the “historic property” of the
 State, pursuant to HRS § 6E-7.
11 Attached to the supplemental
 
memorandum was a declaration of Deputy Attorney General Mark K.
 Miyahira, declaring that “documentation indicates that Kanupa Cave
 is located on State-owned land on the island of Hawaii,” and that
 “the artifacts that are the basis of this prosecution are more
 than fifty (50) years old.” Taylor argued in his supplemental
 memorandum in support of his motion to dismiss that “neither the
 State nor anyone else has possession of the artifacts[]” because,
 pursuant to HRS § 6E-7(c),
12 the “State’s interest in the artifacts
 
11 HRS § 6E-7(a) (1993) provides: “All historic property located on
lands or under waters owned or controlled by the State shall be the property
of the State. The control and management of the historic property shall be
vested in the [Department of Land and Natural Resources].”
HRS § 6E-2 (1993) defines “historic property[,]” as used in HRS
chapter 6E, as “any building, structure, object, district, area, or site,
including heiau and underwater site, which is over fifty years old.”
 
12
 HRS § 6E-7(c) (1993) provides: “The State shall hold known burial
sites located on lands or under waters owned or controlled by the State in
trust for preservation or proper disposition by the lineal or cultural
(continued...)
 
-11­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
is solely to ‘preserve’ them for ‘proper disposition’ to the
 
lineal or cultural descendants of the people with whom the
 artifacts were interred.”
13
 
3. Circuit court ruling 
On October 5, 2007, the circuit court issued a
 
Memorandum of Decision on Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss, denying
 
Taylor’s motion. The circuit court found, inter alia, that the
 indictment properly charged Taylor with obtaining control over the
 “property of another” pursuant to State v. Nases, 65 Haw. 217,
 
14
218, 649 P.2d 1138, 1139 (1982),  and that Taylor’s theft
prosecution was not barred by his federal conviction pursuant to
 HRS § 701-112. 
On November 14, 2007, the circuit court issued its
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs), Conclusions of Law (COLs), and Order
 denying Taylor’s motion to dismiss the indictment. 
In its
 
12(...continued)
descendants.”
  
HRS § 6E-2 defines “burial site” as “any specific unmarked
location where prehistoric or historic human skeletal remains and their
associated burial goods are interred, and its immediate surrounding
archaeological context, deemed a unique class of historic property and not
otherwise included in section 6E-41.”
 
HRS § 6E-2 defines a “burial good” as “any item reasonably
believed to have been intentionally placed with the human skeletal remains of
an individual or individuals at the time of burial.”
 
13
 On September 13, 2007, Taylor filed a second motion to dismiss,
arguing primarily that a theft conviction would violate the rule set forth in
State v. Modica, 58 Haw. 249, 250-51, 567 P.2d 420, 421-22 (1977). The
 circuit court denied the motion. Because this second motion to dismiss is not
 at issue in the instant appeal, we do not discuss it further.
 
14
 As discussed further infra, Nases held that the “naming of the
 
person owning the property in the indictment is surplusage.” 65 Haw. at 218,
649 P.2d at 1139 (citations omitted).
 
-12­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
FOFs/COLs, the circuit court recounted the factual background
 
leading up to Taylor’s federal prosecution and his indictment in
 state court and then stated, in relevant part, as follows: 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . .
 
9. . . . this [c]ourt finds and concludes that
[Taylor] has not shown at this time that one of the
sovereigns is acting as a tool of the other or that
the second prosecution by the state in this case is a
sham or cover for the federal prosecution.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
4. The charged offense of Theft in the First Degree
in this state prosecution requires the proof of
elements not required by the federal offense of
Conspiracy to Traffic in Native American cultural
items. Theft in the First Degree requires proof that
the defendant obtained and exerted unauthorized
 control or [sic] property of another. This
 requirement is substantially different and more
stringent than the requirement of the overt act under
the federal charge, in this case being the removal of
property from the Kanupa Cave. Additionally, the
state charge requires the property be that of another.
There is no allegation of this element in the federal
information against [Taylor]. The state charge also
requires the additional element of proof that the
value of the property taken exceeds $20,000, while the
federal charge requires no such proof. There is also
 the specific intent requirement under the state
charge, that the offense be committed “with intent to
deprive the other of the property,” which is not a
requirement under the federal charge. Therefore, it
is clear that the state offense requires proof of a
fact not required by the former offense.
 
5. The law defining each of the offenses is intended
to prevent a substantially different harm or evil. The
federal offense charged is a conspiracy in violation
of 18 U.S.C[.] §371. The offense against the United
States, which is the target of the conspiracy, is the
illegal trafficking of Native American cultural items
in violation of 18 U.S.C. §1170(b). The obvious
 import of this law is to discourage the illegal
marketing of such cultural items. Apparently such
illegal trafficking can occur even when an object is
obtained in a manner that may not constitute theft.
In U.S. v. Corrow, 941 F. Supp[.] 1553 (D.N.M. 1996),
aff’d 119 F.3d 796 (10th Cir. 1997), the defendant was
convicted for agreeing to sell a Navajo ceremonial
 
-13­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
mask which he had purchased from a Navajo chanter’s
widow, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §1170(b). This case
 illustrates that it is the trafficking of these
cultural objects and not their theft that constitutes
the acts prohibited by 18 U.S.C. §1170(b). Arguably,
18 U.S.C. §1170(b) seeks to protect the interests of
the various Native American cultures and the objects
related to their cultural heritage and history. This
 is a far different interest from Hawaii’s theft
 statute which protects persons from being deprived of
property rights by unauthorized takings. Therefore,
it is clear that the law defining each of the offenses
is intended to prevent a substantially different harm
or evil.
 
6. Since the conditions of H.R.S. §701-112(1)(a) have
been shown to exist in this case, the current state
prosecution is not barred by the [Taylor’s] conviction
in the federal case.
 
. . . . 
15. The indictment in the state theft cases alleges,
inter alia, that [Taylor] “did obtain or exert
unauthorized control over the property of another...”
[Taylor] alleges that the property belongs to no one.
The State alleges that it has a property interest in
the property due to [HRS § 6E-7] which states “All
historic property located on lands or under waters
owned or controlled by the State shall be the property
of the State.”
 
16. The statutory definitions in [HRS] § 708-800, []
of the terms, “control over property”, “obtain”,
“property of another”, and “unauthorized control over
property” leads to the conclusion, as held in [Nases,
65 Haw. at 218, 649 P.2d at 1139], that “where the
offense is obtaining control over the property of
another, proof that the property was the property of
another is all that is necessary and the naming of the
person owning the property in the indictment is
surplusage.” In other words, the elements,
“unauthorized control of the property of another” of
theft, make it an offense for a person to exert
control over property when he is not authorized by the
person who has possession of or any other interest in
the same property.
 
(Some ellipses in original).
 
On December 13, 2007, Taylor filed, and the circuit
 
court granted, a motion for an interlocutory appeal pursuant to
 
-14­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRS § 641-17.15 On December 14, 2007, Taylor filed a notice of
 
interlocutory appeal. 
C. ICA Appeal
 
1. Taylor’s arguments
 
In his opening brief to the ICA, Taylor contended that
 
the circuit court erred in denying his “claim that, as a matter of
 
law, the artifacts were not ‘property of another’ for purposes of
 HRS §§ 708-800, 708-830(1), and 708-830.5(1)(a).” Taylor argued
 that the indictment was based on the State’s theory that the
 artifacts were “property of the museums that once cared for
 them[,]” but “neither [the Bishop nor the Peabody Essex Museums]
 possessed the artifacts or retained any sort of property interest
 in them after they were repatriated under NAGPRA.” (Emphasis in
 original). Taylor contended that “NAGPRA confirms that ownership
 in such artifacts resides solely in the appropriate Native
 Hawaiian organization[.]” Consequently, Taylor argued that “[t]o
 properly indict someone for stealing repatriated artifacts from a
 site such as Kanupa Cave, the State’s presentation to the grand
 
15 HRS § 641-17 (Supp. 2004) provides:
 
Upon application made within the time provided by the
rules of court, an appeal in a criminal matter may be
allowed to a defendant from the circuit court to the
 intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter 602,
from a decision denying a motion to dismiss or from
other interlocutory orders, decisions, or judgments,
whenever the judge in the judge’s discretion may think
the same advisable for a more speedy termination of
the case. The refusal of the judge to allow an
interlocutory appeal to the appellate court shall not
be reviewable by any other court.
 
-15­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jury must identify the Native Hawaiian organization to whom the
 
artifacts were repatriated, since that entity is the only
 ‘person,’ for purposes of HRS § 708-800’s definition of ‘property
 of another,’ who possess[es] and retains all other property
 interests in such artifacts.” Taylor also argued that NAGPRA
 preempted HRS §§ 6E-1 and 6E-7. 
Taylor further argued that the circuit court erroneously
 
denied his HRS § 701-112 claim because the state offense of theft
 in the first degree and the federal offense of conspiracy to
 traffic in native Hawaiian artifacts required proof of the same
 facts. Taylor also argued that the legislatures that enacted the
 laws defining each of the two offenses did not intend to prevent
 substantially different harms or evils.
16
 
2. The State’s arguments
 
The State did not explicitly address Taylor’s
 
sufficiency of the evidence argument, but instead contended that
 
it need not, under Nases, “name the artifacts’ actual owner in the
 charging document[]” and that the “indictment contain[ed] the
 necessary charging information: that [Taylor] ‘did obtain or
 exert unauthorized control over the property of another.’” The
 State further argued that it was “important” that Taylor could not
 claim “ownership in the stolen property[ and, f]or this reason, it
 makes no difference whether the artifacts are owned by the
 
16
 Taylor raised two other points of error to the ICA that are not
challenged in his application and will not be addressed further.
 
-16­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
repatriating museums, the Native Hawaiian groups that reburied the
 
artifacts, or the State itself.” Moreover, the State argued that
 it has a statutory interest pursuant to HRS chapter 6E to all
 historic property on State land and a common law interest in
 property buried on its land.
 
Regarding Taylor’s HRS § 701-112 claim, the State argued
 
that Taylor “was federally convicted, and then prosecuted by the
 State, for entirely different criminal conduct[,]” (emphasis in
 original) and that the charged offenses required proof of
 “different elements[.]” The theft indictment focused on Taylor
 “obtaining control over another’s property, with the intent to
 deprive[,]” while the federal conviction involved “conspiracy to
 illegally traffic Native Hawaiian cultural items obtained in
 violation of NAGPRA.” (Emphasis omitted). The State also argued
 that the statutes defining the state and federal offenses were
 “intended to prevent ‘substantially different harm[s] or
 evil[s].’” (Brackets in original).
 
3. The ICA’s decision
 
In its February 23, 2011, Memorandum Opinion, the ICA
 
found, relying on Nases,
 
that the artifacts did not belong to Taylor in light
of evidence that the artifacts once were possessed by
Emerson and the museums and that the State, Hui
Malama, OHA, and Bishop Museum participated in the
repatriation and reburial at Kanupa Cave. The
 identity of the actual owner of the artifacts is not
required, and the evidence on appeal reveals the
previous possession of the artifacts by the Emerson
Collection, its sale of the artifacts to the Bishop
and Peabody [Essex] Museums, and the involvement by
the State and other entities in the repatriation of
 
-17­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the artifacts from the museums and reburial in Kanupa
Cave. Irrespective of the State’s later assertion
that it owned the artifacts, specification of the
actual owner of the property for purposes of this
theft charge is not required and only evidence that
the property was not that of Taylor is required. 
Taylor, 2011 WL 661793, at *9 (emphasis added).
 
The ICA declined to address Taylor’s preemption
 
arguments, which it found were not necessary to the disposition of
 
Taylor’s case. Id. 
Regarding Taylor’s HRS § 701-112 claim, the ICA found
 
that theft in the first degree “requires proof of the facts that
 the item taken had a value of over $20,000 and the person intended
 to deprive the owner of the property[,]” which “were not required
 for the federal conspiracy and trafficking offenses.” Id. at *3. 
The ICA also held that the primary purpose of the state theft
 statute was to “protect[] owners from the deprivation of their
 property.” Id. at *4. The ICA concluded that this purpose
 
differed from the two purposes of the federal conspiracy statute,
 which are to “protect[] society from the dangers of concerted
 criminal activity” and stop “threat[s] to social order[,]” and of
 NAGPRA, whose primary purpose “is to assist Native Americans in
 the repatriation of items that the tribes consider sacred[.]” Id.
 
at *4 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s
 
December 13, 2007, order.
17 Id. at *10. The ICA entered its
 
17
 As noted supra in note 2, we interpret the reference to the
 
December 13, 2007 order as a clerical error.
 
-18­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
judgment on March 16, 2011. Taylor timely filed his application
 
for a writ of certiorari on May 18, 2011. The State timely filed
 a response on June 2, 2011. 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Sufficiency of evidence to support an indictment
 
In their briefs to the ICA, the parties disputed the 
applicable standard of review for a motion to dismiss an indictment. Taylor asserted that the applicable standard was de novo based on Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 111 Hawai
'i 401, 
407, 142 P.3d 265, 271 (2006), because the questions before the ICA involved statutory interpretation. The State argued that the applicable standard for appellate court review of a circuit court’s motion to dismiss was an abuse of discretion pursuant to State v. Akau, 118 Hawai
'i 44, 51, 185 P.3d 229, 236 (2008). 
In cases involving allegations of prosecutorial abuse 
or misconduct, this court has applied an abuse of discretion standard when reviewing a motion to dismiss an indictment. See, 
e.g., State v. Mendonca, 68 Haw. 280, 282-83, 711 P.2d 731, 733­34 (1985) (involving an allegation that the State improperly indicted the defendant under one statute instead of a second statute). Nevertheless, in cases involving sufficiency of the evidence to support an indictment, this court appeared to apply a de novo standard. See, e.g., State v. Ontai, 84 Hawai
'i 56, 59, 
64, 929 P.2d 69, 72, 77 (1996) (discussing a conclusion of law, but evaluating the evidence presented to the grand jury de novo); 
-19­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
see also State v. Ganal, 81 Hawai 'i 358, 367, 917 P.2d 370, 379 
(1996) (although this court did not explicitly identify the 
standard of review it was applying, this court evaluated the totality of the evidence presented to the grand jury and concluded that the evidence presented to the grand jury was sufficient to elicit a strong suspicion and to support an inference that the defendant committed a crime). 
Therefore, because the instant case involves 
sufficiency of the evidence to support an indictment, we review the circuit court’s order de novo. See Ontai, 84 Hawai
'i at 59, 
64, 929 P.2d at 72, 77; Ganal, 81 Hawai 'i at 367, 917 P.2d at 
379. 
Moreover, as this court noted in Ganal: 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence to
establish probable cause before the grand jury, every
legitimate inference that may be drawn from the
evidence must be drawn in favor of the indictment and
 neither the trial court nor the appellate court on
review may substitute its judgment as to the weight of
the evidence for that of the Grand Jury. The evidence
 to support an indictment need not be sufficient to
support a conviction. 
Id. at 367, 917 P.2d at 379 (internal quotation marks, citation
 
and brackets omitted).
 
B. Motion to dismiss indictment pursuant to HRS § 701-112
 
“As the issue on appeal is strictly a matter of law, 
the standard of review is de novo.” State v. Meyers, 100 Hawai 'i 
132, 134, 58 P.3d 643, 645 (2002) (citation omitted). 
III. Discussion
 
-20­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As set forth below, Taylor’s indictment for theft 
alleged all of the essential elements of the offense and the 
State presented sufficient evidence to the grand jury to find probable cause that the artifacts were “property of another.” When taken as a whole, the evidence submitted to the grand jury was sufficient for “a person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion” that the artifacts were “property of another.” See Ganal, 81 Hawai
'i 
at 367, 917 P.2d at 379. However, the ICA erred in stating that “only evidence that the property was not that of Taylor [was] required” to constitute “property of another.” Finally, the ICA did not err in affirming the circuit court’s holding that the state prosecution was not barred by HRS § 701-112. 
A.	 Taylor’s indictment for theft was supported by probable
cause
 
It is undisputed that Taylor’s indictment is facially 
valid because it alleged all essential elements of the charged 
offense, and Taylor does not argue that he was not informed of the “nature and cause of the accusation against him[.]” See 
State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 281, 567 P.2d 1242, 1244 (1977) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); State v. Stan’s Contracting, Inc., 111 Hawai
'i 17, 34, 137 P.3d 331, 348 (2006) 
(internal citation omitted). Instead, Taylor argues that the evidence presented to the grand jury was insufficient to support 
-21­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18
the theft charge  because “the only basis [the State] proffered
to the grand jury for finding probable cause to find that the
 
artifacts were ‘property of another,’ is legally impossible,
 since NAGPRA unambiguously divested the museums of any type of
 property interest in the artifacts upon their repatriation and
 reburial in Kanupa Cave.” Taylor also argues that the State’s
 theory that it has an interest in the artifacts pursuant to HRS
 chapter 6E is invalid because HRS chapter 6E is preempted by
 NAGPRA.
 
Both Taylor and the State discuss NAGPRA at length, and
 
both assume that it governs the determination of who had
 “possession of or any other interest in” the artifacts when
 Taylor took them from the cave. 
However, at no point was the
 
grand jury advised of the existence or provisions of NAGPRA,19 or
 
given any direct evidence about whether or how it applies here. 
Similarly, the parties vigorously dispute whether the State had
 an interest in the artifacts pursuant to HRS chapter 6E based
 upon the State’s ownership of the land where the cave is located. 
However, although evidence of the State’s ownership of the land
 
18 Although Taylor argues in his application that the indictment
should be dismissed “due to insufficiency of the evidence before the grand
jury[,]” Taylor did not explicitly make this argument to the circuit court.
Nevertheless, the arguments he advanced to the circuit court, including his
arguments that “no one had possession of the artifacts when [Taylor] took them
from the cave” and that the State did not adduce evidence before the grand
jury that a native Hawaiian organization had a property interest in the
artifacts, are properly characterized as a sufficiency of the evidence
argument. 
19
 The only law on which the grand jury was instructed was the
applicable provisions of the Hawai' i Revised Statutes. 
-22­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was presented to the circuit court in connection with the motion
 
to dismiss, the grand jury was presented with no evidence
 whatsoever regarding the ownership of the land.
 
Our task here is to determine whether the grand jury
 
had sufficient evidence before it to infer probable cause that a
 violation of HRS § 708-830 took place, and not what, if this case
 were to go to trial, the evidence might show with regard to the
 identity of those with an interest in the property. Accordingly,
 although we briefly discuss NAGPRA and its potential
 applicability for background purposes, our decision is governed
 by the evidence that was in fact presented to the grand jury, and
 whether that evidence supported a finding of probable cause.
 
1. NAGPRA
 
NAGPRA was enacted on November 16, 1990, to “facilitate
 
the return of Native American cultural items and remains to the
 tribes with whom those items are affiliated.”
20 Fallon Paiute-
Shoshone Tribe v. U.S. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 455 F. Supp. 2d
 1207, 1217 (D. Nev. 2006); see 25 U.S.C. § 3001 et seq. NAGPRA
 essentially functions as a “dual statute[.]” Fallon Paiute-
Shoshone Tribe, 455 F. Supp. 2d at 1217; see 25 U.S.C. § 3001 et
 seq. First, NAGPRA provides for the return of “cultural items
 
20
 NAGPRA applies to both “Native American” and “Native Hawaiian”
cultural items. See 25 U.S.C. § 3001 et seq. A “Native American” is defined
 
as “of, or relating to, a tribe, people, or culture that is indigenous to the
United States.” 25 U.S.C. § 3001(9). A “Native Hawaiian” is defined as “any
individual who is a descendant of the aboriginal people who, prior to 1778,
occupied and exercised sovereignty in the area that now constitutes the State
of Hawaii.” 25 U.S.C. § 3001(10).
 
-23­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that are excavated or discovered on Federal or tribal lands[21]
 
after November 16, 1990[.]” 25 U.S.C. § 3002(a). Second, NAGPRA
 
provides for the repatriation of human remains, funerary objects,
 sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony that are held
 by federal agencies, and museums or institutions that receive
 federal funding.
22 25 U.S.C. § 3005.
 
In the instant case, it is undisputed that the Kanupa
 
Cave artifacts were taken from the cave “in the late 1800s” by
 J.S. Emerson and were then repatriated in 2003. Therefore,
 although Taylor cites to NAGPRA’s “ownership or control”
 provisions set forth in 25 U.S.C. § 3002(a)(1)-(2), involving
 artifacts excavated or discovered on Federal or tribal lands
 after November 16, 1990, it appears that those provisions are not
 directly applicable to the instant case. See 25 U.S.C. §
 
3002(a)(1)-(2) (providing for the “ownership or control of Native
 American cultural items which are excavated or discovered on
 Federal or tribal lands after November 16, 1990”) (emphasis
 added). Instead, assuming that the artifacts were in fact
 repatriated pursuant to NAGPRA, it appears that 25 U.S.C.
 §§ 3003, 3004 and 3005 are the provisions of NAGPRA that would
 
21
 Relevant to the instant case, NAGPRA’s definition of “tribal land”
includes “any lands administered for the benefit of Native Hawaiians pursuant
to the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, and section 4 of Public Law 86-3.”
25 U.S.C. § 3001(15)(C). Neither party argues that Kanupa Cave is located on
tribal land, as that term is defined in NAGPRA.
 
22
 NAGPRA “does not apply to items found on private or state land,”
or “items held by museums that do not receive federal funds[.]” State ex rel.
 
Comm’r of Transp. v. Med. Bird Black Bear White Eagle, 63 S.W.3d 734, 753
(Tenn. Ct. App. 2001) (citation omitted). 
-24­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
directly apply.
 
25 U.S.C. § 3003 requires federal agencies and museums
 
with “possession or control over holdings or collections of
 
Native American human remains and associated funerary objects” to
 inventory such items and identify the cultural affiliation
23
 
between these objects and “present-day Indian tribes and Native
 Hawaiian organizations.” 25 U.S.C. § 3003(a) (emphasis added);
 43 C.F.R. § 10.9 (2003). 25 U.S.C. § 3004 requires agencies or
 museums with “holdings or collections of Native American
 unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects, or objects of
 cultural patrimony” to complete a summary of these items “in lieu
 of an object-by-object inventory[,]” and to describe the cultural
 affiliation of the collection “where readily ascertainable.” 25 
U.S.C. § 3004(a) (emphasis added); see also 43 C.F.R. § 10.8. In 
the instant case, the record does not establish whether the artifacts were within 25 U.S.C. §§ 3003 or 3004.
24   
25 U.S.C. § 3005(a) provides detailed requirements for
 
the repatriation of “Native American human remains and objects
 
23
 “‘[C]ultural affiliation’ means that there is a relationship of
shared group identity which can be reasonably traced historically or
prehistorically between a present day Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian
organization and an identifiable earlier group.” 25 U.S.C. § 3001(2).
 
24
 The dissent appears to conclude that the artifacts at issue in the
instant case were classified as “sacred objects or objects of cultural
patrimony” under NAGPRA. Dissenting opinion at 24-25. However, the record
does not contain any evidence indicating how the artifacts were classified.
Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on this issue.
 
-25­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
possessed or controlled by Federal agencies and museums[.]”25
 
See also 43 C.F.R. § 10.10. For example, pursuant to 25 U.S.C.
 
§ 3005(a)(1) and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(b)(1), a federal agency or
 museum must “expeditiously” return human remains and associated
 funerary objects upon request by a lineal descendant, Indian
 tribe or native Hawaiian organization, where a cultural
 affiliation with the tribe or organization has been established
 pursuant to 25 U.S.C. § 3003 and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(b). 
Similarly, 25 U.S.C. § 3005(a)(2) and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(a)(1)
 provide for the “expeditious[]” return of “unassociated funerary
 objects, sacred objects or objects of cultural patrimony” upon
 request by an Indian tribe or native Hawaiian organization, where
 a cultural affiliation with the tribe or organization has been
 shown pursuant to 25 U.S.C. § 3004 and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(a)(1),
 and where the affiliated tribe or organization “presents evidence
 which . . . would support a finding that the museum or Federal
 agency does not have a right of possession to the objects”
26 as
 
25 In addition, 25 U.S.C. § 3005(a)(5) and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(c) set
forth several exceptions to the general requirements for repatriation. 
26 “[R]ight of possession” is defined in 25 U.S.C. § 3001 as:
 
possession obtained with the voluntary consent of an
individual or group that had authority of alienation.
The original acquisition of a Native American
unassociated funerary object, sacred object or object
of cultural patrimony from an Indian tribe or Native
Hawaiian organization with the voluntary consent of an
individual or group with authority to alienate such
object is deemed to give right of possession of that
object, unless the phrase so defined would, as applied
in section 3005(c) of this title, result in a Fifth
Amendment taking by the United States as determined by
(continued...)
 
-26­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
required under 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(a)(1)(iii). 
In sum, when remains or cultural objects held by a
 
museum subject to NAGPRA are determined to be affiliated with a
 
Native American tribe or native Hawaiian organization, the
 remains or cultural objects “are to be repatriated expeditiously
 upon request.” See Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe, 455 F. Supp. 2d
 
1218 (citing 25 U.S.C. § 3005(a) and 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(b)).
27 In
 
addition, “[t]he return of cultural items covered by this chapter
 shall be in consultation with the requesting lineal descendant or
 tribe or organization to determine the place and manner of
 delivery of such items.” 25 U.S.C. § 3005(a)(3); see also 43
 C.F.R. § 10.10(d). Moreover, with regard to unassociated
 funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural
 
26(...continued)
the United States Court of Federal Claims pursuant to
28 U.S.C. 1491 in which event the “right of
possession” shall be as provided under otherwise
applicable property law. 
The original acquisition of
Native American human remains and associated funerary
objects which were excavated, exhumed, or otherwise
obtained with full knowledge and consent of the next
of kin or the official governing body of the
appropriate culturally affiliated Indian tribe or
Native Hawaiian organization is deemed to give right
of possession to those remains.
 
25 U.S.C. § 3001(13).
The regulations similarly define “[r]ight of possession” with
regard to unassociated funerary object, sacred object or object of cultural
patrimony, but do not extend this definition to human remains or associated
funerary objects. 43 C.F.R. § 10.10(a)(2). In the instant case, it is
undisputed that J.S. Emerson “took” the artifacts from Kanupa Cave and there
is no evidence to suggest that he obtained the consent of an individual or
group that had authority of alienation. 
27
 Although Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe solely concerned “remains,”
 
455 F. Supp. 2d 1218, as noted herein, funerary objects, sacred objects, and
objects of cultural patrimony that are subject to NAGPRA also must be
expeditiously repatriated upon a showing of cultural affiliation. 25 U.S.C.
 § 2005(a)(1)- (2); 43 C.F.R. § 10.10.
 
-27­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
patrimony, a museum must generally return the objects upon
 
request “unless it can . . . prove that it has a right of
 possession to the objects.” 25 U.S.C. § 3005(c); see also 43
 C.F.R. § 10.10(a)(iii)-(iv). 
In the instant case, the State did not provide evidence
 
to the grand jury regarding whether a cultural affiliation
 between the Kanupa Cave artifacts and a native Hawaiian
 organization had been established pursuant to 25 U.S.C. §§ 3003
 or 3004. However, assuming that the Kanupa Cave artifacts were
 repatriated pursuant to NAGPRA as Taylor suggests, the artifacts
 would have been repatriated to a culturally affiliated
 organization or to a lineal descendant. See 25 U.S.C. § 3005(a). 
Accordingly, the individual or organization to whom the artifacts
 were repatriated would have had a right of possession in the
 artifacts at the time the artifacts were repatriated.
 
2.	 The State presented sufficient evidence to the grand
jury to maintain Taylor’s indictment
 
Taylor contends in his application that the State
 
presented insufficient evidence to the grand jury regarding the
 
“property of another” element of the offense. Specifically,
 Taylor argues that the State only presented evidence to the grand
 jury that the Bishop and Peabody Essex Museums previously owned
 the artifacts, and further argues that the museums do not own the
 
-28­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
28In its answering brief, the State disputed Taylor’s
characterization of the theory it presented to the grand jury and argued that
“it never relied on evidence that the artifacts were property of ‘the museumsthat once cared for them’ in order to prove particular ownership” and that“[t]he charging instrument was not, contrary to [Taylor’s] suggestion,obtained under this theory.”  It appears that the State is correct, in that itdid not explicitly identify any specific theory of ownership during itspresentation to the grand jury. 
-29-artifacts after repatriation.28
“A grand jury indictment must be based on probable
cause.”  
Ganal, 81 Hawai #i at 367, 917 P.2d at 379 (quotation
marks and citations omitted).  “Probable cause” has been defined
as “a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary caution
or prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong
suspicion of the guilt of the accused.”  Id. (citation, internal
quotation marks, and brackets omitted).  Furthermore, in order to
support an indictment, the prosecution must provide evidence of
each essential element of the charged offense to the grand jury. 
Ontai, 84 Hawai #i at 63-64, 929 P.2d at 76-77.  “If no evidence
is produced as to a material element of the offense, a person of
ordinary caution and prudence could not have a ‘strong suspicion’
that the defendant is guilty of the [charged] crime.”  Id. at 64,
929 P.2d at 77. 
Therefore, in order for the grand jury to have found
probable cause to support Taylor’s indictment for first degree
theft, the State must have produced evidence of each essential
element of the offense.  See Ontai, 84 Hawai #i at 64; 929 P.2d at
77.  This court has held that there are three material elements
for theft in the first degree under HRS §§ 708-830(1) and 708-***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
29Because the plain language of HRS § 708-800 mentions both
“possession” and “any other interest in” property, the statute appears to
contemplate that multiple parties could have a concurrent or shared propertyinterest in the property at issue.  However, “other interest” is not definedin the Hawai# i Revised Statutes nor is it defined in the Model Penal Code,
from which Hawai# i derived its definition of “property of another.”  Judicial
Council of Hawaii, Hawaii Penal Code (Proposed Draft) at 356 (1970); see Model
Penal Code and Commentaries article 223 (1962).  
The State asserts that it “provided evidence of at least four
named entities with a clear cut ‘other interest’ in the artifacts[,]” i.e.,the State, Hui Malama, OHA, and the Bishop Museum, and that NAGPRA does not“preclude those four groups from having an ‘other interest’ in theartifacts[.]”  More specifically, the State argues that “[b]ecause Hui Malamaand OHA (and perhaps Bishop Museum as well) have at least a cultural interestin the artifacts, [HRS] § 708-800’s ‘other interest’ standard is easilysatisfied.”  However, the State cites no authority for the position that an“other interest” encompasses a “cultural interest[.]”  The State furtherargues that “the Bishop Museum and the State also have an ‘other interest’ inthe artifacts because they, like Hui Malama and OHA, participated in therepatriation and reburial.”  Because we conclude that the State presentedsufficient evidence to the grand jury to establish that someone other thanTaylor had a possessory interest in the artifacts, we do not address theState’s arguments concerning “other” interests, and express no opinion with
regard to their merits. 
 
-30-830.5(1)(a):  that “the defendant intended to:  (1) obtain or
exert control over the property of another; (2) deprive the other
of his or her property; and (3) deprive another of property that
exceeds $20,000 in value.”  State v. Duncan, 101 Hawai# i 269,
279, 67 P.3d 768, 778 (2003).  HRS § 708-800 defines “[p]roperty
of another” as “property which any person, other than the
defendant, has possession of or any other interest in[.]”29  Id.
Because Taylor does not dispute that the State presented evidence
satisfying the second and third elements for theft in the first
degree, we focus on the first element – that Taylor obtained or
exerted control over the property of another.  See id.  at 279, 67
P.3d at 778.  
The following facts were presented to the grand jury
through the testimony of Agent Kaikana:  (1) in the 1800s, J.S.***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Emerson “took artifacts out of [Kanupa Cave,]” some of which he
 
then sold to the Bishop Museum and the Peabody Museum Essex in
 Massachusetts; (2) those artifacts were “repatriated” from the
 
30
museums and “reburied” at Kanupa Cave;  (3) “Hui Malama,
. . . OHA, [the] State, and the Bishop Museum . . . . all got
 together, brought the thing [sic] back to Kanupa and it was
 repatriated”; (4) Taylor, who owned a store in Captain Cook that
 sold antiquities, and an accomplice went to the cave “with the
 direction of some third party”; (5) Taylor and the accomplice
 “removed the rock that was blocking the cave entrance” and went
 inside; (6) there they found “a lot of artifacts or items that
 were in woven lauhala basket [sic] and wrapped in black cloth”;
 (7) they took about 157 artifacts from the cave and tried to sell
 them; (8) some of the artifacts bore “Emerson tags or [] labels”;
 (9) Taylor knew that the artifacts belonged to the J.S. Emerson
 Collection; (10) Taylor, “[t]o hide or conceal the sale of these
 items, [took] the Emerson tags off of the items, the artifacts,
 to sell [them]”; and (11) the estimated value of the artifacts
 was between $800,000 and $1.2 million.
 
Based on the foregoing evidence, “a person of ordinary
 
caution or prudence” could “believe and conscientiously entertain
 a strong suspicion” that the artifacts were “property of
 
30
 The grand jury was not provided with a definition of
“repatriated”; however, it is commonly defined as “to restore or return to the
country of origin, allegiance, or citizenship.” Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate
Dictionary 1055 (11th ed. 2009).
 
-31­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
31Abandoned property is generally defined as “that to which the
owner has voluntarily relinquished all right, title, claim, and possession,
with the intention of terminating his or her ownership, but without vestingownership in any other person, and with the intention of not reclaiming anyfuture rights therein.”  1 Am. Jur. 2d Abandoned, Lost, and Unclaimed Property§ 3 (2005) (footnote omitted).
-32-another.”  See Ganal, 81 Hawai #i at 367, 917 P.2d at 379.  Most
notably, the grand jury heard evidence that artifacts were worth
at least $800,000.  It further heard evidence from which it could
reasonably be inferred that the artifacts had been purposely
secreted in the cave and not simply discarded, including the fact
that the cave entrance had been covered with a rock, the items
were enclosed in lauhala and black cloth, and reburial had been
undertaken in a joint effort involving the State of Hawai# i, as
well as “Hui Malama, . . . OHA, . . . and the Bishop Museum[.]” 
Thus, the evidence before the grand jury did not
suggest that the artifacts were abandoned.31  If the artifacts
were abandoned, they could not, by definition, be “property of
another,” and an indictment for first degree theft could not be
maintained.  Indeed, in his application Taylor analogizes his
case to an environmentalist picking up a discarded soda can to
recycle it or a small boy picking up a penny by the side of the
road, and suggests that their conduct would be criminalized by
the ICA’s holding.  However, those hypothetical cases are clearly
distinguishable, since they did not involve property worth at
least $800,000 which the evidence reasonably suggested had been
carefully wrapped and secreted in a cave as part of a multi-party***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
repatriation effort.
 
Nor did the evidence in the grand jury suggest that
 
Taylor owned the items or that he had permission to take the
 
artifacts. To the contrary, the evidence of Taylor’s conduct
 after he took the items (removing the tags so that they would be
 more difficult to trace) supports the reasonable inference that
 he neither owned them nor had permission to take them.
 
Rather, the value of the items and the manner and
 
circumstances in which they were reburied were sufficient to
 create a “strong suspicion” that someone other than Taylor
 retained a right of possession in the artifacts and that the
 items were accordingly the “property of another” when Taylor took
 them. It is true, as Taylor points out, that the evidence
 presented to the grand jury was not sufficient to establish
 exactly which entity or entities had a possessory or other
 interest in the artifacts.
32 However, our caselaw does not
 
require that level of specificity in order to sustain an
 
32 Accordingly, we respectfully disagree with the dissent’s assertion
that Agent Kaikana’s testimony “left the impression” that the artifacts
belonged to the Bishop Museum or the Peabody Essex Museum. Dissenting opinion
at 36-37. Agent Kaikana testified that J.S. Emerson “took artifacts out of
that cave” and sold some of them to the Bishop Museum and Peabody Essex
Museum, and that those artifacts were in turn “repatriated from both the
Bishop Museum and the Peabody Essex [Museum]” and were “reburied” at Kanupa
Cave by “Hui Malama, . . . OHA, [the] State, and the Bishop Museum.” Inasmuch
 as Agent Kaikana testified that the artifacts were “eventually repatriated
from both the Bishop Museum and the Peabody Essex [Museum],” his testimony did
not “[leave] the impression” that the artifacts continued to belong to either
of the museums. Moreover, although Agent Kaikana testified that items
recovered during the investigation in Taylor’s case bore J.S. Emerson
Collection labels and/or were part of the museums’ collections, this testimony
was relevant to prove that the items in Taylor’s possession were the same
items that had been removed from Kanupa Cave.
 
-33­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
indictment. See Ganal, 81 Hawai 'i at 367, 917 P.2d at 379 
(“[T]he evidence to support an indictment need not be sufficient 
to support a conviction.”). 
This point is illustrated by our holding in Nases, 
where the defendant was charged with and convicted of theft of a
 calculator pursuant to HRS § 708-830. 65 Haw. at 218, 649 P.2d
 1139. On appeal, the defendant argued that there was a fatal
 variance between the charge and the evidence presented against
 him at trial. Id. The charged offense alleged that the
 
calculator was the property of “Setsuko Yokoyama and Setsuko
 Yokoyama doing business as Kalakaua Kleaners, whereas it was
 actually the property of Kalakaua Kleaners, a corporation.” Id. 
This court held that it was “undisputed that the calculator did
 not belong to [the defendant] but was the property of another. 
The particular ownership of the property in question was not an
 essential element in proving the crime and there is no fatal
 variance between the charge and the proof.” Id. at 218, 649 P.2d
 
at 1139-40. Rather, 
[i]t has long been settled that where the offense is
obtaining control over the property of another, proof
that the property was the property of another is all
that is necessary and the naming of the person owning
the property in the indictment is surplusage.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
Although the facts of Nases differ from the instant
 
case in that Nases involved a variance between the indictment and
 
the evidence presented at trial, Nases supports the proposition
 
-34­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the State need only prove that the property taken is that
 
“of another.” Id. Therefore, because the State presented
 
sufficient evidence that the artifacts were “property of
 another,” it was not required to present evidence to the grand
 jury establishing which entity or entities had a possessory
 interest in the artifacts.
33
 
However, the ICA erred when it stated that
 
“specification of the actual owner of the property for purposes
 of this theft charge is not required and only evidence that the
 property was not that of Taylor is required.” Taylor, 2011 WL
 661793, at *9 (emphasis added). As discussed supra, HRS § 708­800 defines “property of another” in HRS § 708-830(1) as
 “property which any person, other than the defendant, has
 possession of or any other interest in[.]” “Property” is defined
 in HRS § 708-800 as “any money, personal property, real property,
 thing in action, evidence of debt or contract, or article of
 value of any kind.” Consequently, as Taylor correctly contends,
 “something may well be ‘property’ (because it is an article of
 value of some kind) but not yet ‘property of another’ (because
 someone does not possess it or have any other interest in it).” 
Therefore, the ICA erred when it stated that “only evidence that
 the property was not that of Taylor is required.” Id.
 
33
 Accordingly, we respectfully disagree with the dissent’s
conclusion that the indictment could not be sustained absent “the presentation
of facts supporting a property interest in a Native Hawaiian organization[.]”
Dissenting opinion at 26; see also dissenting opinion at 40. 
-35­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In sum, because the State presented evidence that “a
 
person of ordinary caution or prudence” could “believe and
 
conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion” that the artifacts
 were the “property of another,” there was sufficient evidence to
 support Taylor’s indictment, and the circuit court did not err in
 denying his motion to dismiss on this ground. 
B.	 The ICA did not err in affirming the circuit court’s holding
that the state prosecution was not barred by HRS § 701-112
 
Taylor argues that “the ICA gravely erred in holding
 
that [Taylor’s] prior federal conviction did not bar the State’s
 
prosecution in this matter under HRS § 701-112,” because the
 state prosecution required proof of the same facts as the federal
 prosecution. For the reasons set forth below, Taylor’s argument
 is without merit.
 
HRS § 701-112 provides in relevant part:
 
When behavior constitutes an offense within the
 
concurrent jurisdiction of this State and of the
United States or another state, a prosecution in any
such other jurisdiction is a bar to a subsequent
prosecution in this State under any of the following
circumstances:
 
(1) The first prosecution resulted in an
acquittal which has not subsequently been set
aside or in a conviction as defined in section
 701-110(3), and the subsequent prosecution is
based on the same conduct, unless:
 
(a) The offense for which the defendant is
subsequently prosecuted requires proof of
a fact not required by the former offense
and the law defining each of the offenses
is intended to prevent a substantially
different harm or evil[.]
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Thus, assuming arguendo that the theft and conspiracy
 
-36­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
offenses in the instant case were based on the same underlying
 
conduct,34 Taylor’s theft prosecution was permissible under HRS
 
§ 701-112(1)(a) if (1) the theft offense required proof of facts
 not required for the conspiracy offense; and (2) the law defining
 each of the offenses is intended to prevent a substantially
 different harm of evil. See HRS § 701-112(1)(a).
 
This court has addressed HRS § 701-112 only once, in 
State v. Myers, 100 Hawai
'i 132, 134, 58 P.3d 643, 645 (2002). 
However, Myers is inapposite because the sole issue considered by this court was “whether [a Uniform Code of Military Justice] Article 15 nonjudicial punishment is equivalent to a criminal ‘conviction’ as defined in HRS § 701-110(3).” Id. This court 
held that the Article 15 nonjudicial punishment was not equivalent to a conviction, as required under HRS § 701-112(1), and thus the court was not required to consider whether the exceptions set forth in HRS § 701-112(1)(a) applied. Id. at 137, 
58 P.3d at 648. Thus, this court did not address the meaning of the phrases “proof of a fact not required by the former offense” and “substantially different harm or evil,” and therefore there is no controlling authority on this point. See id. 
1. Proof of a fact not required
 
In interpreting a statute, “where the statutory
 
34
 While the State argued in the ICA and this court that the offenses
were not based on the same underlying conduct, this issue was not raised in
the circuit court. Because we conclude that the theft prosecution was
permissible under the two-pronged exception set forth in HRS § 701-112(1)(a),
we do not address this issue.
 
-37­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give 
effect to its plain and obvious meaning.” Awakuni v. Awana, 115 
Hawai'i 126, 133, 165 P.3d 1027, 1034 (2007) (citation omitted). 
The unambiguous language of HRS § 701-112(1)(a) states that a subsequent prosecution is permissible if, inter alia, the subsequent offense requires proof of some fact not required by the former offense. The drafters of the Hawaii Penal Code noted that “it seems very unjust to permit the defendant to be prosecuted twice simply because of the fortuitous circumstance that the defendant’s behavior constitutes an offense in more than one jurisdiction[,]” unless the requirements set forth in HRS § 701-112(1)(a) are met. HRS § 701-112 cmt. (1993).
35 
In the instant case, Taylor was charged in state court
 
with theft in the first degree. HRS § 708-830.5(1)(a) provides
 that “[a] person commits the offense of theft in the first degree
 if the person commits theft . . . [o]f property or services, the
 value of which exceeds $20,000[.]” HRS § 708-830(1) further
 provides that “[a] person commits theft if the person . . .
 obtains or exerts unauthorized control over the property of
 another with intent to deprive the other of the property.” As
 noted supra, this court explained in Duncan that there are three
 material elements for theft in the first degree: that “the
 defendant intended to: (1) obtain or exert control over the
 
35
 Although the commentary accompanying the Hawaii Penal Code “may be
used as an aid in understanding the provisions of [the] Code,” it is “not []
evidence of legislative intent.” HRS § 701-105 (1993).
 
-38­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
property of another; (2) deprive the other of his or her 
property; and (3) deprive another of property that exceeds $20,000 in value.” 101 Hawai
'i at 279, 67 P.3d at 778. 
In contrast, in his federal prosecution, Taylor pled
 
guilty to conspiracy under 18 U.S.C. § 371 to commit trafficking
 under 18 U.S.C. § 1170(b). 18 U.S.C. § 371 (1994) defines
 conspiracy, in relevant part, as follows:
 
If two or more persons conspire either to commit any
offense against the United States, or to defraud the
United States, or any agency thereof in any manner or
for any purpose, and one or more of such persons do
any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more
than five years, or both.
 
18 U.S.C. § 1170(b) defines the trafficking crime as:
 
Whoever knowingly sells, purchases, uses for profit,
or transports for sale or profit any Native American
cultural items obtained in violation of [NAGPRA] shall
be fined in accordance with this title, imprisoned not
more than one year, or both, and in the case of a
second or subsequent violation, be fined in accordance
with this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or
both.
 
Therefore, in order to prove Taylor’s conspiracy
 
offense, the federal government was required to prove that (1)
 
Taylor and one or more persons conspired to commit an offense
 against the United States; (2) the offense involved the knowing
 sale, purchase, use for profit, or transport for sale or profit
 of items; (3) the items were Native American cultural items;
 (4) the items were or would be obtained in violation of NAGPRA;
 and (5) Taylor and/or one of his co-conspirators committed an act
 in furtherance of the conspiracy. See 18 U.S.C. §§ 371 and
 
1170(b).
 
-39­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
36Taylor argues that HRS § 701-112(1)(a) does not set forth a “same
elements” test, but rather requires a more fact-specific approach.  However,
even assuming arguendo HRS § 701-112(1)(a) does not set forth a “sameelements” test, Taylor’s argument fails because Taylor’s prosecution for theftin state court requires proof of facts not required by his federal conspiracyconviction, i.e., that the property involved had a value in excess of $20,000.
37Since the requirement that the property involved have a value in
excess of $20,000 clearly satisfies the requirement set forth in HRS § 701-112(1)(a) that the subsequent prosecution involve “proof of a fact notrequired by the former offense[,]” we do not address whether the element of“intent to deprive” was required in both the federal and st
ate prosecut 
See Taylor,ions,
although this element was raised and discussed by the ICA. WL 661793, at *3.  2011
38In support of this assertion, Taylor cites Yates v. United States,
354 U.S. 298, 312 (1957), overruled on other grounds by Burks v. UnitedStates, 437 U.S. 1 (1978), for the proposition that “[i]n pleading guilty,[Taylor] admitted to numerous overt acts and thus, much like a generalverdict, each of those facts predicated and were required by his federal
conviction.”  However, Yates is inapposite because it considered alternative
theories of guilt offered in support of a single charge.  Id.  There, the
Court noted that a verdict must be set aside “in cases where the verdict issupportable on one ground, but not on another, and it is impossible to tellwhich ground the jury selected.”  Id. (citations omitted).  Accordingly, Yatesstands for the proposition that, where the jury returns a general verdict, a
(continued...)
-40-Thus, Taylor’s federal prosecution, unlike his state
prosecution, did not require proof of facts that the property
involved had a value in excess of $20,000.  Compare 18 U.S.C.
§§ 371 and 1170(b) with HRS §§ 708-830(1) and 708-830.5(1)(a). 
The value element of the first degree theft offense is an
additional fact required by HRS § 701-112.36  Therefore, the ICA
correctly concluded that the state theft offense requires proof
of a value element, which the federal conspiracy offense does
not.37 
Nevertheless, Taylor argues that HRS § 701-
112(1)(a) precludes the theft charge because all the facts
required to convict under HRS §§ 708-830(1) and 708-830.5(1)(a)
are admitted to in his plea agreement.38  For example, Taylor***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
argues that “[t]he factual basis for [his] guilty plea in the
 
federal case also included the facts that he attempted to sell
 one artifact for $40,000 and another for $5,600, and actually did
 sell two others for $150 and $2,083.” Although Taylor’s federal
 plea agreement mentions the prices at which Taylor attempted to
 sell and did sell several items, neither 18 U.S.C. § 371 nor 18
 U.S.C. § 1170(b) has a value requirement, and thus such facts
 were unnecessary to Taylor’s conviction. The values listed in
 Taylor’s federal plea agreement did not become required elements
 of his conspiracy offense merely by their placement in the plea
 agreement. 
2. Substantially different harm or evil
 
Additionally, HRS § 701-112(1)(a) requires the former
 
and subsequent offenses be intended to prevent substantially
 different harms or evils. Taylor does not challenge the ICA’s
 conclusion that HRS §§ 708-830(1) and 708-830.5(1)(a) and 18
 U.S.C. §§ 371 and 1170(b) are intended to prevent substantially
 different harms or evils. Moreover, any such argument is without
 merit. 
In determining the harm or evil a statute is intended 
to prevent, this court looks primarily to the language of the statute. See, e.g., State v. Rapozo, 123 Hawai
'i 329, 338, 235 
38(...continued)
conviction will not stand unless each theory of guilt offered is supported by
the evidence. See id. It does not, as Taylor argues, stand for the
proposition that all of the facts Taylor pled to were “required” for his
federal conviction, as that term is used in HRS § 701-112(1)(a). 
-41­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.3d 325, 334 (2010) (“HRS § 702-236 further requires
 
consideration of ‘the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the
 law defining the offense [.]’ As with all efforts to determine
 legislative intent, that inquiry relies primarily on the plain
 language of the statute.”) (brackets in original) (citations
 omitted); State v. Kupihea, 98 Hawai
'i 196, 206, 46 P.3d 498, 508 
(2002) (citation omitted) (noting that legislative intent is
 “obtained primarily from the language of the statute”). This
 court has explained that the purpose of Hawaii’s theft statute is
 to “protect[] owners from the deprivation of their property[.]” 
State v. Freeman, 70 Haw. 434, 439, 774 P.2d 888, 892 (1989). 
As noted by the ICA, the United States Supreme Court
 
has identified the harm or evil intended to be prevented by 18
 U.S.C. § 371, concerning conspiracy, as follows:
 
It is well settled that the law of conspiracy serves
ends different from, and complementary to, those
served by criminal prohibitions of the substantive
offense. Because of this, consecutive sentences may be
imposed for the conspiracy and for the underlying
crime. Our decisions have identified two independent
values served by the law of conspiracy. The first is
protection of society from the dangers of concerted
criminal activity. . . . 
The second aspect is that conspiracy is an inchoate
crime. This is to say, that, although the law
generally makes criminal only antisocial conduct, at
some point in the continuum between preparation and
consummation, the likelihood of a commission of an act
is sufficiently great and the criminal intent
sufficiently well formed to justify the intervention
of the criminal law. The law of conspiracy identifies
the agreement to engage in a criminal venture as an
event of sufficient threat to social order to permit
the imposition of criminal sanctions for the agreement
alone, plus an overt act in pursuit of it, regardless
of whether the crime agreed upon actually is
committed.
 
United States v. Feola, 420 U.S. 671, 693-94 (1975) (citations
 
-42­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
omitted). 
Applying the rationale of Feola here, the state theft
 
offense with which Taylor was charged addresses a harm or evil
 
(the deprivation of property rights) different from that
 addressed by the federal conspiracy statute, which addresses the
 threat posed by agreements to commit criminal conduct. 
Moreover, the purpose of NAGPRA has been articulated by
 
the federal courts as follows:
 
The primary purpose of NAGPRA, which is to assist
Native Americans in the repatriation of items that the
tribes consider sacred, differs from that of the
Antiquities Act, which is directed against the
unlawful taking or destruction of property. Because
the intended purposes of the two acts differ
significantly, they should not be treated similarly
for sentencing calculations.
 
United States v. Corrow, 941 F. Supp. 1553, 1567 (D.N.M. 1996),
 
aff’d, 119 F.3d 796 (10th Cir. 1997). 
Accordingly, NAGPRA and the state theft statutes were
 
intended to prevent substantially different harms or evils,
 because the protection of graves and cultural items that is the
 purpose of NAGPRA and the protection from the deprivation of
 property that is the purpose of Hawaii’s theft statute,
 constitute substantially different interests. While both
 statutes involve a deprivation of some interest, the theft statue
 seeks to protect general property interests, while NAGPRA
 protects a very specific interest in Native American cultural
 items and graves. Moreover, NAGPRA contains a savings provision
 that expressly states that the statute is in no way intended to
 
-43­    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interfere with either state or federal theft law. 25 U.S.C.
 
§ 3009(5) (“Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to. . .
 limit the application of any State or Federal law pertaining to
 theft or stolen property.”). 
Therefore, the ICA correctly held that Taylor’s theft
 
offense required proof of facts which his federal conspiracy
 offense did not, and was designed to prevent a substantially
 different harm. Accordingly, Taylor’s prosecution in state court
 is not barred under HRS § 701-112 and the circuit court did not
 err in denying Taylor’s motion to dismiss in this respect.
39
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Although the ICA erred in stating that “only evidence
 
that the property was not that of Taylor [was] required” to
 establish that the artifacts were the “property of another,” we
 hold that the State nonetheless presented sufficient evidence to
 the grand jury to find probable cause that the property taken was
 “property of another.” We further hold that Taylor’s prosecution
 in state court is not barred by HRS § 701-112 because the theft
 charge requires proof of a fact not required for his federal
 conspiracy offense, and the purposes behind the state and federal
 statutes differ. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the ICA
,
 
39
 In the ICA, Taylor similarly argued that his state prosecution was
barred by article I, section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution, concerning double
jeopardy. The ICA rejected this argument, and Taylor does not challenge this
holding in his application. Accordingly, we need not address this issue. See 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 40.1(d)(1). 
-44­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which, as corrected by this opinion,40 affirmed the circuit
 
court’s November 14, 2007 order denying Taylor’s motion to
 
dismiss the indictment. 
Todd Eddins for /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
petitioner/defendant­
appellant. 
Kimberly Tsumoto Guidryand Girard D. Lau, Deputy
Attorneys General, forrespondent/plaintiff­appellee.
 
40
 See supra n.2.
 
-45­