 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000722 01-MAR-2016 
11:57 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
---oOo--
-
DEBORAH J. WALTRIP, Petitioner/Claimant  -Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
TS ENTERPRISES, INC., DBA KIMO’S RESTAURANT, and  FIREMAN’ S FUND 
INSURANCE COMPANY, Respondent/Employer/Insurance Carrier  -
Appellee, and
  
SPECIAL COMPENSATION  FUND, Respondent/Appellee.
  
SCWC-11-0000722
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-11-0000722; CASE NO. AB 2007  -047(M) (7-02-00262))
  
MARCH 1, 2016
  
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON,   JJ.,
   
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING IN THE RE  SULT, 
 
WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS  
  
OPINION  OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
I. Introduction 
This case arises from a
n accident suffered by 
Petitioner/Claimant-Appellant, Deborah J. Waltrip (“Waltrip” ),  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
   
                     
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
while she worked for TS Enterprises, Inc., dba Kimo’s Restaurant 
(“Restaurant”), on Maui.1 The Special Compensation Fund (“Fund”) 
established under Hawai i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 386 -151 
(1993), is also an interested party.2 We accepted certiorari to 
address certain procedural issues implicated by Waltrip’s pro se 
appeal. 
In brief, Waltrip was not given an award by the 
Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations 
(“DLIR”) for certain aspects of her claimed injuries, and she 
appealed to the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board 
(“LIRAB”). Following a hearing, LIRAB issued its Decision and 
Order (“July 2011 Decision”) . Unsatisfied with LIRAB’s 
decision, Waltrip, pro se, filed two separate motions, each of 
which was denied. The first motion was titled, “ Request to 
Reconsider” (“August Request”). The second motion was titled, 
“Request That the July 25th, 2011 Decision and Order Be Vacated 
and That the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board Issue 
1 The term “Employer” is used to collectively refer to Restaurant and its 
workers’ compensation carrier, Fireman =s Fund Insurance Company. 
2 See HRS § 386- 151 (a) (1993) (“There is hereby created a fund to be 
known as the special compensation fund which shall consist of payments 
made to it as provided by law. . . . ”); HRS § 386 -56 (1993) (“Where an 
injured employee or the employee’s dependents fail to receive prompt 
and proper compensation and this default is caused through no fault of 
the employee, the director shall pay the full amount of all 
compensation awards and benefits from the special compensation fund to 
the employee or dependent.”). 
2
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
     
 
   
  
  
  
 Waltrip v. TS Enters.
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
a New Notice of Initial Conference and Restart the Proceedings 
All Over Again Including New Discovery Deadlines and a Retrial 
of the Issues” (“September Request”). Waltrip appealed to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”). 
Fund then filed a motion to dismiss Waltrip’s appeal 
for lack of jurisdiction, arguing that her notice of appeal was untimely filed. The ICA issued an “Order Granting in Part and 
Denying in Part Appellee Special Compensation Fund’s May 3, 2012 
Motion to Dismiss Appeal for Lack of Jurisdiction ” (“Partial 
Dismissal Order”) stating that Waltrip’s notice of a ppeal was 
untimely as to LIRAB’s July 20 11 Decision, and was also untimely 
as to LIRAB’s order denying the August Request. See 
Waltrip v. 
TS Enters. , No. CAAP-11-0000722, at 3 (App. May 31, 2012) 
(order). As to Waltrip’s appeal of LIRAB’s order denying her 
September Request, the ICA concluded that “it appears that we 
might have appellate jurisdiction over [it].” Id. Accordingly, 
the ICA permitted the parties to proceed with briefing. 
Ultimately, the ICA found LIRAB lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over Waltrip’s September Request when it construed 
that request as a second motion for reconsideration over which 
the Board lacked statutory or regulatory authority to rule. See  
, No. CAAP-11-0000722, at 2 (App. Aug. 28, 
2014) (SDO). 
The following timeline provides a sequence of major 
3

  
 
 
 
    
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
12/2/2008   
  
 
10/12/2009,    
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
8/29/2011 -  LIRAB issues an “Order Denying Claimant’s 
Request to Reconsider”  (“Order Denying August Request”)   
 
 
 
  
  
 
9/28/2011   
 
  
 
9/29/2011  
   
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
events relevant to the procedural posture presented by this 
case: 
9/18/2001 – Waltrip is injured at work 
9/04/2002  
  – Waltrip files a workers’ compensation claim 
1/04/2007 – Director of DLIR issues a decision that awards 
Waltrip medical care, services, and supplies; temporary 
total disability benefits; partial disability benefits for 
her lumbar spine, psychological condition, and left leg; and $250 for disfigurement 
1/23/2007 – Waltrip and Employer both timely a ppeal to 
LIRAB regarding the Director’s January 4, 2007 decision 
12/28/2007 – LIRAB temporarily remands the case to the 
Director for additional findings regarding the Employer’s 
refusal to compensate for a referral and treatment plan 11/14/2008 – Director issues a supplemental decision 
determining that the referral and treatment plan were 
unnecessary 
 – Waltrip timely appeals t he Director’s November 
14, 2008 supplemental decision to LIRAB 
 7/19–7/21/2010  – LIRAB holds hearings 
7/25/2011 – LIRAB issues its Decision and Order (“July 2011 
Decision”) 
8/23/2011 – Waltrip files a “Request to Reconsider” 
(“August Request”) 
9/23/2011 
– Waltrip files a “Request That the July 25th, 
2011 Decision and Order Be Vacated and T hat [LIRAB] Issue a 
New Notice of Initial Conference and Restart the 
Proceedings All Over Again Including New Discovery 
Deadlines and a Retrial of the Issues” (“ September 
Request”) 
-LIRAB issues an “Order Denying Claimant’s 
Motion to Vacate Decision of July 25, 2011” (“Order Denying September Request ”) 
 
– Waltrip files a notice of appeal from the July 
2011 Decision and Order Denying August Request 
10/28/2011  – Waltrip amends her notice of a
ppeal and lists 
the July 2011 Decision and Order Denying September Request 
4
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
as the subjects of her appeal 
5/3/2012 – Fund files a “ Motion to Dismiss the Appeal for 
Lack of Appellate Jurisdiction” (“Motion to Dismiss”) 
5/31/2012 - ICA issues “Order Granting in Part and Denying 
in Part Appellee Special Compensation Fund’s May 3, 2012 
Motion to Dismiss Appeal for Lack of Jurisdiction ” 
(“Partial Dismissal Order”) 
8/28/2014 - ICA issues a Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”) 
vacating the Order Denying September Request and remanding 
the case to LIRAB for the entry of an order dismissing the 
September Request for lack of jurisdiction 
10/2/2014 - ICA issues its Judgment on Appeal 
10/31/2014 – Waltrip files an Application for Writ of 
Certiorari (“Application”) 
Upon accepting certiorari, this court ordered 
supplemental briefing to address the following issues:  
1. Whether this court has jurisdiction under Hawai i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 602 -59(c) (Supp. 2013) to review the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals’ May 31, 2012 “Order Granting in 
Part and Denying in Part Appellee Special Compensation Fund’s May 
3, 2012 Motion to Dismiss A ppeal for Lack of Jurisdiction;” 
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred in the May 31, 2012 order by 
granting in part and denying in part, rather than wholly denying, 
the Special Compensation Fund’s May 3, 2012 Motion to Dismiss and 
addressing any partial dismissal in its eventual summary disposition order; and 
3. Whether the ICA gravely erred in the May 31, 2012 order by 
granting in pertinent part the Special Compensation Fund’s May 3, 
2012 Motion to Dismiss with respect to . . . Waltrip ’s appeal 
from . . . [LIRAB’s] August 29, 2011 “Order Denying Claimant’s 
Request to Reconsider.” 
We hold as follows: 
(1) because: (a) under Hawai i Rules of Appellate Procedure   
(“HRAP”)  Rule 35(a), an order partially dismissing an appeal is 
not a “dispositional order”; (b) pursuant  to HRS § 602-59(c) 
(Supp. 2011), “[a]n application for a writ of certiorari may be 
5
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
                     
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
filed with the supreme court no later than thirty days after the 
filing of the judgment or dismissal order of the intermediate 
appellate court,” and (c) Waltrip timely filed her application 
for certiorari from the ICA’s Judgment on Appeal, this court has jurisdiction to review both the ICA’s Partial Dismissal Order 
and SDO which underpin the Judgment on Appeal;
3 (2) the ICA did 
not err in issuing its Partial Dismissal Order, rather than 
wholly denying Fund ’s Motion to Dismiss and later addressing any 
partial dismissal in its eventual SDO, as it has the power under 
HRS § 602-57(3) (Supp. 2010), “[t]o make or issue any order 
. . . necessary or appropriate in the aid of its jurisdiction . . . ,” and also because it referred to its partial dismissal 
in its subsequent SDO; (3) in reviewing the Partial Dismissal 
Order, the ICA did not err in dismissing Waltrip’s appeal of 
LIRAB’s (a) July 2011 Decision and (b) Order Denying August 
Request, for untimeliness; and (4) pursuant to the fundamental 
tenets that “[p]leadings prepared by pro se litigants should be 
interpreted liberally, ” Dupree v. Hiraga , 121 Hawai i 297, 314, 
219 P.3d 1084, 1101 (2009) (citation omitted), and that 
“pleadings [and letters] in administrative proceedings are to be 
construed liberally rather than technically,” id. (citing Perry 
v. Planning Comm’n, 62 Haw. 666, 685-86, 619 P.2d 95, 108 
3 The Judgment on Appeal was entered pursuant to the SDO; the SDO refers to 
the Partial Dismissal Order. 
6
  
 
 
 
  
 
                     
     
 
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
(1980)); Doe v. Attorney General , 135 Hawai i 390, 399, 351 P.3d 
1156, 1165 (2015) (discussing id.), the ICA erred in holding in 
its SDO that LIRAB  had no authority to rule on the merits of 
Waltrip’s September  Request because it was essentially an 
unauthorized second motion  for reconsideration under HRS § 386-
4 87(d) (1993),  on the same grounds as the August Request, rather 
than viewing it as a motion to reopen under HRS § 386  -89(c)  
5 (1993),  when Waltrip’ s September Request was  filed more than a 
4	 In the absence of an appeal and within thirty days after 
mailing of a certif ied copy of the appellate board’ s 
decision or order, the appellate board may, upon the 
application of the director or any other party, or upon its 
own motion, reopen the matter and thereupon may take 
further evidence or may modify its findings, conclusions or 
decisions. The time to initiate judicial review shall run 
from the date of mailing of the further decision if the matter has been reopened. If the application for reopening 
is denied, the time to initiate judicial review shall run 
from the date of mailing of the denial decision. 
HRS § 386- 87(d). 
5	 On the application of any party in interest, supported by 
a showing of substantial evidence, on the ground of a 
change in or of a mistake in a determination of fact 
related to the physical condition of the injured employee, the director may, at any time prior to eight years after 
date of the last payment of compensation, whether or not a 
decision awarding compensation has been issued, or at any 
time prior to eight years after the rejection of a claim, 
review a compensation case and issue a decision which may award, terminate, continue, reinstate, increase, or 
decrease compensation. No compensation case may be 
reviewed oftener than once in six months and no case in 
which a claim has been rejected shall be reviewed more than 
once if on such review the claim is again rejected. . . . This subsection shall not apply when the employer’ s 
liability for compensation has been discharged in whole by the payment of a lump sum in accordance with section 386 -
54. 
HRS § 386- 89(c). 
7
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
year after LIRAB’s hearing and she had attached post-hearing 
letters from her treating psychiatrist discussing both her 
physical and mental condition, which could be construed to 
constitute “substantial evidence . . . of a change in . . . a 
determination of fact related to [her] physical condition” pursuant to HRS § 386-89. Such a motion, however, should have 
been submitted to the Director of DLIR instead of LIRAB. 
Accordingly, we affirm the ICA’ s Judgment on Appeal.  
The ICA’s Judgment as to the July 2011 Decision a nd August 
Request is affirmed. The ICA’s Judgment as to t he September 
Request is affirmed on other grounds. 
II. Background 
A. Work Injury to LIRAB Proceedings 
Waltrip sustained a work accident on September 18, 
2001 while working for Restaurant.  On September 4, 2002, she filed a claim for workers’ compensation benefits with DLIR.  
Waltrip described her work injury as pain in the left knee, 
reflex sympathetic dystrophy ( “RSD”), neuropathy, atrophy, and 
depression. Waltrip was represented by counsel during the proceedings before DLIR until April 2006.  Subsequently, she 
proceeded pro se. The Director of DLIR issued numerous interim 
decisions on Waltrip’ s claim including a January 4, 2007 
decision awarding Waltrip medical care, services, and supplies; temporary total disability benefits; permanent partial 
8
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
disability benefits for her lumbar spine, psychological 
condition, and left leg; and $250 for disfigurement. 
Both Waltrip and Employer appealed to LIRAB. Waltrip 
appealed in part because the Director did not award her benefits 
for RSD. Employer appealed in part because it disagreed with 
the permanent partial disability benefits awarded to Waltrip. 
LIRAB scheduled a hearing to commence on October 12, 
2009. In a letter da ted September 28, 2008, Waltrip’ s then 
treating physician, Dr. Paul Kaiwi, Jr. (“Dr. Kaiwi”), 
recommended that during the hearing, Waltrip should (1) have her legs elevated, (2) avoid contact with direct wind, air 
conditioning vents, or fans, and, (3) because of her sedating 
medications, be limited to one and one-half hours per day.  
Shortly after the hearing commenced on October 12, 2009, LIRAB 
became concerned that Waltrip would not be able to defend 
herself, speak on her own behalf, or cross-examine Employer’ s 
expert witness, based on the way she was speaking.  LIRAB 
therefore continued the hearing. 
On July 19, 2010, LIRAB resumed proceedings on O ahu.  
After noting that Waltrip appeared to be falling asleep, LIRAB 
continued the hearing to the following afternoon.  
At the start of the proceedings on July 20, 2010, 
LIRAB informed the parties that (1) after the close of the prior 
day’s proceedings, Waltrip was taken to the hospital and (2) 
9
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
LIRAB had spoken with Dr. Kaiwi by conference call that morning, 
in Waltrip’s presence and with her consent . According to LIRAB, 
after it informed Dr. Kaiwi that “Waltrip had fallen asleep at 
estimated intervals [of] once every minute or so,” Dr. Kaiwi 
reported that except for one visit when Waltrip was a little 
drowsy, she had “acted appropriate ly” each time he had seen her. 
Thus, he believed her falling asleep at the hearing might be 
evidence of “ulterior motives” or “malingering” behavior. He 
advised LIRAB that he would no longer be her physician. There 
was no indication, however, that Dr. Kaiwi had examined Waltrip 
on July 19, 2010, or inquired as to Waltrip’s symptoms other 
than that observed by LIRAB.  
Dr. Kaiwi also informed LIRAB during that phone 
conversation that Waltrip’ s medication included methadone at 
six-hour intervals and morphine at eight-hour intervals as needed for pain, and that he thought the methodone and morphine 
Waltrip had reported taking at 6:00 and 12:00 the day before had been appropriate. Dr. Kaiwi also informed LIRAB that Waltrip 
was to take Soma and Neurontin every twelve hours, twice daily. 
In response to follow up questions posed on the record 
by LIRAB to confirm the accuracy of LIRAB’s representations 
regarding the phone call with Dr. Kaiwi, Waltrip reported she had not gotten sleep the night before, that she did not know how 
she could fake falling asleep, that she had not taken morphine 
10
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
that day because she felt she did not need it, and that she took 
less pain medication than prescribed because she only took it 
three times daily as compared to the four times daily 
prescription. LIRAB proceeded with the hearing with Waltrip 
present, and concluded the hearing on July 21, 2010.  
LIRAB issued its July 2011 Decision about one year 
after the hearings were held.  LIRAB specifically found, among 
other things, “[b]ased upon the Board’s observation of [Waltrip] 
and the evidence in the record, the Board doubts the accuracy of 
and motivation for [Waltrip]’s testimony. The Board does not 
find [Waltrip] to be a credible witnes s.” LIRAB concluded that 
(1) Waltrip did not suffer from Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (“CRPS”) or RSD; (2) Employer was liable for workers’ 
compensation benefits relative to Waltrip’ s knee injury and 
psychological condition; (3) Waltrip did not provide credible 
evidence that she remained temporarily and totally disabled 
during the disputed period; (4) Waltrip did not suffer permanent partial disability to her leg or psyche as a result of the work 
injury, thus rendering apportionment moot; (5) Employer was not 
liable to reimburse Waltrip for disputed expenses; (6) Waltrip’ s 
medical care was not terminated by LIRAB’ s decision; and (7) 
Employer was not liable for a referral and a treatment plan. 
Thus, the July 2011 Decision affirmed the Director’ s decision 
denying Waltrip benefits for RSD and further reduced the 
11
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 LIRAB denied the August Request without explanatory 
remarks.  
 
- pre-trial proceedings were postponed in 2008 as I was inpatient 
in the psychiatric unit at Maui Memorial Medical Centre [sic][;]  
 
- during the pre- trial conference I told the Appeals Board that I 
didn’t understand the process[;]  
 
- At the initial Trial in 2009 the Appeals Board postponed the 
Trial ruling that I was unable to participate and sent me home[;]  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
benefits that the Director had granted Waltrip by terminating 
all temporary total disability benefits and all permanent 
partial disability benefits. 
Waltrip stated in her August Request:  
[T]his letter is a request to reconsider by the board the 
July 25th 2011 decision and order by the Appeals Board in 
the above case. The reason for the request is that I was unable to adequately represent myself at the proceedings 
due to my physical and psychological disability, nor was I 
able to adequately file necessary medical records in a 
timely fashion, arrange for expert witnesses or question 
opposing counsels [sic] witness effectively. I need legal 
representation and I am not competant [sic] to represent 
myself. 
On September 23, 2011, Waltrip then filed a document 
entitled “Request That the July 25th, 2011 Decision and Order Be 
Vacated and That [LIRAB] Issue a  New Notice of Initial 
Conference and Restart the Proceedings All Over Again Including New Discovery Deadlines and a  Retrial of the Issues”  (“September 
Request”). In it,  Waltrip stated:  
This request is  a [sic] based on the fact that I was medically  
not capable of representing myself at trial as evidenced by the 
following[:]   
- The Appeals Board ordered me to take medications as prescribed 
by Dr. Paul Ka iwi. The medical records show that Dr. Ka iwi had 
tripled the narcotic/sedating medications in the months before 
12
  
 
 
 
  
 
- Again on the first day of the next Trial (July 19th, 2010) the 
Board ruled that I could not participate and called an 
ambulance[;]
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Trial in [an] attempt to control the chronic pain. Hence I was 
unable to maintain consciousness at Trial[;]
 
- After spending hours under observation at Queens Medical Centre 
[sic] on July 19th, 2010, the Board commenced the Trial on July 
20th, 2010 regardless of my ability to participate effectively[;]  
- The additional proof that Mr [.]  McKee requested in his August 
25, 2011 letter is provided by Dr [.]  Grace Marian, included with 
this letter.  
Waltrip’s September Request included two recent 
letters from her psychiatrist, Dr. Grace Marian, which indicated 
that Waltrip had been her patient since December 2, 2010. An August 23, 2011 letter stated that because of her depression, 
“Complex Pain Syndrome,” numerous medications, and “unstable” 
psychiatric status, “it is definitely not possible” for Waltrip to work thirty hours per week and that Waltrip “should remain on 
full disability for at least a year . . . .” Dr. Marian’s 
September 20, 2011 letter stated that Waltri p’s depressive 
disorder, insomnia, lethargy, “Complex Pain Syndrome,” and the 
medications she was taking for treatment rendered her “not . . . 
capable of representing herself in court.” 
On September 28, 2011, LIRAB issued an order that 
construed Waltrip’s September Request as a motion to vacate, and 
denied it. 
13
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
B. ICA Proceedings 
Waltrip filed a notice of appeal with the ICA on 
September 29, 2011, stating she was appealing from (1) the July 
2011 Decision and (2) the Order Denying August Request. On 
October 28, 2011, she then submitted another notice of appeal 
(which was docketed as an amended notice of appeal), this time 
stating that she was appealing from the (1) July 2011 Decision 
and (2) the Order Denying September Request. 
Employer and Fund filed jurisdictional statements 
contesting the ICA’s jurisdiction on December 12, 2011. The 
next day, Fund amended its statement, but nevertheless contested 
the ICA’s jurisdiction. After the ICA had granted Waltrip two 
extensions, Waltrip timely filed a jurisdictional statement on 
February 21, 2012. In it, Waltrip clarified that her appeal was 
of the July 2011 Decision, Order Denying August Request, and 
Order Denying September Request. She further explained that Dr. 
Marian’s September 20 , 2011 letter, which was included with her 
September Request, served as “credible proof” that she was not 
capable of representing herself. Waltrip also pointed out that 
LIRAB’s July 2011 Decision “should have[, but did not] 
contain[],” language notifying her of the time frame in which an appeal may be filed.  Further, she asserted that when she called 
LIRAB on September 28, 2011, she was twice verbally advised that 
her appeal to the ICA was due on September 29, 2011. 
14
  
 
 
 
                      
    
 
  6 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
On May 3, 2012, Fund  filed a Motion to Dismiss 
Waltrip’s appeals from all three orders  (July 2011 Decision, 
Order Denying Claimant’s August Request, and Order Denying 
September Request) for lack of appellate jurisdiction.  Fund  
argued that the ICA lacked jurisdiction over Waltrip’s appeal  of 
the July 2011 Decision and the Order Denying August Request  
because  Waltrip’s appeal was one day late under  HRS § 386-87(d) 
(1993) and HRS § 386  -88 (Supp. 2010),   as she filed her notice of 
appeal on September 29, 2011, when  the filing deadline was 
September 28, 2011.  With respect to the Order Denying September 
Request, Fund argued that the ICA lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over Waltrip’ s  appeal because: (1) there is “ no 
legal authority for a se cond motion for reconsideration” before 
LIRAB; and (2) even if LIRAB had authority over a second motion 
for reconsideration, Waltrip’ s motion wa s untimely under HRS § 
386-87 and Hawai i Administrative Rules (“ HAR”)  § 12-47-53 6   
Reconsideration or reopening of decision or order. 
(a) In the absence of an appeal and within thirty days 
after mailing of a copy of the board’ s decision or order, 
the board may, upon the request of any party, or upon its 
own motion, reconsider or reopen the matter. If reopening 
is allowed, the board may take further evidence or may 
modify its decision or order. The time to initiate judicial 
review shall run from the date of mailing of the further 
decision if the matter has been reconsidered or reopened. If the request for reconsideration or reopening is denied, 
the time to initiate judicial review shall run from the 
date of mailing the denial decision. (b) The request for 
reconsideration or reopening shall be in writing and shall 
be served upon all parties. The request shall specify the 
reasons why reconsideration or reopening is warranted. (c) 
(continued . . .) 
15
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
    
 
 
   
                                                                  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
because it was filed sixty days after the July 2011 Decision was 
entered. 
On May 31, 2012, the ICA granted Fund’ s motion to 
dismiss with respect to the July 2011 Decision and the Order 
Denying August Request, but denied the motion with respect to 
the Order Denying September Request.  The ICA, noting that it 
“might have appellate jurisdiction” over the Order Denying 
September Request, directed the parties to proceed with briefing 
as to this order. 
After considering the parties’ briefs, t he ICA held in 
its SDO that LIRAB had no authority to rule on the merits of 
Waltrip’s September Request because it “ essentially was a second 
motion for reconsideration on the same grounds as the first . . 
. .” Waltrip, No. CAAP-11-0000722, SDO at 2. Accordingly, the 
ICA vacated LIRAB’s second post-judgment order and remanded the 
case to the LIRAB “ for entry of an order dismissing the motion 
[to vacate] for lack of jurisdiction.” Id. at 2. 
C. Waltrip’s Application for a Writ of Certiorari 
Waltrip timely filed an application for a writ of 
certiorari. Waltrip’s application stated that she was appeali ng 
the ICA’s SDO and Judgment on Appeal. Her application did not 
(. . . continued)  
A hearing on the request for reconsideration or reopening 
may be held at the board's discretion. 
HAR § 12- 47-53. 
16
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
state that she was appealing the Partial Dismissal Order.  
Notably, other than Waltrip asserting  that she was appealing the 
ICA’s SDO, the application lacks any argument regarding the 
ICA’s disposition.  
This court accepted certiorari pursuant to its 
discretionary authority under HRS § 
602-59(a) (Supp. 2011), to 
consider various procedural issues implicated by these pro se 
proceedings before LIRAB and the ICA.  See 
State v. Fields, 115 
Hawai
i 503, 536, 168 P.3d 955, 988 (2007) (stating that HRS § 
602-59(b) “is not descriptive of the scope of review 
determinative of the supreme court’ s decision to grant or deny 
certiorari” (quoting Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 73, in 1979 Senate 
Journal, at 992 (internal quotation marks, emphases, and 
brackets omitted))). 
III. Standards of Review 
A. LIRAB’s Decision 
Ordinarily, deference will be given to decisions of 
administrative agencies acting within the realm of their 
expertise. The rule of judicial deference, however, does 
not apply when the agency’s reading of the statute contravenes the legislature’s manifest purpose. 
Consequently, we have not hesitated to reject an incorrect 
or unreasonable statutory construction advanced by the 
agency entrusted with the statute’s implementation.  
 
Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 98 Hawai i 233, 245, 47 P.3d 
348, 360 (2002) (internal quotation marks, citations, and 
brackets omitted). 
17

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 [Findings of Fact] are reviewable under the 
clearly erroneous standard to determine if the agency 
decision was clearly erroneous in view of reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record.  
 
 [Conclusions of Law] are freely reviewable to 
determine if the agency’ s decision was in violation 
of constitutional or statutory provisions, in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of agency, or 
affected by other error of law.  
 
 A [Conclusion of Law] that presents mixed 
questions of fact and law is reviewed under the 
clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is 
dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the 
particular case. When mixed questions of law and 
fact are presented, an appellate court must give 
deference to the  agency’s expertise and experience in 
the particular field. The court should not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
The standard of review for decisions of the LIRAB is 
well-established:  
Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by HRS § 91-14(g) (1993), which states that: 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case with 
instructions for further proceedings; or it may 
reverse or modify the decision and order if the 
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, 
conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the 
whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized 
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion. 
We have previously stated: 
18
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
“[T]he existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that [is] review[ed]  de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  
Captain Andy’s Sailing, Inc. v. Dep’t of Land & Natural Res. , 
113 Hawai i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 (2006) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Igawa v. Koa House Rest. , 97 Hawai i 402, 405-06, 38 P.3d 570, 
573-74 (2001) (quoting In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 
Hawaii 97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 431 (2000)) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted). 
An FOF or a mixed determination of law and fact is clearly 
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to 
support the finding or determination, or (2) despite 
substantial evidence to support the finding or 
determination, the appellate court is left with the 
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
We have defined “substantial evidence” as credible evidence 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion. 
In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawai i at 119, 9 P.3d at 
431 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  
B. Jurisdiction 
IV. DISCUSSION 
We first clarify that this court has the authority to 
consider the entirety of the ICA’s disposition of Waltrip’s 
appeal. That is, although certain portions of Waltrip’s appeal 
had been dismissed pursuant to the ICA’s Partial Dismissal 
19
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
                     
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Order, that order became eligible for further appellate review 
upon the ICA’s disposition of Waltrip’s entire appeal.7 
Certainly, the ICA may choose to address issues raised 
in a notice of appeal in a piecemeal fashion, as it did here, to 
assist in the efficient disposition of cases. See HRS § 602 -
57(3) (“[T]he [ICA] shall have jurisdiction . . . [t]o make or issue any order . . . necessary or appropriate in the aid of its 
jurisdiction . . . .”). For example, that the ICA issued the 
Partial Dismissal Order prior to the deadline for Employer and 
Fund to file answering briefs, likely prompted the parties to 
more fully discuss remaining issues instead of addressing 
matters on which the court had already ruled. 
The ICA’s management of its cases, however, does not 
alter HRAP’s contemplation that a writ of certiorari only be 
from an order that is actually case dispositive
8 or otherwise 
7 This occurred on October 2, 2014, the issue date of the ICA’s Judgment on 
Appeal. 
Orders of dismissal do not generally require an entry of jud
gment.  See  
HRAP Rule 36(b)(1) (“After a final decision, other than an order of 
dismissal, has been filed in an appeal, the court rendering the decision 
shall prepare and submit to the appellate clerk for filing the judgment on 
appeal, signed by a judge or justice for the court.”). However, here, in 
addition to dismissing Waltrip’s appeal by way of its SDO, the ICA had also 
vacated LIRAB’s Order Denying September Request and remanded the case to 
LIRAB for entry of an order dismissing the motion for lack of jurisdiction. 
Accordingly, a judgment on appeal was warranted, and therefore Waltrip’s 
appeal was not disposed of until the judgment issued. 
8 This is so, even if the underlying notice of appeal also encompasses 
multiple post- judgment motions that may be separately ruled upon by the ICA.  
See HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) (“The notice of appeal shall be deemed to appeal the disposition of all post -judgment motions that are timely filed after the 
entry of the judgment or order.”). 
20
  
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
immediately appealable. See Greer v. Baker , ___Hawai i___, 
___P.3d___, No. SCWC-15-0000034, slip op. passim (Feb. 22, 2016) 
(stating examples of immediately appealable orders). This is 
evident by the use of singular nouns and the lack of specific 
reference in the HRS and HRAP that a non-case-dispositive 
partial dismissal order can serve as the basis for an 
application for a writ of certiorari. See HRS § 602-59(a) 
(Supp. 2011) (“After issuance of the intermediate appellate court’s judgment or dismissal order, a party may seek review of 
the intermediate appellate court’s decision and judgm ent or 
dismissal order only by application to the supreme court for a writ of certiorari, the acceptance or rejection of which shall be discretionary upon the supreme court.”); HRAP Rule 40.1(a)(1) 
(“A party may seek review of the intermediate court of appeals’ decision by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in 
the supreme court. The application shall be filed within 30 
days after the filing of the intermediate court of appeals’ 
judgment on appeal or dismissal order, unless the time for 
filing the application is extended in accordance with this Rule.”). 
In addition, HRS § 602-59(d) provides that the clerk 
“shall forward the complete file of the case to the supreme 
court” upon the acceptance of an application for a writ of certiorari. In most appeals, there is no longer a hard file due 
21
  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to the advent of electronic filing. This statute signifies, 
however, a legislative intent that a single case file be in the 
custody of a single appellate court at any given time. 
Interrupting t he ICA’s review in this manner would be 
inconsistent with the legislature’s reasons for creating the 
ICA; that is, to address “‘the evergrowing congestion of cases 
at the appellate level of our judicial system and the concurrent 
increase in the length of time it takes for both civil and 
criminal cases to reach a conclusion .’” 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 
70, in 1979 House Journal, at 1122, Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 73, in 1979 Senate Journal, at 989 (quoting Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 52, 
in 1978 Proceedings of the Constitu
tional Convention of Hawaii, 
Vol. 1, at 617) (emphasis added); see id., in 1979 House 
Journal, at 1122–1123, Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 73, in 1979 Senate 
Journal, at 990 (noting that the discussion by delegates to the 
Constitutional Convention was “comprehensive,” “thoughtful,” and 
“helpful”). This purpose has endured, even after our appellate system transitioned to its current three-tiered form, as 
evidenced by the legislature’s concerns as to whether the new 
system “will affect rates of appeal, timeliness of decision-
making, and caseload management.” 2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 202, § 83 at 948. 
22
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
                     
 
 
 
“(a) After issuance of the intermediate appellate 
court’s judgment[ ,] or dismissal order,   a party may seek 
review of the intermediate appellate court’s decision and 
judgment or dismissal order  only by application to the 
supreme court for a writ of certiorari, the acceptance or 
rejection of which shall be discretionary upon the supreme 
court.  
 
 
 
 
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 149, § 1 at 409.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
In this light, it is clear that when the phrase “or 
dismissal order” was added in 2006 to HRS § 602 -59(a),9 it was 
intended to address the ICA’s assumption o f new caseload 
management functions following implementation of Act 202, which 
included ruling on potentially case dispositive motions.  See  
Judge Gail C. Nakatani, Judicial Council of Hawai i, 
Final Report 
of the Appellate Review Task Force  (“Task Force ”) 4, 41 (App. C) 
(2005). In other words, the addition of the phrase  “or 
dismissal order,” clarified that an application for writ of 
certiorari may also be filed after the ICA issues a 
dispositional order that may not be a “judgment.” It can be 
further inferred from the legislature’s minimal discussion regarding the addition of  the phrase  “or dismissal order” that 
9 Act 149 of the 2006 legislative session amended HRS § 602 -59 to read 
as follows: 
(b) The application for writ of certiorari shall 
tersely state its grounds[ .], which shall include: 
(1) Grave errors 
of law or of fact; or 
(2) Obvious inconsistencies in the decision of the 
intermediate appellate court with that of the supreme 
court, federal decision, or its own decision,  
and the magnitude of those errors or inconsistencies  
dictating the need for further appeal.  
. . . .” 
23  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the amendment was not   intended to alter the legislature’s clear 
purpose that parties’ appeals be resolved as efficiently as 
possible. See  Stand.  Comm. Rep. No. 2254, in 2006 Senate 
Journal, at 1136 (stating that the proposed bill was “based upon a recommendation by the Hawaii Appellate Review Task Force to 
the Judiciary”); Task Force , at 12–13 (discussing criteria for 
writ of certiorari, but lacking any specific discussion of the 
phrase, “or dismissal order”).  
Moreover, we observe that Act 149’s insertion of the 
phrase “or dismissal order” into part (a) of HRS § 602 -59, 
should be construed together with the entirety of Act 149’s 
amendments to the statute, specifically, the reinstatement of 
criteria for applications for writ of certiorari into part (b). 
See
 text supra n.9. An applicant would be hard-pressed to 
explain why the “magnitude of [the ICA’s] error or 
inconsistencies” with respect to a p artial dismissal order 
“dictat[es] the need for further appeal,” when the magnitude of 
such error might be readily mitigated by the ICA’s resolution of 
the remaining issues on appeal. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 149, § 
1 at 409. 
Accordingly, in cases in which the ICA separately 
addresses raised issues, a party ’s thirty -day window to file an 
application for a writ of certiorari regarding the ICA’s 
decision on any of the raised issues, begins when an appeal is 
24
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
       
 
 
 
                     
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
disposed of in its entirety and judgment on appeal entered, if 
required under HRAP Rule 36. For example, when a petitioner 
timely files her application within thirty days of the date of 
issue of the ICA’s judgment on appeal, as did Waltrip here, this 
court has the authority to consider the entirety of the ICA’s 
disposition. This means that in this case, we may examine both the Partial Dismissal Order and the SDO. 
Next, although this court has the authority to 
consider the entirety of the ICA’s disposition of Waltrip’s 
10  appeal, we observe that   it is undisputed that the Application 
states that Waltrip  seeks a “writ of certiorari of the October 
2nd 2014 Judgment on Appeal, ”  which was entered solely 
“[p]ursuant to the Summary Disposition Order . . . entered on 
August 28, 2014,”  but fails to  state the grounds upon which she 
contests that Judgment.   Waltrip herself recognized the 
scantiness of her Application when she moved for, and was 
denied, an “Extension to File Paperwork on Writ of Certiorari.” 
Nevertheless, it was apparent 
to this court that the 
ICA’s SDO focused on the single issue of LIRAB’s subject matter jurisdiction over Waltrip’s pro se September Request, and that 
therefore the only self-evident challenge to the ICA’s Judgment 
10 The ICA did not err in issuing its Partial Dismissal Order. It had the 
authority to issue the order pursuant to HRS § 602 -57(3), and correctly 
determined that the notice of appeal was untimely filed as to the July 2011 
Decision and August Request. 
25
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
In its Order Denying September Request, LIRAB 
construed Waltrip’s September 23, 2011 “Request T hat the July 
25th, 2011 Decision and Order Be Vacated and That the Labor and 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board Issue a New Notice of Initial 
Conference and Restart the Proceedings All Over Again Including 
New Discovery Deadlines and a Retrial of the Issues” as a “non -
hearing Motion to Vacate the Board’s Decision of July 25, 2011” 
and denied it without f urther explanation. The ICA’s August 2 8, 
2014 Summary Disposition Order concluded that LIRAB’s Order 
Denying September Request was error because LIRAB should have 
instead “dismissed the motion for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction” as Waltrip’s September Request was “essentially . 
. . a second motion for reconsideration on the same grounds as 
                     
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
and SDO would be based on error associated with the ICA’s su a 
sponte jurisdictional determination due to its recharacterization of Waltrip’s September Request.
11 
With these specific circumstances forming the 
backdrop, we granted Waltrip’s pro se Application.      
A. 
	Waltrip’s September Request Could Have Reasonably Been 
Construed as a Motion to Reopen 
Moreover, we note that in Waltrip’s Supplemental Brief, under the 
header, “obvious inconsistencies in the decision s of the Intermediate 
Appellate Court with that of Supreme Court, federal decions [sic] or its own 
decision, and the magnitude of those errors or inconsistencies dictating the 
need for further appeal,” Waltrip stated: “The Intermediate Court of Appeals 
had no valid reason for their [sic] denial of October 2, 2014 where they did 
have jurisdiction.” 
26
 11  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the first.” Waltrip, No. CAAP-11-0000722, SDO at 2 (citation 
omitted). The entirety of the ICA’s discussion reads as 
follows: 
Waltrip does not suggest a statutory or regulatory basis 
supporting her September 23, 2011 motion to vacate, which essentially was a second motion for reconsideration on the 
same grounds as the first, and we can find none. We hold 
that there was no authority for the Board to rule on the 
merits of the motion and, as such, rather than issuing a 
denial, the Board should have dismissed the motion for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. See Hawaii Mgmt. Alliance 
Ass’n v. Ins. Comm’r , 106 Hawaii 21, 27, 100 P.3d 952, 958 
(2004) (holding that th e insurance commissioner’s authority 
to hear external review appeals, as authorized by statute, 
was a question of subject matter jurisdiction); see also 
Bush v. Watson , 81 Hawai i 474, 480, 918 P.2d 1130, 1136 
(1996) (stating that dismissal for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction is not an adjudication on the merits). 
Accordingly, we vacate the . . . Order [Denying September 
Request] because the Board lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction. Haw. Rev. Stat. § 386 -87(d) (1993). 
Waltrip, No. CAAP-11-0000722, SDO at 2 (footnoted omitted). 
Notably, when the September Request was before LIRAB, 
neither Fund nor Employer objected to the September Request on 
grounds that LIRAB lacked jurisdiction. Accordingly, the ICA’s 
decision was premised on its subsequent recharacterization of 
Waltrip’s Request as a second motion for reconsideration, and 
consequent examination of jurisdictional defects based on that 
recharacterization.  
Contrary to the ICA’s characterizations, on their 
faces, the August Request and September Request were not  
submitted on “essentially . . . the same  grounds.” Waltrip, No. 
CAAP-11-0000722, SDO at 2.   Although the ICA accurately noted 
that Waltrip relied in both requests on the same assertion —  
27

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
                     
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
that she was “unable to adequately represent [her]self at the 
proceedings” — the nature of each request differed.  The August 
Request asked the Board to reconsider its ruling given Waltrip’s 
assertion that she is “not competant [sic] to represent 
[her]self.” 
In contrast, the September Request asked for the July 
2011 ruling to be vacated and that proceedings be re-initiated 
so that Waltrip could conduct discovery anew and have a new 
trial. Additionally, Waltrip provided with her September 
Request copies of two letters from her treating psychiatrist, 
Dr. Grace Marian, concerning Waltrip’s psychiatric treatment and 
mental and physical conditions. Dr. Marian began treating 
Waltrip in December 2010 after the Board conducted its hearing 
on Waltrip’s claims, and both letters were dated after the 
Board’s July 25, 2011 ruling issued. Reading Waltrip’s Request 
in the light of (1) the submission of Dr. Marian’s letters that 
include references to Waltrip’s pain, insomnia, and lethargy , 
and (2) that it had been over a year since the Board’s hearing , 
leads to a reasonable, liberal construction of the Request as a 
motion to reopen the case under the Director’s continuing 
jurisdiction pursuant to HRS § 386-89.12 
12 See text supra n.5. 
28
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Thus, although the ICA’s  instruction to LIRAB to 
dismiss Waltrip’s September Request for lac k of jurisdiction is 
not incorrect, we disagree with the ICA’s reasoning. The 
September Request should not have been construed as a second 
“request to reconsider,” but rather as a motion to reopen under 
HRS § 386-89(c) that was inappropriately filed with LIRAB 
instead of the Director.  
B
. Hawaii’s Commitment to Access to Justice for All Litigants 
Requires That Waltrip’s September 23, 2011 Request Not Be 
“Construed Away” 
A fundamental tenet of Hawai i law is that “[p]leadings 
prepared by pro se litigants should be interpreted liberally.” 
Dupree, 121 Hawai i at 314, 219 P.3d at 1101 (citation omitted).  
The underpinnings of this tenet rest on the promotion of equal 
access to justice — a pro se litigant should not be prevented 
from proceeding on a pleading or letter to an agency if a 
reasonable, liberal construction of the document would permit 
him or her to do so. See Doe, 135 Hawai i 390, 351 P.3d 1156 
(holding the ICA erred in affirming the circuit court’s 
dismissal of pro se litigant’s agency appeal based on lack of 
jurisdiction, as circuit court should have liberally construed 
litigant’s letter as initiating administrative proceedings) ; see 
also, e.g., Eldridge v. Block,
 832 F.2d 1132, 1137 (9th Cir. 
1987) (“The Supreme Court has instructed the federal courts to 
29

  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
liberally construe the ‘inartful pleading’ of pro se litigants.” 
(citing Boag v. MacDougall,  454 U.S. 364, 365 (1982) (per 
curiam)). 
Federal courts have extended this “liberality 
doctrine” to include pro se motions in certain scenarios. 
Christensen v. Comm’r , 786 F.2d 1382, 1385 (9th Cir. 1986); 
see, e.g., Bernhardt v. Los Angeles Cnty., 339 F.3d 920, 925 
(9th Cir. 2003) (“Courts have a duty to construe pro se 
pleadings liberally, including pro se motions as well as 
complaints.” (citations omitted)) (reviewing district court’s 
denial of pro se plaintiff’s motion for preliminary injunction 
barring defendant county from settling plaintif f’s civil rights 
action in a way that interferes with her counsel’s ability to 
apply for attorney’s fees under 42 U.S.C. § 1988). Such 
scenarios may “extend[] . . . beyond the prisoner/civil rights 
context.” Christensen , 786 F.2d at 1385 (“T ax disputes that 
involve relatively minor sums may be of great significance to 
less wealthy taxpayers. Such taxpayers’ access to Tax Court 
review should not be barred by legal technicalities. . . . In 
light of the policy favoring liberal reading of pro se 
litigants’ papers, we find that the ‘ Motion to Place the 
Following Statements in the Record’ should have been treated as 
a motion to amend. We remand so that the Tax Court can consider 
whether to grant that motion. ”). 
30

  
 
Waltrip’s circumstances, which center on a workers’ 
compensation claim, warrant similar application of the 
“liberality doctrine.” As the only recovery available for an 
employee who is injured at work is typically a statutory award 
13 under Hawaii’s workers’ compensation law,  and as the law  
embodies a “broad humanitarian purpose,” Lawhead v. United Air 
Lines, 59 Haw. 551, 560, 584 P.2d 119, 125  (1978) (internal  
quotation marks and citation omitted) , to “(1) restore the 
injured employee, and (2) to compensate the employee 
adequately,” Alvarez v. Liberty House, Inc. , 85 Hawai i 275, 278,  
942 P.2d 539, 542 (1997)  (citation omitted), an employee 
proceeding pro se should not be prevented from fully litigating 
his or her claim simply because his or her filings are 
“inartful”  and fails to reference a statute by number, or 
correctly address a request to the Director or LIRAB.   Thus, 
just as Hawaii’s workers’ compensation law should be “‘construed 
liberally in order to accomplish the purpose for which it was 
 
 
                      
    
 
 
 
 13 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Exclusiveness of right to compensation; exception.  The 
rights and remedies herein granted to an employee or the 
employee
’s dependents on account of a work injury suffered 
by the employee shall exclude all other liability of the 
employer to the employee, the employee ’s legal 
representative, spouse, dependents, next of kin, or anyone 
else entitled to recover damages from the employer, at common law or otherwise, on account of the injury, except 
for sexual harassment or sexual assault and infliction of 
emotional distress or invasion of privacy related thereto, 
in which case a civil action may also be brought. 
HRS § 386- 5 (1993). 
31
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
             
 
  
 
  
                     
14  Indeed, access to justice also means making court and agency communications  
readily informative, particularly with respect to workers’ compensation 
cases, so that the law’s “broad humanitarian purpose” is furthered. For 
example, had LIRAB included a notice in its Order Denying August Request that 
the deadline to file a notice of appeal was within thirty (30) days of the 
date the order was mailed, Waltrip would have been officially informed of 
relevant due dates. This may have avoided what Waltrip asserts to have 
occurred: that she relied on incorrect information she orally received from a 
LIRAB employee, leading her to file a notice of appeal one day too late. See  
Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res. ,  136 Hawai i  376, 389, 363 
P.3d 224, 237 ( 2015)  (“[T]he manner in which the justice system operates must 
be fair and must also appear to be fair.” (citing Sifagaloa v. Bd. of Tr s. of 
Emps.’  Ret. Sys., 74 Haw. 181, 190, 840 P.2d 367, 371 (1992))).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
enacted,’” Alvarez, 85 Hawai i at 278, 942 P.2d at 542 (quoting 
Flores v. United Air Lines, Inc., 70 Haw. 1, 12, 757 P.2d 641, 
647 (1988)), so, too, should pro se pleadings, including 
motions, in workers’ compensation cases. 
Had LIRAB properly dismissed Waltrip’s September 
Request for lack of jurisdiction based on the filing of a motion 
to reopen with LIRAB instead of the Director, Waltrip would have 
been alerted with whom to appropriately file her Request so that 
she may seek benefits that she perceived to have been improperly 
denied. In contrast, the ICA’s incorrect construction of the 
September Request as a second motion for reconsideration provided Waltrip, a pro se litigant, little guidance.
14 
C.  Courts and Agencies Should Construe Pro Se Filings in a 
Reasonable Manner That Enables Them to Promote Access to Justice 
Instructive on the issue of the scope of a court’s 
discretion to recharacterize a motion is Mata v. Lynch , 135 S. 
Ct. 2150 (2015). Mata was an illegal alien who was ordered by 
an immigration judge to leave the country. Mata’s attorney 
32
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
filed with the Board of Immigration Appeals (“Immigration 
Board”) a notice of appeal  of the immigration judge’s decision,  
and indicated that a written brief in support of the appeal was 
forthcoming. Ultimately, however, no brief was filed and the 
Immigration Board dismissed Mata’s appeal. Over one hundred 
days after the Immigration Board’s dismissal, new counsel for 
Mata filed a motion with the Immigration Board to reopen his 
case pursuant to 8 U.S.C.  § 1229a(c)(7)(A) (2012).   Although 
such motions must typically be filed within ninety days of the 
final removal order,  see  8 U.S.C. § 1229a(c  )(7)(C)(i) (2012), 
Mata argued that he timely filed his motion because “[Mata’s] first lawyer’s ‘ineffective assistance’ counted as an 
‘exceptional circumstance[]’ excusing his lateness.” Mata, 135 
S. Ct. at 2153 (second brackets in original).   The Immigration 
Board disagreed and dismissed the motion as untimely. The 
Immigration Board also declined to exercise its separate 
authority to reopen the case sua sponte.    
Mata petitioned the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, 
arguing that the Immigration Board improperly denied his motion to reopen as he was entitled to equitable tolling 
given his 
initial counsel’s ineffective assistance . Instead of addressing 
Mata’s appeal on its merits, the Fifth Circuit “construed 
[Mata’s motion] as an invitation for the [Immigration Board] to 
exercise its discretion to reopen the removal proceeding sua 
33

  
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
         
Id.  The United States Supreme Court reversed.  Contrary to 
the Fifth Circuit’s assessment that only the Immigration Board’s 
denial to sua sponte reopen the case  was at issue
, the Court 
first observed that the Immigration Board’ s decision separately 
addressed two matters: (1) Mata’s motion to reopen, and (2) 
whether the Immigration Board  should sua sponte   reopen the case.  
“That courts lack jurisdiction over one matter (the sua sponte  
decision) does not affect their jurisdiction over another (the 
  decision on [Mata]’s request).” Mata
, 135 S. Ct. at 2155. In 
other words, “[t]he Court of Appeals did not lose jurisdiction over the [Immigration] Board’s denial of Mata’s motion just 
because the [Immigration] B oard also declined to reopen [Mata’s]  
case sua sponte.”    
 
  *** 
FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
sponte” and dismissed Mata’s appeal for lack of jurisdiction . 
Mata v. Holder, 558 F. App’x 366, 367 (2014) (“As the [Immigration Board] has complete discretion in determining 
whether to reopen sua sponte under 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(a), and we 
have no meaningful standard against which to judge that exercise 
of discretion, we lack jurisdiction to review such decisions. ” 
(citation omitted)). 
Even if, based on a presumption that the Immigration 
and Nationality Act does not permit equitable tolling, 
the right course on appeal is to take jurisdiction over the 
case, explain why  that is so, and affirm the [Immigration 
Board]’s decision not to reopen.  The jurisdictional 
34
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
question (whether the court has power to decide if tolling 
is proper) is of course distinct from the merits question 
(whether tolling is proper). The Fifth Circuit thus 
retains jurisdiction even if Mata’s appeal lacks merit. . . 
. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals should have asserted 
jurisdiction over Mata’s appeal and addressed the equitable 
tolling question. 
Mata, 135 S. Ct. at 2156 (citations omitted). The Supreme Court 
then noted that “the Fifth Circuit’ s practice of 
recharacterizing appeals like Mata’s as challenges to the Board’s sua sponte decisions and then declining to exercise 
jurisdiction 
over them” p revents potential splits among the 
circuits from “coming to light” and addressed by the Court.  Id.  
(“[T]he Fifth Circuit may not . . . wrap . . . a merits decision 
in jurisdictional garb so that we cannot address a possible division between that court and every other. ”). 
If a litigant misbrands a motion, but could get relief 
under a different label, a court will often make the 
requisite change. But that established practice does not 
entail sidestepping the 
judicial obligation to exercise 
jurisdiction.  And it results in identifying a route to 
relief, not in rendering relief impossible.  That makes all 
the difference between a court’s generously reading pleadings and a court’s construing away adjudicative authority. 
Id. (citation omitted) (emphasis added). 
Just as federal appellate courts should not “construe 
away”  jurisdiction  and prevent substantive decisions from 
“coming to light,”  so, too, should Hawaii’s courts  and agencies  
not construe pro se filings in a manner that leads to a decision 
that does not promote access to justice, or, as pertinent here, 
does not further the “humanitarian purpose of the workers’ 
35
  
 
 
 
 Educ.
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
compensation statute.”   Panoke v. Reef Dev. of Haw., Inc., 136 
Hawai
i 448, 462, 363 P.3d 296, 310   (2015) (“[T]he broad 
humanitarian purpose of the workers’ compensation statute read as a whole requires that all reasonable doubts be resolved in 
favor of the claimant[.]” ( quoting Van Ness v. State, Dep’t of 
, 131 Hawai i 545, 558, 319 P.3d 464, 477 (2014)) (citation, 
internal quotation marks, and emphasis omitted)). Instead, pro 
se filings, even when “misbranded,”  should be reasonably 
construed in a manner that “results in identifying a route to 
relief, not in renderi ng relief impossible.” Mata, 135 S. Ct. 
at 2156.   In this case, in identifying a  “route to relief, ”  
LIRAB should have informed Waltrip that she filed her September 
Request before the wrong governmental entity.    
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the ICA’s 
Judgment on Appeal. The ICA’s Judgment as to the July 2011 
Decision and August Request is affirmed. 
The ICA’s Judgment as 
to the September Request is affirmed on other grounds. This case is remanded to LIRAB for entry of an order dismissing the 
September Request for lack of jurisdiction.  Such dismissal 
shall indicate that it is without prejudice to any subsequent 
36
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
   
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
attempt by Waltrip to request that the Director reopen her case 
pursuant to HRS § 386-89. 
Deborah J. Waltrip, 
petitioner pro se  
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
Robyn M. Kuwabe,   
for respondent, Special  
Compensation Fund 
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
Robert E. McKee, Jr.,  
for respondents, TS Enterprises,  
Inc., dba Kimo’s Restaurant,  and  
Fireman’s  Fund Insurance Company     
37

 