***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-14-0001352 27-JUN-2018 07:57 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
DANIEL IBBETSON,
Respondent/Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant/Appellee,
 
vs.
 
DEAN KAIAWE,
Petitioner/Defendant/Counterclaimant/Third-Party
Plaintiff/Appellant,
 
vs.
 
HAWAII CONFERENCE FOUNDATION, a Hawaii nonprofit corporation,
and DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, COUNTY OF HAWAII, a municipal
corporation, Respondents/Third-Party Defendants/Appellees.
 
SCWC-14-0001352
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-14-0001352; CIV. NO. 06-1-015K)
 
JUNE 27, 2018
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
In 2003, Respondent/Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant/
 
Appellee Daniel Ibbetson (Ibbetson) purchased a 0.722-acre parcel
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of land from Respondent/Third-Party Defendant/Appellee Hawaii
 
Conference Foundation (HCF). Two grave sites were located on the
 property. Over the next few years, Ibbetson built a single-
family residence on the property and began operating a bed and
 breakfast out of the residence. 
In 2006, Ibbetson filed a complaint against
 
Petitioner/Defendant/Counterclaimant/Third-Party Plaintiff/
 Appellant Dean Kaiawe (Kaiawe) alleging that Kaiawe trespassed
 upon his property and destroyed his plants and landscaping. He
 sought, inter alia, a preliminary injunction to preclude Kaiawe
 from entering his property in the future. 
Kaiawe filed a counterclaim against Ibbetson, arguing 
that Ibbetson’s property had been dedicated for exclusive use as a cemetery, and that he had the right to enter upon the property to visit his great-grandmother’s burial site. Kaiawe requested a declaratory judgment clarifying whether Ibbetson validly owned the property, to what use the property could be put, and the nature and extent of Kaiawe’s and Ibbetson’s rights and responsibilities with respect to the property. He also sought to quiet title under Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 669. 
Ibbetson filed a motion for summary judgment as to all
 
counts in Kaiawe’s counterclaim. The Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit (circuit court) granted Ibbetson’s motion for summary
 
2
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
judgment. The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed. 
On certiorari, we are presented with two questions for
 
review: (1) whether the ICA erred in holding that the circuit
 
court correctly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s claims that the Property had been dedicated for
 exclusive use as a cemetery pursuant to common law and/or
 statute; and (2) whether the ICA erred in holding that Kaiawe was
 not entitled to relief under HRS Chapter 669. 
For the reasons stated below, we hold that the ICA did
 
not err in affirming the circuit court’s ruling granting summary
 judgment in favor of Ibbetson with respect to Kaiawe’s statutory
 dedication claim, and that the ICA correctly held that Kaiawe was
 not entitled to relief under HRS Chapter 669. However, we
 conclude that the ICA erred in determining that the circuit court
 properly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim. 
Accordingly, we affirm in part and vacate in part the
 
ICA’s November 30, 2017 judgment on appeal, which affirmed the
 circuit court’s November 13, 2014 amended final judgment, and
 remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This case concerns a 0.722-acre parcel of land in the
 
3
           
          
             
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
South Kona district on the island of Hawai' i (the Property). 
Surveys conducted of the Property refer to it as the “Hoikeana 
Cemetery.” From the early 1900s to the 1950s, a church known as the Hoikeana Church was located next to the Property. 
Currently, there are two grave sites located on the
 
Property, Grave Site A and Grave Site B. Both grave sites are
 separately enclosed by stone walls. Grave Site A, located on the
 northeastern side of the Property, encompasses an area of 4,788
 square feet and contains identified burial plots. Grave Site B,
 located across from Grave Site A on the northwestern side of the
 Property, encompasses an area of 2,316 square feet and contains
 unidentified graves. 
The Property’s recorded chain of title began on
 
February 2, 1915, when Mikala Kaiawe (Mikala), in consideration
 of $1, conveyed the Property to the Board of the Hawaiian
 Evangelical Association (Association). Mikala is Kaiawe’s great-
grandmother. The deed effecting this conveyance (1915 Deed)
 contains the following metes and bounds description of the
 Property: 
Commencing  at  the  Northeast  corner  of  this  piece
on  the  old  government  trail,  a  little  makai[ 1
]  of  the
present  government  road,  adjoining  Kaohe  4,  and
running  thence  along  the  line  between  Kaohe  4  and
 
1
 In Hawaiian, “makai” means “ocean.” See Mary Kawena Pukui &
 
Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary at 225 (2d ed. 1986). Thus, when used
 
directionally, “makai” means “towards the ocean.” See id.
 
4
           
            
              
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kaohe  5,  200  feet  in  a  westwardly  direction  to  a  stake
and  stone  pile;  thence  southwardly  to  a  stake  and
stone  pile  120  feet;  thence  eastwardly  to  a  stake  and
stone  pile  275  feet;  and  thence  northwardly  .  .  .  to
point  of  commencement,  and  containing  about  three-
fourths  of  an  acre,  more  or  less,  and  being  described
in  R.P.  Number  2358  to  Huakonou.
    
The 1915 Deed also contains the following habendum clause:2 “To
 
have and to hold the said premises, with the appurtenances, so
 
that it may be used as a cemetery, to the said Board of the
 Hawaiian Evangelical Association, its successors and assigns,
 forever.”
 
In 1952, the Association changed its name to Hawaiian
 
Evangelical Association of Congregational-Christian Churches. 
Then, in 1963, Hawaiian Evangelical Association of
 Congregational-Christian Churches later changed its name to
 Hawaii Conference of the United Church of Christ. 
On September 2, 1983, Hawaii Conference of the United
 
Church of Christ, in consideration of $10, conveyed the Property
 to HCF by quitclaim deed (1983 Deed). The 1983 Deed contained
 the following habendum clause: “TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same,
 together, with the improvements thereon and all rights,
 easements, privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging or
 appertaining, unto the Grantee, its successors and assigns, for
 
2
 A habendum clause is defined as: “The part of an instrument, such
 
as a deed or will, that defines the extent of the interest being granted and
any conditions affecting the grant.” Black’s Law Dictionary 825 (10th Ed.
 2014).
 
5
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
cemetery purposes only, forever.” The 1983 Deed was recorded 
with the State of Hawai' i Bureau of Conveyances on October 11, 
1983. 
In February 2003, Ibbetson and HCF executed a Deposit
 
Receipt Offer and Acceptance (DROA). According to the DROA, HCF
 agreed to convey Ibbetson the Property in exchange for a payment
 of $50,000. 
An addendum attached to the DROA reserved rights of
 
access to Grave Site A and Grave Site B in favor of HCF and those
 with relatives buried on those grave sites. Under the addendum,
 HCF and relatives of individuals buried in Grave Site A and Grave
 Site B had a right to access the Property to visit, maintain, and
 care for grave sites. However, the addendum limited visits to
 Grave Site A to daylight hours, and required individuals seeking
 to visit Grave Site B to notify Ibbetson in advance of their
 intent to visit, coordinate with Ibbetson on visitation
 logistics, and provide verification of their relationship to the
 person buried on Grave Site B. Further, the addendum limited the
 extent to which subsequent internments could take place on the
 grave sites, and limited Ibbetson’s responsibilities and
 liabilities regarding the maintenance and care of the grave
 sites, as well as the access ways leading to and from the grave
 sites. 
6
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On March 17, 2003, HCF executed a limited warranty deed 
conveying the Property to Ibbetson (2003 Deed). The 2003 Deed 
included the limitations and conditions set forth in the addendum attached to the DROA. Moreover, an exhibit attached to the 2003 Deed stated that the Property was subject to, inter alia: “Restrictions imposed by law regarding the sale and disposition of said land or a place within any mausoleum or columbarium erected thereon resulting from the use or dedication of said land for cemetery purposes.” The 2003 Deed was recorded with the State of Hawai' i Board of Conveyances on March 21, 2003. 
After obtaining the requisite permits from the County 
of Hawai' i Department of Public Works-Building Division, Ibbetson 
constructed a three-bedroom, three-bathroom single-family residence with an accompanying in-ground swimming pool on the Property sometime between 2003 and 2005. 
On July 15, 2005, Ibbetson applied for a Special Permit 
from the County of Hawai' i Planning Commission (Planning 
Commission) to operate a two-unit bed and breakfast establishment out of the aforementioned single-family residence. Kaiawe was granted standing to intervene in a contested case hearing regarding Ibbetson’s Special Permit application. In his written testimony, Kaiawe averred that his great-grandmother, Mikala, was buried in Grave Site B, and that as a relative of a person buried 
7
           
       
         
        
            
            
       
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
on the Property, he objected to Ibbetson’s construction of a
 
residence and operation of a bed and breakfast facility on the
 Property because he believed that the Property could only be used
 as a cemetery. Following a two-day contested case hearing, the
 Planning Commission approved Ibbetson’s application for a Special
 Permit, subject to certain conditions.
3
 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On January 26, 2006, Ibbetson filed a complaint against
 
Kaiawe in circuit court.4 Ibbetson’s complaint alleged that,
 
without his permission, Kaiawe entered the Property with three
 other persons and damaged and removed bushes, hedges, and other
 landscape materials he had planted on Grave Site B. Ibbetson
 claimed that when he asked Kaiawe to stop damaging the
 landscaping and to leave the premises, Kaiawe “responded by
 yelling that it didn’t make any difference because [Ibbetson’s]
 house was going to be gone soon and that the land was his land
 and his family’s land[.]” Ibbetson stated that Kaiawe and the
 others left about an hour later and threatened to return. 
Based on the allegations in his complaint, Ibbetson
 
3
 For example, the Planning Commission’s decision required that
 
Ibbetson preserve the existing cemeteries located on the Property, and
mandated that Ibbetson “maintain the perpetual non-exclusive easement and
right of entry over and for the visitation, maintenance, and care of the
existing graves located within Grave Site ‘A’ and Grave Site ‘B’ identified as
 Easement ‘1’ within [his] deed to the Property.”
 
4
 The Honorable Elizabeth E. Strance presided.
 
8
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requested a preliminary injunction enjoining Kaiawe and anyone
 
associated with him “from coming to the subject property, except
 in accordance with the terms of the Limited Warranty Deed.” He
 also requested a temporary restraining order prohibiting Kaiawe
 and his associates from entering the Property and/or destroying
 his personal property thereon until a decision was rendered on
 his request for a preliminary injunction, and sought money
 damages for the damages that he sustained as a result of Kaiawe’s
 trespass on the Property.
 
In his answer to Ibbetson’s complaint, Kaiawe admitted
 
that he entered the Property, that he visited Grave Site A and
 Grave Site B, and that “he and others cut Christmas Berry trees
 growing within Grave Site B.” He denied all of the other
 allegations. 
Kaiawe’s answer also raised several affirmative
 
defenses. He argued that Ibbetson lacked standing to bring suit
 against him, alleging that Ibbetson did not own the Property, as
 HCF did not have the authority to sell the Property to Ibbetson. 
Further, he alleged that the Property was “subject to limitation
 and restriction that it be used for cemetery purposes and for no
 other uses,” and that he, as a descendant of a person buried on
 the Property, had an unrestricted right to access the Property in
 order to visit and maintain his relative’s grave sites. 
9
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kaiawe also filed a counterclaim against Ibbetson. 
His allegations in his counterclaim were the same as the
 
allegations in his answer to Ibbetson’s complaint. Based upon
 these allegations, Kaiawe argued that “[a] real and actual
 controversy exists between [Ibbetson] and [Kaiawe] as to the
 ownership and use of [the Property].” Thus, Kaiawe requested “a
 declaration of the parties’ respective rights and obligations
 under [HRS] Chapter 632 . . . as to the ownership and use of [the
 Property].” And, “to the extent that title to [the Property]
 must be determined,” Kaiawe sought a “determination of the
 parties’ rights and interest in [the Property]” under HRS Chapter
 669. 
On October 27, 2006, Kaiawe filed a third-party
 
complaint against HCF. Kaiawe alleged that as a result of
 Ibbetson’s lawsuit against Kaiawe, bona fide controversies
 existed as to: (1) HCF’s authority to convey the Property to
 Ibbetson via the 2003 Deed; (2) the present ownership of the
 Property; (3) the uses to which the Property could be put; and
 (4) Kaiawe’s, Ibbetson’s, and HCF’s rights and obligations with
 respect to the Property. Therefore, Kaiawe sought a declaratory
 judgment resolving these issues. 
On November 25, 2009, Ibbetson filed a motion for
 
summary judgment as to all counts in Kaiawe’s counterclaim. 
10
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ibbetson raised two arguments in support of his motion for
 
summary judgment. First, Ibbetson asserted that Kaiawe lacked
 standing to enforce the 1983 Deed, which contained the language
 that, according to Kaiawe, established that the Property could
 only be used for cemetery purposes. Second, he stated that “the
 only basis for [Kaiawe’s] claim of title . . . under [HRS]
 Chapter 669 would be that [the Property] is no longer being used
 as a cemetery and therefore, it should revert to the heirs of
 Mikala Kaiawe, of whom Defendant Kaiawe is one.” Relying upon
 Midkiff v. Castle & Cooke, Inc., 45 Haw. 409, 368 P.2d 887
 (1962), Ibbetson argued that the habendum clause in the 1915 Deed
 “can be construed at most as a covenant or a mere statement on
 the part of Mikala Kaiawe” because “[t]he language used does not
 indicate an intent to qualify or limit the estate granted by the
 deed.” Thus, Ibbetson asserted that inasmuch as Kaiawe lacked
 standing to enforce the 1983 Deed, and the habendum clause in the
 1915 Deed did not restrict the Property’s use to cemetery
 purposes, he was entitled to summary judgment on all counts of
 Kaiawe’s counterclaim. 
On January 7, 2010, Kaiawe filed written objections to
 
Ibbetson’s motion for summary judgment. Kaiawe countered that
 the habendum clause in the 1915 Deed was not a general purpose
 clause. Rather, to Kaiawe, “Mikala’s language is more specific
 
11
           
     
       
         
       
         
       
         
         
        
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the parcel’s actual use and is a limitation on title.” 
Kaiawe contended that the 1983 Deed “confirms and ratifies the
 original limitation in Mikala’s 1915 Deed and the Board of
 Hawaiian Evangelical Association’s (as renamed) commitment to
 that limitation.” Thus, Kaiawe argued, by operation of the
 habendum clause in the 1915 Deed, HCF could not sell the Property
 to Ibbetson, and therefore, Ibbetson “took nothing under the 1983
 Deed.” 
Kaiawe also argued that the Property was dedicated for
 
use as a cemetery under common law and by operation of HRS § 441­17.
5 Thus, Kaiawe asserted that because the Property had been
 
dedicated for exclusive use as a cemetery, Ibbetson was not
 allowed to build a residence on the Property or operate a
 commercial bed and breakfast facility out of said residence. He
 maintained that as a descendant of an individual buried on the
 Property, he had the right to enforce such restrictions on the
 Property’s use. 
5 HRS § 441-17 (1993) provides:
 
All existing cemeteries or parts thereof which shall
have been lawfully established, and for which a map or
plat substantially similar to that required by section
441-3 has been filed or recorded in the bureau of
 conveyances or in the office of the assistant
registrar of the land court, shall be deemed to have
been dedicated as of [July 1, 1967], to the same
extent and with like effect as provided in this
chapter.
 
(Brackets in original.)
 
12
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
One of the exhibits attached to Kaiawe’s objections was 
an excerpt from the transcript of the hearing on Ibbetson’s 
application for a Special Permit to operate a bed and breakfast facility, at which Pastor Nancietta Ha' alilio (Pastor Ha' alilio) 
testified. Pastor Ha' alilio was affiliated with the Puka' ana 
Congregational Church, a sister church to the Hoikeana Church located across the highway from the Property. In brief, she testified that: (1) she and her family maintained the cemeteries on the Property from the 1950s through the 1980s, long after the Hoikeana Church congregation had dissipated; (2) she and Kaiawe had family members buried on the Property; (3) there were “quite a few” other individuals besides her own family members and those known to her buried in Grave Site A; (4) there was no “master list” of who was buried on the Property; and (5) there was no formal system according to which people were buried on the Property. 
On January 11, 2010, Ibbetson filed a reply memorandum
 
in support of his motion for summary judgment. Briefly stated,
 Ibbetson argued: (1) the Property was not statutorily dedicated
 for exclusive use as a cemetery pursuant to HRS § 441-17; (2) the
 Property was not dedicated for use by the public as a cemetery
 under common law because “[t]he Hoikeana Cemetery was for members
 of the Hoikeana Church and their families, not the general
 
13
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public”; and (3) the habendum clause in the 1915 Deed did not
 
clearly reflect Mikala’s intent that the Property should revert
 back to her and her heirs if the Property was used for non-
cemetery purposes.
6
 
A hearing on Ibbetson’s motion for summary judgment was
 
held on January 15, 2010. There, the circuit court orally
 granted Ibbetson’s motion for summary judgment: 
The  Court  having  considered  [Ibbetson’s]  motion  for
summary  judgment  as  to  all  counts  of  the  counterclaim
filed  February  10,  2006,  the  Court  finds  there  is  no
genuine  material  issue  of  fact,  and  that  [Ibbetson]  is
entitled  to  judgment  as  a  matter  of  law.
 
The  Court’s  specifically  finding  that  the  [1915
Deed]  did  not  create  a  fee  simple  determinable[,]  that
[Kaiawe]  does  not  have  standing  to  enforce  the  [1983
Deed],  and  that  the  cemetery  was  not  a  dedicated
cemetery  and,  therefore,  is  not  subject  to  the
restrictions  set  forth  in  [HRS]  Chapter  441.
  
On April 14, 2010, the circuit court entered a written
 
order granting Ibbetson’s motion for summary judgment. Therein,
 the circuit court ruled that: 
The  Court  being  satisfied  that  it  has  jurisdiction
over  all  parties  and  of  the  subject  matter  of  this
case,  and  all  of  the  files  and  records  in  this  action,
and  good  cause  appearing  therefore,  hereby  finds  and
concludes  as  a  matter  of  law  that:   (1)  Defendant
Kaiawe  has  no  standing  to  enforce  the  September  2,
1983,  Deed  from  the  Hawaii  Conference  of  the  United
Church  of  Christ  to  the  Hawaii  Conference  Foundation;
(2)  that  neither  the  February  2,  1915,  deed  from
Mikala  Kaiawe  to  the  Hawaiian  Evangelical  Association
or  the  September  2,  1983,  Deed  from  the  Hawaii
Conference  of  the  United  Church  of  Christ  to  the
 
6
 HCF also filed a statement of position on Ibbetson’s motion for
 
summary  judgment  on  January  14,  2010.   HCF  echoed  Ibbetson’s  position  that
Kaiawe  lacked  standing  to  enforce  the  1983  Deed,  and  that  the  language  in  the
habendum  clause  of  the  1915  Deed  was  “merely  precatory  and  evidences  only  a
suggested  permissible,  not  mandatory,  use  of  [the  Property].”
 
14
           
     
         
        
       
       
        
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaii Conference Foundation contain language limiting
the conveyance in such a manner that the deeds could
be construed as conveying anything other than a fee
simple interest in the subject property to the
Grantee(s); and (3) the property conveyed to Plaintiff
Ibbetson by that Limited Warranty Deed dated March 17,
2003, was never dedicated as a public cemetery.
 
On September 19, 2012, Ibbetson, Kaiawe, and HCF filed
 
a stipulation for entry of final judgment. In their stipulation,
 
the parties stated that the circuit court’s order granting
 Ibbetson’s motion for summary judgment operated as the “law of
 the case” and determined the other issues raised in the case. 
Specifically, the parties stated that the circuit court’s order
 resolved: (1) the 2003 Deed’s legal effect; (2) the legal
 ownership of the Property; (3) HCF’s legal authority to deliver
 the 2003 Deed; and (4) the permitted uses to which the Property
 may be put. 
Accordingly, the parties stipulated that with respect
 
to the complaint and counterclaim, judgment should be entered in
 favor of Ibbetson. The parties stipulated that Ibbetson should
 be declared the owner of the Property, subject to the
 restrictions, easements, limitations, and conditions described in
 the 2003 Deed and subject to his bed and breakfast permit;
 consequently, Ibbetson would allow Kaiawe to visit Grave Site B
 in the manner provided in the 2003 Deed. The parties also
 stipulated that the third-party complaint against HCF would be
 dismissed. 
15
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court entered its final judgment on
 
November 5, 2012. The final judgment entered judgment in favor
 
of Ibbetson and against Kaiawe on the complaint and counterclaim. 
Furthermore, the final judgment declared that Ibbetson was the
 owner of the Property, subject to the restrictions, easements,
 limitations, and conditions described in the 2003 Deed and
 subject to the permit allowing him to operate a bed and breakfast
 out of his residence, and that Kaiawe had the right to visit
 Grave Site B in accordance with the terms set forth in the
 parties’ stipulation. Additionally, the final judgment entered
 judgment in favor of HCF on the third-party complaint; the third-
party complaint was then dismissed.
 
Kaiawe filed a notice of appeal on December 5, 2012. 
However, on May 8, 2013, the ICA dismissed Kaiawe’s appeal for
 lack of appellate jurisdiction based upon its determination that
 the circuit court’s final judgment was not final and appealable. 
The circuit court entered an amended final judgment on
 
November 13, 2014. The amended final judgment entered judgment
 in favor of Ibbetson and against Kaiawe on all counts of the
 complaint and counterclaim, and resolved the trespass claim in
 the complaint by providing as follows: “Kaiawe will not enter
 the area described as Grave Site B except in compliance with the
 restrictions, easements, limitations and conditions described in
 
16
           
         
         
          
              
        
              
           
          
            
             
           
           
               
             
             
    
          
              
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the [2003 Deed], nor will he deface or destroy any real or
 
personal property on the site at the time of the entry or
 visitation.” The amended final judgment also entered judgment in
 favor of HCF on the third-party complaint; the third-party
 complaint was then dismissed with prejudice. 
B. ICA Proceedings
 
7
On appeal, Kaiawe asserted, inter alia,  that the
circuit court erred in ruling that there was no genuine issue of
 
material fact as to whether the Property had been dedicated for
 public use as a cemetery. He raised two arguments in support of
 his position that the record reflected that the Property had been
 dedicated for use by the public as a cemetery.
 
First, Kaiawe contended that the record supported that
 
the Property had been dedicated for public use as a cemetery
 
7
 Kaiawe also contended that the circuit court “erred when it
 
concluded that the Defendant-Appellant Kaiawe lacked standing” to enforce the
 
1983 Deed. Kaiawe argued that the circuit court “misinterpreted the
 significance of the 1983 Deed” to the extent that, in his view, the 1983 Deed
“reflected the Association’s confirmation (admission) of its past dedication
of [the Property] to a cemetery use, its desire to continue that use into the
future and its successor’s ([HCF]) covenant to do so.”
The ICA observed that “Kaiawe does not assert, argue, or otherwise
support a claim that he has standing to enforce the alleged restrictions of
the 1983 Deed per se.” Rather, the ICA noted that Kaiawe “submitt[ed] that
the Circuit Court misinterpreted the significance of the 1983 Deed,” as he
 “introduced the 1983 Deed as evidence of the prior dedication of the
[Property],” not as a means of divesting Ibbetson of title to the Property.
Thus, because it “ha[d] no basis to do otherwise,” the ICA held “that the
 Circuit Court did not err in concluding that Kaiawe has no standing to enforce
the 1983 Deed.”
 
On certiorari, Kaiawe does not challenge the ICA’s holding on this 
point. Ibbetson’s response does not raise the issue. Thus, we do not address it. See Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 40.1(d). 
17
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under common law. Relying upon Smith v. Wilder, 6 Haw. 228 (Haw.
 
Kingdom 1879), and Barker v. Hazel-Fain Oil Co., 219 S.W. 874
 (Tex. Civ. App. 1920), Kaiawe argued that the habendum clause in
 the 1915 Deed evinced Mikala’s intent to dedicate the Property
 for public use as a cemetery, and that the public’s subsequent
 use of the Property in that manner effected the common law
 dedication. Kaiawe asserted that the habendum clause in the
 1983 Deed further illustrated Mikala’s intent to dedicate the
 Property for use by the public as a cemetery, as the clause
 reflected the Association’s understanding that the Property had
 been dedicated to a cemetery use, and that it wanted its
 successor to honor the dedication in the future. 
Second, Kaiawe argued that the record supported that
 
the Property had been dedicated to cemetery use by statute. He
 asserted that the requirements for statutory dedication under HRS
 § 441-17 were met in this case because the metes and bounds
 description of the Property attached to the 1915 Deed was
 “‘substantially similar’ to the survey map referred to in” HRS §§
 441-17 and 441-3. (Quoting HRS § 441-17.) As a consequence of
 being statutorily dedicated as a cemetery under HRS § 441-17,
 Kaiawe reasoned that the Property must be used “‘exclusively’ for
 
18
           
  
      
          
      
        
        
        
         
       
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
cemetery purposes” pursuant to HRS § 441-6.8
 
Ibbetson countered that the record did not establish
 
“that there has been any common-law dedication for the public to
 
be buried on the Property.” Citing Hill v. Towson Realty, 157
 A.2d 796 (Md. 1960), Ibbetson contended that the habendum clause
 in the 1915 Deed did not evince Mikala’s intent to dedicate the
 Property for public use as a cemetery. In particular, he
 reasoned that while the clause stated that Mikala conveyed the
 Property “so that it may be used as a cemetery,” the clause did
 not clearly suggest that the Property was to be used by the
 public as a cemetery. 
Moreover, Ibbetson appeared to argue that the metes and
 
bounds description attached to the 1915 Deed did not satisfy the
 requirements set forth in HRS § 441-17 because the description
 was not a “map or plat showing the sections, blocks, plots,
 avenues, walks, or other subdivisions, with descriptive names,
 initials, or numbers that uniquely identify each plot.” (Citing
 HRS §§ 441-17 and 441-3.) 
8 HRS § 441-6 (1993) states:
 
Upon the recording or filing of a map or plat and
certificate of dedication pursuant to sections 441-2
and 441-3, the dedication is complete with respect to
all property or parts thereof which are described or
depicted in or on both the certificate of dedication
and map or plat for all purposes and thereafter the
property shall be occupied and used exclusively for
cemetery purposes.
 
19
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On October 31, 2017, the ICA issued a memorandum
 
opinion, in which a majority of the court affirmed the circuit
 
court’s amended final judgment. Briefly stated, the ICA majority
 held that: (1) Kaiawe was not entitled to relief by way of a
 quiet title action under HRS Chapter 669; (2) the circuit court
 correctly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim; and (3) the circuit court
 correctly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s statutory dedication claim. 
The ICA majority first addressed whether the circuit 
court erred in ruling against Kaiawe on his quiet title claim under HRS Chapter 669. The ICA majority observed that HRS § 669­1(a), read alongside Hawai' i case law, established that a quiet 
title plaintiff must prove that he or she has title to the disputed land. The ICA majority then noted that “Kaiawe has not raised an adverse possession claim, and has not pled or provided any evidence of superior title,” that the 1915 Deed did not “contain any reservation of interest or right of reversion” in favor of Kaiawe, and that “Ibbetson submitted evidence of unbroken title from Mikala Kaiawe to the Association to HCF to him.” Based on the foregoing, the ICA majority held that the circuit court did not err when it granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s quiet title claim. 
20
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Next, the ICA majority analyzed whether the circuit
 
court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 
Kaiawe’s claim for declaratory relief, inasmuch as the circuit
 court ruled that there was no genuine issue of material fact as
 to whether the Property had been dedicated to use by the public
 as a cemetery. 
The ICA majority rejected Kaiawe’s argument that the
 
record supported that the Property had been dedicated for public
 use as a cemetery pursuant to common law for several reasons. 
The ICA majority ruled that Smith “simply does not support the
 proposition that the dedicated use of part of a parcel as a
 cemetery or burial grounds evidences an implied dedication of the
 entirety of the property for use only as a cemetery.” The ICA
 majority also reasoned that Barker did not support Kaiawe’s claim
 because the habendum clause in the 1915 Deed did not “purport to
 dedicate the land as a public cemetery,” and because “there is no
 evidence that [the Property] was open for burials of the public
 at large[.]” 
Applying this court’s decision in Midkiff to the facts
 
in this case, the ICA majority held that the habendum clauses in
 the 1915 Deed and the 1983 Deed did not support that the Property
 had been dedicated for public use as a cemetery. The ICA
 majority ruled that the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed and
 
21
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1983 Deed were mere expressions of the anticipated use of the
 
Property, which did not indicate an intent “that less than a fee
 simple estate was being transferred.” Therefore, because Kaiawe
 did not “provide authority for the proposition that a deed’s
 expression of anticipated use should be otherwise viewed as
 creating a common law servitude on the deeded property that is
 inconsistent with the estate that was conveyed by the deed,” the
 ICA majority held that the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed and
 1983 Deed did not evince that the Property had been dedicated for
 exclusive use as a cemetery by the public. 
Furthermore, the ICA majority held that Pastor 
Ha'alilio’s testimony did not create a genuine issue of material 
fact as to whether the Property had been dedicated for public use as a cemetery. The ICA majority determined that although her testimony confirmed that individuals were buried in both grave sites, her statements did not “otherwise support Kaiawe’s claim of public dedication.” 
Therefore, the ICA majority held that the circuit court
 
did not err in granting summary judgment against Kaiawe on his
 common law dedication claim. 
The ICA majority also concluded that Kaiawe’s argument
 
premised upon statutory dedication was without merit. The ICA
 majority ruled that “[t]he metes and bounds description in the
 
22
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1915 Deed merely outlines the boundaries of the Property” and did
 
not meet the requirements delineated in HRS § 441-17. 
Accordingly, the ICA majority held that the Property “was not
 deemed dedicated as a cemetery pursuant to HRS § 441-17.” 
Judge Lisa M. Ginoza filed a separate concurring and
 
dissenting opinion. While she agreed with the majority that
 Kaiawe was not entitled to relief under HRS Chapter 669, and that
 the circuit court correctly granted summary judgment in favor of
 Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s statutory dedication claim, Judge Ginoza
 dissented to the extent that she believed that there was a
 genuine issue of material fact as to whether the Property had
 been dedicated for public use as a cemetery under common law. 
Judge Ginoza acknowledged that the 1915 Deed and 1983 
Deed did not contain express language suggesting that the Property was to be used by the public as a cemetery. However, she also observed neither deed restricted the cemetery to the exclusive use of church members, and that “Mikala’s intent can be implied from the public’s use of the cemetery.” And, Judge Ginoza highlighted that Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony suggested 
that “individuals beyond members of the church situated on or next to the Property were buried in the cemetery.” Judge Ginoza posited that nothing in the record supported that “the cemetery was intended and used only for members of the Hoikeana Church.” 
23
           
        
        
        
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Based on the foregoing, Judge Ginoza concluded: “Viewing the
 
evidence in the record in a light most favorable to Kaiawe as the
 non-movant, as is required under the summary judgment standard,
 there is a genuine issue of material fact whether the cemetery
 was intended and utilized as a public cemetery.” 
The judgment on appeal was entered on November 30,
 
2017. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion for Summary Judgment
 
“On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
 
reviewed de novo.” Nuuanu Valley Ass’n v. City & Cty. of
 
Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). It is 
well-established that: 
[S]ummary  judgment  is  appropriate  if  the
pleadings,  depositions,  answers  to  interrogatories,
and  admissions  on  file,  together  with  the  affidavits,
if  any,  show  that  there  is  no  genuine  issue  as  to  any
material  fact  and  that  the  moving  party  is  entitled  to
judgment  as  a  matter  of  law.   A  fact  is  material  if
 
proof  of  that  fact  would  have  the  effect  of
establishing  or  refuting  one  of  the  essential  elements
of  a  cause  of  action  or  defense  asserted  by  the
parties.   The  evidence  must  be  viewed  in  the  light
most  favorable  to  the  non-moving  party.   In  other
 
words,  we  must  view  all  of  the  evidence  and  inferences
drawn  therefrom  in  the  light  most  favorable  to  the
party  opposing  the  motion.
 
Id. (brackets in original) (quoting Kahale v. City & Cty. of
 Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 341, 344, 90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004)). And, 
where the non-movant bears the burden of proof at
trial, a movant may demonstrate that there is no
genuine issue of material fact by either: (1)
presenting evidence negating an element of the non­
24
           
       
          
    
  
         
           
           
           
           
          
              *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
movant’s claim, or (2) demonstrating that the non­
movant will be unable to carry his or her burden of
proof at trial.
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai' i 46, 57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1287 (2013). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
We construe Kaiawe’s application for writ of certiorari
 
to present two questions for review: (1) whether the ICA erred
 
in holding that the circuit court correctly granted summary
 judgment in favor of Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s claims that the
 Property had been dedicated for exclusive cemetery use pursuant
 to common law and/or statute; and (2) whether the ICA erred in
 holding that Kaiawe was not entitled to relief pursuant to a
 quiet title action under HRS Chapter 669.
9
   
A. Dedication
 
“Dedication” is defined as “[t]he donation of land or
 
creation of an easement for public use.” Black’s Law Dictionary
 500 (10th ed. 2014). It is well-settled that there are two
 primary means by which land may be dedicated for public use: 
Dedication  of  land  for  public  use  may  be  achieved
either  by  statute  or  by  common  law.   Statutory
dedication  occurs  when  the  statutory  provisions  are
complied  with.   Common  law  dedication  is  accomplished
either  expressly,  as  by  deed,  or  impliedly,  as  by  acts
 
9
 Kaiawe’s application for writ of certiorari does not comply with 
the requirements of HRAP Rule 40.1(d) insofar as it is twenty-three pages
long. HRAP Rule 40.1(d) (providing that “[t]he application shall not exceed 12 pages”). Nonetheless, in light of this court’s long-standing policy ofaffording litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the meritswhere possible, we address the questions presented in Kaiawe’s application onthe merits. Marvin v. Pflueger , 127 Hawai 'i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012). 
25
           
        
    
      
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and conduct which manifest an intent to give the
property for public use.
 
Maui Ranch Estates Owners Ass’n v. Cty. of Maui, 6 Haw. App. 414,
 
421, 724 P.2d 118, 123 (1986) (citations omitted). 
Kaiawe maintains that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to
 whether the Property had been dedicated for public use as a
 cemetery under common law and by operation of statute. We
 address each argument in turn. 
1. Common Law Dedication
 
“The common law has historically provided for the 
dedication of private property for public use.” Gold Coast 
Neighborhood Ass’n v. State, 140 Hawai' i 437, 450, 403 P.3d 214, 
227 (2017). “Common law dedication of private property is 
‘accomplished either expressly, as by deed, or impliedly, as by acts and conduct which manifest an intent to give the property for public use.’” Id. (quoting Maui Ranch, 6 Haw. App. at 421, 
724 P.2d at 123). 
In this case, Kaiawe does not seem to argue that the
 
Property was dedicated to public use expressly. Rather, Kaiawe
 appears to rely upon a theory of implied dedication. With
 respect to implied dedication, this court has explained: 
A common law dedication may be accomplished
without any statement, written or spoken, for one who
invites or merely permits the public to use his or her
 
26
           
           
       
         
       
           
         
         
       
           
         
       
        
    
        
         
        
          
        
          
        
         
         
      
         
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
land for a long period may be held to have made an
offer of implied dedication. The rationale behind
 this theory is that the owner is estopped to deny
permanent public access where he has admitted the
public to use the land over a long time. There must
 be an offer and acceptance of dedication. When there
 is no express offer, the offer may be implied under
the circumstances and acceptance may also be implied
by the nature of the public use. In other words, the
duration and type of public use can raise both the
presumption of the owner’s intent (or offer) to
dedicate land to public use, as well as constitute
acceptance by the public.
 
In re Banning, 73 Haw. 297, 304-05, 832 P.2d 724, 728-29 (1992)
 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
Furthermore, it is generally recognized that land can
 
be impliedly dedicated for public use as a cemetery: 
Land may be dedicated to the public for cemetery
 
purposes. In the absence of a statute, no particular
form or ceremony is required to accomplish such a
dedication. The intention of the owner of the land to
 dedicate it for a public cemetery, together with the
acceptance and use of the same by the public, or the
consent and acquiescence of the owner in the long-
continued use of his or her lands for such purpose,
are sufficient. . . . While acceptance by the public
is necessary to complete the dedication, such
acceptance may be implied from acts and from the use
of the land[.]
 
14 Am. Jur. 2d Cemeteries § 17 (2018) (footnotes omitted). 
Kaiawe seems to argue that the ICA gravely erred in
 
concluding that the circuit court correctly granted summary
 
judgment in favor of Ibbetson on his common law dedication claim
 for two reasons. First, Kaiawe appears to argue that the ICA
 misapplied 
Midkiff to the facts in this case, and therefore
 
erroneously concluded that the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed
 and 1983 Deed could not, by any means, constitute evidence of
 
27
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mikala’s intent to dedicate the Property for public use as a
 
cemetery. Second, Kaiawe appears to argue that the evidence in
 the record indicates that there is a genuine issue of material
 fact as to whether the Property was used by the public as a
 cemetery for a prolonged period of time. We conclude that both
 of his arguments are meritorious. 
a. Midkiff is distinguishable and inapposite. 
Relying on Midkiff, the ICA majority held that the
 
habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed and 1983 Deed could not
 constitute evidence of Mikala’s intent to dedicate the Property
 for public use as a cemetery. However, the facts in Midkiff are
 distinguishable from those in the present case. Therefore, we
 hold that Midkiff does not apply and the ICA majority’s analysis
 is flawed insofar as it is premised thereon.
 
In Midkiff, the plaintiffs conveyed a parcel of land to
 
Oahu Railway and Land Company (OR&L) by a deed executed in 1899. 
45 Haw. at 410, 368 P.2d at 889. The deed contained a habendum
 clause, which stated: “To have and to hold . . . unto the said
 party of the second part its heirs successors and assigns forever
 for railway purposes.” Id. at 411, 368 P.2d at 889. OR&L used
 
the parcel for railway purposes until sometime in 1947. Id. The
 
defendant was the successor in interest to OR&L’s interest with
 respect to the parcel of land. Id. at 410, 368 P.2d at 889. 
28
           
       
         
        
         
        
          
        
         
        
      
  
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Upon learning that OR&L ceased using the parcel for
 
railway purposes, the plaintiffs filed a complaint, arguing that
 
by operation of the habendum clause in the deed, OR&L either
 received “an easement for a railroad” or “an estate in fee simple
 determinable . . . both of which terminated” when the parcel
 “ceased to be used for railway purposes.” Id. at 412, 368 P.2d
 
at 890. Therefore, the plaintiffs requested, inter alia, “to be
 declared the owners in fee simple” of the land. Id. The
 
defendants countered that the deed unambiguously reflected that
 the grantors intended to convey an estate in fee simple absolute. 
Id. at 413, 368 P.3d at 890. 
This court acknowledged that generally, habendum
 
clauses cannot, by themselves, “operate to qualify or limit the
 estate granted by the deed, or, in other words, . . . operate to
 reduce what would otherwise be an estate in fee simple to an
 easement or an estate in fee simple determinable or other limited
 estate.” Id. at 415, 368 P.2d at 891. The Midkiff court 
further explained: 
The principal reason given for this general rule
is that the purpose clause is a mere expression or
declaration or recital of the anticipated use by the
grantee of the land and that such an expression or
declaration or recital does not indicate an intent to
 qualify or limit the estate granted by the deed. In
 many of the decisions an additional reason for the
rule is given that a grantor desiring to grant an
easement or to convey a determinable fee or other
limited estate can readily use appropriate language
for that purpose.
 
29
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. at 416, 368 P.2d at 891-92 (citations omitted). Applying
 
this rule to the facts before it, this court concluded that the
 habendum clause “did not operate to qualify or limit the estate
 conveyed thereby and the OR&L obtained by the deed a fee simple
 title” to the parcel of land. Id. at 416, 368 P.2d at 892.
 
Here, in contrast with Midkiff, Kaiawe does not argue
 
that the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed or the 1983 Deed
 operated to limit the nature of the estate conveyed in either
 deed. In other words, Kaiawe does not contend that, by operation
 of either or both of these habendum clauses, the Association or
 HCF owned an estate in fee simple determinable, rather than in
 fee simple absolute. Additionally, unlike the plaintiffs in
 Midkiff, Kaiawe does not argue that because the Property is not
 solely being used as a cemetery, the Property should revert back
 to him as Mikala’s heir. Rather, Kaiawe seeks to use the
 habendum clauses in these deeds to serve a completely different
 purpose: as evidence of Mikala’s intent to dedicate the Property
 for public use as a cemetery. 
Consequently, to the extent that Kaiawe seeks to use
 
the habendum clauses in a different context and to accomplish a
 different purpose compared to the plaintiffs in Midkiff, Midkiff
 
30
           
         
           
           
             
              
             
             
           
            
             
             
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is distinguishable and inapposite.10 Thus, we hold that the ICA
 
erred in relying upon Midkiff to conclude that the habendum
 
clauses in the 1915 Deed and 1983 Deed could not, by any means,
 evince Mikala’s intent to dedicate the Property for public use. 
Having determined that the 1915 Deed and 1983 Deed
 
could bear upon whether Mikala intended to dedicate the Property
 for public use, we now review the record de novo to ascertain
 whether the circuit court correctly granted summary judgment in
 favor of Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim. 
b.	 The circuit court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s common
law dedication claim. 
Ibbetson and Kaiawe dispute whether the following 
evidence illustrates that there are genuine issues of material 
fact as to whether Mikala intended to dedicate the Property to public use as a cemetery, and whether the public accepted the Property for such use: (1) the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed and the 1983 Deed; and (2) Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony about the 
10 Assuming arguendo that the Property has been dedicated for public 
use, the effect of such dedication does not accomplish that which Midkiff
prohibits (i.e., an effective reduction of the estate from a fee simple
absolute to a fee simple determinable by operation of a habendum clause). See 
Gold Coast , 140 Hawai 'i at 450, 403 P.3d at 227 (“A common law dedication does
not operate as a grant but as an equitable estoppel[.]” (quoting 23 Am. Jur. 2d Dedication § 54 (2013)). In fact, Ibbetson concedes this point in hisresponse to Kaiawe’s application when he states: “A hypothetical public rightto use a property as a cemetery, because of an implied dedication, couldarguably be considered a restriction in use by the legal owner to the extentthat the owner’s uses conflict with the public’s, but that does not create alegal title right in favor of [Kaiawe].” 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Property’s use as a cemetery. 
In our view, the habendum clauses in the 1915 Deed and 
1983 Deed are ambiguous at most, and do not clearly evince 
whether Mikala intended to dedicate the Property as a public or private cemetery. However, we believe that Pastor Ha' alilio’s 
testimony, viewed in the light most favorable to Kaiawe, suggests that the Property may have been used by the public as a cemetery for several decades. Accordingly, we hold that the ICA erred in concluding that Ibbetson was entitled to summary judgment on Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim. 
The habendum clause in the 1915 Deed reads as follows: 
“To have and to hold the said premises, with the appurtenances,
 so that it may be used as a cemetery, to the said Board of the
 Hawaiian Evangelical Association, it successors and assigns,
 forever.” (Emphasis added.) Similarly, the habendum clause in
 the 1983 Deed states: “TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same, together
 with the improvements thereon and all rights, easements,
 privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining,
 unto the Grantee, its successors and assigns, for cemetery
 purposes only, forever.” (Emphasis added.) 
In our view, these habendum clauses do not suggest one
 
way or the other whether Mikala intended for the Property to be
 used by the public as a cemetery, or intended to restrict the
 
32
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Property’s use to only certain individuals, such as members of
 
the Hoikeana Church congregation. The habendum clause in the
 1915 Deed does not explicitly state that the Property was to be
 used by the public as a cemetery. Cf. Barker, 219 S.W. at 875-76
 
(concluding that a piece of property had been dedicated for
 public use where the habendum clause provided that a property was
 being conveyed “for the use and benefit of said church, as a
 public cemetery,” and the public actually used the property as
 such). By the same token, however, the habendum clause in the
 1915 Deed also does not contain any restrictive language
 indicating that the cemetery was to be available for use only by
 certain persons, as opposed to the general public, or that only
 individuals who were members of the Hoikeana Church could be
 buried on the Property. Similarly, the habendum clause in the
 1983 Deed neither specifies that the Property must be available
 for public use as a cemetery, nor restricts the Property’s use
 for the burials of only certain individuals. Accordingly, these
 habendum clauses are ambiguous at most as to whether Mikala
 intended to dedicate the Property for public use, and do not
 support one way or the other whether Ibbetson was entitled to
 summary judgment on Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim.
 
By contrast, Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony, when viewed 
in the light most favorable to Kaiawe as the non-moving party, 
33
           
         
          
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
indicates that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether the Property was used by the public as a cemetery over the course of several decades. Because “the duration and type of public use [of a property] can raise both the presumption of the owner’s intent (or offer) to dedicate land to public use, as well as constitute acceptance by the public,” In re Banning, 73 Haw. at 305, 832 P.2d at 729, Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony illustrates 
that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the Property was dedicated for public use as a cemetery. 
Pastor Ha' alilio testified that she and her family 
continued to maintain the cemeteries on the Property from the 1950s through the 1980s, long after the congregation at the Hoikeana Church had dissipated. She also testified that, as far as she knew, she had family members buried in Grave Site A, and Kaiawe’s relatives were buried in Grave Site B. 
Pastor Ha' alilio further testified that there were 
“quite a few” other individuals buried in Grave Site A besides her own family members and “those known to [her].” Upon being asked whether she had been in contact with the descendants of the non-relative individuals who were buried upon the Property, Pastor Ha' alilio responded: 
Okay, I need to have you understand that there was
never such thing as a master list back then. When
 people died they were buried in the back yard or the
front yard or wherever . And it just so happened that
 
34
           
         
        
          
         
        
            
          
        
       
           
          
         
        
         
          
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this church that’s across of the highway did have this
piece of property graciously given over to the church
for burial purposes. There was no master list as to
 
who was really buried there. It’s just by knowledge
passed down from generation to generation that so and
so is over here and so and so is over there . And
 
that’s how it is with my in-laws, my immediate family.
But there’s also family members that have been taking
care of their portions, their family portions, that’s
not here in Kona. Some are from Kau and Dean Kaiawe’s
 ohana were all scattered all over but as often as we
 are able we try to maintain those particular plots .
But it’s not necessary that because my family is
buried in [Grave Site] A that I would know who’s
buried in [Grave Site] B. Many of those plots were
not marked or identified by name.
 
(Emphases added.) She further testified that descendants of
 
individuals who were unrelated to her visited the Property in
 order to maintain their ancestors’ grave sites throughout the
 years, though she was not completely aware of who all these
 individuals were. 
The foregoing excerpts of Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony 
support that: (1) in addition to her relatives and Kaiawe’s ancestors, numerous other individuals were buried upon the Property; (2) there was no formal system according to which individuals were buried upon the Property, and no concrete record of who was buried where; (3) the descendants of the individuals who are currently buried upon the Property are now spread across the island of Hawai' i and other islands; and (4) these 
descendants, along with members of the Puka' ana Congregational 
Church, continued to return to the Property to maintain their ancestors’ grave sites throughout the years. Viewed in the light 
35
           
         
         
          
         
        
            
       
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
most favorable to Kaiawe, these facts support the inference that
 
members of the public who lived in the community near the
 Property, not just those who were affiliated with the Hoikeana
 Church, may have been buried on the Property. 
Ibbetson maintains that the Property “had been used as 
a private cemetery . . . for the benefit of certain families affiliated with the no-longer existing Hoikeana Church.” In support of this position, Ibbetson cites to Pastor Ha' alilio’s 
statement that “the cemetery is not a public cemetery.” He also emphasizes that Pastor Ha' alilio stated that the Property was 
“given over to the church for burial purposes.” To Ibbetson, these facts definitively show that the Property was not used by the public as a cemetery. 
We disagree for two reasons. First, Pastor Ha' alilio 
did not suggest that the Property was not used by the public when she stated that the Property was “not a public cemetery,” as Ibbetson suggests. Her statement, in context, is as follows: 
[M]any of [my family members] are not aware that the
cemetery is not a public cemetery, it sits on a
private parcel that has been sold and is resided upon .
So when they did come over [to maintain the grave
sites] they were a little bit awkward, the situations
that resolved as soon as I was able to, as far as the
maintenance and use and access to the cemetery.
 
(Emphasis added.) In other words, when she said that the 
Property was “not a public cemetery,” Pastor Ha' alilio was not 
commenting on whether only certain individuals could be buried 
36
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
there. Rather, she simply noted that Grave Site A was located on
 
privately-owned property. Therefore, Ibbetson’s argument fails
 to the extent that he misconstrues the record. 
Second, although Pastor Ha' alilio testified that the 
Property was “graciously given over to the church for burial purposes,” this statement only bears upon who owned the Property at the time of its initial conveyance. This statement does not shed light upon whether members of the public had buried their relatives on the Property, or whether only those who were affiliated with the Hoikeana Church were allowed to use the Property for burial purposes. Thus, Ibbetson’s argument in reliance on this portion of the record is meritless. 
To conclude, Pastor Ha' alilio’s testimony indicates 
that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the Property was used by the public as a cemetery for a prolonged period of time, and therefore, whether the Property was dedicated for public use under common law. See In re Banning, 73 Haw. at 
304-05, 832 P.2d at 729-30. Ibbetson’s arguments to the contrary misconstrue the record. Further, the record is devoid of other evidence showing that the Property was exclusively used by Hoikeana Church members, rather than the public. Accordingly, the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim, and the ICA 
37
           
       
         
       
         
       
         
         
        
 
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
erred in affirming the circuit court’s ruling on this point. 
2. Statutory Dedication
 
“Statutory dedication occurs when the statutory
 
provisions are complied with.” Maui Ranch, 6 Haw. App. at 421,
 
724 P.2d at 123. HRS § 441-17 defines when pre-existing
 
cemeteries may be deemed dedicated for exclusive use as a
 cemetery. HRS § 441-17 (1993) states: 
All existing cemeteries or parts thereof which shall
have been lawfully established, and for which a map or
plat substantially similar to that required by section
441-3 has been filed or recorded in the bureau of
 conveyances or in the office of the assistant
registrar of the land court, shall be deemed to have
been dedicated as of [July 1, 1967], to the same
extent and with like effect as provided in this
chapter.
 
(Brackets in original.) Put differently, HRS § 441-17
 
establishes two requirements that must be met in order for a pre­existing cemetery to be deemed statutorily dedicated for cemetery
 use. First, the cemetery must have been lawfully established. 
HRS § 441-17. Second, “a map or plat substantially similar to
 that required by [HRS §] 441-3” must be filed or recorded with
 the appropriate authorities. HRS § 441-17. 
Based upon the statute’s plain language, HRS § 441-17
 
refers to HRS § 441-3 as a guidepost, which informs the second
 requirement for statutory dedication of a pre-existing cemetery. 
On this point, HRS § 441-3 (1993) provides in pertinent part: 
(a) The cemetery authority from time to time as any of
 
38
           
      
        
        
       
         
      
      
         
       
     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the property described in the certificate of
dedication, or any part or section thereof, is offered
for sale, transfer, or disposition in the form of
plots, crypts, or niches, shall also:
 
(1) In the case of land, survey and subdivide
[the cemetery property] into sections, blocks,
plots, avenues, walks, or other subdivisions;
make a good and substantial map or plat showing
the sections, blocks, plots, avenues, walks, or
other subdivisions with descriptive names,
initials, or numbers [.]
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Thus, reading HRS § 441-17 alongside HRS § 441-3, it
 
appears that in order for a pre-existing cemetery to be deemed
 
statutorily dedicated for cemetery use under HRS § 441-17: (1)
 the cemetery must have been established lawfully; and (2) a map
 or plat “substantially similar” to a “map or plat showing the
 sections, blocks, plots, avenues, walks, or other subdivisions
 with descriptive names, initials, or numbers” must be filed or
 recorded with the appropriate authority. HRS §§ 441-17 and 441­3. Here, the parties do not dispute that the cemeteries on the
 Property were established lawfully, such that the first
 requirement was met. Their dispute lies in whether the record
 supports that HRS § 441-17’s second requirement was met. 
Though Kaiawe appears to acknowledge that the metes and
 
bounds description from the 1915 Deed “only describes [the
 Property’s] perimeter,” he maintains that the metes and bounds
 description is “substantially similar” to the types of maps or
 plats that are required under HRS § 441-3. Thus, he appears to
 
39
           
       
         
      
        
          
        
         
          
      
         
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
argue that because the metes and bounds description satisfies the
 
second requirement in HRS § 441-17, the circuit court erred in
 granting summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on his statutory
 dedication claim. 
The 1915 Deed’s metes and bounds description states: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of this piece
on the old government trail, a little makai of the
present government road, adjoining Kaohe 4, and
running thence along the line between Kaohe 4 and
Kaohe 5, 200 feet in a westwardly direction to a stake
and stone pile; thence southwardly to a stake and
stone pile 120 feet; thence eastwardly to a stake and
stone pile 275 feet; and thence northwardly . . . to
point of commencement, and containing about three-
fourths of an acre, more or less, and being described
in R.P. Number 2358 to Huakonou.
 
The metes and bounds description does not satisfy the
 
second requirement for statutory dedication under HRS § 441-17
 
for two reasons. First, the metes and bounds description itself
 is neither a map nor a plat. Second, the metes and bound
 description merely outlines the Property’s outer perimeter. The
 metes and bounds description does not show or otherwise describe
 “the sections, plots, avenues, walks, or other subdivisions with
 descriptive names, initials, or numbers” within either of the
 cemeteries located on the Property. Thus, inasmuch as the metes
 and bounds description is not a map or plat and only describes
 the Property’s outer boundaries, the description is not, in our
 view, a map or plat that is “substantially similar” to that which
 is required under HRS § 441-3. Furthermore, the record does not
 
40
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contain any other type of map or plat that would appear to
 
satisfy the second requirement of HRS § 441-17. Therefore, we
 conclude that, as a matter of law, Kaiawe has not established
 that the second requirement in HRS § 441-17 was met in this case. 
Accordingly, we agree with the ICA that the circuit court
 correctly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s statutory dedication claim. 
B. Entitlement to Relief Under HRS Chapter 669
 
On his second question on certiorari, Kaiawe contends
 
that he is entitled to bring a quiet title action under HRS
 
Chapter 669. Without citation to legal authority, Kaiawe argues
 that the ICA erred in holding that HRS Chapter 669 “is limited to
 deciding the legal ownership of land by ‘paper title’ or adverse
 possession only[.]” Rather, Kaiawe argues that he need not
 demonstrate that he had competing title to the Property, and that
 he could utilize HRS Chapter 669 to “establish[] a servitude on
 land.” 
Kaiawe’s interpretation of HRS Chapter 669 is not
 
supported by legal authority. HRS § 669-1(a) provides that an
 individual can bring an action to quiet title when he or she has
 a competing legally cognizable interest in a piece of property. 
Specifically, HRS § 669-1(a) (1993) states: “Action may be
 brought by any person against another person who claims, or who
 
41
           
         
          
        
         
          
        
        
        
          
       
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
may claim adversely to the plaintiff, an estate or interest in
 
real property, for the purpose of determining the adverse claim.” 
This court has propounded clear principles as to a plaintiff’s
 burden in pursuing a quiet title action: 
In an action to quiet title, the burden is on
the plaintiff to prove title in and to the land in
dispute, and, absent such proof, it is unnecessary for
the defendant to make any showing. The plaintiff has
the burden to prove either that he has paper title to
the property or that he holds title by adverse
possession. While it is not necessary for the
plaintiff to have perfect title to establish a prima
facie case, he must at least prove that he has a
substantial interest in the property and that his
title is superior to that of the defendants.
 
Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai' i 402, 407-08, 
879 P.2d 507, 512-13 (1994) (citations omitted); Ka' upulehu Land 
LLC v. Heirs and Assigns of Pahukula, 136 Hawai' i 123, 137-38, 
358 P.3d 692, 706-07 (2015) (applying the principles articulated 
in Maui Land & Pineapple Co. to a quiet title action brought pursuant to HRS Chapter 669). Put differently, Hawai' i case law 
explicitly provides that a plaintiff seeking relief under HRS Chapter 669 must demonstrate that he or she has title to the land, either via paper title or adverse possession, and that he or she has superior title compared to the defendant. See id. 
Kaiawe’s argument is inconsistent with these well-established principles, and accordingly, is without merit. 
Applying the foregoing principles in this case, here,
 
Kaiawe does not contend that he has competing title to the
 
42
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Property by way of paper title, or by virtue of adverse
 
possession. The record does not contain any evidence indicating
 that Kaiawe had an interest in title to the Property superior to
 Ibbetson’s title. On the contrary, the evidence in the record
 illustrates an unbroken chain of title, whereby Mikala conveyed
 the Property to the Association, who conveyed the Property to
 HCF, who transferred the Property to Ibbetson. Thus, because
 Kaiawe has not shown that he has title in the Property, and that
 his title is superior to Ibbetson’s, the ICA correctly held that
 Kaiawe was not entitled to relief under HRS Chapter 669. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons stated above, the ICA correctly
 
affirmed the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment on
 Kaiawe’s statutory dedication claim, and correctly determined
 that Kaiawe was not entitled to relief under HRS Chapter 669. 
However, the ICA erred in holding that the circuit court
 correctly granted summary judgment in favor of Ibbetson on
 Kaiawe’s common law dedication claim. 
Therefore, we affirm in part and vacate in part the
 
ICA’s November 30, 2017 judgment on appeal, which affirmed the
 circuit court’s November 13, 2014 amended final judgment, and 
43
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion. 
Michael J. Matsukawa for
 
petitioner Dean Kaiawe
 
Derek R. Kobayashi and
Matthew A. Hemme for
 respondent Hawaii Conference
Foundation
 
Dennis A. Krueger,
Wayne Nasser and James K.
Mee for respondent Daniel
Ibbetson
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
44
 