***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o--- 
 
 
RAY A. DELAPINIA and ROBYN M. DELAPINIA,  
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
 
 vs.  
 
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC; FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE  
ASSOCIATION; TERRY LOUISE COLE; MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC  
REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC.; AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK, F.S.B., 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
 
 
SCWC-17-0000387 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000387; CIV. NO. 2CC161000432) 
 
OCTOBER 25, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, JJ.,  
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WONG, IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J., RECUSED 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
  In 2010, the plaintiffs’ Kihei property was foreclosed 
by nonjudicial foreclosure under Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000387
25-OCT-2021
08:41 AM
Dkt. 48 OP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
2 
 Part I (since repealed).  Several years later, the plaintiffs 
sued for wrongful foreclosure and quiet title against various 
defendants: their mortgagees, the subsequent purchaser of the 
property, and the subsequent purchaser’s mortgagees.  The 
defendants moved for, and the circuit court granted, dismissal 
of all claims.  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), in a 
published opinion, vacated in part but affirmed as to one 
defendant: the subsequent purchaser’s mortgagee.  Delapinia v. 
Nationstar Mortgage LLC, 146 Hawai‘ i 218, 458 P.3d 929 (Haw. Ct. 
App. 2020). 
  We accepted the plaintiffs’ application for writ of certiorari to consider two aspects of the ICA’s decision: First, the ICA adopted the “tender rule,” a requirement under which a 
plaintiff seeking to quiet title must plead that it can tender 
the amount of indebtedness.  We decline to opine whether the 
tender rule applies in Hawai‘ i wrongful foreclosure cases 
generally.  But we hold that it is inapplicable on these facts, 
where the defendant asserting the rule against a quiet title 
claim is the subsequent purchaser’s mortgagee, to whom the 
plaintiff is not in debt.  As the defendant who sought to assert 
the tender rule was not the plaintiffs’ mortgagee, the 
plaintiffs do not need to plead tender in order to establish 
superior title as to that defendant. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
3 
   Second, this case requires us to consider whether 
foreclosures that violate the power of sale are voidable or 
void.  Silva v. Lopez, 5 Haw. 262 (1884), suggests that such 
wrongful foreclosures are void.  However, we have considered this question in other wrongful foreclosure contexts more 
recently, and those cases favor protecting the reliance 
interests of a bona fide purchaser.  Accordingly, we hold that 
wrongful foreclosures in violation of the power of sale are voidable, and to the extent Silva is to the contrary, it is 
overruled. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
 
1. The Complaint 
 
  This case arises from several motions brought before 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit1 (circuit court) in the 
Delapinias’ wrongful foreclosure suit: Nationstar Mortgage LLC (Nationstar) and Federal National Mortgage Association’s (Fannie Mae) (collectively, “Nationstar defendants”) motion for judgment 
on the pleadings; defendant Terry Louise Cole’s motion to 
dismiss, in which defendant American Savings Bank F.S.B (ASB) 
joined (collectively, “Cole defendants”); and defendant Mortgage 
Electronic Registration Systems, Inc.’s (MERS) motion to 
                     
1  The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
4 
 dismiss.  The circuit court granted all of the above motions 
(although only the motions to dismiss are at issue on 
certiorari), and accordingly, all facts alleged in the 
plaintiffs’ First Amended Complaint (FAC) will be taken as true. 
Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 Hawaiʻ i 224, 236, 439 P.3d 176, 188 
(2019).    
  The Delapinias alleged the following in the FAC.  The 
Delapinias owned property in Kihei, which was secured by 
mortgage executed in 2007.  “In 2010, Nationstar claimed to be 
the assignee of the Mortgage . . . [and] claimed to be a 
mortgagee or successor to a mortgagee entitled under HRS Chapter 
667 Part I (2008) to exercise the power of sale in the Mortgage.”  In fact, “Nationstar was acting at the direction and 
behest of Fannie Mae” and “did not satisfy the conditions 
precedent to the valid exercise of that power.”   
  Nationstar, “purporting to act under the power of sale 
in the Mortgage, executed a deed conveying the Property to 
Fannie Mae,” but “[t]hat deed was void because Nationstar and 
Fannie Mae, as the foreclosing mortgagee, did not comply with the power of sale in the mortgage or the statute then governing 
their exercise of the power of sale, HRS Chapter 667 Part I.”  
The Delapinias identified the following violations of the power 
of sale clause and of the statutes: 
a) Plaintiffs were not served with a notice of acceleration ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
5 
 that complied with Paragraph 22 of the Mortgage; 
b) The notice of intention of foreclosure published by 
Nationstar and Fannie Mae did not contain a description 
of the Property as required by HRS Section 667- 7(a)(1), 
but merely published the address and Tax Map Key Number of the Property, which did not constitute the 
“description” contemplated by the statute; 
c) The Notice did not offer buyers of the P roperty a 
warranty that the putative mortgagee had the right to 
sell or that the sale was conducted lawfully in 
compliance with the applicable statute and the power of sale; 
d) No Defendant first advertised the notice of sale more than 28 days before the proposed auction date as 
required by HRS Section 667- 7 (2008); 
e) No Defendant used a Hawaii attorney to perform all of 
the acts required by the power of sale, including but not limited [to] having an attorney sign and give the 
notice of sale to Plaintiffs and having an attorney who 
conducted the sale executive the Affidavit of 
Foreclosure; 
f) No Defendant ever published any date on which the 
Property was actually sold, in violation of Paragraph 22 
of the Mortgage which stated that the mortgagee “shall 
sell” at the time specified in the published notice; 
g) No Defendant ever held an auction on a published date, 
in violation of Paragraph 22 of the Mortgage which 
stated that the mortgagee “shall sell” at the time 
specified in the published notice; 
h) No Defendant ever issued a written notice to the public 
of any postponed auction date, despite the requirement of Paragraph 15 of the Mortgage that “all notices” in 
connection with the Mortgage be “in writing” and state law requiring a “public announcement” of any 
postponement; 
i) The date when the Property was purportedly sold to 
Nationstar or Fannie Mae (depending on whether one 
believes the Affidavit of Foreclosure or the quitclaim 
deed from Nationstar) was never published in a newspaper 
or otherwise in writing to the public; and 
j) No Defendant ever recorded a lawful Affidavit of 
Foreclosure signed by the attorney conducting the 
putative sale. 
 
(Emphases in original).   
  Fannie Mae purchased the property, and subsequently 
sold it to Cole by limited warranty deed.2  But the Delapinias 
                     
2  The Delapinias also contest whether Cole was a bona fide 
purchaser, as they argue subsequent purchasers should have been charged with 
constructive notice of the defects that were inferable from the Foreclosure 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
6 
 contended that both conveyances are “void and not merely 
voidable” under Silva v. Lopez, 5 Haw. 262, 271 (1884), and Lee 
v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawaiʻ i 287, 218 P.3d 775 (2009), because 
of the statutory and contractual violations that rendered the 
foreclosure wrongful.  The plaintiffs therefore sought “the 
‘classic remedy’ for a challenged nonjudicial foreclosure,” 
return of title and possession, citing Santiago v. Tanaka, 137 
Hawaiʻi 137, 154 n.33, 366 P.3d 612, 629 n.33 (2016).   
  The Delapinias brought two claims against the 
defendants based on these allegations.  In Count I (quiet 
title), the Delapinias asked the court to quiet title in the 
property in favor of the plaintiffs – except for the 2007 
Mortgage, “which should remain on the Property when it is 
returned to Plaintiffs” – ejectment of the third-party purchaser, possession, and damages from the lost rental value.  
In Count II (wrongful foreclosure), the Delapinias further 
alleged that the Nationstar defendants failed to act “in 
accordance with their duties as mortgagee”– since “no lawful 
published auction ever occurred,” those duties continued.  The 
plaintiffs asked for compensatory and punitive damages on the 
wrongful foreclosure count.  
 
                     
Affidavit.  Whether Cole is in fact a bona fide purchaser is not at issue in 
this appeal.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
7 
  
2. Motions to Dismiss and for Judgment on the Pleadings 
 
  The Cole defendants moved to dismiss  the FAC under 
Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 8(a)  and Rule 
12(b)(6)  on the basis that they were protected by their status 
as bona fide purchasers.   The Cole defendants pointed to this 
court’s decisions in Santiago and Mount v. Apao, 139 Hawaiʻ i 167, 
384 P.3d 1268 (2016),  which they claim establish that “an 
unlawful nonjudicial foreclosure is at most ‘voidable,’ unless 
the property has been sold to innocent purchasers for value, in 
which case the appropriate remedy is an award of damages.”  As 
pleaded, it was “apparent from the face of the pleading” that 
the foreclosure was at most voidable, not void.  Under Santiago 
and Mount, the appropriate remedy when the property has been 
conveyed to “innocent purchasers for value” is damages.  It was also “apparent from the face of the FAC” that Cole was a bona 
fide purchaser.   76543
  The Delapinias argued in response that this court has described “the classic remedy for such a cause of action [as] 
                     
3  The Nationstar defendants supported and joined in the arguments 
set forth in this motion.   
 
4  HRCP Rule 8(a) provides:  
 
A pleading which sets forth a claim for relief . . . shall 
contain (1) a short and plain statement of the claim showing that 
the pleader is entitled to relief, and (2) a demand for judgment for the relief the pleader seeks. Relief in the alternative or of 
several different types may be demanded. 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
8 
 return of title and possession.”  (Emphasis omitted).  Moreover, 
the Delapinias contend Mount did not address the remedy when the 
sale violated the power of sale clause, rather than the statute.   
  On the other hand, Silva “is on point and is 
ultimately controlling here.”  Per the plaintiffs, that case stands for the principle that “if the power of sale was violated 
by improper publication of notice of the sale, the sale is ‘void 
and not merely voidable,’” quoting Silva, 5 Haw. at 271. They 
maintained that Silva remains good law – cited approvingly by 
Kondaur Cap. Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 136 Hawai‘ i 227, 240 n.26, 361 
P.3d 454, 467 n.26 (2015), and Mount – and as a result, “[the] 
foreclosure was void and conveyed nothing,” negating the Cole 
                     
5  HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) allows for the dismissal of complaints for 
“failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted.” 
 
6  They also contended that the Delapinias’ claims were time- barred.  
Likewise, the Nationstar defendants filed an answer to the FAC, largely 
denying the allegations and asserting as a defense, among other things, the 
statute of limitations.  They subsequently moved for judgment on the 
pleadings, or in the alternative for summary judgment, per HRCP Rule 12(c).  
In that motion, they too argued that the Delpainias’ claims were time barred, either by a two- or six-year statute of limitations.  The motion also 
reiterated the arguments that “an improperly completed non- judicial 
foreclosure is voidable” not void.  (Emphasis omitted).  I n the alternative, 
they argued that laches barred recovery.   
 
  The Delapinias contended that the relevant statute of limitations 
was twenty years.    
  The court circuit concluded that the two- year statute of 
limitations applied and barred the claim.   
 
7  Mount was decided after the FAC but before the relevant motions 
from the defendants. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
9 
 defendants’ bona fide purchaser defense.  (Original emphasis 
altered).
   
  MERS also moved to dismiss the FAC.  It raised 
substantially similar arguments regarding Cole’s bona fide 
purchaser status, contending that the foreclosure sale cannot be 
voided pursuant to Santiago and Mount.  MERS asserted that 
“citation to the [1884] Silva decision ignores the rulings in 
both Mount and Santiago.”  And, like the Cole defendants, MERS 
argued that Cole was a bona fide purchaser because only notice 
of pending litigation – not the record notice alleged in the 
complaint – would have undermined the protection afforded to 
third-party purchasers for value.   
  Further, MERS argued that “[w]hile this case should be 
dismissed in its entirety against MERS based on Cole’s bona fide 
purchaser defense, Plaintiffs’ underlying claims are equally 
meritless” because the Delapinias failed to “allege that they 
have paid or are able to tender the amount of indebtedness that would be due under the Mortgage,” citing cases from the United 
States District Court for the District of Hawaiʻ i
 that appear to 
adopt the “tender rule.”  “Here, Plaintiffs[’] Count I should be 
dismissed because they do not allege that they have paid or are 
able to tender the amount of indebtedness.  In fact, Plaintiffs 
argue that if they prevail that ‘the Property remains encumbered 
by the [Mortgage].’”  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
10 
   In opposition to MERS, the Delapinias reiterated many 
of the same arguments as they presented in their response to the 
Cole defendants’ motion.  They emphasized that Silva directly 
controls this case and renders the deed void, not voidable.  The Delapinias also addressed MERS’s contention that the “tender 
rule” barred their complaint.  They acknowledged this rule has 
been “adopted in some mainland jurisdictions,” but asserted it 
is inapplicable here.  (Capitalization altered).  MERS cited cases in which the quiet title claim was against the mortgagee; 
here, “[t]he FAC plainly alleges that the original mortgage that 
Plaintiffs gave to Nationstar’s and Fannie Mae’s assignor 
remains on the property, and Plaintiffs only seek to quiet the 
title to the Property[.]”  (Emphasis in original).  They “will 
accept the Property back with the mortgage still on it,” at which point the Nationstar defendants are free to “attempt a 
lawful foreclosure” should the default remain.  In any event, 
Santiago “does not hold that the mortgagor must first pay off or 
offer to pay off the mortgage before being entitled to” relief 
in the form of possession.   
  The circuit court granted the Cole defendants’ motion, orally ruling as follows:  
Even when accepting Plaintiffs’ factual allegations 
as true, dismissal of the claims against Terry Cole, 
American Savings Bank and Nationstar is appropriate. 
. . . 
As to the sale being void or voidable, any reading of 
the law in Hawaii is improperly completed nonjudicial ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
11 
 foreclosure sales are voidable -- my reading of the law, 
excuse me, is that nonjudicial foreclosure sales are 
voidable if the claim is timely and the current owners are 
not bona fide purchasers. 
There’s no allegation that Defendants did not pay 
value for the property, and there is no allegation that the current owners had actual notice of Plaintiffs’ claims. 
There is no allegation that Plaintiffs or anyone else 
recorded any kind of documentation reasonably indicating 
Plaintiffs had any interest in the subject [property]. 
Therefore, the argument for the non- bona fide purchaser 
status under constructive or inquiry notice fails as well. So I’m going to go ahead and grant both motions. 
 
  The circuit court subsequently granted MERS’s motion 
as well, issuing the following in its written order: 
1. Under Hawaiʻ i law, a properly completed non-
judicial foreclosure sale is voidable if the claim is 
timely and the current owners are bona fide purchasers.  
There is no allegation that Cole did not acquire the 
property for value and there is no allegation that Cole had 
notice of Plaintiffs’ outstanding claims if any, so Cole is a bona fide purchaser.  The court notes that it has already 
dismissed claims against Cole because of her innocent bona 
fide purchaser status.  As Cole’s mortgagee, Defendant MERS 
receives the same protection as Cole. 
2. Plaintiffs fail to state a Quiet Title Claim as 
they do not allege that they have paid or are able to tender the amount of indebtedness due under their mortgage. 
3. The notice of sale complied with the mortgage.  
The notice of sale properly described the property under 
HRS 667- 7(a)(1). 
4.  The publishing of the notice of sale complied 
with HRS 667-7. 
5. A Hawaii attorney is not required to sign the 
notice of sale or affidavit of foreclosure. 
6. Lastly, written publication of postponement of an 
auction is not necessary. 
 
B.  ICA Proceedings 
 
  The Delapinias appealed.  The ICA affirmed in part and 
vacated in part8 the circuit court’s judgment in a published 
                     
8  The ICA vacated the circuit court’s order granting judgment on 
the pleadings to Nationstar and Fannie Mae and the order dismissing the Cole 
defendants, which was based in part on the conclusion that the Delapinias’ 
claim was time- barred by the two- year statute of limitations.  As before the 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
12 
 opinion.  Regarding the dismissal of MERS, the ICA reasoned that 
the tender rule barred the Delapinia’s claim:   
The tender rule is based on the principle that a plaintiff 
seeking to quiet title “must at least prove that he has a 
substantial interest in the property and that his title is superior to that of the defendants.”  Maui Land & Pineapple 
Co.[ v. Infiesto] , 76 Haw[ ai‘i] [402,]  408, 879 P.2d [507,] 
513 [(1994)].  The tender rule requires as [sic] borrower, 
in bringing a quiet title action, to allege that he has paid, or is able to tender, the amounts owed.  Klohs v. 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 901 F. Supp. 2d 1253, 1262- 63 (D. 
Haw. 2012). 
 
Delapinia, 146 Hawaiʻ i at 228, 458 P.3d at 939. 
  In this case, “the Delapinias did not allege either 
that ‘they have paid off [Nationstar Mortgage] or are prepared 
to tender all amounts owing’ to Nationstar such as is necessary 
to establish superior title and maintain a quiet title action.”  Id. (brackets in original) (quoting Klohs, 901 F. Supp. 2d at 
1262).  
  The ICA also concluded that no exception to the tender 
rule applied.  The ICA reasoned that tender requirement does not 
apply “where the borrower brings a quiet title claim against a 
party who, according to the allegations in the Complaint (which 
the court accepts as true), is not a mortgagee and who otherwise 
                     
circuit court, see supra note 6, the parties argued in their ICA briefs over 
whether the relevant statute of limitations was 2-, 6- , or 20- years.   
 
  The ICA concluded that the stat ute of limitations was six years, 
and that the Delapinias timely filed their complaint.  Delapinia, 146 Hawaiʻ i 
at 224–26, 458 P.3d at 935– 37.  As no defendant sought certiorari review, 
this memo will not address the statute of limitations issue any further. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
13 
 has no interest in the property whatsoever.”  Id. (quoting 
Klohs, 901 F. Supp. 2d at 1263 n.6).  However,  
based on the Delapinias’ allegations in the FAC, MERS has 
an interest in the Property.  In the portion of the FAC 
describing the parties to the action, the Delapinias described MERS as “a foreign corporation which is and at 
all relevant times was doing business in Hawaii, and which 
claims to hold a mortgage on the Property as nominee.” In 
their quiet title count, the Delapinias alleged that 
“Defendant Cole has purported to grant a first mortgage on the Property to Defendant MERS as nominee of ‘Pinnacle 
Capital Mortgage Corporation[.]’”  Thus, where MERS has an 
interest in the Property according to the allegations in 
the FAC, the tender rule applies. 
 
Id. (brackets in original). 
  As to the Cole defendants, “[t]o the extent that the 
Delapinias alleged that a wrongful foreclosure voided the sale 
and all subsequent transfers, we reject this contention as a 
matter of law.”  Id. at 229, 458 P.3d at 940.  “While it is true 
that the supreme court has not expressly overruled Silva, the 
supreme court has more recently held that improper foreclosure sales are voidable.”  Id.  The ICA pointed to Kondaur and 
Santiago for this principle, noting that in both cases, we 
determined the foreclosure sale to be “voidable.”  Id. (citing 
Kondaur, 136 Hawaiʻi at 240, 361 P.3d at 467; Santiago, 137 
Hawaiʻi at 158, 366 P.3d at 633).  And while this court in Mount 
cited Silva approvingly and acknowledged that in Lee, we held a 
foreclosure sale to be void, Mount also factually distinguished 
Lee on the grounds that the sale in Lee was not yet completed.  
Id. (citing Mount, 139 Hawaiʻi at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281).  Thus, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
14 
 the ICA “conclude[d] that improper foreclosure sales are 
voidable, rather than void, and that the supreme court has 
either distinguished or impliedly overruled its earlier 
decisions holding to the contrary.”  Id.  
  Nonetheless, the ICA vacated the order dismissing the Cole defendants because “[t]he Delapinias were not required to 
make any allegations pertaining to possible affirmative defenses 
in the FAC,” and the circuit court’s conclusion that Cole was a bona fide purchaser as a matter of law was improper.  Id. 
C.  Supreme Court Proceedings 
 
  On certiorari, the Delapinias challenge the ICA’s 
holding adopting the tender rule and the ICA’s treatment of 
Silva.  First, they argue that the ICA gravely erred by 
“requiring a wrongful foreclosure victim to also plead and prove the ability to tender the full amount of the wrongfully 
foreclosed mortgage as a condition to receiving the ‘classic 
remedy’ [of return of title and possession].”  (Emphasis 
omitted).  Even if the tender rule were 
Hawaiʻi law, the 
Delapinias argue that the ICA did not correctly analyze the 
rule’s exceptions.  Second, the Delapinias argue that the ICA 
“gravely erred in exceeding its constitutional authority and 
declaring that Silva v. Lopez, . . . a decision of this court 
that has stood for over 135 years, has been ‘impliedly overruled[.]’”  Per the Delapinias, “[t]his court has never ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
15 
 distinguished Silva” on its holding that improper foreclosure 
sales are void as opposed to voidable.  “[T]he ICA does not have 
the power to limit decisions of this court,” and Silva directly 
controls.   
  The Nationstar defendants and the Cole defendants 
argued in response that the ICA correctly declined to apply 
Silva.  MERS additionally defended the ICA’s application of the 
tender rule: per MERS, the Delapinias are conflating their 
wrongful foreclosure claim against the Nationstar defendants 
with the quiet title claim against MERS.  Quiet title requires 
that the Delapinias establish the superiority of their title, 
which MERS claims requires the Delapanias to “prov[e] that 
[they] can cure the default[.]”  The rule is rooted in equity: 
“[e]quity will not interpose its remedial power in the 
accomplishment of what seemingly would be nothing but an idly 
and expensively futile act[.]”  (Quoting Arnolds Mgmt. Corp. v. 
Eischen, 158 Cal. App. 3d 575, 578-79 (1984)).   
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 A trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo.  The court must accept plaintiff’s 
allegations as true and view them in the light most 
favorable to the plaintiff; dismissal is proper only if it 
appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of 
facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him 
or her to relief.   
 
Goran Pleho, 144 Hawaiʻ i at 236, 439 P.3d at 188 (quoting Wong v. 
Cayetano, 111 Hawaiʻi 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006)) (emphasis ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
16 
 omitted). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. MERS May Not Assert the Tender Rule to Bar the Quiet Title 
Action in this Case 
 
  The tender rule has been described as follows: 
As a general rule, a debtor cannot set aside the 
foreclosure based on irregularities in the sale without also alleging tender of the amount of the secured debt. 
. . . “The rationale behind the rule is that if [the 
borrower] could not have redeemed the property had the sale procedures been proper, any irregularities in the sale did 
not result in damages to the [borrower].” 
 
Ram v. OneWest Bank, FSB, 183 Cal. Rptr. 3d 638, 649-50 (Cal. 
Ct. App. 2015) (citations omitted) (brackets in original). 
  Although we have not determined whether the tender 
rule is Hawaiʻ i law, in other jurisdictions, the rule is rooted 
in the principle that “a defaulted borrower who seeks to set 
aside a [foreclosure] sale is required to do equity before the 
court will exercise its equitable powers.”  Lona v. Citibank 
N.A., 202 Cal. App. 4th 89, 112 (2011).  Said differently, 
plaintiffs must “come into equity with clean hands” by paying 
their outstanding debts.  Shimpones v. Stickney, 28 P.2d 673, 
678 (Cal. 1934).  Allowing plaintiffs to claim property without 
paying what they owe “would give them an inequitable windfall, 
allowing them to evade their lawful debt.”  Stebley v. Litton 
Loan Servicing, LLP, 134 Cal. Rptr. 3d 604, 607 (Cal. Ct. App. 
2011); see also Dimock v. Emerald Properties LLC, 97 Cal. Rptr. 
2d 255, 262 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000) (“Th[e tender] requirement is ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
17 
 based on the theory that one who is relying upon equity in 
overcoming a voidable sale must show that he is able to perform 
his obligations under the contract so that equity will not have 
been employed for an idle purpose.”). 
 
 In jurisdictions in which the tender rule applies, 
“there is no exclusive list of circumstances where a tender is not essential.”
9  5 Miller & Starr, Cal. Real Estate § 13:256 
cmt. (4th ed. 2019).  The question of tender turns on the 
“equities of the situation,” the “degree of prejudice” or 
“misconduct,” and the “nature” of the default.  Id.  In 
California, for instance, the requirement of tender is an element of a wrongful foreclosure claim, but California courts 
recognize several exceptions: 
                     
9  The ICA seemed to conclude that the only exception to the tender 
rule lies “where the borrower brings a quiet title claim against a party who, 
according to the allegations in the Complaint (which the court accepts as 
true), is not a mortgagee and who otherwise has no interest in the property 
whatsoever.”  Delapinia, 146 Hawaiʻi at 228, 458 P.3d at 939 (emphasis 
omitted) (quoting Klohs, 901 F. Supp. 2d at 1263 n.6).  Because the FAC 
alleged that MERS claimed an interest in the property, the ICA reasoned that 
the tender rule could not be excused. 
  But the language “who otherwise has no interest in the property 
whatsoever” comes from the United States District Court for the District of 
Hawaiʻi
 case Klohs v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 907 Supp. 2d 1253, 1263 n.6 (D. 
Haw. 2012), which in turn was quoting Amina v. Bank of New York Mellon, No. 
CIV. 11- 00714 JMS, 2012 WL 3283513, at *4 (D. Haw. Aug. 9, 2012).  I n 
context, that language merely reflected the facts of Amina, in which the 
plaintiffs alleged the defendant bank was threatening to foreclose when it lacked any connection at all to the mortgage.   Id. at *1.  As explained 
herein, there are a number of exceptions to the tender rule.  Indeed, as the Delapinias point out, every quiet title action will, by its nature, require 
the plaintiffs to allege that the defendants have claimed an interest in the 
property, so it cannot be the case that mere allegations that the defendant 
has claimed an interest will per se require the plaintiff to plead tender.  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
18 
 First, if the borrower’ s action attacks the validity 
of the underlying debt, a tender is not required since it 
would constitute an affirmation of the debt. . . . 
Second, a tender will not be required when the person 
who seeks to set aside the trustee’ s sale[10] has a 
counterclaim or setoff against the beneficiary.  In such 
cases, it is deemed that the tender and the counterclaim 
offset one another, and if the offset is equal to or 
greater than the amount due, a tender is not 
required. . . . 
Third, a tender may not be required where it would be 
inequitable to impose such a condition on the party challenging the sale.  (Humboldt Savings Bank v. McCleverty 
(1911) 161 Cal. 285, 291, 119 P. 82 (H umboldt).)  In 
Humboldt, the defendant’s deceased husband borrowed $55,300 
from the plaintiff bank secured by two pieces of property. 
The defendant had a $5,000 homestead on one of the 
properties. (Id. at p. 287, 119 P. 82.) When the 
defendant’s husband defaulted on the debt, the bank 
foreclosed on both properties. In response to the bank’ s 
argument that the defendant had to tender the entire debt 
as a condition precedent to having the sale set aside, the 
court held that it would be inequitable to require the 
defendant to “pay, or offer to pay, a debt of $57,000, for 
which she is in no way liable” to attack the sale of her 
$5,000 homestead.  ( Id. at p. 291, 119 P. 82.) 
Fourth, no tender will be required when the trustor 
is not required to rely on equity to attack the deed because the trustee’ s deed is void on its face.  
 
Lona, 202 Cal. App. 4th at 112-13 (citations and footnotes 
omitted). 
  We need not and do not decide whether the tender rule 
applies in wrongful foreclosure claims.  We hold, however, that 
the rule does not bar the quiet title action against MERS under 
the circumstances of this case, where the party asserting the 
rule in a motion to dismiss is not the plaintiff’s mortgagee.  
The Delapinias are not indebted to MERS, who asserts the tender 
rule here and who is involved in this case through the 
                     
10  In California, a trustee’s sale is a nonjudicial foreclosure 
procedure; the trustee holds the power of sale.  See 5 Miller & Starr, Cal. 
Real Estate § 13:1. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
19 
 subsequent purchaser – MERS, in other words, was never the 
Delapinias’ mortgagee.  Cf. Trusty v. Ray, 249 P.2d 814, 817 
(Idaho 1952) (“A mortgagor cannot without paying his debt quiet title as against the mortgagee[.]” (emphasis added));  Rockridge 
Tr. v. Wells Fargo, N.A., 985 F. Supp. 2d 1110, 1158 (N.D. Cal. 
2013) (“[A] borrower may not assert a quiet title action against 
a mortgagee without first paying the outstanding debt on the 
property.” (emphasis added));  Marzan v. Bank of Am., 779 F. 
Supp. 2d 1140, 1156 (D. Haw. 2011), abrogated on other grounds 
by Compton v. Countrywide Fin. Corp., 761 F.3d 1046 (9th Cir. 
2014) (“[I]n order to assert a claim for ‘quiet title’ against a 
mortgagee, a borrower must allege they have paid, or are able to 
tender, the amount of indebtedness.” (emphasis added)). 
   Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawaiʻi 249, 
428 P.3d 761 (2018), supports this conclusion.  In that case, the ICA concluded that the tender rule barred a homeowner’s 
quiet title counterclaim as against a bank seeking foreclosure 
on her property, which she alleged was not her mortgagee.  Id. 
at 254, 428 P.3d at 766.  We vacated the decision of the ICA, 
reasoning that under our notice-pleading standard, the 
homeowner, by asserting that the bank was not her mortgagee, 
stated a quiet title claim sufficient to survive a motion to 
dismiss.  Id. at 265-66, 428 P.3d at 777-78.  Reyes-Toledo thus 
suggests that the tender rule, if it is Hawai‘ i law, does not bar ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
20 
 a suit from proceeding against a party who is not the 
plaintiff’s mortgagee, as the homeowner’s quiet title claim 
survived in that case by virtue of the fact that they pleaded 
that the bank was not the mortgagee.   We did not require the 
homeowner to satisfy their debt against the true mortgagee in order to “come into equity with clean hands,” Shimpones, 28 P.2d 
at 678, because the debt was allegedly not the defendant’s to 
enforce.   11
  This conclusion makes sense given the equitable 
reasons underpinning the rule.  In a quiet title action, 
“[w]hile it is not necessary for the plaintiff to have perfect 
title to establish a prima facie case, he must at least prove 
that he has a substantial interest in the property and that his 
title is superior to that of the defendants.”  Ibbetson v. 
Kaiawe, 143 Hawaiʻ i 1, 17, 422 P.3d 1, 17 (2018) (quoting Maui 
Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai‘ i 402, 407-08, 879 
                     
11  One federal district court has taken Reyes- Toledo as  
implicit endorsement of the [tender] rule; after all, the 
survival of Reyes- Toledo’s quiet title claim, devoid as it 
was of allegations of tender, appears to have been 
predicated on the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court’s acceptance at face 
value, under the notice pleading standard, of her 
allegations that Bank of America was not the mortgagee.
 
 
Gamblin v. Nationstar Mortgage LLC, 2018 WL 5831207 at *13 (D. Haw. 
November 7, 2018) (emphasis in original). 
 
  While we have not implicitly or explicitly endorsed the tender 
rule, we agree that Reyes- Toledo supports the conclusion that a non- mortgagee 
defendant to a quiet title claim, like MERS in this case, may not invoke it. 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
21 
 P.2d 507, 512-13 (1994)).  The Delapinias do not need to plead 
tender to establish superior title to MERS, even assuming they 
would in a wrongful foreclosure action against the Nationstar 
defendants, because the Delapinias claim MERS acquired its 
interest via a non-innocent third-party purchaser, who knowingly 
purchased the property from a wrongful foreclosure.   Cf. 
Carpenter v. PNC Bank, N.A., 386 F. Supp. 3d 1339, 1347 (D. Haw. 2019) (holding that quiet title plaintiffs had adequately pleaded their “superior title” to defendants when plaintiffs 
alleged that the defendants purchased the subject property 
following a wrongful foreclosure and were not bona fide).  The 
wrongful foreclosure count was not dismissed.  Allowing those in 
MERS’s position – non-mortgagees who are allegedly non-bona fide 
purchasers – to evade the quiet title action altogether by 
asserting the tender rule against the Delapinias in a motion to 
dismiss would not serve the rule’s equitable purpose of 
preventing the Delapinias from “evad[ing] their lawful debt,” Stebley, 134 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 607, because it is not MERS’s debt 
to enforce in this case.   12
                     
12  “A non-bona fide purchaser is one who does not pay adequate 
consideration, ‘takes with knowledge that his transferor acquired title by 
fraud, or buys registered land with full notice of the fact that it is in 
litigation between the transferor and a third party.’”  Kondaur, 136 Hawai‘ i 
at 240 n.27, 361 P.3d at 467 n.27 (brackets and ellipsis omitted) (quoting 
Akagi v. Oshita, 33 Haw. 343, 347 (Haw. Terr. 1935)).   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
22 
  
 On the other hand, if the third-party purchasers were 
indeed innocent purchasers for value,13 their interests are 
adequately safeguarded by virtue of our conclusion below that 
the sale is at most voidable.  If the purchasers were bona fide, 
damages would be the appropriate remedy.  See infra Part IV.B.  
Accordingly, if the purchasers were innocent purchasers for value, the Delapinias have failed to establish “that [their] 
title is superior to that of [MERS],” Ibbetson, 143 
Hawaiʻi at 
17, 422 P.3d at 17 (2018), as required for a quiet title claim 
to succeed; innocent purchasers for value would enjoy superior 
title to the Delapinias if the sale is not void ab initio.  92A 
C.J.S. Vendor and Purchaser § 528 (2021) (“A bona fide purchaser, meaning one who acquires an interest in a property 
for valuable consideration, in good faith, and without notice of 
another party’s adverse interests in the property, takes such 
title free of any interests of third persons except those of 
which the bona fide purchaser has notice.”).  For this reason, 
MERS’s argument that the tender rule is needed to protect bona 
fide purchasers is unavailing – that the sale is voidable means 
                     
13  Whether Cole was in fact a bona fide purchaser is a contested 
issue upon which we do not comment in this opinion.  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
23 
 their purported bona fide purchaser status is a defense to the 
quiet title action.14   
  Therefore, under the facts of this case, we hold that the tender rule does not bar the action against MERS, and MERS 
should not have been dismissed on that basis.  We emphasize that 
the scope of this holding is limited: the application of the 
tender rule to wrongful foreclosures generally, or to factual 
and procedural circumstances unlike those presented by this case, is not before us.  We hold only that the tender rule is 
not an absolute bar to a quiet title action against a party to 
whom the plaintiff is not indebted under the facts of this case, 
and the Delapinias have alleged sufficient facts for their quiet 
title action against MERS to survive dismissal at this stage.   
B. A Wrongful Foreclosure in Violation of the Power of Sale Is 
Voidable, Not Void, and Silva Is Overruled to the Extent it 
Held to the Contrary 
 
  We next turn to whether, if true, the facts alleged in the Delapinias’ complaint render the foreclosure sale void or voidable.  If void, the sale is “invalid” and “unenforceable,” 
and a subsequent purchaser “is entitled only to return of 
[their] down[ ]payment plus accrued interest.”  Lee v. HSBC Bank 
USA, 121 Hawai‘ i 287, 292, 218 P.3d 775, 780 (2009).  If 
                     
14  If the sale were void, the tender rule would not apply in any 
event.  E.g., Barrionuevo v. Chase Bank, N.A., 885 F. Supp. 2d 964, 970 (N.D. 
Cal. 2012) (“[W]here a sale is void, rather than simply voidable, tender is 
not required.” (citation omitted)). 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
24 
 voidable, the sale can be invalidated at the timely election of 
the mortgagor, but “where the property has passed into the hands 
of an innocent purchaser for value, rendering the voiding of a 
foreclosure sale impracticable, an action at law for damages is 
generally the appropriate remedy.”  Mount v. Apao, 139 Hawai‘ i 
167, 180, 384 P.3d 1268, 1281 (2016).  Answering this question 
requires us to revisit the rule set forth in Silva v. Lopez.  
The ICA correctly observed that Silva’s holding is in tension 
with our recent wrongful foreclosure precedent.  We therefore 
take this opportunity to overrule Silva to that extent that case 
would render foreclosures in violation of the power of sale void.  Foreclosures in violation of the power of sale are voidable.  
  In Silva, the defendant mortgagee failed to comply 
with “all the directions of the power of sale”: he did not 
“ent[er] upon or demand for the possession of the mortgaged 
premises and chattels” and, as particularly important here, he 
did not provide “three weeks to intervene between the first 
publication and the time of sale mentioned.”  5 Haw. at 263, 271.  The mortgagee held the sale on June 24, 1884; had he done 
so on June 25, 1884, “the advertisement would have been 
sufficient in time,” but as it was, the mortgagee failed to 
comply with the power of sale, which required three weeks’ 
notice.  Id. at 268.  Justice Austin held in the decision ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
25 
 appealed from that “if the notice is insufficient, the sale 
under it is void and not merely voidable,” and the supreme court 
adopted this analysis.  Id. at 271; see also id. at 265 
(referring to the opinion of Justice Austin “[f]or the full discussion and citation of authorities” on the issue of notice).  
Justice Austin acknowledged that “[t]here are several purchasers 
upon whom this decree will operate as a hardship.”  Id. at 273.  
Nonetheless, “the sale must be set aside, and the conveyances 
made thereunder must be cancelled.”  Id.  
  The Delapinias argue that here, as in Silva, they have 
alleged that the mortgagees failed to comply that the 
advertising provisions of the power of sale, allegations that we 
take as true; accordingly, they contend the ICA was bound to 
follow Silva, and the sale is void.  We agree that to the extent 
the ICA concluded that Silva has been impliedly overruled, it 
erred.  As recently as in Mount, we noted: “As far back as 1884, 
this court voided a mortgage sale of real estate and livestock 
because the mortgagee had not complied with the conditions of 
the power of sale by scheduling the foreclosure sale one day too 
early.”  139 Hawaiʻi at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281 (citing Silva, 5 
Haw. at 263).  We also explained that Lee and the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit opinion In re Kekauoha-
Alisa, 674 F.3d 1083 (9th Cir. 2012), which applied Hawai‘ i law, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
26 
 likewise held wrongful foreclosures to be void rather than 
voidable.  Id.  But we distinguished those cases on their facts.   
In Lee, the high bidder at the nonjudicial foreclosure sale 
had not completed the sale. 121 Hawaiʻi at 289, 218 P.3d at 
777. Under those facts, we held that the sale was void and 
that the high bidder was entitled only to return of his 
down payment plus accrued interest. Id. In 
Kekauoha– Alisa, 
the lender itself had purchased the property through a 
credit bid, so no third party was involved. 674 F.3d at 1086. 
 
Mount, 139 Hawaiʻ i at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281. 
 
  That said, Silva is inconsonant with the direction of 
our recent precedent, and we clarify today that a wrongful 
foreclosure that violates the power of sale is voidable, not 
void.  This conclusion flows from our cases that make clear that 
if a foreclosure violates a statute governing the nonjudicial 
foreclosure scheme, or other law extrinsic to the mortgage 
itself, the sale is “voidable at the election of the mortgagor,” 
and in turn, “where the property has passed into the hands of an 
innocent purchaser for value, . . . an action at law for damages 
 is generally the appropriate remedy.”  Mount, 139 Hawaiʻi at 180, 
384 P.3d at 1281.  In Mount, for instance, the mortgagee had 
“fail[ed] to provide reinstatement or cure information to [the mortgagor], as required by HRS § 667–5(c)(1),” and accordingly, 
“the nonjudicial foreclosure sale was conducted in violation of 
HRS § 667–5.”  Id. at 179–80, 384 P.3d 1268, 1280–81.  
Nonetheless, we noted that the third-party purchasers had 
“completed the sale, took possession of the Property, and have ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
now had the Property for some time . . . rendering the voiding 
of a foreclosure sale impracticable[.]”  Id. at 180, 384 P.3d at 
1281; see also Kondaur, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 242 n.29, 361 P.3d at 469 
n.29 (“[I]f the Ulrich[ v. Sec. Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158, 168 
(1939)]  requirements were not satisfied, a quitclaim deed would 
convey only a voidable interest in the property.”).   
27 
   Santiago is particularly instructive.  That case arose 
from an ejectment action after a foreclosure pursuant to HRS § 667-5; the mortgagors raised wrongful foreclosure as a defense 
to the action, arguing that either the power of sale clause in 
the mortgage was deficient to permit nonjudicial foreclosure, or 
they had a right to cure the defect, which they properly 
exercised.  Santiago, 137 
Hawaiʻi at 154, 366 P.3d at 629.  The 
circuit court concluded neither argument had merit; we reversed 
on both issues.  But as to the mortgagor’s remedy, we explained:  
 Where it is determined that the nonjudicial 
foreclosure of a property is wrongful, the sale of the 
property is invalid and voidable at the election of the 
mortgagor, who shall then regain title to and possession of 
the property.  See Ulrich v. Sec. Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158, 
168 (1939) (holding that where a self- dealing mortgagee 
fails to exercise its right to non- judicial foreclosure in 
a manner that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good 
faith and to demonstrate that an adequate price was 
procured for the property, the resulting sale is void); Lee 
v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 Hawaiʻi 287, 292, 218 P.3d 775, 780 
(2009) (concluding “that an agreement created at a 
foreclosure sale conducted pursuant to HRS section 667– 5 is 
void and unenforceable where the foreclosure sale is invalid under the statute”).  Voiding the foreclosure sale 
at this time, however, has been rendered impracticable because the [property] has already been resold by [the 
defendant] to a third party. See 123 Am. Jur. Proof of 
Facts 3d § 31 (2011) (“It has long been held that if the property has passed into the hands of an innocent purchaser ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
28 
 for value, an action at law for damages is generally the 
appropriate remedy.”).  
 
Santiago, 137 Hawaiʻ i at 158, 366 P.3d at 633. 
 
  Even though we held that the mortgagee altogether 
lacked a power of sale, we nonetheless determined that the sale 
was at most voidable, and where the property had passed to a bona fide purchaser, the appropriate remedy was damages.  Id.  
We see no reason why a foreclosure in violation of a power of sale ought to be treated differently.  It stands to reason that 
if damages were proper absent any authorizing power of sale, the 
same must be true when the defect is failure to comply with an 
otherwise-valid power of sale.   
  The Delapinias attempt to distinguish Santiago and 
related cases.  They argue that rather than supply a blanket 
rule, we “used such non-exclusive terms as ‘impracticable’ and ‘generally,’” pointing out “the purchaser was not before the 
court” in Santiago.  But these distinctions are unavailing.  The 
impracticability of voiding the sale does not stem from the absence of the bona fide purchaser to the suit but from the 
reliance interests they have accrued.  In Santiago, we relied on 
Jenkins v. Wise, 58 Haw. 592, 574 P.2d 1337 (1978), to justify 
the award of damages.  Jenkins explains: “Equity, however, 
abhors forfeitures and where no injustice would thereby result 
to the injured party, equity will generally favor compensation 
rather than forfeiture against the offending party.”  Id. at ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
29 
 597, 574 P.2d at 1341.  In a wrongful foreclosure in violation 
of a power of sale where the purchasers have “completed the 
sale, took possession of the Property, and have now had the 
Property for some time,” Mount, 139 
Hawai‘i at 180, 384 P.3d at 
1281, the principle from Jenkins disfavoring forfeiture applies 
with equal force. 
  The Delapinias argue that failure to adopt their position would leave Hawaiʻ i
 “out of step” with other states, but 
we are not persuaded by the cases they cite from other 
jurisdictions.  The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court 
decision Pinti v. Emigrant Mortgage Co., 33 N.E.3d 1213 (Mass. 
2015) is a particularly useful counterpoint insofar as it 
illustrates the differences between Hawai‘ i law and that of other 
states.  In that case, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court 
concluded that a mortgagee must strictly comply with the terms 
of the power of sale.  33 N.E.3d at 1218.  The mortgagee failed 
to strictly comply because it alerted the mortgagors of their 
“right to assert in any lawsuit for foreclosure and sale the 
nonexistence of a default or any other defense,” whereas the 
power of sale required notice of “the right to bring a court 
action.”  Id. at 1222 (emphasis in original).  The court 
reasoned that in a nonjudicial foreclosure state like 
Massachusetts, the former language might wrongly give the 
impression that the mortgagor need not initiate an action but ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
30 
 may simply raise the defense in due course of judicial 
foreclosure proceedings.  Id. 
  A majority of the Pinti court concluded that this 
defect rendered the foreclosure void and any subsequent 
conveyances to third parties a nullity.  “[A] bona fide 
purchaser’s ‘title is not to be affected by mere irregularities 
in executing a power of sale contained in a mortgage, of which 
irregularities he has no knowledge, actual or constructive.’”  Id. at 1225 (citing Chace v. Morse, 76 N.E. 142, 143-44 (Mass. 
1905); Rogers v. Barnes, 47 N.E. 602, 604 (Mass. 1897)).  The 
deficient notice amounted to more than a “mere irregularity” 
because of the “disastrous consequences” it could have:  
if the mortgagor has a valid defense to the foreclosure 
sale going forward, but is not made aware that he or she 
must initiate an action in court against the mortgagee to 
raise that defense, the sale may well proceed and result in title passing to a bona fide purchaser without knowledge of 
the issue— at which point, and depending on the nature of 
the defense, the mortgagor’ s right to redeem his or her 
home may well be lost. 
 
Id. at 1225-26. 
 
  Three justices dissented on this issue.  They would 
have held that the sale was voidable, but only because in their 
view, the notice provision was not a substantive requirement of the power of sale.  Id. at 1228 (Cordy, J., dissenting).  
Indeed, even the dissenters agreed with the “familiar rule that one who sells under a power [of sale] must follow strictly its 
terms.  If he fails to do so, there is no valid execution of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
31 
 power, and the sale is wholly void.”  Id. at 1228-29 (brackets 
in original) (quoting U.S. Bank Nat’l Ass’n v. Ibanez, 941 
N.E.2d 40 (Mass. 2011)) (quotation marks omitted).  The 
dissenters explained that failure to adhere to the integral 
terms of a power of sale (e.g., “the existence of a default”; 
“assignment of the note or authority to act on behalf of the 
note holder at the time of foreclosure”; or, saliently here, 
“proper advertisement of the foreclosure sale”) renders a deed void ab initio.  Id. at 1229.  By contrast, where “there are 
equitable reasons why the sale should be set aside,” the deed is voidable in equity - in which case, “[t]he principle which is 
applied in courts of equity is that they will not throw the loss 
upon a person who has innocently acquired title to property for 
value.”  Id. at 1228-29 (citations omitted). 
  It would seem, then, that the Pinti court would 
unanimously agree that if, as the plaintiffs allege, the 
Nationstar defendants failed to strictly comply with the advertisement requirements of the power of sale, the deed would 
be void ab initio in Massachusetts.  See McGreevey v. 
Charlestown Five Cents Sav. Bank, 2 N.E.2d 543, 544 (Mass. 1936) 
(holding that a sale advertised in the wrong county did not 
“strictly compl[y]” with power of sale, and “the sale is wholly 
void”).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
32 
  
 Other states likewise do not apply a blanket rule as 
to when a sale is void versus voidable, and instead evaluate the 
magnitude of the error – “mere irregularities” (as put in 
Massachusetts) will not void a sale, but substantial defects 
will.15  See, e.g., Ram, 234 Cal. App. 4th at 11 (“A sale is not 
rendered void merely because of minor or technical defects. . . .  A sale is rendered void, though, when the 
defects are substantial, such as when there has been a failure to give notice of sale to the trustor or to specify the correct 
default in the notice of default.”); Williams v. Kimes, 996 
S.W.2d 43, 45 (Mo. 1999) (“In circumstances where the defect is so great that it goes to the very right or power to foreclose, 
then the non-judicial foreclosure is void and no title is 
conveyed through the sale.”). 
  But Pinti provides a useful touchpoint here because 
Massachusetts and other jurisdictions that apply this framework 
to determine whether a sale is void or voidable would also have likely concluded that the sale in Santiago, in which the 
mortgagee altogether lacked a power of sale, was void, whereas 
                     
15  The Delapinias would claim that failure to adhere to the terms of 
the power of sale qualifies was more than a “mere irregularity,” but some of 
these jurisdictions may well conclude that deviation from the advertisement 
requirements in the power of sale was merely procedural and the sale voidable.  Cf. Ram, 234 Cal. App. 4th 1, 17 (2015) (notice of default 
executed by individual who was not trustee at that time (and would only become trustee weeks thereafter) was not void, but at most voidable, because 
notice defect was nonprejudicial).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
33 our court concluded the sale to be voidable.  Compare 137 Hawai ʻi 
at 158, 366 P.3d at 633 (“Where it is determined that the 
nonjudicial foreclosure of a property is wrongful, the sale of 
the property is invalid and voidable at the election of the 
mortgagor[.]”) with Rogers v. Barnes, 47 N.E. 602, 604 (Mass. 
1897) (“The argument certainly is strong that a bona fide 
purchaser for value ought to be protected in his title by what 
appears on the record in the registry of deeds, in the absence 
of knowledge to the contrary; but the argument is, we think, 
stronger that a mortgagor should not be deprived, without his 
knowledge, of his equity of redemption, by a sale under a power 
contained in a mortgage, which authorizes a sale only in case of 
a default, when there has been no default.”).  And while the 
Delapinias argue that failure to adopt their position would 
leave Hawaiʻi “out of step” with other states, some other 
jurisdictions nonetheless appear to come out the other way.  16
The Supreme Court of Michigan, for instance, explained: 
It was true that failure to advertise according to the 
terms of the power of sale invalidates the sale.  Eubanks 
v. Becton, 158 N.C. 230, 73 S.E. 1009 [(1912)].  But it is
said that such sale is not absolutely void, but will passthe legal title.  Eubanks v. Becton[ ]; Brett v. Davenport,
16And by the same token, some of the out- of-state cases cited by 
the Delapinias would hold that sales conducted in violation of statute
 are 
void.  See, e.g., Jensen v. Andrews, 163 N.W. 571, 571 (S.D. 1917) (failure 
to state the specific hour at which the sale is to take place in the advertisement, in violation of the state code, “will be void and of no effect 
to convey title”).  But Mount held that such a sale is voidable.  139 
Hawaiʻi 
at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
34 
 151 N.C. [56], 65 S.E. 611 [(1909)].  While such sale would 
be set aside as to the purchaser, a subsequent or remote 
grantee without notice and in good faith takes a good title 
against such defects or irregularities in the sale of which 
he had no notice.   
 
Fox v. Jacobs, 286 N.W. 854, 856 (Mich. 1939) (quoting Hinton v. 
Hall, 82 S.E. 847, 848 (N.C. 1914)).17 
  There is therefore precedent from other jurisdictions 
that supports both positions – void or voidable.  But Hawaiʻ i law 
has moved unmistakably towards the conclusion that sales 
pursuant to a wrongful foreclosure are voidable, regardless of 
whether the violation was statutory or contractual, substantial 
or a mere irregularity.  This policy protects the interests accrued by innocent purchasers and avoids forfeiture if 
possible, while deterring the conduct of the party that 
wrongfully foreclosed through a damages remedy.  Applied to 
these facts, we hold that wrongful foreclosures in violation of 
a power of sale are voidable.  Thus, “where the property has 
passed into the hands of an innocent purchaser for value, 
rendering the voiding of a foreclosure sale impracticable, an action at law for damages is generally the appropriate remedy.”   
                     
17  Fox arose from a statutory violation, but as is clear from the 
quoted passage, it did not distinguish between a statutory versus contractual 
violation.  See Kim v. JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 825 N.W.2d 329, 336- 37 
(Mich. 2012) (describing a lower court’s holding that a foreclosure 
undertaken before the mortgagee acquired his interest in the property was 
void ab initio to be “contrary to the established precedent of this Court,” 
which has “long held that defective mortgage foreclosures are voidable”). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
35 
 Mount, 139 
Hawaiʻi at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281 (citing Santiago, 137 
Hawaiʻi at 158, 366 P.3d at 633). 
V. CONCLUSION 
 
 For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s March 13, 2020 
judgment on appeal is vacated in part, as to defendant MERS, and 
affirmed as to all other defendants.  The circuit court’s 
April 18, 2017 Final Judgment is vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.  James J. Bickerton    
(Bridget G. Morgan-Bickerton,Stanley H. Roehrig,   
John F. Perkin and  
Van-Alan H. Shima    with him on the briefs)  for petitioners    
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Paul B.K. Wong   
 
 
  
  
 
Jade Lynne Ching (David A.  Nakashima and Kanoelani S. 
Kane with her on the brief) 
for respondents Nationstar Mortgage LLC and Federal  National Mortgage Association   
 Michael C. Bird (Jonathan W.Y. Lai, Thomas J. Berger and Summer H. Kaiawe with him 
on the brief) for respondents 
Terry Louise Cole and  American Savings Bank, F.S.B. 
 
Patricia J. McHenry  and Janjeera S. Hail for respondent Mortgage 
Electronic Registration 
Systems, Inc.  
 
