                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-13-0000401 11-DEC-2015 09:25 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
SCOTT A. ABREGANO, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-13-0000401
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-13-0000401; FC-CR. NO. 12-1-01963)
 
DECEMBER 11, 2015
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINIONS OF THE COURT
 
Part I (By: Recktenwald, C.J., with whom Nakayama, McKenna,
Pollack, and Wilson, JJ., join)
Part II (By: McKenna, J., with whom Pollack and Wilson, JJ.,
join, and Recktenwald, C.J., dissenting separately, with whom
Nakayama, J., joins)
 
PART I: HAWAI 'I RULES OF PENAL PROCEDURE RULE 48 
The central issue is whether the family court erred in 
finding that a delay due to the trial judge’s illness was    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
excluded as “good cause” from the calculation of the time for
 
commencing defendant’s trial under Rule 48 of Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP). 
Defendant Scott A. Abregano was charged with violation
 
of a protective order, under which Abregano was the respondent
 and his wife, KA, was the petitioner.
1 Before Abregano’s trial
 
began, the date of the trial was continued for one month because
 
the trial judge was ill. Although HRPP Rule 482
 requires that a 
1 Specifically, Abregano was charged with violating HRS § 586-11
 
(Supp. 2012) which provides, in relevant part:  “When an order for protection
is granted pursuant to this chapter, a respondent or person to be restrained
who knowingly or intentionally violates the order for protection is guilty of
a misdemeanor.”
 
2 HRPP Rule 48 (2015) (“Dismissal”) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) By Court.  Except in the case of traffic offenses
that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court
shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge,
with or without prejudice in its discretion, if trial
is not commenced within six months:
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or
from the filing of the charge, whichever is
sooner, on any offense based on the same conduct
or arising from the same criminal episode for
which the arrest or charge was made; or
 
(2) from the date of re-arrest or re-filing of
the charge, in cases where an initial charge was
dismissed upon motion of the defendant; or
(3) from the date of mistrial, order granting a
new trial or remand, in cases where such events
require a new trial.
 
Clauses (b)(1) and (b)(2) shall not be
applicable to any offense for which the arrest
was made or the charge was filed prior to the
effective date of the rule.
 
(c) Excluded Periods.  The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
 
(continued...)
 
2
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(...continued)
 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by collateral or other
proceedings concerning the defendant, including
but not limited to penal irresponsibility
examinations and periods during which the
defendant is incompetent to stand trial,
pretrial motions, interlocutory appeals and
trials of other charges;
 
(2) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by congestion of the trial docket
when the congestion is attributable to
exceptional circumstances;
 
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by a continuance granted at the
request or with the consent of the defendant or
defendant’s counsel;
 
(4) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by a continuance granted at the
request of the prosecutor if:
 
(i) the continuance is granted because of
the unavailability of evidence material to
the prosecution’s case, when the
prosecutor has exercised due diligence to
obtain such evidence and there are
 reasonable grounds to believe that such
evidence will be available at a later
 date; or
 
(ii) the continuance is granted to allow
the prosecutor additional time to prepare
the prosecutor’s case and additional time
is justified because of the exceptional
circumstances of the case;
 
(5) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by the absence or unavailability
of the defendant;
 
(6) the period between a dismissal of the charge
by the prosecutor to the time of arrest or
filing of a new charge, whichever is sooner, for
the same offense or an offense required to be
joined with that offense;
 
(7) a reasonable period of delay when the
defendant is joined for trial with a codefendant
as to whom the time for trial has not run and
 there is good cause for not granting a
severance; and
 
(continued...)
 
3
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
criminal defendant be tried within six months of the earlier of
 
his or her arrest or indictment, this continuance resulted in
 Abregano’s trial not beginning until March 12, 2013--fourteen
 days after the six-month period expired. Before trial began,
 Abregano filed a Rule 48 motion to dismiss, which the family
 court denied based upon its conclusion that the period of delay
 due to the trial judge’s illness was excluded from the HRPP Rule
 48 period because it constituted “good cause” for delay under
 HRPP Rule 48(c)(8).
 
We conclude that under the circumstances in this case,
 
the family court erred in finding that the trial judge’s illness
 constituted good cause to exclude one month under HRPP Rule 48. 
Accordingly, we vacate the judgment on appeal of the Intermediate
 Court of Appeals (ICA) and the family court’s judgment of
 conviction and sentence, and remand to the family court to decide
 whether to dismiss Abregano’s charges with or without prejudice. 
Because this issue is dispositive, we do not address the other
 issues raised by Abregano in his appeal except as noted below. 
I. Background 
A. Pre-trial Proceedings 
On August 30, 2012, Abregano was arrested for violating
 
a protective order. Abregano was charged as follows:
 
(...continued)
 
(8) other periods of delay for good cause.
 
4
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On or about the 30th day of August, 2012, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i, SCOTT A.
ABREGANO did intentionally or knowingly violate theOrder for Protection issued in FC-DA No. 12-1-6011 on the 17th day of January, 2012 by the Honorable LansonK. Kupau, Judge of the Family Court of the FirstCircuit, State of Hawai 'i, pursuant to Chapter 586 of 
the Hawai 'i Revised Statutes, thereby committing the
offense of Violation of an Order for Protection in violation of Section 586-5.5 and Section 586-11(a) ofthe Hawai 'i Revised Statutes. 
Abregano pleaded not guilty and requested a jury trial. 
The State calculated that the deadline for Abregano’s trial under
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 was February 26, 
2013, so the court set Abregano’s trial for January 14, 2013. On
 January 14, 2013 the parties appeared in family court before
 Judge Jeanette Castagnetti. The State and Abregano both stated
 that they were ready for trial, and the court scheduled the trial
 to commence the next day. The parties appeared before the family
 court on January 15, 2013 and declared they were ready for trial. 
The court continued the trial until February 11, 2013 “due to
 court congestion.” Neither party objected to this continuance. 
On February 11, 2013, the parties appeared before the
 
family court and both declared they were ready for trial. 
However, Judge Castagnetti continued the trial until March 11,
 due to her illness: 
As I informed the attorneys earlier during another
matter, notwithstanding that both sides are declaring
ready for trial, having gone through the part of this
morning’s calendar call, uh, the court feels that it’s
not going to be able to proceed to trial this week. 
It’s apparent to me that I’m coming down with a flu
bug, and so I’m going to continue this matter due to
the court’s unavailability for trial this week.
 
5
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
So that means for you, Mr. Abregano, your next
calendar call setting will be on March 11th at 8:30.
 
Although Abregano did not formally object to this
 
continuance, the following exchange occurred between Abregano’s
 
counsel and the court: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  And, Your Honor, it is my
understanding that you won’t make any finding with
respect to Rule 48; right?
 
THE COURT:  Correct.
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  So any objection would not be
relevant at this point?
 
THE COURT:  Well, you can -- I mean we’ll note that
both sides are ready.  And then, um, obviously there
will be no waiver of Rule 48 speedy trial by defense
given the circumstances, so we can note that as well.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Thank you, Your Honor.
 
On March 5, 2013, Abregano filed a “Motion to Dismiss
 
for Violation of HRPP Rule 48, and Speedy Trial.” Abregano
 
argued that the Rule 48 six-month period began running on
 August 30, 2012, the date of his arrest, that six months had
 already elapsed by March 5, 2013, and that the reasons for
 continuance beyond the six-month period did not fall into any of
 the excluded periods provided by Rule 48. Abregano argued that
 for periods of delay caused by court congestion to be excluded
 under Rule 48, there must be “exceptional circumstances,” which
 require a showing that the congestion “deviat[ed] from the norm.” 
Abregano argued that such congestion was not present here. 
Abregano also argued that the illness of the judge does
 
not constitute “exceptional circumstances,” because it is not a
 
6
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“unique, nonrecurring event.” Abregano also contended that delay
 
due to a judge’s illness is not “good cause” because it does not
 amount to a “substantial reason which affords a legal excuse.” 
According to Abregano, his charges should have been dismissed
 with prejudice. 
On March 11, 2013, the parties appeared in the family
 
court.
3 The court heard the parties’ arguments on Abregano’s
 
motion to dismiss, and denied the motion, ruling that the
 continuance due to Judge Castagnetti’s illness extended the Rule
 48 trial deadline by one month to March 26, 2013: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  In this case, Your Honor, this
matter came before the court on February 11, 2013.  At
 that time the court continued all the cases because
 the court was ill.  She said she was ill and
 unavailable.  Um, the defense believed that that is
not a reason that Rule 48 should be told [sic].  It
 doesn’t fall within any of the exceptions under
Subsection 48, 48B or 48C, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  Isn’t there a catch-all provision?
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Good cause?  Is that what the
 
court is referring to?
 
THE COURT:  Yes.
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Good cause has been defined by the
court as, um, I have it in my motion, substantial
reason which -- substantial reason which affords a
 legal excuse.  And under State v. Extencion [sic] the
supreme court indicated there’s no substantial reason
for delay when in that case the State lacked
facilities to test the evidence and the crucial report
that was missing that was received late and there was
a shortage of experienced prosecutors.  In this -­
THE COURT:  Well, is there a case that says the
judge being sick is not good cause?
 
3
 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided over this hearing and all
 
subsequent proceedings in this case.
 
7
    
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  No, Your Honor.  But as in this
 
case we have to make a prima facie case indicating
that Rule 48 – uh, that there was a triggering event
where Rule 48 was violated.  Then the state has to
 make, um -- has to negate the burden or show -- has to
meet its burden of indicating that Rule 48 had not yet
run.  In this case it is not exceptional
circumstances.  It is not good cause.  Merely because
one judge in Circuit Court is ill when there are 21
other judges, there are replacement judges.  There
 are, um –
 
THE COURT:  No.  I disagree with you one hundred
 
percent.  There are no replacement judges.  And it’s
 just like you guys.  When your client shows up and
says I want P.D. Stanley who is my attorney, we
routinely continue it so that we can protect the
procedural rights of the defendant to say, yes, you
have an assigned public defender.  The court’s going
 to honor that. 
If Judge Castagnetti was sick, she was sick. 
That’
s not something that happens every day.  I think
 
that’s good cause.  I’m going to rule March, 26,  ‘13
 is the Rule 48 date.  So we’ll pass this case.  Put it
 in the queue.
 
The family court then set the trial to commence the
 
next day, on March 12, 2013. 
B. Trial
 
Abregano’s jury trial commenced on March 12, 2013, with
 
Judge Ochiai presiding. The State presented its opening
 
statement, contending that the evidence would demonstrate that
 Abregano had violated the protective order by coming too close to
 his stepdaughter, HP, who was one of the “protected persons”
 under the protective order, during a softball game in which HP
 was playing. Abregano, in his opening statement, acknowledged
 that Abregano’s estranged wife (KA), was the “petitioner” under
 the protective order, and that Abregano was prohibited from
 
8
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
coming within 100 feet of KA or 100 yards of KA’s work or home.4
 
Abregano also contended, however, that the evidence would show
 
that no term of the protective order prohibited Abregano from
 coming within 100 feet of HP or 100 yards of HP’s school or home. 
KA testified to the following. On January 17, 2012, KA
 
petitioned for an order of protection in Family Court before
 Judge Kupau. The protective order designated KA as the
 petitioner and Abregano as the respondent. HP was also “covered”
 under the order. When the protective order was issued, Mr.
 William, a staff member of Adult Client Services, read the order
 aloud to Abregano. Abregano stated that he did not understand
 the order, so Judge Kupau read the order aloud, and Abregano then
 stated that he understood and signed the proof of service. 
When, during Abregano’s trial, the State questioned KA
 
as to what Judge Kupau had told HP and Abregano about contact
 between the parties under the protective order, the following
 exchange occurred: 
[STATE]:  Okay.  Um, what did [Judge Kupau] -- what
did he tell you and the defendant about contact
between parties?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection.  Hearsay.  This is
 
hearsay.
 
THE COURT:  Mr. Prosecutor, does the document not
 
4
 In section B, titled “contact between parties,” the protective
 
order provided that “[t]he respondent is prohibited from coming or passing
within 100 yards of any residence or place of employment or school of the
Petitioner” and “[t]he Respondent is prohibited from coming or passing within
100 feet of the Petitioner at all other neutral locations.”  (Emphases added).
 
9
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
speak for itself?  It is in evidence.
 
[STATE]:  All right.  Um, then let’s specifically
address Points 3 and Points 4 in Section 3B -­
THE COURT:  All right.
 [STATE]:  -- ‘cause that deals with contact between
 
parties.
 
[STATE]: [KA], um, Section 3 says “The respondent is
prohibited from coming or passing within 100 yards of
any residence or place of employment or school of the
petitioner.  The respondent must not violate this
order even if the petitioner invites the respondent
over.”
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection.  Is that a question?
 THE COURT:  I think that is part of the question. So
 
overruled at this time.
 
[STATE]:  Do you remember Judge Kupau going over that
portion Point 3B3 with you in open court and the
defendant in open court?
 
[KA]:  Yes.
 [STATE]:  Okay.  Now does 3 -- did he tell you 3B3,
that section that I just read to you, does that apply
-- did he tell the defendant and you that that applies
only to you or to -- I mean -- or to you and the other
people covered under the order of protection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection.  Hearsay.
 THE COURT:  Okay.  Sustained.
 [STATE]:  Okay.  For the contact between parties
section, did Judge Kupau say that it went over -- that
it covers both -- just you or you and the other people
on the order for protection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection.  Hearsay.
 THE COURT:  Sustained.
 [STATE]:  Okay.
 THE COURT:  Mr. Prosecutor, isn’t this covered on Page
1 of Exhibit 1?
 
[STATE]:  Okay.
 THE COURT:  No, I’m just asking.  I don’t mean to pre­
empt your questioning, but isn’t it covered on Page 1?
 
10
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[STATE]:  Yes.  Yes, Your Honor.  You are correct.
 
THE COURT:  Well, it’s in evidence.  If you want to 
ask her who’s covered, I think you can publish that
portion of the exhibit which is in evidence if you
desire.
 
[STATE]:  Okay.  So just to be clear, um, [KA], in
addition to yourself as the petitioner that’s covered
under this order for protection, um, again there’s
three other people covered under this order; right?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection.  Leading.
 
THE COURT:  Overruled.
 [KA]:  Yes.
 [STATE]:  Okay.  So then who are those three people
in addition to yourself covered under this order?
 
[KA]:  Uh, my daughter [HP], uh, my son . . . and our
youngest daughter . . . .
 
[STAT
E]:  Okay. Thank you, [KA].
 
KA testified that on August 30, 2012, KA was at HP’s
 
softball game at HP’s high school. HP told KA that Abregano was
 
at the game, and then KA saw Abregano, who she estimated was
 around thirty to forty feet away from where KA was seated. KA
 then called 911. 
HP testified to the following. On August 30, 2012, she
 
was playing in a softball game at her high school. When HP was
 jogging to the fence, she saw Abregano closer than a football
 field away from her, and felt nervous, so she told her coach and
 then KA that Abregano was present. When HP was walking to the
 bathroom during the game, she heard her name being called and
 recognized Abregano’s voice, although she did not turn to look at
 who was calling her name. 
11
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After HP testified, Abregano moved for judgment of
 
acquittal. Abregano argued that the protective order did not
 
prohibit him from coming to HP’s school because HP was not listed
 as a petitioner but as an additional protected person. Abregano
 acknowledged that the protective order prohibited him from
 contacting specifically enumerated persons, which included HP,
 but argued that whether he had attempted to contact HP was the
 only issue that should go to the jury. The court denied the
 motion and made the following ruling from the bench:
 
[Defense counsel], I have issued orders for protection
myself in the District Court.  When I say “other
protected persons,” they have the same meaning as “the
petitioner” in the court’s eyes.  So -- otherwise they
would not be listed as “other protected persons.” 
I’ve had situations in which people came in claiming
to be other protected persons but they were not listed
on the order for protection as other protected
persons, so the court was powerless to do anything
about it. 
So as far as the court is concerned, other
protected persons stand in the same shoes as the
petitioner in this case.  So if that’s your only
basis, I’m going to flatly deny the motion for
judgment of acquittal.
 
Abregano also objected to the judge’s statements to the
 
prosecutor in the presence of the jury which, according to
 
Abregano, suggested to the jury that the identity of the
 individuals covered by the protective order was already in
 evidence on page 1 of exhibit 1. Abregano moved for a mistrial,
 and the family court denied his motion:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  I do object to the court talking
with the prosecutor during the trial and telling him ­- indicating to him where certain things in the
document may be.  I do believe in front of the jury
 
12
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
when the jury is watching it is prejudicial.
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  You have preserved your record.
That document -- the court was commenting on a
document that was already received into evidence.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT:  Okay.
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  You did so in front of the jury
and you were talking specifically to the prosecutor. 
And in that case we do believe that that shows that
 there is some camaraderie between –
 
THE COURT:  Watch yourself.  Watch yourself very
carefully before you make allegations.  The court was
 facilitating the use of this document for a witness
who was on the stand.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  I understand, Your Honor, but in
 
front of the jury.  The jury was watching that
 exchange.  They were watching you in -- I’m sorry,
Your Honor.  I have to make my record before the
record goes up.
 
THE COURT:  You can make your record, but choose your
words carefully.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  You were -­THE COURT:  Okay.
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  -- talking to the prosecutor while
in front of the jury with respect to the order and you
were telling where on the order things were.  This is
 specifically prejudicial in this case because the
order itself, as you can see our entire defense is
that he did not know that HP was a -- was a petitioner
as HP is not listed.  So by the court indicating, oh,
it’s on Page 1, the first paragraph, the court is
telling the jury in addition to the prosecutor that my
entire argument (inaudible).
 
THE COURT:  Ms. Stanley, the document speaks for
 
itself.  Had you attempted to argue that these people
were not protected persons under this order for
protection issued by Judge Kupau in your closing
argument, I would shut you down to say that is a
misstatement of the law and a misstatement of this
 document even if I had to call Judge Kupau to come in
here and clarify this.  So don’t –
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Your Honor, that is –
 THE COURT:  Don’t try to confuse the issue here.  This
 
was already in evidence, and the court merely was
 
13
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
saying where it is so that questioning of the witness
could be facilitated so that we wouldn’t be here for
 two hours groping in the dark to get to the same
place.  Okay.  So –
 
. . . . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  And the defense does move for a
 
mistrial.
 
THE COURT:  Well, that’s denied also.
[5]
 
After Abregano testified in his own defense, Abregano
 
again moved for judgment of acquittal, which the court denied. 
The jury found Abregano guilty, and the family court
 
sentenced him to two years probation with the conditions of
 
forty-eight hours incarceration, completion of the domestic
 violence intervention and parenting programs, and compliance with
 the terms of the protective order. Abregano timely filed a
 notice of appeal. 
5 Abregano argues in his application for writ of certiorari that the 
family court’s comments were improper and warrant a new trial because they
constituted an improper comment upon the evidence.  Specifically, Abreganotakes issue with the family court’s comment that the identity of the personscovered by section III(B)(3) of the protective order was “covered on page 1 ofExhibit 1,” since Abregano’s defense was that section III(B)(3) did not applyto HP.  However, as set forth below, we resolve this appeal on the HRPP Rule48 issue.  We note, however, that judicial comments that may rationally beperceived by a jury as being a comment on the evidence may constitutereversible error.  See Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence Rule 1102 (1993) (“The court
shall instruct the jury regarding the law applicable to the facts of the case,but shall not comment upon the evidence.  It shall also inform the jury thatthey are the exclusive judges of all questions of fact and the credibility ofwitnesses.”) (emphasis added).  Such errors can be avoided by directing thecomment to counsel at the bench or when the jury is not present. 
Further, we note that when counsel attempts to make an argument,
the court must allow counsel a fair opportunity to state the argument for the
record.  Here, on more than one occasion, the court appeared to interject and
thereby prevented defense counsel from fully expressing her arguments in
support of Abregano’s motions for acquittal and new trial.
 
14
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Appeal to the ICA
 
In his appeal, Abregano argued that the family court
 
erred in denying Abregano’s Motion to Dismiss for violation of
 
HRPP Rule 48. 
Abregano argued that the “good cause” provision under 
HRPP Rule 48(c) is not a “catch-all” provision, and that the court has a duty of due diligence to ensure that a defendant’s trial begins within the six months required by Rule 48. Abregano argued that to constitute “good cause,” a reason for delay must be a “substantial reason which affords a legal excuse,” and that for court congestion to excuse a delay, there must be “exceptional circumstances” caused by “unique, non-recurring events.” Abregano argued that Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 
603-3 and 603-41 require there to be twenty-five circuit court judges in the first circuit, and allow for substitute retired judges or judges from other circuits in the case of court congestion. Therefore, according to Abregano, the lack of findings by the trial court as to why no replacement judges were available to replace Judge Castagnetti during her illness meant the court “failed to fulfill its duty of due diligence” to find a replacement. Abregano also contended that the length of delay resulting from Judge Castagnetti’s illness--four weeks--was unnecessarily long. 
The ICA affirmed the family court’s judgment of
 
15
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conviction. The ICA, relying on two federal cases, United States
 
v. Lane, 561 F.2d 1075, 1078 (2d Cir. 1977), and United States v.
 Ferris, 751 F.2d 436, 441-42 (1st Cir. 1984), held that a trial
 judge’s illness is properly excludable under the “good cause”
 provision of HRPP Rule 48. The ICA disagreed with Abregano that
 the family court had any duty of due diligence to find a
 replacement judge, but stated that even if it did, the court in
 this case made efforts to hear Abregano’s case expeditiously. 
Abregano timely filed an application for writ of
 
certiorari. 
II. Standard of Review
 
This court reviews a trial court’s denial of HRPP Rule
 
48 motion to dismiss under both the “clearly erroneous” and
 “right/wrong” tests:
 
A trial court’s findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding an
HRPP 48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to the
clearly erroneous standard of review.  An FOF is
 clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support
the finding, the appellate court is left with the
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been
 committed.  However, whether those facts fall within
HRPP 48(b)’s exclusionary provisions is a question of
law, the determination of which is freely reviewable
pursuant to the “right/wrong” test.
 
State v. Samonte, 83 Hawai' i 507, 514, 928 P.2d 1, 8 (1996) 
(quoting State v. Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 328-29, 861 P.2d 11, 22
 
(1993)).
 
III. Discussion 
Because Judge Castagnetti continued Abregano’s trial
 
16
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for one month due to her illness, this court must determine
 
whether that illness constituted an excluded period of delay as
 “good cause” under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) and, specifically, whether
 a four-week delay was reasonable under the circumstances of this
 case.
 
Abregano argues that in the event of a trial judge’s
 
illness or court congestion, the family court has a duty of due
 diligence to find a replacement judge. Abregano thus argues that
 it was error for the family court to deny his HRPP Rule 48 motion
 to dismiss without making any findings as to whether any
 alternative judges were available. For example, Abregano argues
 that the family court made no findings that “none of the other
 twenty-four circuit court judges . . . [were] available” or that
 “a family district court judge could not have been assigned to
 sit as a family court judge . . .” Abregano also argues that
 even if Judge Castagnetti’s illness justified the exclusion of
 some time from the Rule 48 period, it did not warrant delay for
 as long as four weeks. 
We conclude that although a trial judge’s illness may
 
constitute good cause for some period of delay, under the
 circumstances of this case, where there is an absence in the
 record of any attempt to find a replacement judge or reassign
 Abregano’s case, there was no good cause to exclude a four-week
 period. 
17
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRPP Rule 48 (b) provides, in part: “the court shall,
 
on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without
 
prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within six
 months: (1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
 filing of the charge, whichever is sooner[.]” HRPP Rule 48(c)
 describes periods that are excluded from the computation of time
 for the commencement of trial. These include HRPP Rule 48(c)(2): 
“periods that delay the commencement of trial and are caused by
 congestion of the trial docket when the congestion is
 attributable to exceptional circumstances,” and (c)(8): “other
 periods of delay for good cause.” 
HRPP Rule 48(c) does not give any guidance on what good
 
cause means, but this court has held that the good cause
 provision “is provided to take care of unanticipated
 circumstances,” State v. Gillis, 63 Haw. 285,288, 626 P.2d 190,
 192 (1981), and that good cause means “a substantial reason that
 affords legal excuse,” State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363,368, 742
 
P.2d 369, 373 (1987) (citing Estencion, 63 Haw. at 267, 625 P.2d
 at 1043). However, “Rule 48(c)(8) is not to be used to excuse a
 lack of diligence on the part of the government to comply with
 Rule 48.” Gillis, 63 Haw. at 288, 626 P.2d at 193. 
Although this court has never addressed the question of
 
whether a trial judge’s illness is good cause for delay of a
 trial, we have found good cause for a delay of five months where
 
18
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the defendant was without local counsel following the grant of 
the defendant’s counsel’s motion to withdraw. See Senteno, 69 
Haw. at 368, 742 P.2d at 373. While not a finding of “good cause,” this court has also affirmed the exclusion of a period of delay of ninety-seven days under HRPP Rule 48(c)(2) after finding that a shortage of judges due to two resignations and “a marked increase in jury demands” was a “unique, nonrecurring event,” which constituted “exceptional circumstances” under the rule. See State v. Baron, 80 Hawai' i 107, 114, 905 P.2d 613, 620 
(1995). 
This court has found there was not good cause where the
 
prosecutor had an increased workload because, while not
 anticipated, the increased workload was not reasonably
 unforeseeable. Hanawahine, 69 Haw. at 630-31, 755 P.2d at 469­
70. In addition, there was no good cause where the delay was
 
caused by the State’s late filing of the complaint and
 difficulties in securing the attendance of witnesses, because
 these were not “unanticipated circumstances.” Gillis, 63 Haw. at
 
288, 626 P.2d at 192. There was also no good cause where the
 State argued that the delay was caused by 
an absence of facilities in Hawai 'i County for the
police criminalist to conduct a test of the evidence,
requiring the evidence to be sent to Honolulu fortesting; that the written report of the criminalistwas not completed until November 24, 1978, and did notreach the prosecutor until January 3, 1979 . . . .and a shortage of experienced prosecutors in theHawai'i County prosecutor’s office. 
19
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Estencion, 63 Haw. at 267, 625 P.2d at 1042.
 
Accordingly, a period is excludable as good cause under
 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) if the events causing the delay are
 
unanticipated and not reasonably foreseeable. The illness of a
 judge such that the court is unavailable is an unanticipated
 event. Although it may be foreseeable that judges will, on
 occasion, become ill, when this might happen is generally not
 reasonably foreseeable. 
Courts in other jurisdictions have found that the
 
illness of a trial judge may constitute good cause for delay. 
See State v. Hoyt, 806 P.2d 204, 208 (Utah App. 1991) (there was
 no constitutional violation where the trial was delayed one
 hundred twenty-four days due, in part, to the judge’s illness);
 Commonwealth v. Thompson, 701 A.2d 1367, 1371 (Pa. 1997) (a
 backlog caused by the judge’s illness and a data entry error by
 the court constituted good cause to justify a delayed
 sentencing); Evans v. State, 742 So.2d 1205, 1208 (Miss. Ct. App.
 1999) (a continuance due to the judge’s illness did not count
 towards the statutory speedy trial deadline); Lane, 561 F.2d at
 1078 (there was no abuse of discretion where the court denied a
 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 48(b) motion to dismiss
 because the delay was due to “institutional factors” such as the
 “illness of a judge and the unavailability of a replacement”);
 
20
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ferris, 751 F.2d at 441-42 (under the federal Speedy Trial Act,
 
18 U.S.C. § 3161, “a relatively short period of delay due to a
 judge’s illness . . . should be treated as a continuance whether
 or not a continuance order issues. The delay due to the judge’s
 illness is, therefore, properly excludable time”).
 
We thus conclude that the illness of a trial judge may
 
constitute “good cause” for some period of delay. However, even
 in the two cases relied upon by the ICA in this case, Lane and
 Ferris, there were limitations on the amount of time that could
 justifiably be excused as “good cause.” In Lane, for example,
 the court noted that the delay was justified not just by the
 judge’s illness, but by the judge’s illness “and the
 unavailability of a replacement.” Lane, 561 F.2d at 1078. 
Similarly, in Ferris, the First Circuit noted that “a relatively
 short period of time” may be excluded from the speedy trial
 period due to a judge’s illness. Both of these courts thus
 appeared to recognize that, even if a judge’s illness may
 constitute “good cause” for delay, it is not without limits. We
 must therefore determine what those limits are, and whether they
 were exceeded by the delay in this case.
 
Whether a period of time is excludable as “good cause”
 
under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) is dependent on the facts of each case. 
See State v. Herrera, 63 Haw. 405, 409, 629 P.2d 626,629 (1981)
 (“‘Exceptional circumstances,’ like ‘good cause,’ is dependent on
 
21
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the facts of each case. The evidence, based upon all legitimate
 
inferences and deductions, facts admitted or known, and matters
 which judicial notice may properly be taken, supports [the trial
 judge’s] findings. Findings of the trial court will not be
 disturbed unless clearly erroneous.”). Similarly, the
 determination of how long a period can be excluded due to a trial
 judge’s illness is dependent on the facts of each case. As the
 Lane and Ferris courts recognized, the delay cannot be
 indefinite, and it cannot exceed the amount of time necessary for
 the sick judge to recover, or for an alternative judge to be
 found.
 
Thus, to determine whether a period of time was
 
properly excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8), a reviewing appellate
 court must consider several factors. 
First, we must consider the reason for the delay and
 
whether it was unanticipated and not reasonably foreseeable. 
See, e.g., Gillis, 63 Haw. at 288, 626 P.2d at 192 (stating that
 the good cause provision of HRPP Rule 48 “is provided to take
 care of unanticipated circumstances”).
 
Second, we must consider the period of absence due to
 
the illness of the judge. See, e.g., Ferris, 751 F.2d at 441-42
 
(holding that under the federal Speedy Trial Act, “a relatively
 short period of delay due to a judge’s illness” is “properly
 excludable time”) (emphasis added). 
22
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Third, we must consider the efforts taken and stated on
 
the record to find a replacement judge or reassign the case. 
See, e.g., State v. Bellah, 252 P.3d 357, 363 (Or. Ct. App. 2011)
 (holding that the trial court erred in denying the defendant’s
 motion to dismiss because the record did not “disclose how the
 particular length . . . of delay was required by the lack of
 available judges or whether the court or the state made a
 reasonable effort to reset the case for an earlier trial date”);
 State v. Lee, 228 P.3d 609, 612-13 (Or. Ct. App. 2010)
 (illustrating the kind of evidence that is helpful to assess the
 delays that are due to a lack of available judges: of the
 possible alternative judges, the record demonstrated that “one
 judge was screened from the case, one had show-cause hearings
 scheduled, a third had a doctor’s appointment, and a fourth
 already had a primary trial scheduled.” The court held in part
 that the defendant’s right to speedy trial was not violated
 because “the reasons for each portion of the delay are well-
established in the record.”) 
Finally, we must consider the complexity of the case
 
and whether it was such that it was not reasonable to ask an
 alternative judge to step in on short notice. See, e.g., 
Williams v. State, 651 S.E.2d 674, 677-78 (Ga. 2007) (“The delay
 that can be tolerated for an ordinary street crime is
 considerably less than for a serious, complex conspiracy
 
23
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
charge.”) (quoting Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514 530-31 (1972));
 
United States v. Murillo, 288 F.3d 1126 (9th Cir. 2002) (holding
 that the defendant’s right to a speedy trial was not violated by
 a thirteen-month delay given the complexity of the case, which
 involved an appeal in a complex murder case in which the death
 penalty was a consideration). 
Regarding the first factor, the reason for the delay,
 
we conclude that a trial judge’s illness is sufficiently
 unforeseeable to warrant some period of delay. The issue here is
 thus how long a delay was warranted, which requires consideration
 of the other three factors.
 
The family court ruled that Judge Castagnetti’s illness
 
justified an exclusion of a period of four weeks from Abregano’s
 HRPP Rule 48 trial date calculation, extending his trial deadline
 from February 26, 2013 to March 26, 2013. Judge Castagnetti’s
 illness may have constituted good cause to delay the trial for a
 few days, even if no action was taken to attempt to find a
 replacement judge.
6 Here, however, Abregano’s trial was delayed
 
for four weeks. The record is silent on whether Judge
 Castagnetti actually remained ill for that period, but even if
 she did, when the trial is delayed for that long due to the
 
6
 We note that in the present case, on February 11, 2013, Judge
 
Castagnetti continued Abregano’s trial for one month, until March 11, 2013.
Abregano’s HRPP Rule 48 trial deadline was February 23, 2011.  Thus, on
February 11, 2013, Judge Castagnetti could have continued Abregano’s trial for
up to twelve days without implicating the HRPP Rule 48 deadline.
 
24
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
judge’s illness, and the case is not complex, efforts must be
 
made to reassign the case to avoid delay. Abregano’s case was
 not complex enough to warrant waiting four weeks for the same
 judge to become available again. This case involved a simple
 misdemeanor charge with uncomplicated facts and did not involve
 extensive pre-trial evidentiary motions or hearings.
7 As such,
 
the family court was obligated to make efforts to reassign the
 case to a different judge. 
On March 11, 2013, when the parties appeared before the
 
family court after the one-month continuance due to Judge
 Castagnetti’s illness, the court heard Abregano’s arguments
 regarding his motion to dismiss on HRPP Rule 48 grounds. 
Abregano argued that a trial judge’s illness does not fall under
 any of the HRPP Rule 48 exceptions, and that the good cause
 exception did not apply here because there were twenty-one other
 circuit court judges that could have replaced Judge Castagnetti. 
The family court rejected Abregano’s arguments:
 
THE COURT:  No.  I disagree with you one hundred
 
percent.  There are no replacement judges.  And it’s
 
just like you guys.  When your client shows up and
says I want P.D. Stanley who is my attorney, we
routinely continue it so that we can protect the
procedural rights of the defendant to say, yes, you
have an assigned public defender.  The court’s going
 to honor that. 
  
If Ju
dge Castagnetti was sick, she was sick. 
That’s not something that happens every day.  I think
 
7
 When there has been extensive pre-trial evidentiary rulings by the
 
same judge, this would weigh in favor of excluding a longer period of delay in
a HRPP Rule 48 calculation due to the judge’s illness. 
25
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that’s good cause.  I’m going to rule March, 26,  ‘13
 
is the Rule 48 date.  So we’ll pass this case.  Put it
 in the queue.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Thus, the only evidence in the record that any efforts
 
were made to find a replacement judge or reassign Abregano’s case
 
was the family court’s comment that “[t]here are no replacement
 judges.” However, rather than demonstrating that efforts had
 been made to reassign the case, this exchange appears to indicate
 that no efforts had been made and that the court believed it was
 under no obligation to make any efforts. The family court
 compared the situation to that in which proceedings are continued
 to allow a defendant to be represented by a particular public
 defender who is temporarily unavailable. However, the illness of
 a trial judge and the temporary unavailability of a public
 defender are not analogous. There is no reason, in a non-complex
 case such as this, that the defendant should have to wait for the
 same judge to become available beyond the defendant’s HRPP Rule
 48 trial deadline. Rather, efforts should be made to minimize
 the trial delay as much as possible by, at minimum, inquiring
 into the availability of other judges. Further, such efforts
 should be stated on the record to allow meaningful review on
 appeal.
8
 
8
 At minimum in this case, the family court should have explained
 
the circumstances that led it to the conclusion that “there are no replacement
(continued...)
 
26
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Without any additional facts or representations in the
 
record, the family court’s statement lacked the necessary basis
 
to support a finding that there were no other judges available. 
Thus, we conclude that the record is not sufficient to support a
 finding of good cause to exclude a four-week delay due to the
 trial judge’s illness. As a result, the family court erred in
 denying Abregano’s HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the judgment on
 
appeal of the ICA and the family court’s judgment of conviction
 and sentence, and remand the case to the family court to decide
 whether to dismiss Abregano’s charge with or without prejudice.
9
  
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
(...continued)
judges.”  In cases where this court has affirmed the exclusion of periods oftime under HRPP Rule 48 as “exceptional circumstances” due to courtcongestion, we have required some explanation as to what those circumstancesare.  For example, in Baron, this court affirmed the circuit court’s exclusionof a ninety-seven day period for “exceptional circumstances” because, indenying the Rule 48 motion, the circuit court explained that there was a lackof replacement judges because of “the reassignment of two judges; theretirement of one judge; the temporary reassignment of one judge to anothercourt; the vacations of potential replacement judges; and a marked increase injury trial demands.”  80 Hawai 'i at 110, 114, 905 P.3d at 616, 620.  However, 
no such explanation was given in the present case. 
9
 “[T]he court shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the
 
charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced
withi
n six months.”  HRPP Rule 48(b) (emphasis added).
 
27
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
PART II: IMPROPER COMMENT ON THE EVIDENCE
 
The second question in Abregano’s application for
 
certiorari asks: 
Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
[family court] did not assume the role of an advocate
for the prosecution and did not exhibit bias when [the
family court] improperly commented on the evidence.
 
The dissent states that it is not necessary to reach 
the second question because we have remanded for a new trial on 
the first question. The right to an impartial judge is a due process right under article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, however, and a judge should not express opinions as to the merits of a case in front of a jury, State v. Silva, 78 Hawai'i 115, 117, 118, 890 P.2d 702, 704, 705 (App. 1995) 
(citations omitted), abrogated on other grounds by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995). In addition, it is 
not unusual for our appellate courts to provide guidance on remand. See, e.g., State v. Basham, 132 Hawai' i 97, 112, 319 
P.3d 1105, 1120 (2014) (providing guidance on remand regarding claims of prosecutorial misconduct); Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 Hawai'i 376, 385 n.6, 38 P.3d 95, 104 n.6 (2001) (addressing 
evidentiary issues to provide guidance to the court on remand); State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83, 88, 26 P.3d 572, 577 (2001) 
(vacating conviction and remanding for new trial based on prosecutorial misconduct and addressing additional issues on 
28
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
erroneously admitted evidence, ineffective assistance of counsel, 
and choice of evils defense “[i]n order to provide guidance to the circuit court and the parties on remand. . . .”); State v. Davia, 87 Hawai' i 249, 252, 953 P.2d 1347, 1350 (1998) (vacating 
conviction and remanding for new change of plea hearing based on district court’s failure to establish that defendant’s plea was knowing and voluntary, but addressing defendant’s remaining points of error “in order to provide guidance to the district court and the parties on remand”). 
We therefore address the second question. The trial
 
transcript passage in Section I(B) provides the background:
 
[STATE]: Okay.  Um, what did [Judge Kupau] –- what did he
tell you and the defendant about contact between parties?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection.  Hearsay.  This is hearsay.
 THE COURT: Mr. Prosecutor, does the document not speak for
itself?  It is in evidence.
 
[STATE]: All right.  Um, then let’s specifically address
Points 3 and Points 4 in Section 3B –
 
THE COURT.  All right.
 [STATE]:  –- ‘cause that deals with contact between parties.
 [STATE]: [KA], um Section 3 says[,] “The respondent is
prohibited from coming or passing within 100 yards of any
residence or place of employment or school of the
petitioner.  The respondent must not violate this order even
if the petitioner invites the respondent over.”
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection.  Is that a question?
 THE COURT: I think that is part of the question.  So
 
overruled at this time.
 
[STATE]: Do you remember Judge Kupau going over that portion
of Point 3B3 with you in open court and the defendant in
open court?
 
29
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[KA]: Yes.
 
[STATE]: Okay.  Now does 3 –- did he tell you 3B3, that
section that I just read to you, does that apply –- did he
tell the defendant and you that that applies only to you or
to –- I mean –- or to you and the other people covered under
the order of protection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection.  Hearsay.
 
THE COURT: Okay.  Sustained.
 
[STATE]: Okay.  For the contact between parties section, did
Judge Kupau say that it went over –- that it covers both -–
just you or you and the other people on the order for
protection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection.  Hearsay.
 
THE COURT: Sustained.
 
[STATE]: Okay.
 THE COURT.  Mr. Prosecutor, isn’t this covered on Page 1 of
 
Exhibit 1?
 
[STATE]: Okay.
 
THE COURT: No, I’m just asking.  I don’t mean to preempt
your questioning, but isn’t it covered on Page 1?
 
[STATE]: Yes.  Yes, Your Honor.  You are correct.
 
THE COURT: Well, it’s in evidence.  If you want to ask her
who’s covered, I think you can publish that portion of the
exhibit which is in evidence if you desire.
 
[STAT
E]: Okay.  So just to be clear, um, [KA], in addition
to yourself as the petitioner that’s covered under this
order for protection, um, again, there’s three other people
covered under this order; right?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection. Leading.
 
THE COURT: Overruled.
 
[KA]: Yes.
 [STATE]: Okay.  So then who are those three people in
addition to yourself covered under this order?
 
[KA]: Uh, my daughter [HP], uh, my son ... and our youngest
daughter....
 
[STAT
E]: Okay.  Thank you, [KA].
 
30
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In front of the jury, in the passage quoted above, the
 
family court suggested that the State was correct in arguing that
 
Abregano could be found to have violated Sections III(B)(3) and
 III(B)(4) of the protective order because “isn’t this covered on
 Page 1 of Exhibit 1.” 
This suggestion by the family court was an improper 
comment on the evidence under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) 
Rule 1102 (1993), which provides that “[t]he court shall instruct the jury regarding the law applicable to the facts of the case, but shall not comment upon the evidence.” We have observed that “the Commentary on Rule 1102 unequivocally states that the present rule precludes comment on the evidence in all cases, without limitation.” State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai' i 38, 59, 79 P.3d 
131,152 (2003) (internal brackets, quotation marks, and emphasis deleted). Thus, the prohibition against judicial comment on the evidence applies throughout the proceedings and is not limited to jury instructions.
10 Id. The rationale for HRE Rule 1102 is 
that judicial comment on the evidence risks placing the judge in the role of an advocate, and that analysis of the evidence is an 
advocate’s function. Addison Bowman, Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence 
Manual § 1102-1 (2014); State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai' i 413, 417, 903 
10
 The family court later explained that “the court was commenting on
 
a document that was already received into evidence,” and that, “[t]he court
was facilitating the use of this document for a witness who was on the stand.”
 
31
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.2d 718, 722 (App. 1995). 
The record does not support Abregano’s assertion,
 
however, that the family court’s improper comment was based on
 
the court assuming the role of an advocate for the prosecution or
 that it constituted an exhibition of bias; rather the record
 suggests that the family court’s improper comment was based on a
 misunderstanding of what was prohibited by the protective order.
 For example, in denying Abregano’s motion for judgment of
 acquittal, the family court stated its belief that “other
 protected persons stand in the same shoes as the petitioner[.]” 
Contrary to the family court’s commentary before the jury and its
 statement during its ruling on the motion for judgment of
 acquittal, under the protective order, other protected persons do
 not stand in the same shoes as the petitioner, and Sections
 III(B)(3) and III (B)(4) do not apply to conduct between Abregano
 and HP.
 
A redacted copy of the protective order is attached to
 
this concurring opinion as “Attachment 1,” with redactions noted
 in brackets. The protective order identifies Abregano as the
 “Respondent.” In and below the caption, it refers to KA as the
 “Petitioner,” giving the “Year of Birth” of the “Petitioner.” 
Below the “PETITIONER IDENTIFIERS” on the first page, HP is
 included as an “Other Protected Person” with a “YOB” or “Year of
 Birth.” Below the “Other Protected Person” information, the
 
32
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
protective order identifies “Respondent’s Relationship to
 
Petitioner” as “MARRIED.” Obviously, this cannot be HP.
 
The protective order is replete with additional
 
references to the “Petitioner” that make it clear that the only
 “Petitioner” is KA. For example, persons present at the court
 hearing on the protective order are identified at the top of page
 2, and notes that “Petitioner” was present. HP was not at the
 hearing. Section III(D)(1) regarding “Temporary Custody and
 Visitation” provides that the “Petitioner” shall have temporary
 legal and physical custody of the parties’ minor children. 
The State asserts that Abregano violated Sections
 
III(B)(3) and (4) of the protective order by contacting HP, and
 before the jury, the family court suggested that the State’s
 assertion was correct. These sections, however, only prohibit
 conduct by Respondent as to the “Petitioner,” or KA. A review of
 the protective order makes clear that the “Petitioner” is KA, and
 HP is an “Other Protected Person.” The protective order’s only
 prohibition on conduct between Abregano and HP appears in Section
 III(B)(8), which prohibits Abregano from “contacting” HP. 
As this court recently reiterated in State v. Guyton, 
135 Hawai' i 372, 351 P.3d 1138 (2015), a case alleging a 
violation of a district court restraining order: 
[A] prerequisite to punishing a person for violating an
injunction order . . . is a court order that is “clear and
unambiguous,” so as to allow a person of ordinary
intelligence to “ascertain from the four corners of the
 
33
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order precisely what acts are forbidden[.]”  This
 
requirement is no more than a rule of reason because, as it
is for statutes, fairness and due process dictate that a
court order must be sufficiently particular and definite so
as to clearly identify the conduct that it prohibits.
 
135 Hawai' i at 377-78, 351 P.3d 1143-44 (citations omitted). 
Thus, in addition to making an improper comment on the
 
evidence, the family court erred in suggesting before the jury
 
that the State correctly asserted that Abregano could be found to
 have violated Sections III(B)(3) and III(B)(4) of the protective
 order and in stating during its ruling on Abregano’s motion for
 judgment of acquittal that “other protected persons stand in the
 same shoes as the petitioner in this case.” The record
 indicates, however, that the family court’s improper comment
 before the jury was based on a mistaken understanding of what was
 prohibited by the protective order. As a remand has already been
 ordered for the Rule 48 violation, we need not address whether
 any remedy is necessary for the improper comment.
11
 
James S. Tabe 
for petitioner
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
Loren J. Thomas for respondent
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
11
 We therefore do not consider the extent of the prejudice by the
 
improper comment on the evidence, although we note that Communication No. 1
from the jury inquired as follows:  “Does the term ‘Petitioner’ include the
 ‘Petitioner Identifiers’ on page 1 of Exhibit 1?  We also do not address the
 sufficiency of the evidence as this issue was not raised on appeal.  See State
 v. Davis, 133 Hawai 'i 102, 120, 324 P.3d 912, 930 (2014) (“[A] reviewing court
is required under article I, section 10 of the Hawai 'i Constitution to address 
a defendant’s express claim of insufficiency of the evidence prior toremanding for a new trial based on a defective charge.”). 
34
 