***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
  
vs. 
 
WILLIAM ROY CARROLL, III, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-16-0000593 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
(CAAP-16 -0000593; 3PC151000386)  
 
JANUARY 24, 2020  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY Mc KENNA, J.   
 
I.  Introduction 
 This case arises from the disappearance, recovery, and 
repair of a bronze spear attached to the  bronze King Kamehameha 
I statue in Hilo, Hawai ʻi.  After a jury trial in the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (“circuit court”),1 William Roy 
Carroll, III (“Carroll”) was convicted  by a jury of two counts 
                         
1  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.  
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000593
24-JAN-2020
07:46 AM***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
2 
 of theft and one count of criminal property damage, and 
sentenced to five years’  imprisonment.   On appeal  to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) , and now again on 
certiorari to this court, Carroll contends the circuit court 
erred by: (1) denying
 his challenge to two prospective  jurors 
for cause, thereby violating his right to peremptory challenges; 
(2)
 denying his motion for judgment of acquittal  based on 
insufficiency of evidence; and (3) improperly penalizing him in 
sentencing for exercising his right to a trial.  The ICA 
concluded Carroll
’s points of error lacked merit and affirmed 
the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and s entence.  See  
State v. Carroll, No. CAAP-16 -0000593, at 12 (App. Oct. 31, 
2018) (SDO).  
We hold the circuit court abuse d its discretion in denying 
Carroll’s challenge for cause of Juror 48, which required him to 
exercise one of his peremptory challenges to excuse that juror  
and caused him to exhaust his peremptory challenges, thus 
impairing his right to exercise a peremptory challenge on a 
different juror.  This error requires his conviction be vacated 
and the case be remanded to the circuit court for a new trial.  
 
We also hold , however, that because there was substantial 
evidence to support Carroll’s convictions for the  theft and 
criminal property damage offenses, double jeopardy principles do 
not preclude a retrial.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
3 
 Based on our  rulings  on the first two questions on 
certiorari, we need not address Carroll’s  third question on 
certiorari regarding sentencing.2   
We therefore vacate the ICA’s November 27, 2018 judgment on 
appeal and the circuit court’s July 26, 2016 judgment of 
conviction and sentence, and we remand this case to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
II.  Background 
A. Factual background 
On September 6, 2015, the top half of the spear that was a
part of the King Kamehameha I statue located off of Kamehameha 
Avenue and Bishop Street in Hilo, Hawaiʻi, was observed missing.
The spear, although a part of the statue, was no longer 
physically attached to it.   On September 8, 2015, during a 
police investigation of the scene, the missing top portion of 
the spear, wrapped in a torn half of a long-sleeved orange T-
shirt and a thick chain attached to a pole, was located in the 
bushes off a trail near the statue.    
  
B. Circuit court proceedings 
 1. Charges  
On September 15, 2015, Carroll was charged via a felony 
information and non-felony complaint with three offenses: 
                         
2  We also need not address Carroll’s assertion of error regarding the 
other juror.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
4 
 (1)
 Count 1, theft in the second degree, in violation of Hawai ʻi 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 708 -830(1) (2014) and  
HRS § 708-831(1)(b) (2014 ), for obtaining or exerting 
unauthorized control over a bronze spear valued at over $300 
belonging to the Kamehameha Schools Alumni Association (“KSAA”);3
(2) Count 2, criminal property damage in the second degree, in 
violation of HRS § 708-821(1)(b)  (2014), for causing damage  
                         
3  “Theft.  A person commits theft if the person . . . [o]btains or exerts 
unauthorized control over property.  A person obtains or exerts unauthorized 
control over the property of another with intent to deprive the other of the 
property.”  HRS § 708- 830(1).  
 
“Theft in the second degree.   (1)  A person commits the offense of 
theft in the second degree if the person commits theft . . . [o]f property or 
services the value of which exceeds $300[.]”  HRS § 708 -831(1)(b).  
 
Valuation of property or services.   Whenever the value of 
property or services is determinative of the class or grade 
of an offense, or otherwise relevant to a prosecution, the 
following shall apply:  
 
     (1)  Except as otherwise specified in this section, 
value means the market value of the property or services at 
the time and place of the offense, or the replacement cost 
if the market value of the property or services cannot be 
determined.  
 
. . . . 
 
(3)  When property or services have value but that 
value cannot be ascertained pursuant to the standards set 
forth above, the value shall be deemed to be an amount not  
exceeding $100.  
 
     (4)  When acting intentionally or knowingly with 
respect to the value of property or services is required to 
establish an element of an offense, the value of property 
or services shall be prima facie evidence that the 
defendant believed or knew the property or services to be 
of that value.  When acting recklessly with respect to the 
value of property or services is sufficient to establish an 
element of an offense, the value of the property or 
services shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant 
acted in reckless disregard of the value.  
 
HRS § 708- 801 (2014). ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
5 (continued. . .)  
 exceeding $1,500 to the 
King Kamehameha I statue, also belonging 
to the KSAA;4 and (3) Count 3, theft in the third degree, in 
violation of HRS § 708-830(1) and HRS § 708-832(1)(a) (2014) for 
obtaining or exerting unauthorized control of a four-foot pipe 
and forty-foot chain valued at over $100 belonging to Bayfront 
Motors Incorporated (“Bayfront Motors”) .5   
2. Pre-trial hearing regarding State’s plea offer  
At a May 4, 2016 hearing  regarding other matters, the 
circuit court indicated it would be conducting what it called a 
“Frye hearing.”   The circuit court was apparently referring to 
Missouri v. Frye, 566 U.S. 134 (2012), in which the United 
States Supreme Court held that, “as a general rule, defense 
counsel has the duty to communicate formal offers from the 
prosecution to accept a plea on terms and conditions that may be
favorable to the accused.”   Frye, 566 U.S. at 145.   T he State 6 
                         
 
4  “Criminal property damage in the second degree.   (1)  A person commits 
the offense of criminal property damage in the second degree if by means 
other than fire: . . . [t]he person intentionally or knowingly damages the 
property of another, without the other’s consent, in an amount exceeding 
$1,500[.]”  HRS § 708- 821(1)(b). 
 
5  “Theft in the third degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of theft 
in the third degree if the person commits theft . . . [o]f property or 
services the value of which exceeds $100[.]”  HRS § 708 -832(1)(a).  
 
6  The Court further stated:  
 
The prosecution and the trial courts may adopt some 
measures to help ensure against late, frivolous, or 
fabricated  claims after a later, less advantageous plea 
offer has been accepted or after a trial leading to 
conviction with resulting harsh consequences. First, the 
fact of a formal offer means that its terms and its ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
6 
 indicated it was offering to agree to a sentenc
e of probation 
and also that any jail term would be equal to time served in 
exchange for Carroll’s  guilty or no contest plea as to Count 3 
and either Count 1 or Count 2.  The State also agreed to take no 
position if Carroll requested a deferral.  The circuit court 
made clear that if Carroll accepted the plea offer, it would 
sentence Carroll to probation stating, “[a]s I see it, the real 
big plus is that you would be avoiding any exposure to prison.”   
                                                                               
(. . .continued)  
processing can be documented so that what took place in the
negotiation process becomes more clear if some later 
inquiry turns on the conduct of earlier pretrial 
negotiations. Second, States may elect to follow rules that
all offers must be in writing, again to ensure against 
later misunderstandings or fabricated charges. See  N.J. Ct.
Rule 3:9– 1(b) (2012) (“Any plea offer to be made by the 
prosecutor shall be in writing and forwarded to the 
defendant's attorney”). Third, formal offers can be made 
part of the record at any subsequent plea proceeding or 
before a trial on the merits, all to ensure that a 
defendant has been fully advised before those further 
proceedings commence. At least one State often follows a 
similar procedure before trial.   
 
 
 
Frye, 566 U.S. at 146- 47 (citations omitted).  Thus, the Court discussed 
possible measures to “help ensure against late, frivolous, or fabricated 
claims” brought by defendants regarding the existence of plea offers for 
lesser sentences than those eventually imposed.  As of the Court’s 2012 
opinion in Frye, it appears that perhaps only one state was conducting on -
the-record discussions regarding plea offers.  Although Hawaiʻ i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 11(f)(1) (2014) allows trial courts to participate in  
plea discussions, HRPP Rule 11(f)(2) does not require a plea offer to be 
communicated to a trial court unless a defendant accepts the State’s offer,  
and there are other methods of memorializing that a plea offer was conveyed 
to a defendant but rejected without involving the trial court.  The most 
common method may be a defense attorney’s notation in the file.  Although we 
need not address the merits of Carroll’s sentencing issue on certiorari, we 
do note that detailed on -the-record inquiries by a trial court regarding the 
terms of a probation plea offer, with indications that the trial court would 
follow the offer and that refusing the offer could result in a prison 
sentence, can, as in this case, lead to questions regarding whether the trial 
court penalized a defendant for exercising trial rights.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
7 Carroll declined the plea offer as supplemented 
to by the court 
and proceeded to trial.  
3. Jury selection
Jury selection began on May 9, 2016.  After the circuit 
court read the charges against Carroll during voir dire, it 
asked the jurors whether they7 had any knowledge or information
about the case from any source, including any media, friends, or 
any other sources.  Several prospective jurors indicated they 
had heard of the case through other sources.  
Juror number 48 (“Juror 48”)8 responded she had been exposed
to information regarding the case from the Hawaii Tribune-Herald 
newspaper.  She also stated she had heard comments made by her 
daughter and son-in
-law and her three grandchildren who attended 
a Hawaiian language immersion school  “who were impacted by” the 
case, and that she “may have heard something from” “another 
child who’s a Hawaiian activist .”  She could not recall who said 
what.  She stated her recollection regarding what she might have 
read was “[a]bout where the items were found” and “the condition 
of what -- where they found him.”  
She indicated she was raising the issue because she “just 
wanted everyone to know that I have the newspaper reports and I 
7“They, them, and their” are sometimes used as singular pronouns when  
(1)the gender identity of a person referred to is unknown or immaterial; or
(2)those are the pronouns of a specific person.
8After preliminary excusals, Juror 48 became juror number 12. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
8 
 may have heard something somewhere along the line.
  What, I 
couldn’t be specific just because my children are very involved 
in Hawaiian activities and the statue is important to them. ”  
Juror 48 explained that she recalled reading where the items 
were found, but that she could not discern “what else was added 
. . . by [her] children ” who were “very upset that the statue 
was desecrated,” “[t]hat things were missing,” “[t]hat what was 
done to the statue was not appropriate,”  and that “[s]omething 
should be done.”   
The circuit court stated  that “[not] too many people would 
disagree with those sentiments,” and asked:  
THE COURT:  Despite what you, um, may  have, uh, read about 
and you might have had some  reactions, uh, from your own 
family about, uh, this  incident do you think you can set 
that aside and in  essence and, um, presume Mr. Carroll, the
defendant,  here to be innocent until he is proven guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt by the evidence in this case?   
 
[JUROR 48]: 
 I would certainly do my best to do that.  
However, I do come  from a, um, my husband and others were 
very much, uh,  of the opinion that if it does get t
o court
there’s a lot of --  got to be a lot of proof somewhere.  
That that’s the way it is.   
 
(Emphasis added.)   
Juror 48  went on to state that she “would definitely try 
[her] best” to find Carroll not guilty if the State did not 
produce sufficient evidence to overcome the presumption of 
innocence.  But, after further colloquy with the circuit court, 
Juror 48 confirmed she “presum[ed] [Carroll] guilty until he 
[could] prove his innocence”  with “pretty good evidence” : ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
9 
 THE COURT:  Okay. 
 If you made a  conscientious effort to do
that what would be your  confidence level or your -- your, 
um, evaluation of  your abilities to do that successfully?   
 
[JUROR 48]:  If, uh, the evidence points that he was not
the one then I would  be able to say that, um, I would be
able to overcome  but I’ve -- I’ve heard --  
 
 
THE COURT:
  Okay. 
 
[JUROR 48]: -- but again it would have to be pretty good
evidence.  
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  But, okay, in essence  what you just told
me is you’re presuming that the  evidence -- you’re 
presuming him guilty until he can  prove his innocence.  You
understand?   
 
 
[JUROR 48]: I understand, but I’m -- I’m saying --  
 
THE COURT: But that ’s what you’ re -- 
 
[JUROR 48]: -- yes. 
 
THE COURT: -- that’s what your orientation is right now?  
 
[JUROR 48]: Right now. 
 
(Emphases added.)   Juror 48 then stated, however, that if she 
were selected to sit on the jury, she would be able to put aside 
the feelings of her family members about the incident when 
making her decision because she would follow the circuit court’s 
instructions.  She also stated:  
So I really I  would try to go by evidence.  I’ve watched a 
lot of, uh, my husband very much loved all the court cases 
he could possibly watch.   Well, he was bedridden and, uh,  
so I’ve seen a lot of those things which I know  are
 not 
true, but I know sometimes thing do not come out  the way it 
sounds like from the first.  
 
Questioning by the circuit court of Juror 48  continued as 
follows:  
THE COURT:   Okay. [Juror 48], you know, I need to clarify
certain things because I ’m getting some very conflicting 
answers from you, and  maybe it’ s because you ’re a little  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
10 
 nervous and because  you may not be understanding some of
the questions so  let
 me try again here.   
First of all whatever it is, you know, in  terms of 
any kind of bias or fe elings or -- or, uh, whatever you may 
have with respect, um, to, uh, what  happened in this case 
about the statue, your – your kids’ reaction to it and 
everything, you know, I can ’t unring the bill  [sic]. 
And we’re all human.  We’re gonna  have biases and 
prejudice we pick up throughout our entire  lives.  Uh, I 
have my own but, uh, and I ’m sure the  prosecutors have 
their own.  
But when you become a juror and/or you  become a judge 
like me, you know, you have to make a  conscientious effort 
to identify those bi ases to say what it is that might 
affect your judgment in that  particular case and tell 
yourself conscientiously, “I can’t let those biases 
interfere with being fair and  impartial.  That cannot be 
the basis of my decision. ” 
In other words I won ’t change you.  I won’t change 
your biases.  I won’t change your  feelings, but once you 
identify what those are as to  whether or not they affect 
your decision in a case as  a juror you have to set ‘em 
aside.  You think you can  do that?  
 
[JUROR 48]:  Yes. 
 
THE COURT:  Okay. The other thing I  think I need, uh, some
assurance of is that also as I  indicated earlier jury and 
jury verdict, um, have to  be based on the evidence 
presented in court.   
So when we have the possibility of a  juror having 
information from outside the court they  will have to engage 
in almost a very similar type of  exercise in terms of 
saying, 
“Well, I cannot forget  what I know but I can 
disregard it. I can set it  aside,” just like I’ m required. 
I know a lot of  things but I have to say I can ’t consider 
that when I  have a trial and I have to make a decision.  
Would you be able to do that as a judge  of the facts 
in this case? In other words render your  verdict only on 
the evidence that ’s presented in court  and not consider -- 
I’m not saying forget but not  consider whatever kind of 
information you might have  gotten from your family, from 
the newspapers in  rendering a verdict. You can do that?  
 
[JUROR 48]:  Yes. 
 
THE COURT:  So if those thoughts came  into your mind during
a trial you would -- and this is  why we going over what it 
is that you might recall 
-- you have to say, “Oh, I can ’t 
consider that, ” and just push it aside. You may not forget 
it but just push it  aside and not use that or discuss that 
or bring it up  in deliberations during, um, deliberations 
as a juror.  Do you think you can do that?   
 
[JUROR 48]
: 
 Yes. 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
11 
 THE COURT:  As to all of these things  that I ask you 
whether or not you ’d be able to do as a  juror to what 
degree of certainty or confidence do you  think you’ d be 
able to be successful if you  conscientiously tried to, um,
do these things?   
 
[JUROR 48]:  90 percent.
 
 
THE COURT:  So you’re fairly -- very, very confident? 
 
[JUROR 48]:
  Yes.
 
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you. 
 Any further questions? 
 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]:   Nothing from the State. 
 
THE COURT:
  Okay.  [DEFENSE ATTORNEY] ? 
 
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]:  
 Just one further question,  ma’am. 
 
THE COURT:
  Go ahead. 
 
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]:
  You had said that, um, when  the -- 
just before the Judge asked you so you 
-- you were stating
something that  sounded like you were  presuming he was 
guilty and the evidence would have to  be good.  Is that 
extra 10 percent that you -- in your certainty level, is 
there a bit of if that you would  want Mr. Carroll to 
somehow prove to you that he ’s not the one or prove to you
that he
’s innocent?   
 
 
[JUROR 48]:
  I guess my
 feeling on that has to be on the 
fact that, um, I have  a lot of faith in the police and that
what they do  and, um, what they put together and who they 
arrest.  That would be the 10 percent.   
 
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]:
  Okay, and so because of that  faith and
belief, um, there is gonna always be a part  of you that 
you
’ll want Mr. Carroll or any defendant  that made it to a 
trial level to have to prove to you  that they’ re not, um, 
the one?  That --
 that somehow the police got it wrong or 
something went wrong.  You would want a little bit of proof
of that?
  
 
 
[JUROR 48]:
  Uh, I would
 base my opinion on what proof
there is.  
 
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]:
  Mmm-hmm. 
 
[JUROR 48]:  Um, I guess also I would feel that if there 
was proof it ’s got to be somewhat sustainable or why would 
it be proved?  
 
 Carroll then challenged Juror 48 for cause, arguing:  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
12 
 [S]he never let go of her idea that even if it ’s 10 percent 
it
’s still 10 percent burden of proof being placed upon Mr. 
Carroll to somehow prove his innocence.  
  
. . . . 
 
I think that she will not be able to give Mr. Carroll 
the full presumption of innocence nor will she be able to 
give the State the full burden of proof they have.
   
 
The circuit court denied Carroll ’s challenge, stating that 
Carroll had misconstrued Juror 48’s answers:  
[W]hat we’re looking here for  in terms of this voir 
dire was basically what she would do with the knowledge she 
might have had about the case and whether or not she might 
have had som e inclination about Mr. Carroll ’s guilt or 
innocence and whether she could put that aside.  
The 90 percent was her confidence level  that if she 
conscientiously tried to do that she would  be able to 
succeed.  That’s a fairly high degree of  confidence that I 
think the Court  would be willing to  accept under the 
circumstances where, you know, you have somebody who has  
this task of -- of sorting out information and being able 
to decide what he can use, what they can ’t use.  It’s not a 
10 percent of  shifting burden.  I think that ’s a 
misconception.   
The other thing is that I will be going  over in other 
voir dire things like police testimony.  I’ll be going over 
evaluation of testimony, also the  concept of proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt and what is  a reasonable doubt.   
And I think all of those things will  probably wash, 
you know, come out in the wash with  [Juror 48], and you ’ll 
also have another chance each  of you to voir dire her.  So 
at this point I’m just going to leave her on  because I ’m 
satisfied with the  answers with respect  to the limited voir 
dire that we had.  Okay. 
 
 Additional voir dire was conducted on May 10, 2016.   In 
response to the circuit court’s questioning, Juror 48 indicated
that Hawaiʻ i
 Police Department Criminal Investigation Section 
Lieutenant Greg ory Esteban, who was later called as a witness 
and testified he assisted in the investigation and found the 
missing top portion of the spear in the bushes, was a friend of
her husband’s through a community watch program in which her  
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
13 
 husband was involved, but that 
she could evaluate his testimony 
like any other witness.  In response to the circuit court’s 
questions with respect to whether any of the prospective jurors 
had relatives or close friends employed by a law enforcement 
agency, Juror 48 responded that her son had been a corrections 
officer on Maui for about twelve or fifteen years, but that this 
would not affect her ability to evaluate the testimony of law 
enforcements officers if they came to testify.  In response to 
the deputy prosecuting attorney’s questio ning, Juror 48 
initially responded that she thought direct evidence had a 
little bit more weight than circumstantial evidence, but in 
response to a follow- up question regarding whether, if the 
circuit court instructed the jurors to give direct and 
circumstantial evidence equal weight, she would be able to 
follow its instruction, Juror 48 responded in the affirmative.   
After this  additional voir dire, Carroll renewed his 
challenge for cause of  Juror 48  based on her statement s the day 
before.  Carroll argued  Juror 48  “had made statements that Mr. 
Carroll would have to provide some evidence in order to sway her 
that he is innocent, and even towards the end of voir dire, she 
had stated that her 10 percent uncertainty was based on the fact 
that she still would want some evidence from Mr. Carroll.”   
The circuit court again denied the challenge for cause of  
Juror 48 based on: (1) the reasons it 
had stated the day before ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
14 
 regarding the “10 percent”; (2)
 Juror 48 ’s statements during 
further voir dire that “she would listen to both sides and she 
could be fair and impartial ”; and (3) additional voir dire by 
both the State and the defense indicating that Juror 48 “would 
be applying the laws with respect to presumption of innocence 
and the burden of proof required.”  Th e circuit court stated 
that Juror 48 “answered basically all of the questions like all 
of the rest of the jurors,  that they would apply the law that 
would be applicable.”   
 Carroll exhausted his peremptory challenges, and had to use 
two of his peremptory challenges to dis miss another challenged 
juror and Juror 48 .  Had Juror 48  been excused for cause, 
Carroll would have used the peremptory challenge  exercised  on 
Juror 48 to excuse another juror .  Defense counsel stated:   
Um, for the record I would be requesting  two more 
peremptory challenges. That would be based on  the fact that  
we had asked for [] Juror No. [35 ] earlier, and [] Juror  
No. [48], we had challenged them being seated. W e would 
have used the two extra peremptory challenges to  get rid of  
[two other jurors].  
 
The circuit court denied the request for additional peremptory 
challenges.9    
 
                         
9  As noted, the other challenged juror was juror number 35 (later 
identified as juror number 7).  Because, as discussed below, Carroll 
exhausted his peremptory challenges and was foreclosed from peremptorily 
challenging at least one of two additional prospective jurors he had wanted 
to excuse, his right to exercise a peremptory challenge on another juror was 
based on the circuit court’s failure to excuse Juror 48 for cause.  We 
therefore need not address  Carroll’s assertion that juror number 35 should 
have also been excused for cause.    ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
15 
 4. Trial e vidence relevant to issues on certiorari  
 
On certiorari, Carroll does not contest evidence 
identifying him as the perpetrator of the acts.10  Rather, 
Carroll contests whether there was sufficient evidence regarding 
the value of the property allegedly taken.  Specifically, 
Carroll alleges there was insufficient evidence that the t
op 
half of the statue’s spear exceeded  $300 in value (Count 1) and 
that the chain and pole belonging to Bayfront Motors exceeded 
$100 in value (Count 3).  Carroll also contests whether there 
was sufficient evidence that the value of the damage to the 
statue exceeded $1,500 (Count 2).11    
 With respect to Counts 1 and 2 regarding the spear and 
statue, an officer of the East Hawaii Region Mamalahoe Chapter 
of the KSAA (“KSAA officer”) testified that the King Kamehameha 
I statue had been given to the KSAA  by the Princeville 
Corporation  on Kaua ʻi in 1996.  The statue was not mass produced,
and had been  cast in bronze in Italy with some gold leaf.  The 
Princeville Corporation initially planned to install the statue  
                         
10  The trial evidence included, in sum, a surveillance video recorded by 
Bayfront Motors, which showed a man — with the same haircut as Carroll, 
dressed in the same manner as Carroll on September 5 and 6, 2015, and who 
walked with the same gait as Carroll — had walked away from Bayfront Motors 
with the pole and chain.  Identification of Carroll as the perpetrator is not 
raised as an issue on certiorari.  
 
11  Although for sentencing purposes, Count 2, the criminal property damage 
charge regarding the statue, was merged into Count 1, the theft charge 
regarding the spear, if only the conviction on Count 1 was vacated, it is 
possible that Carroll could be instead be subject to sentencing on Count 2.  
We must therefore address both counts.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
16 
 on one of its 
Kauaʻi developments , but after public objection,12 
the Princeville Corporation gave it to the KSAA  to have the 
statue installed in Hilo.   
In 1996, the KSAA officer had been a member of the steering 
committee created to seek grants to pay for the  installation of  
the statue.  He had also served as  the general c ontractor for 
the statue’s installation.  As of the date of trial, the KSAA 
officer remained a licensed general contractor.  Additionally,
 
he had continued serving as a member of the steering committee , 
as the permit for the statue tasked KSAA with its continued 
maintenance.  For example, the statue had been restored in early 
2000.  As the only remaining member of the original steering 
committee, the KSAA officer was the custodian of all records 
pertaining to the acquisiti
on of the statue.   
The KSAA officer was asked by the State to render opinion s 
as an estimator and general contractor, as he had determined the 
fair market value of contracting work or projects on numerous 
occasions.  During preliminary questioning by defense counsel 
regarding his qualifications
 to render such opinions, the KSAA 
officer acknowledged he had no experience in appraising fine 
art, sculptures, or statues; that he did not deal in sculptures 
or statues; that he did not have experience in sculp ting or 
                         
12  The objection was based on the fact that King Kamehameha I had never 
conquered Kauaʻ i. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
17 
 creating statues; that he  was not familiar with the foundry work 
to create a statue;  and that he was not aware of the exact metal 
composition of the King Kamehameha I statue.  
The KSAA officer testified t he stated value of the statue 
at the time of the 1996  gift was $80,000.  He was permitted to 
testify as to his opinions, and based on the material 
composition of the spear and the portion of the entire statue it 
constituted, he estimated the value of the taken top half of the 
spear was about $2,500.  The KSAA officer also opined  the repair 
cost for the spear would have been about $2,500 based on what he 
saw of the spear, the damage, and what it would take to 
reconnect the top half to the bottom half.   
The KSAA officer also testified  it would have cost $3,500 
to repair other damage to the statue’s chest and legs, based on 
“what [he] saw as the type of restoration work that would be 
needed[,] . . . and based on what [his] recollection of the 
first time that [the KSAA]
 had the statue restored back in early 
2000[.]”  That restoration project had taken several weeks.  He 
stated, “[W]e had to build a platform around the statue for the 
person to attend to each portion of the statue.  Based on what I 
saw back then I just, you know, figured out the amount of 
manpower -- man hours would take.  And I just guessed at what 
the material costs would have been.”  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
18 
 More specifically, the KSAA officer testified that to 
reattach the two pieces of the spear, he had taken the pieces to 
another person, who attached a series of pins to the spear in 
December 2015 
and did not charge for his services.   He also 
indicated that before the entire spear was reinstalled, the 
bottom half of the spear had to be removed from the statue so 
that the recovered top half could be reattached .  As the statue 
was fourteen feet tall , a manlift and lowbed had been used to 
lift the bottom half of the spear out through the statue’s 
outreached hand.  The labor to perform these  services, as well 
as use of the necessary equipment, had been provided by the KSAA 
officer’s family company ; the KSAA off icer had previously worked 
as a construction r epresentative  for his family company .  
Based on hi s training and experience as a general 
contractor and estimator, the KSAA officer estimated that such 
services and labor, coupled with expenses to return all of the 
equipment, would have cost about $1,000.  Similarly, to 
reinstall the repaired spear, a crane or similar equipment had 
been required.  According to the KSAA officer, use of  a crane 
would have cost $1,000 and the requisite labor  would have raised 
the total cost to $1,500.  The KSAA had not needed to pay for 
these services because use of the equipment had been donated and 
all labor had been performed by volunteers.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
19 
 With respect to 
Count 3 charging theft in the third degree 
of the chain and pole “the value  of which exceeds $100,” a 
manager from Bayfront Motors testified.  The chain and pole had 
been placed in a planter box in front of the property.  The  
manager testified he had purchased the chain and pole in either 
2010 or 2011 from Home Depot for a total cost of approximately 
$135; the pole was purchased for “[r]oughly $15,” and the chain 
was “[r]oughly $3 a foot.”   
After the State concluded presenting its evidence, Carroll 
moved for a judgment of acquittal, arguing the State failed to 
meet its burden of proving the value of the spear or the pole 
and chain, and the cost to repair the statue.  The circuit court 
denied the motion for judgment of acquittal as to all three 
counts.  
 After the State’s case -in-chief, the defense did not call 
any witnesses or present any additional evidence.  
5. Conviction  
On May 20, 2016 , the jury fou nd Carroll guilty as charged 
for all three counts.   In a special interrogatory, the jury 
found the State  did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that 
Counts 1 and 2 were not part of a continuing and uninterrupted 
course of conduct and that Carroll did not have separate and 
distinct intents.   Based on the s pecial interrogatory and ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
20 
 merger, the State 
elected to go forward on Count 1 for 
sentencing.13  
6. Post-verdict motion for new trial 
Before sentencing, Carroll filed a motion for new trial on 
June 3, 2016.  He asserted he should not have been required to 
use two of his peremptory challenges to dismiss two jurors when 
they should have been dismissed for cause.  He alternatively 
argued that he should have been granted two additional 
peremptory challenges.  The State opposed Carroll’s motion , 
arguing the circuit court had prop erly denied Carroll’s 
challenges for cause of Juror 48 and the other juror,  as the 
circuit court had engaged in extensive colloquies with each and 
was satisfied with their responses.  The circuit court denied 
the motion for new t
rial.   
7. Sentencing 
 Carroll was sentenced on July 26, 2016.  At the sentencing 
hearing, defense counsel indicated Carroll maintained  his 
innocence.  When the circuit court asked whether Carroll wished 
to make a statement before sentencing, Carroll answered in the 
affirmative.  He stated that he respected the circuit  court, 
that he was willing to abide by any terms of probation if 
                         
13  Count 1, theft in the second degree, and Count 2, criminal property 
damage in the second degree, are both Class C felonies, punishable with up to 
five years imprisonment.  HRS §§ 708 -821(2), 708 -831(2), and 706- 660(1)(b) 
(2014).  Count 3, theft in the third degree, is a misdemeanor, punishable 
with up to one year imprisonment.  HRS §§ 708 -832(2) and 706- 663 (2014).  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
21 
 granted, that it had been difficult for him to be separated from 
his daughter since being incarcerated, and that he had missed a 
trip with his family.   
 Addressing the HRS § 706- 606 sentencing factors,14 the 
circuit court relied on the pre- sentence report prepared by a 
judiciary probation officer, and stated in part: 
At one time you told a security officer  at the 
welfare office, “Yeah, I’ m the guy that did  it,” and when 
you were interviewed by the probation  officer you deny 
taking the spear or having anything  to do with the offenses 
charged here, and that ’s in
 the face of clear evidence that 
was produced at trial.   Evidence which indicated t hat you 
were the person  dragging the chain that was taken from 
Bayview, uh,  Bayfront Motors, and they ’re [sic] videos that 
I think clearly showed some very identifying 
characteristics  in terms of your general dress and more 
importantly I  think there was on e brief but clear shot of 
your hairdo which was very unique at that time.  
Other evidence includes that the chain  that was 
taken, the spear that was taken and an orange  T-shirt was 
found all wrapped together by the police,  and there was 
evidence to indicate  that you had an  orange shirt -- T-
shirt a few hours before where the  police observed you at a 
                         
14   Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence.   The
court, in determining the particular sentence to be 
imposed, shall consider:      
 
 (1)  
 The nature and circumstances of the offense and 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;  
      (2)
  The need for the sentence imposed:  
           (a)  To reflect the seriousness of the offense, 
to promote respect for law, and to provide just punishment 
for the offense;  
           (b)  To afford adequate deterrence to criminal  
conduct; 
           (c)  To protect the public from further crimes 
of the defendant; and 
           (d)  To provide the defendant with needed 
educational or vocational training, medical care, or other 
correctional treatment in the most effective manner;  
      (3)  The kinds of sentences available; and  
      (4)  The need to avoid unwarranted sentence  
disparities among defendants with similar records who have 
been found guilty of similar conduct.   
 
HRS § 706- 606 (2014).  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
22 
 bar where I think an  acquaintance got injured and you tried 
to help that  person. 
Now, all of this evidence I think when  you look at it 
separate and by itself wou ld probably  not have been enough 
to convict you of the offenses  but when taken together I 
think it paints a very clear  picture that you had knowledge 
of what was being done  or what had been done, and there was 
evidence that  tied you in beyond your own stat ements.  Your 
T-shirt.
  And the chain.  And the video.  
So again even in the face of this kind of  evidence 
you tell the probation officer, “I didn’t have anything to 
do with it, ” it really indicates to  me that you do not have 
the ability at this time to be  upfront and truthful.  
The reason I ’m pointing these things out  is among 
other things that I need to consider are also  
considerations in, as [the deputy prosecuting attorney ] 
pointed out,  Section 706- 621, and these are factors to be  
considered, uh, to consi der in imposing a term of  
probation.  
And one of them I think is whether or not  you can be 
rehabilitated on probation. To be  successful on probation 
requires I think two very  important commitments on your 
part and conduct on your  part.  One is to comply with the 
terms and conditions  of probation.  
Given your track record and your  disregard for the 
law -- and that ’s why I pointed it  out earlier -- I believe 
that there will be serious  violations of the terms of your 
probation if you were  granted probation becau se of your 
lack of ability to  comply with the terms, uh, with the law 
of this community.  How are you gonna comply with the terms 
of probation?  
Second was also very important is that  you be 
truthful with your probation officer and the  Court.  Part 
of probation is trying to rehabilitate  you to provide 
services and help, but if you ’re not truthful with the 
Court or your probation officer how  do we know what help 
you need? 
 
Carroll was sentenced to five years imprisonment.15  The 
circuit court denied Carro ll’s request for a stay pending 
appeal.   
C. Appeal to the ICA and and certiorari application  
 
 In his appeal to the ICA , Carroll presented three points of 
error: 
                         
15  A five-year term of imprisonment  was imposed for Count 1.  A one-year 
term of imprisonment was imposed for Count 3 to run concurrently with the  
five-year term.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
23 
 A. Carroll’s challenges to jurors for cause were 
erroneously denied and Carroll ’s right of 
peremptory 
challenges was violated.  
 
. . . .  
 
B. The trial court erroneously denied Carroll ’s Motion 
for Judgment of Acquittal.  
 
. . . .  
 
C. The trial court ’s sentence improperly 
penalized/punished Carroll for exercising his right to 
trial. 
 
The ICA rejected the  challenge s.   
As to the first point of error, the ICA concluded, inter 
alia, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Carroll’s challenges for cause of Juror 48 and the other juror.  
Carroll, SDO at 7.   The ICA observed that the media coverage 
referred to by both jurors was nearly a year old and consisted 
of mostly factual, non- prejudicial information, such as where 
the spear had been recovered, its condition, and “mention that a 
homeless man may have be en responsible for the incident.”   
Carroll, SDO at 6.  According to the ICA, such coverage was not 
a “barrage of inflammatory publicity immediately prior to trial 
amounting to a huge . . . wave of public passion,” and therefore 
did not rise to the level of presumed prejudice, quoting State 
v. Keohokapu, 127 Hawai ʻi 91, 103, 276 P.3d 660, 672 (2012).  
Carroll, SDO at 6-7 (ellipsis in original).  The ICA indicated 
Juror 48’s disclosure of her prior conversations with her 
children indicating that they were very upset that the statue 
had been damaged was not different from how most members of the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
24 
 public must have felt about the incident.  Carroll , SDO at 7. 
The ICA ruled that, therefore, none of the outside influences on 
Juror 48 rose to the level of presumed prejudice.   Id.  
As to the second point of error, the ICA ruled  that 
although the KSAA  officer  was not qualified as an expert in the 
field of fine arts or sculptures, expert testimony is not 
required to establish the value of stolen property.  Carroll, 
SDO at 9.  The ICA also ruled that evidence of the cost of 
reasonable repairs is an appropriate means to establish the 
amount of damages as an element of the crime of criminal 
property damage.  Id.  The ICA therefore ruled the KSAA 
officer’s testimony was sufficient to support Carroll’s 
conviction on Counts 1 and 2.  Id.   Further, as to Count 3, the 
ICA ruled the testimony of the Bayfront Motor’s manager 
regarding the purchase price of 
the stolen pipe and chain in 
2010 or 2011 was adequate ev
idence for the jury to determine 
whether the stolen property’s value exceeded $100  at the time of 
the offense.  Carroll, SDO at 10.  
As to the third point of error, the ICA ruled  the circuit 
court properly  considered the HRS § 706- 606 sentencing factors, 
arguments by counsel, and the nature of the offense before 
determining Carroll’s five -year imprisonment was an appropriate 
sentence.  Carroll, SDO at 11.  The ICA indicated the circuit 
court’s pre- trial dis cussion with Carroll regarding the possible ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
25 
 prison term for rejecting the State’s plea agreement was 
permissible.  Id.  The ICA ruled the record did not show the 
circuit court abused its discretion in sentencing Carroll.   Id. 
Carroll’s application for a writ of certiorari presents the 
same three issues he had presented to the ICA.   
III.  Standard s of Review 
A. Challenge to juror for cause 
 A trial court’s decision on a challenge for cause of 
a juror is reviewed for an abuse of  discretion.  An abuse 
of discretion occurs when the trial court “exceeds the 
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law 
or practice to the substantial detriment of a party 
litigant.”    
 
State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai ʻi 196, 203, 65 P.3d 143, 150 (2003) 
(citations omitted). 
B. Motion for judgment of a cquittal  
The standard to be applied by the trial court in 
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is 
whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the 
province of the [trier of fact], a reasonable mind might 
fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. An 
appellate court employs the same standard of review.   
 
State v. Keawe, 107 
Hawaiʻi 1, 4, 108 P.3d 304, 307 (2005) 
(alteration in original) (citations omitted).  
C. Sentencing  
In general, “[t]he applicable standard of review in 
sentencing matters is whether the court committed a plain and 
manifest abuse of discretion in its decision.”   State v. Putnam , ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
26 
 93 Hawaiʻi 362, 372, 3 P.3d 1239, 1249 (2000) (citations 
omitted). 
IV.  Discussion  
A. The ICA erred in ruling the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying Carroll’s challenge  for cause of 
Juror 48 , and Carroll’s right to exercise a peremptory 
challenge was impaired. 
 
 The first issue raised on certiorari is whether the ICA 
erred in “holding Carroll’s challenges to jurors for cause were 
not erroneously denied and Carroll’s right of peremptory 
challenges was not violated.”16  For the reasons discussed below, 
the first issue regarding the circuit court’s failure to dismiss 
Juror 48 for cause has merit, and it requires that Carroll’s 
conviction be vacated and the case remanded to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
 
Carroll contends the circuit court should have  granted his  
challenge to Juror 48 for cause and that he should not have had 
to use a peremptory challenge to dismiss Juror 48.  The ICA 
appears to have concluded that based on our existing case law, 
the circuit court adequately “rehabilitated” Juror 48 .  For the 
following reasons, the ICA err ed in concluding the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in denying Carroll’s challenge  to 
Juror 48 for cause.   
                         
16  Again, we need not address the challenge to juror number 35.  See  supra 
notes 2 and 8. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
27 
  “[T]he right to jury trial guarantees to the criminally 
accused a fair trial by a panel of impartial . . . jurors.”   
State v. Graham, 70 Haw. 627, 633, 780 P.2d 1103, 1107  (1989) 
(alteration in original) (quoting Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 
722 (1961) ).  “The theory of the law is that a  juror who has 
formed an opinion cannot b e impartial.”   Reynolds v. United 
States, 98 U.S. 145, 155 (1878 ).  However, a rule “ that the mere 
existence of any preconceived notion as to the guilt or 
innocence of an accused, without more, is sufficient to rebut 
the presumption of a prospective juror’ s impartiality [is] an 
impossible standard. ”  Graham, 70 Haw at 633, 780 P.2d at 1107 
(quoting Irvin , 366 U.S. at 723).  “The prevailing rule thus  
allows a person with preconceived notions about a case to serve 
as a juror if [they ] ‘can lay aside [their] impression or 
opinion and render a verdict based on the evidence presented in 
court.’”   Id. (quoting Irvin , 366 U.S. at 723).    
In Graham, the defendant challenged a juror who had made 
“ambiguous and at times contradictory responses [] to queries 
regarding her willingness to lay aside impressions or opinions 
formed from earlier media accounts.”  70 Haw. at 634, 780 P.2d 
at 1108.  This court noted that such contradictory responses are 
not unusual during voir dire examination, “particularly in a 
highly publicized criminal case.”  Id. (citation omitted).  T his 
court noted the juror’s “opinions could hardly be characterized ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
28 
 as ‘strong and deep i mpressions which close the mind against the 
testimony that may be offered in opposition to them. ’”  70 Haw. 
at 634-35, 780 P. 2d at 11 08 (citation omitted).  
In this case, t he ICA evaluated Carroll’s challenge to 
Juror 48 based only on standards applicable to jurors who have 
been exposed to pretrial publicity.  However, Juror 48’s 
exposure to the case was not limited to 
pretrial publicity,  
unlike the other prospective jurors.  Rather, Carroll challenged 
Juror 48 for cause based on the expressed and strong views of 
her family members regarding the case.    
In Iuli, we addressed a defendant’s challenge for cause of 
a juror whose father and uncles were police officers, and whose 
brother had just retired as a police chief.  101 Hawai ʻi at 200, 
65 P.3d at 147.  We noted that “when a juror is challenged on 
grounds that he has formed an opinion and cannot be impartial, 
the test is whether the nature and strength of the opinion are 
such as in law necessarily raise the presumption of partiality. ”
  
101 Hawaiʻ i at 204, 65 P.3d at 204 (internal brackets, quotation 
marks, and ellipses omitted) ( citing Graham , 70 Haw. at 633, 780 
P.2d at 1107) (quoting Reynolds , 98 U.S. at 156).  
Juror 48’s responses and comments indicate the nature and 
strength of her opinions were “such as in law necessarily raise 
the presumption of partiality.”  Juror 48’s daughter and so n-in-
law worked at a Hawaiian immersion school, which her three ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
29 
 grandchildren attended.  She had “another child who’s a Hawaiian 
activist.”  She indicated she had heard comments made by family 
members because her “children are very involved in Hawaiian 
activities and the statue is important to them.”  Juror 48 also 
explained that her children were very upset that  the statue was 
“desecrated” and stated that “[s]omething should b e done” as a 
result. 
Then, after the circuit court’s statement that “[not] too 
many people would disagree with those sentiments,” in response 
to the circuit court’s inquiry as to whether Juror 48 could “set 
that aside” and “presume [ Carroll] innocent until he is proven 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt,” Juror 48 stated that although 
she “would certainly do her best,” it was the opinion of her 
“husband and others” that “ if it does get to court there’s a lot 
of -- got to be a  lot of proof somewhere.”   When the circuit 
court again asked if Juror 48 could presume Car roll’s innocence, 
Juror 48 suggested she could not, responding that she understood 
she was saying she presumed Carroll guilty until he could prove 
his innocence.   
Juror 48’s responses and comments clearly raised the 
presumption of partiality, which was compounded by her 
statements asserting that Carroll needed to present “pretty good 
evidence” to prove his innocence .  Thus, Juror 48 expressed 
serious doubts about her ability to be fair and impartial.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
30 
 In Iuli, we indicated that i f a prospective juror expresses 
serious doubts about their  ability to be fair and impartial, 
they must be excused for cause, unless they ultimately assure 
the trial court that 
they will base  their decision solely upon 
the evidence.  101 Hawai ʻi at 205, 65 P.3d at 152 (citing State 
v. Ibanez, 31 P.3d 830, 832 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2001)).  After 
serious doubts were raised about Juror 48’s ability to be fair 
and impartial, the circuit court engaged in lengthy explanations 
of the need for jurors to set aside biases, that verdicts have 
to be based on the evidence presented in court, and of the need 
to set aside information she had gotten from newspapers or her 
family.  Juror 48 only gave mono- syllabic “yes” responses to 
each of the circuit court’s lengthy explanations.  When the 
circuit court then asked for her to give a percentage of her 
“degree of certainty or confidence” as to her ability to “do 
these things,”17 Juror 48 indicated “90 percent” confide nce.  
Yet, regarding the “90 percent,” in response to further voir 
dire questioning by defense counsel, Juror 48 stated she has “a 
lot of faith in the police,” and that she would “feel that if 
there was proof it’s got to be somewhat sustainable or why woul d 
it be proved?” 
                         
17  It is unclear whether “these things” referred only to the need to set 
aside information Juror 48 received from newspapers or her family, or also to 
the other topics within the circuit court’s lengthy explanations that drew 
her “yes” responses. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
31 
  As held in Griffin v. Commonwealth,  454 S.E.2d 363 (Va. 
Ct. App. 1995), a  trial judge may not rehabilitate an obviously 
biased juror by long, complex,  and leading questions, and a 
conviction in which such a juror participates must be set aside 
due to manifest error.  Also, trial and appellate courts “are 
not bound by a prospective juror ’s statement that [they] will be 
fair and impartial.”  State v. Kauhi , 86 Hawai ʻi 19
5, 199, 948 
P.2d 1036, 1040 (1997).  “Common sense and human experience tell 
us that anyone in [ Juror 48 ’s] position, ” with children who were 
deeply affected and upset by the crime of which Carrol was 
accused, “would be reluctant to return a verdict [of acquittal], 
no matter how great her belief that she could set aside her 
personal feelings. ”  Walls v. Kim , 549 S.E.2d 797, 800 (Ga. Ct. 
App. 2002).   
     In its attempt to rehabilitate Juror 48, the circuit court 
asked numerous leading questions.  M ere assent to leading 
inquiries “is not enough to rehabilitate a prospective jur or who 
has initially demonstrated a prejudice or partial 
predisposition.”  Griffin , 454 S.E.2d at 366 (citation omitted).   
Leading questions employed to rehabilitate a prospective juror 
after an unequivocal demonstration of bias are generally 
insufficient, as leading questions, particularly from the court, 
may often lead to unreliable answers.  This is because “[w]hen 
asked by the court, a suggestive question [may produce] an even *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
32 more unreliable response,” because of “[a ] juror's desire to 
‘say the right thing’ or to please the authoritative figure of 
the judge.”   McGill v. Commonwealth , 391 S.E.2d 597, 600 (Va. 
Ct. App. 1990).  Thus, in general, a juror should, in their own 
words, clarify or modify a declaration of bias in a fashion 
which demonstrates that any bias can be set aside.
  See Scott v.
Commonwealth, 708 S.E.2d 440 (Va. Ct. App. 2011).18 
Juror 48’s “presumption of partiality” was therefore not 
ultimately rectified based on her “yes” responses to the many 
leading questions asked by the circuit court.  Juror  48 did not,
in her own words,  clarify or modify her earlier indicated bias 
in a fashion demonstrating th at her bias could be set aside.   
Finally, 
[a] trial judge should err on the side of caution by
dismissing, rather than trying to rehabilitate, biased
jurors because, in reality, the judge is the only person in
a courtroom whose .  . . primary duty . . . is to ensure the
selection of a fair and impartial jury.
Walls, 549 S.E.2d at 799.  In this case, rather than err on the 
side of caution, the circuit court engaged in extensive 
explanations in an attempt to rehabilitate Juror 48.  “The trial 
judge, in seeking to balance the parties’ competing interests, 
18We recognize that it may be necessary for the trial court, during voir 
dire, to explain concepts such as the  presumption of innocence to prospective 
jurors, who are often unfamiliar with legal processes and terms, and confirm 
that prospective jurors understand what those concepts  mean.  Nothing in this 
opinion should be read to foreclose that practice.   We only caution that  
attempting to rehabilita te a juror who has expressed doubts about the ability 
to be fair and impartial  is best conducted via open -ended questions that 
allow a juror to show in their own words that they can remain impartial, and 
in this case, Juror 48 did not show that she could do so.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
33 must [, however,] be guided not only by the need for an  
impartial jury, but also by the principle that no party to any  
case has a right to have any particular person on their jury.”   
Id. (footnote omitted). 
In this case, the circuit court abused its discretion by 
denying Carroll’s challenge  for cause of Juror 48.  As Carroll 
exhausted his peremptory challenges, the circuit court’s failure
to excuse Juror 48 precluded Carroll from exercising one of his 
peremptory challenges on a different prospective juror.  
Carroll’s right  to exercise his peremptory challenge was 
therefore “denied or impaired ,” and his conviction must be 
vacated.  This case is therefore remanded to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  See 
Kauhi, 86 Hawai ʻi at 200, 948 P.2d at 1041.  
B. The ICA did not err in concluding the evidence, when taken
in the light most favorable to the State, was sufficient to
support a prima facie case, i.e., the value of the stolen
or damaged property.
The second issue raised on certiorari is whether the ICA
erred in holding the circuit court did not erroneously deny 
Carroll’s motion for judgment of acquittal.  Although the 
conviction must be vacated due to the circuit court’s abuse of 
discretion in denying Carroll’s  challenge for cause  of Juror 48, 
we must also address the second issue, as t he motion for 
judgment of acquittal was based on sufficiency of evidence and ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
34 
 the defense did not present any evidence after the motion for 
judgment of acquittal made at the close of the Sta te’s case.  
State v. Calaycay, 145 Hawai ʻi 186, 195 n.8, 449 P.3d 1184, 1193 
n.8 (2019).  The prohibition against double jeopardy therefore 
requires this court to address Carroll’s insufficiency of 
evidence claim.  State v. Davis, 133 Hawai ʻi 102, 120, 324  P.3d 
912, 930 (2014).  
 Carroll argues the evidence was insufficient to prove the 
necessary valuation thresholds of the various charges (more than 
$300 for theft in the second degree of the spear in Count 1, 
more than $1,500 for c
riminal property d amage in the second 
degree in Count 2 as t o the statu e, and more than $100.00 for 
theft in the third degree in Count 3  for the chain and pole).   
Carroll points out that the only evidence presented at trial as 
to the value or repair cost of the spear, and the repair costs 
of the statue, was testimony provided by the KSAA officer
.  
Carroll asserts the KSAA officer had no background in art or 
sculpture, had not work
ed as a general contractor since 2000, 
and had “guessed” at what material costs would be necessary to 
repair damaged portions of the statue.  Additionally, Carroll 
contends the purchase price of the chain and pole in 2010 or 
2011 is insufficient to support a finding as to their  2015 
value.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
35 
 Carroll’s arguments lack merit .  Viewing the evidence in 
the light most favorable to the State, there is substantial 
evidence to support the convic tions on all three counts .19 
 For purposes of all three charges, HRS § 708 -801 provides 
that “value means the market value of the property or services 
at the time and place of the offense, or the replacement cost if 
the market value of the property or services cannot be 
determined.”  HRS § 708 -801(1).    
With respect to Count 1 , regarding theft of the spear from 
the KSAA “of property the value of which exceeds $300,” t he KSAA 
officer testified the value of the taken portion of the spear 
was $2,500.  With respect to Count 2, damages to the statu e 
exceeding $1,500, the KSAA officer testified the repair cost was 
$3,500.  With respect to Count 3, regarding theft of the chain 
and pole from Bayfront Motors “of property the value of which 
exceeds $100,” the manager of Bayfront Motors, testified the 
purchase price of the chain and pole in 2010 or 2011 was roughly 
$135.   
This evidence, as further described in Section II.B.4 
above, when viewed in the light most favorable to the State, 
constitutes sufficient evidence for all counts.   
 
                         
19  Although Counts 1 and 2 were merged for sentencing, we must address 
both counts in the event there was insufficient evidence for one.  See s upra 
note 11. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
36 
 C. We need not address the sentencing issue.   
  
 Based on our rulings on the first two questions on 
certiorari, we need not address Carroll’s t hird question, 
whether the ICA erred in holding the circuit court’s sente nce 
did not improperly penalize or punish Carroll for exercising his 
right to trial.20   
V.  Conclusion 
For the reasons stated above , we vacate the ICA’s November 
27, 2018 judgment on appeal and the circuit court’s July 26, 
2016 judgment of conviction and sentence, and we remand this  
 
 
                         
20  We note that in Kamanaʻo, we held that “a sentencing court may not 
impose an enhanced sentence based on a defendant’s refusal to admit guilty 
with respect to an offense the conviction of which he intends to appeal.”  
103 Hawaiʻ i at 316, 82  P.3d at 402. 
 
 We also note that, after the sentencing in this case, in State v.
Sanney, 141 Hawaiʻ i 14, 404 P.3d 280 (2017), we indicated:    
 
First, absent unusual circumstances, a trial court should 
not provide a sentencing inclination unless plea 
negotiations have concluded or did not occur. Second, 
before giving a sentencing inclination, a trial court 
should consider whether the existing record concerning the 
defendant and the defendant's offenses  is adequate to make 
a reasoned and informed judgment as  to the appropriate 
penalty. Third, a trial court must follow the established 
principle forbidding a trial court from improperly 
considering the defendant's exercise of his constitutional 
right to a trial as an influential factor in determining 
the appropriate sentence. State v. Kamanao , 103 Hawai
ʻi 315,
321 n.8, 82 P.3d 401, 407 n.8 (2003)  (citations omitted). 
In other words, the sentencing inclination must be the same
punishment the court would be prepared to impose if the 
defendant were convicted after trial.   
 
 
141 Hawaiʻ i at 21, 404 P.3d at 287 (internal parentheses, ellipsis,  and 
quotation marks omitted).  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
37 
 case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent
 
with this opinion. 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna    
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
     
Haʻaheo M. 
Kahoʻohalahala ,
for respondent     
 
  
       
  
       
 
