                                                                 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-11-0000064 15-JAN-2014 09:43 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
PHILLIP DELEON, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
                                                               
SCWC-11-0000064
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000064; CR. NO. 09-1-1237)
 
JANUARY 15, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.,
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING
SEPARATELY, WITH WHOM POLLACK, J. JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
Phillip DeLeon was convicted of Murder in the Second
 
Degree, two counts of Carrying or Use of a Firearm in the
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1
Commission of a Separate Felony, and several other charges,  in
relation to the July 31, 2009 fatal shooting of Shawn Powell. 
The State alleged, inter alia, that DeLeon shot Powell and shot
 at Powell’s friend, Justin Gamboa, following an altercation at a
 nightclub. On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals reversed
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s
2 judgment as to
 
DeLeon’s conviction for one count of Carrying or Use of a Firearm
 in the Commission of a Felony, but affirmed DeLeon’s remaining
 convictions.
 
DeLeon raises two issues in his application for writ of 
certiorari. First, DeLeon argues that his trial attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel by committing errors that resulted in the circuit court precluding expert testimony regarding the presence of cocaine in Powell’s blood at the time of the shooting. Second, DeLeon argues that the circuit court’s jury instruction, modeled after the then-current Hawai' i Pattern 
Jury Instructions - Criminal (HAWJIC) 7.01 with regard to self-defense “failed to completely and properly instruct the jury on the law of self-defense.” 
We conclude that DeLeon has failed to establish that
 
1
 As explained infra, DeLeon was also convicted of two counts of
 
Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, and Ownership or Possession
Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person Indicted for Certain
Crimes.
 
2
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 
2
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
his trial counsel was ineffective with regard to the
 
admissibility of expert testimony on cocaine use. However, we
 further conclude that the circuit court plainly erred in
 excluding such testimony. The defense expert was prepared to
 testify that, to a reasonable degree of scientific probability,
 Powell was under the influence of cocaine at the time of the
 shooting. However, the circuit court erroneously required that
 the testimony be offered to a reasonable degree of scientific
 certainty, and accordingly excluded the testimony. This error
 was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and thus we vacate
 DeLeon’s convictions for second-degree murder (Count II) and
 Carrying or Use of a Firearm While Engaged in the Commission of a
 Separate Felony (Count IV), and remand for a new trial.
 
With regard to the jury instruction on self-defense, we
 
conclude that the circuit court’s instruction accurately stated
 the law and thus was not erroneous.
 
Accordingly, we vacate in part and affirm in part the
 
ICA’s judgment, and vacate the circuit court’s judgment of
 conviction and sentence on Counts II and IV, and remand to the
 circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion. 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
3
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
record on appeal.
 
A.	 Circuit Court proceedings
 
On August 5, 2009, DeLeon was indicted for: Attempted
 
Murder in the First Degree as to Powell and Gamboa (Count I);
 
Murder in the Second Degree as to Powell, in violation of HRS
 
3
§§ 707-701.5 and 706-656 (Count II) ; Attempted Murder in the
Second Degree as to Gamboa, in violation of HRS §§ 705-500, 707­
701.5, and 706-656 (Count III); Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21 as
 to Count II (Count IV); Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21 as
 to Count III (Count V); Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver in
 violation of HRS § 134-25 (Count VI); Reckless Endangering in the
 First Degree in violation of HRS § 707-713 (Count VII); and
 Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition
 by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes in violation of HRS
 §§ 134-7(b) and (h) (Count VIII).
 
1.	 State’s first motion in limine to exclude cocaine
 
evidence
 
Prior to trial, on August 24, 2010, the State filed a
 
3
 HRS § 707-701.5 (1993) provides in relevant part, “a person
 
commits the offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes the death of another person.”  HRS § 706-656(2) (Supp.
2010) provides in relevant part: “[P]ersons convicted of second degree
murder . . . shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with possibility of
parole.”
 
4
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion in limine, seeking, inter alia, to exclude any evidence
 
that Powell’s blood tested positive for .05 mg/L of cocaine on
 grounds that such evidence is inadmissible under Hawai' i Rules of 
4
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b)  and/or irrelevant and unfairly
prejudicial under HRE Rule 403.5
 
DeLeon opposed the State’s motion, arguing, inter alia,
 
that evidence that Powell’s blood tested positive for .05 mg/L of
 cocaine was “essential and probative to [DeLeon’s] self-defense
 assertion, and its exclusion would be extremely prejudicial to
 his claims[.]” Among the exhibits attached to DeLeon’s
 opposition was a letter from Dr. Clifford G. Wong, the Toxicology
 
4 HRE Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2010) provides:  
Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in
conformity therewith.  It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that
is of consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus
operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be
offered under this subsection shall provide reasonable
notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the
court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of
the date, location, and general nature of any such
evidence it intends to introduce at trial. 
5
 HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues,
or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence.
 
5
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Laboratory Director for Clinical Laboratories of Hawaii.  The
letter indicated that DeLeon’s defense counsel retained Dr. Wongas an expert in “DUI toxicology” and largely discussed Powell’sblood alcohol concentration.  With regard to Powell’s cocaineconcentration at the time of the shooting, Dr. Wong stated, inrelevant part:
The retrograde extrapolation of [] Powell’s
blood cocaine concentration to the time of the
shooting was performed to yield a probable range of0.06 to 0.08 mg/L.  The time of cocaine ingestion isunknown, so the actual cocaine dosage cannot bedetermined.  Information regarding total amountingested and the time of ingestion would be requiredto determine more accurately whether [] Powell has[sic] under the influence of cocaine at the time ofthe shooting. 
(Emphasis added).
At a hearing on the motion, the circuit court noted
that “[t]he issue right away that the Court [saw]” was Dr. Wong’s
statement that he would need more information.  Defense counselresponded:
I have since spoken to Dr. Wong.  This is what I
expect the proof to be:  First, respectfully, if you
would, keeping in mind we have a video of Powell goingtowards the defendant after at least three warningshots were fired and saying some things that will comeout that my client heard.  There’s loud screaming.  Wehave a witness from the manager of the Seoul Karaokethat heard two men screaming and then a shot or shots.
This is what Dr. Wong says -- and we’ve
subpoenaed [medical examiner Dr. William] Goodhue, whowas -- who did the toxicology and autopsy.  He saysthat the cocaine was of recent use, and all that meansis -- I mean, what does “recent” mean?  But with thedoctors and . . . Dr. Wong, “recent use” meansprobably within 24 hours because the cocaine was stillin the blood, it had not been completely absorbed. Dr. Wong says when . . . there’s a use of cocaine. . . it gives -- and he will testify, if he’s allowed
6       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to -- someone a sense of euphoria, and he defines
euphoria as invincibility, like you think you’re
Superman, which is consistent with why anyone would be
going after someone who’s firing three shots in the
air.  My client will testify that when he was grabbed
-- and he has seen people, and he will testify, on the
west side and when he was in California that he
 thought were high on something.  And when he was
 grabbed in the bar by the victim, his testimony will
be . . . this guy was drunk but there was something
wrong with this guy, he looked like he was high on
something[.]
And then we have the cocaine, the invincibility,
the Superman, and then there’s an explanation as to
why this guy is doing this.  Their witnesses say they
thought Powell was crazy that he would be going after
someone that just fired a gun in the air and just went
right after him.
6
[ ] So I don’t mind a [HRE Rule] 104 hearing   as
well, but it’s the euphoria that the cocaine gives. 
We have the toxicology report that says recent use. 
We have the testimony from the defendant who says this
guy looked like he was on something.  Now, if he says
that, then I think he has the right to say that.  If
 it’s not buttressed or corroborated by the medical
testimony and the expert testimony, it may look like
it’s simply a self-serving statement he wants to make
with no basis in fact. 
The DPA then argued for an HRE Rule 104 hearing:
 
[I]t’s the state’s understanding that cocaine does not
have a consistent effect on people like alcohol does. 
I think that this euphoric state can also be a
dysphoric state and I think that the witness would
testify to that, that he cannot describe the states
that people go through on a consistent basis,
. . . even knowing or being able to retro-extrapolate
the amount of cocaine that was in the blood at the
 time of the specific incident.
 
The circuit court ruled that it would conduct an HRE
 
Rule 104 hearing before allowing any testimony regarding Powell’s
 
cocaine level. The circuit court also informed defense counsel
 of its concerns:
 
6
 HRE Rule 104 governs preliminary questions regarding the
 
admissibility of evidence.  
7
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
THE COURT: . . . And just so, you know, counsel,
you’re very clear, it’s the Court’s concern that Dr.
Wong is not able to render an opinion that the victim
was under the influence at the time of the shooting,
and . . . doesn’t have enough information and that’s
what’s stated on the bottom of page 5 of his opinion,
and if that remains his opinion, then it’s not
admissible.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I’m clear with that.  Thank
 
you, Your Honor.  I’m clear as to the ruling.
 
THE COURT: Questionable relevancy and
materiality will just create undue confusion.
 
Shortly before opening statements, the circuit court
 
ruled, over the State’s objection, that defense counsel could
 
mention in his opening statement DeLeon’s perception that Powell
 may have been “high on something without making any
 specifications.” The circuit court stated that the substance or
 the amount could not be mentioned “until we have had subsequent
 [HRE] Rule 104 hearings.”
 
2. State’s Case-in-Chief
 
At trial, Jermaine Beaudoin testified that on the night
 
of July 30, 2009, he, along with Gamboa, and Powell went in
 
7
Gamboa’s Lincoln Navigator to Bar Seven  next to Ala Moana Center
at about 2:15 to 2:30 a.m. Beaudoin estimated that at this point
 
in the evening, he had consumed between nine to eleven alcoholic
 drinks, and that Powell had also been drinking but was not drunk. 
At some point, Beaudoin saw Powell talking to DeLeon, whom
 
7
 Other witnesses, as well as defense counsel and the DPA, referred
 
to this establishment as either Club 7 or Bar Seven.  For purposes of
consistency, this opinion will use the name “Bar Seven.”
 
8
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Beaudoin did not know at the time. Powell and DeLeon “got into a
 
little tussle.” Beaudoin intervened and DeLeon began yelling at
 him. In response, Beaudoin slapped DeLeon’s head with his open
 hand, knocking off DeLeon’s dark glasses. Beaudoin testified
 that he believed that DeLeon then left Bar Seven.
 
Beaudoin, Powell, and Gamboa then went in Gamboa’s
 
Navigator to Seoul Karaoke at about 3:45 a.m. Powell, Beaudoin,
 Gamboa and another acquaintance, Lane Akiona, walked in to Seoul
 Karaoke. The group was in Seoul Karaoke for about two to three
 minutes, was told that it was closing, and walked out to the car. 
According to Beaudoin, as the group walked to the car, someone
 yelled at them. Beaudoin stated that he “couldn’t make out what
 he was yelling at us, but he was yelling something at us. So we
 turned around and walked towards the defendant.” When Beaudoin
 came within about five to ten feet of DeLeon, Beaudoin “noticed
 that it was the same guy from Bar 7.” At that point, Powell was
 closest to DeLeon, and Beaudoin told Powell “that’s the guy from
 Bar 7[,]” and said “we go.” According to Beaudoin, when Powell
 reached DeLeon, Powell said, “Everything is cool, everything -­no more problem.” Beaudoin described Powell’s body language as
 “[r]egular, hands down. Everything is cool, misunderstanding or
 whatevers.” Beaudoin stated that Powell did not look mad and
 that Powell was trying to calm the situation. Powell was about
 
9
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
an “[a]rm’s length[]” from DeLeon when DeLeon then “[g]rab[bed]
 
his gun and started shooting.” DeLeon first shot into the ground
 two or three times, then shot Powell in the chest. At that
 point, Beaudoin was “turning around, trying to get away[,]” and
 then DeLeon shot “towards [Beaudoin] in the ground and [shot] at
 the vehicle.” Beaudoin stated that as DeLeon shot the gun,
 Beaudoin was on the ground and “felt the pebbles off the ground
 hitting [his] face.” Beaudoin testified that the shots were
 “[c]ontinuous[].”
 
On cross-examination, Beaudoin acknowledged that his
 
July 31, 2009 written statement describing the incident reflected
 that DeLeon’s first shots were in the air and that his written
 statement and his August 5, 2009 grand jury testimony did not
 mention that his group approached DeLeon because DeLeon yelled at
 them. Beaudoin stated that he tried to stop Powell by grabbing
 his shoulder and that he was able to stop him from walking. 
Beaudoin acknowledged that when asked before the grand jury how
 many feet away DeLeon was from Powell when DeLeon shot Powell in
 the chest, Beaudoin answered, “[n]ot feet” and “[n]ot even feet.”
 
Gamboa testified that at Bar Seven, he noticed Powell
 
talking to a Mexican man in dark glasses and that the
 conversation between them appeared friendly. At some point there
 was a commotion in the group, and Gamboa saw another
 
10
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
acquaintance, Joe Chang, “trying to break it up [and p]ulled kind
 
of [Powell] to the side.” Gamboa did not see anyone being hit
 but saw “this Mexican guy stumbling.” Gamboa saw the Mexican man
 walk towards the entrance of the club and did not see him in the
 club after that.
 
Later, the group left Bar Seven, and Gamboa drove
 
Beaudoin, Powell, and two other men whom Gamboa did not know to
 Seoul Karaoke. No one talked about the incident from Bar Seven,
 and Powell “seemed normal[]” and “[n]othing bothered him.” 
Gamboa further testified that he, Powell, Beaudoin,
 
Lane, and two other men went to Seoul Karaoke but were told it
 was closed and left. Gamboa walked into the parking lot to his
 car, with the other men “kind of trailing behind” him. Gamboa
 opened his car door, and then heard someone yelling aggressively,
 “You want to mess with me? You want to hit me?” Gamboa then
 heard someone say, “What, the guy from Sevens.” Gamboa turned
 around to see who was yelling and walked in the direction of the
 yelling. Gamboa saw “him coming towards us. Then he shot three
 rounds into the ground. . . . [T]hen I seen him shoot [Powell].” 
Gamboa estimated that one to two seconds passed between when he
 heard the man yelling and when he fired the first three shots
 into the ground, and stated that it was another one to two
 seconds between the first three shots and the shot to Powell. 
11
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Gamboa stated that Powell and the man had been “kind of talking
 
towards each other,” but that Gamboa could not hear what they
 were saying. Gamboa stated that he saw the man point the gun
 towards Powell’s chest and that Powell was raising his hands with
 his palms facing forward when the man shot Powell. About one to
 two seconds after shooting Powell, the man shot toward Gamboa. 
Gamboa heard his car windshield “blowing up[,]” and ran to the
 building next door. Gamboa stated that Powell was about one to
 two feet away from the shooter when he was shot. Gamboa
 identified the shooter in court as DeLeon.
 
On cross-examination, Gamboa acknowledged that he told
 
police that DeLeon’s car pulled up as the group left Seoul
 Karaoke, and Powell “veered off.” Gamboa stated that he did not
 drink the night of the incident.
 
Lane Akiona testified that as he was leaving Seoul
 
Karaoke with Powell, Beaudoin and Gamboa, a male Lane did not
 know approached them. Lane did not know about the incident with
 DeLeon at Bar Seven. According to Lane, the male said, “What’s
 up?” When asked how the male was acting, Lane answered: “Like
 what’s up now, like, then [Powell] raised his hands approaching
 him and the guy reached behind his back and he just -- it
 happened so fast. He just started firing shots and I ducked out
 of the way and tried to get out of the line of fire.” Lane
 
12
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
estimated it was about 15 to 20 seconds between when the male
 
said, “what’s up” to when he started shooting. Lane stated that
 before Powell was shot, Powell was “[j]ust standing there[.]” 
Lane stated that he saw the shooter point directly to Powell’s
 chest when the shooter was about three feet from Powell. Lane
 identified the shooter in court as DeLeon.
 
Daekum Kim, who worked at Seoul Karaoke at the time of
 
the incident, stated that at about 4:00 a.m. on July 31, 2009, he
 told a group of about four to five drunk men who entered that
 Seoul Karaoke would be closing. The men left, and Kim heard
 “someone fight” outside. Kim could not see who was outside, but
 “[t]heir voice was loud and the yelling and they say bad words.” 
Kim then heard a single gun shot, then “after two, three seconds,
 two, three times more.” Kim called the police and did not go
 outside until after the police arrived.
 
Liana Cuarisma, DeLeon’s girlfriend at the time of the
 
incident, testified that on July 31, 2009, at about 3:50 a.m.,
 
8
DeLeon called her and said, “I just got fucking mobbed”  at Bar
Seven. Cuarisma stated that DeLeon sounded upset and was
 “[h]uffing and puffing” over the phone. Later that day, during
 lunchtime, DeLeon told Cuarisma over the phone that he had to
 
8
 Cuarisma initially testified that DeLeon told her that he had just
 
gotten “mugged.”
 
13
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
return to Washington, where he was from, to see his mother in the
 
hospital.9 Later that evening, Cuarisma dropped DeLeon off at
 
the airport.
 
Taro Nakamura, a Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 
homicide detective, testified that at some point he received an
 anonymous phone call from a male who said that Powell had gotten
 into an argument with someone at Bar Seven, and described the
 person as a tall Mexican male with the name of Jose Lion or
 Deleon.
10 Nakamura ran background checks for “combinations of
 
Jose, Jesus, Lion, Deleon,” found an entry and photograph for
 DeLeon, and assembled a photographic lineup. Beaudoin and Gamboa
 picked out DeLeon from the photographic lineup, but Lane was not
 able to identify a suspect. Nakamura learned that DeLeon had
 purchased an airplane ticket, and sent officers to the airport.
11
 
HPD criminalist Kaleo Kaluhiokalani testified as an
 
expert in the field of gunshot residue analysis and stated that
 gunshot residue kit samples taken from Powell’s hands showed
 particles “highly specific to gunshot residue.” Kaluhiokalani
 
9
 Cuarisma, whom the State treated as a hostile witness, later
 
acknowledged on direct examination that it was possible, although she did not
remember, that between 4:08 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. on July 31, 2009 she talked to
DeLeon at least 40 times.
 
10
 It appears that the anonymous call occurred on July 31, 2009.
 
11
 Additional witnesses testified about DeLeon’s check-in and arrest
 
at the airport on the evening of July 31, 2009.
 
14
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated that this finding could indicate that Powell discharged a
 
gun, handled the gun or another object contaminated with gunshot
 residue, or was near a firearm when it was discharged, and that
 if a person is shot in the chest and touches the wound, gunshot
 residue can be transferred to the person’s hands.
 
Acting chief medical examiner Dr. William Goodhue,
 
testifying as an expert in the field of forensic pathology,
 stated that he performed an autopsy on Powell on July 31, 2009
 and concluded that Powell’s cause of death was “massive blood
 loss due to injury to his heart as a result of a gunshot wound to
 the chest.” On cross-examination, Dr. Goodhue stated that the
 gunshot to Powell was not a contact wound in which the barrel of
 the gun was placed against the body. Dr. Goodhue stated that he
 could not conclude how far away the gun was from Powell at the
 time it was fired because he did not receive Powell’s shirt to
 examine.
 
After the State rested,
12 DeLeon moved for judgment of
 
acquittal as to all charges. The circuit court denied the
 motion.
 
3.	 HRE Rule 104 hearing regarding cocaine evidence and
circuit court ruling
 
On September 22, 2010, the day after resting its case­
12
 Additional witnesses testified for the State; however, their
 
testimony is not relevant to the issues before this court.
 
15
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in-chief, the State filed Motion in Limine No. 2, seeking to
 
exclude from trial (1) any evidence of any opinion by Dr. Wong
 regarding the behavioral effects of cocaine and/or alcohol
 combination, (2) any testimony about how Powell might have
 reacted to the cocaine and/or alcohol in his system, and (3) Dr.
 Wong’s opinion in his September 7, 2010 letter
13 that:
 
Given[] the co-presence of significant levels of
cocaine and alcohol in the decedent, my opinion is
that [] Powell was under the influence of those two
drugs at the time of the shooting, and accordingly,
made a fatal misjudgment in his attempt to accost the
defendant, [] Deleon, even after warning shots were
fired.
 
The State argued that allowing such evidence would
 
violate HRE Rule 702,14 stating: “Dr. [] Wong cannot testify to
 
[] Powell’s state of mind because he does not have enough
 
information. Additionally, it is an issue of fact for the jury
 to decide whether there was an ‘attempt to accost the defendant.’ 
Lastly, the opinion is outside Dr. Wong’s expertise.” The State
 also argued that Dr. Wong’s “opinion is outweighed by the danger
 
13 Dr. Wong’s September 7, 2010 letter is not included in the record 
on appeal. 
14 HRE Rule 702 (1993) provides: 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized
knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understandthe evidence or to determine a fact in issue, awitness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill,experience, training, or education may testify theretoin the form of an opinion or otherwise. In determining the issue of assistance to the trier offact, the court may consider the trustworthiness andvalidity of the scientific technique or mode ofanalysis employed by the proffered expert. 
16
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, and misleading the
 
jury,” warranting its exclusion pursuant to HRE Rule 403.
 
The circuit court held an HRE Rule 104 hearing the same
 
day. At the hearing, Dr. Wong testified that he is a forensic
 
toxicologist and the toxicology lab director at Clinical
 
Laboratories of Hawaii’s toxicology department. Dr. Wong
 explained that cocaine is a “central nervous system stimulant
 . . . [that] mimics the activity of adrenaline.” Its effect
 increases the heart rate and dilates blood vessels, “engorg[ing]
 the muscles of the body to fight or flight[]” – that is, “when a
 person is confronted with danger or something that is opposing
 them, they would develop the ability to fight off that threat or
 to run away.” Dr. Wong agreed that he could say “to a reasonable
 scientific probability that based on [his] training and
 experience, . . . the ingestion of cocaine can affect someone’s
 behavior[.]”
 
With respect to the instant case, Dr. Wong testified
 
that he reviewed some parts of the police report, the testimony
 of the witnesses before the grand jury, witness statements to the
 police officers “investigating right after” the shooting, the
 medical examiner’s report, and a security camera video recording
 of the shooting. Dr. Wong noted that Dr. Goodhue’s autopsy
 report indicated the finding of cocaine and benzoylecgonine, a
 
17
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
metabolite of cocaine, in Powell’s blood. According to the
 
medical examiner’s laboratory report on Powell, “the alcohol was
 extremely high.” A toxicology report indicated the presence of
 .05 milligrams per liter of cocaine and .39 milligrams per liter
 of benzoylecgonine. Dr. Wong stated that the proportion of
 benzoylecgonine to cocaine “generally means that the cocaine
 . . . was perhaps consumed at a . . . much earlier time frame,
 say beyond four or five hours.” Dr. Wong noted that Dr.
 Goodhue’s autopsy report stated that the cocaine was taken “in
 close proximity to the death”; Dr. Wong stated that given the
 level of cocaine detected, it was taken within the previous 24
 hours. Dr. Wong also testified that he called the laboratory
 that performed the toxicology analysis on Powell’s blood, and
 learned that the laboratory also found cocaethylene, which
 “indicates a usage of cocaine while there was still alcohol
 present in the body.”
 
Defense counsel asked Dr. Wong if he could say to a
 
“reasonable scientific probability” that if cocaine is in the
 blood, it would have an effect on the user’s behavior, to which
 Dr. Wong responded: “I would say not knowing his medical
 history, his experience with cocaine, I would say just if I would
 assume an average user or a naive user, yes, we would normally
 see the effects of cocaine.”
 
18
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Dr. Wong also performed a retrograde extrapolation for
 
alcohol and cocaine, in which he calculated the concentrations of
 
alcohol and cocaine in Powell’s body at the time of the shooting. 
Dr. Wong stated that Powell’s blood alcohol at the time of the
 
shooting was 0.18.15
 
Dr. Wong stated that the combined effects of cocaine
 
and alcohol “generally are additive, especially in the effects of
 judgment.” The following exchange occurred between defense
 counsel and Dr. Wong:
 
Q. Does it help you at all in the video in
assessing as you may look at a police report a field
sobriety test, does this video help you at all in
being able to give an opinion based on a reasonable
scientific probability as to what the effects first of
all with the alcohol and then -- strike the alcohol,
the effects of the cocaine?
 
A. Just that everyone else there at that party
had drinks as well as he.  When they saw or appeared
to have seen a gun, they all pretty much stayed away
from the defendant, whereas the victim did not.  Now,
 what is the commonality of all of them?  They had
 alcohol.  What was the -- at least all we know at this
 time the only difference between [] Powell and the
others in his party was that we found cocaine in him,
and so by inference perhaps it was that cocaine that
gave him that extra shove to confront the individual.
 
Q. Can you say to a reasonable scientific
probability the fact that there was cocaine found in
his bloodstream, the proximity of the cocaine, that it
affected his judgment and his critical judgment or his
behavior, just the cocaine alone?
 
A. Well, again, just based on cocaine
 
15
 Although Dr. Wong did not state at the hearing the concentration
 
of cocaine in Powell’s blood at the time of the shooting, Dr. Wong’s August 9,
2010 letter that defense counsel submitted to the circuit court on September
3, 2010 indicated that Powell’s blood cocaine concentration at the time of the
shooting was in a “probable range of 0.06 to 0.08 mg/L.”
 
19
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concentrations that is something I can’t give you a
definite answer  but if this individual was approaching
staring down the barrel of a gun, where most normal
people would shy away or perhaps remove themselves
from, I would say that perhaps cocaine, yes, by a
probability would have been a factor in having him
confront this individual even with a gun being
presented towards him.
 
. . . . 
Q. . . . Are you satisfied that the ingestion
of cocaine in the proximity to the death had an impact
on Powell’s behavior?
 
A. With reasonable probability I would say yes.
 
Q. To a reasonable medical scientific
 
probability?
 
A. Yes.
 
(Emphases added).
 
On cross-examination, the State questioned Dr. Wong
 
about what he could testify to regarding the effect of cocaine on
 
Powell:
 
Q. You know, you just used words like perhaps
the cocaine could or would have been a factor in []
Powell’s judgment; right?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you cannot testify today in court under
oath that to a reasonable degree of medical certainty
[] Powell was under the influence of cocaine at the
time of the shooting?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Excuse me, I don’t
mean to interrupt you, . . . I’m not so sure the
standard is medical certainty, I think it’s
probability but either way.
 
THE WITNESS:  Yes.
 
BY [THE STATE]:
 
Q. Dr. Wong, you’re uncomfortable with saying
that; isn’t that true?
 
A. Well, normally in court in a criminal case I
 
20
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
usually would make an opinion based on beyond a
reasonable doubt, okay?  In this case it’s clearly
it’s not beyond a reasonable doubt whether or not he
was or not or was not under the influence of cocaine.
 I can only say with reasonable probability because of
the concentration that was found, extrapolated
concentration that was found in the blood, as well as
his behavior, his apparent behavior in the camera of
moving towards the defendant –
 
. . . . 
Q. Can you testify to a reasonable medical
degree of certainty that [] Powell was under the
influence of cocaine at the time of the shooting?
 
A. I can only say by probability.
 
Q. Yes or no, Doctor.
 
A. High probability, that’s all I can say.
 
Q. High probability, not to a reasonable degree
of medical certainty ?
 
A. Not beyond a reasonable -­
THE COURT: Scientific certainty. 
 
BY [T
HE STATE]:
 
Q. Scientific certainty.   To a reasonable
 
degree of scientific certainty, can you testify that
[] Powell was under the influence of cocaine at the
time of the shooting?
 
A. No.
 
Q. And the reason why you can’t is because you
don’t know the background of [] Powell?
 
A. Yes.
 
. . .
 . 
Q. . . . [Y]ou cannot testify to a reasonable
degree of scientific study [sic] because you state you
need more information?
 
A. Yes, that’s correct.
 
Q. From your August 9 letter to your September
7 letter you say you need more information; correct?
 
A. Yes.
 
21
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q. Now, you need to know how the cocaine was
ingested, was it smoked, was it snorted, was it
intravenous?
 
A. No, that aspect was not important. 
Primarily the important factors were did the
individual show signs of intoxication, and we have no
evidence other than any anecdotal evidence from the
other witnesses.  The camera was too far away to
really determine any behaviors of tremors or antsyness
of the individual.   Of course, you cannot determine
the pupil dilation, so I can’t use any other evidence
to determine whether or not he was definitely under
the influence of cocaine.
 
(Emphases added).
 
Dr. Wong acknowledged that in his September 7, 2010
 
letter, he cited to two references, including a “McCance-Katz”
 
article – which studied the effects of cocaine and alcohol – but
 did not read that article. Dr. Wong stated that he relied
 primarily on an article by Dr. Eisenschmidt, and that he cited
 the McCance-Katz study because it was noted in the Dr.
 Eisenschmidt article.
 
Dr. Wong acknowledged that between his August 9, 2010
 
letter and his September 7, 2010 letter, he never received
 information regarding the total amount of cocaine Powell ingested
 and when it was ingested, which would be required to determine
 more accurately whether Powell was under the influence of cocaine
 at the time of the shooting. Dr. Wong also stated that he would
 need to know Powell’s tolerance. When asked whether he received
 the information he requested, Dr. Wong responded: “Not all the
 information, no, that I needed. And I did say I could not make
 
22
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that statement that with reasonable -- with medical certainty. I
 
said I could not make that determination that he was under the
 influence of cocaine.”
 
The circuit court also examined Dr. Wong:
 
Q. Dr. Wong, this last paragraph that [defense
counsel] was just asking you about [in Dr. Wong’s
supplemental report dated September 7, 2010], the
highly intoxicated by alcohol and cocaine, does the
highly intoxicated modify both?  I mean, was he highly
intoxicated by cocaine at the time?
 
A. The highly intoxication would refer to the
 
alcohol.
 
Q. Okay.  And as the Court understands your
first letter, you were not able to determine whether
he was under the influence of the cocaine at the -­
A. Well, I mention it was hard to make a
definitive judgment on his impairment or the influence
by cocaine unless there is more information given.
 
Q. And the additional information between
 
August and September was your viewing of the video?
 
A. Yes, and the finding about the cocaethylene
 
as well.
 
Q. And the effect of that was just to indicate
that the cocaine and alcohol had been taken at the
 same time?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. But did not give any additional information
about amount, time of ingestion?
 
A. That, yes, we don’t know but the fact that
they were both then coincident in the blood would give
a very high probable of circumstance of intoxication
by both, okay? [sic] I don’t have any behavioral clues
other than perhaps what may be seen in the film of the
man approaching the suspect with the -- the defendant
with the -- I guess in their confrontation.  It’s
 difficult to see at what point the gun is brandished.
You can’t really pick that out in the film.  So my
point is that if a person points a gun at you it
normally would give the person pause.  I would not run
 up to him face-to-face if I see a gun in his hand.
 
23
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q. The chart that was attached to your August
letter with regard to the level of alcohol
intoxication and the behavior, is there a similar
chart for cocaine?
 
A. No, for any of the drugs.  That’s the reason
 
16
 [ ] why the DRE program was established because there
is no definitive way you can give a level of drug with
a level of impairment.  Some drugs exert effects even
as the levels are dropping, so they don’t always
correlate increase level increase intoxication either
 drugs as it does in alcohol. [Sic]
 
Following the questioning of Dr. Wong, defense counsel 
argued that Dr. Wong should be allowed to testify about the
 
behavioral effects of cocaine:
 
. . . I think really it’s a weight issue, if anything,
based on whether [the jury] believe[s] that was a
factor.  It’s . . . impossible for any expert to be
present unless it’s a controlled test to watch
somebody ingest any drug, cocaine included, and that’s
why we have toxicology reports and that’s why we have
experts, forensic toxicologists, who testify regarding
the accepted effects, behavioral effects, based on
studies that are done.  And when [the DPA] asked [Dr.
Wong] whether or not there’s anything in his
references or CV, it is there.  He has testified
 before and been admitted as an expert for the effects.
It’s the combined effects.  And I think he certainly
shouldn’t be precluded and the jury should not be
misled as to the condition of [] Powell.  I think his
 testimony is an aid to the trier of fact.  I think
 there’s a sufficient basis based on his credentials,
based on the toxicology report, based on his
extrapolation, and if it does enhance the effects of
alcohol they should know that.  And I think it would
 be properly admitted.  I think it would be error to
 exclude it. . . . 
(Emphasis added).
 
The circuit court allowed Dr. Wong’s testimony as to
 
16
 Dr. Wong described the DRE program as a certification program that
 
trains officers to recognize impairment due to drugs rather than alcohol.
 
24
    
17
 the presence of cocaine.[ ]
The Court, in reviewing Dr. Wong’s initial
letter, the subsequent September letter, as well as
the testimony presented today, the Court thinks that
it does not have sufficient reliability to present the
issue before the jury and is going to cause confusion.
The Court does note that in the [August] letter he
indicated that he was not able to render an opinion
with respect to whether [] Powell was under the
influence of cocaine at the time of the shooting
without additional information.  He received some
 additional information between August and September,
not the specific information that he indicated that he
would need to do that, and he further indicated today
that he could not make the -- render an opinion to a
reasonable degree of scientific certainty that []
Powell was under the influence of cocaine at the time
 of his -- at the time of the shooting and therefore to
allow him to opine about influence of both substances
and the effect on the behavior of the deceased would
 be speculative.  So Court precludes that use.
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the effects of alcohol, but excluded his testimony regarding
 
cocaine:
 
Viewing the evidence that has been presented
with respect to this issue, the Court affirms its
prior ruling on the motion in limine, is going to
preclude the evidence and testimony with respect to
. . . . 
[Dr. 
Wong] could not give an opinion in August
and then he did render that opinion in the September
7th letter, but the Court is not allowing that opinion
based on the testimony presented this morning.  And he
 did indicate this morning that he cannot render that
opinion to a reasonable degree of scientific
certainty.
But just to clarify . . . , he will be able to
testi
fy as to the blood alcohol level at the time of
the shooting and what that level blood alcohol may
indicate in terms of an individual’s behavior.  The
 Court does find he’s qualified in that area.
 
(Emphases added).
 
4. Defense’s Case-in-Chief
 
17
 It is unclear from the record whether the circuit court actually
 
made a prior ruling on this issue.  A transcript of the September 3, 2010
hearing indicates that the circuit court’s prior ruling was that an HRE Rule
104 hearing would be held prior to any admission of the cocaine evidence.  
Minutes of the September 3, 2010 hearing state:  “State and Deft’s motions in
 limine:  granted in part, reserved in part, and Rule 104 hearings to be held.”
 
25
  
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Chang testified that he met DeLeon through a mutual
 
friend and saw DeLeon about four or five times at various bars
 
before the night of the incident. DeLeon appeared to be at Bar
 Seven alone and was drinking. At some point, DeLeon wound up
 talking with Powell. Chang, who considered Powell a friend,
 testified that Powell had his arm around DeLeon “like how you
 would hold like a pal or a buddy[,]” but Chang could not hear
 what Powell was saying to DeLeon. Beaudoin then told Chang he
 wanted to “false crack the Mexican guy[,]” and Chang told
 Beaudoin, “The guy is not doing anything wrong. Leave him alone. 
They’re all right.” Chang turned to talk to someone else, and
 then heard a slap. DeLeon started yelling at Beaudoin, “[W]hat
 the hell are you doing?” Chang “stopped the confrontation[,]”
 picked up DeLeon’s glasses from the floor, returned them, and
 told DeLeon, “You need to get the hell out of here before
 something worse happens to you[,]” because “they have all their
 friends[.]” DeLeon then left the club. About half an hour
 later, Chang left the club and went to Seoul Karaoke, where he
 saw Powell and Powell’s group. Chang left Seoul Karaoke before
 Powell was shot.
 
Dr. Wong was qualified as an expert witness in the
 
field of forensic toxicology, and testified that he reviewed the
 Sorabol security video, Powell’s autopsy report, and a toxicology
 
26
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
report of Powell’s blood alcohol content. Dr. Wong stated that
 
Powell was found to have a blood alcohol level of 0.171, which
 indicates “a high degree of alcohol intoxication.” Dr. Wong
 further stated that he calculated by retrograde extrapolation
 that Powell’s blood alcohol level was .181 at the time of the
 shooting. Dr. Wong then consulted the “Dubowski table”
18 in
 
which ranges of blood alcohol concentrations are assigned various
 stages of alcoholic influence and clinical signs and symptoms. 
According to the Dubowski table, Powell’s blood alcohol level
 bordered between the alcoholic influence categories of confusion
 and excitement. Dr. Wong also testified that the category of
 euphoria, which included symptoms of being “supremely
 overconfident[,]” was also applicable. Dr. Wong explained that
 the category of “excitement” includes symptoms of emotional
 instability and impairment of the perception of distance,
 objects, and danger. Dr. Wong explained the category of
 confusion as
 
not being situationally aware of where you are in a
given time. . . . [I]f you have mental confusions you
may not be aware of these different options . . . that
were available to you and you may take other options
that are perhaps more dangerous.  It also is a means
 of interpretation of what the situation is.  If a
 person is in conversation or in actions that may be
misinterpreted as something else.
. . .
 . 
[I]f a person is angry at an individual, alcohol will
 
18
 Dr. Wong testified that the table was constructed by Dr. Kurt
 
Dubowski, a “world expert on alcohol.”
 
27
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
supplement and will fuel that anger to a higher level,
in some cases rage, uncontrollable rage.
 
After the defense rested,19 DeLeon moved for judgment
 
of acquittal, which the circuit court denied.
 
5. Jury instruction on self-defense
 
The circuit court provided the jury an instruction
 
modeled after HAWJIC 7.01 with regard to self-defense. The
 
instruction provided the following:
 
Justifiable use of force, commonly known as
self-defense, is a defense to the charge of Attempted
Murder in the First Degree in Count I and Murder in
the Second Degree in Count II and the included offense
in Count II of Manslaughter.  The burden is on the
 Prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
the force used by the defendant was not justifiable.  
If the Prosecution does not meet its burden, then you
must find the defendant not guilty.
The use of force upon or toward another person
is justified when a person reasonably believes that
such force is immediately necessary to protect himself
on the present occasion against the use of unlawful
force by the other person.  The reasonableness of the
 defendant’s belief that the use of such protective
force was immediately necessary shall be determined
from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the
defendant’s position under the circumstances of which
the defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably
believed them to be.
 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another
person is justified when a person using such force
reasonably believes that deadly force is immediately
necessary to protect himself on the present occasion
against death or serious bodily injury. The
 reasonableness of the defendant’s belief that the use
 of such protective force was immediately necessary
shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the defendant’s position under the
circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as
 
19
 DeLeon chose not to testify.  Additional witnesses testified for
 
the defense; however, their testimony is not relevant to the issues before
this court.  
28
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
The use of deadly force is not justifiable if
the d
efendant, with the intent of causing death or
serious bodily injury, provoked the use of force
against himself in the same encounter or if the
defendant knows that he can avoid the necessity of
using such force with complete safety by retreating.
“Force” means any bodily impact, restraint, or
confinement or the threat thereof.
 
“Unlawful force” means force which is used
 
without the consent of the person against whom it is
directed and the use of which would constitute an
 unjustifiable use of force or deadly force.
“Deadly force” means force which the actor uses
with the intent of causing, or which he knows to
create a substantial risk of causing, death or serious
bodily injury.
Intentionally firing a firearm in the direction
of another person or in the direction which the person
is believed to be constitutes deadly force.
A threat to cause death or serious bodily injury
by the production of a weapon or otherwise, so long as
the actor’s intent is limited to creating an
apprehension that he will use deadly force if
necessary, does not constitute deadly force.
“Bodily injury” means physical pain, illness, or
any impairment of physical condition.
“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury
which creates a substantial risk of death or which
 causes serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.
If and only if you find that the defendant was
reckless in having a belief that he was justified in
using self-protective force against another person, or
that the defendant was reckless in acquiring or
failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which was
material to the justifiability of his use of force
against the other person, then the use of such
self-protective force is unavailable as a defense to
the offense of Manslaughter.
 
The defense did not object to the court’s self-defense
 
instruction.
 
6. Closing arguments
 
In its closing argument, the State described DeLeon as
 
a person with various VIP cards to bars and nightclubs and “who
 
thinks he’s somebody, he’s a baller, he’s a VIP.” The DPA stated
 
29
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that that image was “crushed” on the night of the incident at Bar
 
Seven, when Beaudoin slapped him, and DeLeon was told to “get the
 hell out of here[,]” leaving DeLeon to “do the walk of shame in
 front of all these guys[.]” The DPA stated that DeLeon,
 humiliated, “waited to see which car they got into, he waited to
 see where they would go, and he waited for his opportunity.”
 
The DPA stated that DeLeon arrived at Seoul Karaoke two
 
minutes after Powell’s group walked into Seoul Karaoke – “one
 hour, seven minutes, and 55 seconds after the slap.” The DPA
 stated that DeLeon waited “in the dark, and watch[ed] as [Powell]
 and his friends walk from Seoul directly to the Navigator[.]” 
DeLeon then “shout[ed] out to them, You wanna mess with me? You
 wanna hit me? What’s up now? He’s trying to, and he does, get
 the attention of [Powell] and his friends.” The DPA described
 what occurred next as follows:
 
So at 04:09:07 A.M. you see [Powell] turn and walk
towards that shouting.  They walk towards him, . . .
listening to this shouting and screaming, wondering
what’s going on, when they finally realize, when they
get closer, Oh, it’s the guy from [Bar Seven].  So
 [Beaudoin] tells him, Nah, let’s just go.  But
 [Powell] tells him, No, brah, everything’s cool.  He
 has his hands up.  Everything’s cool.  It doesn’t stop
 the defendant.  First three shots. . . .
 
Meanwhile, [Powell] is still there, hands up, I
surrender; It’s okay; Everything’s cool.  He doesn’t
 kick him; he doesn’t punch him; he doesn’t slap him;
he doesn’t choke him; he doesn’t lunge at him; he
doesn’t threaten him.  But it doesn’t matter.  Shot
 four, less than three feet away, Defendant points,
aims, and shoots.  [Powell] crumbles.  And at this
 
point, he doesn’t lower the gun to shoot to his leg;
he doesn’t raise the gun to shoot to his shoulder or
his foot. Straight to the heart.
 
30
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The DPA also argued that self-defense did not apply to
 
DeLeon:
 
You cannot create your own thing, walk up to it, and
then claim self-defense.  He calls them over.  He
 says, Come over here; Look what I gotta show you. 
Shawn walks up with his hands.  When he realizes who
 it is, Everything’s cool, brah.  You know, nothing. 
I’m in surrender, palms face up.  He doesn’t hit him;
he doesn’t punch him; he doesn’t kick him; he doesn’t
threaten him.
 
In his closing argument, defense counsel stated that
 
DeLeon did not want to shoot anyone but ended up shooting Powell
 
in self-defense. Defense counsel questioned the State’s theory
 that DeLeon was seeking revenge, noting that DeLeon did not shoot
 Beaudoin, who slapped him at Bar Seven, but shot Powell, “the guy
 that was on him, that walked across and ignored the warning
 shots, ignored his friend who tried to grab him, and he was on
 him.”
 
[T]here’s a gun at [DeLeon’s] side, and they start
coming.  They’re screaming and yelling.  And then
 there’s finally, when he’s five feet away, a gunshot
in the air.  [Powell’s] friends are trying to pull him
 off.  He’s less than a foot away.  His hands, I
 suggest, are out and he shot once.  Was there a
 reasonable belief that he was going to sustain serious
bodily injury?  Is there anyone that can possibly
imagine some crazy guy, drunk, coming at you and you
firing a warning shot?  If he wants to shoot somebody,
what's he firing warning shots about?  Why does he
then shoot in the ground to keep the other guys back?
He wants to kill somebody?  He thought about it?  How
 could anyone right-thinking not believe that he has a
reasonable belief he’s going to suffer serious bodily
injury when the guy is now on him after he’s fired a
warning shot?  And you’ll see [DeLeon] steps out of
 the screen.  He steps back.  But [Powell is] on him.
And he doesn’t listen to Beaudoin, who’s grabbing his
shoulder.
 
Defense counsel described Powell as “one mean guy when
 
31
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he got drunk,” and called Powell’s group a “mob looking for
 
trouble, going after a guy with a gun, who’s firing a warning
 
shot.”  Defense counsel stated that on the night of the shooting,
 
Powell and his friends were “drunk out of their minds” after
 
engaging in “eight hours of drinking alcohol.” Defense counsel
 noted that Powell’s extrapolated blood alcohol level was 0.181
 and that “Dr. Wong said the presumption of intoxication is 0.82,
 [sic] which is twice the amount, which fits into every category
 almost of the Dubowski table.” Defense counsel further discussed
 Dr. Wong’s testimony regarding the effects of alcohol on Powell: 
[W]e have increased self-confidence, decreased
inhibitions, diminished judgment and control,
emotional instability, critical judgment, Superman. 
Bullets don’t hurt you.  Critical judgment, impairment
of perception. . . . This guy . . . has lost his
critical judgment and it increases his rage. To
 suggest to you folks he just walked across the parking
lot -- and you’ll see it -- just to say, Braddah,
everything is cool, my hands are up, you see, I
surrender -- who are the other two people that were
screaming and swearing in that parking lot?  Braddah,
 it’s so cool.  How come Beaudoin had to try to grab
him by the shoulder and couldn’t do it? 
G. Verdict, Judgment, and Sentence
 
On October 1, 2010, the jury found DeLeon guilty of
 
Murder in the Second Degree as to Powell (Count II), Carrying or
 
Use of a Firearm While Engaged in the Commission of a Separate
 Felony (Counts IV and V), Place to Keep a Pistol or Revolver
 (Count VI), Reckless Endangering in the First Degree (Count VII),
 and Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or
 
32
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Specified Crimes (Count
 
VIII). The jury found DeLeon not guilty of Attempted Murder in
 the Second Degree as to Gamboa (Count III), but found him guilty
 of the included offense of Reckless Endangering in the First
 Degree. The jury acquitted DeLeon of Attempted Murder in the
 First Degree regarding Powell and Gamboa (Count I).
 
At sentencing, the circuit court granted the State’s
 
oral motion to dismiss without prejudice Count VI, which merged
 with Count VIII. DeLeon was sentenced to concurrent prison terms
 of life with the possibility of parole (Count II), five years
 (Count III), twenty years (Count IV), twenty years (Count V),
 five years (Count VII), and ten years (Count VIII). DeLeon was
 also sentenced to mandatory minimum terms of twenty years for
 Count II and five years for Count III, and was ordered to pay
 $4,000 in restitution to the Crime Victim Compensation
 Commission. DeLeon timely filed a notice of appeal.
 
B. ICA Appeal
 
In his opening brief, DeLeon raised four points of
 
error. Specifically, DeLeon asserted that (1) defense counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to
 establish Powell’s recent cocaine ingestion before the incident,
 (2) the circuit court’s self-defense instruction failed to
 properly instruct the jury on the law of self-defense, (3) the
 
33
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court erroneously refused to instruct the jury on extreme
 
mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) manslaughter, and (4) the
 circuit court wrongly convicted and sentenced him as to Count V
 (Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate
 Felony) because the jury convicted him in Count III of reckless
 endangerment, an excluded offense.
20
 
In its January 18, 2013 Summary Disposition Order, the
 
ICA agreed that DeLeon’s conviction as to Count V was improper
 because his reckless endangerment conviction did not constitute a
 “separate felony,” and accordingly reversed the Count V
 conviction. The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s judgment in all
 other respects. Relevant to the issues before this court, the
 ICA rejected DeLeon’s ineffective assistance of counsel argument, 
and concluded that the circuit court properly instructed the jury
 on self-defense. The ICA filed its judgment on appeal on
 February 14, 2013.
 
20 HRS § 134-21 (Supp. 2009), which governs the offense of Carrying
 
or Use of a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony, provides, in
relevant part:
 
(a) It sh
all be unlawful for a person to knowingly
carry on the person or have within the person’s
immediate control or intentionally use or threaten to
use a firearm while engaged in the commission of a
separate felony, . . . provided that a person shall
not be prosecuted under this subsection when the
separate felony is:
. . . . 
(2)
 The felony offense of reckless endangering in the
first degree under [HRS §] 707-713[.]
 
34
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
DeLeon timely filed his application for a writ of
certiorari, in which he raises the following questions:
1.Whether the ICA gravely erred in rejecting
DeLeon’s claim that counsel was ineffective forfailing to establish [decedent Shawn] Powell’scocaine ingestion (in addition to his alcoholintoxication) which substantially impairedDeLeon’s defense of self-defense.
2.Whether the ICA gravely erred in rejectingDeLeon’s claim that the self-defense instructionbased on HAWJIC 7.01, which omitted the languageof HRS § 703-304(3), failed to completely andproperly instruct the jury on the law of self-defense.
The State filed a response on April 22, 2013.21
III.  Standards of Review
A.Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, this court looks at whether defense counsel’sassistance was within the range of competence demanded ofattorneys in criminal cases.  The defendant has the burdenof establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and mustmeet the following two-part test:  1) that there werespecific errors or omissions reflecting counsel’s lack ofskill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors oromissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantialimpairment of a potentially meritorious defense.  To satisfythis second prong, the defendant needs to show a possibleimpairment, rather than a probable impairment, of apotentially meritorious defense.  A defendant need not proveactual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote  
omitted).
21On May 22, 2013, this court accepted DeLeon’s application and
ordered supplemental briefing regarding the degree of certainty required for
admission of scientific expert testimony in criminal cases.  The parties filedsupplemental briefs on this issue on June 25, 2013.
35    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
The proper standard for claims of ineffective
assistance of counsel on appeal is whether, “viewed as a whole,
the assistance provided was within the range of competencedemanded of attorneys in criminal cases.”  Dan v. State, 76Hawai#i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (internal quotation
marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
General claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every
action or omission is not subject to inquiry.  Specificactions or omissions alleged to be error but which had anobvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant’s casewill not be subject to further scrutiny.  If, however, theaction or omission had no obvious basis for benefitting thedefendant’s case and it “resulted in the withdrawal orsubstantial impairment of a potentially meritoriousdefense,” then it will be evaluated as information that anordinarily competent criminal attorney should have had.  
Id. (ellipses and brackets omitted) (emphasis in original)
(quoting Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 462-63, 848 P.2d 966, 976(1993)).  “[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel,like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicialhindsight.”  State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d
1227, 1247-48 (1998) (internal quotation marks and citationomitted) (emphasis in original).
B.Jury instructions
The standard of review for jury instructions that were
not objected to at trial was clarified in State v. Nichols, 111Hawai#i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai# i Supreme Court
held that
36    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury.  As a result, onceinstructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to thedefendant’s conviction, i.e., that the erroneous juryinstruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted).  
Thus, the appellant must first demonstrate
instructional error by rebutting the “presumption that
unobjected-to jury instructions are correct.”  Id. at 337 n.6,141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai# i 239,
250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005).  If the appellant is able to rebutthis presumption, the burden shifts to the State to prove thatthe error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from therecord as a whole that the error was not prejudicial. However, error is not to be viewed in isolation andconsidered purely in the abstract.  It must be examined inthe light of the entire proceedings and given the effectwhich the whole record shows it to be entitled.
Nichols, 111 Hawai# i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai# i 289,
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)).  If the State cannot demonstrate
that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, theconviction must be vacated.  Nichols, 111 Hawai# i at 337, 141
P.3d at 984.
37   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Plain Error
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) 
states that “[p]lain errors or defects affecting substantial 
rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.” Therefore, an appellate court “may recognize plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant.” State v. Staley, 91 
Hawai'i 275, 282, 982 P.2d 904, 911 (1999) (citation omitted). 
The appellate court “will apply the plain error 
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights.” Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 334, 141 
P.3d at 981 (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 330, 966 
P.2d 637, 642 (1998)). An appellate court’s “power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system—that a party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's mistakes.” Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 335, 141 P.3d at 982 (quoting 
State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 515, 849 P.2d 58, 74–75 (1993)). 
D. Admission of Expert Testimony
 
“Generally, the decision whether to admit expert
 
38
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testimony rests in the discretion of the trial court. To the 
extent that the trial court’s decision is dependant upon interpretation of court rules, such interpretation is a question of law, which [the appellate] court reviews de novo.” Barcai v. 
Betwee, 98 Hawai' i 470, 479, 50 P.3d 946, 955 (2002) (citations 
omitted). 
IV. Discussion
 
A.	 The circuit court’s ruling to exclude Dr. Wong’s testimony
regarding cocaine use by Powell
 
DeLeon argues on appeal that trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance of counsel by committing errors that
 
resulted in the circuit court’s exclusion of testimony regarding
 Powell’s cocaine level at the time of the shooting. As set forth
 below, DeLeon has failed to establish that his trial counsel was
 ineffective with regard to this issue. However, upon examination
 of the merits of the circuit court’s ruling, we find that the
 circuit court plainly erred in excluding such testimony. As
 stated supra, Dr. Wong was prepared to testify that, to a
 reasonable degree of scientific probability, Powell was under the
 influence of cocaine at the time of the shooting. However, the
 circuit court excluded the testimony because Dr. Wong could not
 testify to a “reasonable degree of scientific certainty.” 
(Emphasis added). 
39
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although trial courts may exclude expert testimony that
 
is speculative in nature, expert opinions need not be based on a
 
“reasonable degree of scientific certainty” in order to be
 admissible. Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court plainly
 erred in excluding the expert testimony at issue.
 
1.	 DeLeon’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim
 
fails
 
DeLeon argues that the ICA erred in rejecting his claim
 
that his trial counsel was ineffective for “failing to establish
 
Powell’s cocaine ingestion[.]” Specifically, DeLeon argues that
 his trial counsel was ineffective by committing two specific
 errors: (1) failing to move the court to rule on the admission of
 the cocaine evidence at least in advance of Dr. Goodhue’s
 testimony, and (2) failing to, during the HRE Rule 104 hearing,
 direct Dr. Wong to present his retrograde cocaine extrapolations
 and explain his opinion that Powell was affected by the cocaine. 
As set forth below, DeLeon’s claim lacks merit.
 
To succeed on his claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, DeLeon must show that “there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel’s lack of skill, judgment, or diligence” and that “such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.” Wakisaka
, 102 Hawai' i at 514, 78 P.3d at 
40
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
327. With respect to his first contention, DeLeon has not 
demonstrated that trial counsel’s failure to seek a ruling on the admission of the cocaine evidence prior to Dr. Goodhue’s testimony constitutes ineffective assistance. DeLeon’s argument appears to depend on the assumption that holding an HRE Rule 104 hearing in advance of Dr. Goodhue’s testimony would have resulted in the admission of the cocaine evidence. However, DeLeon does not point to any part of the record that supports such a result. As stated above, the circuit court ruled before trial that it would not allow any evidence about Powell’s cocaine level until an HRE Rule 104 hearing, noting its concern that Dr. Wong stated he did not have enough information to opine that Powell was under the influence at the time of the shooting. After the HRE Rule 104 hearing, the circuit court excluded the cocaine evidence, stating that Dr. Wong could not state with a reasonable degree of scientific certainty that Powell was under the influence of cocaine. Dr. Wong stated at the hearing that to make such a determination, he needed more information, such as Powell’s tolerance level, the amount of cocaine Powell ingested, and when he ingested it. DeLeon has not alleged that Dr. Goodhue could have provided such additional information. Cf. Richie, 88 Hawai'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (“Ineffective assistance of 
counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be 
41
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the
 
testimony of the proffered witnesses.”). Indeed, DeLeon has
 neither offered any clear reasons nor pointed to any parts of the
 record that indicate that the timing of the HRE Rule 104 hearing
 was at all consequential. For these same reasons, to the extent
 that DeLeon argues that holding the HRE Rule 104 hearing after
 Dr. Goodhue testified prevented Dr. Goodhue from being cross-
examined about the cocaine findings in his autopsy report, this
 argument fails.
22
 
DeLeon’s argument regarding trial counsel’s “failure
 
. . . to direct Dr. Wong to present his retrograde cocaine
 extrapolations and explain his opinion that Powell was impacted”
 by cocaine during the HRE Rule 104 hearing also lacks merit. The
 record shows that defense counsel brought Dr. Wong’s retrograde
 cocaine extrapolations to the attention of the circuit court. 
Defense counsel had presented Dr. Wong’s cocaine extrapolations
 to the circuit court on September 3, 2010 through Dr. Wong’s
 August 7, 2010 letter. Defense counsel also referenced the
 extrapolation in his arguments during the September 22, 2010 HRE
 Rule 104 hearing; indeed, defense counsel argued, inter alia,
 
22
 Moreover, Dr. Goodhue was included in DeLeon’s witness list, and
 
if the circuit court had ruled that the cocaine evidence was admissible
 
following the September 22, 2010 HRE Rule 104 hearing, DeLeon arguably could
have called Dr. Goodhue to testify about any cocaine findings.  In other
 words, the timing of the HRE Rule 104 hearing alone did not preclude the
defense from questioning Dr. Goodhue about any cocaine evidence.
 
42
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that “there’s a sufficient basis based on [Dr. Wong’s]
 
credentials, based on the toxicology report, based on his
 extrapolation[.]” Finally, in explaining its ruling, the circuit
 court noted that it reviewed, inter alia, Dr. Wong’s “initial
 letter[.]” The initial letter included Dr. Wong’s retrograde
 extrapolation figures.
 
Accordingly, the ICA did not err in rejecting DeLeon’s
 
ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
 
2.	 The circuit court plainly erred in excluding Dr.
Wong’s testimony regarding Powell’s cocaine use
 
HRE Rule 702, which governs the admissibility of expert
 
testimony, provides:
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized
knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand
the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a
witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill,
experience, training, or education may testify thereto
in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In
 determining the issue of assistance to the trier of
fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness and
validity of the scientific technique or mode of
analysis employed by the proffered expert.
 
HRE Rule 702 does not require a specific degree of
 
certainty for the admission of scientific or other expert
 
testimony. This court has stated that “the touchstones of
 admissibility for expert testimony under HRE Rule 702 are
 relevance and reliability.” 
State v. Vliet , 95 Hawai' i 94, 106, 
19 P.3d 42, 54 (2001). The relevance prong “primarily stems from
 the precondition . . . that the evidence or testimony assist the
 
43
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact 
in issue.” Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted). The 
reliability prong “refers to evidentiary reliability-that is trustworthiness.” Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted). 
Under the reliability factor, admission of expert evidence “is premised on an assumption that the expert’s opinion will have a reliable basis in the knowledge and experience of his [or her] discipline.” Id. (citation omitted) (brackets in original). 
“Generally, the decision whether to admit expert testimony rests in the discretion of the trial court.” State v. Metcalfe, 129 
Hawai'i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013) (citation omitted). 
“An abuse of discretion occurs when the decisionmaker ‘exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party.’” Vliet, 95 
Hawai'i at 108, 19 P.3d at 56 (quoting In re Water Use Permit 
Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 183, 9 P.3d 409, 495 (2000)). 
This court has stated, in civil cases, that medical 
opinions must be based on reasonable medical probability. In Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 1, 15-16, 84 P.3d 509, 523-24 
(2004), which involved, inter alia, a negligence action against a chiropractor, this court stated that a “plaintiff may solicit opinions from medical experts, but such medical opinions ‘must be grounded upon reasonable medical probability as opposed to a mere 
44
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
possibility because possibilities are endless in the field of
 
medicine.’” The Miyamoto court further stated that
 
[T]he plaintiff’s medical expert may be cross-examined
as to “(1) the witness’ qualifications, (2) the
subject to which the witness’ expert testimony
relates, and (3) the matter upon which the witness’
opinion is based and the reasons for the witness’
opinion,” as well as “the underlying facts or data [of
the medical opinion].”  After all, “[e]xpert testimony
is not conclusive and like any testimony, the jury may
accept or reject it.” 
Id. at 16, 84 P.3d at 524 (internal citations omitted); see also 
Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai' i 287, 305, 893 P.2d 138, 156 (1995) 
(holding, in a negligence case, that it was proper to instruct the jury to disregard any medical opinion “that was not based upon reasonable medical probabilities” (emphasis added)). 
Because the HRE are patterned on the Federal Rules of 
Evidence, this court has looked to federal cases for guidance. Vliet, 95 Hawai' i at 105, 105 n.20, 19 P.3d at 53, 53 n.20 
(stating that “because the HRE are patterned on the [FRE], construction of the federal counterparts of the HRE by the federal courts is instructive” and that “federal case law on FRE Rule 702 may be instructive regarding our construction of HRE Rule 702”). At least some federal courts have expressly rejected the proposition that a “reasonable degree of scientific certainty” is required for the admission of expert testimony. 
In United States v. Mornan, 413 F.3d 372, 376, 381 (3d
 
Cir. 2005), the Third Circuit Court of Appeals considered the
 
45
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defendant’s challenge to the admissibility of a handwriting
 
expert’s testimony where, when asked whether her opinions were
 rendered to a “reasonable degree of scientific certainty,” the
 expert answered, “I think they are.” The Third Circuit noted
 that the expert had “explained her qualifications, her
 methodology, the bases for her conclusions, and the degrees of
 certainty with which she was able to reach her conclusions,” and
 that
 
there is nothing magical about the phrase, “to a
reasonable degree of scientific certainty.”  It is not
 derived from the language of Rule 702 itself, and this
Court has been unable to find any authority to support
the position that questions regarding the expert’s
“degree of scientific certainty” categorically renders
expert testimony inadmissible.
 
Id. at 381 (internal citation omitted). 
The court noted that “[h]andwriting experts often given
 
their opinions in terms of probabilities rather than
 
certainties.” Id. The court therefore found that the trial
 
court did not err in allowing the expert’s testimony and “to
 allow the jury to determine what weight to give her ‘less-than­certain’ conclusions.” Id. 
Similarly, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals
 
rejected the argument that the trial court erroneously admitted
 expert testimony that hair recovered from items used in a robbery
 were “microscopically like” hair samples taken from the
 defendants, which meant that the hairs found from the robbery
 
46
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“could have come” from the defendants. United States v. Cyphers,
 
553 F.2d 1064, 1071-73 (7th Cir. 1977). The defendants argued
 
that such testimony was inadmissible because, inter alia, it was
 not based on a reasonable scientific certainty. Id. at 1072-73. 
The Seventh Circuit rejected the defendants’ argument, stating
 that “[t]here is no such requirement” that an expert’s opinion
 testimony be expressed in terms of reasonable scientific
 certainty in order to be admissible, and that “[w]e adhere to the
rule that an expert’s lack of absolute certainty goes to the
 weight of his testimony, not to its admissibility.” Id. 
 
At least some state courts appear to use the terms
 
“certainty” and “probability” interchangeably
23 and favor
 
admissibility of expert testimony under either standard while
 
23 See, e.g., State v. Benner, 533 N.E.2d 701, 714 (Ohio 1988) (“In
 
this jurisdiction, an expert opinion is competent only if it is held to a
reasonable degree of scientific certainty.  In this context, ‘reasonable
certainty’ means ‘probability.’” (citation omitted)); State v. Vernes, 130
P.3d 169, 173 (Mont. 2006) (“Expert testimony of the type proposed here may
not be admitted . . . unless it satisfies the ‘reasonable medical certainty’
test.  This Court has defined the reasonable medical certainty test in terms
of probabilities as ‘more likely than not.’”); State v. Shepherd, 41 P.3d
1235, 1238 (Wash. App. 2002) (“Expert testimony should express ‘a reasonable
probability rather than mere conjecture or speculation.’ . . . [I]n the
criminal case, expert testimony on a person’s mental status is not admissible
unless the expert’s opinion is based on reasonable medical certainty, which is
the equivalent of more likely than not.” (citations and some internal
quotation marks omitted)).
Using “certainty” and “probability” interchangeably appears
consistent with Black’s Dictionary, which defines “reasonable medical
probability” as follows:  “In proving the cause of an injury, a standard
requiring a showing that the injury was more likely than not caused by a
particular stimulus, based on the general consensus of recognized medical
thought.  -– Also termed reasonable medical certainty.”   Black’s Law
 
Dictionary  1380 (9th ed. 2009) (emphasis added).  However, in the instant
case, it is clear that the circuit court did not use the terms “probability”
and “certainty” interchangeably.
 
47
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disfavoring the admission of evidence based on speculation or
 
possibility. See State v. Freeman, 538 A.2d 371, 384 (N.J.
 
Super. Ct. App. Div. 1988) (“Medical expert testimony must be
 couched in terms of reasonable medical certainty or probability;
 opinions as to possibility are inadmissible.” (citation and
 quotation marks omitted)); Floray v. State, 720 A.2d 1132, 1136
 (Del. 1998) (“Generally when an expert offers a medical opinion
 it should be stated in terms of ‘a reasonable medical
 probability’ or ‘a reasonable medical certainty.’”).
 
At least some other states have expressly rejected the
 
notion that expert testimony must be grounded in reasonable
 scientific certainty to be admitted. For example, the Supreme
 Court of Rhode Island has held that “scientific certainty” is not
 required to admit expert testimony. State v. Gardner, 616 A.2d
 
1124, 1129 (R.I. 1992). In Gardner, the trial court precluded an
 expert from testifying whether the defendant suffered from a
 mental defect at the time of the offenses, expressing “concern
 over the difficulty and potential unreliability of a retroactive
 diagnosis.” 616 A.2d at 1126, 1129. The Supreme Court of Rhode
 Island held that the trial court erred, stating that although
 such a retroactive diagnosis “is an elusive undertaking” and that
 “[i]n a meta-physical sense it may be impossible to know the
 mental state of the defendant at the time of the criminal
 
48
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conduct[,] [a]bsolute scientific certainty . . . is not the
 
standard for the admissibility of expert testimony.” Id. at
 
1129. The court stated that the trial court should have
 addressed such concerns by allowing the prosecutor to question
 this testimony on cross-examination. Id.; see also State v.
 
Bertram, 591 A.2d 14, 24-25 (R.I. 1991) (holding that the trial
 court did not err in admitting a document examiner’s testimony
 about a signature when the examiner was not able to identify the
 signature to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty, stating
 that defense counsel had “ample opportunity” to cross-examine the
 witness “on his conclusions and emphasize any infirmities
 pertaining to his analysis” and that “[t]he jury could then
 decide what weight, if any, should be accorded to the
 testimony”).
 
In Robinson v. United States, 50 A.3d 508, 514 (D.C.
 
2012), the criminal defendants contended that they were
 prejudiced by the trial court’s exclusion of expert testimony
 regarding the effects that the complaining witness’s
 phencyclidine (PCP) use may have had on the accuracy of her
 perceptions. The trial court excluded expert testimony on
 untimeliness grounds and because the expert was not able to “give
 an opinion within a reasonable degree of scientific certainty
 that 15 to 20 hours [after using PCP, the complaining witness’s]
 
49
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ability to see, perceive, recall, understand were significantly
 
affected by her use of PCP[.]” Id. at 518 (emphasis added) (some
 
brackets in original). 
On appeal, the Court of Appeals stated that “[a] trial
 
court may exclude outright speculation, but short of speculation,
 a particular expert witness’s degree of certainty in proffering
 an opinion goes to the weight of the testimony, not its
 admissibility, and ‘the weight to be given an expert opinion is
 for the jury to decide.’” Id. at 523 (citation omitted). The
 
Court of Appeals viewed the trial court’s ruling as a “question
 of the basic relevance of the proffered testimony and whether it
 would assist the jury in understanding the facts in issue.” Id.
 
at 524. The Court of Appeals stated that the proffered expert
 testimony “could have lent credence to [the defendants’]
 contention that PCP could substantially hinder a witness’s
 ability to perceive and remember events many hours later.” Id.
 
at 527. The Court of Appeals held, therefore, that excluding the
 testimony because the expert could not specifically say how PCP
 affected the complaining witness “misapprehended the purpose for
 which the evidence was offered and ran afoul of our case law
 indicating that expert testimony ‘should generally be admitted if
 
50
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it will assist the jury to understand the facts in issue.’”24
 
Id. at 527-28.
 
In light of the foregoing authorities, we conclude that 
trial courts should not require a “reasonable degree of 
scientific certainty” before admitting expert opinions but may exclude expert testimony based on speculation or possibility. Cf. Miyamoto, 104 Hawai' i at 15-16, 84 P.3d at 523-24. 
The State appears to concede that a reasonable degree
 
of scientific certainty is not required for the admission of
 scientific expert testimony. However, the State argues that the
 circuit court did not plainly err in excluding Dr. Wong’s cocaine
 testimony because the circuit court had sufficient basis for
 finding that his testimony “lack[ed] sufficient reliability and
 was going to cause confusion without considering Dr. Wong’s
 ability to testify to a reasonable degree of scientific
 certainty[.]” In other words, the State argues that although the
 circuit court “commented that Dr. Wong could not opine that
 Powell was under the influence of cocaine to a reasonable degree
 of scientific certainty, that finding was superfluous to its
 primary findings of lacking sufficient reliability and will cause
 
24
 The Court of Appeals, however, held that the error in excluding
 
expert testimony was harmless because given the evidence in the case, the
exclusion of the expert testimony did not substantially influence the outcome
of the trial.  Id. at 528.
 
51
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
confusion.”
 
The State points to the following to support the
 
circuit court’s conclusion that Dr. Wong’s opinion about the
 
influence of both alcohol and cocaine would be speculative. 
First, the circuit court stated that Dr. Wong’s initial letter
 stated that he was not able to opine whether Powell was under the
 influence of cocaine without additional information, and that
 although he had since received some additional information, he
 did not receive the specific information that he would need to
 make that determination. Second, Dr. Wong noted that he viewed
 the video of the shooting and stated, “I would not run up to him
 face-to-face if I see a gun in his hand.” The State argued that
 “[w]hat Dr. Wong would do personally in that situation was not
 specialized knowledge requiring the testimony of an expert.” 
Third, the State argues that Dr. Wong relied on a “McCance-Katz”
 article in opining in his September 7, 2010 letter that Powell
 was under the influence of cocaine, but admitted that he did not
 read this article. Finally, the State notes that Dr. Wong
 testified that there was no chart “correlating the range of
 cocaine with behavior[,]” and that “[w]ithout such a correlation,
 there was no foundation establishing a valid scientific technique
 by which Dr. Wong arrived at his conclusion” that Powell was
 under the influence of cocaine.
 
52
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The State’s argument lacks merit. First, the circuit
 
court’s ruling appears to rest largely on Dr. Wong being unable
 
to opine whether Powell was under the influence of cocaine to a
 reasonable degree of scientific certainty. As stated above, the
 circuit court stated the following in ruling on the admissibility
 of Dr. Wong’s cocaine testimony:
 
The Court, in reviewing Dr. Wong’s initial
letter, the subsequent September letter, as well as
the testimony presented today, the Court thinks that
it does not have sufficient reliability to present the
issue before the jury and is going to cause confusion.
The Court does note that in the [August] letter he
indicated that he was not able to render an opinion
with respect to whether [] Powell was under the
influence of cocaine at the time of the shooting
without additional information. 
 He received some
 
additional information between August and September,
not the specific information that he indicated that he
would need to do that, and he further indicated today
that he could not make the -- render an opinion to a
reasonable degree of scientific certainty that []
Powell was under the influence of cocaine at the time
 of his -- at the time of the shooting and therefore to
allow him to opine about influence of both substances
and the effect on the behavior of the deceased would
 be speculative.   So Court precludes that use.
 
. . .
 . 
[Dr. Wong] could not give an opinion in August
and then he did render that opinion in the September
7th letter, but the Court is not allowing that opinion
based on the testimony presented this morning.  
And he
 
did indicate this morning that he cannot render that
opinion to a reasonable degree of scientific
certainty.
 
(Emphases added).
 
Second, the deficiencies argued by the State would not
 
preclude the admission of Dr. Wong’s testimony. At the HRE Rule
 
104 hearing, Dr. Wong stated to a “reasonable medical scientific
 probability” that the ingestion of cocaine in the proximity to
 
53
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Powell’s death had an impact on his behavior. While Dr. Wong did
 
not receive certain information such as the amount of cocaine
 ingested and the time of ingestion, such information was only
 required to render a more definitive opinion, i.e., to a
 reasonable degree of medical certainty. For example, Dr. Wong
 acknowledged that he never received information regarding the
 amount of cocaine ingested and the time of ingestion, which would
 be required to determine “more accurately” whether Powell was
 under the influence of cocaine. Dr. Wong also stated that he
 would need to know Powell’s tolerance and time of ingestion “[t]o
 render with absolute certainty, medical certainty” whether he was
 under the influence of both alcohol and cocaine. With regard to
 the McCance-Katz article, it appears that although Dr. Wong cited
 to that article in the September 7, 2010 letter, he also cited
 and relied “primarily” on an “Eisenschmidt article,” which quoted
 the McCance-Katz article.
 
In sum, the circuit court erred in precluding Dr.
 
Wong’s cocaine testimony. Although DeLeon did not argue on
 appeal that the circuit court erred in excluding Dr. Wong’s
 
25
 cocaine testimony,  this court “may notice a plain error not
presented.” See
 Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
25
 As discussed supra, DeLeon vigorously sought to admit Dr. Wong’s
 
cocaine testimony at trial, and argued before the circuit court that there was
a sufficient basis for the admission of this evidence.
 
54
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
28(b)(4)(D). Specifically, “an appellate court ‘may recognize 
plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant.’” Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i at 222, 297 P.3d at 
1078 (quoting Staley, 91 Hawai' i at 282, 982 P.2d at 911). The 
appellate court “will apply the plain error standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights.” Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (quoting Sawyer, 88 
Hawai'i at 330, 966 P.2d at 642). 
This court has stated that “[t]he due process guarantee 
of the . . . Hawaii constitution [ ] serves to protect the right of an accused in a criminal case to a fundamentally fair trial.” State v. Kaulia, 128 Hawai' i 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013) 
(quoting State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990)). “Central to the protections of due process is the right to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.” Id.
 (quoting Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 185, 787 P.2d at 
672). 
To the extent that DeLeon was precluded from 
introducing Dr. Wong’s testimony with regard to the probable
 effects of cocaine on Powell at the time of the shooting, DeLeon
 was not able to present a complete defense. DeLeon’s self­
55
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defense argument relied largely on Powell’s actions immediately
 
before the shooting. Although Dr. Wong was able to present
 testimony at trial as to Powell’s “high degree of alcohol
 intoxication,” the jury was precluded from receiving information
 regarding Powell’s cocaine use and the combined effects of
 cocaine and alcohol. Indeed, during the HRE Rule 104 hearing,
 Dr. Wong testified that the combined effects of cocaine and
 alcohol “generally are additive, especially in the effects of
 [sic] judgment.” Dr. Wong also stated during the Rule 104
 hearing that “the amount of cocaine or the presence of cocaine
 could render that level of intoxication perhaps a stage higher.” 
The jury was precluded from hearing and considering such
 evidence. Because DeLeon’s defense depended heavily on Powell’s
 behavior immediately before DeLeon shot him, there is a
 reasonable possibility that the exclusion of this testimony
 affected the outcome of the trial. In sum, the exclusion of Dr.
 Wong’s cocaine testimony compromised DeLeon’s ability to present
 a complete defense.
 
Accordingly, the circuit court plainly erred in
 
precluding Dr. Wong’s cocaine testimony. Therefore, we vacate
 DeLeon’s convictions for second-degree murder (Count II) and
 Carrying or Use of a Firearm While Engaged in the Commission of a
 Separate Felony (Count IV). 
56
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. The jury instruction on self-defense was not erroneous
 
DeLeon argues that the ICA gravely erred in concluding
 
that the circuit court’s self-defense instruction was not
 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 misleading. Specifically, DeLeon argues that the instruction was
 erroneous because it did not include the language of HRS § 703­
304(3)26
  advising that “a person 
26 HRS § 703-304 (1993 & Supp. 2009) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and of
section 703-308, the use of force upon or toward
another person is justifiable when the actor believes
that such force is immediately necessary for the
purpose of protecting himself against the use of
unlawful force by the other person on the present
occasion.
 
(2) The use of deadly force is justifiable under this
section if the actor believes that deadly force is
necessary to protect himself against death, serious
bodily injury, kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy.
 
(3) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (4)
and (5) of this section, a person employing
protective force may estimate the necessity thereof
under the circumstances as he believes them to be
 when the force is used without retreating,
surrendering possession, doing any other act which he
has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any
lawful action.
 
(4) The use of force is not justifiable under this
section:
 
(a) To resist an arrest which the actor knows is
being made by a law enforcement officer, although the
arrest is unlawful; or
 
(b) To resist force used by the occupier or possessor
of property or by another person on his behalf, where
the actor knows that the person using the force is
doing so under a claim of right to protect the
property . . . 
(continued...)
 
57
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof
 
under the circumstances as he believes them to be when the force
 is used without retreating, surrendering possession, doing any
 other act which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from
 any lawful action[.]” Because DeLeon did not object to the jury
 
26(...continued)
. . . . 
(5) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under
this section if :
 
(a) The actor, with the intent of causing death or
serious bodily injury, provoked the use of force
against himself in the same encounter; or
 
(b) The actor knows that he can avoid the necessity
of using such force with complete safety by
retreating  or by surrendering possession of a thing
to a person asserting a claim of right thereto or by
complying with a demand that he abstain from any
action which he has no duty to take, except that:
 
(i) The actor is not obliged to retreat from his
dwelling or place of work, unless he was the initial
aggressor or is assailed in his place of work by
another person whose place of work the actor knows it
to be; and
 
(ii) A public officer justified in using force in the
performance of his duties, or a person justified in
using force in his assistance or a person justified
in using force in making an arrest or preventing an
escape, is not obliged to desist from efforts to
perform his duty, effect the arrest, or prevent the
escape because of resistance or threatened resistance
by or on behalf of the person against whom the action
is directed.
 
(6) The justification afforded by this section
extends to the use of confinement as protective force
only if the actor takes all reasonable measures to
terminate the confinement as soon as he knows that he
 safely can, unless the person confined has been
arrested on a charge of crime.
 
(Emphases added).
 
58
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instruction at trial, he must first demonstrate instructional 
error by rebutting the “presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct.” Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 337 n.6, 141 
P.3d at 984 n.6. As set forth below, DeLeon fails to do so. 
DeLeon’s claim lacks merit because the circuit court’s 
jury instruction on self-defense was not erroneous. First, the jury instruction that the circuit court provided was based on then-current HAWJIC 7.01,
27 which this court has upheld as “fully 
consonant with the controlling statutory and case law of this state.” State v. Augustin, 101 Hawai' i 127, 127, 63 P.3d 1097, 
1097 (2002). 
Moreover, the Augustin court noted that the relevant
 
jury instruction language in that case – which is virtually
 identical to the instant case – incorporated a key portion of HRS
 § 703-304(3). Id. at 127-28, 63 P.3d at 1097-98. Specifically,
 
the Augustin court noted that the jury instruction stated in part
 as follows:
 
The reasonableness of the defendant’s belief that the
 
use of such protective force was immediately necessary
shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the defendant’s position under the
circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as
 the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
Id. at 128, 63 P.3d at 1098 (emphasis in original). 
The Augustin  court stated that the foregoing language
 
27
 This court amended HAWJIC 7.01 on April 4, 2011.  
59
    
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
derived from the statutory defenses of, inter alia, “use of force 
in self-protection,” as codified in HRS § 703-304, including the language in subsection (3): “[A] person employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he believes them to be[.]” Id. at 128, 63 P.3d at 1098 
(emphasis omitted). Put another way, the instruction conveys the legal basis for using protective force, despite not referencing HRS § 703-304(3) verbatim.
28 See Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i at 230, 
297 P.3d at 1086 (“The trial court is not required to instruct the jury in the exact words of the applicable statute but to present the jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in applying that law to the facts of the case.”) (citing Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i at 330, 966 P.2d at 642). Accordingly, to the 
extent that DeLeon argues that the self-defense instruction was incomplete because it omitted the language in HRS § 703-304(3) that “a person employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he believes them to be[,]” DeLeon’s contention lacks merit. 
Second, insofar as DeLeon argues that the self-defense
 
instruction should have included the remaining language in HRS
 
28
 In the ICA, the State argued that HRS § 703-304(3) is inapplicable
 
in cases involving deadly force because it refers to “protective force” and
imposes no duty to retreat.  However, HRS § 703-304(5) states that the use of
deadly force is not justifiable if “[t]he actor knows that he can avoid the
necessity of using such force with complete safety by retreating.”  Where such
 retreat is not possible, HRS § 703-304(3) applies.
 
60
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 703-304(3) regarding retreating and other acts, his argument
 
also fails. According to the commentary on subsection (3) and
 the explanatory note on the Model Penal Code provision upon which
 HRS § 703-304(3) is based, the subsection states the rule that an
 actor need not retreat or take other evasive action before
 estimating the necessity for the self-protective force. See
 
Model Penal Code § 3.04 cmt. (2001); HRS § 703-304 cmt. (1993). 
Here, the given instruction guided the jury in determining
 whether the use of protective force was immediately necessary. 
After all, it would be apparent to the jury that an actor who may
 be justified in using immediate self-protective force would also
 be justified in not retreating, surrendering possession, or doing
 any other act which the actor has no legal duty to do. Moreover,
 the given instruction informed the jury that deadly force is not
 justifiable if the defendant “provoked the use of force against
 himself in the same encounter” or “knows that he can avoid the
 necessity of using such force with complete safety by
 retreating.” Based on this instruction, it would be apparent to
 the jury that a defendant does not have to retreat if he or she
 knows that retreat cannot be done with complete safety. 
Accordingly, the instruction is sufficient given that it
 communicates these points despite not including the exact
 language of subsection (3). 
61
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Third, to the extent that DeLeon relies on this court’s
 
April 4, 2011 amendments to HAWJIC 7.01, such reliance is
 
misplaced. In his application, DeLeon argues that “the self-
defense instructions given were NOT correct for the very reason
 that they were amended: to apprise the jury that a defendant was
 permitted to estimate the necessity for the use of force
 . . . under the circumstances as he reasonably believed them to
 be without retreating or doing any act which he has no legal duty
 
to do.”  Insofar as DeLeon is arguing that the court’s jury
 
instructions are erroneous because they were revised,
29 this
 
29 The amended HAWJIC 7.01A instruction with regard to “‘Deadly
 
Force’ Used” provides, in relevant part:
 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another
person is justified if the defendant reasonably
believes that deadly force is immediately necessary to
protect himself/herself on the present occasion
against [death] [serious bodily injury] . . . .  The
 reasonableness of the defendant’s belief that the use
 of protective deadly force was immediately necessary
shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the defendant's position under the
circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as
 the defendant reasonably believed them to be when the
deadly force was used. 
[The use of deadly force is not justifiable if
the defendant, with the intent of causing death or
serious bodily injury, provoked the use of force
against himself/herself in the same encounter]. 
[The use of deadly force is not justifiable if
the defendant knows that he/she can avoid the
necessity of using such force with complete safety by
retreating, but the defendant is not required to
retreat from his/her own dwelling unless he/she was
the initial aggressor. . . .] 
The “‘Deadly Force’ Not Used” section of the amended
HAWJIC 7.01 provides, in relevant part:
 
(cont
inued...)
 
62
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
argument lacks merit given that the language of the jury
 
instruction has been upheld as “fully consonant with the
 controlling statutory and case law of this state.”
30 Augustin,
 
101 Hawai' i at 127, 63 P.3d at 1097. In any event, as stated, 
the given jury instructions sufficiently communicated the
 applicable law. 
29(...continued)
The use of force upon or toward another person
is justified if the defendant reasonably believes that
force is immediately necessary to protect
himself/herself on the present occasion against the
use of unlawful force by the other person.  The
 reasonableness of the defendant’s belief that the use
 of protective force was immediately necessary shall be
determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person
in the defendant’s position under the circumstances of
which the defendant was aware or as the defendant
 reasonably believed them to be.  The defendant may
estimate the necessity for the use of force under the
circumstances as he/she reasonably believes them to be
when the force is used, without [retreating]
[surrendering possession] [doing any other act that
he/she has no legal duty to do] [abstaining from any
lawful action].
 
(Emphasis added).
 
30 While DeLeon has argued that “[p]romulgation of the newly-drafted 
HAWJIC self-defense instructions, together with the repeal of HAWJIC 7.01,support [his] position” that the circuit court’s instructions were erroneous, DeLeon also asserted that the amended deadly force HAWJIC instruction iserroneous because it still omits the HRS § 703-304(3) language.  However, theamendment does not appear to reflect a change in the substantive law regardingself-defense, but instead appears to provide the jury with more specificinstructions, depending on whether “force” or “deadly force” is at issue. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai 'i at 231 n.19, 297 P.3d at 1087 n.19.  In any event, for
the reasons stated above, neither the previous nor current HAWJIC languageregarding self-defense when deadly force is used is erroneous.  Nevertheless,we agree with the dissent that, on remand, the circuit court may include inits self-defense instruction the language of HAWJIC 7.01B stating that adefendant may estimate the necessity of using force.  See dissenting opinion at 13-14.  Moreover, for the purposes of clarity and completeness, we suggestthat the Standing Committee on Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions considerwhether it would be appropriate to include the language in both 7.01A and7.01B. 
63
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In sum, the self-defense jury instruction given in the
 
instant case was not erroneous.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons set forth in this opinion, we vacate in
 
part and affirm in part the ICA’s judgment, and vacate the
 
circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence on Counts II
 and IV, and remand the case to the circuit court for further
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 Phyllis J. Hironaka
for petitioner
 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Sonja P. McCullen
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
64
 