 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ---o0o--
 I. Introduction 
 
 This certiorari proceeding arises out of Lisa E. Alkire’s  
(“Alkire”) conviction for the offense of operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant (“OVUII”) in violation of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-17-0000638 25-JUN-2020 08:01 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
-
STATE OF HAWAIʻI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff -
Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
LISA E. ALKIRE, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-17-0000638  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP- 17
-0000638; 1DTA-16-03825)  
 
JUNE 25, 2020   
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH  
NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING AS TO SECTION IV.A.,  
WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.   
 2 
  
 Alkire raises four questions in her application for writ of   
certiorari, which challenges the Intermediate Court of Appeals’  
(“ICA”) January 24, 2019 summary disposition order (“SDO”).  The
ICA’s SDO affirmed the District Court of the First Circuit’s   
(“district court”) August 30, 2017 judgment.  1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2014) on   
Likelike Highway in the early morning hours of October 15, 2016. 
 
 
 
The four questions raised on certiorari are: 
I. As a matter of first impression, did the ICA gravely err
in finding that the Tachibana admonishment was sufficient 
where Petitioner was not informed of her right to testify
in her consolidated suppression hearing without thattestimony being used to determine guilt or innocence and/or where the court specifically declined to inform Petitionerof her right to remain silent? 
II. As a matter of first impression, did the ICA gravely
err in rejecting Petitioner’s HRPP, Rule 48 and/orconstitutional speedy trial challenges, where the trial “commenced” with one state witness but was subsequently
continued for eight months at no fault of Petitioner? 
III. Did the ICA gravely err in holding that HRPP Rule 16
usurps United States Supreme Court precedent that requires individual prosecutors to obtain and disclose impeachment
materials rather than merely relying on representations of
the police to determine whether and what materials shouldbe disclosed to Defendants? 
IV. Did the ICA gravely err in finding that discovery, 
requested for its potential exculpatory value, was not
material because the evidence of guilt was “overwhelming”and/or in affirming the conviction where Ms. Alkire wasdeprived of an opportunity to establish an appropriaterecord as to the existence of the video? 
The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. 
1  
 3 
  
 
   
 
  
   
   
  
   
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
      2 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The first question on certiorari was resolved through our 
opinion in State v. Chang, 144 Hawaiʻi 535, 445 P.3d 116 (2019).2 
With respect to the second question on certiorari, we adopt 
the California Supreme Court’s reasoning in Rhinehart v. 
Municipal Court, 677 P.2d 1206, 1211-12 (Cal. 1984), and hold 
that, in order to effectuate its intent, Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (“HRPP ”) Rule 48 (2000) requires a “meaningful” 
commencement of trial. A 
trial is “meaningfully” commenced when 
a trial court reasonably commits its resources to the trial. As 
this is a “new rule,” it will only apply prospectively to events 
occurring after publication of this decision, i.e., to trials 
that commence after the date of this opinion.3 
With respect to the third question on certiorari, we hold 
that, under the circumstances of this case, the prosecutor was 
not required to personally review files of the testifying police 
officers. 
As to the fourth question on certiorari, we hold that 
because the video recording showing Alkire at the police station 
In Chang, we noted that because the defendant had the right to testify 
for the purpose of his motion to suppress without having that testimony used 
against him at trial, it was essential that the defendant be informed of those rights in order to ensure that his decision on whether to testify at 
the suppression hearing was knowingly and intelligently made. 144 Hawaiʻ i at 
545, 445 P.3d at 126. Overruling State v. Texeira, 62 Haw. 44, 609 P.2d 131 
(1980), we also prospectively held 
that trial courts could no longer 
consolidate a motion to suppress hearing with a trial. 144 Hawaiʻ i at 546, 
445 P.3d at 127. We therefore need not further address this issue. 
See a lso infra note 8. 3  
 4 
  
 
  
    
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
after her arrest was material to Alkire’s defense and her 
request was reasonable, the district court abused its discretion 
in denying her motion to compel.  We set out additional 
parameters the district court must consider.  Although the district court may not reach this issue, we also hold that the permissive adverse inference rule, which allows a trier of fact 
to draw an adverse inference that lost or destroyed evidence was 
unfavorable to the spoliator, also applies in criminal cases. 
Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s February 25, 2019 judgment 
on appeal, which affirmed the district court’s August 30, 2017 judgment, and we remand the case to the district court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
II.  Background 
A. Arrest, request to preserve evidence, and charge In the early morning of October 15, 2016, Alkire was 
stopped while driving northbound on Likelike Highway after a 
Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) officer (“patrol officer”) 
observed her swerve from the traffic lane into the shoulder lane three times. Alkire was later placed under arrest for OVUII and transported to the police station. 
On October 20, 2016, Alkire’s counsel faxed a five-page, 
single-spaced letter (“request to preserve”) to the HPD Central Receiving Division (“Central Receiving”).  In the letter,  
 5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Alkire’s counsel specifically requested that the following 
information be preserved: 
[A]ny and all video or audio recordings that may contain 
evidence of this case . . . (or records of such footage)from any video, audio or traffic cameras maintained, operated, controlled, leased, or accessible by the . . .Honolulu Police Department, . . . Department of the
Prosecuting Attorney and/or any other government entity or
sub- department, semi- autonomous or any other department, 
that may pertain to this incident . . . . This request also specifically includes, but is not limited to, any and allrecordings, captured in whatever manner, of this Defendant
by police department employees or contractors whether at
the police station, from any in- car recording devices, 
and/or video or audio recording devices. 
The request listed Alkire’s identifying information, the date of 
arrest, citation number, and state ID booking number. Alkire’s counsel also emailed the request to preserve to the Department 
of the Prosecuting Attorney for the City and County of Honolulu 
(“prosecutor’s office”).  The following day, Alkire’s counsel faxed to Central Receiving an addendum to the October 20, 2016 request to preserve, which specifically requested that the video 
from the Kalihi Police Station be preserved. Alkire’s counsel 
also emailed the addendum to the prosecutor’s office and mailed physical copies of both the request to preserve and the addendum 
to HPD Headquarters (“Headquarters”), Central Receiving, and the 
prosecutor’s office. 
On November 1, 2016, the State filed a complaint charging 
Alkire with one count of OVUII in violation of HRS § 291E- 
 6 
  
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  . . . . 
   
 
 4 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3).4 
B. District court proceedings relevant to issues on certiorari 
1. Motion to compel officer files 
On December 5, 2016, Alkire filed a motion to compel files 
of the police officers the State intended to call as witnesses (“motion to compel officer files”). Alkire requested that (1) 
the State produce the personnel files of the officers involved in Alkire’s case (and any other documentation regarding the officers’ misconduct); and (2) that the prosecutor “be required 
to review the files of its witnesses to determine whether 
impeachment materials exist and not shift that burden to police or non-lawyer bureaucrats,” as purportedly required by Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963) (suppression of evidence favorable 
to the accused violates due process where the evidence is 
material to guilt or punishment, regardless of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution), and United States v. Bagley, 
HRS § 291E- 61(a) (Supp. 2014) provides in relevant part, 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates
or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an 
amount sufficient to impair the person’s normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty; 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per twohundred ten liters of breath[.]  
 7 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 SGT. TONG: In response to [defense counsel’s] request
for video surveillance from our detention facility on the
date that [redacted] was arrested, unless we actually had a
subpoena of some sort within 20 to 25 days –- that is 
usually when the –- the video recording is written over. 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
473 U.S. 667 (1985) (a prosecutor’s failure to disclose evidence 
favorable to the accused constitutes reversible error when the 
suppressed evidence might have affected the outcome of the 
trial).  
2. Motion to compel video recording 
On January 6, 2017, Alkire filed a motion to compel 
production of the video recording showing her at the police station after her arrest (“motion to compel video recording”). Alkire indicated she had been under surveillance at the Kalihi 
Police Station after her arrest, and that she had sent the 
request to preserve a few days after her arrest and “well within the time that the video footage was maintained” to the HPD and to the prosecutor’s office. 
Alkire attached to her motion the request to preserve and 
the addendum, which had been sent to Headquarters, Central Receiving, and the prosecutor’s office.  Alkire also attached a 
transcript of statements by HPD Police Sergeant Barry Tong (“Sgt. 
Tong”) at one of defense counsel’s previous hearings involving another OVUII defendant.  Sgt. Tong, who worked at Central Receiving, had explained HPD practice for retaining video 
surveillance footage: 
THE COURT: Okay.  
 8 
  SGT. TONG: So it’s not destroyed; it’s just written
over.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
THE COURT: Okay. So I think what you’re saying –-
tell me if I’m correct. 
You’re saying that the normal course of events is
after 20 to 25 days existing material is re –-is recorded 
over? 
SGT. TONG: Correct. 
With our current system, yes,
sir. 
Additionally, Sgt. Tong had testified that future requests to 
preserve evidence should be sent to the Central Receiving and 
that either he or one of his officers “will go through its proper channels . . . to preserve the information.” 
In addition, Alkire attached (1) a copy of the HPD policy 
requiring video monitoring of all detainees in holding cells and (2) a letter from Sgt. Tong regarding a discovery request for another case, stating that (a) video recordings from the 
District 5 Kalihi Police Station “exist[s] for a period of 30 
days after the day and time it was recorded;” and (b) “cameras at the District 5 Kalihi Police Station are positioned to get 
maximum viewing angle of the exterior of the police station and 
all access points to the station[]” and also provide “surveillance viewing of the adult and juvenile processing and cellblock areas.” 
Alkire also represented that, as of January 6, 2017, the 
State had not responded to her request, and that the video recording had not been provided in the State’s January 5, 2017 
disclosure. Alkire argued that her constitutional rights 
entitled her to access this video footage. Alkire argued that   
   
  
 
 . . . .  Alkire further contended that even if her constitutional 
rights were not implicated, under HRPP Rule 16 (2012)    , her 5 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  . . . . 5 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this video footage was “an ‘essential ingredient’ to demonstrate
to [the district court] the Defendant’s version of the facts, 
i.e., that Defendant was not impaired and that the purported 
indicia of impairment simply were not present.”   
HRPP Rule 16 provides in relevant part: 
(a) Applicability. Subject to subsection (d) of this rule,
discovery under this rule may be obtained in and is limited
to cases in which the defendant is charged with a felony,and may commence upon the filing in circuit court of an indictment, an information, or a complaint. 
(b) Disclosure by the prosecution . 
(1) Disclosure of matters within prosecution’s
possession. The prosecutor shall disclose to thedefendant or the defendant’s attorney the following 
material and information within the prosecutor’s
possession or control: 
(vii)
 any material or information which tends
to negate the guilt of the defendant as to theoffense charged or would tend to reduce thedefendant’s punishment therefor. 
(2) Disclosure of matters not within prosecution’spossession. Upon written request of defense counseland specific designation by defense counsel ofmaterial or information which would be discoverable if in the possession or control of the prosecutor and 
which is in the possession or control of other
governmental personnel, the prosecutor shall usediligent good faith efforts to cause such material orinformation to be made available to defense counsel;and if the prosecutor’s efforts are unsuccessful the 
court shall issue suitable subpoenas or orders to
cause such material or information to be made available to defense counsel. 
(continued . . .) 
9  
 10 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
request for the video footage was both “reasonable” and “material.” Finally, Alkire argued that if the video footage 
had been destroyed despite her request that the footage be 
preserved, her case should be dismissed. 
On January 9, 2017, the State filed a memorandum in 
opposition.  The State argued that pursuant to HRPP Rule 16, 
discovery in misdemeanor cases is allowed “only if defendant 
makes a showing of materiality and if defendant’s request is reasonable.” The State argued that Alkire was requesting the 
video recordings “with no good faith basis” and that her request 
was in the nature of a “fishing expedition.” The State contended that any surveillance video would not be material because Alkire arrived at the Kalihi Police Station nearly forty 
minutes after the initial car stop and it was speculative that 
the video would show the signs and symptoms of possible impairment that the officers had observed earlier. 
(. . . continued)
(d) Discretionary Disclosure. Upon a showing of
materiality and if the request is reasonable, the court 
in its discretion may require disclosure as provided for
in this Rule 16 in cases other than those in which the 
defendant is charged with a felony, but not in casesinvolving violations.  
 11 
    
 
    
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3. January 10, 2017 proceedings 
a. Pretrial matters 
On the afternoon of January 10, 2017, Alkire’s case was 
called, and before starting trial, the district court addressed Alkire’s motions to compel officer files and the video recording. 
The district court asked the State whether it was in possession 
or control of any potentially exculpatory or sentence -reducing 
information that had not yet been turned over to the defense. 
The State responded that it was not. The State further stated: 
And I can put on the record, Your Honor, that in regards to
this matter, we did –-we are not aware of any exculpatory 
evidence as I’ve already indicated, however, we also didmake affirmative inquiries on –-into both of these 
officers, both to HPC [Honolulu Police Commission] and HPD, 
and in each case we were told that there are no records re 
–-or on either officer.  And from HPC, Your Honor, from
the commission we received that response November 30th andfrom HPD rather we received that response November 28th.  So as of that time, Your Honor, not only do we not have any
information, but we have made affirmative checks and found
nothing to turn over. 
At defense counsel’s request, the State clarified that it had 
made standard requests for information pertaining to the witnesses’ truth or veracity and argued it therefore met its burden under Brady and its progeny to disclose exculpatory 
evidence. The district court then denied Alkire’s motion to 
compel officer files. 
With respect to the motion to compel video recording, 
Alkire argued that, based on HPD policy and Sgt. Tong’s 
testimony, a video should exist and that it was material because  
 12 
   
    
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the alleged indicia of impairment should have been observable 
when Alkire arrived at the Kalihi Police Station. The district 
court denied this motion also, on the grounds Alkire had not 
shown that a video recording of her actually existed, or, if it existed, that it was material. 
b. Patrol officer’s testimony 
After both the State and defense waived opening statements, 
the State called its first witness, the patrol officer, who testified as follows. 
While driving north on Likelike Highway on October 15, 2016, 
he observed a red Jeep suddenly veer into the right shoulder, veer back into the driving lane, and veer into the right shoulder again. After observing the Jeep veer into the shoulder 
a third time “just slightly,” he decided to stop the vehicle.  
After approaching Alkire, who was seated in the Jeep while he stood two feet away from it, he smelled a strong odor of alcohol 
emanating from her. 
c. Trial continuance 
Following cross-examination, the patrol officer was excused.  
The court and the parties briefly went off, then came back on the record. Although the record states Alkire’s counsel agreed 
to continue trial to March 16, 2017, it appears the continuance 
was due to chronic court congestion.  
 13 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4. March 16, 2017 proceedings 
On March 16, 2017, the State called to the stand the HPD 
officer who conducted a standardized field sobriety test (“SFST”) on Alkire (“SFST officer”). He testified in relevant part as follows. 
When he arrived on the scene, the patrol officer told him 
that Alkire was possibly under the influence of an intoxicant and asked him to administer a SFST.  When the SFST officer approached the vehicle, Alkire was seated in the driver’s seat.  
He observed that “[s]he had some redness and watery –-watery 
eyes. And from outside the window, I could smell an odor of an 
alcoholic-type beverage coming from her person.”  
Alkire then consented to the SFST. After it was 
administered, Alkire was arrested and transported to the Kalihi Police Station. 
The district court then interrupted the SFST officer’s 
testimony and asked him to leave the courtroom so he could discuss with counsel how they wished to proceed, considering that the officer was not likely to finish his testimony that day.  The district court stated it wanted to give defense counsel some 
time to cross-examine the SFST officer that day, stating: 
Because by the time we continue this -- because it doesn’t 
look like we’re going to finish, is my guess, today. I don’t want memory to be kicking in if we have another six
or eight weeks of delay.  
 14 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Further, the district court stated that it was not allowing the 
State “to pursue the (a)(3) [violation] if you don’t have your 
necessary evidence today.”6 Defense counsel then stated that he 
wanted to get transcripts to finish his cross-examination. 
The SFST officer was called back into the courtroom and the 
State’s direct examination continued. The officer clarified that Alkire’s arrest was based on “[his] observations of 
[Alkire] in the driver’s seat, coming out, and then the performance of the standardized field sobriety test[,]” as well 
as the odor of alcohol coming from her. 
Defense counsel then began cross-examination.  After a few 
questions, the district court interrupted and stated that the 
trial would be continued to a later date. Defense counsel 
requested that the district court allow him “some time . . . to 
get the transcript” prior to the next day of trial and that, based on his past experience, a six-week continuance would 
likely not be sufficient. The State objected, arguing that if 
defense counsel was “concerned about memory, it’s very, very easy to obtain audio of this . . . hearing.” The district court agreed that defense counsel could obtain an audio CD promptly 
This was in reference to HRS § 291E- 61(a)(3), which prohibits operating 
a vehicle “[w]ith .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of 
breath[.]”  As in Alkire’s case, defendants arrested for OVUII after being
pulled over are often charged with OVUII under both HRS § 291E -61(a)(1), 
which prohibits operating a vehicle “[w]hile under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person’s normal mental faculties orability to care for the person and guard against casualty” as well as HRS § 
291E- 61(a)(3).  See supra text accompanying note 4. 6  
 15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and noted that “transcripts often take several months,” which 
would only exacerbate potential memory issues.  Thus, the 
district court declined the defense request for a delay to 
obtain the transcript. 
The district court then inquired whether the SFST officer 
would have any scheduling issues in the next three months. The 
officer indicated the month of April would not work for him due 
to a significant personal family issue, and that he probably would not be available until the second half of May or until 
June. Alkire indicated a preference for an afternoon trial time.  
The district court stated the first date it would be available would be the afternoon of June 8th, and trial was continued until that date. 
5. June 8, 2017 
On June 8, 2017, the defense and the prosecutor, with her 
witnesses, appeared for trial. Unbeknownst to the parties, 
however, the district court had entered an order on May 19, 2017 
stating that “[t]his matter, currently scheduled for further trial on June 8, 2017, at 1:30 p.m., is hereby rescheduled for status/no witnesses at 8:30 a.m. on August 2, 2017[.]” On June 
23, 2017, another order was filed by the district court, stating 
that “[f]urther trial of this matter is hereby rescheduled to August 4, 2017 at 8:30 a.m.” and “[t]he previously scheduled  
 16 
   
   
   
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
status/no witnesses at 8:30 a.m. on August 2, 2017, is hereby 
cancelled.” 
6. Motion to dismiss 
On July 21, 2017, Alkire filed a motion to dismiss, 
claiming the State had violated her constitutional right to a speedy trial and/or HRPP Rule 48. Alkire argued that “[s]imply 
‘commencing’ trial and continuing the proceedings beyond the 
time permitted by Rule 48 in the first place allows the State to present one witness and toll Rule 48 in perpetuity without any 
inclination as to when trial will finally conclude.”
7 
Alkire contended that defendants are entitled to a 
meaningful commencement of trial and that the spirit of HRPP 
Rule 48 was violated because, although the trial technically 
“commenced” on January 10, 2017, ten months had passed since her 
arrest and the trial had not yet concluded. Alkire argued that even if HRPP Rule 48 was not violated, the ten-month delay from 
arrest to the August 2017 continued trial date was presumptively 
prejudicial for speedy trial purposes, citing Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 530 (1972). Alkire contended that the district 
court was therefore required to consider the three other Barker 
Alkire also argued that “[t]his is an ongoing issue in District Court.
Due to the current practices in District Court, when ‘commenced’ [trials]
have been scheduled months later because no other openings are available dueto the chronic congestion resulting from these exact practices.  This is exactly what Rule 48 dismissals are designed to prevent. This case should be 
dismissed.” 7  
 17 
     
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factors to determine whether her constitutional rights were 
violated: (1) reason for the delay; (2) defendant’s assertion of 
her right; and (3) prejudice to the defendant. 407 U.S. at 530. 
Alkire claimed that all three factors “weigh heavily in favor of dismissal.” 
In its memorandum in opposition, the State countered that 
HRPP Rule 48 did not apply because the rule “addresses delays prior to trial.” The State also argued that the constitutional right to a speedy trial similarly contemplates only pre -trial 
delays. The State also argued that the defense had filed several motions. 
7. August 4, 2017 proceedings 
On August 4, 2017, before trial resumed, the district court 
orally denied Alkire’s motion to dismiss. It found that neither HRPP Rule 48 nor Alkire’s constitutional rights to a speedy trial were violated. With respect to HRPP Rule 48, the district 
court stated: 
Completing this trial less than nine months from the
date of arraignment is reasonable in my view under the
circumstances, particularly given that in this case thedefense has filed nine motions of one sort or another, the
State has filed one motion of its own, and also given that
the defense has formally waived Rule 48 and speedy trialrights in this particular case. 
In addition, I would note that certainly at the March
16, 2017 trial, the defense also orally requested alengthier delay in further trial than I actually allowed.That request was to obtain transcripts. Candidly, I thinkdefense counsel has unclean hands in this matter because of the waiver of time and because of the request for lengthier
delays than the court was willing to allow. The point  
 18 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
being the court has tried when it can to bring this case to
trial and completion sooner rather than later. 
The district court then ruled Alkire’s constitutional 
rights to a speedy trial were also not violated because (1) the 
reasons for the delay were to address numerous motions, the 
defense waived time, and the judge had temporarily been assigned to another court; (2) Alkire did not specifically assert her speedy trial rights; and (3) Alkire was not prejudiced because 
there was no significant pretrial incarceration. Additionally, 
with respect to Alkire’s claim of possible prejudice, the district court stated that “if counsel was genuinely concerned 
about a loss of recollection, it would make no sense to request 
lengthier than normal delays for -- to obtain transcripts.”  
After the district court denied the motion to dismiss, the 
SFST officer was recalled for defense counsel to continue his 
cross-examination.  Defense counsel questioned the officer with 
respect to his training on conducting SFSTs and whether Alkire was properly instructed in performing her SFST.  The officer was 
then excused. 
The district court found Alkire guilty of the OVUII charge 
based on HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).  It found that Alkire 
was under the influence –-influence of alcohol in an 
amount sufficient to impair her ability to care for herself
and guard against casualty. That is basically evidenced by the three swerves so to speak and the quote -unquote indicia.  
So I do not find that she was impaired by alcohol in anamount sufficient to impair her normal mental faculties,
but I do find on the alterna –-alternative ground to guard 
against casualty.  I also find that the defendant was at a  
 19 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
minimum reckless in all instances required to be proven by
the State. 
The district court stated its finding of guilt was based on the 
police officers’ observations of Alkire’s driving and other 
indicia of impairment. The district court indicated that even 
without considering the results of the SFST, it would have adjudged Alkire guilty. A notice of entry of judgment was 
entered on August 30, 2017. 
C. ICA proceedings 
Alkire appealed her conviction to the ICA, asserting the 
four points of error also raised on certiorari. The ICA 
affirmed Alkire’s conviction in a summary disposition order (“SDO”).  State v. Alkire, CAAP-17-0000638, 2019 WL 312155 (App. Jan. 24, 2019) (SDO). 
With respect to the three remaining issues we address on 
certiorari, first, the ICA concluded that Alkire’s speedy trial rights were not violated. Alkire, SDO at 2.  The ICA concluded that HRPP Rule 48 was not violated because Alkire was arrested 
on October 15, 2016, and trial commenced on January 10, 2017 — 
within the six months allowed by the rule. Id. As to Alkire’s 
constitutional speedy trial rights under the Sixth Amendment to 
the United States Constitution, and article I, section 14 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution, the ICA rejected Alkire’s claim that the 
district court erred by failing to consider the period of time  
 20 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
between arrest and the conclusion of trial.  Alkire, SDO at 2-3. 
The ICA reasoned that because only three months elapsed between 
the time when Alkire was arrested and the beginning of trial, 
the delay was not presumptively prejudicial, and no further analysis under Barker was required to determine whether Alkire’s constitutional speedy trial rights were preserved.  Alkire, SDO 
at 3. 
Next, with respect to Alkire’s request that the prosecutor 
more thoroughly investigate whether impeachment evidence existed, the ICA concluded that Alkire was urging the ICA to promulgate a 
new discovery rule requiring prosecutors to personally review officers’ personnel files for impeachment evidence, which the ICA declined to impose. Id. 
With respect to the video recording, the ICA concluded that 
the district court did not err by denying Alkire’s motion to compel because it did not appear the video footage was material.  
Alkire, SDO at 4 (citing Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U.S. 419, 434-35 
(1995)).  The ICA so concluded based on its understanding of the lack of evidence that any video existed at the time of Alkire’s request and its view of the overwhelming evidence of impairment 
in support of the conviction. Id. 
The ICA thus affirmed the district court’s August 30, 2017 
judgment of conviction.  
 21 
   
   
 
    
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Standards of Review 
A. HRPP Rule 48 dismissal 
An appellate court reviews a trial court’s decision on 
a HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss under both the “clearly 
erroneous” and “right/wrong” tests: 
A trial court’s findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding an HRPP
48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous
when, despite evidence to support the finding, theappellate court is left with the definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been committed. However,
whether those facts fall within HRPP 48(b)’s exclusionary 
provisions is a question of law, the determination of whichis freely reviewable pursuant to the “right/wrong” test. 
State v. Samonte, 83 Hawaiʻi 507, 514, 928 P.2d 1, 8 (1996) 
(citation omitted). 
B. Constitutional questions This court reviews questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case. State v. Phua, 135 Hawaiʻi 504, 511-12, 
353 P.3d 1046, 1053-54 (2015) (quotation marks omitted).  
Therefore, questions of constitutional law are reviewed under 
the right/wrong standard. 
Phua, 135 Hawaiʻi at 512, 353 P.3d at 
1054. 
C. Discovery requests The scope of discovery is reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion. State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawaiʻi 462, 477-78, 946 P.2d 
32, 47 
-48 (1997).  “An abuse of discretion occurs when the  
 22 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
  
      
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
decisionmaker exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules 
or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of 
a party.” State v. Fukuoka, 141 Hawaiʻi 48, 55, 404 P.3d 314, 
321 (2017) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
IV.  Discussion 
The issues on certiorari for our consideration are: 
II. As a matter of first impression, did the ICA gravely
err in rejecting Petitioner’s HRPP, Rule 48 and/orconstitutional speedy trial challenges, where the trial“commenced” with one state witness but was subsequentlycontinued for eight months at no fault of Petitioner? 
III. Did the ICA gravely err in holding that HRPP Rule 16
usurps United States Supreme Court precedent that requiresindividual prosecutors to obtain and disclose impeachmentmaterials rather than merely relying on representations of
the police to determine whether and what materials should 
be disclosed to Defendants? 
IV. Did the ICA gravely err in finding that discovery,
requested for its potential exculpatory value, was not
material because the evidence of guilt was “overwhelming”
and/or in affirming the conviction where Ms. Alkire was deprived of an opportunity to establish an appropriaterecord as to the existence of the video? 
A. The interests sought to be protected by HRPP Rule 48
require a “meaningful” commencement of trial 
With respect to Alkire’s second question on certiorari, we 
have held that “[u]nder the sixth amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 14 of the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution, an accused is guaranteed the right to a speedy 
trial 
in all criminal prosecutions.” State v. 
Lau, 78 Hawai ʻ i 54, 
62, 890 P.2d 291, 299 (1995).  This court applies the four
-part 
test set forth by the United States Supreme Court in Barker, 407 
U.S. 514, and adopted in 
State v. Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 509 P.2d  
 23 
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
  . . . . 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
549 (1973), to determine whether the government has violated a 
defendant’s federal and state constitutional rights to a speedy 
trial. Lau, 78 Hawaiʻi at 62, 890 P.2d at 299. These factors 
are: 
“(1) length of the delay; (2) reasons for the delay; (3) 
defendant’s assertion of his right to speedy trial; and (4) 
prejudice to the defendant.” Id. (citing Barker, 407 U.S. at 
533). 
The United States Supreme Court indicated in Barker that 
“[t]he States, of course, are free to prescribe a reasonable 
period consistent with constitutional standards[.]” 407 U.S. at 
523. Many states have such speedy trial rules, and HRPP Rule 48 
is our version of a rule so prescribed, which, in Alkire ’
s case, 
required that her trial “commence” within six months of her 
arrest: 
Rule 48. Dismissal. 
(b) By C ourt. Except in the case of traffic offenses
that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall,
on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with orwithout prejudice in its discretion, if trial is notcommenced within six months: 
(1) from the date of arrest . . . . 
Although Alkire’s trial started three months after her 
arrest, Alkire alleges that her speedy trial rights under the 
federal and state constitutions as well as HRPP Rule 48 were 
violated because the district court failed to “meaningfully” 
commence trial.  This is because her trial was continued for  
 24 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
months at a time and was not concluded until almost seven months 
after it began and ten months after her arrest. 
Because HRPP Rule 48 “is intended to provide broader 
protections than the analogous constitutional [speedy trial] 
guarantee,” Fukuoka, 141 Hawaiʻi at 64, 404 P.3d at 330, we 
address Alkire
’s assertion that HRPP Rule 48 requires a 
“meaningful” commencement of trial. Alkire urges this court to 
adopt the California Supreme Court’s interpretation of its speedy trial rule. In Rhinehart, 677 P.2d at 1208, a jury was impaneled on the day before California’s speedy trial rule would 
have been violated, and the judge announced that, due to court 
congestion, there would be a five or six day delay before evidence would be presented. The California Supreme Court held 
that “brought to trial” does not mean when a jury is impaneled, 
but rather, 
an accused is “brought to trial” within the meaning of 
[California’s speedy trial rule] when a case has been
called for trial by a judge who is normally available and
ready to try the case to conclusion. The court must have committed its resources to the trial, and the parties mustbe ready to proceed and a panel of prospective jurors must be summoned and sworn. 
677 P.2d at 1211-12. 
The language of HRPP Rule 48 differs from the California 
rule. HRPP Rule 48 requires that a trial be “commenced” within 
a certain time period while the California rule requires that an accused by “brought to trial” within a certain time. Both rules,  
 25 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
however, are state rules designed “to prescribe a reasonable 
period consistent with constitutional standards[.]” Barker, 407 
U.S. at 523. Although “separate and distinct from [the] constitutional protection to a speedy trial[,]” State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 268, 625 P.2d 1040, 1043 (1981), HRPP Rule 48 is intended to ensure an accused a speedy trial. 
Fukuoka, 141 Hawaiʻi at 55, 404 P.3d at 321.  
Further, 
[s]peedy trial rules are intended to prevent unreasonable 
delay in the determination of criminal actions that subvert
the public good and disgrace the administration of justice.  
To accomplish this end, HRPP Rule 48(b) requires a court to
dismiss the charge upon the defendant’s motion if trial is 
not commenced within 6 months of a relevant triggering date. The six- month period under HRPP Rule 48 is 
equivalent to 180 days. Under HRPP Rule 48(c), there areeight categories of delay that are to be excluded fromcalculating the time within which trial must commence . 
State v. Hernane, 145 Hawaiʻi 444, 450, 454 P.3d 385, 391 (2019) 
(
internal citations, alterations, and quotation marks omitted). 
Accordingly, “HRPP Rule 48 operates to ‘ensure an accused a 
speedy trial’ and to further ‘policy considerations to relieve congestion in the trial court, to promptly process all cases 
reaching the courts, and to advance the efficiency of the 
criminal justice process.’” Fukuoka, 141 Hawaiʻi at 62-63, 404 
P.3d at 328-29 (citations omitted).  
Thus, HRPP Rule 48 “
is intended to provide broader 
protections than the analogous constitutional [speedy trial] guarantee,” Fukuoka, 141 Hawaiʻi at 64, 404 P.3d at 330, but also  
   
 
   
    
   
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
  (continued . . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
seeks to effectuate constitutional speedy trial interests, which 
include the following: 
(i) to prevent oppressive pretrial incarceration; (ii) to
minimize anxiety and concern of the accused; and (iii) tolimit the possibility that the defense will be impaired. Of these, the most serious is the last, because theinability of a defendant adequately to prepare his case
skews the fairness of the entire system. If witnesses die 
or disappear during a delay, the prejudice is obvious.There is also prejudice if defense witnesses are unable to recall accurately events of the distant past. 
Lau, 78 Hawaiʻi at 64, 890 P.2d at 301 (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. 
at 532). 
Therefore, we now hold that, in order to effectuate its 
intent, HRPP Rule 48 requires a “meaningful” commencement of 
trial.  We also hold that a trial is “meaningfully” commenced when a trial court has “reasonably” committed its resources to 
the trial, which also requires that the parties be ready to 
proceed, and, if applicable, a panel of prospective jurors summoned and sworn, as held by Rhinehart, 677 P.2d at 1211-12. 
As this is a “new rule,” State v. Kaneaiakala, 145 Hawaiʻi 231, 
235, 450 P.3d 761, 765 (2019), however, it will only 
apply prospectively to events occurring after publication of this decision, i.e., to trials that commence after the date of this opinion.
8 Thus, this holding does not apply to Alkire’s 
case.9 
As we stated in Lewi v. State, 145 Hawaiʻ i 333, 346 n.21, 452 P.3d 330,
349 n.21 (2019): 
26 8  
  
 
 
  
   
    
   
 
     
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  (continued . . .) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(. . . continued)
We recognize that we announce a new rule in this case, and 
that we are “[f]ree to apply” this new rule “with or
without retroactivity.” State v. Jess , 117 Hawai ‘i 381, 401, 
184 P.3d 133, 153 (2008) (citation omitted). This court 
has generally considered three primary alternatives in 
deciding to what degree a new rule is to have retroactiveeffect. Id. First, this court may give a new rule “purely
prospective effect, which means that the rule is appliedneither to the parties in the law -making decision nor to 
those others against or by whom it might be applied to conduct or events occurring before thatdecision.” Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Second, this court may give a new rule “limited or ‘pipeline’ retroactive effect, under which the rule 
applies to the parties in the decision and all cases that
are on direct review or not yet final as of the date of thedecision.” Id. (citations omitted). Third, this court 
may give a new rule “full retroactive effect, under whichthe rule applies both to the parties before the court and 
to all others by and against whom claims may be
pressed.” Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Lastly, this court has recognized a fourth alternative, in which a new rule is given “selective retroactive effect,” meaning the court applies the new rule
“in the case in which it is pronounced, then return[s] to
the old [rule] with respect to all [other cases] arising on
facts predating the pronouncement.” 117 Hawai‘ i at 401 n.19, 
184 P.3d at 153 n.19. We have declined to apply this
fourth alternative, as it “violates the principles of
treating similarly situated defendants the same.” Id. 
(citations omitted). 
In exercising our discretion in deciding the effect of a
new rule, we “weigh the merits and demerits” of retroactive 
application of the particular rule in light of “(a) thepurpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the extent ofreliance by law enforcement authorities on the oldstandards, and (c) the effect on the administration of
justice of a retroactive application of the new 
standards.” 117 Hawai‘ i at 401- 02, 184 P.3d at 153-
54 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
The first factor, the purpose of the newly announced rule, would appear 
to counsel against a purely prospective application of this new rule, as the 
purpose of the newly announced rule is to protect a defendant’ s speedy trial 
rights. On the other hand, the second factor (reliance by law enforcement onthe old standards) counsels against a full retroactive application of this 
new rule, as our trial courts have not been required to consider a 
“meaningful commencement” standard for HRPP Rule 48 when setting continuedtrial dates. The third factor (the effect on the administration of justice of the new standards) also counsels against a full retroactive application ofthis new rule, as HRPP Rule 40 petitions challenging trial commencements 
based on an alleged lack of “meaningful commencement” could arise.
27  
 28 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 9 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Under the circumstances of this case, the prosecutor was 
not required to personally review the personnel files of 
the testifying police officers to satisfy Brady obligations 
In her third question on certiorari, Alkire asks whether 
“HRPP Rule 16 usurps United States Supreme Court precedent that 
requires individual prosecutors to obtain and disclose impeachment materials rather than merely relying on 
representations of the police to determine whether and what 
materials should be disclosed to Defendants.” 
As noted in Sections II.B.1 and II.B.3, the district court 
denied Alkire’s motion to compel the personnel files of the testifying police officers based on the prosecutor’s representation that she had made standard written inquiries to HPC and HPD and had been informed no exculpatory evidence, 
(. . . continued)
See, e.g., Jess, 117 Hawai‘ i at 403, 184 P.3d at 155 (concluding that the 
third factor counseled against full retroactive effect of new rule, because
“our courts would be inundated with HRPP Rule 40 (2006) petitions filed by 
defendants who were sentenced to extended terms from as long ago as 1978[.]”). 
On balance, based on the second and third factors, we determine that a 
prospective- only application of the new rule is most appropriate. We 
anticipate, however, that adoption of this new rule will encourage meaningfultrial commencements. 
We must therefore also address Alkire ’s constitutional speedy trial 
claim. This court applies the four -part test set forth by the United States 
Supreme Court in Barker, 407 U.S. 514, and adopted in Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 509 P.2d 549, to determine whether the government has violated a defendant’s
federal and state constitutional rights to a speedy trial. Lau, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 
62, 890 P.2d at 299. 
These factors are: “(1) length of the delay; (2) 
reasons for the delay; (3) defendant’s assertion of his right to speedy
trial; and (4) prejudice to the defendant.” Id. (citing Barker, 407 U.S. at 
533). We have stated that, unless there is a delay in bringing a defendant that is presumptively prejudicial under factor (1), it is not necessary toinquire into the other factors. Almeida, 54 Haw. at 447, 509 P.2d at 552.  As Alkire was brought to trial three months after her arrest, there was no
violation of her constitutional rights to speedy trial.  
 29 
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
including evidence regarding truth or veracity, existed in the 
files of the testifying police officers. Alkire maintains that 
despite this representation, the prosecutor was required to 
investigate further by personally reviewing the files for impeachment materials to satisfy Brady, which, as noted above, held that “[t]he suppression by the prosecution of evidence 
favorable to the accused violates due process where the evidence 
is material to guilt or punishment, regardless of the good faith 
or bad faith of the prosecution.”  Fukusaku, 85 Hawai‘i at 479, 
946 P.2d at 49 (quoting State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 
P.2d 671, 672 (1990))
. 
Under Brady, the government must disclose evidence 
favorable to the defense “where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment[.]” 
Kyles, 514 U.S. at 432 (citing 
Brady, 373 U.S. at 87). “[F]avorable evidence is material, and 
constitutional error results from its suppression by the 
government, ‘if there is a reasonable probability that, had the 
evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the 
proceeding would have been different.’” Kyles, 514 U.S. at 433 (quoting Bagley, 473 U.S. at 682).  
In Kyles, the United State Supreme Court stated that “the 
individual prosecutor has a duty to learn of any favorable evidence known to the others acting on the government’s behalf in the case, including the police.” 514 U.S. at 437. In Kyles,  
 30 
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a federal habeas case arising out of a capital murder conviction, 
the State had failed to turn over numerous pieces of evidence 
favorable to the defendant. 514 U.S. at 431-32.  The State 
argued that because “some of the favorable evidence in issue here was not disclosed even to the prosecutor until after trial,” the State “should not be held accountable under Bagley and Brady 
for evidence known only to police investigators and not to the 
prosecutor.” 514 U.S. at 438.  The Supreme Court rejected this argument and explained that its precedent imposes on the 
prosecutor a “duty to learn of any favorable evidence known to 
the others acting on the government’s behalf in the case, including the police.” 514 U.S. at 437. 
Thus, Kyles imposes an affirmative duty on a prosecutor to 
learn of favorable evidence known to other government agents, which must be disclosed if it is “material,” i.e., gives rise to a reasonable probability that the evidence could lead to a 
different result at trial. Youngblood v. West Virginia, 547 U.S. 
867, 869-70 (2006) (per curiam).  “Material” evidence includes that pertaining to witness credibility, as when the “reliability of a given witness may well be determinative of guilt or 
innocence,” the nondisclosure of evidence affecting that 
witness’s credibility is material. Giglio v. United States, 405 
U.S. 150, 154 (1972) (citation omitted).  Put another way, evidence is material “if there is a reasonable probability that,  
 31 
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of 
the proceeding would have been different.” State v. Moriwaki, 
71 Haw. 347, 356, 791 P.2d 392, 397 (1990) (quoting Bagley, 473 
U.S. at 676). 
In Kyles, the Court acknowledged that police investigators 
sometimes fail to fully inform prosecutors of all that they know, 
but it also stated that “procedures and regulations can be 
established to carry [the prosecutor’s] burden and to insure communication of all relevant information on each case to every 
lawyer who deals with it.” 514 U.S. at 438 (quoting Giglio, 405 
U.S. at 154). Thus, pursuant to Kyles, states may set out 
procedural rules to address a prosecutor ’s discovery obligations.  
We therefore address whether the district court’s refusal to 
order the prosecutor to personally review the testifying police 
officers’ files in Alkire’s case met the requirements of our discovery rules. 
With respect to discovery obligations under our procedural 
rules, “[d]isclosure in criminal cases is governed by HRPP Rule 16, which limits discovery ‘to cases in which the defendant is charged with a felony,’ . . . except as provided in HRPP Rule 
16(d).” State v. Lo, 116 Hawaiʻi 23, 26, 169 P.3d 975, 978 
(2007). 
HRPP Rule 16(d) prescribes rules for discovery when a 
defendant is charged with nonfelony and criminal traffic 
offenses, and provides that, “[u]pon a showing of materiality  
 32 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and if the request is reasonable, the court in its discretion 
may require disclosure as provided for in this Rule 16 in cases 
other than those in which the defendant is charged with a felony, 
but not in cases involving violations.” (Emphasis added.) 
Because Alkire was charged with a criminal traffic offense, 
HRPP Rule 16(d) applies. HRPP Rule 16(d) provides courts with 
discretion to allow discovery in misdemeanor matters upon a 
showing of “materiality” and if a request is “reasonable.” Being that the patrol officer and SFST officer were to be the 
only witnesses presented by the State to establish its case 
against Alkire, the request for exculpatory impeachment evidence with respect to these officers was “material” and “reasonable” for purposes of our discovery rules. 
As an officer of the court, the prosecutor in this case 
represented that the prosecutor’s office was not in possession or control of any potentially exculpatory or impeachment 
information that had not yet been turned over to the defense. 
But under HRPP Rule 16(b)(2), even if discoverable matters are not within a prosecutor’s possession or control, the prosecutor has additional obligations: 
Upon written request of defense counsel and specific
designation by defense counsel of material or informationwhich would be discoverable if in the possession or control of the prosecutor and which is in the possession or controlof other governmental personnel, the prosecutor shall use
diligent good faith efforts to cause such material or 
information to be made available to defense counsel; and ifthe prosecutor’s efforts are unsuccessful the court shall  
 33 
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
issue suitable subpoenas or orders to cause such material
or information to be made available to defense counsel. 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, because the officers’ files were not 
within the prosecutor’s possession, she was obligated to 
exercise “diligent good faith efforts to cause such material or 
information to be made available to defense counsel[,]” if such material was “in the possession or control of other governmental personnel.” HRPP Rule 16(b)(2). 
In this regard, the prosecutor further represented she had 
made affirmative inquiries to both the HPC and the HPD for information pertaining to the truth or veracity of the 
testifying police officers and was informed that no such 
information existed.  Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude these efforts of the prosecutor constituted “diligent 
good faith efforts to cause such material or information to be 
made available to defense counsel[,]”  satisfying HRPP Rule 
16(d)(2) and Kyles.  
Our analysis does not, however, end here. As we stated in 
State v. Tetu, 139 Hawaiʻi 207, 386 P.3d 844 (2016), HRPP Rule 16 
does not set an outer limit on this court
’s power to ensure a 
defendant’s Hawaiʻi Constitution, article I, section 5 due 
process right to a fair trial, which requires that 
“a defendant be given a meaningful opportunity to present a 
complete defense and that discovery procedures provide the  
 34 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
maximum possible amount of information and a level-playing field 
in the adversarial process.”  139 Hawaiʻi at 214, 220, 386 P.3d 
at 851, 857. And as noted in State v. Bowe
, 77 Hawaiʻi 51, 881 
P.2d 538 (1994), we are not bound to give the state due process 
clause the same interpretation as given under the United States 
Constitution. 77 Hawai
ʻi at 58, 881 P.2d at 545. Thus, state 
due process rights are also implicated in discovery requests. 
We have also stated, however, that “due process is flexible 
and calls for such procedural protections as the particular situation demands.” State v. Mundon, 121 Hawaiʻi 339, 359, 219 
P.3d 1126, 1146 (2009) (citation omitted).  Under the 
circumstances, we conclude that the State satisfied its 
obligations with respect to Alkire’s rights under Hawai
ʻi’s due 
process clause with its inquiries of HPD and HPC, which came 
back negative. 
For all of these reasons, the district court did not abuse 
its discretion in not requiring the prosecutor to personally review the testifying officers’ 
personnel files. 
C. As the video recording was material to Alkire’s defense and 
her request was reasonable, the district court abused itsdiscretion in denying her motion to compel the video 
recording 
1. The video recording was material and Alkire’s request 
was reasonable 
In the fourth and last question on certiorari, Alkire 
contends that the district court abused its discretion with  
 35 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
respect to her motion to compel production of the video 
recording. As discussed in Section IV.B above, HRPP Rule 16(d) 
allows a trial court in a criminal traffic case to, in its 
discretion, require disclosure as provided by HRPP Rule 16, “[u]pon a showing of materiality and if the request is reasonable.” The district court denied Alkire’s motion to 
compel video recording on the grounds Alkire had not shown that 
a “video recording of [Alkire] exists or that it is material[.]” Because Alkire’s request was both “reasonable” and “material,” 
the district court abused its discretion in denying her motion 
to compel video recording. 
First, Alkire’s request was reasonable. We first note that 
the State does not even argue that Alkire’s request was 
unreasonable. And with respect to reasonableness, contrary to 
the district court’s ruling, Alkire showed that the video recording should have existed at the time she sent her request 
to preserve evidence.  Alkire attached as exhibits to her motion 
(1) a copy of the HPD policy requiring video monitoring of all detainees in holding cells; (2) a transcript from a prior unrelated hearing where Sgt. Tong from the HPD Central Receiving 
Division explained that HPD retains video recording s for “20 to 
25 days” before it is written over, unless a request to preserve 
or subpoena is received; (3) a letter from Sgt. Tong regarding a discovery request for another case where Sgt. Tong stated that  
  (continued . . .) 
36 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(a) video recordings of the Kalihi Police Station “exist for a 
period of 30 days after the day and time it was recorded;” and 
(b) “cameras at the District 5 Kalihi Police Station are 
positioned to get maximum viewing angle of the exterior of the police station and all access points to the station[]” and provide “surveillance viewing of the adult and juvenile 
processing and cellblock areas[]”; and (4) Alkire’s request to 
preserve evidence, which was sent to the HPD Central Receiving Division just five days after her arrest. Thus, the HPD under 
its procedures would have possessed the video recording when it 
received a request to preserve evidence, and it would not have been burdensome for the State to preserve and then produce the video recording.  Thus, Alkire’s request was reasonable. 
Second, the video recording of Alkire at the Kalihi Police 
Station is “material” to challenging the police officers’ testimony that Alkire demonstrated indicia of intoxication. See 
Lo, 116 Hawaiʻi at 27, 169 P.3d at 979 (holding that information 
regarding the calibration of laser units operated by the police 
was “material to challenging the accuracy of the particular laser unit,” which provided the sole basis for the defendant’s 
charge of excessive speeding).
10 Here, the district court found 
Other jurisdictions have also concluded that police video recordings 
are material to the defense when the defendant is charged with impairment or
intoxication. See, e.g., Koonce v. District of Columbia, 111 A.3d 1009, 1015 
(D.C. 2015) (“[V]ideo of a person just arrested for driving under the10  
 37 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
      
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Alkire guilty based solely on the indicia of impairment observed 
by the police officers. Thus, the video recording of Alkire at 
the Kalihi Police Station shortly after her arrest is material 
to challenging the police officers’ testimony about the indicia of impairment that they allegedly observed. Moreover, the video recording could lead to the discovery of other admissible 
evidence.
11 
2. Before any retrial, the district court must conduct
another hearing regarding the video recording 
On remand, before any retrial, the district court must hold 
a hearing to determine if the video recording was preserved. As 
we stated in Matafeo: 
In Brady v. Maryland , the United States Supreme Court held
that the suppression by the prosecution of evidence 
favorable to the accused violates due process where theevidence is material to guilt or punishment, regardless of
the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution. The Brady 
rule has been incorporated into the Hawaiʻ i due 
process jurisprudence and relied upon frequently by this 
court. 
. . . . 
(. . . continued)
influence or operating a vehicle while impaired is material in that it mayassist in showing whether the person was acting in a way consistent withintoxication or impairment.”); State v. Ferguson, 2 S.W.3d 912, 918 (Tenn. 1999) (concluding that videotape of sobriety test at police station was “at
least material to the preparation of defendant’s defense”). See also State v. 
Zinsli, 966 P.2d 1200, 1205 (Or. Ct. App. 1998) (holding that a dashboard 
camera video of a defendant performing a field sobriety test was material tothe defense “because its replay would have given defendant a uniqueopportunity to permit the jurors to form their own opinions as to defendant’s
intoxication level. ”). 
As discovery of the video recording should have been permitted under
HRPP Rule 16, we need not reach the issue of whether state constitutional due
process also mandated its discovery under Tetu, 139 Hawaiʻ i 207, 386 P.3d 844. 
11  
 38 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court has held that the duty of disclosure is 
operative as a duty of preservation, and that principlemust be applied on a case- by-case basis[.] 
In certain circumstances, regardless of good or bad faith, the State may lose or destroy material evidence which is socritical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it. 
71 Haw. at 185, 187, 787 P.2d at 672-73 (citations, alterations, 
and quotation marks omitted). 
Thus, based on due process considerations, if the video 
recording was not preserved, as indicated in Matafeo, the district court must first determine whether it was so critical to Alkire’s defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it. If the district court determines that it was, 
regardless of good or bad faith, it must dismiss the charge 
against Alkire. State v. Steger, 114 Hawaiʻi 162, 169-70, 158 
P.3d 280, 287
-88 (App. 2006) (citing Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 187, 
787 P.2d at 673). If the recording was not preserved and the 
district court determines, however, that the video recording is 
not so critical to Alkire’s defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair without it, the district court should then 
fashion an appropriate remedy. 
In civil cases, this court has recognized that trial courts 
have authority “to fashion a remedy to cure prejudice suffered 
by one party as a result of another party’s loss or destruction 
of evidence.” Stender v. Vincent, 92 Hawai‘i 355, 362, 992 P.2d 
50, 57 (2000) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  
 39 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Where evidence has been lost or destroyed, the trier of fact may draw an adverse inference that the lost evidence was unfavorable 
to the spoliator. 92 Hawai‘i at 364-65, 992 P.2d at 59-60.  
We therefore now hold that the permissive adverse inference 
rule also applies to criminal cases where, as here, the State 
should have had a recording in its possession and, despite the 
accused’s timely request to preserve the evidence, the video 
recording was apparently lost or destroyed.  See People v. Strife, 167 A.D.3d 1095, 1098 (N.Y. App. Div. 2018) (holding that the trial court “erred by failing to provide a permissive 
adverse inference charge based upon the [State’s] failure to 
preserve a copy of the booking room video on the night of defendant’s arrest”); People v. Handy, 988 N.E.2d 879, 882 (N.Y. 
2013) (“[A] permissive adverse inference charge should be given 
where a defendant, using reasonable diligence, has requested evidence reasonably likely to be material, and where that evidence has been destroyed by agents of the State.”). 
V.  Conclusion 
Based on the reasons discussed above, we vacate the ICA’s 
February 25, 2019 judgment on appeal, which affirmed the  
 40 
  
 
   
 
     
    
     
 
      
 
 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
district court’s August 30, 2017 judgment, and we remand to the district court for further proceedings in accordance with this 
opinion. 
Richard L. Holcomb 
for petitioner/defendant-appellant 
Donn Fudo 
for respondent/plaintiff-
appellee 