*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I,  
Petitioner and Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs.  
 
LEAH SKAPINOK,  
Respondent and Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee.  
 
 
SCWC-19-0000476 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000476; CASE NO. 1DTA-19-01048) 
 
JUNE 3, 2022 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND McKENNA, JJ., AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WONG, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY, 
WITH WILSON, J., DISSENTING 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
  This case requires us to examine the practice of 
asking so-called medical rule-out questions in the course of an 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000476
03-JUN-2022
10:22 AM
Dkt. 19 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 
 investigation.  An officer administering a standardized field 
sobriety test (SFST) to an OVUII suspect asks the medical rule-out questions, which “rule out” other reasons, besides 
intoxication, for poor performance on the SFST.  Leah Skapinok 
was asked seven medical rule-out questions while in police 
custody, before she was advised of her Miranda  rights.  If the 
questions were interrogation, article I, section 10 of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution requires that her answers to them be 
suppressed. 1
  We hold that these questions are interrogation under 
the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  There is no per se exception under the 
Hawai‘i
 Constitution for questions “necessarily ‘attendant to’ 
[a] legitimate police procedure.”  Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 
U.S. 582, 605 (1990) (citation omitted).  To avoid suppression 
for want of Miranda warnings, such questions must pass muster 
under our well-established interrogation test: “whether the officer should have known that his words and actions were 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the 
defendant.”  State v. Paahana, 66 Haw. 499, 503, 666 P.2d 592, 
595–96 (1983) (citing Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 
(1980)).  The medical rule-out questions asked to Skapinok in this case were “reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
                     
1  Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 
 response” because her answers to them aided in interpreting the 
SFSTs’ results – that is, her answers supported the inference that she was intoxicated because no medical cause could explain 
any aberrations in her test performance.  Skapinok’s answers to 
the medical rule-out questions must be suppressed.   
 
 But we cannot say the same for any of the other 
challenged evidence.  Neither asking whether Skapinok would participate in the SFST nor asking whether she understood the 
instructions to the test would be reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response.  And the evidence gathered thereafter, 
including her performance on the SFST, was not an exploitation of, or benefit derived from, the medical rule-out questions; 
accordingly, subsequent evidence was not the fruit of the 
poisonous tree.   
II.  BACKGROUND 
 
A. Skapinok’s Arrest 
 
  On August 18, 2019, around 11:00 p.m., Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD) Officer William Meredith observed a white Toyota Tacoma speeding down King Street in Honolulu.
2  He 
followed the vehicle onto Ward Avenue, where he observed it “weaving through traffic”; the truck then turned right onto the 
H-1 freeway onramp, merged onto the freeway, “cross[ed] over a 
                     
2  This account of Skapinok’s arrest comes from the District Court 
of the First Circuit’s findings of fact in the order granting Skapinok’s 
motion to suppress, which are not contested on appeal. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 
 solid white line,” and “crossed three lanes of the freeway to 
the left without a turn signal.”  After following the truck on the freeway, which appeared to be speeding, Officer Meredith 
pulled the vehicle over.  “Based on his observations, Officer 
Meredith characterized Defendant’s driving as Reckless Driving,” 
which is a petty misdemeanor under Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 291-2 (2007).
3   
  When Officer Meredith approached the driver’s side and 
spoke with Skapinok, he “noticed a strong odor of alcohol coming 
from Defendant and observed Defendant’s eyes to be red, glassy 
and bloodshot.”  Officer Meredith asked if she would participate 
in an SFST; she “became argumentative” at first, but ultimately 
consented after Officer Meredith informed her that “if she did not participate in an SFST, that he would arrest her.”  
   
  
Officer Meredith waited for another officer, Corporal 
Ernest Chang, to arrive;4 when Corporal Chang was informed by 
Officer Meredith, outside of Skapinok’s presence, of the reason for the traffic stop, he agreed that Skapinok could be arrested 
for reckless driving.  Corporal Chang then “approached 
Defendant’s vehicle and began conversing with her.  Corporal 
                     
3  HRS § 291-2 provides: “Whoever operates any vehicle . . . 
recklessly in disregard of the safety of persons or property is guilty of 
reckless driving of [a] vehicle . . . and shall be fined not more than $1,000 
or imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both.”   
 
4  The record does not indicate how long Skapinok and Officer 
Meredith waited for Corporal Chang, but testimony indicated that the traffic stop took about thirty minutes in total.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 
 Chang asked Defendant if she would be willing to participate in 
an SFST.”  Skapinok asked whether she would be arrested if she did not participate, and “Corporal Chang told Defendant that she 
could already be arrested for reckless driving.”  Skapinok again 
consented to the SFST.   
 
 Corporal Chang asked a series of questions known as 
the medical rule-out questions prior to administering the SFST:  
i. Do you have any physical defects or speech 
impediments? 
ii. Are you taking any medications? 
iii. Are you under the care of a doctor or dentist for 
anything? 
iv. Are you under the care of an eye doctor? 
iv. Do you have an artificial or glass eye? 
v. Are you epileptic or diabetic? 
vi. Are you blind in either eye? 
 
According to Corporal Chang’s testimony, the 
medical rule-out questions “must be asked to administer the 
SFST safely” and when answered in the negative, it “tells 
the officer that the results he sees on the SFST are likely 
caused by an intoxicant.”  Corporal Chang “never 
administers an SFST without first asking the [medical rule-out] questions.”   
Skapinok responded “no” to all questions except 
that she told Corporal Chang that she was taking the 
medication Wellbutrin and that she was seeing a doctor for 
depression.  Corporal Chang knew “that ingesting Wellbutrin 
in conjunction with alcohol can cause side effects that are 
similar to that of intoxication.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 
 After performing the SFST, Skapinok was arrested 
for OVUII and reckless driving.  Neither Corporal Chang nor 
Officer Meredith administered Miranda warnings prior to her 
arrest.  
B. District Court Proceedings 
 
  Skapinok was charged in the District Court of the 
First Circuit (district court)5 with OVUII in violation of HRS 
§§ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) (2018).6   
1. Motion to Suppress 
  Skapinok moved to suppress “[a]ny statements made by Defendant to [HPD] Officers or other governmental personnel” and 
“[a]ny and all evidence seized or information gained by the 
[HPD] after Defendant was placed under arrest, [and] was not 
read [their] Miranda rights.”  The motion argued that Skapinok 
was both in custody and subjected to interrogation during the traffic stop.  Skapinok contended she was subjected to 
interrogation when the officer asked if she would like to 
                     
5  The Honorable Summer M. M. Kupau-Odo presided.  
 
6  HRS § 291E-61 provides in relevant part: 
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person’s normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard 
against casualty; [or] 
. . . . 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 
 participate in the SFST; during the communica
tions that occurred 
during the test itself (e.g., counting aloud during one 
component of the SFST); when she was asked the medical rule-out 
questions; and when asked if she understood the field sobriety 
test instructions or had any questions about them.   
  Officer Meredith and Corporal Chang testified at the 
hearing on the Motion to Suppress.  Officer Meredith first 
testified that after pulling Skapinok over, he “observed that 
the defendant had red, glassy, bloodshot eyes and a strong odor 
of alcoholic beverage as [he] was talking to her.”  Skapinok 
stipulated to the admission of edited body-camera footage.  In the footage, Officer Meredith explained to Skapinok why she was 
pulled over – for speeding and swerving – and informed her that 
he could “smell a lot of alcohol coming from [her].”  Officer 
Meredith asked Skapinok if she would like to do a field sobriety 
test, to which she responded, “No. I’m – I just got off work. 
I’m in my work uniform,” and added, “I swear I haven’t been 
drinking.”     Officer Meredith then told Skapinok that participating 
in the test was voluntary, but that if she did not, she would be arrested under suspicion of driving under the influence.  A 
lengthy exchange followed in which Skapinok repeated several 
times that she had not had any alcohol.  In its findings of 
fact, the district court characterized Skapinok as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 
 “argumentative with Officer Meredith” during this exchange.  
Officer Meredith replied that he was not asking her if she was drinking, he was only conveying his observations and asking if 
she would participate in the test
.   
  On cross-examination, Officer Meredith testified that he would characterize Skapinok’s driving as reckless and that he 
had probable cause to arrest her for either OVUII or reckless 
driving even without the SFST.  Additionally, he testified that 
“very early on in [the] conversation she was not free to leave 
the scene” and that he told Skapinok three times that if she 
declined to do the SFST, she would be arrested.  Thirty minutes passed from the time that he stopped the vehicle to her arrest.  
  Corporal Chang testified thereafter.
7  Skapinok 
stipulated to the admission of Corporal Chang’s body-camera footage, which showed, as relevant here, the following 
interaction: 
[CORPORAL] CHANG: (Inaudible.) Hello, ma’am.  So I’m 
Officer Chang.  I’m just here to offer you the standardized 
field sobriety test.  Do you want to take the test, ma’am? 
 
THE DEFENDANT: (Inaudible.) 
 
[CORPORAL] CHANG: No, it’s up to you. 
 
THE DEFENDANT: (Inaudible.) 
 
[CORPORAL] CHANG: Okay.  Possibly.  Yeah.  Possibly.  
I mean just to be honest with you, there’s already enough 
to arrest you just for the reckless driving alone. 
 
                     
7  Skapinok stipulated for purposes of the hearing that Chang was 
qualified to administer and evaluate the SFST.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 
 THE DEFENDANT: Just because I was speeding? 
 
[CORPORAL] CHANG: Yeah.  ‘Cause you -- well, you 
committed multiple traffic violations. 
 
THE DEFENDANT: How? 
 
[CORPORAL] CHANG: So anyway I’m not here to -- I’m 
not here to talk about that in detail because I didn’t stop you.  I’m just letting you know the officer apprised me of 
why he stopped you, and there’s multiple traffic 
violations.  All -- I mean it’s not only the speeding.  
There’s, you know, cutting off cars.  And, like I said, I’m 
just letting you know it’s reckless driving.  You may be 
arrested for that as well.  Just letting you know.  So if 
you want to try the field test, you gotta get out of your car, please. 
 
  Corporal Chang then testified that, consistent with 
his training, he asked Skapinok the seven medical rule-out 
questions before administering the SFST.  Corporal Chang 
testified that he asked the questions because “they are things 
that may affect [a suspect’s] ability to perform the test,” and 
it is “necessary to ask these questions to perform the test 
safely.”  He further testified that based on his training and 
experience, he was not permitted to administer the SFST without 
first asking the medical rule-out questions, nor had he ever done so.  In response, Skapinok said “no to everything” except 
that she was taking medication – Wellbutrin, which she said was 
for depression – and was under the care of a doctor for 
depression.  He then gave the instructions for each component of 
the SFST in turn, asking if Skapinok understood after each set 
of directions.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 
  
 On cross-examination, Corporal Chang confirmed that he 
implied to Skapinok she would be arrested for reckless driving 
if she declined the test.  He further testified that he needed 
consent to do the SFST.  In addition, Corporal Chang testified 
that the medical rule-out questions help “determine if there’s 
going to be any type of medical or physical condition that might 
affect the results of the [SFST.]”  If a person answers all 
“nos” to the medical rule-out questions, “that tells [Corporal 
Chang] that a person is medically and physically fit to perform 
the test,” and “focuses [his] attention away from medical and 
physical problems and it focuses it more on a cause by an intoxicant.”  If a person indicates that they understand the 
instructions, but fails to follow them, that might indicate 
“that they are possibly mentally impaired by an intoxicant.”  If 
a person responds that they don’t understand the instructions to 
the SFST, that, too, might “possibly” indicate that person is 
“mentally confused or impaired by an intoxicant.”   
  Corporal Chang also testified on cross-examination that he knew Wellbutrin “can have an effect” when it 
“interact[s] with alcohol . . . lead[ing] to certain symptoms 
that may look like impairment.”  On redirect, he testified that 
taking Wellbutrin is not a crime.   
  Skapinok argued that she was in custody during the 
traffic stop and that the question of whether she would consent *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 
 to the SFST was interrogation because if she refused, it could 
be used against her to support consciousness of guilt per State 
v. Ferm, 94 Hawaiʻ i 17, 7 P.3d 193 (App. 2000).  Likewise, she 
argued the medical rule-out questions were “reasonably likely to 
elicit incriminating responses” and in fact did elicit an 
incriminating response, because Wellbutrin “can interact with alcohol to show symptoms of . . . impair[ment]”; Skapinok argued 
that alcohol need only be a contributing cause of impairment 
under the OVUII statute pursuant to State v. Vliet, 91 
Hawaiʻi 
288, 983 P.2d 189 (1999).  Asking whether she understood the 
questions would likewise be reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response because a negative answer would indicate 
impairment, and a positive answer would also indicate impairment 
if she failed to follow the instructions.  Skapinok emphasized 
that Corporal Chang “is not even permitted to administer the 
[SFST] without asking” the medical rule-out questions and 
whether the suspect understands the instructions; she argued that the results of the SFST must therefore be suppressed as 
fruit of the poisonous tree as well.   
  The State conceded that there was probable cause to arrest for reckless driving but argued that “no interrogation 
occurred and so therefore there was no custodial interrogation 
although the defendant was in custody.”  The State contended 
that none of the medical rule-out questions “are explicitly *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 
 exculpatory or inculpatory”; even Skapinok’s answer regarding 
Wellbutrin was not incriminating because “taking Wellbutrin by itself is not a crime.”  The State pointed to Muniz, which it 
argued held “questions . . . which were just part of the [SFST] were fine” but may become interrogation “when the officers 
exceeded that scope.”  The State argued that Officer Meredith’s 
repeated statements in the body-camera footage that he did not 
ask about her drinking suggested that the officers were “taking 
special precautions not to interrogate the defendant.  They’re 
just administering the standardized field sobriety test.”     
2.  District Court’s FOFs and COLs 
 
  The court ruled in favor of Skapinok, finding that 
there was custodial interrogation.  The district court’s written 
findings of fact (FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs) state in 
relevant part as follows: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
. . . . 
 
12. Defendant was the focus of an OVUII investigation.
 
 
13. Corporal Chang cannot conduct the SFST unless a 
person consents to the test. 
 
. . . . 
 
17.
 Prior to administering the SFST, Corporal Chang asked Defendant the following questions: 
 
i. Do you have any physical defects or speech impediments? 
ii. Are you taking any medications? 
iii. Are you under the care of a doctor or dentist 
for anything? 
iv. Are you under the care of an eye doctor? 
v. Do you have an artificial or glass eye? *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 
 vi. Are you epileptic or diabetic? 
vii. Are you blind in either eye? 
 
. . . . 
 
21.
 The [medical rule- out] questions are to “rule- out” 
medical causes that might cause a person to perform 
poorly on the SFST.  If a person answers “no” to all 
the [medical rule- out] questions, it tells the 
officer that the results he sees on the SFST are 
likely caused by an intoxicant[,] [a]s opposed to 
medical or physical conditions. 
 
22. The [medical rule- out] questions must be asked to 
administer the SFST safely. 
 23. Based on his training, Corporal Chang never 
administers an SFST without first asking the [medical 
rule-out] questions.  Corporal Chang testified that 
he is not permitted to administer an SFST without first asking the [medical rule- out] questions.[
8] 
 
. . . . 
 27.
 Defendant was arrested for OVUII and Reckless Driving. 
 28. Defendant was never advised of her Miranda rights or 
her right to remain silent.  At no point in time did 
either officer tell Defendant anything she said could be used against her. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
. . . . 
 
9.
 The Hawai[ ʻ]i Supreme Court has defined 
“interrogation” as “express questioning or its 
functional equivalent.”  The Court has also stated that “to the extent that, under article I, section 
10, the ultimate question regarding “interrogation” 
is whether the questioning officer knew or reasonably 
should have known that [their]
 question was likely to 
elicit an incriminating response” and that 
“interrogation consists of any express question – or, 
absent an express question, any words or conduct – 
that the officer knows or reasonably should know is 
likely to elicit an incriminating response.”  State 
                     
8  We note that this sentence is a recitation of the testimony of a 
witness, which is not a finding of fact.  See Dep’t of Env’ t Servs., City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu v. Land Use Comm’n , 127 Hawai‘ i 5, 15 n.12 , 275 P.3d 809, 
819 n.12 (2012) (“We encourage courts and factfinding tribunals to properly 
state their findings . . . and not merely recite testimony.”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 
 v. Kazanas, 138 Haw[aiʻ i] 23, [38, 375 P.3d 1261, 
1276] (2016). 
 
10. Asking Defendant if she was willing to participate in the SFST constituted custodial interrogation because 
she was not free to leave, she was the focus of an 
OVUII investigation and officers had probable cause 
to arrest her.  Asking a person if they would be 
willing to participate in a SFST is reasonably likely 
to elicit an incriminating response.  For example, 
refusing to participate in the SFST can be used at trial to show consciousness of guilt pursuant to 
State v. Ferm, 94 Haw[aiʻ i]
 17, 7 P.3d 193 (2000). 
 
. . . . 
 
12. The results of the SFST and the responses to the 
[medical rule
-out] questions will likely be used 
against Defendant at trial. 
 13. The [medical rule- out] questions in this case 
constituted custodial interrogation and were reasonably likely to elicit incriminating responses.  In this particular case, the [medical rule- out] 
questions did elicit incriminating responses.  Defendant stated that she was taking the medication 
Wellbutrin.  Alcohol ingested in conjunction with 
medication which causes intoxication is a basis for OVUII . . . as alcohol only has to be a contributing 
factor in impairment. 
 
. . . . 
 
15. Corporal Chang’s questioning during the SFST as to 
whether Defendant understood the instructions was 
reasonabl[
y] likely to elicit an incriminating 
response.  If Defendant answered “no,” it would be commentary on her mental faculties and ability to understand the instructions.  If Defendant answered 
“yes,” and did not perform the test as instructed, her “yes” response could be used against her at trial 
to show her mental faculties were impaired. 
 
16. Defendant’s consent to the SFST is suppressed and all 
evidence obtained after the consent i[s] fruit of the 
poisonous tree. 
 
17. The [medical rule- out] questions are suppressed and 
all evidence obtained by HPD after the [medical rule-
out] questions are suppressed as fruit of the 
poisonous tree. 
 18. Defendant’s answer that she understood the 
instructions during the SFST is suppressed and the 
SFST is suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 
 19. Defendant’s statements while she was still in the 
vehicle in response to Officer Meredith’s statement 
that he was not asking whether she was drinking is 
suppressed.  
 
C.  Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) Proceedings 
  The State appealed, and the ICA affirmed in part and 
vacated in part the district court in a memorandum opinion, 
relying primarily on the ICA’s published opinion in State v. 
Sagapolutele-Silva, 147 Hawai‘ i 92, 464 P.3d 880 (App. 2020).  
As set forth in Sagapolutele- Silva, as applied in this 
case, the defendant’s physical performance on a field 
sobriety test was not testimonial, and the defendant’ s 
responses to whether she would participate in the test and whether she understood the instructions were attendant to 
legitimate police procedures, and should not have been suppressed.  We further hold, however, that the medical 
rule-out questions posed by the officer were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response, and that the District Court did not err in suppressing those statements.  
Finally, for the reasons stated below, we conclude that a statement made by the defendant in response to being asked 
whether she would participate in the test and being told 
that she was not being asked whether she was drinking, was 
not the result of custodial interrogation and should not 
have been suppressed. 
 
State v. Skapinok, No. CAAP-19-0000476, 2020 WL 2991783, at *1 
(App. June 4, 2020) (mem.)  
  The ICA reasoned that “the touchstone in analyzing 
whether ‘interrogation’ has taken place is whether the police 
officer ‘should have known that [their] words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the 
defendant.’”  Id. at *5 (quoting Kazanas, 138 Hawai‘ i at 38, 375 
P.3d at 1276).  Skapinok was under investigation for OVUII at 
the time the relevant questions were asked, and Officer *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 
 Meredith’s observations of her driving, her eyes, and the smell 
of alcohol furnished reasonable suspicion (but not probable cause) for OVUII.  Id.  Because “the right against self-
incrimination is not necessarily implicated whenever a person suspected of criminal activity is compelled in some way to 
cooperate in developing evidence which may be used against her, 
such as when a driver is asked to participate in a SFST,” and in 
light of Muniz’s holding that questions “necessarily ‘attendant 
to’ the police procedure” are permissible, the ICA held the district court “erred by suppressing Skapinok’s response to 
whether she would participate in the SFST, whether she understood the instructions to the SFST, and the officer's 
observations of her performance on the SFST.”  Id. at *6 (first 
citing State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 302, 687 P.2d 544, 551 
(1984); then citing Muniz, 496 U.S. at 603-04).  
  However, the ICA concluded that the medical rule-out 
questions were “reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response.”  Id. (quoting Kazanas, 138 Hawai‘ i at 38, 375 P.3d at 
1276).  “An incriminating response is any response, either 
inculpatory or exculpatory.”  Id. (citing Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 
n.5).  But the ICA noted that a physical response – like the “inability to articulate words in a clear manner” – is not a testimonial response requiring Miranda warnings.  Id. (citing 
Muniz, 496 U.S. at 590-91).  The ICA held: “Based on, inter *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 
 alia, our analysis in Sagapolutele-Silva, we conclude that the 
medical rule-out questions posed to Skapinok were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response and, therefore, 
constituted interrogation.”  Id.   
  The ICA finally addressed the district court’s suppression of Skapinok’s statements in response to Officer 
Meredith’s statements that he wasn’t asking her if she was 
drinking, concluding that this was error.  Id. at *8.  The ICA 
reasoned that “informing a defendant of the reason for being stopped or arrested does not constitute custodial interrogation 
likely to elicit an incriminating response,” and that Officer Meredith’s statements were otherwise “attendant to a permissible 
OVUII investigation.”  Id.  “We cannot conclude that Officer 
Meredith informing Skapinok that he was not asking her if she was drinking was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response and therefore, it did not constitute interrogation.”  
Id.   
D.  Supreme Court Proceedings 
Both the State and Skapinok sought review in this 
court.  The State’s application for writ of certiorari presents 
two questions: (1) “[w]hether the ICA gravely erred in holding 
that the medical rule-out questions asked as part of the [SFST] 
are interrogation” and (2) “[w]hether the ICA gravely erred in 
affirming the suppression of [Skapinok’s] answers to the medical *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 
 rule-out questions.”   
In Skapinok’s application for writ of certiorari, she 
first contends that the ICA correctly held that the medical 
rule-out questions were interrogation, but failed to address the 
district court’s conclusion of law that “all evidence obtained 
by HPD after the [medical rule-out] questions are suppressed as 
fruit of the poisonous tree.”
  Skapinok next challenges the 
ICA’s conclusion that the district court’s COL 79 was erroneous, 
arguing that “[t]he ICA gravely erred in holding that Skapinok 
was not in ‘custody’ for the ‘separate and distinct[] 
investigation’ for OVUII.”10  Finally, Skapinok asks us to 
correct the ICA’s “gravely erroneous holding” that “Skapinok’s 
                     
9  The district court’s COL 7 held that the officers had probable 
cause prior to the administration of the SFST, and that custody had attached: 
 
At the time that Defendant was sitting in her vehicle, 
prior to the administration of the SFST, she was not free to leave, she was the focus of an OVUII investigation and 
officers had probable cause to arrest her for OVUII and/or 
Reckless Driving.  Officer Meredith and Corporal Chang did not need the results of the SFST to arrest Defendant for 
OVUII and/or Reckless Driving.  Legal custody had attached.  
10  Skapinok contends the ICA erred because she “was in ‘ custody’ as 
the district court correctly concluded[.]”  But the ICA affirmed the custody 
determination, holding only that the district court erred insofar as “red and 
glassy eyes alone and imperfect driving are insufficient to establish 
probable cause to arrest a person for OVUII,” a correct statement of Hawai‘ i 
law.  State v. Skapinok, No. CAAP- 19-0000476, 2020 WL 2991783, at *5 
(emphasis added) (citing to State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai‘ i 3 70, 377– 78, 56 
P.3d 138, 145– 46 (2002) (“We conclude that red and glassy eyes, a criminal 
record, and imperfect driving, standing alone, are insufficient to establish probable cause to arrest a person for driving under the influence of 
drugs.”)) .   
  Since the ICA affirmed that Skapinok was in custody, an issue we 
do not address, see infra note 11, and nothing else about this conclusion of 
law is germane to the question of what evidence should have been suppressed, 
we do not further address Skapinok’s argument as to this conclusion of law.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 
 right against self-incrimination was not implicated when she was 
asked to participate in the SFST,” as well as when she was asked whether she understood the instructions.  
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
  “We review the [trial] court’s ruling on a motion to 
suppress de novo and must look to the entire record on appeal to 
determine whether the ruling was right or wrong.”  State v. 
Joseph, 109 Hawai‘ i 482, 493, 128 P.3d 795, 806 (2006) (citation 
omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A.   The Medical Rule-Out Questions Were Interrogation 
 
Article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution provides 
that “[n]o person shall . . 
. be compelled in any criminal 
case to be a witness against himself.”  State v. Pau‘ u, 72 
Haw. 505, 509, 824 P.2d 833, 835 (1992) (quoting article 
[I], section 10).  It is established that “[w]hen a 
confession or other evidence is obtained in violation of [this right], the prosecution will not be permitted to use 
it to secure a defendant’ s criminal conviction.”  Id. 
(citing State v. Russo, 67 Haw. 126, 681 P.2d 553 (1984)). 
 
State v. Eli, 126 Hawai‘ i 510, 519–20, 273 P.3d 1196, 1205–06 
(2012) (alterations in original). 
 
Constitution, and a defendant’s statements adduced in violation 
of Miranda cannot be used against them at trial.  Kazanas, 138 
must be preceded by Miranda warnings.  “A defendant seeking to  Miranda warnings safeguard the right against self-
incrimination contained in article I, section 10 of the  Hawai‘i
Hawai‘i at 34, 375 P.3d at 1272.  But not all police questioning *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 
 suppress [their] statement [for want of Miranda warnings] ‘must 
establish that [their] statement was the result of (1) “interrogation” that occurred while [they were] (2) “in 
custody.”’”  Id. at 35, 375 P.3d at 1273 (quoting State v. 
Ketchum, 97 
Hawai‘i 107, 118, 34 P.3d 1006, 1017 (2001)).  The 
ICA held, and the State does not now challenge, that Skapinok 
was in custody at all relevant times.11  Therefore, the State’s 
application presents only the question of whether the medical rule-out questions were interrogation. 
1. The ICA misapplied Pennsylvania v. Muniz 
 
     
definition of interrogation set forth in Innis: “In determining Constitution the This court adopted under the Hawai ‘i
whether an officer’s questions constitute interrogation, the 
test is whether the officer should have known that [their] words 
and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response from the defendant.”  State v. Paahana, 66 Haw. at 503, 
666 P.2d at 595–96 (citing Innis, 446 U.S. at 301); State v. 
Trinque, 140 Hawaiʻi 269, 277, 400 P.3d 470, 478 (2017) (“There 
are several important considerations in this court’s definition: 
‘interrogation’ under Miranda refers to (1) any words, actions, 
or practice on the part of the police, not only express 
                     
11  The State’s application admits that it “conceded at the hearing 
in this case that Skapinok was in custody.”  This opinion therefore does not 
address custody and assumes that Skapinok was in custody at all relevant 
times.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 
  
(continued . . .) questioning, (2) other than those normally attendant to arrest 
and custody, and (3) that the police should know is reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating response.”); Kazanas, 138 
Hawai
iʻ at 38, 375 P.3d at 1276 (“We agree and reaffirm that the
touchstone in analyzing whether ‘interrogation’ has taken place 
is whether the police officer ‘should have known that [their] words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response from the defendant.’” (citation 
omitted)).  “‘[I]ncriminating response’ . . . refer[s] to any 
response – whether inculpatory or exculpatory – that the 
prosecution may seek to introduce at trial.”  Innis, 446 U.S. at
301 n.5.  
 
  In Sagapolutele-Silva, upon which the ICA relied in 
the instant case, the ICA concluded that “the medical rule-out 
questions posed to [the defendant]” – which were largely 
identical to those administered to Skapinok  – “were reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response and, therefore, 
constituted interrogation.”  147 12
Hawaiʻi at 102, 464 P.3d at  
890.  There, the ICA based this conclusion on Muniz: 13
                     
12  In addition to the seven questions asked to Skapinok in this 
case, the officer in Sagapolutele- Silva also asked the defendant if she wore 
corrective lenses.  147 Hawaiʻi at 102, 464 P.3d at 890.  
 
13  The ICA’s memorandum opinion in the instant case relied on this 
reasoning and did not opine any further: 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 
 In Muniz, an officer asked a defendant if he knew the date 
of his sixth birthday to which the defendant responded: 
“No, I don't.”  [ Muniz, 496 U.S. at 586.]  The Muniz court 
held the question constituted interrogation because it required a testimonial response.  Id. at 600[.] 
 
. . . . 
 
 Here, although [the officer] stated that the purpose 
of the medical rule- out questions was to assist him in 
evaluating [the defendant]’s physical performance on the 
SFST, which is non- testimonial evidence, his subjective 
intent is not relevant.  Kazanas, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 40, 375 
P.3d at 1278 . . . .  The medical rule- out questions 
required a testimonial response that disclosed facts relating to the offense of OVUII and that was reasonably 
likely to assist the police in determining whether [the 
defendant] was under the influence of an intoxicant by 
either admitting or denying there were other causes that 
could explain her actions.  A negative response to all of 
the questions is testimonial, and combined with physical characteristics of impairment, supports an incriminating 
inference of impairment.  Similarly, a positive response to 
whether a defendant is taking any medicines, in some 
instances, may constitute an incriminating statement. 
 
Sagapolutele-Silva, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 102, 464 P.3d at 890. 
  Respectfully, the ICA incorrectly analyzed Muniz in 
Sagapolutele-Silva.  Muniz addressed a number of questions asked 
in connection with a drunk-driving arrest, one of which was the 
sixth birthday question described above.  But the Supreme Court 
                     
(continued . . .) 
 
Based on, inter alia, our analysis in Sagapolutele-
Silva, we conclude that the medical rule- out questions 
posed to Skapinok were reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response and, therefore, constituted 
interrogation.  See Sagapolutele- Silva, No. CAAP- 19-
0000491, 2020 WL 1699907, slip op. at 17- 20 (Haw. App. 
April 8, 2020). 
Skapinok was in custody.  She had not been given 
Miranda warnings.  The medical rule- out questions 
constituted interrogation.  Thus, we conclude that her 
responses to those questions should have been suppressed 
and the District Court did not err in so concluding in COLs 13 and 17. 
 
Skapinok, mem. op. at *6-7 .   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 
 held as it did because it determined the response to that 
question was testimonial – in other words, the “communication 
. . . itself, explicitly or implicitly, relate[d] a factual 
assertion or disclose[d] information.”  Muniz, 496 U.S. at 594 
(quoting Doe v. United States, 487 U.S. 201, 210 (1988)).  
Pennsylvania had argued that the question did not require a 
testimonial response because “the inference [from the answer] 
concerns ‘the physiological functioning of Muniz’s brain,’” not 
any particular fact related to the crime.  Id. at 593 (brackets 
omitted).  The Court disagreed because the content of the answer 
would have supported the conclusion he was impaired – “the incriminating inference of impaired mental faculties stemmed, 
not just from the fact that Muniz slurred his response, but also 
from a testimonial aspect of that response.”  Id. at 599.  In 
this way, the sixth birthday question differed from non-testimonial observations that can be compelled, such as a voice 
sample or blood alcohol content.  Id. at 593.  
  In this case and in Sagapolutele-Silva, there is no 
dispute that the responses to the medical rule-out questions are testimonial.  The contents of the answer, as opposed to the 
manner in which the answer is given, communicate the information 
that may or may not be used to support the incriminating 
inference of impairment.  Indeed, Muniz took as given that the 
question was incriminating.  496 U.S. at 592.  The “birthday *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 
 question” analysis in Muniz therefore provides little assistance 
to answering the determinative question: whether the medical 
rule-out questions would be “reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response.”  Id. at 601. 
2. Under article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution, evaluating whether questions are 
“attendant to” a police procedure still requires an 
inquiry into whether the officer knew or should have 
known the questions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response 
 
  The Muniz court did, however, consider whether certain 
questions asked in advance of an SFST when defendant Muniz was 
in custody were interrogation.  The Court held that the “limited 
and carefully worded inquiries as to whether Muniz understood 
th[e] instructions” to each component of the SFST were not interrogation.  Muniz, 496 U.S. at 603.  Rather, “these focused 
inquiries were necessarily ‘attendant to’ the police procedure,” and therefore Muniz’s answers “were not elicited in response to 
custodial interrogation.”  Id. at 603–04.  The Court cited to 
South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553 (1983), which “h[eld] that 
police inquiry [into] whether [the] suspect would submit to 
blood-alcohol test was not ‘interrogation within the meaning of 
Miranda.’”  Muniz, 496 U.S. at 604 (quoting Neville, 459 U.S. at 
564 n.15).  Neville explained:  
[P]olice words or actions “normally attendant to arrest and 
custody” do not constitute interrogation.  The police inquiry here is highly regulated by state law, and is 
presented in virtually the same words to all suspects.  It 
is similar to a police request to submit to fingerprinting *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 
 or photography.  Respondent’s choice of refusal thus enjoys 
no prophylactic Miranda protection outside the basic Fifth 
Amendment protection.   
 
459 U.S. at 564 n.15 (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 301). 
  In Gibson v. Commonwealth, 706 S.E.2d 541 (Va. Ct. 
App. 2011) – a decision that the ICA in Sagapolutele-Silva 
explicitly rejected, 147 Hawaiʻi at 101, 464 P.3d at 889, but 
that the State now urges us to adopt – the Court of Appeals of 
Virginia relied on Muniz when it held that asking “whether [an 
OVUII suspect] had any physical problems” prior to administering the SFST was not interrogation.  706 S.E.2d at 545.  The 
Virginia court opined that Muniz “recognized two exceptions to 
this definition of interrogation”: (1) the “‘routine booking question’ exception which exempts from Miranda’s coverage 
questions to secure the ‘biographical data necessary to complete booking or pretrial services,’” and (2) the exception for 
“inquiries ‘necessarily “attendant to” [a legitimate] police procedure.’”  Id. (brackets in original) (quoting Muniz, 496 
U.S. at 601, 603-04).  Applied to the question at issue, “[t]he ‘physical problems’ question is sufficiently analogous to asking 
whether [the suspect] understood [the officer’s] instructions as 
to how each test is to be performed.  Both questions are clearly 
meant to assure the validity of the test and not to elicit an 
incriminatory response.”  Id.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 
   In turn, Gibson relied on the analysis of the Supreme 
Court of Vermont, which had also “recognized that inquiries 
intended to assure the validity of a legitimate police procedure 
fall under the ‘necessarily attendant to a legitimate police 
procedure’ exception.”  Id.  In State v. Blouin, 716 A.2d 826 
(Vt. 1998), the Supreme Court of Vermont held that asking an OVUII suspect prior to administering a breath test whether he 
“burped, belched or vomited within the last fifteen minutes” – 
the purpose of which “is to ensure that trace amounts of alcohol 
are not in the mouth which could render an inaccurate test 
result,” id. at 827 – did not require Miranda warnings.  Id. at 
830.  The Blouin court determined that the “burp question” was 
not likely to elicit an incriminating response because:  
The burp question is designed to help assure the accuracy 
of the test – an objective as significant to the suspect as 
to the State.  In and of itself, there is nothing incriminating about defendant’s response: if defendant had answered yes to the question, the officer would have merely 
waited another fifteen minutes to obtain accurate test 
results.  In short, the burp question is not interrogation.  
 
Id.  
  We decline to adopt an exception to the interrogation 
test that obviates the need to inquire into whether the question would elicit an incriminating response when the question is 
attendant to the SFST or otherwise “necessarily ‘attendant to’ 
the legitimate police procedure.”  Muniz, 496 U.S. at 605 
(citing Neville, 459 U.S. at 564 n.15).  While we have *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 
 explicitly recognized the “attendant to arrest and custody” 
carve-out to the definition of “interrogation,” Trinque, 140 
Hawaiʻi at 277, 400 P.3d at 478, Hawaiʻ i  law points against 
eliminating the “incriminating response” inquiry even when the 
police ask questions “attendant to” a routine, legitimate 
procedure.  
  Application of the “routine booking question 
exception” is instructive: Muniz recognized that “questions to 
secure the biographical data necessary to complete booking or pretrial services” that are “requested for record-keeping 
purposes only” and “reasonably related to the police’s 
administrative concerns” do not require Miranda warnings despite 
being direct questioning of an in-custody suspect.  496 U.S. at 
601-02 (quotation marks omitted).  Nonetheless, “the police may 
not ask questions, even during booking, that are designed to 
elicit incriminatory admissions.”  Id. at 602 n.14.  The same is 
true under the Hawai‘ i Constitution:  
[I]f the “ booking” officer knows or reasonably should know 
that a “ routine booking question” is likely to elicit an 
incriminating response, [they] must administer the 
requisite warnings and obtain a valid waiver of the 
arrestee’s relevant constitutional rights before posing the 
question if the prosecution, in a subsequent criminal 
prosecution of the arrestee, is to be permitted to adduce 
evidence of the arrestee’ s response without running afoul 
of article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution.   
 
Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 128, 34 P.3d at 1027. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 
   Ketchum rejected the existence of a so-called “booking 
exception” under Hawaiʻi law, but our analysis in that case 
comports with that of many other courts, which permit booking 
questions without Miranda warnings, but not if the officer knew 
or should have known that the question would be reasonably likely to elicit incriminating information.  Compare id. at 119, 
120–21, 34 P.3d at 1018, 1019–20 (“[T]he ‘exception’ is, when 
scrutinized, no real exception at all. . . .  In other words, 
the ‘routine booking question exception’ does no more than 
recognize that not every ‘express question’ constitutes 
‘interrogation.’”) with United States v. Zapien, 861 F.3d 971, 
975 (9th Cir. 2017) (“Once the import of the booking exception is properly understood as part and parcel of the question whether there has been ‘interrogation,’ it becomes clear that 
the determinative issue is whether the officer ‘should have 
known that his questions were reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response.’” (citation omitted)); see also United 
States v. Williams, 842 F.3d 1143, 1147 (9th Cir. 2016) (“The 
booking questions exception, however, is subject to an important 
qualification: ‘When a police officer has reason to know that a 
suspect’s answer may incriminate him, however, even routine 
questioning may amount to interrogation.’” (quoting United 
States v. Henley, 984 F.2d 1040, 1042 (9th Cir. 1993)).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 
   In Ketchum, we held that asking the suspect his 
address – to be sure, information that is usually not 
incriminating – constituted interrogation when asked after a 
drug raid of a residence; the officer knew or should have known 
that the information was relevant to establishing constructive 
possession of the contraband recovered from the home.  97 Hawai‘ i 
at 126-27, 34 P.3d at 1025-26.  Thus, even usually mundane 
biographical information can constitute interrogation if the 
officer should know that the question is reasonably likely to 
elicit an incriminating response.  Other jurisdictions have 
similarly held that, for example, asking where a suspect was 
born may require Miranda warnings when asked by a federal 
immigration agent and where the suspect faces charges related to 
illegal entry.  United States v. Gonzalez-Sandoval, 894 F.2d 
1043, 1046-47 (9th Cir. 1990).  Likewise, asking a suspect during booking whether they are a gang member may be reasonably 
likely to elicit an incriminating response depending on the 
circumstances and thus require Miranda warnings, despite the 
question’s legitimate relationship to “police’s administrative concerns” of prison security and inmate placement.  People v. 
Elizalde, 351 P.3d 1010, 1017 (Cal. 2015); Williams, 842 F.3d at 
1148-49.   
  The so-called booking exception is analogous to the 
“‘attendant to’ the legitimate police procedure” carve-out that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 
 the State urges us to adopt.  Muniz, 496 U.S. at 605.  While the 
booking exception independently developed in the federal courts 
before Innis and Muniz, it provides a useful touchpoint to 
understanding the validity of a purported “attendant to a legitimate police procedure” exception because they both relate 
to the definitional exclusion from interrogation for express 
questioning “normally attendant to arrest and custody.”  
Trinque, 140 Hawai‘ i at 277, 400 P.3d at 478; United States v. 
Gotchis, 803 F.2d 74, 79 (2d Cir. 1986) (“Routine questions 
about a suspect’s identity and marital status, ordinarily 
innocent of any investigative purpose, do not pose the dangers 
Miranda was designed to check; they are rather the sort of 
questions ‘normally attendant to arrest and custody[.]’” 
(quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 301)).  The pragmatic basis for 
booking questions and procedural questions is the same: both are “highly regulated . . . and . . . presented in virtually the 
same words to all suspects,” Neville, 459 U.S. at 564 n.15, 
posing less risk that the questioning would “subjugate the individual to the will of [their] examiner and thereby undermine 
the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination.”  Paahana, 
66 Haw. at 502, 666 P.2d at 595 (quotation marks omitted) (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 299).  But that is not to say there 
is no risk, and we see no reason to treat questions “attendant 
to” police procedures differently than “booking questions” under *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 
 the 
Hawai‘i Constitution – the inquiry in both circumstances is 
whether the question is reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response.     
  
We therefore hold that under the self-incrimination 
clause of the Hawai‘ i Constitution, police questioning that is 
“‘attendant to’ [a] legitimate police procedure,” Muniz, 496 
U.S. at 605, is interrogation if the officer “knows or reasonably should know that [the question] is likely to elicit 
an incriminating response,” Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 128, 34 P.3d 
at 1027.  In other words, being attendant to a police procedure, 
standing alone, does not obviate the need to examine whether the 
officer knew or should have known that the questions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.  If such 
questions are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response, they must be preceded by Miranda warnings in order to 
be admissible. 
3. The medical rule-out questions were reasonably likely 
to elicit an incriminating response 
 
  We must then apply this principle to the seven medical 
rule-out questions asked to Skapinok in this case:  
i. Do you have any physical defects or speech 
impediments? 
ii.  Are you taking any medications? 
ii. Are you under the care of a doctor or dentist for anything? 
iv. Are you under the care of an eye doctor? 
v. Do you have an artificial or glass eye? 
vi. Are you epileptic or diabetic? 
vii. Are you blind in either eye? *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 
  
  Corporal Chang knew or should have known that “are you 
taking any medications” is reasonably likely to elicit an 
incriminating response.  A person may be guilty of OVUII if they 
“operate[] or assume[] actual physical control of a vehicle 
. . . [w]hile under the influence of any drug that impairs the 
person’s ability to operate the vehicle in a careful and prudent 
manner.”  HRS § 291E-61(a)(2).  “Drug” is defined as “any controlled substance, as defined and enumerated in schedules I 
through IV of chapter 329, or its metabolites.”  HRS § 291E-1 
(2007).  In turn, Chapter 329, the Uniform Controlled Substances 
Act, classifies numerous legal prescription medications as 
controlled substances in schedules I through IV, including, for 
example: Marijuana (HRS § 329-14(d)(20) (2010)), Xanax (HRS 
§ 329-20(b)(1) (2010)) (identified by its generic name Alprazolam), and Ambien (HRS § 329-20(b)(54) (2015)) (identified 
by its generic name Zolpidem).  Someone who is lawfully 
prescribed and taking a medication that is a controlled 
substance confronts the “cruel trilemma of self-accusation, 
perjury or contempt,” Muniz, 496 U.S. at 596 (quoting Doe, 487 
U.S. at 212), when faced with this question: lie, incriminate themselves with the truth, or say nothing and face arrest.   
  Even answering the question with a medication that isnot a controlled substance may be incriminating, as Skapinok’s  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 
 answer demonstrates.  Corporal Chang testified that he knew 
Wellbutrin can interact with alcohol to create side effects that look like impairment.  Even if Skapinok did not consume enough 
alcohol to exceed the breath or blood alcohol content 
thresholds, she may still be guilty of OVUII if she “operate[d] 
or assume[d] actual physical control of a vehicle . . . [w]hile 
under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair 
the person’s normal mental faculties or ability to care for the 
person and guard against casualty.”  HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).  As 
Skapinok has pointed out, “[n]othing in the statute requires 
that alcohol be the sole or exclusive cause of a defendant’s impairment.  Rather, what is required is proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt that liquor contributed to the diminishment of 
the defendant’s capacity to drive safely.”  Vliet, 91 Hawaiʻ i at 
293, 983 P.2d at 194; see also id. at 294, 983 P.2d at 195 
(citing favorably to, inter alia, State v. Daniels, 379 N.W.2d 
97, 99 (Minn. Ct. App. 1986), in which a defendant was convicted 
for consuming alcohol and an anti-depressant).  Skapinok, too, 
faced the “cruel trilemma”: admit to the incriminating fact that 
she was taking Wellbutrin, lie, or face certain arrest by 
remaining silent.  Thus, given that many answers to “[a]re you 
taking any medications” would incriminate an OVUII suspect, the officers knew or should have known that asking a person under 
investigation for OVUII if they are taking any medication is *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 
 reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.  Even 
though the question relates to the administration of the SFST, if the suspect is in custody, this question must be preceded by 
Miranda warnings for the answer to be admissible.  
  The remaining medical rule-out questions at issue here do not present the same direct link to the crime being 
investigated.  “Do you have any physical defects or speech 
impediments?”; “[a]re you under the care of a doctor or dentist 
for anything?”; “[a]re you under the care of an eye doctor?”; 
“[d]o you have an artificial or glass eye?”; “[a]re you 
epileptic or diabetic?”; and “[a]re you blind in either eye?”; elicit information that, standing alone, neither inculpates nor 
exculpates the defendant of OVUII.
14  But Skapinok argues these 
questions, as a battery, are incriminating because they serve to rule out other possibilities for poor performance on the SFST.  
In other words, the incriminating inference to be drawn from all 
“no” responses is that only drugs or alcohol could have caused 
the defendant to exhibit signs of intoxication on the test.  The lone dissenter in Blouin agreed with this argument as to the 
                     
14  Both Gibson and Blouin reasoned that “assuring the accuracy of 
the [test] is just as significant to [the defendant] as it is to the 
[government].”  Gibson, 706 S.E.2d at 546; Blouin, 716 A.2d at 830.  Whether 
or not the question is “significant” to the defendant is of no matter.  Indeed, an incriminating response is “any response – whether inculpatory or 
exculpatory – that the prosecution may seek to introduce at trial.”  Innis, 
446 U.S. at 301 n.5 (1980) (first emphasis added); Miranda v. Arizona, 384 
U.S. at 477 (“[N]o distinction may be drawn between inculpatory statements 
and statements alleged to be merely ‘exculpatory.’”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 
 “burp” question: “the interrogatory is designed to bolster the 
quality of evidence against the suspect and, thus, calls for an incriminating response.”  716 A.2d at 831 (Skoglund, J., 
dissenting).  Likewise, in State v. Forsyth, 859 A.2d 163 (Me. 
2004), the Supreme Judicial Court of Maine rejected the State’s argument that asking whether the defendant “had any physical 
impairments” in advance of a component of the SFST was “a mere 
preliminary question for the officer to determine whether or not 
a test would be fair” akin to “general health and other similar 
booking questions”: “[w]e do not agree that such a question does 
not seek to elicit incriminating statements.  The question asks a suspect to provide information to assist the officer in ruling 
out anything other than intoxication as an explanation for 
[their] performance on a field sobriety test.”  Id. at 165. 
  We conclude that all of the medical rule-out questions are interrogation.  Although the “incriminating inference” may 
be indirect, the questions nevertheless adduce evidence to 
establish that intoxication caused any poor performance on the 
SFST.  Sagapolutele-Silva, 147 Hawaiʻ i
 at 102, 464 P.3d at 890.  
Indeed, Corporal Chang testified that the medical rule-out 
questions “focuse[d] [his] attention away from medical and 
physical problems and . . . more on a cause by an intoxicant[.]”  And the State, in its application, admitted that the questions 
do not just “ensure the accuracy” of the SFST, but “assist the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 
 trier-of-fact in evaluating the OVUII suspect’s physical 
performance on the SFST.”  That they are used to assist the trier-of-fact shows that the medical rule-out questions elicit a 
“response — whether inculpatory or exculpatory — that the 
prosecution may seek to introduce at trial.”  Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i 
at 130, 34 P.3d at 1029 (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 n.5).  
  Here, the questions do not merely ensure that the SFST 
can be safely performed, they affect the officer’s 
interpretation of the test’s output – in other words, the 
questions gather evidence against the defendant rather than 
simply determining whether evidence can viably be gathered.  The 
questions’ breadth demonstrates that their scope exceeds what is 
needed to assess whether the test can in fact be administered and crosses into investigatory: it is difficult to understand 
how being under the care of a dentist or having a speech 
impediment, for instance, would affect whether not the defendant 
could safely perform the test.  Compared to Muniz, these are not 
the “limited and carefully worded inquiries” that case sanctioned, nor do they reflect that the officers “carefully 
limit[] [their] role to providing [the suspect] with relevant 
information.”  496 U.S. at 603, 605.  Rather, the sweep of the 
seven medical rule-out questions asked to Skapinok ensured not only that the officer could administer the test, but that all 
other possible explanations were systemically ruled-out as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 
 causes of the test’s results.  They were interrogation under 
article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  Because 
Skapinok was in custody at the time the officer asked them, 
Miranda warnings were required, and her answers to them must be 
suppressed. 
B. Neither Asking if Skapinok Would Participate in the SFST 
nor Asking if She Understood the Instructions Constituted 
Interrogation 
   Although not squarely raised as a point of error,
15 the 
ICA did not err by holding that neither asking Skapinok if she 
would participate in an SFST nor asking if she understood the 
instructions were interrogation.  We recently considered the 
same questions in State v. Uchima, 147 Hawai‘ i 64, 464 P.3d 852 
(2020): 
Here, [the officer administering the SFST] asked [the 
defendant] whether he would participate in an [S]FST, 
whether he understood the instructions of the individual 
tests, and whether he had any questions.  These preliminary 
questions were not reasonably likely to lead to 
incriminating responses because neither an affirmative or 
negative response to these questions is incriminating.  
Rather, the questions allow the officer to determine whether [the defendant] was willing to undergo the [S]FST 
and whether he understood the officer’ s instructions prior 
to performing the three tests comprising the [S]FST.  Thus, 
these questions were not of such nature that [the officer] 
should have known that they were likely to elicit an 
incriminating response. 
 
Id. at 84, 464 P.3d at 872. 
                     
15  The only point of error in Skapinok’s application relates to 
fruit of the poisonous tree, but the application nonetheless discusses the 
ICA’s treatment of these other questions.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 
   We reach the same conclusion here.  Asking whether 
Skapinok would participate in and understood the tests constituted “limited and focused inquiries” that were not 
reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.  Muniz, 
496 U.S. at 605.  The ICA did not err by concluding that these questions are not interrogation. 
C.  The Evidence Gathered After the Miranda Violation Was Not 
“Fruit of the Poisonous Tree” 
 
  We must next consider whether the evidence obtained after the illegality – including questions asked subsequent to 
the medical rule-out questions as part of the SFST and 
Skapinok’s performance on the SFST (to which we will refer 
collectively as “the SFST”) – was tainted by the Miranda 
violation as fruit of the poisonous tree.16  “[T]he ‘fruit of the 
poisonous tree’ doctrine ‘prohibits the use of evidence at trial which comes to light as a result of the exploitation of a 
previous illegal act of the police.’”  Trinque, 140 Hawaiʻ i
 at 
281, 400 P.3d at 482 (quoting State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai‘ i 462, 
                     
16  The record suggests that Skapinok was asked whether she 
understood the instructions to the SFST after being asked the medical rule-
out questions.  As explained above, this question is not itself 
interrogation.  The fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine would furnish an 
independent ground to suppress this question, but as we explain in this 
section, this argument is also unavailing. 
 We also note that Skapinok squarely raised the fruits doctrine in 
her answering brief to the ICA, but the ICA’s memorandum opinion did not 
address it.  We ultimately agree with the result the ICA reached.  But because fruit of the poisonous tree, if applicable, would require suppression of evidence acquired after the Miranda violation irrespective of whether that 
evidence was the product of interrogation, the ICA erred by failing to evaluate whether the fruits doctrine applied. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 
 475, 946 P.2d 32, 45 (1997)).  We hold that the SFST was not an 
exploitation of the illegality in this case. 
  We addressed the fruits doctrine under virtually 
identical circumstances in State v. Manion, SCWC-19-0000563 
(Haw. 2022).  In that case, during an OVUII investigation, the defendant was asked the medical rule-out questions while in 
custody, in violation of Miranda; Manion argued that his 
performance on the SFST must therefore be suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree.  Id. at *10.  But we explained, “Although 
they immediately preceded the SFST in time, the medical rule-out questions did not give the officers information that ‘le[d] [them] to search for’ evidence of intoxication, nor did the 
medical rule-out questions pique their suspicions such that 
their investigation was ‘direct[ed]’ towards discovering 
evidence of intoxication.”  Id. at *12 (brackets in original) 
(quoting State v. Lee, 149 Hawai‘ i 45, 50, 481 P.3d 52, 57 
(2020)).   
  The same is true here.  The officers had already set out to administer the SFST before asking the medical rule-out 
questions – indeed, they had already asked for, and received, 
Skapinok’s consent for the tests.  “The officers did not exploit 
the illegality by continuing to gather evidence that they had already set out to gather.”  Id.  And “that the illegally-
obtained evidence is relevant to interpreting subsequently-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
obtained evidence does not mean that discovery of the latter 
‘exploit[s]’ the former.”   Id. at *14 (quoting State v. 
Poaipuni, 98 Hawai‘ i 387, 392, 49 P.3d 353, 358 (2002)).  
Accordingly, the SFST was not the fruit of the poisonous tree in 
this case.  17
40 
 V. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, although we disagree in part with its reasoning, the ICA was correct to conclude that 
Skapinok’s answers to the medical rule-out questions must be 
suppressed but that the other challenged evidence is admissible.  
The ICA’s June 30, 2020 judgment on appeal is accordingly 
affirmed.   Brian R. Vincent   
for Petitioner and Respondent
State of Hawai‘ i    
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
   /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  
   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
     
  /s/ Paul B.K. Wong 
  
 
  
   
    
Alen M. Kaneshiro   for Respondent and Petitioner 
Leah Skapinok    
         
 
 
                     
17  For this reason, respectfully, the dissent incorrectly frames the 
inquiry when it considers only whether the questions “[had] an effect on” the 
administration of the SFST or “allow[ed] officers to interpret” its results.  
Dissent at 14, 16.  That the medical rule- out questions are incriminating 
because they assist in the interpretation of the test’s results is distinct 
from whether the questions lead the officers’ investigation towards the 
tests. 