***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________
  
 
DJ, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant , 
 
vs. 
 
CJ, Petitioner/Defendant- Appellee.   
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-17-0000027 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000027; FC -D. NO. 12- 1-6689) 
 
APRIL 13, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J.,  
CONCURRING AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I.  Introduction 
 In their 2012 divorce, C J (Mother) and DJ (Father) were 
granted joint legal and physical custody of their two minor 
children.  In 2016, Mother filed a motion for post-decree relief
in the Family Court of the First Circuit (“family court”) , 
requesting sole physical custody and joint legal custody, so  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000027
13-APR-2020
08:12 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
2 
 that she could  relocate from Hawai ʻi to North Carol
ina with the 
children and their soon-to -be-stepfather.  
 
More than  six months after Mother filed her motion for 
post-decree relief, the family court held a half- day trial on 
the motion.  One week before the  trial, a social worker in the 
family court’s Custody Investigations Unit (“CIU”)  completed a 
custody evaluation investigation and report (“CIU Report” or 
“Report”)
.  It is unclear when the parties received the R eport.  
 Both Mother and Father proceeded to trial  without attorneys.  
Father, who had a Tagalog interpreter available at trial, 
experienced diffi culty cross- examining several witnesses.  When 
the family court indicated it was calling the CIU social worker 
as a witness, Father orally requested a continuance so that he 
could obtain the assistance of an attorney.  The family court 
denied Father’
s oral motio n as untimely, then ruled that it was 
in the children’s best interest s to relocate with Mother.   
 On appeal, Father argued that the family court abused its 
discretion in:  (1) denying his motion for a continuance at 
trial, and (2) considering the CIU Report in granting Mother’s 
motion for post-decree relief.  The Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (“ICA”) majority vacated the family court’s ruling , 
holding that the family court abused its discretion in denying 
Father’s motion for a continuance to seek a
n attorney .  The ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
3 
 majority did not address whether the family court abused its 
discretion in considering the CIU  Report. 
 Mother’s application for writ of certiorari p resents two 
questions:  (1) whether the ICA erred in holding that the family 
court abused its discretion in denying Father’s motion for a 
continuance at trial; and (2) if so, whether the family court 
abused its discretion in considering  the CIU Report in ruling 
upon Mother’s motion for post -decree relief.   
 The main populated Hawaiian Islands are some of the most 
remote populated land masses in the world, located about 2,400 
miles from California and 4,000 miles from Japan.  When a child 
relocates out-of- state with the other parent, even if a court 
order allows for visitation during summer or winter vacations, 
travel expenses make regular continued contact with the child 
quite difficult, if not impossible, for the great majority of 
Hawaiʻi
 parents.  A proposed out-of -state relocation with a child 
can therefore significantly affect a parent’s substantive 
liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of a child.  
Whether or not to allow relocation, however, must be based 
on a 
determination of the child’s best interests, which includes a 
child’s right to pare ntal contact.   
 Based upon the important interests involved, 
for the 
reasons discussed below, the ICA majority did not err by holding ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
4 
 that the family court abused its discretion in denying Father’s 
request for a continuance to seek the assistance of an attorney .  
Father not only had English language difficulties , but was not 
able to effectively exercise his statutory right to cross-
examine the CIU social worker on the detailed CIU Report, which 
had been prepared only one week before trial, and may not have 
been received by Father until the day of trial.   
 On the other hand, with respect to the second question on 
certiorari, the family court did not abuse its discretion in 
considering the CIU Report.  F amily courts should consider CIU 
or any other available family court social worker reports in 
making these difficult decisions regarding whether or not to 
allow relocation.  Family courts also have the discretion to 
appoint guardians ad litem for children in relocation cases 
pursuant to HRS § 571
-46(a)(8) (2006 & Supp. 2013).  
 In summary,  we affirm the ICA’s February 8, 2018 Amended 
Judgment on Appeal remanding this case to the family court for 
further proceedings.  The family court is to conduct further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.    
II.  Background 
A. Factual background and prior divorce proceedings 
 Father and Mother were both born in the Philippines.  
Father moved to Hawai ʻi in 1997.  Father met Mother in the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
5 
 Philippines in 2007 while vacationing there, and Mother became 
pregnant.  After Father returned to Hawai ʻi
, he petitioned for 
Mother to come as his fiancé
e.  Mother gave birth to their son 
in the Philippines in February 2008  (“Son”), then moved to 
Hawaiʻi in 2009.   Father and Mother were married in May 2009 , and 
they had another child, a daughter, born in January 2012 
(“Daughter”).
 
 Several weeks after Daughter’s bi rth, Mother and Daughter 
traveled to the Philippines for Daughter’s  baptism.  Father 
arrived later.  Due to marital issues, Father returned to Hawai ʻi 
alone in March 2012 to return to work, and Mother and Daughter 
returned in April. 
 Through an attorney, 
Father f iled for divorce o n May 11, 
2012.  At the time, he was employed as a housekeeper at the 
Sheraton Waikīkī
 Hotel.  Mother was employed as a certified 
nurse’s aide  at a Hawaiʻi Kai retirement community and as a 
cashier at Times Supermarket in Kaimuk ī. 
 Sometime thereafter, Mother moved into the Pauoa home of a 
married couple to serve as caretaker for the wife’s mother.  The 
wife, L.C., worked as a legal assistant and the husband, M.C., 
was a retired Honolulu Police Department Lieutenant.   
 At a hearing on August 22, 2012, Father and Mother, through 
their attorneys, placed their agreements regarding divorce terms ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
6 
 on the record.  With respect to the children, Father and Mother 
agreed to joint legal and joint physical custody.  They also 
orally agreed that neither party could
 leave Hawaiʻ i with the 
children 
without written consent of the parties or a court order.  
The October 25, 2012 Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and 
Awarding Child Custody (“Divorce Decree”)  reflected the 
agreement for joint legal and physical custody.  With respec t to 
removal of the children from Hawaiʻi, 
the Divorce Decree provided,  
“The parties shall provide the other party sixty (60) days 
written notice prior to removing the minor children outside the 
City and County of Honolulu or relocating the minor children to 
another state.  If the other party consents then that party 
shall provide written approval allowing the removal of the minor 
children.”    
 By the date of the October 25, 2012 Divorce Decree, Mother 
had met a nurse at Tripler Army Medical Center, with whom she 
entered into a relationship (“Boyfriend,” “ Fiancé,” or 
“Stepfather”).  After Boyfriend’s discharge from the Army, he 
relocated to Durham, North Carolina.  He and Mother were married 
there in April 2016. 
 After the Divorce Decree, Father filed a pro se motion on 
March 14, 2013, requesting that child exchanges occur at a 
police station.  This motion was orally denied at a hearing on ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
7 
 June 19, 2013.  On June 28, 2013, Mother filed a motion 
requesting that the court 
authorize Boyfriend and the couple 
with whom she lived to conduct child exchanges with Father when 
Mother was working and to order Father to communicate with her 
regarding Son’s immigration application.  This motion was 
granted over Father’s opposition .  
 More than two years later, on November 10 , 2015, Father 
filed a motion regarding the children’s doctors and medical and 
immigration expenses, which the parties resolved at the December 
16, 2015 hearing, with Mother represented by counsel; as part of 
this order, Father and Mother both agreed to attend parenting 
counseling. 
 Although Father had been represented b y an attorney in the 
divorce, in the post-divorce hearings, he appeared pro se each 
time.   
B. Subject custody/ relocation proceedings 
 On February 1, 2016, Mother filed a motion for post- decree 
relief requesting that she be granted sole physical custody of 
Son and Daughter, then about eight and four years old, subject 
to Father’s reasonable visitation  rights.  Mother’s motion 
asserted that a change in custody was appropriate because she 
was “planning on relocating to another state and believe[d] that 
it [was] in the children’s best  interest to reside with her.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
8 
  In her declaration, Mother explained that she intended to 
relocate to Durham, North Carolina with her children, where she 
would live with Boyfriend, who was by then her Fiancé, and her 
parents (the children’s maternal grandparents).  Mother 
explained that Fiancé had already r elocated to North Carolina to 
start a new career, and had secured temporary housing for 
himself, Mother, the children, and Mother’s parents.   
 Mother advanced several reasons as to why she believed that 
the children’s relocation to Durham was in their bes t interests .  
She averred that the intended neighborhood of relocation was 
safe, and that the area provided the children with opportunities 
to attend top-rated elementary schools and participate in 
excellent extracurricular activities.  Additionally, Mother 
stated that her parents and 
Fiancé’s extende d family, who also 
lived in the Durham area, would be able to help raise the 
children and support Mother.  Lastly, Mother cont ended that 
Father had been inconsistent in caring for the children, that he 
did not place the children’s needs first,  and that if the 
children were not permitted to relocate with her, Father would 
“continue to alienate [Mother] and cut off or minimize any 
contact” that she would be able to have with her children.  
Mother asserted that if the children were allowed to relocate 
with her, she would ensure they maintained  a relationship with ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
9 
 Father by having regular 
contact with him, and by allowing them 
to visit Father during their school breaks.     
 Proceeding pro se, Father filed a response to Mother’s 
motion for post-decree relief on February 18, 2016.  Father 
argued that relocation to Durham would not be in the children’s 
best interests because (1) Mother’s relationship status and 
living situation in Du
rham would be unstable, as Fiancé could 
leave her at any time; (2) Father did not trust that Fiancé 
would care for his children and that they would be safe in his 
care; and (3) the children already had an established network of 
family support in Hawai ʻi, where they had
 developed positive 
relationships with their paternal cousins and aunt.  Father also 
asserted that Mother did not have proper parenting skills, and 
that she had raised the children with improper morals by 
encouraging them to damage Father’s property and to misbehave 
towards others.  
 The family court1 held an initial hearing on Mother’s motion 
for post-decree relief on March 16, 2016.  Mother was 
represented by two attorneys, and Father appeared pro se.  
Mother’s counsel clarified that she only sought sole physical 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau  presided over the hearings held on March 
16, 2016; March 30, 2016; and June 8, 2016.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
10 
 custody, and was not seeking to set 
aside joint legal custody.  
At the hearing, the family court stated it was unable to 
determine whether relocation to Durham was in the children’s 
best interests based on the information in the file, and opined  
that a custody evaluator or fact finder would be able to provide 
the family court with information to render an informed decision .  
The parties then  agreed to the appointment of a custody 
evaluator or fact finder,  and they agreed to split the costs.  
 When the family court tried to ascertain whether the 
parties preferred a custody evaluator or a fact finder and who 
the parties wanted to serve in either capacity, Father requested 
the assistance of a Tagalog interpreter to ensure that he could 
make an informed decision.  In light of Father’s request for an 
interpreter, the family court continued the hearing on Mother’s 
motion for post-decree relief to March 30, 2016.   
 On March 22, 2016, Father filed a second response to 
Mother’s motion for post-decree relief, stating he no longer 
desired to split the costs  of a custody evaluator.  He asserted 
that an investigation was not necessary, and that if Mother 
wanted an investigation
, she should bear the costs.  He also 
expressed his opinion that Mother’s request was a waste of time 
and that it should be dismissed.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
11 
 At a further 
hearing on March 30, 2016, Mother was 
represented by counsel, Father was again pro se, and a Tagalog 
interpreter was present for Father.  At the hearing, Father 
reiterated that he did not want to bear the costs of a fact 
finder. 
 After some discussion, the parties ultimately agreed to 
the appointment of a fact finder and that Mother would pay for 
his services.  The family court ordered that the hearing on 
Mother’s motion for post -decree relief be continued to July 6, 
2016 to afford the parties a sufficient opportunity to receive 
and review the fact finder’s report and resolve the matter.
 
 On May 25, 2016, 
however, Mother, now also proceeding pro  
se, filed an ex parte motion and declaration to advance the 
hearing on her motion for post-decree relief.  Mother requested 
that the hearing be advanced because she decided not to proceed 
with a fact finder because the fees were much greater than she 
had anticipated and she needed that money to enroll Son in a 
private school in North Carolina to assist in his academic 
adjustment.  The family court2 approved Mother’s  motion to 
advance and scheduled a hearing for June 8, 2016.  
                                                           
2  The Honorable Matthew J. Viola granted Mother’s ex parte motion to 
advance the hearing on her motion for post -decree relief.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
12 
  On June 8, 2016, Father and Mother both appeared pro se.  A 
Tagalog interpreter again appeared to assist Father .  Mother 
reiterated that she did not want to proceed with a fact finder 
because the expenses were more than she had anticipated and that 
she believed the money should be used to enroll Son in a private 
school.  The family court determined that it was unable to rule 
upon Mother’s motion for post -decree relief and ordered that the 
case be set for trial on July 8, 2016.  Specifically, the 
following exchange took place:  
THE COURT:  Because you guys have changed basically what 
you had agreed to do, and -- which is fine.  I mean, I 
understand your -- your situation.  But I’m unable to have 
the hearing today.  
 So what I’m going to do is you guys are going to have 
to go to trial on July  8th, 2016, at 8:30 in the morning.  
 
. . . .  
 
[Y]ou guys have to . . . come back here for trial on July 
8th at 8:30.  
 All witness and exhibit lists need to be filed and 
exchanged with the parties by July 1st, 2016.  
 And then we’ll --
 I’ll give you a half -day trial, 
from 8:30 to 12 o’clock, to present whatever witnesses you 
have and evidence you have to either support your request 
to relocate or to challenge the request to relocate.  Okay?  
 Do you guys understand that?  
 
. . . .  
 
[MOTHER]:
 Actually, I actually prepared the exhibits, but 
then if you want to (indiscernible) for the trial, then -- 
THE COURT:  Because I -- I want you guys to have more time 
than you guys are going to have just in a -- a short 
hearing today,  ‘cause this is a very important request.  So 
I’m going to set it for trial and give you half a day, just 
you guys, to present your case so that I can have more time 
to go and consider everything.  Okay?  
 Okay.  Any questions, sir?  
 
[FATHER]: No, Your Honor. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
13 
 THE COURT:  And then [an] interpreter will be ordered for 
that day.
   
 
 On June 8 , 2016, t he family court also ordered the parties 
to appear before a family court officer on June 20 , 2016 for a 
quick custody study, to exchange and submit all witness lists 
and exhibits by July 1, 2016 , and then set an “extended hearing ” 
for July 8, 2016 at 8:30 a.m.3  On June 14, 2016, however, the 
family court set aside its June 8, 2016 order and instead 
referred the parties 
to the family court’s Custody Investigation 
Unit for a regular custody investigation
.4  The parties were also 
ordered to appear for “an extended hearing”  on Mother’s motion 
for post-decree relief and “for the Return on [CIU] 
investigation” on September 30, 2016.  
 On September 22 , 2016, F ather submitted a detailed, 
notarized letter addressed to Judge Kupau, who had been 
presiding over Mother’s post -decree motion, expressing ser ious 
concerns with what he perceived to be the antagonistic  attitude 
toward him by the CIU social worker who had come to conduct the 
                                                           
3  The family court referred to this as a “trial” during the hearing, but 
the order used the term “extended hearing.”  
 
4  This investigation differs from the quick custody study previously 
ordered, which does not involve site visits and interviews with various other 
persons that may be able t o provide information pertinent to a custody report.  
   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
14 
 home visit, and also expressing why he thought the children 
should not be relocated to North Carolina.  It appears the CIU 
social worker completed the twenty-eight page, single-spaced CIU  
Report on or about September 23, 2016.  The record does not 
reflect the mailing of the CIU  Report to the parties.5        
 On September 30, 2016, the parties appeared before the 
family court.6  At the outset, the family court indicated that 
“this hearing, this trial” would have to be completed by noon.  
The proceedings began at 8:34 a.m. and concluded at 11:44 a.m., 
with one fourteen minute recess.  Both Mother and Father 
proceeded pro se, and a Tagalog interpreter was present to 
assist Father. 
 Before opening statements, the family court asked Mother 
and Father to clarify the identities of their witnesses 
and 
testimonies they expected from each.  Mother first indicated she 
was going to call M.C. a nd L.C. to testify regarding their past 
                                                           
5  In contrast, the minutes reflect that a court clerk mailed the June 13, 
2016 order, which was not entered at the end of a court proceeding, to the 
parties.  The CIU Report itself is sealed due to its confidentiality pursuant 
to HRS § 571- 84(c) (Supp. 2001), which provides that “[n]o information 
obtained or social records prepared in the discharge of official duty by an 
employee of the court shall be disclosed directly or indirectly to anyone 
other than the judge or others entitled under this chapter to receive the 
information, unless and until otherwise ordered by the judge. ” 
 
6  The Honorable William J. Nagle presided over the trial and the motion 
for reconsideration.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
15 
 encounters with Father, their relationship with the children, 
their impressions of Mother’s husband, and why they believed it 
was in the children’s best interests to move to North Carolina.  
The family court indicated that Mother could only call either 
M.C. or L.C. as a witness.  
Mother also stated she would also be 
calling her mother as a witness to testify regarding the Son and 
Father 
in the Philippines, Father’s behavior when picking up Son, 
and the help she would provide when movin g to North Carolina.  
The family court then stated that what happened in the 
Philippines was not relevant to the trial issue of whether 
Mother should be granted sole legal7 and physical custody of the 
children and the “other issue . . . [of] whether [Mother] should 
be allowed to relocate with the children to North Carolina. ” 
Father next explained he had brought his sister, his father, 
and a family friend to testify on his behalf and the natures of 
their expected testimonies.  Regarding the proposed testimony of 
the sister and the father, the family court indicated that 
Father would only be able to call one of them to testify about 
the caretaking of the children because their testimony would be 
cumulative. 
                                                           
7  Mother had not requested a change in Father’s joint legal custody.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
16 
 The family court also stated that “the fact that [Mother 
and Father had] listed witnesses to testify in addition to 
[themselves] is going to put a strain on our ability to get this 
done this morning[,]” and indicated that if the parties were 
going to call witnesses other than themselves, they needed to 
get to the point.  The family court additionally indicated it 
was not interested in parties’ “ past disputes and quarrels”  as 
it had reviewed the court file.  The family court then advised 
the parties that “if you’re going to call people, get to the 
point.  And if you’re going to cross-examine people , ask your 
questions.  Be sure you know what you’re asking, and don’t get 
into arguments in front of the Court.”    
The family court also acknowledged that both parties had 
submitted numerous exhibits to be received into evidence and 
addressed which ones were going to be admitted.  The family 
court then asked if either party wanted to make an opening 
statement. 
 Father’s opening statement consisted of the following: 
[FATHER]: Your Honor -- (Through interpreter) -- it’s this 
-- this (indiscernible). It’ s very hurting to me to --  
seeing as my children were still young. It’ s been seven 
years that they’ ve been out from me. So they remove her – 
[Daughter]  (indiscernible). It’ s -- it really hurts me. 
It’s your decision. It’ s up to you, Your Honor, if you -- 
if you allow them to be removed away from me, although it 
hurts me very much. I -- I wish that they could stay with 
me, because I love them very much. They are my life. So 
(indiscernible) they did to me, I am a U.S. citizen. I also 
stay with my parents. It is up to you, Judge. It’ s your 
decision. Please don’ t allow them to be removed from me.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
17 
  
(In English)  That
’s all, Your Honor.  
 
(Through interpreter) That’ s all I can say.  
 
Mother then presented a much more lengthy opening statement in 
English.  She stated she was not seeking to change Father’s 
joint legal custody
 of the children . 
 Mother then called three witnesses to testify on her 
behalf:  (1) L.C., the friend with whom she had resided, for 
whose mother she had served as caretaker; (2) the children’s 
maternal grandmother; and (3) M.C. , the retired HPD Lieutenant, 
with whom Mother also resided.  Although the family court had 
indicated earlier that Mother could only call either L.C. or M.C. 
as a witness, at the conclusion of the grandmother’s testimony, 
the family court asked Mother if she wanted to call M.C., who 
was then also allowed to testify.  Mother also testified on her 
own behalf.  
 
Father was provided opportunit ies to cross -examine each of 
Mother’s witnesses, including Mother herself ; he attempted 
cross-examination of L.C. and M.C.  only.  While Father was able 
to ask L.C. and M.C. to clarify certain parts of their testimony, 
Father had to be reminded several times that he was only 
permitted to ask questions on cross- examination, and was not 
allowed to argue with the witnesses.  For example, the following 
exchange took place on cross -examination of L.C. :  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
18 
 BY [FATHER]:  
Q.
 [L.C.], you just said that it would be 
(indiscernible) I’m not good father in terms of educating 
and intensive (indiscernible) for my kids.  I believe that 
I did my best, sending them in their doctors -- 
 
THE COURT:  Excuse me.  Do you have any questions for her?  
 
Q. (BY [FATHER])  [L.C.], how did you said that -- you said 
that I am not being a good father to my kids in terms of 
their health or something or their school, in their school, 
sending them in [] School?  
 
A. Well, I understand from your son, [Son], who is . . . 
eight years old, that you do his homework for him, and you 
provide him his answers because you felt that he was too 
lazy to do his homework, and he was frustrated about doing 
his homework.  I don’t think that’s a good thing for a 
father to do because the son -- your son will never learn 
anything in school.  
 
Q. I’m -- I’m trying to encourage him to do his homework 
or to do his classwork.  
 
THE COURT:  [Father], not time to argue with the witness.  
If you have a question to ask her, you should ask her now.   
 
[FATHER]:  (Through interpreter) Only the question -- only 
statements that (indiscernible) make?  
(In English) Only the statement, Your Honor, or -- 
 
THE COURT:   This is not the time for you to make 
statements.  If you have questions to ask [L.C.]-- 
 
[FATHER]: About what she said?  
 
THE COURT:  About her testimony, yeah.  
 
[FATHER]: That’s all, Your Honor.  
 
 Similarly, on M.C. ’s cross -examination, the following 
exchange took place: 
BY [FATHER]:  
Q. Sir, [M.C.] Lieutenant, what did you said, N.C., 
North Carolina, is better than Hawaii, considering now 
there’s a lot of crime happening there, considering Hawaii 
is very peaceful, and there’s no history of anything 
violence, except the last war, which is World War II, which 
has been long, long time [sic]?  
 
A. [Father], for your information, working -- working 
the streets of Kalihi for 29 years and the surrounding ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
19 
 district of Kaneohe, our town is not as peaceful as you 
migh
t imagine.  I’ve been trained in riot control, and we 
have prevented a few riots, including a few at a bar . . . 
many times.  So the actions that you’ve seen in Charlotte, 
North Carolina, are typical of a . . . metropolitan area.  
We’re no different.  
 The metropolitan [area] here . . . has a permanent 
population of 956,000 people.  Of that, the average . . . 
people who are committing crimes is 3 percent.  Well, 
that’s over 30,000 who are causing trouble in our city.  So 
we don’t live in a real peaceful envi ronment[.] 
 
Q. And then you said that the kids not going have a hard 
time going back and forth every week.  Have you ever think 
that it’s going to be hard for them not to see me, if 
you’re thinking the -- their best interest, to 
(indiscernible) me as their  father, not see me every week 
(indiscernible) right now?   
 
A. Considering my observations of their reactions to you, 
oh, I certainly think they’ll be much better off, 
especially as a baby, when your daughter, [Daughter], used 
to kick and scream when you’ d take her away from her mother 
or me or my wife during the twice weekly exchanges.  
 
Q. For what I see, [M.C.], my daughter always excited to 
see me, and my son.  
 
THE COURT:  Excuse me, [Father].  This is the time for 
questions.  Okay?  
 
[FATHER]:  That’s all, Your Honor.   
 
 Then, d uring Mother’s direct testimony, the following 
exchange took place: 
THE COURT: Now, are you asking the Court, as far as joint 
legal custody is concerned, to give you any tie -breaking 
authority if you move to North Carolina because you will be 
there with the kids?  
 
[MOTHER]: Yes, Your Honor. 
That’s what was recommended in 
the custodial evaluator’ s report. I would love to have the 
tie-breaking, Your Honor.  
 
THE COURT: Okay. I just wanted to clarify that.   
  
 After Mother finished presenting her evidence, the family 
court informed the parties that it had asked the CIU social 
worker to come up to court to be sworn as the court’s witness ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
20 
 and to authenticate her CIU Report.  The fami ly court observed 
that the CIU Report “does not appear to have been filed in 
court,” and that the family court wanted to provide the p arties 
an opportunity to ask the social worker any questions they had 
regarding the CIU Report.  Upon being informed that the CIU 
social worker was being called to testify, Father then orally 
requested a continuance to consult an attorney: 
[FATHER]:  Can I say something, Your Honor?  I would like 
to practice my right to -- to see a -- a lawyer. 
 
THE COURT:  See a lawyer now?  
 
[FATHER]:  I would like to extend this hearing.  
 
THE INTERPRETER:  Asking for a continuance because he wants 
to consult a lawyer.   
 
 Mother objected to Father’s request for continuance, 
stating that she intended to enroll Son in school in North 
Carolina and the hearing on her motion for post-decree relief 
had already been continued several times.  The family court then 
asked Father why he had not retained an attorney up until this 
point.  Father responded: 
Your Honor, I didn’t know is going --
 this going to be the 
setup, ‘cause normally when we go to . . . court, it’s 
normally asking the judge.  I didn’t know about .  . . 
cross-examination, something like that.  I have no idea.  
So I would like to practice my right to hire a lawyer, to 
see a lawyer (indiscernible), and extend this hearing, 
‘cause I . . . have no idea about this .  . . procedure.  
  
The family court denied Father’s motion for a continuance in the 
following exchange:  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
21 (continued. . .)  
 
 THE COURT:  Okay.  [Father], the problem I’m having is that 
this motion was filed back . . . in February.  Yo
u folks 
have had numerous hearings before . . . Judge Kupau.  Since 
that time, you’ve been to court, you know, a fair amount.  
I guess . . . I don’t understand why you’ve had in excess 
of six months to hire an attorney, and now we’re halfway 
through the trial, and you want to continue the matter to 
hire an attorney.  
 
[FATHER]:  Like, again, like I said, Your Honor, I didn’t 
know this -- that this the first time I been here in this 
kind of setup of -- in the court.  I normally go to a -- 
they get a judge and  two of us.   
 
THE COURT:  Uh -huh.  
 
[FATHER]:  That’s -- that’s how it is.  But cross -
examination, I have no idea.  That’s why I cannot do it.  
So I would like to say -- I would like to practice my right 
to . . . see a lawyer so I can also (indiscernible)  for me 
to deliver my –- my . . .  
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  [Father], the Court’s going to deny your 
motion for a continuance.  I think it’s too late.  We’re 
already in the trial.  That’s something that if you 
were . . . going to, you should have hired an attorney 
early on.  So I’m going to deny your motion.   It’s too late.  
 
 The family court then called the CIU social worker to the 
stand.  The social worker briefly testified that she had 
performed a custody evaluation for the present case, that she 
had prepared the CIU 
Report, that the signature on a document 
before her was her signature, that she had made certain 
recommendations to the court as a result of the investigation, 
and that her recommendations had not changed from
 the September 
23, 2016 date of the Report.8    
                                                           
8  As indicated later, the family court considered the CIU Report, which 
was not marked as an exhibit and was not received in evidence.  The CIU ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
22 
  
Both parties were then given opportunities for cross-
examination.  Mother indicated she had no questions.  Father 
again experienced difficulty and again requested a continuance 
so that he could consult a lawyer, which the family court 
denied:  
BY [FATHER]:   
Q. In her report, you never  said that I do have a one -
bedroom house and all that . . . safety first, which is I  
-- I mention it -- mention to you four times.  If you 
remember, when you come to my house, my main goal for 
my . . . children is . . . their safety.  But . . . you 
never put anything about that, all that safety thing that I 
show it to you?  
 
A. I’m sorry.  I don’t understand the question.  
 
THE COURT:  [Father], it would help if you’d just ask a 
very simple question like, do you remember the time you 
visited my house?  
 
[FATHER]:  Like again -- like I said, Your Honor, I would 
like to see a lawyer because I would like to practice my 
right to --  ‘cause I don’t know -- I don’t know how to do 
this thing.  
 
THE COURT:  Well, it’ s not hard, [Father].  If you’re 
asking her about what she did or didn’ t see on a visit to 
your house, all you have to do is ask her, do you remember 
-- Do you remember visiting [Father’s]  house?  
 
THE WITNESS:  Yes.  
 
THE COURT:  What did the house look like?  
 
THE WITNESS:  It was a one- bedroom, one -bath, with a living 
room into an open kitchen area apartment.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
(continued. . .)  
social worker never testified as to the contents of the Report or her 
recommendations, except in response to the few questions asked by Father.  
The rules of evidence should be followed.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
23 
 [FATHER]:  In her report, she didn’t write down what inside 
of the refrigerator, things like that, what  
. . . foods 
that my children eat, and then what (indiscernible) my 
parent’s hous e, and what the childrens do . . . there.  So 
to me -- 
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  
 
[FATHER]:  –- this woman is incomplete.  
 
THE COURT:  All right.  
 
[FATHER]:  (Indiscernible.)  
 
THE COURT:  Do you agree that your report is incomplete in 
any way? 
 
THE WITNESS:  No.  
 
THE COURT:  Okay.  
 
[FATHER]:  Your Honor, again, I would like to practice my 
right to hire a lawyer, to . . .  
 
THE COURT:  [Father], again, we’re in the middle of the 
trial.  If you wanted to hire a lawyer, this was something 
you should have done way before this.  
 
Do you have any other questions for [the social worker]? 
Because if you don’ t, I’m going to release her.  
 
[FATHER]:  That’s all I want to ask (indiscernible).  
   
 After the CIU social worker left the stand, Father was 
given an opportunity to present his evidence.  Father elicited 
testimony from three witnesses .  Father also testified.  For the 
most part, Father testified in English, on his own; he relied on 
the Tagalog interpreter to clarify that he believed his children 
would experience anxiet
y if they r elocated to Durham.   As he 
testified, Father went through his exhibits,  explained their 
contents, and explained how each exhibit supported that moving 
to Durham was not in the children’s best interest s.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
24 
  
Mother and Father then gave their closing arguments.  
Father’s closing argument was as follows:  
[FATHER]:  Thank you, Your Honor. It’s -- for me, it’s more 
about the stability, that the kids will be there.  Over 
here in Hawaii, they are more stable. They already 
establish stability here. School, family, medical. 
Everything’ s -- everything that already is stable. Moving  
-- moving her in North Carolina is (indiscernible) 
especially –- 
  
THE COURT:  It’s what?  
 
[FATHER]:  Anxiety. (Through interpreter) Anxiety. (In 
English) Anxiety. (Through interpreter) Creates anxiety.  
 
THE COURT:   Anxiety for?  
 
[FATHER]:  For them, especially they’re too young. I’ve 
been taking care of them -- my -- to them, except to my son, 
who has just came here, since his (sic) birth. So if 
they’re going to be remove, Your Honor, that relationship 
is going to be different because they -- weekly we -- we 
always see each other, so it’ s going to be hard for both of 
us, for the -- for the -- for me and for my both children, 
that they enjoying, also, their family -- extended family 
here, which is their cousins, their uncle, the auntie, the 
grandparents. And, also, Your Honor, I've been a good 
father to them. I would like to continue that. They are my 
life. I will do more best for my kids. Last, Your Honor, I 
never do anything bad or a crime. I’ m a good citizen. I 
deserve to have them. They are my life. They are my 
happiness.  And then, also, Your Honor, it’ s not fair to me, 
as the petitioner or plaintiff in the very beginning, that 
I -- I going to -- I going to have only two months during 
the summer and from the – for . . . [MOTHER], having school 
year the whole year, which is ten months. Just change the -
- the -- change the -- the situation. Have her the 
summertime, and I get the school year. Do you thin k it’s 
going to be fair?  
 
THE COURT:   You should have asked that question of [MOTHER]  
on cross- examination. Okay. Anything else, [FATHER]?  
 
[FATHER]:  That’s all, Your Honor.  
  
THE COURT:  Okay. Thank you very much . 
 
 At the conclusion of his closing argument, the following 
further exchange took place: ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
25 
 THE COURT:  
 Okay. Thank you very much. The Court at this 
time is going to take  the matter under advisement. I’ m 
going to look over the exhibits that  you folks have 
provided, and I’ ll render a decision within the next week. 
Okay? I want to thank both [FATHER] and [MOTHER ] . . . . 
Thank you very much for your presentation and for your very 
professional -- your very professional demeanor. I 
appreciate it.  
 
[FATHER]:  I have a question, Your Honor. I ’m sorry about 
every -- if this -- like I said in the very beginning, this 
is my first time to be in this kind of setup of -- in the 
court, ‘cause normally the judge, me, and (indiscernible) 
or the lawyers. I don’ t know anything about cross-
examination. That’ s why I just like, you know, what to do 
(indiscernible), I ask him many times. My question is, Your 
Honor, ‘cause I feel that I need a lawyer, but you -- you 
deny it, just in case that you favor to her, I can always 
appeal? I practice my rights to -- to fight for my kids?  
 
THE COURT:   [FATHER], you can retain the services of an 
attorney anytime. But you can’ t do it in the middle of 
trial and expect the Court to  continue, especially after 
[MOTHER] has put on her evidence already. So if you  want to 
go out and retain an attorney to prosecute an appeal after 
the Court’ s decision, that’s entirely up to you.  
 
[FATHER]:  I just ask (indiscernible).  
 
THE COURT:  As the Court, I can’ t give you legal advice. 
You need to retain your own attorney to  do that.  
 
[FATHER]:  Yeah, I’m sorry about that, ‘cause I didn’ t know 
this going to be the setup. That’ s why I don't know that -- 
you know, how to do this. If I --  if I knew it going to be 
like this, I probably hire a attorney, ‘ cause just 
considering t hat I have a interpreter, I don’ t know what –  
 
THE COURT:   Okay.  
 
 Although the family court had stated it would rule within 
the next week, the record does not reflect a ruling until almost 
two months after the September 30, 2016 trial.  On November 23, 
2016, the family court filed an “Order Granting Defendant’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
26 (continued. . .)  
 
 Motion For Post-Decree Relief Filed February 1, 2016 ” (“the 
Order”).9  In the O rder, the family court issued its factual 
findings based upon the CIU Report  and the evidence presented at 
trial, and ruled with respect to legal and physical custody as 
follows:  
 2. LEGAL CUSTODY . The Court has considered the 
criteria set forth in [HRS] §571 -46(b) . . .
 with respect 
to each parent ’s request that the Court award them sole 
legal custody of the minor children. Particularly, the 
Court focused on subsections (3) through (9), (12), (15)10 
                                                           
9  As argued by Father in his motion for reconsideration, despite stating 
to the parties at the beginning of trial that it was not interested in the 
parties’ past disputes and quarrels, apparently based on its review of the 
record, the family court discussed the previous post- decree motions in some 
detail, drawing negative inferences against Father,  such as “Father’s written 
response to Mother’s Motion [to allow L.C. and M.C. to pick up the children] 
demonstrates an intense antipathy for, and hostility to, Mother because of 
events which occurred during their marriage; and a stated willingness to 
involve the minor children in disputes with Mother.”   In addition, as argued 
by Father in his motion for reconsideration, the family court might not have 
had been fully apprised regarding the details regarding this motion.  In 
addition, however, the response negatively referred to by the family court 
was filed on July 18, 2013, within nine months after the divorce decree, and 
this matter took place more than three years later.  
 
10  HRS § 571- 46(b)(3) through (9), (12), and (15) provide:  
 
(b) In determining what  constitutes the best interest of 
the child under this section, the court shall consider, but 
not be limited to, the following:  
 
 . . . 
 (3) The overall quality of the parent -child 
 relationship;  
 (4) The history of caregiving or parenting by each  
 parent prior and subsequent to a marital or other 
 type of separation;  
 (5) Each parent’s cooperation in developing and 
 implementing a plan to meet the child’s ongoing 
 needs, interests, and schedule; provided that this 
 factor shall not be considered in any case where the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
27 
 and (16)11 as indicative of the best interests of the minor 
children
 . . . . The Court finds that Mother has carried 
her burden of proof, as set forth b
elow.  
 As between the two parents, it is evident that Mother 
has been the more consistent parent in providing quality to 
her relationship with the children since the divorce. She 
has been the more attentive to the physical, emotional, 
safety and educational needs  of the children. Mother has 
consistently demonstrated that she can separate the 
children’ s needs from her own, and place the best interests 
of the children over her own interests.  
 The Court also finds that Mother has demonstrated the 
occurrence of a change in circumstances necessitating a 
change in legal custody principally due to Father ’s 
inability or unwillingness to place the best interests of 
the children above his own disagreements and hostility 
towards Mother.  [fn2 See § 571- 46(b)(12), HRS.]  Independent 
of any relocation decision, it is obvious that joint legal 
custody has not produced the desired benefits for the minor 
children, because  of Father’s behaviors. [fn3 The Divorce 
Decree requires that the parties attempt mediation of their 
disputes before filing motions in court.  To date, there is 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
(continued. . .)  
 court has determined that family violence has been 
 committed by a parent;  
 (6) The physical health needs of the child;  
 (7) The emotional needs of the child;  
 (8) The safety needs of the child;  
 (9) The educational needs of the child;  
 . . . 
 (12) Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they 
 separate the child’s needs from the parent’s needs;  
 . . . 
 (15) The areas and levels of conflict present 
 within the family;  
 . . . . 
 
11  HRS § 571-46(b)(16) requires consideration of “ [a] parent’s prior 
wilful misuse of the protection from abuse process under chapter 586 to 
gain a tactical advantage in any proceeding involving the custody 
determination of a minor” in the best interests analysis.    
Despite the family court’s reliance on HRS  § 571-46(b)(16), there 
is no record of any HRS Chapter 586 proceedings involving Father and 
Mother. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
28 
 no indication that the parties have  attempted mediation.12]  
Father has placed the minor children at the center of his 
disputes with Mother; first, by calling HPD repeatedly at 
the pick up and drop off location
s to document his 
frivolous allegations against Mother for custodial 
interference; and second, by refusing to communicate with 
Mother to resolve relatively insignificant issues relating 
to the pickup and drop off schedule. Moreover, Father
’s 
trial testimony demonstrates that he has no intention of 
cooperating and coparenting with Mother in the future; his 
fixation with “fighting for [his] children ” with Mother 
instead of attempting to work with her for the children ’s 
benefit, demonstrates misplaced priorities. From the post -
Decree history of the parents, the Court has no factual 
basis for inferring that Father’ s hostility towards Mother 
will lessen with time or distance. Mother has also carried 
her burden of showing that she has attempted to work with 
Father for the benefit of the children, albeit 
unsuccessfully.  
 For these reasons, the Court finds that the best 
interests of the minor children require a change in legal 
custody from joint legal custody to sole legal custody in 
favor of Mother. The Court further finds that the best 
interests of the children require that Mother be tasked the 
obligation to inform and confer with Father concerning the 
major issues of the minor children ’s lives. Father shall 
also have equal access to the children ’s medical and school 
records, as well as their extracurricular activities. If 
the parties cannot arrive at a consensus decision on the 
major issues of the children’ s lives, then Mother shall 
make the decision.[13]  
 
 3. PHYSICAL CUSTODY/RELOCATION.  The Court finds that 
Mother has carried her burden of demonstrating that the 
best interests of the children support her request to 
relocate her residence with the children from Honolulu to 
                                                           
12  Father’s alleged failure to refer matters to mediation was not raised 
by Mother and was never discussed during the trial, and as also argued by 
Father in his motion for reconsideration, may have been factually incorrect.  
 
13  Mother’s motion was based on her relocation request.  In addition, as 
noted, Mother repeatedly stated she was not requesting a change in legal 
custody.  Upon questioning by the family court, Mother indicated she wanted 
“tie-breaking” authority with respect to legal custody.  Yet, this portion of 
the family court’s ruling, which changes legal custody from joint to solely 
to Mother, is not conditioned on any relocation, and orders a change not 
requested by Mother. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
29 
 Durham, North Carolina, forthwith.[14
] The Court also finds 
that Mother has carried her burden of demonstrating that 
the best interests of the children require an award of 
physical custody of the minor children to Mother.  
 Mother has demonstrated that the children
’s 
opportunities for education, medical care,  employment and 
cultural growth in Durham, NC are better than Honolulu. 
Because the maternal grandparents will accompany Mother to 
Durham, Mother has shown that she has support for 
supervision, direction and care for the children, in 
addition to her husband. Mother has also shown that her 
opportunities for employment in the Durham  area are more 
numerous and advantageous to her, than those in Honolulu.  
 The Court is not persuaded that the children should 
remain in Honolulu with Father. First, as noted above, 
Father’s evident and continuing hostility to Mother, even 
after the divorce, and his willingness to place the 
children at the center of their disputes, cannot be in the 
children’ s best interests. Moreover, based on his behavior 
to date, the Court finds that Father is unable to place the 
children’ s best interests ahead of his own. Second, neither 
Father nor any of his witnesses at trial articulated any 
compelling reasons for the children to remain in Honolulu. 
Finally, Mother ’s plan for relocation adequately provides 
time for Father to visit with and enjoy time with the 
children.  
 In order to prevail on her request to change physical 
custody and to relocate with the minor children to  Durham, 
North Carolina, Mother must demonstrate that: (1) “there 
occurred such a change in circumstances that the 
replacement of custody would be in for the best interests 
of the children ”, Dascoscos v. Dascoscos, 38 Haw. Terr.265, 
266 (1948); and (2) that relocation of the minor children 
to Durham, North Carolina would be in the best interests of 
the children as enumerated in §571 -46(b), HRS. Mother must 
demonstrate these elements to a preponderance of evidence.  
 Mother’s proposed relocation of the minor  children to 
Durham, North Carolina is a change in circumstances, the 
occurrence of which would dictate a change in physical 
custody, in the best interests of the children. Dascoscos, 
supra; quoted in Waldecker, supra at p. 22. The Divorce 
Decree clearly contemplated that the parties would share 
equal time with the minor children while they resided on 
the island of Oahu. While the Decree does refer to the 
possibility of relocation by one or both parties in §3, the 
provision requires that  a relocating party give 60 days 
                                                           
14  Although the Order allows relocation “forthwith,” the record does not 
indicate any ruling on the September 30, 2016 trial until this November 23, 
2016 order.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
30 
 notice of the relocation to the other party, who may then 
consent or object. Nothing in the Decree governs time -
sharing between the parties in the event that one relocates 
out of the State of Hawaii.  
 Based on the evidence at trial and the re
port of CIU, 
the Court finds that Mother has been the primary caregiver, 
and more consistently supportive parent to the children. 
The Court also finds that Mother has, and is presently able 
to place the interests of the children ahead of her own, 
even while working multiple jobs to provide for them 
financially. No evidence was presented at trial that any 
safety issues will arise if an award of physical custody is 
made to Mother for the relocation. On the other hand, 
Father has failed to show that he has advanced the 
children’ s educational opportunities  [fn4 [L.C.] testified 
that Father, rather than supervising [Son’s] homework, 
actually did  the homework for [Son], which hindered [Son’s] 
efforts at school.]  nor has he demonstrated at trial that 
he would be an  adequate physical custodian. Based upon 
these findings, the Court awards sole physical custody of 
the minor children to Mother, subject to Father’ s rights of 
visitation, as set forth below .  
 
 Additionally, in a footnote, the family court indicated 
that Father requested a continuance at trial, but that the 
request was denied:   
Father requested a continuance of the trial to retain legal 
counsel after Mother had concluded her presentation of 
evidence in her case in chief.  Despite the passage of 7 
months and numerous court hearings since the filing of 
Mother’s Motion, Father had failed to seek or retain legal 
counsel.  Father presented no excuse for his failure to 
retain legal counsel in a timely fashion, and the Court 
denied Father’s request for a co ntinuance literally in the 
middle of trial as untimely.  
 
 On December 2, 2016, Father filed a motion for 
reconsideration.  In summary , Father argued that his motion 
should be granted because: (1) several of the family court’s 
factual findings were erroneous or based upon incomplete 
information; (2) the evidence, in his view, demonstrated that 
relocation to Durham was not in the children’s best interest; ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
31 
 and (3) the family court should have granted his motion for a 
continuance so he could have sought advice from a lawyer.15   
 On January 4, 2017, the family court issued a written order 
denying Father’s motion for reconsideration.  The family court 
ruled that Father’s motion reiterated arguments he had raised at 
trial and did not present any new evidence and/or arguments that 
could not have been presented at trial.  
C. ICA proceedings  
 On appeal, Father, now represented by counsel, raised two 
points of error.  Father argued that the family court abused its 
discretion in denying his motion for a continuance at trial and 
in considering the CIU Report in support of its decision 
granting mother’s motion for post -decree relief.   
 Regarding the first point of error, in summary, Father 
argued that the family court abused its discretion in denying 
his motion for a continuance because:  (1) a continuance would 
not have resulted in any inconvenience to the family court, the 
parties, or the witnesses; (2) Father had legitimate reasons to 
seek a continuance, given that “[h]e is not a native English 
speaker and had great difficulty communicating as he attempted 
                                                           
15  See also notes 9 & 12, supra. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
32 
 cross-examination of the witnesses”; and (3) Father was not at 
fault for waiting to consult a lawyer for several months, as 
Father did not know he would need the assistance of counsel 
until shortly before trial because he was not given a copy of 
the CIU report until, at a
 maximum, a week before trial.  
 With respect to his second point of error, Father advanced 
several arguments in 
support of his position that the family 
court abused its discretion in considering the CIU R eport.  
First, Father argued that the CIU report was deficient.  Father 
highlighted that the CIU R eport only “compared alternatives of 
MOTHER or FATHER having sole physical custody, without taking 
into account that these alternatives mean that MOTHER was 
prepared to abandon the children to FATHER if the motion were 
denied,” and “failed to consider the advantages to the children 
of remaining in a stable and familiar environment in Hawai
[ʻ]i 
within the jurisdiction of the Hawai[ʻ]i Family Court.”  Fath er 
also argued that the CIU Report was incomplete because it did 
not sufficiently investigate Stepf ather’s background and the 
details of the intended neighborhood of relocation.  Father 
further argued that the family court abused its disc
retion in 
considering the CIU Report because the social worker was not 
qualified to serve as a custody evaluator under HRS § 571-46.4 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
33 
 (Supp. 2013), and Father did not consent to 
the social worker’s 
appointment as a custody evaluator.
 
 Mother , acting pro se, responded to each of Father’s points 
of error.  Mother first argued that the family court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying Father’s mid -trial motion for a 
continuance.  Mother argu ed that at the June 8, 2016 hearing, 
the family court had informed both of the parties that the next 
proceeding was going to be a trial.  Additionally, Mother argued  
that at the September 30, 2016 hearing, prior to the parties’ 
opening statements, the family court explained how the trial was 
going to proceed and provided the parties with an opportunity to 
ask questions.  Mother contended that the family court correctly 
denied Father’s motion for a continuance, as he had ample 
opportunity to seek counsel and to resolve any questions 
regarding the nature of trial proceedings, but still chose to 
represent himself.    
 With respect to the second point of error, Mother contended 
that the family court did not abuse its discretion in 
considering the CIU Report.  Mot her argued that HRS § 571-
46(a)(4) does not require a parent to consent to an 
investigation or report, and asserted that the CIU social worker 
was qualified to serve as a custody evaluator under HRS § 571-
46.4(a) (Supp. 2013).  Mother also countered that the social ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
34 
 worker sufficiently investigated Stepf ather by speaking with him 
over the phone twice and by speaking with his  landlord/housemate 
over the phone.  Mother concluded that the CIU Report was not 
only complete, but was thorough , accurate, and drafted by a 
qualified individual. 
 On December 26, 2017, the ICA filed a summary disposition 
order, in which a majority of the ICA panel vacated the family 
court’s orders granting Mother’s motion for post -decree relief 
and denying Father’s motion for reconsideration.   DJ v. CJ, 
CAAP-17-0000027, at 1-5 (App. Dec. 26, 2017) (SDO).  The ICA 
majority concluded that “the family court abused its discretion 
in denying Father’s request for a continuance to seek the 
assistance of counsel.”   DJ, SDO at 5.  Th e ICA majority further 
determined that it need not address Father’s second point of 
error.  DJ , SDO at 2 n.1.   
 Judge Reifurth dissented.   DJ, SDO at 6- 12 (Reifurth, J., 
dissenting).  In his view, the family court did not abuse its 
discretio
n in denying Father’s request for a continuance.  DJ, 
SDO at 6 (Reifurth, J., dissenting).  He reasoned that because 
Father had been provided with an interpreter, Mother’s motion 
had been filed more than seven months before the trial, and 
Father was familiar with his right to counsel and the process, 
yet chose not to hire an attorney, Father had not exercised due ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
35 
 diligence.  Accordingly, Judge Reifurth would have ruled that 
father’s substantive parental rights had not been infringed upon 
and the family court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
“Father’s mid-hearing request for a further continuance.”  DJ, 
SDO at 10-11 (Reifurth, J., dissenting).   
 Judge Reifurth also addressed Father’s second point of 
error.  DJ, SDO at 11- 12 (Reifurth, J., dissenting).  He opined 
that Father did not demonstrate that:  (1) the CIU Report was 
incomplete in any material sense; (2) the family court ’s ability 
to consider the CIU Report was conditioned upon his consent 
thereto; or (3) the family court relied upon the CIU report in 
granting Mother’s motion for post -decree relief.  DJ, SDO at 11 
(Reifurth, J., dissenting).  Based on t he family court’s “broad 
discretion in examining reports concerning a child’s custody,” 
Judge Reifurth opined that the family court did not abuse its 
discretion in considering the CIU R eport.  DJ, SDO at 11- 12 
(Reifurth, J., dissenting).   
 On Febr uary 8, 2018, the ICA entered its Amended Judgment 
on Appeal.  
D. Application for writ of certiorari  
 Mother filed a timely application for a writ of certiorari, 
raising two questions: (1) whether the family court abused its 
discretion by denying Father’s request for a continuance to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
36 
 obtain legal counsel; and (2) whether the family court 
manifestly abused its discretion by relying upon a CIU R
eport 
that was alleged to be incomplete and performed without Father’s 
consent. 
 For the reasons below, the ICA majority did not err in 
ruling that the family court abused its discretion by denying 
Father’s reque
st for continuance to obtain legal counsel.  Based 
on its ruling on the first question, the ICA majority did not 
address the second question.  As the second question on 
certiorari would still be at issue on remand, however, we 
address issues raised therein to provide guidance.  Ultimately, 
we affirm the ICA’s Amended Judgment on Appeal, as modified by 
this opinion.  
III.  Standards of Review  
A. Whether an abuse of discretion occurred 
 A family court’s decision to grant or deny a motion for a 
continuance is reviewed for an abuse of discretion.  Onaka v. 
Onaka, 112 Hawaiʻ i 374, 378, 146 P.3d 89, 93 (2006).  “It is well 
established that ‘[a]n abuse of discretion occurs if the trial 
court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial 
detriment of a party- litigant. ’”  Id. (brackets in original, 
citation omitted).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
37 
   Whether an abuse of discretion occurred is a question of 
law.  In re B.G.D., 351 S.W.3d 131, 145 (Tex. Civ. App. 2011).  
Thus, an Intermediate Court of Appeals ruling that an abuse of 
discretion occurred is a question of law reviewed under the 
right/wrong standard of review.   
B. Consideration of evidence  
When application of a particular evidentiary rule can yield 
only one correct result, the proper standard for appellate 
review is the right/wrong standard.  However, the 
traditional abuse of discretion standard should be applied 
in the case of those rules of evidence that require a 
“judgment call” on the part of the trial court.   
 
State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawaiʻi 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003)
 
(citations omitted). 
IV.  Discussion  
A. The ICA did not err in ruling that the family court abused 
its discretion in denying Father’s motion for a continuance.  
 
 At issue is whether the ICA majority erred in ruling that 
the family court abused its discretion in denying Father’s 
request for a continuance, in other words, whether the ICA erred 
in ruling that the family court clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to 
the substantial detriment of a party-litigant.  As we noted in 
AC v. AC, 134 Hawai ʻi 221, 233, 339 P.3d 719, 731 (2014):
 
Important constitutional interests provide . . . reason for 
providing parents a full and fair opportunity to present 
their case in  custody decisions.  Indeed, a parent’s 
right to the “ care, custody and control” of his or her 
child is a fundamental liberty interest protected by the 
United States Constitution.  Troxel v. Granville , 530 U.S. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
38 
 57, 65, 120 S.Ct. 2054, 147 L.Ed.2d 49 (2000)  (“[T]he 
interest of parents in the  care,
 custody, and control of 
their children is perhaps the oldest of the fundamental 
liberty interests recognized by this Court.”). This court 
has also recognized that independent of the United States 
Constitution “parents have a substantive liberty interest 
in the care, custody, and control of their children 
protected by the due process clause of article 1, section 5 
of the Hawai ʻi Constitution.[] Parental  
rights guaranteed 
under the Hawai ʻi Constitution would mean little if parents 
were deprived of the  custody of their chi ldren without a 
fair hearing.” In re Doe,
 99 Hawai ʻi 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 
458 (2002) . 
 
 As reflected in the passage above, it is axiomatic that a 
parent’s right  to the care, custody, and control  of the parent’s 
child is a fundamental liberty interest protected by the United 
States and Hawaiʻ i constitution s and entitled to due process 
protection.  In a child custody context, we have specifically 
stated that the State may not deprive a parent of the 
fundamental liberty interest in the care, custody, and control 
of a child 
without providing a fair procedure for the 
deprivation . Furthermore, the Supreme Court has said that 
parental rights cannot be denied without an  opportunity  for 
them to be heard at a  meaningful  time and in 
a meaningful  manner
. 
 
In Re Doe, 108 Hawai ʻi 144, 157, 118 P.3d 54, 67 (2005) (emphasis 
in original).  In light of the important constitutional interest 
involved, the ICA majority did not err in ruling that the family 
court abused its discretion in deny
ing Father’s  oral request for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
39 
 a continuance to seek counsel under the circumstances of this 
case.16  
 This case involved Mother’s motion to relocate to North 
Carolina with the children and their soon to be step- father, a 
potentially significant deprivation of Father’s fundamental 
liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of his 
children.  The reality is that if the request for relocation was 
granted, even with an order allowing visitation during some 
school vacations, Father’s future contact with his children 
would be significantly curtailed, especially due to the high 
cost of travel to and from Hawai ʻi.  Based on the possibility of 
such a significant curtailment of his fundamental liberty 
interest, Father was entitled not just to his “day in court,” 
                                                           
16  The dissent opines that because the family courts are uniquely 
positioned as triers of fact throughout complicated and emotional custody 
cases, we afford them “great deference”  in making custody decisions and in 
determining what is in the best interests of  the child.  The applicable 
standard of review is still “ abuse of discretion .”  But here, we are not even 
reviewing the merits of the actual custody or “best interests” decision , but 
rather, the family court ’s denial of Father’s request for a continuance t o 
seek counsel.    
 
 We also note that in In re Jane Doe, Born on May 22, 1976, 84 Hawaiʻi 41, 
46, 928 P.2d 883, 888 (1996) which the dissent cites and  which states that 
family courts have wide discretion in making decisions  that will not be set 
aside without a manifest abuse of discretion,  we actually held that the 
family court abused its discretion in denying a motion for new trial, which 
resulted in the exclusion of testimony inferentially bearing upon the best 
interests of a child.      
  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
40 
 but to be heard in a “meaningful manner.”  See AC, 134 Hawai ʻi at 
232-34, 339 P.3d at 731 -32 (finding an abuse of discretion in 
the family court’s setting of a rigid time period for custody 
trial based on the important constitutional interest involved).   
 As the ICA majority noted and as the transcript passages in 
Section II(B) depict, “[t]he record indicates that Father was 
unfamiliar with the trial process, did not understand that trial 
would impose different requirements than prior hearings that he 
attended, and did not know how to conduct cross- examination.   
Father was also burdened with language difficulties as English 
was not his first language[ .]”  DJ, SDO at 2.  As the ICA 
majority also emphasized, Father did not seek the continuance 
for a general delay, and Father’s substantive parental rights 
were at stake at trial.  DJ , SDO at 5.  In additio n, the 
continuances before September 30, 2016 were not due to dilatory 
tactics by Father.  
 In regard  to Father not understanding that the September 30, 
2016 trial would impose different requirements than prior court 
hearings, although Father had appeared at various “hearings,” 
and although the family court referred to the initial setting
 on 
July 8, 2016 as a “trial,” the written orders referred to the 
trial 
as an “extended hearing.”  It also appears that Father 
received some information regarding trial requirements because ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
41 
 he appeared with witnesses and exhibits.17  However, e ven if 
Father had received some basic information regarding “extended 
hearing” or “trial ” requirements, as noted by the ICA majority 
and as reflected in Section II(B), he clearly was unfamiliar 
with cross-examination of witnesses at a trial, and had 
difficulty understanding 
and expressing himself in English in a 
case involving the fundamental and important constitutional 
interest of the care, custody, and control of his children.    
Significantly,  it was when the family court stated it would 
be calling the CIU social worker as its own witness that Father 
requested a continuance to seek and retain counsel.  The family 
court denied Father’s request for a cont inuance on the grounds 
that Mother’s motion had initially been filed in February (about 
seven months earlier), there had been numerous appearances 
before Judge Kupau, and that,  therefore, the request was “too 
late.”  As reflected in Section II(B), however, Father explained 
that only he , Mother, and the judge  had been present at past 
hearings, and that he was unfamiliar with the trial process, 
                                                           
17  If the family court provides written guidelines, pretrial orders, or 
otherwise provides other information to pro se litigants regarding trial 
requirements, the record would be enhanced by including this information.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
42 
 including cross-examination.  In addition, as pointed out by the 
ICA, and as reflected in Section II(B)
 above: 
[The record ] further indicates that Father had not 
officially been ser ved with the CIU report, which the 
family court introduced at the trial and on which the 
family court relied, and it is unclear when Father actually 
received the report .  
 
 
DJ, SDO at 2. 
   
 As also noted by the ICA majority, the record does not 
reflect that Father had been served with the September 23, 2016 
CIU Report on or about that date.  Although it appears the 
parties were in possession of the CIU Report 
during the trial,18 
it is unclear whether this occurred on the day of or before the 
September 30, 2016 trial date.  It was important to provide the 
parties with sufficient time to review findings from a custody 
study, as Judge Kupau had earlier noted at the March 30, 2016 
hearing, to allow them to prepare for trial accordingly.  
 
Although there had been previous appearances before Judge 
Kupau, those appearances had occurred before preparation of the 
CIU Report, which contained major recommendations adverse to 
                                                           
18  When Father attempted to cross -examine the CIU social worker, he tried 
to point out that her report and investigation were incomplete because she 
did not describe what types of food were in his refrigerator and what the 
children were doing while they were at their paternal grandparent’s ho use 
during the home- visit, i ndicating that Father had read the CIU report by that 
time.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
43 
 Father.  In fact, it was not until September 14, 2016, nine days 
before the report, that the CIU social worker conducted a home 
visit and observation of Father with the children at Father’s 
home.  Father’s perception of the social worker’s attitude 
toward him prompted his detailed letter to Judge Kupau on 
September 21, 2016.  The CIU report was dated September 23, 2016 
and it is unclear whether Father received it before the 
September 30, 2016 date of trial.  Thus, even if Father had 
sought counsel immediately after receiving  the report  with 
findings adverse to him, he realistically did not have adequate 
time to retain and receive appropriate assistance from counsel 
before the September 30, 2016 trial date.    
 In other words, Father did not have seven
 months to obtain 
counsel, as implied by the family court, after receiving the 
adverse CIU Report.19  Father requested a continuance to seek 
counsel when the family court informed the parties that it would 
be calling the CIU social worker as its own witness.  Under the 
circumstances, the family court’s ruling that “Father presented 
                                                           
19  For this reason, the California Court of Appeal cited by the dissent, 
A.G. v. C.S., 246 Cal. App. 4th 1269 (Cal. Ct. App. 2016), is clearly 
distinguishable on its facts, as the mother in that case apparently had 
several months to seek counsel without any intervening event such as the CIU 
Report here.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
44 
 no excuse for his failure to retain legal counsel in a timely 
fashion” is ther
efore erroneous.  In fact, Father’s September 21, 
2016 letter to the Judge Kupau should have alerted the family 
court that Father might need to seek counsel or at least need 
more time to gather evidence to respond to a twenty -eight page, 
single-spaced report that summarized the testimonies of numerous 
witnesses and implicated  important constitutional interests.  
The family court could have  exercised its discretion to ask 
Father on September 30th  whether he needed more time to seek 
counsel or prepare evidence to respond to the Report instead of 
proceeding with trial.  
 Also, Father’s right to b e heard in a “meaningful manner” 
included his right to cross-examine the CIU social worker.  
Cross-examination is the “greatest legal engine ever invented 
for the discovery of truth.”   California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 
158 (1970) (citations omitted).  The importance of cross-
examination is not limited to criminal cases.  As the United 
States Supreme Court stated in the context of a complex 
antitrust case,  
It is only when the witnesses are present and subject to 
cross-examination that their credibility and the weight to 
be given their testimony can be appraised. Trial by 
affidavit is no substitute for trial by jury which so long 
has been the hallmark of ‘even handed justice.’  
 
Poller v. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc., 368 U.S. 464, 473 
(1962).  We have also recognized the importance of allowing ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
45 
 cross-examination in the context of a civil proceeding affecting 
substantial rights.  See  In re Waiola O Molokai, Inc., 103 
Hawaiʻi 401, 443, 83 P.3d 664, 706 (2004) (finding error in 
refusal to permit cross- examination regarding limu population 
along shoreline with respect to protection of native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary gathering rights).  
 The importance of the right of cross- examination with 
respect to the CIU Report is explicitly recognized by the 
Legislature in HRS § 571-46(a)(4), which provides in relevant 
part that 
[w]henever good cause appears therefor, the court may 
require an investigation and report concerning the care, 
welfare, and custody of any minor child of the parties.  
When so directed by the court, investigators or 
professional personnel attached to or assisting the court, 
hereinafter referred to as child custody evaluators, shall 
make investigations and reports that shall be made 
available to all interested parties and counsel before 
hearing, and the reports may be received in evidence if no 
objection is made and, if objection is made, may be 
received in evidence; provided the person or persons 
responsible for the report are available for cross-
examination as to any matter that has been investigated[.]  
   
HRS § 571-46(a)(4) (emphasis added).  Yet, Father clearly did 
not understand how to exercise this right to cross-examination.   
 
The concurrence and dissent  (“dissent”)  states that Father 
did not identify what information he was prevented from 
eliciting on cross- examination.  We have recognized, however, 
that “the harm suffered by parents proceeding without counsel 
may not be readily apparent from the record, especially because ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
46 
 without the aid of counsel, it is unlikely that a case is 
‘adequately presented. ’”  In re T.M. , 131 Hawai ʻi 419, 436, 319 
P.3d 338, 355 (2014) (citing Lassiter v. Dep’t of Soc. Servs. Of 
Durham Cnty., N.C., 452 U.S. 18, 51 (1981)  (Blackmun, J., 
dissenting)).20  We have also recognized  that “[c]ounsel often 
cannot know in advance what pertinent facts may be elicited on 
                                                           
20  The dissent contends that Father successfully gave opening and closing 
statements, presented his evidence, elicited testimony from his witnesses, 
and cross- examined Mother’s witnesses, that he competently presented his case, 
and the family court’s ruling merely avoided further unnecessary delay.  Not 
only do we disagree with this contention, as indicated by this  quoted passage 
in In re T.M., when there is a deprivation of counsel, it is unclear what 
harm may have been suffered by a parent.  
 
 In addition, due process requires that “justice []not  only be done but 
[] manifestly be seen to be done.”  In re Estate of Damon, 119 Hawai ʻi 500, 
509, 199 P.3d 89, 98 (2008).  The family court’s reliance on previous post -
decree motions to draw adverse inferences against Father appears unfair when 
the family court informed the parties at the commencement of trial that the 
past arguments were not relevant.  Also, the family court ’s reliance on 
Father’s alleged failure to refer matters to mediation appears unfair when 
the issue was never raised or discussed, and when the family court may not 
have had the entire background.  Also, it does not appear just for the family 
court to have ended Father’s legal custody when Mother repeatedly made it 
clear that she was not making such a request and the family court’s 
questioning only suggested it was considering “tie -breaker” authority with 
respect to legal custody.  Counsel would have been able assist Father on 
these issues. 
 
Moreover, in addition to the problems with cross -examination, Father 
was also told by the family court during his “closing argument” that he 
should have asked mother during cross -examination whether it would be fair 
for Father to only have the children during summer vacation, further 
indicating that Father did not understand the process.  The family court also 
incorrectly suggested to Father that he could retain counsel after the trial 
only for purposes of prosecuting an appeal, rather than for post -trial or 
other motions.  Counsel most probably could have been of assistance in 
Father’s motion for reconsideration.  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
47 
 cross-
examination.”  State v. Maluia , 107 Hawai ʻi 20, 32, 108 
P.3d 974, 986 (2005) (quoting Alford v. United States, 283 U.S. 
687, 692 (1931)).  In any event, as contended by Father’s 
appellate counsel, counsel could have not only argued applicable 
law, but could also have presented additional evidence, 
including conducting a much more rigorous cross- examination of 
the CIU social worker, to address various issues in the 
relocation decision.  For all of these reasons, we respectfully 
but strongly disagree with the dissent. 
 The family court denied Father’s request for a continuance 
based solely on the grounds it had been made during trial and 
was “too late.”  Due process concerns must prevail over court 
scheduling concerns.  Prejudice to Mother was not raised or 
cited as a reason for denying a continuance
.21  Based on Father’s 
constitutional interest in the care,  custody , and control of his 
children, and for all of the reasons stated, the ICA majority did 
not err by holding that the family court abused its discretion 
                                                           
21  It appears Mother wished to move quickly to join Husband and start Son 
in a North Carolina school, but that by the time the family court ruled on 
November 23, 2016, it made more sense for Son to start at a new school after 
the winter break.  In any event, under the circumstances, Father should have 
been given a reasonable continuance to seek counsel.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
48 
 in not granting Father’s request for a continuance to seek the 
assistance of counsel.22  
B. The family court did not abuse its discretion in 
considering the CIU Report.  
  
 Because issue s regarding the CIU Report may arise on remand, 
we address Mother’s second  question  on certiorari.   
 Father  argued that the family court erred in considering 
the CIU Report because he did not consent to a custody 
evaluation being perf ormed by the family court’s CIU  and because 
the CIU social worker was not qualified to serve as a custody 
evaluator under HRS § 571- 46.4.  This is an evidentiary question 
of law reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review. 
 With respect to Father’s alleged lack of consent  to a 
custody evaluation by the family court’s CIU , HRS § 571- 46(a)(4)  
provides in relevant part as follows:23  
Whenever good cause appears therefor, the court may require 
an investigation and report concerning the care, welfare, 
and custody of any minor child of the parties.  When so 
directed by the court, investigators or professional 
personnel attached to or assisting the court, hereinafter 
                                                           
22  The family court should have procedures in place that allow all judges 
to set further trial dates when necessary to ensure protection of important 
constitutional interests, such as the care, custody, and control of children.  
Father should have been granted  a reasonable continuance to seek the 
assistance of counsel, whether or not he ultimately was successful in doing 
so. 
 
23  There have been no changes to HRS § 571 -46 since 2013.  
   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
49 (continued. . .)  
 
 referred to as child custody evaluators, shall make 
investigations and reports that shall be made available to 
all interested parties and counsel before hearing, and the 
reports may be received in evidence if no objection is made 
and, if objection is made, may be received in evidence; 
provided the person or persons responsible for the report 
are available for cross -examination as to any matter that 
has been investigated[.]  
  
 
 As can be seen, HRS § 571 -46(a)(4) does not require consent 
to a custody evaluation investigation and report befo re one can  
be ordered and considered by the family court.  Father does not 
cite to any other authority supporting his contention that 
consent was a prerequisite to the family court’s ability to 
consider the CIU Report.  Therefore, Father’s consent was not 
required. 
 Father also asserts that the CIU social worker was not 
qualified to conduct a child custody evaluation due to HRS § 
571-46.4, which, in general, sets out licensing requirements for 
court-appointed custody evaluators and provides that the 
judiciary shall maintain a publicly accessible registry of child 
custody evaluators qualified pursuant to that section.24  This is 
also a question of law reviewed under the right/wrong standard. 
                                                           
24  HRS § 571- 46.4 provides;  
 
Child custody evaluators; qualification; registry; 
complaints.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
50 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(continued. . .) 
(a)  A person may be appointed as a child custody evaluator 
for purposes of section 571 -46 if the person is actively 
licensed as a:  
 (1)  Physician under chapter 453 and is a board 
certified psychiatrist or has completed a residency  
in psychiatry;  
     (2)  Psychologist under chapter 465;  
     (3)  Marriage and family therapist under chapter 451J; 
or 
     (4)  Clinical social worker under section 467E -7(3).  
(b)  A person may be appointed as a child custody evaluator 
in the absence of  a license under subsection (a) if:  
     (1)  The individual has obtained education and 
training that meet nationally recognized competencies and 
standards of practice in child custody evaluation; provided 
that there are no child custody evaluators enumerated under 
subsection (a) who are willing and available, within a 
reasonable period of time, to perform child custody 
evaluations; or  
     (2)  The parties stipulate to a person who does not 
qualify as a child custody evaluator under subsection (a) 
and the court approves that person as a fact -finding 
investigator to the court.  
(c)  The judiciary shall maintain on its website a publicly 
accessible registry of child custody evaluators who are 
qualified pursuant to this section.   Professionals who are 
willing and available to perform child custody evaluations 
shall be responsible for providing the judiciary with 
relevant information, including contact information, 
evidence of qualifications, and fees.  
(d)  The judiciary shall establish a referral process to 
allow parties to file a complaint with the judiciary 
regarding a court -appointed child custody evaluator.   Upon 
notification by a party of the party’ s intent to file a 
complaint against a child custody evaluator appointed under 
subsection (a), the judiciary may refer the complainant to 
the appropriate licensing authority.   The judiciary shall 
submit to the legislature an annual report regarding the 
number of complaints against court -appointed child custody 
evaluators that are processed through the referral process.  
(e)  A complaint against a court -appointed child custody 
evaluator not qualified under subsection (a) may be 
resolved through civil litigation.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
51 
 HRS § 467E-6(2) (2013), however,  exempts CIU social workers from 
the licensure requirements of HRS Chapter 467E.25  Father’s 
argument therefore lacks merit.    
 Mother also contests  Father’s argument  that the family 
court abused its discretion in considering the CIU R eport 
because the record is unclear as to whether Father had been 
officially served with a copy, and whether Father had actually 
received the report before trial.  HRS § 571- 46(a)(4) requires 
that “investigations and reports . . . be made available to all 
interested parties and counsel before [the] hearing[.]”  As 
Father’s counsel will have had ample time to review the CIU 
Report on remand, we need not address this issue.  We agree, 
                                                           
25  HRS § 467E- 6 provides in relevant part that “[l]icensure shall not be 
required of . . . (2) Any person employed by a federal, state, or county 
government agency in a social worker position, but only at those times when 
that person is carrying out the duties and responsibilities as a social 
worker in governmental employment [.]” 
 
 Article VI, section 7 of the Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi 
provides this court with the power to promulgate court rules relating to 
practice and procedure, which have the force and effect of law, including the 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence.  Admissibili ty of a CIU social worker’s opinion 
regarding custody would be subject to the rules of evidence, including the 
rules regarding qualification as an expert.  
 
 In addition, the first sentence of HRS § 571 -46.4 provides that a 
person may be appointed as a chil d custody evaluator “for purposes of section 
571-46,” and subsection (4) of HRS 571 -46 in turn provides that “[w]here 
there is no child custody evaluator available that meets the requirements and 
standards . . . the court may appoint a person otherwise willing and 
available in accordance with section 571 -46.4[,]” which also provides 
exceptions to the licensure requirement.  See  HRS § 571- 46.4 quoted in note 
25, supra.  Such circumstances exist here.  See Section II(B), supra . ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
52 
 however, that parties should be given adequate time  to review 
and respond to a twenty-eight  page, single-spaced report that 
summarizes the te stimonies of numerous witnesses and implicates 
important constitutional interests .  
 Finally, Mother raises as an issue on certiorari and 
requests that this court address Father’s contention  that the 
family court abused its discretion in considering  the CIU Report.  
Father had argue d that the CIU R eport was flawed and that its 
recommendation was suspect because it did not explicitly address 
all factors set forth in HRS § 571-46(b), and that it could have 
included additional information that would have helped the 
family court ascertain whether relocation was in the children’s 
best interests.  Father’s  arguments in this regard go to the 
weight to be given the report, not to its admissibility.  See 
City & Cty . of Honolulu v. Bonded Inv. Co., 54 Haw . 385, 390- 91, 
507 P.2d 1084, 1089 (1973) (“The fact that an expert witness 
omits consideration of one element of many in arriving at [an] 
opinion . . . goes to th e weight of [the expert’s] testimony 
rather than to the admissibility of [the expert’s] opinion.”) .  
 The CIU R eport addresses nearly all of the factors that the 
family court is required to consider in determining the best ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
53 (continued. . .)  
 
 interests of the children pursuant to HRS § 571- 46(b).26  Thus, 
Father’s argument that the CIU report is flawed because it fails 
                                                           
26  HRS § 571- 46(b) provides:  
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest of 
the child under this section, the court shall consider, but 
not be limited to, the following:  
 
 (1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a 
 child by a parent;  
 (2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of 
 a child by a parent;  
 (3) The overall quality of the parent -child 
 relationship;  
 (4) The history of caregiving or parenting by each  
 parent prior and subsequent to a marital or other 
 type of separation;  
 (5) Each parent’s cooperation in  developing and 
 implementing a plan to meet the child’s ongoing 
 needs, interests, and schedule; provided that this 
 factor shall not be considered in any case where the 
 court has determined that family violence has been 
 committed by a parent;  
 (6) The physical health needs of the child;  
 (7) The emotional needs of the child;  
 (8) The safety needs of the child;  
 (9) The educational needs of the child;  
 (10) The child’s need for relationships with 
 siblings;  
 (11) Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they 
 allow the child to maintain family connections 
 through family events and activities; provided that 
 this factor shall not be considered in any case where 
 the court has determined that family violence has 
 been committed by a parent;  
 (12) Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they 
 separate the child’s needs from the parent’s needs;  
 (13) Any evidence of past or current drug or 
 alcohol abuse by a parent;  
 (14) The mental health of each parent;  
 (15) The areas and levels of conflict present 
 within the family; and  
(16) A parent’s prior wilful misuse of the protection 
from abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a 
tactical advantage in any proceeding involving the 
custody determination of a minor.  Such wilful misuse ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
54 
 to address all requirements 
governing a family court’s custody 
decision lacks merit.  
C. Based on the effect an out -of-state relocation has on 
parental and children ’s rights, a family court should 
consider available resources in reviewing a relocation
request    
 
 This case highlights one of the difficult decisions 
addressed by family court judges in this state —whether to allow 
one parent to relocate out -of-state with a child.  Such 
decisions implicate the rights of parents as well as the rights 
of children. 
 With respect to parental interests, we have recognized the 
importance of procedural safeguards in protecting parental 
liberty interests in the care, custody, and control of children.  
                                                                                                                                                                                          
(continued. . .)  
may be considered only if it is established by clear 
and convincing evidence, and if it is further found 
by clear and convincing evidence that in the 
particular family circumstance the wilful misuse 
tends to show that, in the future, the parent who 
engaged in the wilful misuse will not be able to 
cooperate successfully with the other parent in their 
shared responsibilities for the child.   The court 
shall articulate findings of fact whenever relying 
upon this factor as part of its determination of the 
best interests of the child.   For the purposes of 
this section, when taken alone, the voluntary 
dismissal of a petition for protection from abuse 
shall not be treated as prima facie evidence that a 
wilful misuse of the protection from abuse process 
has occurred.   
The CIU Report itself is sealed due to its confidentiality pursuant to  
HRS § 571- 84(c).  See note 5, supra. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
55 
 In Doe, we held that parents in need of an interpreter because 
of an inability to understand English are entitled to the 
assistance of one at any family court hearing in which their 
parental rights are substantially affected.  Doe , 99 Hawai ʻi at 
526, 57 P.3d at 451.  Then in T.M., we recognized that 
“[i]nherent in the substantive liberty interest that parents 
have in the care, custody, and control of their children under 
the Hawaiʻ i Constitution is the right to  counsel to prevent 
erroneous deprivation of their pa rental interests.”  131 Hawaiʻi 
at 434, 319 P.3d at 353.  We held that in light of the 
constitutionally protected liberty interest at stake in a 
termination of parental rights proceeding, indigent parents must 
be guaranteed the right to court-appointed counsel in 
termination of parental rights proceedings under the due process 
clause of the Hawaiʻi Constitution.  131 Hawaiʻi at 436, 319 P.3d 
at 355.27   
                                                           
27  In so holding, we recognized that, as Justice Stevens discussed in 
Lassiter, a state’s decision to deprive a parent of a child is often “more 
grievous” than a state’s decision to incarcerate a criminal defendant.  
Lassiter, 452 U.S. at 59  (Stevens, J., dissenting).  We further pointed out 
that, as explained by Justice Blackmun, a parent in termination proceedings 
may struggle with legal issues that are “neither simple nor easily defined,” 
and with a standard that is “imprecise and open to the subjective values of 
the judge.”  T.M., 131 Hawaiʻi at 435, 319 P.3d at 35 4, (citing Lassiter, 452 
U.S. at 45) (majority opinion).   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
56 (continued. . .)  
 
  
The main populated Hawaiian Islands are some of the most 
remote land masses in the world, located about 2,400 miles from 
California and 4,000 miles from Japan.  When a child relocates 
out-of-state with the other parent, even if a court order allows 
for visitation during summer or winter vacations, travel 
expenses make regular continued contact with the child quite 
difficult, if not impossible, for the great majority of 
Hawaiʻi 
parents.  Even if a parent can afford travel expenses, a child’s 
relocation out-of-state substantially affects the rights of a 
custodial parent.  As in this case, the prospect of children 
relocating out-of-state can be extremely difficult for a
 parent. 
 When one parent requests permission to relocate out- of-
state with a child, however, under Hawai ʻi law, the governing 
consideration is 
not a parent’s interests, but whether allowing 
relocation is in the “best interests of the child .”  See HRS § 
571-46(a)(1);28 see also Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawaiʻi 41, 50, 137 
                                                           
28  HRS § 571- 46(a)(1)  provides in general as follows:  
 
Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and visitation; 
best interest of the child.    
 
(a)  In actions for divorce, separation, annulment, 
separate maintenance, or any other proceeding where there 
is at issue a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, 
the court, during the pendency of the action, at the final 
hearing, or any time during the minority of the child, may ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
57 
 P.3d 355, 364 (2006).  In Fisher, we discussed our precedent as 
well as approaches of other states in relocation cases, and 
reaffirmed that the “best interests of the child ” standard, 
which provides a family court with “broad discretion to weigh 
the various factors involved,” also govern s relocation cases.  
Fisher, 111 Hawaiʻ i at 50, 137 P.3 d at 364.   
 A proposed out-of-state relocation with a child undoubtedly 
raises difficult questions regarding what is actually in a 
child’s “best interests.”29  In addition, a family court ’s “best 
interests” determina tion also implicates a child’s rights to 
parental contact.  See HRS § 576 -46(b)(7); see also  Sweet v. 
Passno, 206 A.D.2d 639, 640 (N.Y. App. Div. 1994) (recognizing 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
(continued. . .)  
make an order for the custody of the minor child as may 
seem necessary or proper.   In awarding the custody, the 
court shall be guided by the following standards, 
considerations, and procedures:  
(1)  Custody should be awarded to either parent or to 
both parents according to the best interests of the 
child, and the court also may consider frequent, 
continuing, and meaningful contact of each parent with 
the child unless the court finds that a parent is 
unable to act in the best interest of the child[.]  
29  HRS § 571- 46(b), quoted in note 2 6, supra, sets out a non- exhaustive 
list of factors a court is to consider in determining best interests, but the 
factors are not geared toward relocation decisions.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
58 
 child’s right to maintain a meaningful and nurturing 
relationship with 
parent).  
 Therefore, an out-of-state relocation affects a parent’s 
substantive liberty interest in the care, custody, and control 
of a child, but is governed by a child’s best interests, which 
includes a child’s right to parental contact.   In making these 
difficult determinations regarding whether or not to allow 
relocation, family courts should consider CIU or any other 
available family court social worker reports.  Family courts 
also have the discretion to appoint guardians ad litem for 
children in relocation cases pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(8).30  
This case, however, also illustrates the importance of f amily 
courts providing parties with sufficient time to review and 
respond to custody recommendations in order to comport with 
procedural due process.    
 
 
                                                           
30  HRS § 571- 46(a)(8) provides:  
The court may appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the 
interest of the child and may assess the reasonable  fees 
and expenses of the guardian ad litem as costs of the 
action, payable in whole or in part by either or both 
parties as the circumstances may justify[.]  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
59 
 V.  Conclusion 
 Based on the reasons above, the ICA’s February 8, 2018 
Amended Judgment on Appeal remanding this case to the family 
court is affirmed.  The family court is to conduct further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
   
Blake T. Okimoto,
for petitioner    
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson    
      
  
Rebecca A. Copeland,
for respondent   
