*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
ELESTHER CALIPJO, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
vs. 
JACK PURDY, REGAL CAPITAL CORPORATION, 
REGAL CAPITAL COMPANY, LLC, 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants.  
________________________________________________________________ 
SCWC-14-0001305 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14 -0001305; CIVIL NO. 04- 1-0003) 
APRIL 23, 2019 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION
We consider only one issue from the application for 
writ of certiorari filed by Petitioner Elesther Calipjo 
(“Calipjo”):  whether there was no evidence to support the 
jury’s verdict that (1) Respondent Jack Purdy ( “Purdy”) was the 
alter ego of Respondents Regal Capital Corporation ( “Regal 
Corp.”) and Regal Capital Company, LLC ( “Regal LLC ”) 
(collectively, “Respondents ”), (2) Regal Corp. breached the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0001305
23-APR-2019
10:28 AM *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
2 
 contracts it entered into with Calipjo, and (3) Regal LLC 
committed unfair and deceptive acts or practices.  
 
 In a jury trial before the Circuit Court of the Fifth 
Circuit1 (“circuit court ”), the jury found that Regal Corp. 
violated the agreements of sale for two parcels of land on the 
island of Kaua
ʻi and breached the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing implied in the agreements.  The jury determined that 
Regal Corp. and Regal LLC committed unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices in their dealings with Calipjo.  Furthermore, the jury 
concluded that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal 
LLC.  Based on the alter ego finding, the jury determined that 
Purdy, too, violated the agreements of sale for the two 
properties, breached the covenant of good faith and
 fair dealing 
implied in the agreements, and committed unfair and deceptive 
acts or practices. 
 
 We hold that there was evidence to support the jury’s 
verdict that Regal Corp. violated the terms of the agreements, 
Regal LLC engaged in unfair and deceptive acts or practices, and 
Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  
Therefore, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ ICA”) erred when 
it found that no evidence was introduced at trial to support 
these findings.  Calipjo v. Purdy, No. CAAP- 14-000130 5, 2017 WL 
                     
1 The Honorable Randal Valenciano presided  over the trial . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
3 
 6547461, at *4-*7 (App. Dec. 22, 2017) (SDO).  Additionally, the 
ICA erred when it reversed the circuit court’s final judgment 
against Purdy on the breach of contract, breach of the implied 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unfair and 
deceptive acts or practices claims.2  We affirm in part and 
vacate in part the ICA’s January 24, 2018 Judgment on Appeal and 
reinstate the circuit court’s July 18, 2014 final judgment.  
II. BACKGROUND 
  On or around August 12, 2002, Calipjo entered into two 
Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance ( “DROA”) contracts with 
Regal Corp. for the purchase of two lots owned by Regal Corp. on 
the island of Kaua ʻi:  Unit E of the Moana Ranch Estates ( “Moana 
property”) and Unit A of the Ali ʻi Ranch Estates ( “Aliʻi 
property”).  At the time, Purdy was the sole owner and operator 
of Regal Corp.  The DROAs governed the sale of the Moana 
property for $175,000.00 and the Ali ʻi property for $280,000.00.  
  The Moana and Ali ʻi property DROAs contained different 
“special terms” located in condition C -67 of each contract.  On 
the one hand, condition C-67 of the Moana property DROA provided 
that Calipjo’s purchase of the Moana property was contingent on 
                     
2 The ICA reversed the judgment against Purdy for breach of 
contract (Counts 3 and 4), breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing (Count 11), and unfair and deceptive acts or practices (Count 10).  
Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461 , at *7. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
4 
 his purchase of the Ali ʻi property.3  On the other hand, 
condition C-674 of the Ali ʻi property DROA gave Calipjo an option 
to purchase the Aliʻi property once the Real Estate Commission of 
the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs of the State of 
Hawaiʻi (“Commission ”) issued a Final Condominium Public Report 
for the properties.5  Condition C-67 of the Ali ʻi property DROA 
also gave Calipjo the option to terminate the Ali ʻi property DROA 
by giving written notice to Regal Corp. at any time prior to the 
issuance of the Final Condominium Public Report.6  When Calipjo 
                     
3 Condition C -67 of the Moana property DROA provided that the 
purchase of the Moana property was “[c]ontingent upon Buyer’s purchase and 
successful close of escrow for Uni t A of Alii Ranch Estates I[.]”  
4 Condition C -67 of the Aliʻ i property DROA stated : 
1) This DROA shall constitute a reservation and not 
an obligation to purchase or sell subject property.  Buyer 
may terminate this reservation at any time prior to it 
becoming a binding contract by written notice to Seller.  
2) Seller to provide to Buyer a copy of the Final Public 
Report upon completion of [Condominium Property Regime 
(“CPR”)].  Buyer shall have 15 days to examine said Report 
and rescind this reservation by written notice to Seller.  
At expiration of stated examination period this DROA shall 
become a binding contract.  3) All contingency dates stated 
in this DROA shall be based on the date that this offer 
becomes a binding contract.  4) This offer is contingent 
upon Seller’s acceptance of Buyer’s offer to purchase TMK 
4-4-2-22-30-A. 
5 Under the version of the Condominium Property Act  effective at 
the time that Calipjo entered into the DROAs, the owner of a parcel that 
currently has condominiums or is zoned to have condominiums must notify the 
Commission of its intent to sell the property and submit a Final Condominium 
Public Report disclosing all material facts regarding the development.  
Hawaiʻi Revised S tatutes (“HRS”)  §§ 514A-31, -36 (Supp. 2002). 
6 The Aliʻ i property DROA provided, in pertinent part, “Buyer may 
terminate this reservation at any time prior to it becoming a binding 
contract by written notice to Seller.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
5 
 signed the DROAs, Regal Corp. did not possess an option to 
terminate the Ali
ʻi property DROA.   
  Shortly thereafter, Regal Corp.’s real estate agent, 
Tom Summers (“Summers ”), provided copies of the Aliʻi and Moana 
property DROAs to Purdy for review.  At trial, Purdy testified 
that he thought it was unfair that condition C- 67 in the Aliʻi 
property DROA only gave Calipjo, the buyer, the option to 
terminate the agreement.  He testified that “[i]f the buyer had 
a right to terminate, then I should have that same right.”  
Purdy instructed Summers to add the phrase “or Seller” to 
condition C-67  of the Ali ʻi 7property DROA.   Thereafter, 
condition C-67 read:  “This DROA shall constitute a reservation, 
and not an obligation to purchase or sell subject property.  
Buyer or Seller may terminate this reservation at any time prior 
to it becoming a binding contract by written notice t o Seller.”  
(Emphasis added.)  Because the purchase of the Moana property 
was contingent on the purchase of the Ali ʻi property, this 
addendum effectively gave the buyer or  the seller the authority 
to terminate both DROAs at will —although the seller was not 
required to notify the buyer of its  intent to cancel.  
                     
7 Summers and Purdy dispute who handwrote “or Seller” above 
condition C- 67.  Summers claims that Purdy wrote the term in, while Purdy 
claims that his office merely directed Summers to add the term.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
6 
   
Summers informed Calipjo that he needed to come to 
Summers’ office to initial and back date the addendum to the Ali ʻi 
property DROA that added the language in condition C- 67 giving 
the seller the authority to terminate the DROAs for the Aliʻi and 
Moana properties without notice to the buyer.8  While at Summers’ 
office, Calipjo asked Summers if the alteration would change his 
position because he was unsure whether “or Seller” referred to 
himself or Regal Corp.9  According to Calipjo, Summers replied, 
“No.  I just — this is just a mere technicality with the CPR 
laws that they’re doing.”  Summers later testified that he told 
Calipjo that the addition of “or Seller” was Purdy’s 
counteroffer “and if [Calipjo] didn’t want to acknowledge this, 
then he wouldn’t have a reservation agreement.”  Relying on 
Summers’ 
representations about the alteration, and with no prior 
experience with CPRs,10 Calipjo initialed the addendum to the 
Aliʻi property DROA and backdated his signature to August 12, 
2002 per Summers’ request.  Neither Summers nor Calipjo 
                     
8 Calipjo and Summers dispute the exact date upon which Calipjo 
returned to sign and backdate the addendum.  Calipjo asserts that he signed 
the addendum the day after he originally signed the DROAs, on August 13, 
2002.  Summers claims that Calipjo returned on September 4, 2002 to sign and 
backdate the addendum.  
9 Calipjo asked, “Will this change my position because you are the 
seller or buyer?” 
10 Under the Condominium Property Act, a CPR governs ownership of 
condominiums or “single units, with common elements, located on property 
within the [CPR].”  HRS § 514A -3 (1993). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
7 
 testified that Calipjo received consideration for agreeing to 
the addendum.  Upon signing and backdating the alteration, 
Calipjo deposited $5,000.00 per property into escrow, totaling 
$10,000.00. 
 
 Over the course of the next few months, while awaiting 
the Final Condominium Public Report, Calipjo met with several 
interested buyers for the Aliʻi and Moana properties.  On October 
30, 2002, Calipjo agreed to sell the Aliʻi property to a buyer 
for $375,000.00.  The closing date was set for sixty days after 
Calipjo received the Final Condominium Public Report.  Then, on 
April 14, 2003, Calipjo entered into a contract with Francis 
Green for the sale of the Moana property for $550,000.00.  
 
 Meanwhile, Purdy realized that the properties could be 
used for a lucrative high- end development.  At trial he 
testified that after signing the DROAs, he gained “a learning 
and understanding of the property.  And as time went on, it was 
sort of solidifying in [his] mind to do something better with 
the property.”  Statements made during his deposition  further 
explained this realization:   
 Our Realtor, Tom Summers[,]  rehearsed the law.  And 
the law was changing in terms of their ability to use an 
agricultural condominium for other than livestock and 
farming purposes.  So we got the idea of putting rocks, 
gates at the entrance at each one of the lots, divided in 
the best few quarters to protect the few quarters of all 
lots, putting some common amenities on a common area on one 
of the lots, putting wood fences, plank fences, painted all 
the way around, making it really quite an exclusive 
property, which is far different than what we earlier 
started. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
8 
 At the time, Purdy was not only the sole owner of Regal Corp., 
but also the sole member and manager of Regal LLC, a Hawaiʻi 
limited liability company.  On April 30, 2003, approximately 
eight months after entering into the DROAs, Regal Corp. 
transferred its interest in the Aliʻi property to Regal LLC.  
Likewise, on November 7, 2003, Regal Corp. assigned its interest 
in the Moana property to Regal LLC. 
  Regal Corp. was not paid for these properties.
  Purdy 
testified that although the properties were worth over 1.7 
million dollars at the time of transfer, Regal LLC received them 
for free—no cash transfer or consideration was conveyed from 
Regal LLC to Regal Corp.  At trial, Purdy referred to this 
transfer as a “book entry” and  said that it was “pretty 
commonplace.”  He did not explain how Regal Corp. received value 
from the transfer. 
 
 On August 7, 2003, Calipjo received a letter from 
Purdy on behalf of Regal Corp. notifying Calipjo that Regal 
Corp. was exercising its right to cancel the Ali ʻi property DROA.  
Because the sale of the Moana property was contingent on the 
sale of the Aliʻi property,11 and Regal Corp. was no longer 
selling the Aliʻ i property, this letter effectively cancelled 
                     
11 Pursuant to condition C -67 of the Moana property DROA.  See supra 
note 3, at 4. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
9 
 both DROAs.  In the letter, Purdy explain ed that “[d]ue to the 
recent change in the law affecting the uses of agricultural 
property and the substantial increases in the real estate market 
over the past few months,” Regal Corp. was exercising its right 
to cancel the Aliʻ i
 property DROA pursuant to condition C-67.  
Regal Corp. sent Calipjo notices of cancellation and refunded 
the $10,000.00 that Calipjo tendered into escrow.  Calipjo 
refused to execute the escrow cancellation forms and sent the 
checks back to escrow. 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
  Calipjo brought suit against Respondents  Regal Corp.,  
Regal LLC, and Purdy seeking specific performance of the DROAs 
and money damages.  In his first amended complaint, Calipjo 
asserted, inter alia, two claims of  breach of contract, one 
claim of breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing, 
and one claim for unfair and deceptive 
acts or practices.  He 
also claimed Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal 
LLC. 
1. Calipjo’s Argument s 
In support of his breach of contract claims, 
Calipjo 
argued at trial that Regal Corp. violated the express terms of 
the DROAs by transferring the Aliʻi property to Regal LLC before 
cancelling the DROAs.  He noted that, at the time the DROAs were 
originally entered into, Calipjo had an absolute right to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
10 
 purchase the properties.  This right was altered, he claimed, 
when Respondents required Calipjo to sign the addendum to 
condition C-67 of the Ali ʻi proper
ty DROA which gave Regal Corp. 
the option to terminate the DROA without notice to Calipjo at 
any time before issuance of the Final Condominium Public Report.  
Calipjo noted that Respondents altered condition C- 67 of the 
Aliʻi property DROA with the intent to cancel the DROAs after 
using Calipjo’s offer to attract financing.  Because Regal Corp. 
transferred the Ali ʻi property before cancelling the DROAs, 
Calipjo claimed, Regal Corp. breached the DROAs.  
Next, Calipjo argued that Respondents  committed unfair 
and deceptive acts or  practices.  He alleged that Regal Corp., 
Regal LLC, and Purdy carried out a fraudulent scheme to entice 
Calipjo into entering the DROAs, then cancel the DROAs once the 
development attracted greater financing.12 
In addition, Calipjo
 argued that Purdy  should be 
liable for the actions of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC as the alter 
ego of both companies.  He raised three main issues to support 
his alter ego theory of liability.  First, Calipjo identified 
Purdy as the sole shareholder, director, and officer of Regal 
Corp. and the sole member and manager of Regal LLC.  Calipjo 
                     
 12 Calipjo testified that he saw a sign posted on the property 
grounds soliciting the sale of the Aliʻi and Moana properties.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
11 
 argued that sole ownership and control is one of many factors 
that can establish alter ego and, therefore, evidence of Purdy’s 
ownership and control was pertinent to this claim. 
  Second, Calipjo claimed that Purdy used Regal Corp. 
and Regal LLC to perpetuate a fraud because he never intended to 
sell the properties, but rather, intended to develop the parcel 
himself and needed to attract financing for the project.  
According to Calipjo, Purdy’s intent was to cancel the Ali ʻi 
property DROA after using it to obtain financing for Purdy’s 
development of the property for his own benefit.  To facilitate 
his eventual cancellation of the Ali ʻi property DROA, Purdy 
included in the contract the option permitting him, as the 
seller, to terminate the agreement. 
  Calipjo alleged that the Ali ʻi and Moana property DROAs 
helped Purdy successfully obtain financing for his intended 
development because the completed DROAs showed that Purdy had 
interested buyers: 
 You know what he did with that contract?  He showed 
it to people to get them more money.  He’s got contracts 
for preselling already.  Banks love that stuff.  He showed 
it to other people; oh, yeah, I got this property, it’s got 
to be subdivided, I already got contracts already.  It 
builds and it builds on itself because he’s having trou ble.
 
 
Calipjo contended that Purdy’s intent to renege on the Ali ʻi 
property DROA became evident once he secured alternative 
financing because, at that time, Purdy cancelled the DROAs.  
Once the financing was secured for Purdy’s intended development, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
12 
 Purdy cancelled the Ali ʻi property DROA, which inherently 
cancelled the Moana property DROA, and thus perpetuated a fraud 
through Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  To support this claim, 
Calipjo testified that seven years after the parties entered 
into the DROAs, Purdy approached Calipjo outside the 
Kauaʻi 
courthouse and said “[h]e [didn’t] intend to sell [Calipjo] the 
property in the first place anyway.”  Although Purdy denied 
making this statement, another witness corroborated Calipjo’s 
testimony. 
  
Third, Calipjo raised an issue regarding 
undercapitalization.  Based on Purdy’s testimony, Calipjo 
contended that Purdy transferred approximately 1.2 million 
dollars13 worth of real estate from Regal Corp. to Regal LLC “for 
nothing, zero.”  Calipjo alleged that because no money was paid 
to Regal Corp., this transfer left Regal Corp. severely 
undercapitalized.  Therefore, he argued, Regal Corp. and Regal 
LLC failed to function as legitimate businesses and, instead, 
functioned as mere pretenses for Purdy’s personal dealings.   At 
the close of Calipjo’s case, Respondents orally moved for 
                     
13 There is no record of the value of the properties at the time of 
transfer and the parties disputed the value at trial.  Calipjo claimed that 
the properties were worth 1.2 million dollars and Purdy claimed  that the 
properties were worth 1.7 million  dollars. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
13 
 judgment as a matter of law on all claims.  The motion was 
denied. 
2. Respondents’ Counter Arguments  
 
 Respondents argued to the jury that Calipjo failed to 
present sufficient evidence to support his claims.  Respondents 
claimed that they did not breach the express terms of the DROAs 
or commit unfair and deceptive acts or practices because the 
DROAs were non-binding reservation agreements.  Respondents 
claimed that Regal Corp. and Calipjo, acting as “sophisticated 
investor[s],” simply entered a rescindable agreement for the 
sale of two properties.  They argued that condition C-
67 of the 
Aliʻi property DROA, as amended, granted the buyer and the seller 
the right to cancel the agreements at any time before the Final 
Condominium Public Report was issued.  Because the purchase of 
the Moana property was contingent on the purchase of the Aliʻi 
property, Respondents claimed, Regal Corp. lawfully exercised 
its right to cancel both DROAs.  
 
 In addition, Respondents asserted that there was 
insufficient evidence to support a finding of alter ego and 
emphasized that “[t]he only evidence [of alter ego] in this case 
is that [Purdy] owned both companies.”  Respondents stressed 
that exclusive ownership, alone, is not determinative of alter 
ego.  Respondents denied Calipjo’s claim that Purdy intended to 
cancel the DROAs from the start and only used the DROAs
 to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
14 
 attract financing for his own personal gain.  Purdy testified 
that the properties “weren’t actively for sale” and he did not 
intend to sell the properties until Calipjo approached him and 
made an offer.  Purdy also denied Calipjo’s claim that Purdy 
approached him outside the courthouse and said that he never 
intended to sell Calipjo the properties.14  Although  Respondents 
did not specifically address the undercapitalization claim, 
Purdy testified that the transfer of the properties from Regal 
Corp. to Regal LLC for no cash or consideration was “pretty 
commonplace.”  At the close of their case, Respondents renewed 
their motion for judgment as a matter of law as to all claims.   
They argued that Purdy was not a party to the DROAs and there 
was “no evidence or testimony that would allow [the jury] to 
pierce the LLC veil or the corporate veil.”  Again, the circuit 
court denied the motion.  
3. Jury Instructions 
  The circuit court provided the following jury 
instructions for the alter ego claim: 
                     
14 On direct examination, Purdy testified as follows:  
[A.]  By all means, I just put out my hand to say hi 
to him, because he happened to be facing me, and I wanted 
to see if I could see what was going on, you know, to open 
a conversation with these folks.  
Q.  Did you ever tell him that you wouldn’t have sold 
the property to him anyway?  
A.  No. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
15 
  Under the alter  ego claim for relief, three elements 
must be established in order to award a piercing of the 
corporate veil.  One, that the corporation was the mere 
instrumentality of the shareholder; two, that the 
shareholder exercised control over the corporation in such 
a way as to harm the plaintiff; and, three, that a refusal 
to disregard the corporate entity would subject the 
plaintiff to unjust loss.  
 
. . . . 
 
 A corporation is, for most purposes, a legal entity 
distinct from its individual members or stockholders, who, 
as natural persons emerged into the corporate identity.  
However, the idea that a corporation is a legal entity 
existing separate and apart from the persons composing it 
is a mere fiction introduced for purposes of convenience 
and to serve the ends of justice.  This fiction cannot be 
urged to an extent and purpose not within its reason and 
policy and, in an appropriate case, and in furtherance of 
the ends of justice, a corporation and the individual and 
individuals owning all its stock and assets may  be treated 
as identical.  
 
 In this case, plaintiff dealt with the corporation 
known as Regal Capital Corporation and Antigua and Barbuda 
Corporation, one of the defendants in this case.  
 
 Plaintiff urges that this is an appropriate case in 
which the legal entity of Regal Capital Corporation should 
be disregarded and that plaintiff should be entitled to 
require payment of damages that Regal Capital Corporation 
owes plaintiff from defendant Jack Purdy.  
 
 You should consider the following facts in 
determining whether or not to disregard the legal entity of 
Regal Capital Corporation and return a verdict in favor of 
plaintiff against Defendant Jack Purdy, as an individual.  
 
 One, whether or not defendant Jack Purdy owned all or 
substantially all the stock in Regal Capital Corporation; 
two, whether or not Jack Purdy exercised discretion and 
control over the management of Defendant Regal Capital 
Corporation; three, whether or not Defendant Jack Purdy 
directly or indirectly furnished all or substantially all 
of the financial investment in Defendant Regal Capital 
Corporation; four, whether or not Regal Capital Corporation 
was adequately financed either originally or subsequently 
for the business in which it was to engage.  
 
 Five, whether or not there was actual participation 
in the affairs of Regal Capital Corporation by its 
stockholders and whether stock was issued to them.  Six, 
whether or not Regal Capital Corporation observed the 
[formalities]  of doing business as a corporation such as 
the holding of regular meetings, the issuance of stock, the 
filing of necessary reports and similar matters.  Seven, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
16 
 whether or not Defendant Regal Capital Corporation [dealt] 
exclusively with Defendant Jack Purdy, directly or 
indirectly in the real estate sales development activities 
in this case.  Eight, whether or not Defendant Regal 
Capital Corporation existed merely to do a part of business 
of Defendant Jack Purdy.  
 
 If your determination of these facts or most of them, 
as well as the other evidence in this case leads you to 
believe that you should disregard the legal entity known as 
Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, then you will be 
justified in returning a verdict against Defendant Jack 
Purdy individually in such amount as you find due plaintiff 
from Defendant Regal Capital Corporation.  On the other 
hand, if your consideration of these questions of fact or 
most of them, as well as the other evidence in this case, 
leads you to believe that Defendant Regal Corporation 
should be considered a legal entity distinct from its 
individual stockholders, then you will not return a verdict 
against Defendant Jack Purdy on this claim.[15] 
 
The jury was instructed as follows on the breach of contract 
claim: 
 A contract is an agreement between two or more 
persons which creates an obligation to do or not to do 
something.  A
 contract may be written or oral.  A contract 
requires proof of  all of the following elements.  
 
 One, persons with the capacity and authority to enter  
into the contract; and, two, an offer; and, three, an  
acceptance of that offer producing a mutual agreement or a  
meeting of the minds between the persons as to all of the  
essential terms of the agreement at the time the offer was  
accepted; and, four, consideration.  
 
 An offer is an expression of willingness to enter 
into a contract which is made with the understanding that 
the acceptance of the offer is sought from the person to 
whom the offer is made.  An offer must be sufficiently 
definite or must call for such definite terms in the 
acceptance that the consideration promised is reasonably 
clear. 
 
. . . . 
 
 Consideration is an exchange which is bargained for 
by the parties where there is a benefit to one making the 
promise or a loss or detriment to the one receiving the 
promise. 
                     
15 Identical jury instructions were provided for the alter ego claim 
against Regal LLC and the alter ego claim against Regal Corp. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
17 
  
 Promises given in exchange for each other can be 
valid consideration.  
 
 To prevail on the claim for breach of contract,  
plaintiff must prove all of the following elements.  One, 
the existence of the contract; and , two, plaintiff’s 
performance; and, three, defendants’  failure to perform an 
obligation under the contract; and, four, def endants’ 
failure to perform the legal cause of damage to plainti ff’s 
[sic]; and, five, the damage was of the nature and extent 
reasonably foreseeable by defendants at the time the 
contract was entered into. 
 
Finally, the circuit court provided the following jury 
instructions for the unfair and deceptive acts or practices 
claim: 
 To prevail against defendants on the claim of unfair 
and deceptive acts or practices, plaintiff must prove all 
of the following elements.  
 
 One, plaintiff is a consumer; and, two, defendant 
engaged in an act or practice that was unfair or deceptive; 
and, three, the unfair or deceptive act or practice 
occurred in the conduct of trade or commerce; and, four, 
that the unfair  or deceptive act or practice was a legal 
cause of damages to plaintiff.  
 
 A consumer is an individual who, primarily for 
personal, family or household purposes, purchases goods or  
services, attempts to purchase  goods or services, is 
solicited to purchase 
goods or services, or commits -- 
money property or services in a personal investment.  
 
 An act or practice is unfair if it offends 
established public policy and is immoral, unethical, 
oppressive, unscrupulous, or substantially injurious to 
consumers.  
 
 An act or practice is deceptive if it is a . . .  
material representation, . . . omission or practice that is 
likely to mislead consumers acting  reasonably under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Plaintiff need not show that defendant intended to 
deceive plaintiff or that plaintiff was actually deceived.  
It is sufficient if the representation, omission or 
practice was likely to deceive.  The representation, 
omission or practice is material if it involves information 
that is important to consumers and it is likely to affect 
their choice of or conducting --  conduct regarding a 
product, service or investment.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
18 
  
 An object or practice occurs in the conduct of trade 
or commerce if it is in the context of  business activity or 
a business transaction.  
 
No objection was made to the jury instructions.  
4. Jury Verdict and Award 
  
The jury concluded in relevant part that Regal. Corp 
breached the DROAs and breached the covenant of good faith and 
fair dealing implied in the DROAs.  Additionally, the jury found 
that Regal Corp. and Regal LLC engaged in unfair and deceptive 
acts or practices.  In response to special interrogatories, the 
jury also determined that Purdy was the alter ego of both Regal 
Corp. and Regal LLC.16  Accordingly, Purdy was liable for breach 
of contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing, and unfair and deceptive acts or practices.17  After 
                     
16 The jury noted that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and 
Regal LLC on the special verdict form:  
VI. ALTER EGO:  REGAL CAPITAL CORPORATION  
A. Is Jack Purdy the alter ego of Regal Capital 
Corporation? 
  ( ) Yes ( ) No 
Please proceed to Section VII.  
VII. ALTER EGO:  REGAL CAPITAL COMPANY, LLC  
 A. Is Jack Purdy the alter ego of Regal Capital Company, 
LLC?  
() Yes ( ) No 
17 Judgment was entered in favor of Calipjo as follows:  
 
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
19 
                                                                   
(. . . continued) 
 
 [W]ith respect to Count 3 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the Alii Ranch Estates Reservation 
DROA claim), $1.00 against Defendant Jack Purdy and $1.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, plus statutory 
interest currently in the amount of ten percent (10%) per 
annum until paid in full;  
 with respect to Count 4 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the Moana Ranch Estates Reservation 
DROA claim), $1.00 against Defendant Jack Purdy and $1.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, plus statutory 
interest currently in the amount of ten percent  (10%) per 
annum until paid in full;  
 with respect to Count 11 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing regarding the Alii Ranch Estates Reservation DROA 
claim), $1.00 against Defendant Jack Purdy and $1.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, plus statutory 
interest currently in the amount of ten percent (10%) per 
annum until paid in full;  
 with respect to Count 11 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing regarding the Moana Ranch Estates Reservation DROA 
claim), $1.00 against Defendant Jack Purdy and $1.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, plus statutory 
interest currently in the amount of ten percent (10%) per 
annum until paid in full;  
 with respect to Count 10 of the First Amended 
Complaint (unfair and deceptive trade practice s claim), 
$166,865.00 against Defendant Jack Purdy, $166,875.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, and $7,500.00 
against Defendant Regal Capital Company, LLC, plus 
statutory interest currently in the amount of ten percent 
(10%) per annum until paid in full;  
 with respect to the claim for attorneys’ fees and 
costs, $38,213.46 against Defendant Jack Purdy, $38,213.46 
against Defendant Regal Capital Corporation, and $1,559.74 
against Defendant Regal Capital Company, LLC, plus 
statutory interest currently in the amount of ten percent 
(10%) per annum until paid in full; and  
 with respect to the monetary judgments entered 
against both Regal Capital Corporation and Regal Capital 
Company, LLC, Defendant Jack Purdy shall be joint and 
severally liable.  
Judgment was entered in favor of Regal LLC, and against Calipjo, as follows:  
 
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
20 
 entry of the final judgment, Respondents filed a renewed motion 
for judgment as a matter of law  as to all claims.  In light of 
the conflicting evidence introduced at trial, and viewing “the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the party that secured 
the jury verdict,” the circuit court denied Respondents’ renewed 
motion for judgment as a matter of law.  
B. ICA Judgment 
  On appeal to the ICA, Respondents argued that the 
circuit court erred in denying their motions for judgment as a 
matter of law.18  They claimed , inter alia, that Calipjo 
                                                                  
(. . . continued) 
 
 [W]ith respect to Count 3 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the Alii Ranch Estates Reservation  
DROA claim);  
 with respect to Count 4 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the Moana Ranch Estates Reservation 
DROA claim);  
 with respect to Count 11 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing regarding the Alii Ranch Estates Reservation DROA 
claim); and  
 with respect to Count 11 of the First Amended 
Complaint (breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing regarding the Moana Ranch Estates Reservation DROA 
claim). 
18 Respondents argued that Purdy was entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law on the following claims:  breach of contract, breach of the 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices.  Respondents claimed that, because Purdy was not the alter ego of 
Regal Corp. and Regal LLC, nor a party to the DROAs, he could not be held 
liable for breaching the express or implied terms of the agreements.  In 
addition, because Purdy did not negotiate the terms of the DROAs, Respondents 
argued that he could not have engaged in unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices.  The ICA concluded that Purdy was not the alter ego of Regal Corp. 
or Regal LLC and, therefore, he could not be held liable based on contract 
 
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
21 
 presented no evidence that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal 
Corp. and Regal LLC, that Regal Corp. breached the DROAs, or 
that Regal LLC committed unfair and deceptive acts or practices.  
Calipjo countered that evidence presented at trial supported the 
jury’s verdict. 
 
 The ICA determined that there was no evidence 
introduced at trial to support the jury’s findings that (1) 
Regal Corp. breached the DROAs, (2) Regal LLC engaged in unfair 
and deceptive acts or practices, and (3) Purdy was the alter ego 
of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.   Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461, at *4-
*7. 19
  As to the alter ego claim, the ICA acknowledged that 
Purdy was the sole owner of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC, however, 
it found that this fact, alone, was insufficient to support the 
jury’s verdict.   Id. at *3- *4.  The ICA concluded that the 
evidence presented at trial did not establish 
undercapitalization —one factor relevant to whether an individual 
                                                                  
(. . . continued) 
 
theories or for unfair or deceptive  acts or practices.  Calipjo, 2017 WL 
6547461, at *4, *6.  Additionally, the ICA rejected Calipjo’s alternative 
argument that Purdy was liable for unfair and deceptive acts or practices 
pursuant to HRS § 480 -17(a) (2008), which provides that individual directors 
and officers of a corporation may be held liable for acts of a corporation 
that violate the penal provisions of HRS chapter 480 , because the jury did 
not find that Regal Corp. violated penal provisions of HRS chapter 480.  Id. 
at *6. 
 19 However, the ICA found there was sufficient evidence to support 
the jury’s finding that Regal Corp. breached the covenant of good faith and 
fair dealing.  Id. at *5. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
22 
 acts as the alter ego of a company.  Id. at *4.  It defined 
undercapitalization as “[t]he financial condition of a firm that 
does not have enough cap ital to carry on its business.”  Id. 
(quoting Black’s Law Dictionary  251 (10th ed. 2014)) .  The ICA 
stated that the trial testimony had “nothing to do with [the] 
capitalization” of the entities and it did not “infer any 
particular level of capitalization of Regal Corp., let alone 
undercapitalization such that it would bring about injustice and 
inequity not to find Purdy to be the alter ego of Regal Corp.”   
Id.  Additionally, the ICA held that the transfer of the Ali ʻi 
and Moana properties from Regal Corp. to Regal LLC did not 
constitute a fraudulent transfer or an abuse of the corporate 
form.  Id.  It noted that “[t]his case does not involve 
findings, or even claims, of fraudulent transfer with respect to 
these transfers.  There is no evidence that these tra
nsfers 
rendered Regal Corp. unable to satisfy its corporate debts and 
obligations.”  Id.  The ICA concluded that Purdy’s purported 
statement that he never intended to sell the properties to 
Calipjo was insufficient evidence to support a finding of alter 
ego.  Id.  In light of these conclusions, the ICA reversed in 
part the final judgment, concluding that “there was no evidence 
to support the jury’s verdict that Purdy was the alter ego of 
Regal Corp. and Regal LLC .”  Id. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
23 
   Because the ICA reversed the jury’s finding that Purdy 
was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC, it reversed the 
underlying claims and damages awards against Purdy for breach of 
contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing, 
and unfair and deceptive acts or practices.  Id.  at *4, *6.  The 
ICA reasoned that absent a finding of alter ego, Purdy could not 
be held personally liable for the claims because Regal Corp. and 
Regal LLC shielded him from liability.  Id.  The ICA explained 
that “Calipjo’s contract claims against Purdy are entirely 
dependent on the assertion that Purdy is the alter ego of Regal 
Corp. [and Regal LLC. ]”  Id. at *4. 
  The ICA also upheld the judgment against Regal Corp. 
for unfair or deceptive acts or practices, but held that there 
was no evidence that Regal LLC had engaged in an unfair or 
deceptive act or practice.   Id. at *6.  Having ruled that there 
was no evidence that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp., and 
rejecting Calipjo’s alternative argument that Purdy  was liable 
for unfair or deceptive acts or practices pursuant to HRS § 480-20
                     
 20 Because the ICA vacated the circuit court’s judgment that Regal 
LLC committed unfair and deceptive acts or practices, the ICA also vacated 
and remanded the circuit court’s denial of Regal LLC’s request for attorneys’ 
fees.  Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461 , at *6. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
24 
 2117(a), the ICA also held Purdy could not be held liable for 
unfair or deceptive acts or practices.   Id. 22
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
  This court reviews a trial court’s ruling on a motion 
for judgment as a matter of law de novo: 
A trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment as a 
matter of law is reviewed de novo .  “A [motion for judgment 
as a matter of law] may be granted only when after 
disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non -moving 
party’s evidence all the value to which it is legally 
entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which 
may be drawn from the evidence in the non -moving party’s 
favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to support 
a jury verdict in his or her favor.”  
 
Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawaiʻi 253, 261, 259 P.3d 
569, 577 (2011) (internal citations omitted); see also Hawai ʻi 
Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 50(a)(1) (“If during a  trial by 
jury a party has been fully heard on an issue and there is no 
legally sufficient evidentiary basis for a reasonable jury to 
find for that party on that issue, the court may determine the 
issue against that party and may grant a motion for judgment as 
a matter of law against that party with respect to a claim or 
                     
21 See supra note 18, at 20- 21. 
 22 The ICA also affirmed the judgment against Regal Corp. for breach 
of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing, unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices, and treble damages totaling $166,875.00 arising from the unfair 
and deceptive acts or practices claim.  Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461 , at *7.  
Because these issues are not raised in the application to this court, we 
affirm the ICA’s judgment in part.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
25 
 defense that cannot under the controlling law be maintained or 
defeated without a favorable finding on that issue.”).  
IV. DISCUSSION 
  A motion for judgment as a matter of law is granted 
only if there is no evidence to support the jury’s verdict.  
Ray, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 261, 259 P.3d at 577.  In making this 
determination, the court must disregard conflicting evidence, 
give “to the non -moving party ’s evidence all the value to which 
it is legally entitled, and indulg[e] every legitimate inference 
which may be drawn from the evidence in the non- moving party’ s 
favor[.]”  Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  
Applying this standard, we examine the record de novo to 
determine whether e vidence was introduced to support the jury’s  
determination that Purdy is the alter ego of Regal Corp. and 
Regal LLC, that Regal Corp. breached the DROAs, and that Regal 
LLC committed unfair and deceptive acts or practices.  
A. The Jury’s Verdict that Purdy was the Alter Ego of 
Regal Corp. and Regal LLC was Supported by Evidence 
 
  Courts have identified a variety of factors to 
determine whether a corporate entity is the alter ego of 
another, though no single factor is dispositive.
  Robert’s 23
                     
23 These factors include:  
[1] Commingling of funds and other assets, failure to 
segregate funds of the separate entities, and the 
 
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
26 
                                                                   
(. . . continued) 
 
unauthorized diversion of corporate  funds or assets to 
other than corporate uses; [2] the treatment by an 
individual of the assets of the corporation as his own; [3] 
the failure to obtain authority to issue stock or to 
subscribe to or issue the same; [4] the holding out by an 
individual that he is personally liable for the debts of 
the corporation; [5] the identical equitable ownership in 
the two entities; [6] the identification of the equitable 
owners thereof with the domination and control of the two 
entities; [7] identi[ty] of . . . directors and officers of 
the two entities in the responsible supervision and 
management; [8] sole ownership of all of the stock in a 
corporation by one individual or the members of a family; 
[9] the use of the same office or business location; [10] 
the employment of the same employees and/or attorney; [11]  
the failure to adequately capitalize a corporation; [12] 
the total absence of corporate assets, and 
undercapitalization; [13] the use of a corporation as a 
mere shell, instrumentality or conduit for a single venture 
or the business of an individual or another corporation;  
[14] the concealment and misrepresentation of the identity 
of the responsible ownership, management and financial 
interest, or concealment of personal business activities; 
[15] the disregard of legal formalities and the failure to 
maintain arm’s length relationships among related entities;  
[16] the use of the corporate entity to procure labor, 
services or merchandise for another person or entity; [17] 
the diversion stockholder [sic] or other person or entity,  
to the detriment of creditors, or the manipulation of 
assets and liabilities between entities so as to 
concentrate the assets in one and the liabilities in 
another; [18] the contracting with another with intent to 
avoid performance by use of a corporate entity as a shield 
against personal liability, or the use of a corporation as 
a subterfuge of illegal transactions; and [19] the 
formation and use of a corporation to transfer to it the 
existing liability of another person or entity.  
Robert’s Hawaii School Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 Hawaiʻi 
224, 242, 982 P.2d 853, 871 (1999), superseded by statute on other 
grounds as noted in Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel Ltd., 122 Hawaiʻ i 423, 
428 n.9, 228 P.3d 303, 308 n.9 (2010)  (alterations in original) 
(emphasis removed) (citing Associated Vendors, Inc. v. Oakland Meat 
Co., 26 Cal. Rptr. 806, 813 -15 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1962)).  Courts  
also consider: 
(1) incorporation for the purpose of circumventing public 
policy or statutes; (2) whether the parent finances the 
subsidiary; (3) whether the subsidiary has no business or 
assets except those conveyed to it by the parent; (4) 
whether the parent uses the subsidiary’s property as its 
own; (5) whether the directors of the subsidiary do not act 
 
(continued . . .)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
27 
 Hawaii, 91 Hawaiʻ i
 at 242- 43, 982 P.2d at 871-72.  In addition, a 
two-part test must be satisfied: 
[I]t must be made to appear that [1] the corporation is not 
only influenced and governed by that person, but that there 
is such a unity of interest . . . that the individuality, 
or separateness, of such person and corporation has ceased, 
and [2] that the facts are such that an adherence to the 
fiction of the separate existence of the corporation would, 
under the particular circumstances, sanction a fraud or 
promote injustice.  
 
Id. at 242, 982 P.2d at 871 (alterations in original) (
quoting 
Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 813).  Thus, the jury must 
determine whether there was a “unity of interest” between the 
individual and the corporation.  Id. (quoting Associated 
Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 813).  A “unity of interest” means 
that “[t]heir objectives are common, not disparate; their 
general corporate actions are guided or determined not by two 
separate . . . consciousness, but one[.]”  Id. at 242, 253, 982 
P.2d at 871, 882 (quoting Copperweld Corp. v. Indep. Tube Corp., 
467 U.S. 752, 771 (1984)).  The jury must also consider whether 
maintaining the corporate fiction would “sanction a fraud or 
promote injustice.”  Id. at 242, 982 P.2d at 871 (quoting 
Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 813).  Here, entry of 
                                                                  
(. . . continued) 
 
independently in the interest of the corporation but take 
their orders from and serve the parent; and (6) whether the 
“fiction of corporate entity . . . has been adopted or used 
to evade the provisions of a statute.”  
Id. (quoting Kavanaugh v. Ford Motor Co ., 353 F.2d 710, 717 (7th Cir. 1965)).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
28 
 judgment as a matter of law is proper only if there is no 
evidence to support the jury’s  verdict that there was a “unity 
of interest” between the individual and the corporation and that 
the corporate fiction resulte d in “a fraud or promote[d] 
injustice.”   Id. (quoting Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 
813). 
  In this case, the jury was presented with evidence 
that Purdy exercised exclusive ownership and control over Regal 
Corp. and Regal LLC.  Purdy testified that he was the sole 
shareholder, director, and officer of Regal Corp. and the sole 
member and manager of Regal LLC.  This court has held that “sole 
ownership of all of the stock in a corporation by one 
individual” is one relevant factor to determine alter ego .  Id. 
(quoting Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 814).  Purdy’s 
testimony supports the jury’s determination that Purdy exercised 
exclusive ownership and control over Regal Corp. and Regal LLC; 
it constitutes evidence that Purdy was the sole owner and 
manager of either company. 
  The jury was also presented with evidence that Regal 
Corp. and Regal LLC were undercapitalized24—another factor 
relevant to whether Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and 
                     
24 Undercapitalization is “[t]he financial condition of a firm that 
does not have enough capital to carry on its business.”  Black’s Law 
Dictionary  251 (10th ed. 2014).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
29 
 Regal LLC.  See id.  The ICA concluded that Purdy’s “t estimony 
did not evidence or infer any particular level of capitalization 
of Regal Corp., let alone undercapitalization[.]”   Calipjo, 2017 
WL 6547461, at *4.  However, Purdy testified that he transferred 
the Aliʻ i and Moana properties from Regal Corp. to Regal LLC for 
no consideration.  He was unable to identify the value of the 
transfer.  On cross
-examination, Purdy provided testimony 
supporting Calipjo’s claim that Regal Corp. and Regal LLC were 
undercapitalized: 
Q.  Okay.  So, now, with respect to the actual conveyances 
from Regal Capital Corporation and Antigua & Barbuda 
Corporation to Regal Capital Company, you transferred Alii, 
which is 19 acres, is that correct, at that time?  
 
[Purdy.]  Alii One. 
Q.  Okay.  And how much money did Regal Capital Company LLC 
pay to Regal Capital Corporation for that conveyance?  
[Purdy.]  Can you show me a copy of it.  
Q.  Well, I can show you the actual title report, but I 
don’t have a number on it.  So I was asking you i f you 
know? 
[Purdy.]  It would be a little bit of a guess, but I could 
give it a try.  I would think maybe $1.2 million, in that 
range. 
Q.  Well -- 
[Purdy.]  I just can’t recall. 
Q.  Okay.  Did you actually transfer that money over?  Was 
there a cash transfer? 
[Purdy.]  No. 
Q.  How did it work?  
[Purdy.]  You have to -- for tax purposes of both 
companies, you have to value the property.  You’d have to 
discern a value. And then -- *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
30 
 Q.  Would it surprise you to know the Kauai Business Report 
said it was $36,800 ? 
[Purdy.]  Well, maybe it was just the price of the taxes.   
No, I would think that would be -- no, that would really 
surprise me.  
Q.  Okay. 
[Purdy.]  That would seem like the taxes.  
Q.  Well, here’s what I want to know.  This is simple.  You 
got Regal -- the Antigua company owns it, right, and it’s 
worth something?  Okay? 
[Purdy.]  Yeah. 
Q.  As the fair market value of it.  Right? 
[Purdy.]  Yeah. 
Q.  And then you transfer from the Antigua company to the 
LLC, the Hawaii company.  Is that right?  
[Purdy.]  Yes. 
Q.  Okay.  How much money did the Antigua company give to 
the Hawaii company to acquire that property?  
[Purdy.]  I don’t know. 
Q.  Okay. 
[Purdy.]  (Inaudible) it would have been a tax 
consideration and whatever the -- I don’t know. 
THE COURT:  Mr. Purdy, what is the answer?  
[Purdy.]:  The answer is today, I don ’t know. 
. . . . 
Q.  And then I’ll ask you the same question with respect to 
the Moana Ranch conveyance from Regal Capital Corporation 
to Regal Capital Company, which, according to the title 
report I’ve got, happened on November 7th, 2003.  
[Purdy.]  Okay. 
Q.  How much money was transferred --  how much money did 
the LLC, the Regal Capital Company LLC, a Hawaii limited 
company, give to Regal Capital Corporation for the transfer 
of the interest in the Moana Ranch property, if you know?  
[Purdy.]  Well, I would just say around the amount that we 
were into the property for.  And in my mind -- but then you 
say would it surprise me – I’m putting words in my mouth.  
I would think it would have been transferred in the half -a-
million- dollar range.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
31 
 Q.  Are you saying that a check for half a million dollars 
was cut? 
[Purdy.]  No. 
Q.  That’s what I want to know.  
[Purdy.]  No. 
. . . . 
Q.  Did you, in your capacity as president or director of 
the Antigua company, write a check -- strike that.  Did 
you, in your capacity as the president of -- or, excuse me, 
managing member of the LLC, the buyer of the property, 
write a check to the Antigua Barbuda Company for the 
conveyance of either of these properties?  
[Purdy.]  I did not. 
Q.  You just conveyed it and had a tax designation on it?  
[Purdy.]  Yeah, it would have been a book entry in terms of 
the amount of money, the value that went from one 
corporation to another, which I think that’s pretty 
commonplace.  
(Emphases added.)  This testimony constitutes evidence that 
Purdy was unable to explain whether 
or not his companies were, 
in fact, adequately capitalized.  For example, though he 
acknowledged that the cumulative value of the Aliʻi and Moana 
properties was 1.7 million dollars,  he did not explain how Regal 
Corp. derived any value from the transfer of these properties.  
Purdy admitted that no money was exchanged.  He provided answers 
such as “[y]eah, it would have been a book entry in terms of the 
amount of money, the value that went from one corporation to 
another, which I think that’s pretty commonplace” and “[y]ou 
have to -- for tax purposes of both companies, you have to value 
the property.  You’d have to discern a value.”  Ultimately, this 
evidence indicates that Regal Corp. was undercapitalized given *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
32 
 that it transferred 1.7 million dollars’ worth of assets to 
Regal LLC for no consideration.  Thus, Purdy’s testimony 
constitutes evidence supporting the jury’s verdict.  
  Further, Purdy’s testimony constitutes evidence that 
there was a “unity of interest” between the Respondents.  
Robert’s Hawaii, 91 Hawaiʻi at 242, 982 P.2d at 871 (quoting 
Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 813).  This supports the 
jury’s determinations that Purdy is the alter ego of Regal Corp. 
and Purdy is the alter ego of Regal LLC.  In Robert’s Hawaii, 
this court stated that in order to find alter ego, there must be 
“such a unity of interest . . . that the individuality, or 
separateness, of such person and corporation has ceased[.]”  Id. 
(alteration in original) (quoting Associated Vendors , 26 Cal. 
Rptr. at 813).  In other words, the alter ego’s consciousness 
must guide the company’s actions.  See id. at 253, 982 P.2d at 
882 (citing Copperweld Corp., 467 U.S. at 771).  Here, Purdy 
testified that he authorized the transfer of Regal Corp.’s 
assets because he knew that he could make more profit from a 
high-end development on the property.  This testimony supports a 
finding that Purdy’s consciousness was guiding Regal Corp.’s 
actions and objectives because Regal Corp. suffered a detriment 
as a result of the transfer, while Purdy directly and personally 
benefitted from it.  Therefore, the jury was presented with 
evidence of a “unity of interest” between Purdy and Regal Corp.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
33 
 Id. at 242, 982 P.2d at 871 (quoting Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. 
Rptr. at 813). 
  In addition, the jury was presented with evidence that 
allowing Purdy to act as the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal 
LLC would “sanction a fraud or promote injustice.”   Id. 
(quoting Associated Vendors, 26 Cal. Rptr. at 813).  Purdy 
altered condition C-67 of the  Aliʻi property DROA to provide 
himself, the seller, the option to cancel the agreement without 
providing notice to the buyer.   Purdy testified that “[i]f the 
buyer had a right to terminate, then I should have that same 
right” and he directed Summers to add “or Seller” to condi tion 
C-67 of the  Aliʻi property DROA.  Summers told Calipjo that the 
addition of “or Seller” was Purdy’s counteroffer “and if 
[Calipjo] didn’t want to acknowledge this, then he wouldn’t have 
a reservation agreement.”  Therefore,  Purdy did not merely 
suggest the incorporation of “or Seller[,]” but he insisted on 
it as a condition of the DROA.  Moreover, due to the contingency 
in the Moana property DROA, if Purdy elected to cancel the Ali ʻi 
property DROA, which he ultimately did, he automatically 2625
                     
25 The jury was instructed that two of the essential elements of an 
alter ego claim are whether “the shareholder exercised control over the 
corporation in such a way as to harm the plaintiff” and whether “refusal to 
disregard the corporate entity would subject the plaintiff to unjust loss.”  
26 The alteration read:  “Buyer or Seller  may terminate this 
reservation at any time prior to it becoming a binding contract by written 
notice to Seller.”  (Emphasis added.)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
34 
 cancelled the Moana property DROA.  
Summers testified that Purdy 
needed an investor for the project “to do the improvements that 
we planned on doing to the property.”  Therefore, testimony 
regarding Purdy’s forceful inclusion of the term “or Seller” may 
have evidenced his intent to cancel the DROAs because it showed 
that from the beginning of his dealings with Calipjo, Purdy 
intended to renege on the Ali ʻi property DROA.  Evidence was 
presented at trial that Purdy altered the Ali ʻi property DROA to 
remove an essential protection for the buyer.  This indicates 
that Calipjo would suffer an injustice as a result of Purdy’s 
actions as the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC, and 
supports the jury’s verdict.  
 
 Additional evidence was presented at trial that Purdy 
intended to cancel the DROAs and thereby use Regal Corp. and 
Regal LLC to commit a fraud or an injustice against Calipjo.  
This supports the jury’s determinations that Purdy is the alter 
ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  Calipjo testified that Purdy 
approached him seven years after signing the DROAs and stated 
that he never intended to sell Calipjo the properties.  Another 
witness corroborated this testimony.
  Therefore, the jury was 
presented with evidence that Purdy used Regal Corp. and Regal 
LLC to commit a fraud because he never intended to sell the 
properties to Calipjo. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
35 
 “[D]isregarding conflicting evidence, giving to 
[Calipjo’s] evidence all the value to which it is legally 
entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which may be 
drawn from the evid ence in [Calipjo’s] favor,” the record does 
not support the conclusion that there was no evidence to support 
the jury’s verdict in Calipjo’s favor.  Ray, 125 Hawai ʻi at 261, 
259 P.3d at 577. 
B. The Jury’s Verdict that Regal Corp. Breached the DROAs 
is Supported by Evidence 
 
  
At trial, the jury was instructed on the essential 
elements of a contract:  (1) capacity to enter the contract, (2) 
offer, (3) acceptance, and (4) consideration.  This court has 
held that “[i]t is well -settled that consideration is an 
essential element of, and is necessary to the enforceability or 
validity of, a contract.”  Douglass v. Pflueger Hawaii, Inc., 
110 Hawaiʻ i 520, 534, 135 P.3d 129, 143 (2006), 
as corrected (May 
30, 2006) (quoting Shanghai Inv. Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 Hawaiʻi 
482, 496, 993 P.2d 516, 530 (2000), overruled on other grounds 
by Blair v. Ing , 96 Hawaiʻi 327, 335-36, 31 P.3d 184, 192-93 
(2001)).  We define consideration “as a bargained for exchange 
whereby the promisor receives some benefit or the promisee 
suffers a detriment.”  Id. (quoting Shanghai , 92 Hawaiʻi at 496, 
993 P.2d at 530).  Furthermore, “[a] modification of a contract *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
36 
 must be supported by new consideration.”  Shanghai, 92 Hawaiʻi at 
496, 993 P.2d at 530. 
  Based on the testimony presented at trial, “ indulging 
every legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence 
in [Calipjo’s] favor,”  we cannot say that the jury’s finding 
that Regal Corp. breached the DROAs was not supported by 
evidence.  Ray, 125 Hawaiʻi at 261, 259 P.3d at 577.  Lengthy 
testimony was offered by Summers, Purdy, and Calipjo regarding 
the alteration to condition C- 67 of the Ali ʻi property DROA that 
gave Regal Corp., the seller, the right to cancel the Ali ʻi 
property DROA at any time before the Final Condominium Public 
Report was released.  This testimony notably lacks mention of 
any new benefit to Calipjo for modifying the original agreement.  
Because the modification to condition C- 67 of the Aliʻi property 
DROA was not supported by consideration, it is void.  Therefore, 
there was evidence at trial that Regal Corp. breached the 
express terms of the original contract when it cancelled the 
DROAs and the ICA’s determination that there is no evidence that 
Regal Corp. breached the DROAs is error. 
C. The Jury’s Verdict that Regal LL C Committed Unfair and 
Deceptive Acts or Practices is Supported by Evidence 
 
The ICA concluded that there is no evidence to support 
a finding that Regal LLC engaged in unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices.  Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461, at *6.  “A deceptive act *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
37 
 or practice is ‘(1) a representation, omission, or practice that 
(2) is likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the 
circumstances where (3) the representation, omission, or 
practice is material.’”  Hungate v. Law Office of David B. 
Rosen, 139 Hawaiʻ i 394, 411, 391 P.3d 1, 18 (2017) (brackets 
omitted) (quoting Courbat  v. Dahana Ranch, Inc., 111 Hawaiʻi 254, 
262, 141 P.3d 427, 435 (2006)).  “A representation, omission, or 
practice is considered material if it ‘involves information that 
is important to consumers and, hence, likely to affect their 
choice of, or conduct regarding, a product.’”  Id. (citation 
omitted).  The test for whether an act or omission is deceptive 
is an objective test, and it turns “on whether the act or 
omission is likely to mislead consumers, . . . as to information 
important to consumers . . . in making a decision regarding the 
product or service.”  Id. (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted) (alterations in original). 
Giving the evidence presented at trial “ all the value 
to which it is legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate 
inference which may be drawn from the evidence in [Calipjo’s] 
favor,” it is apparent that the jury could have determined that 
the acts or omissions of Regal LLC misled Calipjo as to 
information critical to his position as the buyer of the Ali ʻi 
and Moana properties.  Ray , 125 Hawaiʻi at 261, 259 P.3d at 577.  
Purdy testified that as early as 2000, Regal LLC was heavily *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
38 
 involved in the development of the Ali ʻi and Moana properties.  
Just eight months after the parties entered the DROAs on August 
12, 2002, Regal Corp. transferred the Aliʻi property to Regal LLC 
for no consideration.  Regal Corp. and Regal LLC did not notify 
Calipjo that the DROAs were cancelled until three months later, 
on August 7, 2003.  Thus, there is evidence to support the 
jury’s conclusion that Regal LLC’s role in the development of 
the properties, and ultimate ownership of the properties, 
involves information that would be important to consumers such 
as Purdy, and was likely to affect Purdy’s conduct regarding the 
DROAs.27 
D. The Underlying Claims Against Purdy are Reinstated 
 
 The ICA reversed all claims against Purdy including 
breach of contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and 
fair dealing, and unfair and deceptive acts or  practices.  
Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461, at *7.  The ICA reasoned that absent a 
finding of alter ego, Purdy was not a party to the Ali ʻi and 
Moana property DROAs.  
Id. at *4.  Therefore, he could not be 
held liable for breaching the express and implied terms of 
                     
27 Because we vacate  the ICA’s determination that no evidence 
supports the jury’s finding that Regal LLC committed unfair and deceptive 
acts or practices, we also vacate the ICA’s holding that the circuit court 
erred in determining that Regal LLC is not entitled to attorneys’  fees.  
Calipjo, 2017 WL 6547461 , at *6. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
39 
 either DROA, or unfair and deceptive acts or  practices.  Id. at 
*4, *6. 
  Accordingly, the ICA erroneously overturned the jury ’s 
verdict regarding alter ego and reversed the judgment against 
Purdy for breach of contract, breach of the covenant of good 
faith and fair dealing,  and unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices.  This court has held that the alter ego doctrine does 
not create a separate cause of action, but  rather, c reates a 
means for an individual (the alter ego) to be held personally 
liable for a cause of action against a corporate entity: 
 A claim based on the alter ego theory is not in 
itself a claim for substantive relief, but rather to 
disregard the corporation as a distinct defendant is 
procedural.  A finding of fact of alter ego, standing 
alone, creates no cause of action.  It merely furnishes a 
means for a complainant to reach a second corporation or 
individual upon a cause of action that otherwise would have 
existed only against the first corporation.  An attempt to 
pierce the corporate veil is a means of imposing liability 
on an underlying cause of action, such as a tort or breach 
of contract.  The alter ego doctrine is thus remedial, not 
defensive, in nature.  One who seeks to disregard the 
corporate veil must show that the corporate form has been 
abused to the injury of a third person.  
 
Robert’s Hawaii , 91 Hawaiʻi at 241, 982 P.2d at 870 
(emphasis in 
original) (quoting 1 William Meade Fletcher et al., Fletcher 
Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations § 41.10, at 568- 81 
(perm. ed. 1999)).  Although Purdy was not named as a party to 
the DROAs, the jury determined that he functioned as the alter 
ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  Because the jury found that 
Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC, Purdy was *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
40 
 28held liable for the underlying claims.   See id.  The ICA’s 
reversal of the final judgment as to these claims was error. 
V. CONCLUSION 
  The ICA’s holding that no evidence supported the 
jury’s verdict that Regal Corp. breached the DROAs, Regal LLC 
engaged in unfair and deceptive acts or practices, and Purdy was 
the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC was error.   Because 
evidence supported the jury’s verdict that Purdy is the alter 
ego, he is liable for breach of contract, breach of the covenant 
of good faith and fair dealing , and unfair and deceptive acts or 
practices.  Accordingly, we affirm in part and vacate in part 
the January 24, 2018 judgment of the ICA and reinstate the 
circuit court’s July 18, 2014 final judgment.  
Donna E. Richards, 
Mark R. Zenger 
for Petitioner   
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 
     
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
Richard E. Wilson  
for Respondents 
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
 
     /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 
                     
28 On the special verdict form, with respect to the Aliʻi and Moana 
property DROAs, the jury determined that Purdy breached his contractual 
obligations, failed to act with good faith and fair dealing, and committed 
unfair and deceptive acts or practices.  
