*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
ALEXANDER & BALDWIN, LLC,  a Hawai ‘i limited liability company, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
 vs.  
 
NELSON ARMITAGE, SR.,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant, 
 
and 
 
WAYNE ARMITAGE; FREDERICK TORRES -PESTANA, also known as RIKI 
TORRES-PESTANA; and KINGDOM OF HAWAI‘ I, also known as REINSTATED 
LAWFUL HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also known as LAWFUL HAWAIIAN 
GOVERNMENT, also known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also 
known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN NATION, also known as REINSTATED 
HAWAIIAN KINGDOM , an unincorporated association,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants, 
 
and 
 
ROBERT ARMITAGE, also known as BOBBY ARMITAGE; JAMES AKAHI, also 
known as AKAHI NUI, also known as MAJESTY AKAHI NUI,  also known 
as JAMES  AKAHI NUI,  also known as ROYAL MAJESTY AKAHI NUI, 
Executor/Trustee of the Kingdom of Hawai ‘i Nation Ministry Trust; 
and KINGDOM OF HAWAI‘ I NATION MINISTRY TRUST, also known as 
KINGDOM OF HAWAI‘ I, an unincorporated association, 
Respondents/Defendants- Appellees . 
 
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000667
05-APR-2022
08:17 AM
Dkt. 50 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
2 
 SCWC-16-0000667 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000667; CIV. NO. 13-1-1065) 
APRIL 5, 2022  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
  Beginning in 201 1, Nelson Armitage (Armitage) and a 
group of others that included Robert Armitage, Wayne Armitage, 
and Frederick Torres -Pestana (collectively, individual 
defendants) entered onto and occupied land belonging to 
Alexander & Baldwin, LLC (A&B) in Maui.  They purported to act 
on behalf of an organization called the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation.  A&B sued  seeking a writ of ejectment , damages,  and 
preliminary and permanent  injunction s barring them from entering 
any property owned by A&B .  In addition to the individ ual 
defendants, A&B  also sued the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation by 
various names.   
  Throughout the proceedings, Armitage , and Henry Noa , 
who was not a party, defended the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation as 
foreign minister and prime minister , respectively .  In short, 
they acted as lawyer s would in representing the interests of the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  The circuit court granted summary 
judgment to A&B and entered the requested injunction.  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
3 
 defendants appealed, with Armitage and Noa again purporting to 
represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  
  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) dismissed the 
appeal as to the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, reasoning that , as 
non-attorney s, Armitage and Noa could not represent its interest 
before that court.  However, the ICA addressed Armitage’s appeal  
individually and rejected each of his substantive points of 
error.  Armitage sought review before this court.  Although he 
abandons his substantive points of error, he asserts that if the 
ICA was correct that his represe ntation of the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation was improper and merited dismissal of the 
appeal, then, for the same reason, the circuit court’s judgment 
must be vacated as to the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  
 We agree.  In doing so, w e reject a rule that would 
automatically render a nullity any judgment obtained as a result 
of the improper participation of a non-attorney  representative, 
but nevertheless hold that the judgment against the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation must be voided .  The public policy behind the 
prohibition on the unauthorized practice of law requires us to 
vacate the circuit court’s judgment as to the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation.  However, we do not vacate the judgment against 
Armitage or any other defendant.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
4 
  II. BACKGROUND  
A. Circuit Court Proceedings  
  On November 26, 2013, A&B filed a complaint for 
preliminary and permanent injunctions in the circuit court 
against Armitage and his codefendants  for entering an d occupying 
land owned by A&B in Maui .  In addition to the individual 
defendants, A&B named the R einstated Hawaiian Nation in its 
complaint .1  A&B sought damages and an order of ejectment along 
with preliminary and permanent injunctions against Armitage and 
                     
 1  The complaint named the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation as “KINGDOM OF 
HAWAI’I, also known as REINSTATED LAWFUL HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also known as 
LAWFUL HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, also known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT, 
also known  as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN NATION, also known as REINSTATED HAWAIIAN 
KINGDOM, an unincorporated association.”  The organization filed a motion to 
dismiss the complaint, identifying itself as “Reinstated Hawaiian 
Government.”  However,  in its opening brief  before the ICA , it identifie d 
itself as the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, and the ICA addressed it as such.   
See Alexander & Baldwin, LLC v. Armitage , 146 Hawai‘i 232, 459 P.3d 791 , 2020 
WL 1227517 , at *1 (App. Mar. 12, 2020).  For clarity, we use the same 
terminology as the ICA and the opening brief.  
  According to the appellants’ opening brief, the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation was established on March 13, 1999:  
 
[F]ollowing the failure of the State of Hawaii to 
accomplish the intent of Act 359 (1993), loyalists to Queen 
Lili[ʿ]uokalani  and citizens of the Kingdom of Hawaii, 
. . . exercised their “perfect right” .  . . to re-instate 
their inherent and LAWFUL Hawaiian Government, which had 
been suspended in an ACT OF WAR, by the ARMED FORCE of the 
UNITED STATES OF AME RICA, on January 17, 1893.  
Therefore, the Lawful [Reinstated] Hawaiian 
Government [] , that has been in existence since March 13, 
1999, nearly 17 years and recently completed their 41st 
Manakau Kanawai (The convening of the Legislature), is the 
lawfully cre ated native Hawaiian Government of native 
Hawaiians, as it is a self -determining government of their 
own choosing , pursuant to International Law, U.S. Law, and 
even Hawaii Law pursuant to Act 359 of 1993.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
5 
 his codefendants enjoining them from entering the land as well 
as all other property owned by A &B.   
  According to A&B ’s first amended complaint , Armitage 
and his codefendants entered and occupied  three parcels 
belonging to A&B beginning in 2011 .  They put up the Hawaiian 
flag and signs declaring the land to be under the jurisdiction 
of the lawful Hawaiian government and began constructing an ahu, 
a traditional stone land marker  or cairn.  They also cleared 
land and conducted unpermitted commercial activities  that 
resulted in citations against A&B .  During the trespass, 
Armitage represented himself to A&B as the “Minister of Foreign 
Affairs of the Hawaiian Kingdom ” and claimed ownership of the 
land by virtue of a kingdom registry.   
  Throughout  the proceedings that followed, Armitage and 
Noa participated extensively as representatives of  the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation .  While Armitage sometimes identified 
himself in filings only as “NELSON ARMITAGE, Pro Se ,” he signed 
other filings as foreign minister of  the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation.  Noa was not a defendant, although he was sometimes 
referred to  as a defendant pro se  and sometimes  represented 
himself as such .  Both filed motions and responded  to A&B’s 
motions.  For example,  Noa filed a motion to dismiss A&B’s 
complaint signed only by him, above the signature line,  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
6 
 “REINSTATED HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT[,]  By its Prime Minister, Henry 
Noa.”  Armitage  and Noa filed witness lists and made objections 
to evidence , conducted voir dire for expert witnesses and cross-
examined both expert and fact witnesses  during the preliminary 
injunction hearing and rehearing , and made oral and written 
arguments.2  None of the presiding judges barred Noa and 
Armitage, as non-attorney s, from representing the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation.  
  At several points throughout the proceedings , Noa’s 
status as a non -party – and Armitage’s cap acity as a 
representative of the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation - became 
evident.  On January 15, 2014, the circuit court held a hearing 
on A&B’s motion for a preliminary injunction .  Noa initially 
appeared alone and identified himself  as a representative of t he 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.   Later, he objected to a default 
that had been entered against Armitage.  The court appeared to 
treat Noa as a defendant p ro se:  
THE COURT:  Okay.  There’s just no default against you.  
MR. NOA:  Even against the other parti es. 
                     
 2  Three different judges presided over the case.   Originally, the 
Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided; however, he recused himself on June 10, 
2014.  The case was reassigned to the Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo, but she 
recused herself on September 2, 2014.  The case was then reassigned to the 
Honorable Jose ph E. Cardoza, who presided over the remain der of the 
proceedings.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
7 
  THE COURT:  Well, the other parties have to speak for 
themselves.  I’m not saying I won’t vacate it, but they’ve 
got to speak for themselves.  
 
(Emphasis added.)3   
  Armitage arrived  shortly thereafter , and the court 
vacated the default against him.   
  Five days later, on January 29, 2014, the court 
reconvened on the preliminary injunction, and Noa and Armitage 
again introduced themselves  as representatives of the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation.  During the hearing, Noa introduced a “staff 
member working with my office, prime minister’s office” whom he 
said he had “assigned . . . to speak on my behalf.”  The court 
responded:  
THE COURT:  Is he an attorney?  
MR. NOA:  No, he is not.  
THE COURT:  Then he can’t speak for you.  You don’t need 
anybody to speak for  you. 
MR. NOA:  No, your Honor. . . .  We are here performing pro 
se.  We’re doing our best, but at times, our best just 
seems to run into these difficulties.  . . . I -- you know, 
I asked him to advise – be my advisor.  
THE COURT:  And he can do that.  
MR. NOA:  Okay.  Fantastic.  
THE COURT:  But he can’t speak for you in court.  And, in 
fact, his even sitting on that side of the bench is 
normally not allowed, but I’ll let you do it because you 
wanted him to advise you, he can advise you, but he’s not 
an attor ney.   
                     
 3  Later in the same hearing, Noa addressed the court, “Your Honor, 
I’m here under pro se.  I don’t have the luxury of having A&B’s great lawyers 
behind them.”  The court responded, in par t, “I know,” before changing 
subjects.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
8 
    Next, on November 19, 2014, Judge Cardoza presiding,4 
the circuit court addressed  the issue of whether Noa could 
represent the interests of others before the court .  Noa had 
filed a motion to strike entries of default  against defendants 
Akahi Nui  and the Kingdom of Hawai‘i Nation Ministry Trust (an 
organization distinct from the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation) as 
well as Torres -Pestana.  The court questioned Noa:  “Now , you’re 
essentially putting yourself in a position of representing 
someone other th an yourself?”  The court pointed out that 
neither Noa nor Armitage were in default .  Regarding Torres -
Pestana’s default, the court ruled:  
THE COURT:  I’ll tell you what.  If he wants to present 
something to the Court, he can do that by way of motion.  
MR. NOA:  At least we know so we can contact him and let 
him know.  I don’t think the order does include his name, 
your Honor.  I think it’s very clear that it’s -- you know, 
if you look at the order.  
THE COURT:  That -- the motion does indicate that you’re 
acting as a representative of the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Kingdom Nation, and that does present some issues relati ve 
to your representation of a -- of another entity.   
 And, respectfully, although that’s your contention, I 
think you’re going to need to consider w hether you’re able 
to serve as a legal representative of the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Kingdom Nation.   
 I don’t have any problem with you appearing here and 
acting on your behalf to oppose A&B’s request.  But, at 
least based on the record that I have before me , as I’ve 
mentioned, number one, you’re not in default, and then the 
other thing that I raised earlier was a concern that I 
would have if you’re representing yourself as a legal 
representative.  
MR. NOA:  No.  I’m not trying to do that, your Honor.  
                     
 4  After Judges Cahill and Loo  recused, Judge Cardoza ordered that 
A&B would have to present anew its evidence establishing that it was entitled 
to injunctive relief.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
9 
 THE COUR T:  All right. Then I will -- based on all of that, 
I’m going to deny the motion.  That doesn’t prevent anyone 
from coming in here and if they’re in default and asking 
the Court for some relief, but that’s not what’s before me 
today. 
(Emphasis added.)  
 Lastly, on July 15, 2015, the court held a hearing on 
A&B’s motion for summary judgment.  After the parties made their 
arguments, the court addressed Noa regarding his personal claim 
to the contested parcels.5  During this discussion, Noa 
acknowledged to the court that he was not a named defendant:  
THE COURT:  So, Mr. Noa, your -- your -- in part you seem 
to be arguing, or I guess collectively you folks seem to be 
arguing on behalf of the reinstated Hawaiian government 
that the property was conveyed to Victori a Kamamalu and 
that you’re descendants of that individual.  Are you 
arguing that?  
MR. NOA:  Your Honor, I’d like to just state that we -- we 
didn’t enter the court case as the reinstated Hawaiian 
nation.  It was Alexander & Baldwin that actually provided 
that to the Court, okay.  And because the party, the party 
was made, of which I am a part.  I am a part of the 
reinstated Hawaiian nation, lawful Hawaiian government, 
that I appeared representing that government.  Okay.    
 So kind of not sure as to the ques tion that you are 
directing at me, other than to say that, yes, that I have 
been representing the lawful Hawaiian government  in this 
issue and we are not -- as the government, we have not made 
a claim to the property at all.  I haven ’t, as the  
                     
 5  Noa filed a counterclaim on November 10, 2014 identifying himself 
as a defendant and claiming loss of income and revenue in the amount of $100 
million as an heir of Victoria Kamamalu , the rightful claimant to the land.  
In response to his counterclaim, A&B argued:  “ While Henry Noa has appeared 
in this action as the representative Defendant Reinstated Hawaiian 
Government, he was not named individually, and has never received Court 
approval to appear and file claims in his individual capacity.”  At the 
hearing on A&B’s motion, the court acknowledge d that Noa was not a named 
defendant and orally dismissed the complaint:  “Mr. Henry Noa actually is not 
a named party in this case, but he has appeared and represented — or appeared 
individually and in the capacity that he’s noted, as prime minister of th e 
[Reinstated Hawaiian Nation].”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
10 
 government , okay.  So I’ve just been representing the 
government since they named us as a party.  
. . . 
 So, I was never -- I was never named in as a 
defendant, other than representing the lawful Hawaiian 
government, your Honor.   
 
(Emphasis added.)   
 
  Throughout the  proceedings, A&B argued that it held 
title to the contested parcels  deriving from Royal Patent Grant 
(RPG) 165 , granted by King Kamehameha III to M. Kekuanaoa,  
father and guardian of  Kamamalu,  on November 20, 1848.  It 
adduced expert testimony and introduced exhibits  to this effect, 
and it called its managers and other personnel  to testify to the 
trespassing incidents.   
  Although they challenged A&B’s arguments and evidence, 
Noa and Armitage presented no evidenc e.  After A&B rested in the 
evidentiary hearings for a preliminary injunction, Armitage and 
Noa requested additional time to prepare and present evidence.   
But when the court reconvened on October 27, 2014, Armitage, 
Noa, and Wayne Armitage rested without calling any witnesses or 
presenting evidenc e.   
  However, i n their cross -examination and arguments, Noa 
and Armitage challenged A&B’s chain of title through RPG 165.  
In particular, they sought to establish that A&B could not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
11 
 (continued...)  produce a n original  deed of title to RPG 165.6  They also 
challenged an April 24, 1850 conveyance of the land described by 
RPG 165 to Richard Armstrong b y Kekuanaoa, arguing that 
Kekuanaoa could not transfer a fee simple title as, under the 
Hawaiian translation of the deed , Kekuanaoa held only a life 
estate, the remainder bein g reserve d to Kamamalu.  And, at 
closing arguments, Noa argued that by failing to produce the 
original RPG, A&B was attempting to perpetuate a fraud on the 
court.  Armitage added that the State lacked jurisdiction in 
this matter as its authority had been i llegitimately substituted 
for that of the Hawaiian monarchy .  
  The circuit court granted summary judgment to A&B and 
entered a permanent injunction against Armitage and his 
codefendants , naming Noa as “ Pro Se representative” of the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nat ion.  It entered a n amended final 
judgment on September 16, 2016.7 
                     
 6  Instead, A&B introduced into evidence a certified copy of RPG 
165, conveying the subject parcels to Kekuanaoa.  
  
 7  The circuit court entered final judgment on November 2, 2015, and 
Armitage and Noa filed a pro se no tice of appeal.  However, the ICA dismissed 
the appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction, noting that although the 
November 2 judgment held that there were “no remaining claims” it did not 
“specifically identify[] the claim or claims on which the circuit court 
intend[ed] to enter judgment.”   
  In dismissing the appeal, the ICA noted that Noa did not 
intervene as a defendant, but rather claimed to represent the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation.  It noted that Hawai ‘i law prohibits non-attorney s from 
representing  other persons or entities before the circuit court.  And it 
suggested that, although the judgment named Noa, as a nonparty he would not  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
12 
  B. ICA Proceedings  
  Armitage, Noa, Wayne Armitage, and Torres -Pestana 
filed a pro se notice of appeal from the amended final judgment.  
Armitage signed as “Foreign Minister, Defendant, Pr o Se”; Noa as 
“Prime Minister [,] Defendant, Representing Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation.”  The opening brief raised six points of error relating 
to the proceedings below and A&B’s claim to the parcels,8 and was 
signed by Armitage on his own behalf and by Noa and Armitage as 
prime minister and foreign minister of the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation, respectively.  
  After the defendants filed their opening brief , A&B 
moved to dismiss the appeal or strike the brief as to the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation on the basis that th e brief was filed 
by non-attorney s Noa and Armitage.  In its memorandum in 
                                                                  
(...continued) 
be bound by it.  See Alexander & Baldwin, LLC v. Armitage , No. CAAP -15-
0000890, 2016 WL 3349070 , at *1 n.1 (App. June 1 4, 2016)  (citing Oahu 
Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr. Inc. , 60 Haw. 372, 377, 590 P.2d 
570, 574 (1979)).    
 
 8  Those points of error were: (1) Judge Loo erred when she failed 
to certify familiarity with the underlying action pursuant to Hawai‘i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 63 (2000) and held a hearing despite having a 
conflict of interest in the matter; (2) Judge Loo abused her discretion when 
she granted A&B’s ex parte motion for a temporary restraining order (TRO) 
after having recuse d herself; (3) Judge Loo erred by granting the TRO despite 
having a conflict of interest in the matter; (4) Judge Cardoza erred when he 
failed to certify familiarity with the underlying action pursuant to HRCP 
Rule 63 prior to accepting the case; (5) Judge  Cardoza abused his discretion 
when he prevented Armitage from challenging the validity of A&B’s evidence 
regarding ownership of the contested parcel s; and (6) Judge Cardoza erred in 
granting A&B’s motion for summary judgment because A&B failed to show it had 
clear and unbroken title to the contested parcels.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
13 
 support, A&B argued that Noa “is not a named party to this 
action,” and as non -lawyers, neither Noa nor any of the 
defendants could represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  A&B 
contended that representation of a corporation by a non -lawyer 
constitutes the unauthorized  practice of law, citing Oahu 
Plumbing & Sheet Metal , Ltd. v. Kona Constr uction, Inc., 60 Haw. 
372, 590 P.2d 570 (1979).  A&B noted that a court has  inherent 
power to sua sponte  “prevent an unauthorized person from 
practicing law in a case pending before it,” and opposing 
parties have standing to challenge such an appearance.  (Quoting 
Tradewinds Hotel v. Cochran , 8 Haw. App. 256, 26 4, 799 P.2d 60, 
65 (1990)) . Noa and A rmitage filed a memorandum in opposition 
objecting to the motion without argument , as prime minister a nd 
foreign affairs minister/ defendant pro se, respectively .  The 
ICA denied the motion “without prejudice to the merit panel’s 
consideration when reviewin g the appeal on the merits.”  A&B 
renewed its arguments for dismissal in its answering brief.  
Armitage and Noa filed a reply brief in the same capacities as 
in the opening brief, but did not address the issue of their 
representation of the Reinstated Hawa iian Nation .   
  In a summary disposition order, the ICA affirmed the 
circuit court’s September 16, 2016 amended final judgment.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
14 
    As a preliminary matter, the ICA held that under 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 605-2 (2016)9 and 605-14 
(2016)10, Noa and Armitage could not represent the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation .  Therefore, the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation was 
not a party to the appeal:  
Under HRS § 605-2 (2016) and § 605 -14 (2016), persons who 
are not licensed to practice law in Hawai‘i “are not 
permitted to act as ‘attorneys’ and represent other natural 
persons in  their causes.”   Oahu Plumbing & Sheet Metal, 
Ltd. v. Kona Constr., Inc. , 60 Haw. 372, 377, 590 P.2d 570, 
573 (1979) (emphasis in original).   “By the same token, 
non-attorney  agents are not all owed to represent 
corporations in litigation, for a wholly unintended 
exception to the rules against unauthorized practice of law 
would otherwise result.”   Id. at 377, 590 P.2d at 574.  The 
same rules apply to unincorporated entities, such as 
Reinstated Ha waiian Nation.   See Free Church of Tonqa -Kona 
v. Ekalesia Ho‘ole Pope O Kekaha , No. CAAP -19-0000005, 2019 
WL 2285359, at *2 (Haw. App. May 28, 2019) (SDO).  
Therefore, neither Nelson  Armitage  nor Henry Noa was 
entitled to assert an appeal on behalf of Rein stated 
                     
 9  HRS § 605-2 provides:  
 
Except as provided by the rules of court, no person shall 
be allowed to practice in any court of the State unless 
that person has been duly licensed so to do by the suprem e 
court; provided that nothing in this chapter shall prevent 
any person, plaintiff, defendant, or accused, from 
appearing in person before any court, and there prosecuting 
or defending that person ’s, plaintiff ’s, defendant ’s, or 
accused’s own cause, withou t the aid of legal counsel; 
provided further that in the district cou rts sections 605 -
13 and 633 -28 shall apply.  
 
 10  HRS § 605-14 provides  in relevant part : 
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or 
corporation to engage in or attempt to  engage in or to 
offer to engage in the practice of law, or to do or attempt 
to do or offer to do any act constituting the practice of 
law, except and to the extent that the person, firm, or 
association is licensed or authorized so to do by an 
appropriate court, agency, or office or by a statute of the 
State or of the United States.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
15 
 Hawaiian Nation.   Accordingly, the notice of appeal is not 
valid with respect to Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, and 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation is not a party to this appeal.  
 
Alexander & Baldwin, LLC v. Armitage , 146 Hawai‘i 232, 459 P.3d 
791, 2020 WL 1227517, at *1 (App. Mar. 12, 2020).     
  Moreover, the ICA noted that, although purportedly 
filed on their behalf , the opening brief was not signed by Wayne 
Armitage, Robert Armitage, or Torres-Pestana.  Id. at *2.  
Therefore, it reasoned that Armitage w as the only appellant.  
Id.  As to the six substantive points of error on appeal, the 
ICA rejected each of Armitage’s arguments  and affirmed the 
September 16, 2016 amended final judgment of the circuit court.   
Id. at *2-*8.   
C. Supreme Court Proceedings  
  Armitage filed an application for writ of certiorari.  
Armitage asserts only  two questions  in his application : “Whether 
the circuit court committed reversible error by permitting 
Petitioner and Petitioner’s codefendants to represent the 
[Reinstated] Hawaiian  [Nation], and whether failure of the judge 
to remedy this error denied Petitioner his due process rights to 
a fair hearing?”  He does not challenge the ICA’s ruling on the 
six points of error presented in the opening brief.  
  Armitage argues that the ICA ’s decision “implicitly 
voids the judgment” of the circuit court: if it was correct that 
Armitage and Noa’s representation of the Reinstated Hawaiian *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
16 
 Nation rendered its appeal a nullity, then so too must the 
judgment below be voided.  “The judiciary may no t apply one set 
of rules in circuit court and another set of rules at the 
appellate level[.]”  
  Armitage also asserts that his individual due process 
rights are implicated by the ICA’s holding because he “rel[ied] 
on the circuit court’s implicit ruling th at the [Reinstated] 
Hawaiian [Nation]’s appearance and defense was valid.”  Armitage 
asserts that all relevant actors, including three circuit court 
judges, recognized him as a representative of the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation .  He claims that his defense “ would have been 
entirely different  had he been sued alone, without the 
[Reinstated] Hawaiian [Nation] as a codefendant .”  Finally, 
noting that  his hearing was inextricable with the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation ’s, he argues that if this court vacates the 
judgment against the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, the court must 
also vacate the judgment against him and all other named 
codefendants.   
  In response, A&B argues the ICA properly held that 
Armitage could not represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  As 
a result, A&B argues, the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation  was 
correctly not considered a party to the appeal before the ICA.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
17 
   A&B also asserts that Armitage was not denied due 
process.  A&B cites  Sandy Beach Def ense Fund v. City Council of 
Honolulu , 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989)  for the 
proposition that “[t]he basic elements of procedural due process 
of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a 
meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental 
deprivation of a significant pro perty interest.”   A&B points out  
that Armitage and his codefendants were given an opportunity to 
cross-examine witnesses, present evidence  and arguments , 
question and call their own witnesses, and file closing briefs.  
A&B notes that when it was Armitage’s  turn to present evidence 
on September 19, 2014, he requested a continuance but never 
called any witness or presented any evidence .   
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A.  Pro Se Litigants  
  “Pleadings prepared by pro se litigants should be 
interpreted liberally. ”  Dupree v. Hiraga , 121 Hawai‘i 297, 314, 
219 P.3d 1084, 1101 (2009) .  “The underpinnings of this tenet 
rest on the promotion of equal access to justice  — a pro se 
litigant should not be prevented from proceeding on a pleading 
or letter to an agency if a reasonable , liberal construction of 
the document would permit him or her to do so.”  Waltrip v. TS 
Enters., Inc., 140 Hawai‘i 226, 23 9, 398 P.3d 815, 82 8 (2016). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
18 
 B. Constitutional Law  
 
  “We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent cons titutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case.   Thus, we review questions of 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.”   Onaka v. 
Onaka, 112 Hawai‘i 374, 378, 146 P.3d 89, 93 (2006) (quoting 
State v. Friedman , 93 Hawai‘i 63, 67, 996 P.2d 268,  272 (2000)).   
IV. DISCUSSION  
A. As Non-Attorneys, Noa and Armitage Were Not Authorized to 
Represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation  
 
  As an unincorporated entity, the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation may only appear in court through an attorney 
representative.  Noa a nd Armitage , as non-attorney s, should not 
have been allowed to represent its interests  before the circuit 
court.  The circuit court should have sua sponte  exercised its 
power to prevent the unauthorized practice of law by preventing  
Noa and Armitage from r epresenting the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation. 
  Under HRS § 605 -2, with exceptions not relevant here, 
no person may practice in any court of this state unless 
licensed to do so by the supreme court.  Indeed, the 
unauthorized practice of law is a misdemeanor.   HRS §§ 605 -14, 
605-17 (2016); see also  HRS § 605 -15.2 (2016) (providing  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
19 
 injunctive, declaratory, and criminal remedies for the 
unauthorized practice of law ).  
  The rule against non-attorney  representation applies 
to lay representation of corporations.  “The prevailing rule is 
that a corporation cannot appear and represent itself either in 
proper person or by its officers, but can do so only by an 
attorney admitted to practice law.”  Oahu Plumbing , 60 Haw. at 
374, 590 P.2d at 572; see also  Rowland v. Cal . Men’s Colony , 
Unit II Men’s Advisory Coun cil, 506 U.S. 194, 201 –02, (1993) 
(“It has been the law for the better part of two centuries, for 
example, that a corporation may appear in the federal courts 
only through licensed counsel.”).  
  This rule arises ou t of the necessity of having a 
single person  represent a corporation’s interests.  Oahu 
Plumbing , 60 Haw. at 37 6, 590 P.2d at 57 3.  Corporations are 
“hydra-headed entit [ies]” whose shareholders are immune from 
liability, thus requiring “ a designated spokes man accountable to 
the Court. ”  Id. at 377-78, 590 P.2d at 574 ( citation omitted ); 
see also  Downtown Disposal Servs., Inc. v. City of Chicago , 979 
N.E.2d 50, 54  (Ill. 2012) ( “It is not every case where the views 
or interests of a principal and the corporat ion mesh.  By 
requiring an attorney to represent a corporation in legal 
proceedings, this problem is mitigated. ”).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
20 
 (continued...)    The same  rationale applies with equal force to 
unincorporated entities .  See Rowland, 506 U.S. at 202 (“[T]he 
rationale for that rule app lies equ ally to all artificial 
entities. ”).  As we held in Oahu Plumbing , non-attorney agents 
may not represent corporations in litigation because “ a wholly 
unintended exception to the rules against unauthorized practice 
of law would otherwise result. ”  60 Haw. at 377, 590 P.2d at 574.  
Likewise, a “wholly unintended exception” would arise if non -
attorneys could represent unincorporated associations, but not 
corporations or natural persons, in court.  In addition, the 
weight of authority from other jurisdic tions holds that non -
attorneys are barred from representing any organization in 
court, not just corporations.  See, e.g.,  Church of the New 
Testament v. United States , 783 F.2d 771, 773 (9th Cir. 1986) ; 
State ex rel. Stephan v. Williams , 793 P.2d 234, 24 1-42 (Kan. 
1990); State v. Settle , 523 A.2d 124, 129 ( N.H. 1987).11 
                     
 11  In this case, the ICA relied on Free Church of Ton ga-Kona, 2019 
WL 2285359, at *2 , which held that to the extent “an unincorporated entity 
consisting of multiple members”  would fit the definition of a “nonprofit 
association” under HRS § 429 -1 (2004), it may not appear in court through a 
non-attorney agent.  Armitage , 2020 WL 1227517 , at *1.  HRS § 429-1 defines a 
nonprofit association as  “an unincorporated organization, ot her than one 
created by a trust, consisting of two or more members joined by mutual 
consent for a common, nonprofit purpose. ”   
  However, the bar on non -attorney representation of unincorporated 
entities does not turn on their statutory classification.  W hatever its 
statutory status, an unincorporated entity with multiple constituents may not 
be represented by a non -attorney agent in court.  See Settle, 523 A.2d at 129 
(holding that even though under New Hampshire law, an association may be 
viewed as “mere ly a group of individuals voluntarily joined together to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
21 
    Here, it is undisputed that Noa and Armitage were 
engaged in the practice of law  as representatives of  the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation .  Under Hawai‘i law, Noa and Armitage  
were not authoriz ed to represent its interests  in court .   
  Because Noa and Armitage , as non -lawyers, were not 
authorized to represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation  in court , 
the circuit court should have exercised its inherent power to 
prevent their unauthorized practic e of law.  “Our courts have 
inherent and statutory powers to deal with the unauthorized 
practice of law. . . .  Under those powers, our courts, sua 
sponte, may prevent an unauthorized person from practicing law 
in a case pending before [them].”  Tradewinds  Hotel, 8 Haw. App. 
at 263-64, 799 P.2d at 65 (citations omitted) .  Courts have an 
active role in enforcing HRS §§ 60 5-2 and 605-14.  Thus, they 
not only may but should act sua sponte  to prevent non-attorney s 
from practicing law before them.   
  In particu lar, when confronted with an attempt by a 
layperson to represent an entity, the court should continue the 
proceedings to allow the entity to obtain counsel; if the entity  
fails to do so within a reasonable period, the court should 
enter a default or take o ther remedial action .  See Shasteen, 
                                                                  
(...continued) 
further a common purpose” or “a collection of individuals,” it may not be 
represented by a non -attorney agent in court).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
22 
 Inc. v. Hilton Hawaiian Vill. Joint Venture , 79 Hawai‘i 103, 109, 
899 P.2d 386, 392 (1995)  (“[A] corporation should be allowed an 
opportunity to secure counsel before permitting an entry of 
default against the corporati on or, as in this case, dismissing 
the action[.]”).   
  This was substantially the course of action that the 
district court took in Oahu Plumbing .  In that case, default was 
entered against a corporation, Kona Construction,  Inc., after 
which its non-attorney officer, Walters, appeared before the 
court and moved to set aside the default.  
The court below then informed Walters that it was initially 
inclined to withhold action on the motion  if an attorney 
was obtained to represent Kona Construction.  After 
continued discourse, Walters informed the court that Kona 
Construction did not intend to find an attorney to 
represent it.  The court thereafter ruled that since, in 
its opinion, corporations could not be represented by their 
non-attorney officers, and in view  of the fact that Kona 
Construction did not intend to obtain an attorney, the 
motion could not be granted and that Kona Construction 
would remain in default.  
 
60 Haw. at 374, 590 P.2d at 572.  
  We affirmed , holding, “ Without an attorney, Kona 
Construction was precluded from further participation in the 
proceedings, and the court below acted properly in allowing the 
entry of default to stand. ”  Id. at 380, 590 P.2d at 576.   
Likewise, here, the court should have provided  the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation with an opportunity to obtain an attorney.  If 
it failed to do so, an entry of default would have been *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
23 
  appropriate.  Cf. KSNG Architects, Inc. v. Beasley , 109 S.W.3d 
894, 899 (Tex. App. 2003)  (“The trial court abused its 
discretion in striking [the defendant’s]  answer without giving 
it the opportun ity to hire counsel and replead .”).  In either 
case, the court should not have let Noa and Armitage continue to 
represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation .12 
B. Although We Reject the Nullity Rule, Public Policy and the 
Pervasiveness of the Representation Here Require Vacatur 
 
  Because we conclude that Armitage and Noa should not 
have been allowed to represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation , 
we must decide what effect, if any, their unauthorized 
representation  has on the judgm ent rendered against the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  This is a question of first 
impression before this court.  We hold that although the 
participation of a non-attorney  representative does not 
                     
 12  We note that to the extent Armitage here seeks to vacate the 
judgment aga inst the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, he is arguably attempting to 
represent it on certiorari review.  Although the application is unsigned, the 
accompanying certificate of service is signed by Nelson Armitage as “Minister 
of Foreign Affairs , Kingdom of Hawai‘i.”  We nevertheless reach the merits of 
the application  in the interests of justice , as we did in Oahu Plumbing : 
 
We recognize that the propriety of Walters ’ appearance on 
behalf of Kona Construction on this appeal, as well as in 
all proceedings below , may be seriously questioned in view 
of the very issue raised on this appeal.  However, mindful 
of the significance of this issue, we have allowed this 
case to proceed and have examined the record to determine 
the rights of both Kona Construction and Oahu Plumbing.  
 
60 Haw. at 373 n.1, 590 P.2d at 571 n.1.  (citations omitted).  
  So here, we reach the merits of the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation’s 
application in order to determine the effect of the judgment against it.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
24 
 (continued...)  automatically render a resulting judgment null, the 
pervasive ness of the representation here requires vacatur.  
  Jurisdictions  generally fall into two groups regarding 
the effect of non-attorney  representation.  One group – the so-
called “nullity rule” jurisdictions - holds that these actions 
automatically result in  a nullity .13  The other group assesses 
the circumstances of the non-attorney ’s actions to determine 
whether they should be rendered null or if they can be 
corrected.14   
                     
 13  See Kelly v. Saint Francis Med. Ctr. , 889 N.W.2d 613, 6 21 (Neb. 
2017) (“We regard the unauthorized practice of law as a serious offense, and 
we therefore favor the approach of those jurisdictions that have found that 
any unauthorized practice is a nullity. ”); Naylor Senior Citizens Hous., LP  
v. Side Const r. Co., 423 S.W.3d 238, 246 –47 (Mo. 2014) (en banc)  (“[A]ctions 
constituting the unauthorized practice of law must not be recognized or given 
effect.”); Davenport v. Lee , 72 S.W.3d 85, 93 –94 (Ark. 2002) (“In light of 
our duty to ensure that p arties are represented by people knowledgeable and 
trained in the law, we cannot say that the unauthorized practice of law 
simply results in an amendable defect. ”); Jadair Inc. v. U.S. Fire Ins. Co. , 
562 N.W.2d 401, 411 ( Wis. 1997) (holding notice of appea l not signed by an 
attorney was “fundamentally defective” and could not be saved by amendment) ; 
Land Mgmt., Inc. v. Dep ’t of Env ’t Prot., 368 A.2d 602, 604 (Me. 1977)  
(“Since the plaintiff was not represented by counsel licensed to practice 
law, its compla int was a nullity and was properly dismissed by the [lower 
court].”); Expressway Assocs. II v. Friendl y Ice Cream Corp. , 642 A.2d 62, 6 7 
& n.10 (Conn. App. Ct. 1994) (holding that failure of an attorney to sign 
appeal deprived the court of subject -matter j urisdiction and dismissing the 
appeal). 
 
 14  See In re IFC Credit Corp. , 663 F.3d 315, 321 (7th Cir. 2011)  
(holding debtor could relate back to its bankruptcy filing to correct the 
lack of an attorney signature); Retail Clerks Union Joint Pension Tr . v. 
Freedom Food Ctr., Inc. , 938 F.2d 136, 13 7 (9th Cir. 1991)  (“The fact that a 
non-attorney represented a party in a judicial proceeding does not render the 
resulting judgment void per se.”); Bisher v. Lehigh Valley Health Network, 
Inc., 265 A.3d 383, 408 -10 (Pa. 2021)  (holding that complaint filed by non-
attorney  parent on behalf of son’s estate was not automatically a nullity);  
Rental Prop. Mgmt. Servs. v. Hatcher , 97 N.E.3d 319, 329 (Mass. 2018)  
(holding trial judge has discretion to either dismiss a complai nt improperly 
filed by non-attorney  or allow amendment) ; Downtown Disposal , 979 N.E.2d at 
57 (“We hold there is no automatic nullity rule.  Instead, the circuit court *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
25 
    Preliminar ily, we reject the view of some 
jurisdictions that the absence of an attorn ey, where required, 
is jurisdictional.  See, e.g. , Expressway Assocs. II v. Friendl y 
Ice Cream Corp. , 642 A.2d 62, 67 n.10 (Conn. App.  Ct. 1994).  
HRS § 603 -21.5 (Supp. 2017)  provides that the “circuit courts 
shall have jurisdiction, except as otherwise ex pressly provided 
by statute , of . . . [c]ivil actions and proceedings.”  
(Emphasis added.)   Nothing in HRS §§ 605 -2 or 605 -14 limits that 
                                                                  
(...continued) 
should consider the circumstances of the case and the facts before it in 
determining whet her dismissal is proper. ”); H & H Dev., LLC v. Ramlow , 272 
P.3d 657, 663 (Mont. 2012)  (holding trial court should evaluate circumstances 
to decide if plaintiff could relate back to original complaint improperly 
filed without counsel) ; Save Our Creeks v. Ci ty of Brooklyn Pa rk, 699 N.W.2d 
307, 311 (Minn. 2005)  (holding that “ the lack of an attorney ’s signature is a 
defect that can be cured ”); Moore Energy Res., Inc. v. Pub. Serv. Comm’n , 785 
A.2d 300, 305 (D.C. 2001)  (“[C]ompelling policy reasons exist for fa shioning 
a rule that permits a corporation to cure its petition for review if it was 
not initially signed by counsel. ”); Torrey v. Leesburg Reg’l Med. Ctr. , 769 
So. 2d 1040, 1046  (Fla. 2000)  (“[A] trial court must allow litigants a 
reasonable amount of tim e to amend their complaints with the appearance of 
authorized counsel.   A dismissal should only be granted if the party fails to 
timely amend his or her pleading. ”); Boydston v. Strole Dev. Co ., 969 P.2d 
653, 656 ( Ariz. 1998) (en banc) (“A corporation cann ot appear without a 
lawyer, but when it does so its action is not automatically a nullity.  A 
reasonable opportunity should be given to cure the problem. ” (citation 
omitted)); A-OK Const. Co. v. Castle Const r. Co., 594 So. 2d 53, 54 (Ala. 
1992) (declining to dismiss corporation’s appeal by layperson because 
judgment was “ due to be affirmed on the merits ” so dismissal “c ould lead only 
to . . . a pointless rebriefing of the case ”); Starrett v. Shepard , 606 P.2d 
1247, 1253 –54 (Wyo. 1980)  (where non-attorney  “representation was very 
limited,” default against a corporation was not required) ; Hamilton Livery 
Leasing, LLC v. State , 58 N.Y.S.3d 624, 628 (N.Y. App. Div. 2017)  (“[T]he 
irregularity of claimant ’s initial filing was one that the Court of Claims 
could hav e disregarded, given counsel ’s subsequent appearance on behalf of 
claimant, by granting so much of claimant ’s motion to amend the claim as 
added counsel ’s signature [.]”); First Wholesale Cleaners Inc. v. Donegal Mut. 
Ins. Co. , 792 A.2d 325, 334 (Md.  Ct. Spec. App. 2002)  (declining to dismiss 
appeal filed by non-attorney  where corporation subsequently obtained 
counsel) ; Peachtree Plastics, Inc. v. Verhine , 528 S.E.2d 837, 837 –38 (Ga. 
Ct. App. 2000) (holding corporation, through attorney, could relate back to  
answer filed by non-attorney  president) . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
26 
  jurisdiction  or the jurisdiction of the courts of appeals .  
Further, our courts have reached the merits of appeals by non-
attorney s as to whether they could represent entities in court.  
See Oahu Plumbing , 60 Haw. at 373 n.1, 590 P.2d at 571 n.1; 
Tradewinds Hotel , 8 Haw. App. at 259 -60, 799 P.2d at 63 -64 
(considering appeal of non-attorney  trustee on the issue of 
whether he could represent trust).15  It would not be possible 
for our courts  to hear those cases if the lack of an attorney 
representative deprived us of jurisdiction.  Thus, we have 
implicitly rejected this view.  
  Moreover, we do not view the nullity rule as nec essary 
in every case to promote the policies behind the ban on the 
unauthorized practice of law .   
  This holding requires us to first examine the policies 
underlying the proscription agai nst non-attorney  representation .  
We have reasoned that a corporatio n must be represented by 
counsel because, as an artificial entity, it can only act 
through a representative; in turn, that representative must be 
an attorney “ to protect the courts and to further the efficient 
administration of justice. ”  Oahu Plumbing , 60 Haw. at 376, 590 
                     
 15  We note that these cases involved non -attorneys appealing with 
respect to their ability to represent entities or, as here, the result of 
that representation ; we do not suggest a broader right for laypersons to  
represent entities on appeal.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
27 
 P.2d at 573.   In addition to protecting the courts, we have 
noted that the statutes criminalizing unauthorized practice 
“were intended to protect the public ‘ against inc ompetence or 
improper activity.’”  Fought & Co. v. Steel Eng’ g & Erec tion, 
Inc., 87 Hawai‘i 37, 45, 951 P.2d 487, 495 (1998)  (quoting S. 
Stand. Comm. Rep.  No. 700, in 1955 Senate Journal,  at 661; H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep.  No. 612, in 1955 House Journal, at 782).  
  Other jurisdictions have similarly held that the ban 
on non-attorney representation serves  
(1) to protect citizens from injury caused by the ignorance 
and lack of skill on the part of those who are untrained 
and inexperienced in the law, (2) to protect the courts in 
their administration of justice from interference by t hose 
who are unlicensed and are not officers of the court, and 
(3) to prevent the unscrupulous from using the legal system 
for their own purposes to the harm of the system and those 
who may unknowingly rely upon them.  
 
Kelly v. Saint Francis Med. Ctr. , 889 N.W.2d 613, 619  (Neb. 
2017) (quoting Waite v. Carpenter , 496 N.W.2d 1, 6 (Neb. Ct. 
App. 1992)); see also  Ex parte Ghafary , 738 So. 2d 778, 779 
(Ala. 1998)  (adopting the same rationale).  
  Thus, corporations and other entities must be 
represented by an att orney in order to protect both the courts 
and the public from the unskilled and the unscrupulous.   Among 
the members of the public sought to be protected by the rule are 
litigants themselves, who may suffer prejudice from “the 
mistakes of the ignorant and . . . injuries caused by the 
unscrupulous.”  Gomes v. Roney , 151 Cal. Rptr. 756 , 757 (Cal. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
28 
 Ct. App. 1979) .  Courts and opposing parties may also be 
impacted  by “confusion aris[ing]  because of unintelligible, 
untimely or inappropriate documents drawn by the  layman.”  
Rogers v. Mun. Ct. , 243 Cal. Rptr. 530, 532 ( Cal. Ct. App. 
1988). 
  For the following  reasons, we hold that the nullity 
approach is not necessary to serve these policy goals.  
  First, there are other remedies besides nullification 
that deter the  unauthorized practice of law.  See Torrey v. 
Leesburg Reg ’l Med. Ctr. , 769 So. 2d 1040, 1045 (Fla. 2000)  
(noting in the context of out -of-state attorneys practicing in 
Florida without a license that there are “ better suited 
mechanisms available to discour age the unlicensed practice of 
law” such as  injunctive relief and  attorney discipline).  For 
example, the attorney general or any bar association may bring a 
civil action, HRS § 605 -15.1 (2016), and those guilty of 
unauthorize d practice of law may incur criminal penalties , HRS § 
605-17.  Courts also  can use their “inherent and statutory 
powers” to craft appropriate remedies, and opposing parties have 
standing to request that the court enjoin unauthorized practice .  
Tradewinds Hotel , 8 Haw. App. at 263 -64, 799 P.2d at 65; see 
also Rental Prop. Mgmt. Servs. v. Hatcher , 97 N.E.3d 319, 329 
(Mass. 2018) (holding that although a “court has no discretion *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
29 
 to tolerate” unauthorized practice, a “judge does have the 
discretion  . . . to determine the appropriate remedy” ).  
  Second, the nullity approach is harsher than necessary 
to achieve its ends.  Rather than punishing the culpable  party – 
the purported representative – it may punish  those who were 
purported to be represented.  See Bisher v. Lehigh Valley Health 
Network, Inc. , 265 A.3d 383 , 409 (Pa. 2021)  (noting that an 
inadvertent violation by a corporate officer could prejudice 
thousands of stockholders).  “[I]t would be ironic to protect 
the public from the unauthorized practice of law by adopting a 
remedy that can  end up doing more damage than the infraction 
itself.”  Id. at 408-09.  Moreover, even under the remedial rule 
we announce today, any action infected by non-attorney  
representation might be voided on appeal.  Thus, all parties 
have an incentive to prevent unauthorized practice of law in 
order to avoid duplicative litigation.   In other words, the 
nullity rule sweeps too broadly.  
  Lastly, the nullity rule cuts against our policy of 
affording litigants the opportunity to be heard on the merits 
whenever possib le, which is especially pertinent in pro se 
cases.  See Erum v. Llego , 147 Hawai‘i 368, 380 -81, 465 P.3d 815, 
827-28 (2020).  Other courts have cited similar policies  as a 
reason to reject the nullity approach.  See Bisher, 265 A.3d at *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
30 
  408 (“[Although t]he  bright-line rule is attractive  . . . our 
preference  for adjudicating cases on the merits countenances 
against that temptation.”); Moore Energy Res., Inc. v. Pub. 
Serv. Comm’n , 785 A.2d 300, 305 (D.C. 2001)  (citing the 
preference for resolution on the meri ts as one of several  
reasons for rejecting the nullity rule).   
  For all these reasons, we reject the nullity approach. 
Instead, we find persuasive the logic of the Illinois Supreme 
Court in Downtown Disposal : 
[B]ecause the consequences of applying the nu llity rule to 
a case can be harsh, it should be invoked only where it 
fulfills the purposes of protecting both the public and the 
integrity of the court system from the actions of the 
unlicensed, and where no other alternative remedy is 
possible.  
 
979 N.E. 2d at 57. 
  In sum, courts should address the effects of non-
attorney  representation on a case -by-case basis with an eye 
toward vindicating the policy aims of HRS §§ 605 -2 and 605 -14, 
namely protecting the courts and the public, including the 
litigants, fr om the conduct of non-attorney s.  In conducting 
this analysis, courts should consider among other relevant 
circumstances : 
whether the nonattorney’ s conduct is done without knowledge 
that the action was improper, whether the corporation acted 
diligently in correcting the mistake by obtaining c ounsel, 
whether the nonattorney’ s participation is minimal, and 
whether the participation results in prejudice to the 
opposing party.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
31 
 Id. (adding that a court “ may properly dismiss an action where 
the nonlawyer ’s participation on behalf of the corporation is 
substantial, or the corporation does not take prompt action to 
correct the defect ”); see also  Save Our Creeks v. City of 
Brooklyn Park , 699 N.W.2d 307, 311 (Minn. 2005) (adopting these 
factors); H & H Dev., LLC v. R amlow, 272 P.3d 657, 662 (Mont. 
2012) (concurring with Save Our Creeks ).   
   Here, the se factors require that the circuit court’s 
judgment  be vacated  as to the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation . 
  First, we find it significant that Armitage and Noa 
were apparent ly unaware that they were not authorized  to 
represent the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  Where a violation is 
knowing or intentional  and the non-attorney  party is attempting 
to “game the system,” they should not be allowed to benefit from 
their own wrongful conduct.  Rental Prop. Mgmt. , 97 N.E.3d at 
329; cf. Scandia Down Corp. v. Euroquilt, Inc. , 772 F.2d 1423, 
1427 (7th Cir. 1985)  (“A corporation may not grant itself a 
continuance by manipulating things so that it has no counsel. ”). 
That is not the case here .  The circuit court  acquiesced to  the 
representation, and A&B did not challenge it  until the resulting 
judgment was appealed.  Under these circumstances, it was 
reasonable for Noa and Armitage to believe they were within 
their rights to represent the Rein stated Hawaiian Nation.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
32 
   The second factor – whether the non-attorney  party 
acted diligently in obtaining counsel – does not apply to this 
case.  At no relevant point were Noa and Armitage made aware 
that they were not authorized to represent the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation  and given an opportunity to seek counsel.  
  Third, the non-attorney s’ participation here was not 
minimal, but rather  continuous and pervasiv e.  Over the course 
of a years -long proceeding  before multiple circuit court judges, 
Noa and Ar mitage were allowed to act as an attorney would on 
behalf of the R einstated Hawaiian Nation by  filing motions, 
making arguments, cross -examining witnesses, and challenging 
evidence.   
  The final factor weighs in favor of A&B.  A&B would 
indeed be prejudic ed by having to relitigate this matter, a case 
it has already litigated  for the better part of a decade.  While 
the prejudice to A&B is substantial, it is outweighed by the 
other three factors weighing in favor of vacatur.  
  In addition, the  policies behin d the prohibition 
against non-attorney  representation  support vacatur here .  Many 
of the “harmful consequences of unlicensed law practice are 
evident here ,” particularly “ confusion aris [ing] because of 
unintelligible, untimely or inappropriate documents dr awn by the 
layman.”  Rogers, 243 Cal. Rptr. at 532.  Noa and Armitage’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
33 
 lack of training and accountability to the court resulted in 
delays, obscure or confusing filings, and the outlay of 
considerable judicial resources.  
  The prohibition also seeks to p rotect the public; in 
this case, that included the members of the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation.  These members were prejudiced when judgment was entered 
against the organization of which they are a  part without it 
ever having benefited from the assistance of  counsel.  While we 
do not judge their likelihood of success, Noa and Armitage 
sought to make  arguments here that would have benefited from the 
guidance of a trained attorney.  There is no doubt that several 
of the dangers contemplated by HRS §§ 605-2 and 605-14 were 
present in this case.  
  In sum, the fact that the representation was 
apparently unwitting, the pervasiveness of the representation, 
and the policy goals behind HRS §§ 605 -2 and 605 -14 require 
vacatur here.   
  In light of this conclusion, the I CA erred by 
dismissing Armitage and Noa’s appeal on behalf of the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation without giving them an opportunity to cure the 
defect by hiring counsel .  The ICA had at least two options it 
could properly have taken.  First, it could have addr essed the 
effect of the non-attorney  representation  on the circuit court’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
34 
 judgment below , as we do here and as the ICA itself did in  
Tradewinds Hotel, 8 Haw. App. at 260, 799 P.2d at 64 ( reaching 
the merits of a non-attorney ’s appeal on the issue of wheth er 
the court below properly enjoined him from representing a 
trust).  Second, it could have ordered the Reinstated Hawaiian 
Nation to refile an opening brief signed by counsel, subject to 
dismissal  only if an amended brief was not filed within a 
reasonable  period.  See Shasteen , 79 Hawai‘i at 109, 899 P.2d at 
392; Boydston v. Strole Dev. Co. , 969 P.2d 653, 656 ( Ariz. 1998) 
(en banc) (holding that non-attorney  who filed appeal on a 
corporation’s behalf should have been given opportunity to cure 
the defect).   However, in light of our policy in favor of 
hearing cases on the merits wherever possible and our liberal 
construction of pro se filings, Erum, 147 Hawai‘i at 380-81, 465 
P.3d at 827 -28, the ICA should not have dismissed the appeal 
without giving the Rein stated Hawaiian Nation a reasonable 
opportunity to obtain counsel.  
  For this reason, we vacate the ICA’s judgment to the 
extent that it affirmed the circuit court’s judgment against the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  We further vacate the circuit  
court’s judgment against the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
35 
 C. Armitage’s Due Process Rights Were Not Violated 
 
  Armitage also argues that his due process rights were 
violated because, relying on “the circuit court’s implicit 
ruling” that he could represent the Reinst ated Hawaiian Nation, 
he did not present any personal  defenses, but rather focused his 
arguments on the rights of the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  He 
argues that his “ defense strategy would have been entirely 
different  had he been sued alone, without the [Reinstated] 
Hawaiian  [Nation] as a codefendant  – i.e., [Armitage’s] entire 
defense was undermined. ”  In addition, he argues that “t his is 
not a case where the [Reinstated] Hawaiian [Nation] , its 
evidence, and testimony,  etc., can be neatly separated and 
stricken from the record, as [Armitage’s]  ‘hearing’ is 
inextricable from that of the [Reinstated] Hawaiian [Nation] .”  
Therefore, if the circuit court’s judgment is vacated as to the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, Armitage argues it must also be 
vacated as to him.   
  The Hawaiʻi Constitution provides, “No person shall be 
deprived of life , liberty  or property without due process of 
law[.]”  Haw. Const. art. I, §  5.  The United States 
Constitution provides similar protections .  U.S. Const. amend. 
XIV.  “The basic elements of proc edural due process of law 
require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
36 
 time and in a meaningful manner [.]”  Sandy Beach Def. Fund , 70 
Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261; see also  Mathews v. Eldridge , 424 
U.S. 319, 333 (1976) (“The fundamental re quirement of due 
process is the opportunity to be heard ‘at a meaningful time and 
in a meaningful manner. ’” (quoting Armstrong v. Manzo , 380 U.S. 
545, 552 (1965))).   
  An examination of the record reveals that Armitage was 
afforded a full opportunity to b e heard at a meaningful time and 
in a meaningful manner.   Armitage appeared at the relevant 
hearings and was given ample opportunities by the circuit court 
to cross -examine witnesses, present evidence, question and call 
witnesses, and present arguments ora lly and in writing .  And, as 
A&B points out, although Armitage was given an opportunity to 
present evidence after A&B rested in the preliminary injunction 
proceedings, he instead rested without putting forth any 
evidence or calling any witnesses.   Armitage  thus had the 
opportunity  to participate fully in the court proceedings.  
  Although Armitage contends in his application that he 
focused his defenses on the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation , the 
record does not disclose  any confusion during the proceedings 
that Armitage was being sued.  For example, at the January 15, 
2014 hearing, the court addressed Armitage and asked him if he 
wanted “to vacate the default that was entered against you .”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
37 
 (Emphasis added.)  Armitage consistently identified himself as a 
defendan t pro se in filings .  In at least one instance, he 
signed a filing twice, once above the title, “REINSTATED 
HAWAIIAN GOVERNMENT[ ,] By its Minister, Nelson Armitage,” and 
then again above the title, “N ELSON ARMITAGE, Individually ,” 
indicating an understandi ng of his dual role as representative 
of the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation and a defendant in his own 
right.  In other words, he was on notice and , based on his 
conduct, in fact  knew that he faced liabili ty for the relief 
sought.   
  Additionally, while Armitage points out that he did 
not raise any “personal defenses to the action,” he does not say 
what defenses he might have raised that would have been 
applicable to him, but not the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  To 
the contrary, the arguments that he and Noa r aised on behalf of 
the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation amount ed to the assertion  that 
A&B did not own the contested land.  This argument applies 
equally to Armitage and all his codefendants.  In other words, 
although he generally claims his defense was geared t oward the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, he does not say how it would have 
been different if he had been aware that he could not represent 
the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation in court .  As we noted in Sandy 
Beach Def ense Fund, one of the considerations when weighi ng *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
38 
 procedural due process arguments is “ the probable value, if any, 
of additional or alternative procedural safeguards .”  70 Haw. at 
378, 773 P.2d at 261 (citing Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335).  Here, 
Armitage does not establish that the alternative procedural 
safeguard of being barred from representing the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation would have served to protect his right to due 
process of law.   
  In sum, although Armitage claims his defense was 
undermined, nothing prevented him from mounting his own 
arguments, given that the record indicates he understood that he 
was a defendant in his own right.  Thus, Armitage was afford ed 
the “full rights of due process present in a court of law, 
including presentation of witnesses and cross -examination .”  Id. 
at 378, 773 P.2 d at 261.  Armitage’s improper representation of 
the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation  did not render the judgment 
against him in his individual capacity improper.   
  Finally, we reject the argument that because we vacate 
the judgment as to the Reinstated Hawaii an Nation, we must 
vacate the judgment against Armitage.  While the Reinstated 
Hawaiian Nation was not represented by licensed counsel, as 
required, Armitage appeared in person and properly represented 
himself pro se.  See HRS § 605-2 (providing that “n othing in 
this chapter shall prevent any person, plaintiff, defendant, or *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
39 
 accused, from appearing in person before any court, and there 
prosecuting or defending that person ’s, plaintiff ’s, 
defendant ’s, or accused ’s own cause, without the aid of legal 
counsel”).  Armitage’s representation of himself did not 
implicate the same policy concerns as his an d Noa’s 
representation of the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation.  In short, 
while Armitage may have shared defenses and evidence with the 
Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, the error that infected the 
organization’s representation did not infect Armitage’s hearing, 
and we see no reason to vacate the judgment against him 
individually.  Thus, while we vacate the judgment below as to 
the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation, we affirm the jud gment as to all 
other defendants.  
V. CONCLUSION  
  For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s April 
14, 2020  judgment on appeal to the extent it affirmed  the 
circuit court’s September 16, 2016 a mended final judgment  as to 
the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation , and vacate the circuit court’s 
amended final judgment  as to the Reinstated Hawaiian Nation .  
However, we affirm the circuit court’s judgment  as to Armitage   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
40 
 and all other defendants .  We remand this matter to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.    
Nelson K. Armitage, Sr. 
petitioner pro se   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
        
Deborah K. Wright, 
Keith D. Kirschbraun, 
and Douglas R. Wright 
for respondent     
  
 
        