           
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 ---o0o---
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
    
 
   
 
        
         
 
       Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-21-0000097 20-MAR-2026 08:12 AM Dkt. 11 OP 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI‘I  
NAHO  YAMAGUCHI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
TITLE  GUARANTY  ESCROW  SERVICES,  INC.,  a  Hawaiʻi  corporation,  
Petitioner/Defendant/Cross-Claimant/  
Third-Party  Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
and  
 
 MARTELL  CAPITAL  GROUP,  LLC,  doing  business  as  IRONGATE;  
THE  BLACKSTONE  GROUP,  L.P.,  a  Delaware  Limited   Partnership,   
Respondents/Defendants/Cross-Claim  Defendants-Appellees,  
 
and  
 
PACREP  LLC,  a  Delaware   limited   liability   company,   
Respondent/Third-Party   Defendant.    
SCWC-21-0000097
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-21-0000097; CASE NO. 1CC181000539) 
MARCH 20, 2026 
McKENNA, ACTING, C.J., EDDINS, GINOZA, AND DEVENS, JJ., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE JOHNSON, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY DEVENS, J.            
 
 
 
 2  
         
       
          
        
         
        
           
            
         
          
 
         
            
        
       
         
        
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
This case involves a 2013 condominium sales contract (Sales 
Contract) between purchaser Naho Yamaguchi (Yamaguchi) and 
seller PACREP LLC (PACREP). That Sales Contract incorporated a 
separate escrow agreement (Escrow Agreement) executed by PACREP 
and Title Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc. (Title Guaranty), the 
escrow company facilitating the condominium sale. Title 
Guaranty was not a party to the Sales Contract, and Yamaguchi 
was not a party to the Escrow Agreement. This appeal arises 
from Yamaguchi’s claims against Title Guaranty for breach of 
contract and breach of fiduciary duty relating to the Escrow 
Agreement. 
In February 2016, Yamaguchi defaulted on the Sales Contract 
after failing to make the closing payment on the purchase of a 
condominium unit in the Ritz-Carlton Residences, Waikiki Beach 
condominium development (Ritz-Carlton Waikiki). The Escrow 
Agreement between PACREP and Title Guaranty, which did not 
incorporate the Sales Contract, provided, in pertinent part, 
that in the event of a purchaser’s default, 
[e]scrow  shall  thereafter  treat  all  funds  of  the  purchaser  
paid  on  account  of  such  purchaser’s  sales  contract  as  funds  
of  Seller  and  not  as  funds  of  the  purchaser.   Thereafter,  
such  funds  shall  be  free  of  the  escrow  established  by  this  
Agreement  and  shall  be  held  by  Escrow  for  the  account  of  
Seller.   Upon  written  request  by  Seller,  Escrow  shall  pay  
such  funds  to  Seller,  less  any  escrow  cancellation  fee.  
(Emphases added.) Separately, Section D.38 of the Sales            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
  
        
          
        
           
          
          
       Contract provided that upon default, if Yamaguchi had already 
paid more than fifteen percent of the purchase price into 
escrow, PACREP was entitled to liquidated damages equaling 
fifteen percent of the sales price or the amount of damages 
PACREP incurred as a result of Yamaguchi’s breach, whichever was 
greater. At the time of default, Yamaguchi’s escrow payments 
exceeded fifty percent of the purchase price. 
Upon  Yamaguchi’s  default,  PACREP  sent  Yamaguchi  notice  of  
her  breach.   PACREP  then  sent  Yamaguchi  two  contract  termination   
letters  after  Yamaguchi  failed  to  cure  her  default.   The  first  
termination  letter,  copied  to  Title  Guaranty,  informed  Yamaguchi   
that  PACREP  had  “elected  to  exercise  its  right,  pursuant  to  
Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  to  terminate  the  Sales  
Contract  and  retain  fifteen  percent  (15%)  of  the  Total  Purchase  
Price  as  liquidated  damages.”   (Emphases  added  and  omitted.)   
The  second  termination  letter,  also  copied  to  Title  Guaranty,  
notified  Yamaguchi  that  PACREP  had  “elected  to  exercise  its  
right,  pursuant  to  Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  to  
terminate  the  Sales  Contract  and  retain  all  deposits  pursuant  to  
the  Sales  Contract.”   (Emphases  added  and  omitted.)   Both  
termination  letters  stated  that  PACREP  was  “hereby  notifying  
Title  Guaranty  Escrow  Services,  Inc.  to  cancel  escrow  and  to  
release  said  funds  and  accrued  interest  to  Seller.”   In  April  
3
            
 
 
 
 4         
   
         
       
         
          
        
   
 
            
           
  
 
        
  
              
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2016, Title Guaranty disbursed the balance of Yamaguchi’s 
deposit to PACREP. 
Pursuant to the remedy provisions of the Sales Contract, 
Yamaguchi subsequently filed for arbitration against PACREP, 
contesting the amount PACREP refunded her from the escrow 
deposits. Yamaguchi was awarded damages on a conversion claim, 
less PACREP’s entitlement to liquidated damages. PACREP 
satisfied the judgment. 
Separately,  Yamaguchi   filed  a  complaint  in  the  present  
action  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  First  Circuit  (circuit  court)  
against  Title  Guaranty,  asserting  breach  of  contract  and  breach  
of  fiduciary  duty  claims.1  
Title  Guaranty  moved  for  summary   judgment   on  Yamaguchi’s  
claims  and  Yamaguchi   cross-moved   for  partial   summary   judgment.    
The  circuit   court  granted   Title  Guaranty’s   motion,   denied  
Yamaguchi’s   cross-motion,   and  awarded   attorney   fees  to  Title  
Guaranty.2   Yamaguchi   appealed   to  the  Intermediate  Court  of  
Appeals  (ICA),  which  affirmed   the  circuit  court’s   order  denying   
Yamaguchi’s   motion  for  partial   summary   judgment.3   However,   the  
1 Yamaguchi also alleged claims of conversion and unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices (UDAP) in violation of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 480. 
2 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. 
3 The ICA also affirmed summary judgment in favor of Title Guaranty on 
Yamaguchi’s conversion and UDAP claims.            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 5          
         
            
          
          
         
            
          
          
           
      
 With  respect  to  Yamaguchi’s  breach  of  contract  claim,  Title  
Guaranty  had  a  legal  obligation  to  follow  the  terms  of  the  
Escrow  Agreement,  to  which  Yamaguchi  assented  in  the  Sales  
Contract,  and  which  Title  Guaranty  fulfilled.   Upon  a  
purchaser’s  default,  Title  Guaranty  was  required,  pursuant  to  
the  Escrow  Agreement,  to  “treat  all  funds  of  the  purchaser  paid  
on  account  of  such  purchaser’s  sales  contract  as  funds  of  
Seller,”  and  to  “pay  such  funds  to  Seller”  upon  the  seller’s  
“written  request.”   (Emphases  added.)  ICA vacated summary judgment as to Yamaguchi’s breach of 
contract and breach of fiduciary duty claims, after concluding 
there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Title 
Guaranty breached the Escrow Agreement and its fiduciary duty to 
Yamaguchi when it disbursed the entirety of her escrow deposit 
to PACREP. Citing  Hawaiʻi Revised  Statutes (HRS)  § 449-16 
(2013),  the   ICA  concluded  that  “Title  Guaranty  had  ‘the  
responsibility  of  a  trustee  for  all  moneys’  it  received  from  
Yamaguchi.”   (Emphasis  added.)  
We hold
 that Yamaguchi failed to raise a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether Title Guaranty breached the Escrow 
Agreement. Accordingly, we also hold that Yamaguchi failed to 
raise a genuine issue as to whether Title Guaranty breached its 
fiduciary duty under HRS § 449-16.            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 6         
           
         
            
         
           Yamaguchi defaulted. PACREP sent the required written 
notices to Yamaguchi. With the terms of the Escrow Agreement 
met, Title Guaranty released the entire escrow deposit to 
PACREP. Thus, there is no genuine issue of material fact as 
Title Guaranty complied with the plain and unambiguous language 
of the Escrow Agreement. Therefore, as to Yamaguchi’s breach of 
contract  claim,  we  vacate  the  ICA’s  decision  and  judgment  and  
affirm  the  circuit  court’s  order  granting  summary  judgment  for  
Title  Guaranty.  
As  to  Yamaguchi’s  claim  that  Title  Guaranty  breached  its  
fiduciary  duty,  we  also  vacate  the  ICA’s  decision  and  judgment  
and  affirm  the  circuit  court’s  order  granting  summary  judgment   
for  Title  Guaranty.   As  an  escrow  depository,  Title  Guaranty  
owed  a  fiduciary  duty  to  Yamaguchi  for  the  deposits  made.   
However,  Title  Guaranty’s  fiduciary  duty  was  to  “‘comply  
strictly  with  the  provisions’  of  the  parties’  escrow  agreement  
or  instructions.”   Hancock  v.  Kulana  Partners,  LLC,  145  Hawai‘i  
374,  383,  452  P.3d  371,  380  (2019)  (quoting  DeMello  v.  Home  
Escrow,  Inc.,  4  Haw.  App.  41,  47,  659  P.2d  759,  763  (App.  
1983)).   See  also  HRS  §  449-1  (2013)  (stating  that  acts  by  an  
escrow  depository  are  to  be  performed  “in  accordance  with  the  
terms  of  the  agreement  between  the  parties  to  the  transaction”);  
and  HRS  §  449-16  (explaining  that  an  escrow  depository  “shall             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
         
      have the responsibility of a trustee for all moneys, other 
consideration, or instruments received by it”). 
Title  Guaranty  strictly  complied  with  the  terms  of  the  
Escrow  Agreement  and,  therefore,  Title  Guaranty  did  not  breach  
its  fiduciary  duty  to  Yamaguchi.   In  reference  to  PACREP’s  first  
letter  to  Yamaguchi  indicating  its  election  to  retain  fifteen  
percent  of  Yamaguchi’s  deposit  as  damages,  and  PACREP’s  second  
letter  indicating  its  election  to  retain  all  of  Yamaguchi’s  
deposit,  the  ICA  concluded  that  Title  Guaranty  breached  its  
fiduciary  duty  after  receiving  “conflicting  instructions  from  
[PACREP]  before  it  disbursed  Yamaguchi’s  funds.”   Even  if  the  
two  letters  were  interpreted  to  be  in  conflict,  read  in  the  
light  most  favorable  to  Yamaguchi,  the  Escrow  Agreement  clearly  
and  unambiguously  stated  that  in  the  event  of  a  purchaser’s  
default,  Title  Guaranty  was  required  to  treat  “all  funds”  in  
escrow  as  property  of  the  seller,  and  that  “such  funds  shall  be  
free  of  the  escrow  established  by  this  Agreement.”   Thus,  
PACREP’s  two  termination  letters  did  not  conflict  with  the  
relevant,  controlling  provision  of  the  Escrow  Agreement  with  
which  Title  Guaranty  complied.  
Yamaguchi  also  appealed  the  circuit  court’s  award  of  
attorney  fees  and  costs  to  Title  Guaranty,  which  the  ICA  did  not  
reach  after  concluding  that  Title  Guaranty  was  no  longer  the  
7
            
 
 
 
 8         
          
           
          
           
           
    
 
Pursuant  to  the  Escrow  Agreement,  Title  Guaranty  was  to  
“receive,  deposit  and  hold  in  escrow  and  disburse  .  .  .  all  
payments  received  by  Escrow  under  sales  contracts  made  by  
Seller[.]”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prevailing  party.   Title  Guaranty  does  not  raise  attorney  fees  
on  certiorari.   Because  the  issue  of  attorney  fees  is  not  
properly  before  this  court,  we  remand  the  case  to  the  ICA  to  
determine  whether  the  circuit  court  abused  its  discretion  in  
awarding  attorney  fees  and  costs  to  Title  Guaranty.  
II.  BACKGROUND  
A.  Escrow  Agreement   
The  Escrow  Agreement  was  executed  by  PACREP  and  Title  
Guaranty  in  February  2013.  
Section C of
 the Escrow Agreement’s “Recitals” provided: 
Seller intends to enter into sales contracts for the sale 
of units in the Project under the Public Report, the terms 
of which sales contracts will provide for payment of the 
purchase price and closing costs to be made to Escrow, to 
be held and disbursed by Escrow pursuant to the terms and 
provisions of this Agreement. 
In  the  event  of  a  purchaser’s  default,  Section  12  of  the  
Escrow  Agreement  stated  in  relevant  part:  
If  Seller  subsequently  certifies  in  writing  to  Escrow  that  
Seller  has  terminated  the  sales  contract  in  accordance  with  
the  terms  thereof  and  provides  to  Escrow  copies  of  all  such  
notices  of  termination  and  proof  of  receipt  sent  to  the  
purchaser,  Escrow  shall  thereafter  treat  all  funds  of  the  
purchaser  paid  on  account  of  such  purchaser’s  sales  
contract  as  funds  of  Seller  and  not  as  funds  of  the  
purchaser.   Thereafter,  such  funds  shall  be  free  of  the  
escrow  established  by  this  Agreement  and  shall  be  held  by  
Escrow  for  the  account  of  Seller.   Upon  written  request  by             
 
 
 
 9   
     
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Seller,  Es crow  shall  pay  such  funds  to  Seller,  less  any  
escrow  cancellation  fee.   Escrow  shall  thereupon  be  
released  from  any  further  duties  or  liability  hereunder  
with  respect  to  such  funds  and  such  purchaser.  
(Emphases added.)  
The Escrow Agreement further provided: 
14.  Protection  of  Escrow.   In  consideration  of  Escrow  
acting  as  escrow  holder  hereunder,  it  is  agreed  that  Escrow  
is  relieved  from  all  liability  for  acting  in  accordance  
with  the  terms  hereof,  notwithstanding  a  notice  to  the  
contrary  by  Seller  or  any  purchaser  or  third  person[.]  
 . . . .  
15.  Binding  Effect.   This  Agreement  shall  be  binding  
upon,  shall  apply  to  and  shall  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the  
parties  hereto  and  their  respective  heirs,  devisees,  
personal  representatives,  successors  in  trust,  and  assigns,  
and  shall  upon  its  acceptance  by  a  given  purchaser  (which  
shall  automatically  occur  upon  Seller’s  execution  of  a  
sales  contract),  also  be  binding  upon  and  inure  to  the  
benefit  of  such  purchaser,  his  or  her  heirs,  personal  
representatives,  devisees,  successors  and  permitted  
assigns.  
(Emphases added.) 
B.  Sales  Contract   to  Purchase   Ritz-Carlton   Waikiki   Condominium   
Unit  
In  September   2013,  Yamaguchi   entered   into  the  Sales  
Contract   with  PACREP  to  purchase   Unit  1215  (Unit)  in  the  Ritz-
Carlton  Waikiki  for  a  sale  price  of  $1,182,800.00,  to  be  paid  in  
installments.  
Section  13  of  the  Sales  Contract  provided  that  the  Escrow  
Agreement  between  Title  Guaranty  and  PACREP  would  be  
incorporated  into  the  Sales  Contract,  stating,  in  relevant  part,  
Seller  has  entered  into  the  Escrow  Agreement  with  Escrow,  
which  by  this  reference  is  incorporated  herein  and  made  a   
part  hereof,  covering  the  deposit  with  Escrow  of  all  funds  
paid  by  Purchaser  under  this  Sales  Contract  and  the             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
            
         
          
        
        
         
         
 
 
 10     . . . . 
 
    
             
        
         
           
         
         
           
           
        
           
          
           
           
         
         
         
        
        
           
         
           
           disbur
sement of such funds by Escrow. All payments to be 
made hereunder, other than the Initial Deposit made through 
the Project Broker, shall be paid by Purchaser to Escrow 
pursuant to the Escrow Agreement. Purchaser hereby 
acknowledges that Purchaser has examined and approves the 
terms of the Escrow Agreement, and hereby assumes the 
benefits and obligations set forth therein. . . . 
.  .  .  SELLER  AND  PURCHASER  HEREBY  IRREVOCABLY  INSTRUCT  
ESCROW  TO  MAKE  DISBURSEMENTS  FROM  PURCHASER’S  DEPOSITS  AS  
MAY  BE  PERMITTED  BY  THE  ESCROW  AGREEMENT.   SELLER  AND  
PURCHASER  HEREBY  AGREE  THAT  ESCROW  IS  RELIEVED  FROM  ALL  
LIABILITY  FOR  ACTING  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  TERMS  OF  THIS  
SECTION,  NOTWITHSTANDING  A  NOTICE  TO  THE  CONTRARY  BY  
SELLER,  PURCHASER,  OR  ANY  OTHER  PARTY  OR  THIRD  PERSON;  
PROVIDED,  HOWEVER,  THAT  ESCROW  SHALL  NOT  BE  RELIEVED  FROM  
ANY  LIABILTY  ARISING  OUT  OF  OR  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  ITS  OWN  
INTENTIONAL,  GROSS  NEGLIGENCE,  OR  RECKLESS  ACTS  OR  
OMISSIONS.  
 
(Emphases added and omitted.) 
Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract  provided  that  in  the  
event  of  a  purchaser’s  default,  the  seller’s  remedies  were,  in  
relevant  part,  as  follows:  
In the event purchaser . . . shall fail to comply with or 
perform any of the covenants, agreements or other 
obligations to be performed by purchaser under the terms 
and provisions of this sales contract, . . . seller shall 
provide purchaser with written notice of such default or 
breach and the opportunity for purchaser to remedy such 
default or breach within twenty (20) days after the date of 
receipt of such notice. If purchaser has not remedied such 
default or breach within such twenty (20)-day period, 
seller shall be entitled to any remedy available in law or 
in equity including . . . termination of this sales 
contract upon written notice to purchaser . . . . [I]f 
purchaser loses its rights and interest in the unit as a 
result of purchaser’s breach or default under this sales 
contract after fifteen percent (15%) of the purchase price 
has been paid by purchaser, (exclusive of any interest 
accrued thereon), seller shall refund to purchaser any 
amount that remains after subtracting (A) fifteen percent 
(15%) of the purchase price of the unit (exclusive of any 
interest earned thereon), or the amount of damages incurred 
by seller as a result of such breach, whichever is greater, 
from (B) the amount paid by purchaser with respect to the            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
          
 
  
 11 C.  Yamaguchi’s  Default  
  
        
         
  
          
           
             
          
        
 
  
           
          
    
 
  
        
         
        
 
    
         purchase
 price of the unit, excluding any interest earned 
thereon. 
(Capitalization altered.) 
In  2016,  Yamaguchi  defaulted  under  the  Sales  Contract.   
Prior  to  defaulting,  Yamaguchi  had  deposited  approximately  
$592,400.00   into  escrow,   which  was  substantially  greater  than  
fifteen  percent  of  the  purchase
  price  of  the  Unit.  
On February
 2, 2016, PACREP sent Yamaguchi a letter, with 
Title Guaranty copied, notifying Yamaguchi of her default and 
warning that 
[p]ursuant to Section D.38 of the Sales Contract, you have 
twenty (20) days from the receipt of this notice of default 
to remedy the default. If you fail to close by said date, 
Seller may exercise any of its available remedies as set 
forth in Section D.38 of the Sales Contract. 
(Emphases omitted.) 
In a letter dated March 7, 2016 (March 7 Letter), PACREP 
sent a “Notice of Termination” to Yamaguchi, copied to Title 
Guaranty, stating in part: 
Because  you  failed  to  timely  remedy  the  default,  you  
are  hereby  notified  that  Seller  has  elected  to  exercise  its  
right,  pursuant  to  Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  to  
terminate  the  Sales  Contract  and  retain  fifteen  percent  
(15%)  of  the  Total  Purchase  Price  as  liquidated  damages.  
By copy of this letter, we are hereby notifying Title 
Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc. to cancel escrow and to 
release said funds and accrued interest to Seller. 
(Emphases added and omitted.) 
Included with PACREP’s March 7 Letter was an unsigned            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
“Termination  Agreement  and  Mutual  Release”  noted  as  being  by  and  
between  PACREP  and  Yamaguchi,  communicating  in  part:  
 
 12  
  
           
         
      
 
          
         
        
 
    
          
         Buyer  and  Seller  agree  that  as  soon  as  reasonably  possible  
after  the  Termination  Date,  Escrow  shall  release  to  Buyer  
the  amount  that  remains  after  subtracting  (A)  ONE  HUNDRED  
SEVENTY  SEVEN  FOUR  THOUSAND  FOUR  HUNDRED  TWENTY  AND  NO/100  
DOLLARS  ($177,420.00)  (“Seller’s  Payment”)  from  (B)  the  
Deposits,  which  totals  FOUR  HUNDRED  FOURTEEN  THOUSAND  NINE  
HUNDRED  EIGHTY  AND  NO/100  DOLLARS  ($414,980.00)  (“Buyer’s  
Payment”).  
(Emphases omitted.) 
In a letter dated March 25, 2016 (March 25 Letter), PACREP 
sent a second “Notice of Termination” to Yamaguchi, again 
copying Title Guaranty, declaring in part: 
Because  you  failed  to  timely  remedy  the  default,  you  
are  hereby  notified  that  Seller  has  elected  to  exercise  its  
right,  pursuant  to  Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  to  
terminate  the  Sales  Contract  and  retain  all  deposits  
pursuant  to  the  Sales  Contract.  
By
 copy of this letter, we are hereby notifying Title 
Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc. to cancel escrow and to 
release said funds and accrued interest to Seller. 
(Emphases added and omitted.) 
Twelve  days  after  the  March  25  Letter,   Title  Guaranty   
disbursed   $250,014.39   to  PACREP  on  April  6,  2016.   This  
disbursement   represented   the  balance   of  Yamaguchi’s  escrow  
deposit,  with  the  difference  of  approximately  $592,400.00  of  her  
total  deposit  having  been  previously  disbursed  to  PACREP  for  
permitted  construction  costs.  
On
 March 31, 2016, Title Guaranty issued a letter to 
Yamaguchi, informing her that “[f]unds have been released to            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 13         
           
         
          
 
 
        
 seller as liquidated damages.” Shortly thereafter, Yamaguchi’s 
counsel informed PACREP that she objected to the release of the 
funds. Yamaguchi’s counsel also sent a subsequent communication 
to Title Guaranty, inquiring as to the status of Yamaguchi’s 
deposit. 
D.  Yamaguchi  and  PACREP’s  Arbitration  Proceedings  
Pursuant  to  the  arbitration  provision  in  the  Sales  
Contract,  Yamaguchi  submitted  her  dispute  with  PACREP  to  
arbitration  claiming:  (1)  recission  of  the  Sales  Contract  under  
HRS  Chapter  514B;  (2)  breach  of  contract;  (3)  conversion;  (4)  
liquidated  damages;  and  (5)  unfair  and  deceptive  acts  or  
practices  (UDAP)  under  HRS  Chapter  480.   Yamaguchi  prevailed  on  
her  conversion  and  UDAP  claims.   The  arbitrator  awarded  
Yamaguchi:  $412,750.90  in  conversion  damages;  $1,000.00  in  
statutory  damages  and  $5,000.00  in  attorney  fees  related  to  her  
UDAP  claim.   The  arbitrator  also  awarded  PACREP  liquidated  
damages  in  the  sum  of  $177,420.00,  which  was  reflected  in  the  
net  amount  awarded  to  Yamaguchi.   The  circuit  court  entered  a  
final  judgment  confirming  the  arbitration  award  on  September  25,  
2018,  and  PACREP  fully  satisfied  the  judgment  on  October  12,  
2018.4  
The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. 4            
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 14     
   
       
          
           
        
         
          
    
       
         
          
           
           
       
 
           
          
           
          
          
 E. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Yamaguchi’s Complaint 
While  Yamaguchi’s   arbitration   claims  against   PACREP  were  
pending,   Yamaguchi   filed  a  lawsuit   in  the  circuit   court  against   
Title  Guaranty.5   Relevantly,   Yamaguchi   alleged   conversion   (Count  
I);  breach  of  fiduciary   duty  (Count  II);  breach  of  contract  
(Count  III);  and  a  UDAP  claim  (Count  IV).  
2.
 Title Guaranty’s Motion for Summary Judgment 
On December 18, 2020, Title Guaranty filed a motion for 
summary judgment asserting that its sole duty was to comply with 
the Escrow Agreement, which it fulfilled by disbursing 
Yamaguchi’s full escrow deposit to PACREP after PACREP provided 
Title Guaranty with the notice of termination of the Sales 
Contract following Yamaguchi’s default. 
Yamaguchi countered that the Escrow Agreement was 
unenforceable because she never signed it which violated the 
statute of frauds. Further, Yamaguchi asserted there was a 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether she received the 
Escrow Agreement. Yamaguchi also argued that Section 13 of the 
Sales Contract (incorporation section) was unintelligible, and 
Yamaguchi amended her circuit court complaint twice. Yamaguchi’s 
initial complaint also named Irongate, LLC (Irongate) and The Blackstone 
Group, L.P. (Blackstone Group). Title Guaranty answered and filed a cross-
claim against Irongate and Blackstone Group and a third-party complaint 
against PACREP. These claims were later dismissed by stipulation. 5            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 15          
          
       
 Yamaguchi  cross-moved  for  partial  summary  judgment  on  her  
conversion,  breach  of  contract,  breach  of  fiduciary  duty,  and  
UDAP  claims.  
    
    
       
         
       
 
       
    
 
       
        
 
 
 
 
The  circuit  court  also  found  that  Yamaguchi’s  claim  that  
she  never  received  the  Escrow  Agreement  did  not  “nullify  or  Section 12 of the Escrow Agreement (escrow funds release 
section) was unconscionable and void as a matter of law. 
3. Yamaguchi’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment 
4. Circuit Court’s Decision 
Following  a   hearing,  the  circuit  court  granted  Title  
Guaranty’s  motion  for  summary  judgment  on  all  counts  and  denied  
Yamaguchi’s  motion  for  partial  summary  judgment.  
The circuit
 court reasoned: 
[N]umber one, plaintiff’s sales contract with [PACREP] 
incorporates by reference and includes the terms of the 
escrow agreement between Title Guaranty and [PACREP]. 
Number two, plaintiff defaulted on her obligations 
under that sales contract. 
Number three, despite plaintiff receiving notice of 
her default, plaintiff did not cure the default. 
Number  fou r,  pursuant  to  section  D.38  of  the  sales  
contract,  [PACREP]  elected  to  terminate  the  sales  contract  
and  retain  all  of  the  money  plaintiff  had  deposited  with  
escrow.  
Number  five,  pursuant  to  paragraph  12  of  the  escrow  
agreement,  [PACREP]  instructed  Title  Guaranty  to  release  
all  of  plaintiff’s  deposited  funds  to  [PACREP].  
And,  number  six,  because  all  of  the  contractual  
preconditions  to  doing  so  were  fulfilled,  Title  Guaranty  
had  know  [sic]  choice  but  to  follow  the  escrow  instructions  
that  plaintiff  herself  had  agreed  to  and  were  incorporated  
and  made  a  part  of  her  sales  contract.             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 16          
          
           
        
           
       
          
              
   
          
        
           
         
           
 
        
            
          
           
          
        
 
         
         
       
         
         diminish her agreement to incorporate and make the escrow 
agreement a part of her sales contract[,]” and her assertion 
that it was not attached to the Sales Contract was “immaterial.” 
The court concluded that the Escrow Agreement was 
“incorporated into and made a part of the sales contract between 
[PACREP] and [Yamaguchi,]” finding that Yamaguchi “unambiguously 
incorporated the escrow agreement into her sales contract. She 
[did] not need to sign the escrow agreement to make it a part of 
her own contract.” 
The court further found Section 12 of the Escrow Agreement, 
which provided instructions regarding a purchaser’s default, to 
be “applicable to the facts of this transaction in this case.” 
The circuit court concluded that “Title Guaranty did not 
breach any duty whether in contract or in tort to plaintiff[,]” 
noting: 
Title Guaranty has presented evidence negating the elements 
of breach of duty, both in tort and in contract, and has 
demonstrated that plaintiff will not be able to carry her 
burden of proof at trial. In response, plaintiff has done 
nothing to show any genuine issue of material fact with 
respect to either of Counts 2 or 3. 
The court also granted Title Guaranty’s motion for summary 
judgment as to Yamaguchi’s conversion and UDAP claims, finding 
that Yamaguchi did not satisfy her burden. 
The circuit court entered judgment for Title Guaranty and 
granted Title Guaranty’s motion for attorney fees and costs            
 
 
 
 17       
   
   
        
           
         
          
         
           
        
          
            
         
         
        
     
          
         
        
      
 
 
             
            
        
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (2016).6 
F. ICA Proceedings 
1. Opening Brief 
Yamaguchi appealed the circuit court’s grant of summary 
judgment for Title Guaranty and its denial of her motion for 
partial summary judgment. Yamaguchi raised eleven points of 
error. Relevant here, Yamaguchi argued that the circuit court 
erred in granting Title Guaranty’s motion for summary judgment 
on her breach of contract and breach of fiduciary duty claims. 
First, Yamaguchi asserted that the circuit court erred 
because Title Guaranty’s fiduciary duty extended to her, even if 
she was not a signatory to the Escrow Agreement. She argued 
that Title Guaranty’s duty “extended beyond the alleged escrow 
agreement that binds Yamaguchi” and required Title Guaranty to 
avoid self-dealing, conflicts of interest, and gross negligence 
or reckless acts or omissions. 
Second, Yamaguchi asserted that she was “not a party to 
this Escrow Agreement” and “did not negotiate this Escrow 
Agreement”; and thus, the Escrow Agreement was illegal, 
unconscionable, unfair and deceptive, and, therefore, 
unenforceable. 
6 The ICA temporarily remanded the case for entry of an appealable 
judgment, and the circuit court entered an amended final judgment. Yamaguchi 
subsequently filed a First Amended Statement of Jurisdiction.            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
Yamaguchi  also  contended  that  the  circuit  court  abused  its  
discretion  in  awarding  Title  Guaranty  attorney  fees  and  costs.  
2.  Answering  Brief  
Title  Guaranty  contended  that  the  circuit  court  did  not  err  
because,  as  an  escrow,  its  only  duty  was  to  “comply  strictly  
with  the  provisions  of  the  [Escrow  Agreement]  or  instructions.”   
DeMello,  4  Haw.  App.  at  47,  659  P.2d  at  763.   Title  Guaranty  
argued  that  Yamaguchi  agreed  to  the  Escrow  Agreement’s  terms  
when  she  executed  the  Sales  Contract,  which  expressly  
incorporated  the  Escrow  Agreement.  
 
         
          
         
         
       
       
         
         
         
            
          
          
       Title
 Guaranty also maintained that the Escrow Agreement 
was neither illegal nor unenforceable. Pursuant to Section 12 
of that agreement, it argued, “once [Title Guaranty] received 
[PACREP]’s certification in writing that the Sales Contract was 
terminated due to Yamaguchi’s default, Yamaguchi’s deposited 
funds automatically by irrevocable agreement became [PACREP]’s 
free of the escrow[.]” Accordingly, when Title Guaranty 
received the letter from PACREP, it continued, which “instructed 
[Title Guaranty] to release the deposited funds to [PACREP], 
[Title Guaranty] was required to do so under Section 12 of the 
Escrow Agreement.” Title Guaranty contended there was no breach 
of its fiduciary or contractual duty because it complied with 
PACREP’s instructions; further, the Escrow Agreement released 
18            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 19           
   
        
          
        
   
       
          
         
         
          
           
        
           
     
        
        
         
     
        
         
         
          Title Guaranty from liability with respect to the escrow funds 
and “such purchaser.” 
Title Guaranty also argued that Yamaguchi’s claims for 
conversion, UDAP, and punitive damages must fail and that the 
circuit court properly awarded Title Guaranty attorney fees. 
3. Reply Brief 
Yamaguchi replied that Title Guaranty breached its 
fiduciary duty because it was “fully aware of the conflict 
between the Sales Agreement and the Escrow Agreement.” 
Yamaguchi contended that Title Guaranty was acting as a 
fiduciary for all the parties to the transaction. Therefore, 
Title Guaranty breached this duty when it released the funds to 
PACREP; failed to disclose to Yamaguchi material information 
related to the disbursement of the funds; and failed to maintain 
neutrality as the escrow agent. 
Yamaguchi also reasserted her breach of contract claim, 
arguing that Title Guaranty breached the Escrow Agreement 
because the agreement favored the seller over the purchaser. 
4. ICA Summary Disposition Order 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s order denying 
Yamaguchi’s motion for partial summary judgment and the order 
granting summary judgment for Title Guaranty as to Yamaguchi’s 
conversion and UDAP claims. However, the ICA vacated summary            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 20          
        
         judgment for Title Guaranty with respect to Yamaguchi’s breach 
of contract and breach of fiduciary duty claims. 
The  ICA  concluded  there  was  a  genuine  issue  of  material  
fact  as  to  whether  Title  Guaranty  breached  its  fiduciary  duty  
under  HRS  §  449-16  when  it  disbursed  the  entirety  of  the  escrow  
funds  to  PACREP  after  PACREP  sent  “conflicting  instructions”  to  
Title  Guaranty  in  the  March  7  Letter  and  the  March  25  Letter.   
The  first  letter,  the  ICA  noted,  instructed  Title  Guaranty  to  
disburse  fifteen  percent  of  the  purchase  price,  pursuant  to  
Yamaguchi’s  default,  while  the  subsequent  letter  instructed  
Title  Guaranty  to  disburse  all  the  escrow  funds.   Under  Section  
D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  the  ICA  continued,  if  the  purchaser  
deposited  more  than  fifteen  percent  of  the  Unit’s  purchase  
price,  upon  the  purchaser’s  default,  PACREP  was  entitled  to  keep  
fifteen  percent  of  the  price.   The  ICA  pointed  out  that  after  
PACREP  notified  the  parties  of  Yamaguchi’s  default,  Title  
Guaranty  disbursed  all  of  Yamaguchi’s  funds  even  though  she  
deposited  more  than  fifty  percent  of  the  purchase  price  into  
escrow.   “Under  these  circumstances,”  the  ICA  concluded,  “there  
was  a  genuine  issue  of  material  fact  about  whether  Title  
Guaranty  breached  its  duty  as  a  trustee  of  Yamaguchi’s  funds  
when  it  released  all  of  her  deposits  to  [PACREP].”  
As
 to Yamaguchi’s breach of contract claim, the ICA            
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 21        
         
          
           
           
         
           
   
         
          
       
             
            
         
   
          
          
     
        
    
        
            
            determined that Yamaguchi was an intended third-party 
beneficiary of the Escrow Agreement, consistent with Section 15 
of the agreement stating that the agreement shall be “binding 
upon and inure to the benefit of such purchaser” of a Ritz-
Carlton Waikiki unit. Thus, the ICA concluded: “[t]here is a 
genuine issue of material fact about whether Title Guaranty 
breached its contractual duty to Yamaguchi by paying all of her 
deposits to [PACREP].” 
The ICA rejected Yamaguchi’s remaining claims. The ICA 
determined that: (1) “Yamaguchi wasn’t a party to the Escrow 
Agreement[,]” meaning her argument regarding the “enforceability 
of section 12 has no bearing on the merits of her claims against 
Title Guaranty”; and (2) “Title Guaranty was not a party to the 
Sales Contract or otherwise in privity with [PACREP,]” rendering 
res judicata inapplicable. 
The ICA vacated the circuit court’s award of attorney fees 
and costs to Title Guaranty, concluding that Title Guaranty was 
“no longer the prevailing party.” 
The ICA denied Title Guaranty’s motion for reconsideration. 
G. Supreme Court Proceedings 
On certiorari, Title Guaranty raises two questions: (1) 
“[d]id the ICA err in holding that [Yamaguchi] was not a party 
to the [] Escrow Agreement”; and (2) “[d]id the ICA err in            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 22            
        
 holding that there were questions of fact as to whether Title 
Guaranty breached its contractual and fiduciary duties to 
Yamaguchi[.]” 
         
            
           
           
          
       
           
 
         
          
          
         
       
         
        
     
       
           
           As to
 the first question, Title Guaranty contends that 
Yamaguchi never argued that she was not a party to the Escrow 
Agreement. Title Guaranty also asserts that the ICA erred in 
sua sponte raising an issue not first considered by the circuit 
court. Moreover, Title Guaranty argues that because the Sales 
Contract incorporated the Escrow Agreement, Yamaguchi “assumed 
its benefits and obligations” and was therefore a party to the 
agreement. 
With respect to the second question, Title Guaranty asserts 
two positions: (1) that Title Guaranty’s only fiduciary duty was 
to “remain neutral” and “comply strictly” with the provisions of 
the Escrow Agreement and PACREP’s instructions; and (2) Title 
Guaranty correctly complied with PACREP’s second instruction 
(March 25 Letter) to disburse the entire deposit, which 
“superseded” PACREP’s first instruction to disburse only fifteen 
percent of the purchase price. 
Title Guaranty further posits that Yamaguchi’s contention 
that she did not receive or understand the Escrow Agreement does 
not allow her to “escape [its] binding effect,” and the circuit            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 23           
         
         
         
          
           
       
          
           
           
          
          
         
           
   
    
   
          
 
       
       
          court correctly found that she was bound by the agreement. 
Title Guaranty also argues that escrow companies are not 
required to interpret contracts or advocate for escrow parties; 
they must remain “neutral” and comply strictly with the 
provisions of an agreement. Title Guaranty thus maintains that 
the ICA erred in concluding that the escrow company breached its 
duty to Yamaguchi after receiving “conflicting instructions” 
from PACREP regarding disbursal of the escrow funds. Because 
Section 12 of the Escrow Agreement provided that, in the event 
of default, escrow funds were to “be treated as the Seller’s 
free of the escrow,” and because it complied with PACREP’s 
instructions, Title Guaranty asserts that it did not breach the 
Escrow Agreement or violate its fiduciary duty to Yamaguchi. 
Based on the facts and circumstances of this case, we agree 
with Title Guaranty. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Summary Judgment 
We  review   the  circuit  court’s  grant  or  denial  of  summary  
judgment  de  novo.   Jou  v.  Dai-Tokyo  Royal  State  Ins.  Co.,  116  
Hawai‘i   159,  164,  172  P.3d  471,  476  (2007).  
The standard
 for granting a motion for summary judgment is 
well-settled: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there            
 
 
 
 24             
             
           
         
           
           
           
          
          
 
 
   
 “‘As  a  general  rule,  the  construction  and  legal  effect  to  
be  given  a  contract  is  a  question  of  law  freely  reviewable  by  an  
appellate  court.’”   Frederick  A.  Nitta,  M.D.,  Inc.  v.  Hawaii  
Med.  Serv.  Ass’n,  156  Hawaiʻi  457,  470,  575  P.3d  547,  560  (2025)  
(citing  Casumpang  v.  ILWU  Local  142,  108  Hawaiʻi  411,  420,  121  
P.3d  391,  400  (2005)).  
This  court  has  determined  that  it  is  fundamental  that  terms  
of  contract  should  be  interpreted  according  to  their  plain,  
ordinary  and  accepted  use  in  common  speech,  unless  the  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom 
in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
motion. 
Id.  (cleaned  up).   In  reviewing  the  evidence,  “[t]he  court  is  
permitted  to  draw  only  those  inferences  of  which  the  evidence  is  
reasonably  susceptible[.]”   Ka‘upulehu  Land  LLC  v.  Heirs  and   
Assigns  of  Pahukula,  136  Hawai‘i   1 23,  132,  358  P.3d  692,  701  
(2015)  (citing  Winfrey  v.  GGP  Ala  Moana  LLC,  130  Hawai‘i  262,  
270–71,  308  P.3d  891,  899–900  (2013)).  
“This  court  may  affirm  a  grant  of  summary  judgment  on  any  
ground  appearing  in  the  record,  even  if  the  circuit  court  did  
not  rely  on  it.”   Reyes  v.  Kuboyama,  76  Hawai‘i   137,  140,   870  
P.2d  1281,  1284  (1994)  (citations  omitted).  
B. Contract
 Interpretation            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 25         
         
         
           
       
         
 
Harrison  v.  Casa  De  Emdeko,  Inc.,  142  Hawaiʻi  218,  225,  418  P.3d  
559,  566  (2018)  (citation  omitted).  
          
              
          
           
           
 contra
ct indicates a different meaning. Further, in 
construing a contract, a court’s principal objective is to 
ascertain and effectuate the intention of the parties as 
manifested by the contract in its entirety. If there is 
any doubt, the interpretation which most reasonably 
reflects the intent of the parties must be chosen. 
IV.  DISCUSSION  
A.  Breach   of  Contract  
1.  Yamaguchi  was  a  third-party  beneficiary  of  the  Escrow  
Agreement.  
 
Yamaguchi  was  not  a  signatory  to  the  Escrow  Agreement,  but  
she  was  clearly  a  third-party  beneficiary  of  that  agreement.   
The  ICA  correctly  concluded  that  Yamaguchi  was  entitled  to  
pursue  her  breach  of  contract  claim  as  a  third-party  beneficiary   
of  the  Escrow  Agreement  because  the  agreement  was  made  expressly   
for  her  benefit  as  a  purchaser  of  a  Ritz-Carlton  Waikiki  unit.  
A third party beneficiary is one for whose benefit a 
promise is made in a contract but who is not a party to the 
contract. The rights of the third party beneficiary must 
be limited to the terms of the promise, and this promise 
may be express or it may be implied from the circumstances. 
Ass’n  of  Apartment  Owners  of  Newtown  Meadows   ex  rel.  its  Bd.  of  
Directors  v.  Venture  15,  Inc.,  115  Hawaiʻi  232,  269,  167  P.3d  
225,  262  (2007)  (cleaned  up).  
“Ordinarily,  third-party  beneficiary  status  is  a  question  
of  fact  as  to  whether  the  terms  of  the  contract  reflect  an  
intent  to  benefit  the  party.”   Jou,  116  Hawai‘i  at  168,  172  P.3d             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 26     
       
        
         
 
 
 
 
 
 at 480 (cleaned up). 
In resolving the foregoing factual inquiry, this 
jurisdiction follows the framework set forth by the 
RESTATEMENT (SECOND) of CONTRACTS § 302 (A.L.I. 1981), as 
follows: 
(1)  Unless  otherwise  agreed  between  promisor  and  
promisee,  a  beneficiary  of  a  promise  is  an  intended  
beneficiary  if  recognition  of  a  right  to  performance  
in  the  beneficiary  is  appropriate  to  effectuate  the  
intention  of  the  parties  and  either  
(a)  the  performance  of  the  promise  will  satisfy  
an  obligation  of  the  promisee  to  pay  money  to  
the  beneficiary;  or  
(b)  the  circumstances  indicate  that  the  
promisee  intends  to  give  the  beneficiary  the  
benefit  of  the  promised  performance.  
(2)  An  incidental  beneficiary  is  a  beneficiary  who  is  
not  an  intended  beneficiary.  
Id.  at  168–69,  172  P.3d  at  480–81  (quoting  RESTATEMENT  (SECOND)  OF  
CONTRACTS   §  302  (A.L.I.  1981))  (cleaned  up  and  emphases  added).  
As  this  court  noted  in  Title  Guaranty  Escrow  Servs.,  Inc.  
v.  Wailea  Resort  Co.,  Ltd.,  146  Hawai‘i  34,  46,  456  P.3d  107,  119  
(2019),  “‘contract  terms  should  be  interpreted  according  to  
their  plain,  ordinary,  and  accepted  sense  in  common  speech.’”   
146  Hawai‘i  at  46,  456  P.3d  at  119  (citation  omitted).   In  this  
case,  pursuant  to  the  Escrow  Agreement,  Title  Guaranty  was  to  
“receive,  deposit  and  hold  in  escrow  and  disburse  .  .  .  all  
payments  received  by  Escrow  under  sales  contracts  made  by  
Seller[.]”   Section  15  of  the  agreement  clearly  provided  that  
its  terms  would  be  “binding  upon  and  inure  to  the  benefit  of             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
    
   
         
        
         
         
           
          
          
          
           
         
    
 
As  an  intended  third-party  beneficiary  of  the  Escrow  
Agreement,  Yamaguchi  had  a  right  to  pursue  a  breach  of  contract  
claim  against  Title  Guaranty.   “Generally,  third  parties  do  not  
have  enforceable  contract  rights.   The  exception  to  the  general  
rule  involves  intended  third-party  beneficiaries.”   Ass’n  of  such purchaser” of the condominium units. 
Based on a plain reading of the Escrow Agreement’s 
unambiguous language, the agreement was clearly intended to 
benefit the purchasers of PACREP’s Ritz-Carlton Waikiki units. 
Yamaguchi was an intended beneficiary of the Escrow Agreement, 
as were all purchasers of the Ritz-Carlton Waikiki units. This 
is further evidenced by Title Guaranty’s role as an “escrow 
depository,” as established by HRS § 449-1, which defines an 
“escrow depository” as “the corporation which, in an escrow, and 
for  compensation,  receives,  holds,  and  delivers  the  money,  other  
consideration,  or  instrument  affecting  title  to  real  property.”   
HRS  §  449-1.  
Given  the  terms  and  provisions  of  the  Escrow  Agreement,  
which  expressly  benefited  purchasers  of  the  units,  the  ICA  did  
not  err  in  concluding  that  Yamaguchi  was  an  intended  third-party   
beneficiary.  
2.
 The ICA erred in concluding that there was a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether Title Guaranty 
breached the Escrow Agreement. 
27            
 
 
 
            
            
           
            
         
          
            
           
           
  
        
         
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows , 115 Hawai‘i at 269, 167 P.3d 
at 262 (cleaned up). However, “the rights of the third party 
beneficiary must be limited to the terms of the promise, and 
this promise may be express or it may be implied from the 
circumstances.”   Id.  (cleaned  up).   Thus,  Yamaguchi’s  right  was  
limited  to  the  terms  of  the  Escrow  Agreement,  with  which  Title  
Guaranty  complied.  
The  interpretation  of  a  contract  is  reviewed  de  novo  and  
“absent  an  ambiguity,  the  contract  terms  should  be  interpreted  
according  to  their  plain,  ordinary,  and  accepted  sense  in  common  
speech.”   Wailea  Resort  Co.,  Ltd.,  146  Hawai‘i  at  45,  456  P.3d  at  
118  (cleaned  up).   “As  a  general  rule,  the  court  will  look  no  
further  than  the  four  corners  of  the  contract  to  determine  
whether  an  ambiguity  exists.”   Hawaiian  Ass’n  of  Seventh-Day  
Adventists  v.  Wong,  130  Hawai‘i  36,  45,  305  P.3d  452,  461  (2013)  
(citation  omitted).  
We
 note that although the Sales Contract incorporated the 
Escrow Agreement, the converse is not true; in other words, 
Section D.38 of the Sales Contract is not part of the Escrow 
Agreement. Then, as further noted, Section 12 of the Escrow 
Agreement provides in pertinent part that in the event of a 
purchaser’s default, 
[i]f Seller subsequently certifies in writing to Escrow 
that Seller has terminated the sales contract in accordance 
with the terms thereof and provides to Escrow copies of all 
28            
 
 
 
 29           
         
         
           
          
          
           
          
        
        
        
 
           
        
         
           
           
          
          
  
            
          
          
          
       
 
        
          
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
such notices of termination and proof of receipt sent to 
the purchaser, Escrow shall thereafter treat all funds of 
the purchaser paid on account of such purchaser’s sales 
contract as funds of Seller and not as funds of the 
purchaser. Thereafter, such funds shall be free of the 
escrow established by this Agreement and shall be held by 
Escrow for the account of Seller. Upon written request by 
Seller, Escrow shall pay such funds to Seller, less any 
escrow cancellation fee. Escrow shall thereupon be 
released from any further duties or liability hereunder 
with respect to such funds and such purchaser. 
Based on the plain and unambiguous language of Section 12, the 
agreement authorizes Title Guaranty to disburse a purchaser’s 
escrow deposit to PACREP, provided: (1) the purchaser defaults 
on the Sales Contract; (2) PACREP certifies in writing to Title 
Guaranty that it terminated the Sales Contract as a result of 
the default; and (3) PACREP provides Title Guaranty with copies 
of its termination notices and proof that the purchaser received 
the same. 
There is no issue of material fact as to whether PACREP 
complied with Section 12 of the Escrow Agreement. Yamaguchi 
defaulted, and PACREP subsequently sent her a notice of default 
and two termination notices, all copied to Title Guaranty. 
Yamaguchi confirmed receiving PACREP’s default and termination 
notices. 
After Title Guaranty received the notices of termination 
from PACREP, Yamaguchi’s escrow deposit was “free of the escrow 
established by [the Escrow Agreement]” and “held by Escrow for 
the account of Seller[,]” pursuant to Section 12 of the            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 30          
           
        
           
           
           
        
          
           
           
          
       
            
           
           
        
       
          
          
          
         
          
          agreement. Further, “[u]pon written request by Seller, Escrow 
[was obligated to] pay such funds to Seller, less any escrow 
cancellation fee.” Title Guaranty received PACREP’s written 
requests to return the funds by the March 7 Letter (requesting 
the return of fifteen percent of the deposit) and later the 
March 25 Letter (requesting the return of the entire deposit). 
Thus, after Yamaguchi defaulted, the governing and controlling 
provisions of the Escrow Agreement set the entirety of the 
deposit “free of the escrow,” and dictated that the funds should 
be treated by Title Guaranty as PACREP’s property. Acting in 
compliance with the clear and definite language of the Escrow 
Agreement, Title Guaranty disbursed Yamaguchi’s deposit to 
PACREP. Yamaguchi had the option of enforcing the terms of the 
Sales Contract with respect to any portion of the proceeds she 
believed PACREP owed her from the escrow deposits. This is 
precisely what Yamaguchi did when she initiated arbitration 
proceedings against PACREP for those claimed amounts. 
We hold that Yamaguchi did not meet her burden of 
establishing a genuine issue of material fact as to Title 
Guaranty’s compliance with Section 12 of the Escrow Agreement. 
Title Guaranty complied with the Escrow Agreement by disbursing 
Yamaguchi’s funds. Accordingly, the circuit court did not err 
in granting summary judgment in favor of Title Guaranty on            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 31      
 
 
 Title  Guaranty  asserts  that  the  ICA  erred  in  determining  
Yamaguchi  was  not  a  party  to  the  Escrow  Agreement.   However,  
with  regard  to  the  ICA’s  analysis  of  Yamaguchi’s  breach  of  
contract  claim  now  under  review,  Yamaguchi’s  status  as  a  non-
signatory  to  the  Escrow  Agreement  is  immaterial.  
     
          
        
            Yamaguchi’s breach of contract claim. 
3.  The  ICA’s  conclusion  that  “Yamaguchi  wasn’t  a  party  to 
the  Escrow  Agreement”  is  of  no  consequence  to  the  
ICA’s  analysis  of  Yamaguchi’s  breach  of  contract  
claim.  
As  stated,  the  ICA  correctly  concluded  that  Yamaguchi  
brought  her  contract  claim  as  an  intended  third-party  
beneficiary  of  the  Escrow  Agreement.   See  supra  Section  IV.A.2.   
As  a  third-party  beneficiary,  Yamaguchi’s  breach  of  contract  
claim  was  “‘limited  to  the  terms  of  the  promise[.]’”   Ass’n  of  
Apartment  Owners  of  Newtown  Meadows,  115  Hawai‘i  at  269,  167  P.3d  
at  262.   As  discussed  above,  Title  Guaranty  complied  with  the  
Escrow  Agreement.   Therefore,  Title  Guaranty’s  contention  that  
the  ICA  erred  in  concluding  Yamaguchi  was  not  a  party  to  the  
Escrow  Agreement  is  of  no  consequence  to  our  review  of  
Yamaguchi’s  breach  of  contract  appeal  before  us.  
B.
 Breach of Fiduciary Duty 
The ICA concluded that there was a genuine issue of 
material fact regarding Yamaguchi’s breach of fiduciary duty 
claim based on PACREP’s March 7 Letter and March 25 Letter that            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 32         
   
 issued purported “conflicting instructions” to Title Guaranty. 
We respectfully disagree. 
Proving  a   breach  of  fiduciary  duty  requires  plaintiff  to  
show  that:  (1)  a  fiduciary  relationship  existed;  (2)  defendant  
breached  their  fiduciary  duty  to  plaintiff;  and  (3)  the  breach  
was  the  proximate  cause  of  plaintiff’s  injury.   See  Awakuni  v.  
Awana,  115  Hawaiʻi   126,  142  n.20,  165  P.3d  1027,  1043  n.20  
(2007);  Domingo  v.  James  B.  Nutter  &  Co.,  153  Hawaiʻi  584,  615,  
543  P.3d  1,  32  (App.  2023);  37  C.J.S.  Fraud  §  15  (2023).  
Here,  Title  Guaranty  had  a  fiduciary  duty  to  both  PACREP  
and  Yamaguchi,  who  were  parties  to  the  Sales  Contract.   Title  
Guaranty  is  an  escrow  depository  as  defined  in  HRS  Chapter  449.   
See  HRS  §  449-1.   “Escrow”  refers  to   
any  transaction  affecting  the  title  to  real  property,  
including  leaseholds,  proprietary  leaseholds,  and  
condominiums,  in  which  a  person  not  a  party  to  the  
transaction  and  neither  having  nor  acquiring  any  interest  
in  the  title  receives  from  one  party  to  the  transaction,  
holds  until  the  happening  of  an  event  or  performance  of  a  
condition  and  then  delivers  to  another  party  to  the  
transaction,  any  money  or  other  consideration  or  any  
instrument  affecting  the  title  to  that  real  property,  all  
            
 
 
 
 33            
           
        
          
         
         
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  agreement  between  the  
parties  to  the  transaction.  
 
Id.  (emphasis  added).   “Escrow  depository”  refers  to  “the  
corporation  which,  in  an  escrow,  and  for  compensation,  receives,   
holds,  and  delivers  the  money,  other  consideration,  or  
instrument  affecting  title  to  real  property.”   Id.  
HRS  §  449-16(a)  provides  that  an  escrow  depository  “shall  
have  the  responsibility  of  a  trustee  for  all  moneys,  other  
consideration,  or  instruments  received  by  it.”   HRS  §  449-16(a)  
(2013)  (emphasis  added).  
In  DeMello,  the  ICA  concluded  that  a  fiduciary  duty  is  
clearly  imposed  by  statute  under  HRS  §  449-16,  and  “such  duty  is  
owed  only  to  the  parties  to  the  escrow  transaction.”   4  Haw.  
App.  at  47,  659  P.2d  at  763.   There,  the  ICA  noted,  “[t]he  
statutory  definition  of  ‘escrow’  specifically  limits  the  
depository’s  function  to  acts  performed  ‘in  accordance  with  the  
terms  of  the  agreement  between  the  parties  to  the  transaction.’”   
Id.
 (quoting HRS § 449-1). This court cited approvingly to 
DeMello in Hancock, stating that “[t]he general rule is that an 
escrow depository occupies a fiduciary relationship with the 
parties to the escrow agreement or instructions[,]” and that the 
escrow company must “‘comply strictly with the provisions’ of 
the parties’ escrow agreement or instructions.” Hancock, 145 
Hawai‘i at 383, 452 P.3d at 380 (citing DeMello, 4 Haw. App. at            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 34      
 In  the  case  at  bar,  PACREP  and  Yamaguchi  were  the  parties  
involved  in  the  escrow  transaction,  and  Yamaguchi  was  a  third-
party  beneficiary  of  the  Escrow  Agreement.   Title  Guaranty  
therefore  owed  a  fiduciary  duty  to  Yamaguchi.   DeMello,  4  Haw.  
App.  at  47,  659  P.2d  at  763.   Title  Guaranty’s  fiduciary  duty  
was  to  “‘comply  strictly  with  the  provisions’  of  the  parties’  
escrow  agreement  or  instructions.”   Hancock,  145  Hawai‘i  at  383,  
452  P.3d  at  380.  
          
         
           
          
            
           
            47, 659 P.2d at 763). 
Once PACREP satisfied the requirements of Section 12 of the 
Escrow Agreement, the terms of the agreement further provided 
that the deposit “shall be free of the escrow established” by 
the Escrow Agreement. Title Guaranty’s only duty thereafter was 
to adhere to the terms of the Escrow Agreement and “treat all 
funds of the purchaser paid on account of such purchaser’s sales 
contract as funds of Seller” and “pay such funds to Seller” upon 
“written  request  by  Seller[.]”  
There  is  no  genuine  question  of  material  fact  as  to  whether  
Title  Guaranty  complied  with  Section  12  of  the  Escrow  Agreement.   
As  discussed,  the  March  7  Letter  notified  Yamaguchi  and  Title  
Guaranty  that  PACREP  had  “elected  to  exercise  its  right,  
pursuant  to  Section  D.38  of  the  Sales  Contract,  to  terminate  the  
Sales  Contract  and  retain  fifteen  percent  (15%)  of  the  Total             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 35          
          
          
           
          
          
          
         
     
          
           
         
          
         
           
          
         
           Purchase Price as liquidated damages.” (Emphasis omitted.) 
Eighteen days later, PACREP sent the March 25 Letter informing 
Yamaguchi and Title Guaranty that PACREP had elected to “retain 
all deposits pursuant to the Sales Contract.” (Emphasis added.) 
Both letters also stated that PACREP was “hereby notifying Title 
Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc. to cancel escrow and to release 
said funds and accrued interest to Seller.” Title Guaranty 
complied and disbursed the balance of Yamaguchi’s deposit to 
PACREP on April 6, 2016. 
The ICA concluded that the instructions in PACREP’s two 
letters were in conflict. The ICA explained that under one 
interpretation of Section D.38 of the Sales Contract, if 
Yamaguchi had paid more than fifteen percent of the purchase 
price into escrow--which she had--PACREP was only entitled to 
fifteen percent of the Unit’s sale price as a result of 
Yamaguchi’s default, with the balance to be refunded to the 
buyer. The ICA determined that under these circumstances, 
“there was a genuine issue of material fact about whether Title 
Guaranty  breached  its  duty  as  a  trustee  of  Yamaguchi’s  funds  
when  it  released  all  of  her  deposits  to  PACREP.”  
 While  the  ICA  correctly  noted  that  “[u]nder  one  
interpretation”  of  Section  D.38,  PACREP’s  entitlement  to  the  
deposit  could  be  limited  to  only  fifteen  percent  of  the  escrow             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 36  
        
         
           
        
       
        
          
          
   deposit, this interpretation of the Sales Contract has no 
bearing on Title Guaranty’s fiduciary duty to Yamaguchi under 
the Escrow Agreement. But, as earlier noted, although the Sales 
Contract incorporated the Escrow Agreement, the Escrow Agreement 
did  not   incorporate  the  Sales  Contract.   Therefore,  Section  D.38  
of  the  Sales  Contract  is  not  part  of  the  Escrow  Agreement.   
Hence,  even  if  PACREP’s  two  letters  to  Title  Guaranty  could  be  
construed as
 containing “conflicting instructions,” as opposed 
to superseding instructions, Title Guaranty’s fiduciary duty was 
to “‘comply strictly with the provisions’ of the parties’ escrow 
agreement or instructions.” Hancock, 145 Hawai‘i a t 383, 452 
P.3d at 380. 
As  noted,  under  Section  12  of  the  Escrow  Agreement,  Title  
Guaranty  was  obligated  to  “treat  all  funds  of  the  purchaser  paid  
on  account  of  such  purchaser’s  sales  contract  as  funds  of  Seller  
and  not  as  funds  of  the  purchaser.  .  .  .  Upon  written  request  by  
Seller,  Escrow  shall  pay  such  funds  to  Seller[.]”   (Emphases  
added.)   Based  on  its  plain  and  obvious  meaning,  “such  funds”  
refers  to  “all  funds  of  the  purchaser  paid  on  account  of  such  
purchaser[].”   As  there  is  no  genuine  issue  of  material  fact  as  
to  Title  Guaranty’s  compliance  with  Section  12  of  the  Escrow  
Agreement,  we  affirm  the  circuit  court’s  order  granting  Title  
Guaranty  summary  judgment.             
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 37   
 
         
             
          
          
         
        
      
 V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, we vacate the ICA’s December 19, 2024 
judgment on appeal and remand the case to the ICA to address the 
award of attorney fees and costs. The circuit court’s 
January 25, 2022 Amended Final Judgment, January 13, 2021 order 
granting Title Guaranty summary judgment on all claims, and 
January 13, 2021 order denying Yamaguchi’s partial summary 
judgment on all claims are affirmed. 
Charles  A.  Price   
for  petitioner  
 
Junsuke  Aaron  Otsuka  
for  respondent  /s/  Sabrina  S.  McKenna  
/s/  Todd  W.  Eddins  
/s/  Lisa  M.  Ginoza  
/s/  Vladimir  P.  Devens  
/s/  Ronald  G.  Johnson  
