***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
CAMBRIDGE MANAGEMENT, INC., 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
NICOLE JADAN, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-17-0000176 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000176; CIVIL NO. 1RC16-1-4118) 
 
FEBRUARY 16, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE TONAKI, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
  The Hawaiʻ i State Judiciary has committed that all 
litigants who cannot meaningfully access court proceedings based 
on their English proficiency will be given language access 
assistance, including the services of a court-appointed Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000176
16-FEB-2021
07:52 AM
Dkt. 29 OP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
2 
 interpreter.  The courtroom setting is often intimidating; its 
language, technical.  In light of this reality, it is the 
court’s responsibility to determine whether a litigant can speak and understand English such that they are able to meaningfully 
access justice in this extraordinary setting – not simply whether their English is passable, adequate, or otherwise “good 
enough” to meet ordinary day-to-day demands.  
  In the instant case, the Judiciary’s language access commitment was not kept.  Specifically, the District Court of 
the First Circuit (district court) failed to determine whether defendant Nicole Jadan’s participation in the court proceedings 
would be meaningful absent language assistance when it resolved 
her repeated requests for an interpreter.  We accordingly vacate 
the judgment with respect to Jadan’s counterclaim for damages 
and remand to the district court, which must give due 
consideration to her request for the services of an interpreter, 
for further proceedings. 
  We also clarify that the meaningful access mandate 
extends to all proceedings in Hawaiʻ i
 state courts, including 
appeal.  We recognize, however, that our rules do not 
contemplate how to ensure adequate language access on appeal.  
We therefore refer this matter to the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court 
Committee on Court Interpreters and Language Access to determine ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
3 
 what services are necessary and how best to provide those 
services in the course of the appellate process.   
II. BACKGROUND 
A.  District Court Proceedings 
  All told, the district court held nine hearings on 
respondent Cambridge Management’s (Cambridge) complaint and 
Jadan’s counterclaim, presided over by five different judges.  
Although the record lacks transcripts of the district court 
proceedings, in light of the issues presented by this case and 
pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Court Records Rules Rule 41 and our authority 
under Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rules 11(b)(3)2 
and 10(e)(2),3 this court ordered that the audio and video 
recordings of the proceedings below be transmitted.4  We have 
reviewed those recordings, and we observe that at eight of those 
                     
1  Hawaiʻi Court Records Rules Rule 4 provides that “[t]he record of 
each case . . . shall include . . . (d) . . . audio or video recordings of 
court proceedings[.]” 
 
2  HRAP Rule 11(b)(3) provides in relevant part: “Physical exhibits 
other than documents, and such other parts of the record shall not be 
transmitted by the clerk of the court or agency appealed from unless he or 
she is directed to do so by appellate court order.” 
 
3  HRAP Rule 10(e)(2) provides in relevant part: “If anything 
material to any party is omitted from the record by error or accident or is 
misstated therein, corrections or modifications may be as follows: . . . (C) 
by direction of the appellate court before which the case is pending, on 
proper suggestion or its own initiative.” 
 
4  Cambridge urges this court not to rely on the audio and video 
recordings of the proceedings.  However, Hawaiʻ i court rules contemplate that 
the appellate courts may order parts of the record that were not previously 
transmitted.  We chose to exercise that authority under the exceptional 
circumstances presented by this case. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
4 court dates, Jadan either requested the assistance of an 
interpreter – including once by written motion during the short 
period in which she was represented by counsel – or indicated to 
the court that she struggled with understanding and 
communicating in English.  These requests were denied all but 
once.  Even after one judge agreed to appoint an interpreter 
midway through the district court proceedings, subsequent court 
dates proceeded without the services of an interpreter.  The 
following description of the district court proceedings reflects 
the recordings of the proceedings and the written record on 
appeal.    5
Cambridge, the managing agent of the apartment in 
which Jadan lived, filed a complaint for writ of possession 
against Jadan on June 21, 2016.  The complaint alleged that 
Jadan broke her rental agreement because she gave notice she 
would move out by June 2, 2016, but failed to do so.  With the 
assistance of the district court’s Access to Justice Room, a 
volunteer-driven program providing free legal advice to pro se 
litigants, Jadan filed a counterclaim for about $40,000 in 
damages and an injunction.  She claimed, among other things, 
that Cambridge had “destroy[ed] medical equipment” in her unit, 
that her unit was “not fit to be lived in,” and that Cambridge 
5Given that the only issue presented by Jadan’s application for 
certiorari relates to her interpreter requests, we review and describe the 
record only as it relates to her language access needs. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
5 
 should be enjoined from “interfering with [her] ability to enter 
into another rental agreement,” alleging that Cambridge had been 
“speaking untruths about [her] ability to pay rent[.]”    
 The first status hearing was held on July 15, 2016.6  
Immediately after stating her name, she asked the court whether a friend could assist her with English.  The court never 
resolved this request.  It instead referred the parties to 
mandatory mediation and, when they returned from mediation 
unsuccessful, set the case for trial.   
  The trial regarding the writ of possession occurred on August 5, 2016.
7  Jadan initially told the court that her 
interpreter had not arrived, but she would attempt to proceed on her own.  But roughly ten minutes later, she requested the 
services of an interpreter.  The court asked how long she had 
been in the United States; Jadan responded that she had been in 
this country a long time, and the court told her that her 
English was “pretty good.”  Jadan explained that she had been 
badly injured and that the injury made it difficult for people 
to understand her; the court did not conclude the injury was grounds for language assistance and denied her request.  The 
minutes reflect that the request for a Polish interpreter was 
denied because “[Jadan’s] English is fine.”   
                     
6  The Honorable Gerald H. Kibe presided. 
 
7 The Honorable Ronald A. Albu presided. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
6 
   The 
possession trial proceeded.  Numerous times that 
day, Jadan expressed that she was finding it challenging to 
translate what she wished to say into English and that interruptions (such as Cambridge’s objections) made it difficult 
for her to communicate.  For example, during cross-examination 
of one of Cambridge’s witnesses, the district court cautioned 
Jadan that she was wasting time by asking irrelevant questions; 
Jadan responded that expressing herself in English was proving 
challenging and that she would be able to better communicate 
with an interpreter.  As another example, during direct examination of one of her witnesses, Jadan stated that she was 
ashamed of her poor English.  And one of her witnesses testified 
that Jadan had difficulty with the English language and that the 
witness had suggested that Jadan get the services of a 
translator.    
  The trial was characterized by the court’s repeated 
admonishments for Jadan to ask relevant questions and avoid 
using examination as an opportunity to testify.  This dynamic 
proved frustrating for the court – at one point, the court expressed anger at Jadan for refusing to follow the rules.  At 
another, the court told her that if she did not cooperate and 
stop wasting time, it would simply find for the plaintiff.  
However, Jadan repeated on several occasions that she was 
struggling to express herself in English, implying that this ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
7 
 challenge, rather than any dilatory intent, caused her often-
lengthy questions and responses.    
 
 The court ruled in favor of Cambridge and ordered a 
writ of possession to issue forthwith.  Per the minutes, “[t]he 
court found that defendant had no legal reason for not moving 
out.”   
  The parties reconvened for a status hearing on 
September 30, 2016, at which point Jadan once more asked for an 
interpreter.  She explained to the court that she could speak 
English, but she could not understand technical terms, and that the assistance of an interpreter would help her more fully 
express herself in English.  The court again asked her how long 
she had lived in the United States; she again responded that she 
had been in the country for some time but recently was injured.  
The court denied her interpreter request, reasoning that she did 
not have an interpreter during the trial, which was only a few 
months prior.  The minutes state, “[Jadan] speaks English well 
and manage[d] on her own at the trial[.]”   
  By the time of an October 21, 2016 status hearing, Jadan had procured counsel.
8  This was the only hearing at which 
no interpreter request was made.   
                     
8  At the hearing, the court and counsel discussed their pre-
existing professional relationship.  Counsel accordingly requested Judge 
Albu’s recusal, and Judge Albu recused from the case thereafter.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
8 
   Through counsel, Jadan moved for appointment of an 
interpreter on October 31, 2016.  The written motion argued:  
[A] review of the videotape transcript of the 
[possession trial] make[s] it clear that Defendant was in 
need of an interpreter.  Defendant’s lack of proficiency in 
the English language should have been apparent to the 
Court, which indicated that it could not understand 
Defendant.  In addition, Defendant’s lack of proficiency most likely caused the Court t o grow impatient with her, 
which caused Defendant to cry, and which lead to the Court’s threat to impose sanctions on Defendant who was 
trying to ask questions of witnesses and of the Court.[
9] 
The Court should have recognized that Defendant was 
in need of an interpreter, instead of ignoring her requests 
and her quite obvious non- fluency in English.  This motion 
seeks to right that injustice.  
 
  Cambridge’s written opposition argued that the request 
should be denied because Jadan had already twice asked for, and 
was twice denied, an interpreter.  Cambridge’s counsel attested 
in a declaration that he had met with Jadan in person in June of 
2016; counsel “did not have any trouble understanding Defendant 
and does not believe Defendant had any trouble understanding 
[him].”  Cambridge also cited court records indicating that 
Jadan had been a party in at least six other cases, one of which 
also involved a denied interpreter request.  Cambridge argued 
these records indicated she had the “wherewithal” to handle matters such as orally requesting dismissal without language 
assistance.  And Cambridge responded to the claim that the court 
had grown “impatient” with Jadan by asserting that any 
                     
9  This likely refers to the court’s statement at the possession 
trial that Jadan was wasting Cambridge’s attorney’s time and that attorney’s 
fees could be imposed if she lost, asking her: “Do you want to pay his 
attorney’s fees too?”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
9 
 impatience was “the result of Defendant’s disagreement with the 
Court’s rulings and refusal to move on with the case.”  
Cambridge argued appointment of an interpreter would only cause further delay.  
 
  A hearing was held on the motion on December 16, 2016.
10  Jadan’s counsel asserted that, in addition to the 
arguments raised in the written motion, he himself could not understand his client, and he would not have brought the motion 
if he could.   
  The court denied the motion, noting that it had presided over a case involving Jadan in the past and had denied 
an interpreter request in that case, as had prior judges in the 
instant proceeding.  The court also noted that Jadan had been a 
paid interpreter for the judiciary.
11   
                     
10  The Honorable Thomas A. Haia presided. 
 
11  Cambridge supported this contention in its memorandum in 
opposition by reference to the minutes of an August 2014 hearing in one of 
the six other cases involving Jadan – the case over which Judge Haia also 
presided, as he referenced at the December 16, 2016 hearing.  The minutes of 
the 2014 hearing, which occurred more than two years prior in an unrelated 
case, state that “[Jadan] made representation that she was previously a translator for the Judiciary[.]”  Jadan briefly mentioned that she once 
served as an interpreter during the September 30, 2016 hearing before Judge 
Albu, but it is not clear from the district court record when and under what 
circumstances this occurred.   
 Cambridge raised the same assertion in its answering brief at the 
Intermediate Court of A ppeals.  I n her opening brief, Jadan said that twenty-
six years ago, she assisted her son in a case in which he was a party, and in her reply brief, she indicated that this was the occasion to which Cambridge 
referred.  The reply brief asserted that she “was not adequate” in that case, 
and “[the judge in that case] got the truth of my son by herself without me.”   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
10 
   Jadan began to speak while the court announced its 
ruling.  The court noted for the record that Jadan “just spoke 
English.”  Her counsel, however, responded that the issue was not whether she could simply speak English, but whether she 
could speak English such that they could effectively communicate 
with each other.  Nonetheless, the motion was denied. 
  The parties appeared for a status hearing on 
January 6, 2017.
12  Jadan’s counsel did not appear.  Although the 
case was continued, Jadan twice told the court during the hearing that it was a challenge for her to translate her thoughts and express herself in English.    
  Another status hearing occurred on January 13, 2017.  
Jadan expressed dissatisfaction with counsel and told the court 
she wished to proceed on her own, with the assistance of an 
interpreter.  Neither Cambridge nor Jadan’s counsel objected to 
her proceeding pro se, although Cambridge objected to the 
appointment of an interpreter, noting the same request had been 
denied three times.  The court granted both requests after 
engaging directly with Jadan to ascertain exactly what assistance she was requesting and why she needed it.    
  On February 3, 2017, no interpreter appeared; Jadan 
proceeded on her own.  The court set a trial date for Jadan’s 
                     
12  The Honorable Michael K. Tanigawa presided.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
11 
 counterclaim.  When Jadan asked whether she could get an 
interpreter for that date, the court responded that it could 
try, but that trial would proceed on the next date either way because Jadan was able to express herself.  The minutes 
reflected the same: “The court ordered a Polish interpreter but 
informed [Jadan] that trial will proceed even if one is 
unavailable.”  
 
  The trial for damages on the counterclaim proceeded 
before a fifth judge on February 17, 2017.13  When asked why she 
thought Cambridge owed her money, Jadan tried to explain to the 
court that she needed an interpreter, saying that although she 
spoke English, “legal English” was different, akin to a new 
language altogether.  A few minutes later, she reiterated this 
need; the court responded that she had appeared in court many 
times since the case began.  But Jadan told the court that 
without an interpreter, what could normally be said in a 
sentence would take her a paragraph.    
  Jadan took the stand.  After being sworn in, Jadan 
once again asked for an interpreter, asking why the previous judge had found that she could not speak the kind of English 
required by the courtroom.  The court responded that many people 
proceed pro se, that her English was adequate, and that one does 
                     
13  The Honorable Maura M. Okamoto presided. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
12 not need to be a lawyer to do what Jadan was doing.  Per the 
minutes: “The court . . . noted . . . Jadan appeared to 
understand and speak English competently and that per court 
minutes from 2/3/17 trial could proceed even if a Polish 
interpreter was unavailable.”   
Jadan’s testimony proceeded.  Multiple times, she 
exhibited difficulty in communicating.  Later, Cambridge 
presented a witness; during cross-examination, Jadan again 
expressed the challenge of formulating a question in English 
absent an interpreter.  As in the possession trial, Jadan was 
repeatedly admonished to keep her questions relevant and to 
avoid testifying while asking them.    
The court found for Cambridge and awarded attorney’s 
fees against Jadan.   
On February 22, 2017, Jadan moved for reconsideration.  
Her handwritten motion argued that Judge Tanigawa had ordered 
the appointment of an interpreter, no language services were 
ever provided, and the damages trial proceeded without an 
interpreter over her objections.   The motion was denied.   Jadan 
appealed thereafter. 
B. Proceedings on Appeal
On appeal, Jadan again filed a request for a Polish 
interpreter.  Her handwritten motion said, “I am 71 years old***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
13 
 and I can not[ ] even start to begin with NO interpreter.  There
was Court order for Polish interpreter for me ordered by the 
honorable Judge, but the interpreter didn’t show up because there is NO justice.”  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
construed Jadan’s filing as a motion for appointment of a Polish 
interpreter on appeal and denied the request.  It determined 
that “appointment of an interpreter is not necessary to raising 
any argument on appeal,” and “[b]ased upon consideration of 
[Jadan]’s motion and the record, we observe no authority for 
appointment of an interpreter on appeal.”  However, the ICA indicated that “a renewed request” could be filed “in the event 
that the merit panel schedules oral argument.”   14  
  Jadan, who was relieved of the requirement to pay court filing fees before the district court due to indigency and 
granted in forma pauperis status for her appeal, also moved for 
a fee waiver in order to acquire the transcripts she requested.  The ICA determined that Jadan had “fail[ed] to demonstrate that 
she is statutorily exempt from transcript fees” and denied the 
motion.  It later explained in its summary disposition order 
that 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 802-7 (2014), which 
provides for the waiver of transcript expenses for certain 
                     
14  Any errors in the quotations from Jadan’s briefs included in this 
opinion are in the original and have been intentionally left given the nature 
of the issues in this case.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
14 
 criminal defendants, was inapplicable in a civil appeal, and 
“Jadan remains responsible for providing the appellate court 
with appropriate transcripts to support her contentions on appeal.”   
 
 Jadan’s handwritten opening brief requested that the 
award of attorney’s fees be “take[n] away” and that the ICA grant her counterclaim.  The brief stated: “It is very difficult 
for me to express what I want to express information and 
explanation in American English without interpretor nor 
translator.”  Jadan went on to point out, as relevant here, that one of the five district court judges who heard her case indeed 
ordered the appointment of an interpreter, but no interpreter 
was ever appointed.   
  Cambridge’s answering brief argued in response that 
the absence of transcripts in the record alone warranted affirmance.  Even if the court did proceed to the merits, “[t]he 
record shows that [Jadan] understands, speaks and writes English 
well,” pointing again to the six other cases in which she 
appeared upon which Judge Haia had relied; “in one of those cases, she represented she was a [c]ourt translator.”
15  Plus, 
Cambridge argued, she proceeded through the district court and 
                     
15  See supra note 11. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
15 
 filed the instant appeal without the assistance of an 
interpreter.   
  Jadan’s handwritten reply brief reiterated, as relevant here, that she had “plead[ed] for Polish interpreter 
because [she is] not saying nor understand one half of this what 
[she] did master in Polish language to the perfection.”  She 
argued that she told the court that, besides her limited 
English, she was in “tormenting pain,” and a jaw injury impeded 
her ability to speak.   
  The ICA affirmed.  It noted the conflicting rulings with respect to her interpreter requests, but concluded that 
“without the transcripts we are unable to review what 
examinations (if any) the district court conducted and why or 
how the district court judges arrived at contrary conclusions.”  
It also pointed to the want of evidence in the record “showing 
that [Jadan] was unable to make herself understood before the 
district court,” relying on the fact that Jadan had “represented 
herself in two trials and numerous hearings after the district 
court’s finding that she did not require an interpreter.”   
  Represented by counsel, Jadan asked us to resolve one 
question in her application for writ of certiorari: “Did the ICA commit a grave error of law by failing to recognize that 
Petitioner, whose first language is Polish, was entitled to the 
appointment of an interpreter below and on appeal, pursuant to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
16 
 (1) Hawaii Judiciary Policy, (2) this Court’s Rules pertaining
to the appointment of an interpreter, and (3) the requirements
of due process of law?”16 
 
   
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
  Interpretation of court rules “is a question of law, which the appellate court reviews de novo.”  State v. Metcalfe, 
129 Hawaiʻi 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013) (brackets 
omitted) (quoting Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawaiʻ i 470, 479, 50 P.3d 
946, 955 (2002)). 
  The decision to appoint an interpreter rests within 
the sound discretion of the trial court.  “An abuse of 
discretion occurs if the trial court has ‘clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.’”  
Villaver v. Sylva, 145 Hawaiʻ i
 29, 34, 445 P.3d 701, 706 (2019) 
(quoting Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 
85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992)). 
                     
16  We resolve this case based on the application of court rules and 
therefore decline to reach the issue of due process. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
17 
 IV. DISCUSSION 
A.  The District Court Erred by Failing to Determine Whether 
Jadan’s Access to the Courts Would Be “Meaningful” Absent 
an Interpreter 
   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbids any 
program receiving federal aid from discriminating on the basis 
of national origin.  42 U.S.C. § 2000d.  In 2006, the Hawaiʻ i 
Legislature enacted HRS Chapter 321C, Hawaiʻ i’s Language Access 
Law, to reduce language barriers that inhibit limited English 
proficient (LEP) persons from meaningful access to services, 
programs, and activities offered by the State of Hawaiʻ i.  The 
legislature recognized: 
Many individuals living in Hawaii read, write, speak, 
and understand English.  There are many individuals, 
however, who are limited English proficient.  Language for limited English proficient persons can be a barrier to 
accessing important benefits or services, understanding and 
exercising important rights, complying with applicable 
responsibilities, or understanding other information 
provided by state- funded programs and activities. 
The purpose of this chapter is to affirmatively 
address, on account of national origin, the language access needs of limited English proficient persons.   
 
HRS § 321C-1 (Supp. 2012). 
  The Hawaiʻ i State  Judiciary is obligated under this 
chapter to “take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to
services, programs, and activities by [LEP] persons[.]”  
HRS § 321C-3(a) (Supp. 2012).  HRS § 321C-3(b) requires “each state agency . . . [to] provide competent, timely oral language 
services to limited English proficient persons who seek to 
access services, programs, or activities.”  The Judiciary  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
18 accordingly set forth a Language Action Plan (LAP) pursuant to 
its obligations under HRS § 321C-4 (Supp. 2012); the LAP guides 
judges and judiciary personnel in ensuring access to the courts 
for people with limited English proficiency.   See Language  
Access Plan for Persons with Limited English Proficiency, Hawaiʻi 
State Judiciary (2017-2018), https://perma.cc/UCJ4-VSMY.  17
Additionally, the Hawai ʻi Rules for Certification of 
Spoken-Language Interpreters (HRCSLI)  provide: “All persons 
involved in proceedings before the Hawaiʻi State Courts, 
regardless of literacy or proficiency in the English language, 
have the right to equal access to the courts and to services and 
programs provided by the Hawaiʻi State Courts.”  HRCSLI Rule 1.2.  
Further, “A person who is Limited English Proficient (LEP) 18
17Judiciary Policy #12 provides the guiding framework: 
The Hawaiʻi State Judiciary is committed to providing 
meaningful access to court processes and services to 
persons with limited English proficiency.  In all case types, the Judiciary shall reasonably provide, free of 
charge, and in a timely manner, competent court 
interpreters for parties, witnesses and individuals with a 
substantial interest in a case.  It shall also provide 
language assistance services at points of contact with the Judiciary, including over- the-counter and over
-the-
telephone encounters for all Judiciary- related business. 
The Judiciary shall notify the public of the Judiciary’s 
language assistance commitment. 
Language Access Plan for Persons with Limited English Proficiency, Hawaiʻi 
State Judiciary, 7 (2017-2018), https://perma.cc/UCJ4- VSMY. 
18In March 2019, this court ordered that the previous version of 
these rules, the Hawaiʻ i Rules for Certification of Spoken and Sign Language 
Interpreters, be vacated and replaced with the HRCSLI, effective July 2019.  This change did not affect the substance of the relevant rules. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
19  shall, throughout a legal proceeding, have the right to the 
assistance of a spoken-language interpreter appointed by the 
court as provided by court rule.”  HRCSLI Rule 1.3.  The HRCSLI 
also incorporates as Appendix B the June 22, 1995 “Order 
Adopting the Policies for Interpreted Proceedings in the Courts 
of the State of Hawaiʻi,” issued by Chief Justice Ronald Y. Moon.  
Appendix B provides:   
An interpreter is needed if, upon examination by the court, 
(1) a party or witness is unable to speak English so as tobe understood directly by counsel, court, and jury, or (2)
if a party is unable to hear, understand, speak, and/or useEnglish sufficiently to comprehend the proceedings and to
assist counsel in the conduct of the case.
HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(A); In re Doe, 99 Hawaiʻ i 522, 535, 57 
P.3d 447, 460 (2002) (“To assess whether an interpreter is
necessary, trial courts should consider the guidelines adopted
by the Chief Justice on June 22, 1995.”).
Appendix B, § I(B) further provides that an 
examination by the court is required “[i]f it appears that a party’s or witness’ primary language is not English or that a 
party or witness may not hear, understand, speak and/or use 
English well enough to fully participate in the proceedings[.]”  
Such an examination must occur “with or without a motion,” and 
the court must conduct the examination and state its conclusions 
on the record.  
HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(B).  Appendix B sets 
forth the following guidance as to the content of the 
examination: ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
20 
 The examination of a party or witness to determine if an 
interpreter is needed should usually include questions 
about the following: 
 
(1) Identification (for example: name, address, birthdate, 
age, place of birth); 
 (2) Active vocabulary in vernacular English (for example: 
“How did you come to court today?” “What kind of work do you do?” “Where did you go to school?” “What was the 
highest grade you completed?” “Describe what you see in the 
courtroom.” “What have you eaten today?”).  Questions 
should be phrased to avoid “yes- no” replies; 
 (3) The court proceedings (for example: the nature of the 
charge or the type of case before the court, the purpose of 
the proceedings and function of the court, the rights of a 
party or criminal defendant, and the responsibilities of a 
witness).  
 
HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(C).  
  In this case, the district court erred by failing to 
conduct the examination mandated by the HRCSLI to determine 
whether Jadan could “speak English so as to be understood 
directly by counsel, court, and jury,” whether she could 
communicate and speak in English “sufficiently to comprehend the 
proceedings,” and whether she could “understand, speak and/or 
use English well enough to fully participate in the 
proceedings[.]”  HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(A)-(B).   
  The district court had multiple opportunities to fully 
probe Jadan’s language access needs, but it repeatedly failed to 
do so.  For example, on the day of the possession trial, Jadan  
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
21      (continued . . .) 
 expressly requested an interpreter.19  The court’s only question 
before denying the request was how long she had been in the 
United States.  This sole question failed to resolve whether Jadan could “speak English so as to be understood,” “use English 
sufficiently to comprehend the proceedings,” or “understand 
. . . English well enough to fully participate in the 
proceedings[.]”  HRCSLI Appendix B, §1(A)-(B).  A person who has 
lived in the United States their entire life may nonetheless 
have limited English proficiency such that they require an 
interpreter in court.
20  
                     
19  This was not the first time Jadan asked for an interpreter.  
During the first status hearing, she asked for assistance as well (and 
although she asked for her friend to assist, the LAP is unequivocal that the 
assistance of a lay relative or friend is no substitute for a professional).  
Rather than consider the request, the court instead referred the parties to 
mandatory mediation.  When it is court- ordered, mediation constitutes a 
“court process[]” or “service[]” to which the Judiciary has promised litigants “meaningful access.”  Language Access Plan for Persons with Limited 
English Proficiency, Hawaiʻi State Judiciary, 7 (2017- 2018), 
https://perma.cc/UCJ4- VSMY; HRCSLI Rule 1.3 (guaranteeing “ throughout a legal 
proceeding, . . . the right to the assistance of a spoken- language 
interpreter appointed by the court as provided by court rule.” (emphasis 
added)).  It was therefore improper for the court to fail to address Jadan’s 
request before ordering her to participate in mediation.  The court should have, at minimum, ascertained her English proficiency and assessed her 
language access needs prior to ordering Jadan to mediate. 
 
20  Indeed, this question could, in some circumstances, have a 
chilling effect on access to the courts because it could be perceived as 
relating to the individual’s immigration status.  The American Bar 
Association’s Standards for Language Access in Courts cautions:  
 
Courts should avoid requesting or compiling individualized 
information that may inhibit requests for language access  services, such as information or documents potentially 
reflecting immigration status (i.e., green cards, work 
permits and social security numbers).  This type of 
information is irrelevant to determine language access 
needs and potentially erects a barrier to the courts. 
    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
22 The court also based its denial of an interpreter 
during the possession trial in part on the fact that it did not 
consider Jadan’s jaw injury relevant to the determination.  Injuries or illness are absolutely relevant if they exacerbate 
communication challenges for LEP persons.  The court should not 
have dismissed the injury as irrelevant; instead, consistent 
with court rules, it should have probed how and why, if at all, 
the injury affected her ability to communicate in English.   
This pattern continued throughout the proceedings, 
during which Jadan repeatedly requested language assistance.  Even during the brief period in which Jadan had counsel, the 
court merely inquired into whether Jadan could, in some ordinary 
sense, speak English – even noting for the record that when 
Jadan spoke in court, it was in English.
21  As her counsel aptly 
pointed out, the key question, about which the court was mandated to inquire, is whether Jadan could speak English at a 
high-enough level to meaningfully access the courts.   
Jadan’s written motion was resolved in part by 
reference to past cases in which Jadan was a party, which 
Standards for Language Access in Courts, American Bar Association, 39 (Feb. 
2012), https://perma.cc/MMW9- 9KY4. 
21It should also be noted our rules provide that appointment of an 
interpreter is appropriate when “a party . .
 . is unable to speak English so 
as to be directly understood by counsel[.]”  HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(A) 
(emphasis added).   Certainly, counsel’s representations that he could not 
understand and effectively communicate with his own client should have been 
given due weight under the rules.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
23 occurred years before the instant case began.  But the key 
inquiry is not whether Jadan once spoke proficient English, 
which is the most that the minutes of past cases could possibly 
reflect – and even that inference is tenuous at best.  Rather, 
the court is bound to ask whether she now speaks English well 
enough to give her meaningful access to the court.  Language 
proficiency is not static, so that determination requires the 
court to probe her English proficiency afresh.   
In a similar vein, the ICA pointed to the fact that 
“Jadan represented herself in two trials and numerous hearings 
after the district court’s finding that she did not require an 
interpreter.”  Respectfully, this reasoning is flawed – once her 
request was denied, it would seem she had little choice but to 
go it alone.  To hold that against her on appeal upends the 
purpose of appellate review. 
 
 In assessing a litigant’s language access needs - 
self-identified or otherwise - no particular colloquy must be 
performed or checklist met.  Our rules provide that the 
suggested open-ended questions about the specified topics 
“should usually” be included in an examination, but they do not
require them.  HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(C).  Given that our rule 
is flexible, we believe it useful to draw from other 
authorities’ approaches toward inquiring into a party’s 
language access needs, which offer additional lines of inquiry  
that our***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
24 courts may find instructive.  In particular, the American Bar 
Association (ABA) adopted Standards for Language Access in 
Courts in 2012.  In addition to some of the questions captured 
in Appendix B of the HRCSLI, the ABA suggests asking LEP 
persons: “Please tell me about your country of origin”; “How did
you learn English and what is most difficult about communicating
in English?”; and “Tell me a little about how comfortable you 
feel speaking and understanding English.”  Standards for  
Language Access in Courts, American Bar Association, 44 (Feb. 
2012), https://perma.cc/MMW9-9KY4.  We agree with the ABA that 
these may prove useful inquiries.  This case demonstrates as 
much.  Had similar questions been asked of Jadan, she may have 
been able to communicate what she repeatedly attempted to share 
with the district court: that she did not feel her English was 
of a courtroom level; that she struggled to translate her 
thoughts from Polish to English; and that what would normally 
take her a sentence to convey in Polish took far longer when she
phrased it in English.  And armed with those answers, the 
district court would have been positioned to determine whether 22 
 
 
 
22This court has turned to ABA standards as persuasive authority in 
a variety of contexts.  See, e.g., Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Au, 107 
Hawaiʻi 327, 341, 113 P.3d 203, 217 (2005) (attorney discipline); State v. 
Hussein, 122 Hawaiʻi 495, 504, 229 P.3d 313, 322 (2010) ( justification of a 
criminal sentence) ; State v. Scalera, 139 Hawaiʻi 453, 461- 62, 393 P.3d 1005, 
1013-14 (2017) (accused’s right to communicate with counsel); State v. 
Hernane, 145 Hawaiʻi 444, 451, 454 P.3d 385, 392 (2019) (speedy trial). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
25 
 Jadan’s access to the courts would in fact be meaningful without 
language assistance. 
 
 We emphasize that in evaluating a litigant’s answer to 
these questions, the touchstone is whether the person can “be 
understood directly by counsel, court, and jury,” and 
“understand, speak and/or use English sufficiently to comprehend 
the proceedings,” “to assist counsel in the conduct of the 
case,” and “to fully participate in the proceedings[.]”  HRCSLI 
Appendix B, § I(A)-(B).  In other words, the court must evaluate 
the answers to determine whether the litigant’s access will be meaningful.
23   
  Importantly, a court should conduct its examination on the record, and if it decides in its discretion to deny the 
request, it should make its reasons clear by expressing why the 
litigant’s English ability enables him or her to be understood, 
to comprehend the proceedings, to assist counsel, and to fully 
participate.  HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(B); see also Strook v. 
Kedinger, 766 N.W.2d 219, 226 (Wis. Ct. App. 2009) (“[O]nce a 
circuit court has notice of a language difficulty such that the ability to understand testimony or make him or herself 
understood may be a problem, it has an obligation to make a 
                     
23  The LAP instructs to assess the speaker’s responses for the 
following: “[i]nappropriate grammar,” “[a]wkward vocabulary,” “[l]ack of 
fluency,” “[u]nintelligible accents,” “[r]epeated statements,” or a “[b]lank 
look.”  Language Access Plan for Persons with Limited English Proficiency, 
Hawaiʻi State Judiciary, 11 (2017 -2018), https://perma.cc/UCJ4- VSMY. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
26 
 factual determination on the need for an interpreter.” (citation
omitted)).  Our review of the recordings of the proceedings 
confirms that the district court’s on-the-record findings in response to Jadan’s interpreter requests were superficial and 
insufficient.  The thrust of these findings is reflected in the 
minutes: The minutes from the August 5, 2016 possession trial 
reflect that the judge simply found that “[h]er English is 
fine.”  Likewise, the September 30, 2016 status hearing minutes 
reflect that Jadan “speaks English well[.]”  Concluding that a 
party’s English proficiency is “fine” fails to address his or her English competency in the unique context of the courtroom, 
where “good” or “fine” language ability may nonetheless fail to 
afford meaningful access to justice.
24 
   
  The ABA contemplates this misconception - that the ability to merely “speak English” suffices - and explains why a 
litigant’s self-identified language access needs should be given 
some deference: 
Courts should allow an LEP person to self- identify as 
needing services.  When an individual or [their] 
representative requests an interpreter, a judge or 
adjudicator should presume the need is bona fide.   This 
preference for self- identification recognizes that 
assessing language proficiency is a difficult and intensive 
task that requires training in language acquisition and 
language proficiency assessment – training not usually 
possessed by a judge or court personnel.  For example, a judge might be inclined to deny an interpreter for an 
individual after observing him or her conversing with an 
        
24               
The September 30, 2016 minutes also s tate that an interpreter was 
denied because Jadan “manage[d] on her own at the [possession] trial[.]”  During the possession trial, Jadan repeatedly requested language assistance 
precisely because she self- assessed as struggling to “manage on her own.” ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
27 
 attorney without the aid of an interpreter, or after 
observing the individual following simple instructions such 
as “sit down.”  Such a denial could be erroneous because it 
incorrectly assumes that the ability to use English for 
simple communications and rote statements (which are often 
memorized) is an indication of the language proficiency necessary for the meaningful comprehension and effective 
communication that is required to protect a person’s 
interest in a legal matter.  
Understanding legal proceedings and communications in 
court settings is particularly challenging to LEP individuals due to a number of factors: the complexity of 
legal proceedings; the use of specialized terminology; the 
importance of detailed and accurate information; the lack 
of familiarity with the legal system in the United States; 
the stressful and emotional content of the communication; and the impact of court proceedings on a person’s life, 
liberty, family relationships, or property interest.  As a 
result, many individuals who are comfortable speaking in 
English in less formal settings require interpreter 
services and translated written materials in court.   
Communicating under these circumstances should be done in the language in which the individual is most proficient.  
Furthermore, the importance of accuracy in legal 
proceedings outweighs any concern for abuse of the system 
in those rare instances where an LEP person appears to be unnecessarily requesting an interpreter.  Legal proceedings 
can be confusing and intimidating even for an individual 
who speaks English fluently; the potential for 
misunderstanding is more acute for one who does not.  In 
addition to misunderstanding information due to the language barrier, LEP persons from a country where legal 
systems and concepts vary substantially from those of the 
United States may be further confused when an interpreter 
is not used.  The failure to appoint an interpreter when 
one has been requested not only impairs that person’s 
access to justice but also can result in costs and 
inefficiencies to the court system in the form of appeals, 
reversals, and remands. 
 
Standards for Language Access in Courts, American Bar 
Association, 41-42 (Feb. 2012), https://perma.cc/MMW9-9KY4 
(emphases added) (footnotes omitted). 
  We agree.  The unique considerations of the courtroom 
setting mean that the mere fact a litigant can speak English 
passably in everyday life might nonetheless fail to afford her 
meaningful access to the courts.  And we reject the notion that ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
28 a base level of English proficiency alone can suggest that a 
request for an interpreter is not made in good faith.  In our 
view, the harms of the erroneous denial of an interpreter 
outweigh the risk that the rare bad faith request will be 
erroneously granted.  This is not to say that the court must 
grant every request for an interpreter – the court, of course, 
retains discretion to deny the request if the litigant’s English 
proficiency suffices to afford meaningful access to the courts.  
But that discretion only lies after the court ascertains the 
litigant’s actual, not assumed, language access needs based on 
an on-the-record probe.  
Jadan’s pro se status for most of the district court 
proceedings also heightened the need for a careful inquiry into 
whether her access to the court would be meaningful absent an 
interpreter.  During the damages trial, the court told Jadan, in 
response to yet another request for an interpreter, that her 
request was denied because litigants proceed pro se frequently 
and that she did not need a lawyer.  But Jadan was not asking 
for a lawyer, and the comparison is inapt – while she had no 
right to counsel, she certainly did have a right to an 
interpreter if she needed one.  HRCSLI Rule 1.3.   
Indeed, the fact that she did not have a lawyer should 
have made the court more, not less, sensitive to her language 
access needs.  Cf. Villars v. Villars, 305 P.3d 321, 328 (Alaska   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
29 2013) (“[W]e encourage trial courts to assess the need for 
interpreters for pro se litigants even in the absence of any 
formal request[.]”).  A litigant, especially a pro se litigant, 
as a threshold matter must be able to express why she is in 
court before a judge can consider the merits of her claim.  
Thus, just as courts must construe the pleadings of pro se 
litigants liberally, see Waltrip v. TS Enterprises, Inc., 140 
Hawaiʻi 226, 239, 398 P.3d 815, 828 (2016), courts should 
consider the request for an interpreter by a pro se litigant 
even more carefully and resolve doubt in favor of appointment 
where the court has questions about a pro se litigant’s ability 
to understand and be understood.  “[T]he underpinnings of this 
tenet” – as with the liberal construction rule – “rest on the 
promotion of equal access to justice.”  Villaver, 145 Hawai ʻi at
36, 445 P.3d at 708 (brackets omitted); Standards for Language  
Access in Courts, American Bar Association, 2 (Feb. 2012), 
https://perma.cc/MMW9-9KY4 (“[L]anguage services are critical to
ensure access to justice for LEP persons[.]”).  The Nevada 
Supreme Court recognized this principle in connection with 
similar proceedings:   
 
It is apparent that unless the non- English speaking party 
has an interpreter he is effectively barred from access to 
the small claims proceeding.  Because small claims court 
proceedings are informal and involve the spoken language to resolve conflicts between the parties, rather than relying 
on counsel representation, a particular concern arises when 
a non-English speaking litigant lacks an interpreter’s 
assistance: “[a]lthough the small claims court functions ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
30 successfully without lawyers, pleadings, legal rules of 
evidence, juries, and formal findings, it cannot function 
without the use of language.”  This heightened need for 
ready and accurate oral communications in small claims 
proceedings is echoed in other types of cases in which the 
parties are self- represented.  
Caballero v. Seventh Judicial Dist. Court ex rel. Cty. of White 
Pine, 167 P.3d 415, 420 (Nev. 2007) (emphasis added) (footnotes 
and citations omitted).
In sum, when a party asks for an interpreter, or if 
the court has difficulty understanding a litigant’s English or 
otherwise suspects they may need language assistance, the record 
should reflect that the court has engaged in a meaningful 
examination into the party’s language proficiency by asking 
open-ended questions designed to assess his or her ability to 
understand the proceedings and communicate with the court and 
counsel.  Furthermore, the record should include findings about 
the party’s English language proficiency in the context of court 
proceedings.  Courts should not merely evaluate whether a party 
can speak English; the critical inquiry is whether the party 
would be able to meaningfully access the court absent an 
interpreter because their English enables them to understand 
and be understood by the court and counsel.   
In the instant case, the district court abused its 
discretion by denying Jadan’s requests for an interpreter 
without adequate inquiry into her language access needs.  The 
court’s examination - or lack thereof - into Jadan’s language***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
31 proficiency failed to assess whether Jadan’s access would be 
meaningful without an interpreter.  Cf. Villaver, 145 Hawai ʻi at 
37, 445 P.3d at 709 (failing to consider the factors required 
by court rule constituted an abuse of discretion).
The proper remedy is the vacatur of the judgment in 
favor of Cambridge with respect to damages and attorney’s fees, 
and remand for additional proceedings.25  The failure to conduct 
the inquiry our rules prescribe would perhaps be harmless if our 
review of the record “satisfie[d] us that [Jadan] was able to 
express [her]self with clearness in the English language and to 
understand the questions asked.”  Cornwell v. Wailuku Sugar Co., 
20 Haw. 585, 586 (Haw. Terr. 1911); see also Doe, 99 Hawai ʻi at 
535, 57 P.3d at 460.26  In other words, we would leave the 
judgment undisturbed if, despite the district court’s failure 
to thoroughly probe her language access needs, Jadan nonetheless
25This is the only relief Jadan requests on appeal.  We therefore 
do not address the writ of possession. 
26In its supplemental brief, Cambridge urges us to affirm based on 
Doe, but
 its reliance on that case is misplaced.  In Doe, we held that a 
mother in a proceeding affecting her parental rights was not “substantially 
prejudiced” by the absence of an interpreter for some of the proceedings.  99 
Hawaiʻi at 532, 57 P.3d at 457.  In that case, however, “[s]everal witnesses 
testified that Mother comprehends and speaks English in daily conversation, and specifically at home.”  
Id. at 535, 57 P.3d at 460.  Moreover, Mother – 
who was represented by counsel – “agree[d] to proceed without an interpreter 
in some instances” and was given the opportunity to request postponement in an interpreter’s absence.  Id. at 535, 57 P.3d at 460. 
This case presents markedly different circumstances than Doe.  
Here, by contrast, Jadan – who was pro se for the majority of the proceedings 
–repeatedly requested an interpreter to no avail.  And the record reflects
the court failed to even adequately inquire into her language access needs –let alone hear from several witnesses (and it bears repeating, her own
counsel claimed he could not communicate with her) .***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
32 received meaningful access to justice.  But that is not the 
case.  Based on our review of the nine district court hearings, 
there were numerous occasions in which Jadan struggled to understand and to be understood.  On this record, it cannot be 
said that the district court’s failure to adequately inquire 
into Jadan’s language access needs was harmless.  
B. Our Rules Allow for Language Assistance on Appeal
This case reveals an important gap in the Judiciary’s 
language access provisions.  In light of the disposition of this 
case, evaluating whether the ICA abused its discretion in 
denying Jadan’s interpreter request on appeal is unnecessary.  
However, the ICA, in denying Jadan’s request for language 
assistance, suggested that there is “no authority for 
appointment of an interpreter on appeal.”   
We respectfully disagree.  Our rules provide that 
“[a]ll persons involved in proceedings before the Hawaiʻ
i State 
Courts, regardless of literacy or proficiency in the English 
language, have the right to equal access to the courts and to 
services and programs provided by the Hawai ʻi State Courts.”  
HRCSLI Rule 1.2 (emphasis added).  Rule 1.3 further mandates 
that “[a] person who is Limited English Proficient (LEP) shall, 
throughout a legal proceeding, have the right to the assistance 
of a spoken-language interpreter appointed by the court as provided by court rule.”  HRCSLI Rule 1.3 (emphasis added).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
33 Appellate proceedings are self-evidently “proceedings before the 
Hawaiʻi State Courts” and “legal proceeding[s],” and therefore 
fall within the ambit of the HRCSLI.
However, our rules are particularly tailored to the 
context of legal proceedings taking place in a courtroom 
setting.  An examination by the presiding judge must be 
conducted “on the record” and such an examination is oral and 
in-person.  HRCSLI Appendix B, § I(B)–(C).  But appellate judges 
will rarely have the opportunity to perform such an inquiry 
given the nature of the appellate process.  And although the ICA 
contemplated an interpreter could perhaps be appointed for oral 
argument, many cases in our appellate courts are resolved on the 
briefs without any occasion for in-court argument.  At present, 
the rules do not contemplate the appointment of a translator to 
assist in the translation of appellate briefs, and the criteria 
for determining when an interpreter is needed focuses on a 
party’s ability to “speak” English so as to be understood or 
“hear” English so as to understand the proceedings, rather than, 
for instance, ability to “write” in English so as to be 
understood, or “read” English so as to understand as would be 
more applicable to the appellate process.  See HRCSLI Appendix 
B, § I(A).  Moreover, Jadan’s application to this court 
indicates that Jadan requested an interpreter on appeal to help***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
34  her understand the rules of appellate procedure,27 including 
HRAP Rules 28 and 10, and to help her submit transcripts and 
appellate briefs in accordance with these rules.28  Translated 
versions of the appellate rules are not available.29   
Even though an appeal is no doubt a “proceeding[] 
before the Hawai ʻi State Courts,” HRCSLI Rule 1.2, this court 
lacks the necessary information to decide whether, when, and how 
language services should be provided in this new context.  We 
decline to go farther than clarifying the HRCSLI furnishes 
authority for the provision of language assistance on appeal.  
Instead, we find it appropriate to refer this matter to the 
Hawaiʻi Supreme Court Committee on Court Interpreters and 
Language Access to develop standards and best practices to 
ensure meaningful language access during appellate proceedings. 
27We note, however, that Rule 9 of the Code of Professional 
Responsibility for Court Interpreters, to which court interpreters are 
subject, prohibits an interpreter from giving legal or any other kind of 
advice to parties. 
 HRCSLI § 5.1; HRCSLI Appendix B, § III, Rule 9. 
28Eligible parties are entitled to over- the-counter language access 
services that provide meaningful access, which are sometimes provided through a bilingual judiciary employee or through telephonic interpretation services, and a live interpreter may not be required.   
29When written translations are not available, sight translation 
services, whether live, remote, or telephonic, or other methods that provide meaningful language access, could perhaps be considered.  However, it is for 
the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court Committee on Court Interpreters and Language Access 
to develop standards and best practices to ensure meaningful language access 
during appellate proceedings. 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
35 
 V. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s May 1, 2019 
judgment on appeal is affirmed in part, and vacated in part with 
respect to Jadan’s counterclaim.  The district court’s March 13, 
2017 judgment is vacated, and we remand this case to the 
district court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Gary Victor Dubin and 
Frederick J. Arensmeyer
for petitioner  
 
Michael A. Glenn for respondent 
(Richard A. Yanagi on the brief)/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 /s/ John M. Tonaki 
