***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFI C REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
KIMBERLY A. PASCO, Respondent/Petitioner- Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE EMPLOYEES’ RETIR EMENT SYSTEM, 
Petitioner/Respondent- Appellee . 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-13-0003629 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-13-0003629; CIV. NO. 12- 1-3294) 
 
MAY 22, 2018 
  
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,  
WITH NAKAYAMA, J. , DISSENTING,  
WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY Mc KENNA, J.  
 
I.  Introduction 
This case concerns whether an injury suffered by Kimberly 
A. Pasco (“Pasco”) that arose while she worked as a Public 
Health Educator IV for the Department of Health of the State of Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0003629
22-MAY-2018
08:20 AM2 
 
 
 Hawaiʻi (“DOH”) i
s a covered injury under Hawai ʻi Revised 
Statutes (“HRS”) § 88-336 (Supp. 2007),1 which provides service-
connected disability retirement benefits under the Employees’ 
Retirement System’s (“ERS[’s]”) Hybrid Plan to Class H public 
officers and employees, such as Pasco.  At issue is whether the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) erred in ruling that 
Pasco’s injury resulted from an “accident,” i.e., an unlooked 
for mishap or untoward event which is not expected or designed2 
“occurring while in the actual performance of duty at some 
definite time and place.”  
We hold that Pasco’s permanent  incapacitating injuries to 
her elbow, arm, and hand, which manifested on April 17, 2007 
while Pasco was in the actual performance of duty as a public 
health educator, were the result of an “accident  occurring while 
in the actual performance of duty at some definite time and 
                         
1    Service- connected disability retirement.   (a)  Upon  
application of a class H member, or the person appointed by 
the family court as guardian of an incapacitated member, 
any class H member who has been permanently incapacitated 
for duty as the natural and proximate result of an accident 
occurring while in the actual performance of duty at some 
definite time and place, or as the cumulative result of 
some occupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on 
the member’s part, may be re tired by the board for service -
connected disability. . . .  
 
HRS § 88- 336. 
 
2 See Lopez v. Bd. of Trs., Emps.’ Ret. Sys. , 66 Haw. 127, 130, 657 P.2d 
1040, 1043 (1983) (“An accident is an unlooked for mishap or untoward event 
which is not expected or designe d.” (citing Chun Wong Chu v. Yee Wo Chan , 26 
Haw. 785 (1923))).  “Accident” is similarly defined in Hawai ʻi Administrative 
Rule (“HAR”) § 6- 22-2 (1989) as follows: “‘Accident’ means an unlooked for 
mishap or untoward event which is not expected or designed, occurring while 
in the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place.”  3 
 
 
 place.”  We therefore affirm the ICA’s July 14, 2016 Judgment on 
Appeal, entered pursuant to its June 17, 2016 Memorandum 
Opinion, which vacated the September 17, 2013 “Decision and 
Order Affirming the Final Decision of Respondent- Appellee Board 
of Trustees of the Employees’ Retirement System of the State of 
Hawaii and Dismissing Petitioner- Appellant Kimberly Pasco’s 
Appeal” and the September 17, 2013 “Final Judgment,” and we 
remand this matter to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(“circuit court”) for further proceedings consistent with the 
ICA’s Memorandum Opinion and this opinion.  
II.  Background 
A. Factual Background  
In 2006, Pasco worked for the DOH as a public health 
educator who helped start a nutrition program on Kaua ʻi, and 
later expanded it to Maui and the Big Island.  As she did not 
have a permanent desk, Pasco typed voluminous program reports on 
a laptop at vacant desk spaces in various DOH departments, as 
well as the lunchroom and conference room, based on 
availability.  By March 2007, Pasco was provided an old metal 
desk at the Kapa
ʻa Neighborhood Center, as well as a desktop 
computer to supplement her laptop.  Pasco typically typed two to 
three hours a day at work, but those hours increased when 
project deadlines neared.  Specifically, as a program report for 4 
 
 
 a federally funded project was due in mid- April 2007, Pasco’s 
typing increased in the weeks leading up to the deadline to the 
point that she typed seven hours per day from April 12 to April 
17 in an effort to timely complete the report.      
According to an April 25, 2007 workers’ compensation report 
completed by a supervisor, on April 17, 2007 at 4:15 p.m. during 
Pasco’s workshift, she was injured when she used her computer 
keyboard and mouse.  That injury, as described by Pasco, was an 
“instant” “severe throbbing, aching kind of pain,” that was 
located in her right inner elbow and led down to her fourth and 
fifth fingers, as well as an aching and burning sensation in her 
fingers.  Pasco’s right arm, wrist, and hand became so fatigued 
and painful that she had difficulty using her right arm and hand 
to do work, and she could not
 sleep.   
This was the first time Pasco had experienced pain in this 
area of her body, despite extensively typing for three weeks 
leading up to April 17, 2007, and carrying binders, training 
materials, and a laptop when traveling interisland bi
-weekly in 
January 2007 to conduct training sessions.  Also, prior to April 
17, 2007, Pasco did not have any pre-existing injuries to her 
hands, arm s, or elbows.     
Following April 17, 2007, Pasco began seeking medical 
treatment for her injury from physicians and physical or 5 
 
 
 occupational therapists on Kaua ʻi, Oʻahu, and the mainland, as 
the pain would not cease.  After briefly returning to work on 
May 2, 2007, by May 14, 2007, Pasco reported that her left arm 
began to bother her.   She suspected it was because she used 
voice-activated software to type at work following her injury; 
however, the software made frequent errors and she used her left 
hand to manually correct them.   
Several of Pasco’s treating physicians diagnosed Pasco with 
medial epicondylitis, also referred to as tendinitis along the 
medial epicondyle.  In a March 31, 2008 independent medical 
evaluation, however, Dr. Daniel I. Singer concluded Pasco 
suffered from non-work- related myofascial pain syndrome, which 
is pain in the soft tissue that is unrelated to tendons or the 
ulnar or median nerves.  
When conservative treatment for medial epicondylitis proved 
unsuccessful, Pasco underwent left ulnar nerve decompression 
surgeries at the Mayo Clinic on August 27, 2008 and October 9, 
2008.  After her surgeries, Pasco began to experience a new type 
of burning pain in her left arm, and was diagnosed with complex 
regional pain syndrome, left upper extremity greater than right 
upper extremity.  Pasco continued to experience pain in her un-
operated right arm.   
 6 
 
 
 B. Pasco’s Application for Benefits  
 On April 13, 2009, Pasco submitted an application for 
service-connected disability retirement.  In describing her 
April 17, 2007 accident, Pasco stated: 
 
During April 2007 I was required to do extensive and 
unreasonable amounts of typing up to 7 hrs a day to meet 
project deadlines.  A support staff including a clerk was 
not given so I injured bi -lateral elbow, arm, hand.  Also 
materials to train DOH/DOE staff were carried inter -island 
and this contributed to extensive injury.  
 
In a statement attached to her application, her employer 
described Pasco’s work conditions as: “New office for new 
program.  Clerk not yet hired, full computers not yet purchased.  
Extensive typing on a laptop computer.”  Additionally, the 
employer’s account of the accident stated: “Extensive typing on 
a laptop without assistance of a clerk typist put stress and 
strain on right arm, wrist, and ha nd.”  The employer also 
indicated the accident occurred at 4:15 p.m. on April 17, 2007 
at the Kapaʻ a Neighborhood Center while Pasco was “on duty”; the 
accident was not the result of Pasco’s own willful negligence; 
Pasco appeared to have suffered a disability as the actual and 
proximate result of the accident; and that because Pasco was 
incapable of continued work in the position, her appointment was 
not extended.    
 In its report to the Board of Trustees of the Employees’ 
Retirement System (“ERS Board”) d ated August 19, 2009, the ERS 7 
 
 
 Medical Board (“Medical Board”) concluded that Pasco’s 
incapacitating diagnosis was non- work-related myofascial pain 
syndrome of the arms, and not the medial epicondylitis that had 
been diagnosed by several of Pasco’s treating  physicians.  Thus, 
although there was no dispute that Pasco was permanently 
incapacitated for the further performance of duty through no  
“wilful negligence on [her] part,” the Medical Board determined 
that Pasco’s incapacity was not the result of an “accident,” 
i.e., “an unlooked for mishap or an untoward event,” nor was it 
the result of an “occupational hazard,” i.e., “the cumulative 
result of a danger or risk inherent in and concomitant to [her] 
occupation.”  Accordingly, the Medical Board recommended to  the 
ERS Board that Pasco be denied service- connected disability 
retirement.  
 
By letter dated December 29, 2009, notice was issued to 
Pasco that the ERS Board proposed to deny Pasco’s application 
based on the Medical Board’s report.  In a statement dated 
February 16, 2010, Pasco, pro se, timely filed an appeal with 
the ERS Board.  A hearing officer was assigned on March 2, 2010, 
and shortly thereafter, Pasco obtained counsel.  
 A contested case hearing was held on September 12, 2011.  A 
member of the Medical Board, Dr. Patricia Chinn, testified that 
in her expert opinion, Dr. Singer’s diagnosis of non -work-8 
 
 
 related myofascial pain syndrome was correct.  Dr. Chinn also 
clarified that the Medical Board determined that Pasco’s 
condition was not the result of an “accident” only because it 
did not occur at any definite place and time, as the injury was 
described in the medical record as a “cumulative or repe titive 
injury.”     
 
The hearing officer issued a Recommended Decision dated 
April 23, 2012.  As an initial matter, the hearing officer found 
that Pasco did not have pre- existing injuries to her elbow, arm, 
and hands prior to April 17, 2007, and that typing was part of 
Pasco’s normal and routine job duties.  The hearing officer 
disagreed with the Medical Board an d concluded that Pasco’s 
incapacitating diagnosis was not myofascial pain syndrome.  
Rather, the hearing officer found Pasco’s testimony credible 
when she testified “that the unnatural positioning of elbows . . 
. while typing for extended periods of time . . . result[ed]  in 
elbow pain.”  Further, as Pasco’s pain was specific and not 
diffused, and as several of Pasco’s treating physicians with 
various specializations from Kaua ʻi, Honolulu, and Minnesota 
consistently diagnosed Pasco with medial epicondylitis, the 
hearing officer found Pasco initially had medial epicondylitis 
due to extensive typing, which led to complex regional pain 
syndrome, ultimately incapacitating her.   Additionally, the 9 
 
 
 hearing officer found that Pasco was not a malingerer as she 
diligently pursued many courses of treatment, including surgery 
as a last resort.      
 Nevertheless, the hearing officer concluded that the 
“overuse of Petitioner’s arms over a period of time did not 
constitute an ‘accident’ and there was no occupational hazard.”  
The hearing officer opined that as the overuse of Pasco’s arms 
took place over a period of time, it did not occur at a 
“specific time and place” and thus did not constitute an 
“accident.”  Furthermore, in her opinion the hardships faced by 
Pasco, such as lacking a permanent desk, typing long hours, or 
transporting heavy materials were not hazards unique to Pasco’s 
job, and therefore did not constitute an occupational hazard.  
 As to the issue of whether an “accident” occurred, the 
hearing officer disting uished Pasco’s circumstances from those 
in Myers v. Board of Trustees, Employees’ Retirement System , 68 
Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 902 (1985), a case in which this court 
affirmed the award of service- connected disability benefits to 
an employee who hurt his back when lifting a coffee pot, by 
noting that the employee in Myers suffered his injury from a 
single lifting, and not from multiple liftings or overuse over a 
period of time.  The hearing officer also appeared to reject the 
notion that any “accident” could occu r due to overuse over a 10 
 
 
 period of time by noting that the Supreme Court had determined 
in Lopez, 66 Haw. 127, 657 P.2d 1040, that “an accident did not 
occur when [an] employee’s incapacitation was due to work 
pressures and stresses over a period of time.”    
 Ultimately, the hearing officer recommended that the ERS 
Board reject the Medical Board’s finding that Pasco’s 
incapacitating diagnosis was myofascial pain syndrome, and 
concluded instead that Pasco suffered from medial epicondylitis, 
leading to complex regional pain syndrome.  In all other 
respects, the hearing officer recommended the findings and 
certification of the Medical Board dated August 19, 2009 be 
affirmed, and Pasco be denied service- connected d isability 
retirement benefits.     
 The ERS Board adopted the hearing officer’s Recommended 
Decision as its Proposed Decision dated June 22, 2012.   Upon 
consideration of Pasco’s exceptions, the Medical Board’s  
opposition to those exceptions , Pasco’s supplemental memorandum, 
and the parties’ oral argument  regarding the exceptions at a 
hearing on November 13, 2012, the ERS Board issued its Final 
Decision on December 19, 2012.  The Final Decision affirmed the 
Proposed Decision, adopted the Recommended Decision, and denied 
Pasco’s application for service -connected disability retirement 
benefits.         11 
 
 
 C. Circuit Court Proceedings 
 Pasco timely filed an appeal with the circuit court3 on 
December 26, 2012.  In her opening brief filed on April 12, 
2013, Pasco’s points of error were solely based on whether the 
ERS Board erred in denying Pasco service- connected disability 
retirement benefits “on the basis that Petitioner had failed to 
prove by the preponderance of the evidence that her permanent 
incapacitation was the natural and proximate result of an 
accident at some definite time and place.”  Oral argumen t was 
held on August 15, 2013.  
 On September 17, 2013, the circuit court issued its 
“Decision and Order Affirming the Final Decision of Respondent -
Appellee Board of Trustees of the Employees’ Retirement System 
of the State of Hawaii and Dismissing Petitioner
-Appellant 
Kimberly Pasco’s Appeal.”  The circuit court concluded that 
Pasco’s excessive keyboarding, whether over weeks or months, 
does not describe or constitute an accident occurring while in 
the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place 
within the meaning of HRS § 88- 336.  Final Judgment was entered 
on September 17, 2013.   
D. ICA Proceedings 
 Pasco timely filed a notice of appeal on September 27, 
2013.  In its June 17, 2016 Memorandum Opinion, the ICA noted 
                         
3 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presiding.  12 
 
 
 that HRS § 88-336 uses analogous and identical language to that 
used in HRS § 88-79,4 and that, as clarified by the Supreme Court 
in Panado v. Board of Trustees, Employees’ Retirement System , 
134 Hawaiʻ i 1, 332 P.3d 144 (2014), the exact moment of injury 
need not be identified to conclude that an “accident” occurred 
for the purposes of HRS § 88- 79.  See Pasco v. Bd. of Trs. of 
the Emps. Ret. Sys. , No. CAAP -13-0003629, at 8 –9 (App. June 17, 
2016) (mem.).   
Specifically, in Panado, we rejected the ERS Board’s 
argument that “the word ‘definite’ in ‘definite place and time’ 
requires a showing of the ‘specific time and place’ at which 
[Panado’s] injury occurred.”  134 Hawai ʻi at 13, 332 P.3d at 156.  
In Panado, the employee had satisfied the statutory requirement 
that an accident had occurred “while in the actual performance 
of duty at some definite time and place” by establishing that 
she was injured some time during her October 8 –9, 2004 work 
shift.  Id.    
Based on Panado , the ICA concluded here that Pasco was able 
to identify a “definite” time and place of her work -related 
injury:  
Pasco described her injury as resulting from extensive 
keyboarding that was required at her job as the cause of 
her disability.  She could point to the period of time, 
                         
4 HRS § 88- 79 is the service -connected disability retirement statute for 
Class A and Class B members of the ERS, whereas HRS § 88- 336 is the service -
connected disability retirement statute applicable to Class H members.  13 
 
 
 “April 2007” when this activity intensified, leading up to 
the point, on April 17, 2007,  that the pain from her injury 
was so severe that it caused her to seek medical attention.  
Her employer, DOH, did not contest these assertions.  
 
Pasco, mem. op. at 9.  Accordingly, the ICA vacated the circuit 
court’s September 17, 2013 “Decision and Order  . . .” and “Final 
Judgment,” and remanded the case to the circuit court with 
directions to vacate the ERS Board’s denial of disability 
retirement to Pasco and for further proceedings consistent with 
its decision. 
E. Issues on Certiorari 
 The ERS Board raises two questions on certiorari: 
A.  Did the First Circuit Court and ERS Board err in 
concluding that Pasco’s overuse of her arms in typing and 
transporting training materials over weeks and months did 
not constitute an “accident occurring while in the actual 
performance of duty at some d efinite time and place” within 
the meaning of HRS § 88 -336(a) and [Hawai ʻi Administrative 
Rules (“HAR ”)] § 6-22-2? 
 
B.  Was the First Circuit Court right or wrong in 
determining that the ERS Board was not clearly erroneous in 
finding that Pasco had failed to prove by a preponderance 
of the evidence that her permanent incapacity was the 
“natural and proximate result” of an accident as required 
by HRS § 88 -336(a)? 
  
The ERS Board argues that it did not agree or stipulate 
that Pasco was injured on April 17, 2007.  Rather, the ERS Board 
argues that Dr. Chinn and the Medical Board had agreed with Dr. 
Singer that Pasco suffered from a pain syndrome not directly 
related to work.  As such, the ERS Board distinguishes Pasco’s 
case from Panado
 because the parties in Panado had stipulated 
that the applicant- employee had been injured during a specific  14 
 
 
 workshift.   
The ERS Board also argues that because Pasco’s injury 
“developed over weeks and months,” it was not the result of a 
discrete event that occurred at a fixed time and place, which is 
required under the statute.  The ERS further argues that because 
Pasco claims to have been injured while performing her regular 
work duties, “[t]he only thing that was unexpected or unforeseen 
was that Pasco began to have pain sympto ms” while working, which 
does not amount to an “accident” for service -related disability 
retirement.  The ERS Board also asserts that because the ERS 
Board did not stipulate that Pasco’s permanent incapacity was 
the natural and proximate result of her “claimed accident,” the 
ICA erred in concluding otherwise.  
Pasco asserts in her opposition brief that the ICA was 
correct to apply Panado  to Pasco’s case.  Pasco also appears to 
suggest that various workers’ compensation cases, such as Van 
Ness v. State of Hawai ʻi, Department of Education , 131 Hawai ʻi 
545, 319 P.3d 464 (2014), and Lawhead v. United Air Lines , 59 
Haw. 551, 584 P.2d 119 (1978), are also applicable to her case.   
III.  Standard s of Review 
A. Interpretation of a Statute 
Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de 
novo.  See Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of  15 
 
 
 Appeals, 114 Hawai ʻi 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)  (citation 
omitted).  When construing statutes, the court is governed by 
the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.  
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
 
When there is ambiguity in a statute, the meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, 
with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may 
be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.  
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in 
determining legislative intent, such as legislative 
history, or the reason and spirit of the law.  
 
114 Hawaiʻ i at 193-94, 159 P.3d at 152- 53 (citations omitted).  
 
B. Administrative Agency Appeals 
Ordinarily, deference will be given to decisions of 
administrative agencies acting within the realm of their 
expertise.  The rule of judicial deference, however, does 
not apply when the agency’s reading of the statute 
contravenes the legislature’s manifest purpose.  
Consequently, we have not hesitated to reject an incorrect 
or unreasonable statutory construction advanced by the 
agency entr usted with the statute’s implementation.  
 
Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 98 Hawai ʻi 233, 245, 47 P.3d 
348, 360 (2002) (citations and brackets omitted). 
IV.  Discussion 
A.  The ERS Did Not Challenge the Nature of Pasco’s Injury  
As a preliminary matter, with respect to the second issue 
asserted by the ERS Board on certiorari, the hearing officer 16 
 
 
 specifically found that Pasco’s medial epicondylitis, which 
initially manifested on April 17, 2007, was due to work- related 
extensive typing.5  As the ERS Board adopted the hearing 
officer’s recommended decision as its final decision, it, too, 
agreed that Pasco’s injury was medial epicondylitis due to 
extensive typing, eventually leading to complex regional pain 
syndrome.  Accordingly, any assertions by the ERS Board on this 
appeal that Pasco’s injury was due to non -work-related 
myofascial pain syndrome, or that her incapacity was not the 
natural and proximate result of extensive typing, are contrary 
to its Final Decision. 
Therefore, the remaining questions are those contained in 
the first issue on certiorari:  whether Pasco suffered an 
                         
5 Neither of the parties contest s the hearing officer’s findings, which 
include: (1) Pasco did not have pre -existing injuries of her elbow, arm and 
hands prior to the alle ged accident of April 17, 2007; (2) Pasco’s testimony 
was credible when she testified “that the unnatural positioning of elbows . . 
. while typing for extended periods of time could result in elbow pain”; (3) 
Pasco began to feel pain in her rig ht arm, wrist, and hand on April  17, 2007 
while typing at work; and (4) Pasco did initially have medial epicondylitis, 
which eventually led to complex regional pain syndrome .   
 
Although Pasco had asserted in her “Application for Disability 
Retirement” that the carrying of training materials contributed to her 
injury, the hearing officer did not specifically make such a finding; in 
contrast, the hearing officer did specifically note that she found Pasco’s 
testimony credible that extensive typing caused her elbow pain.  Also, 
nothing in the record indicates that Pasco engaged in extensive typing 
outside of her position.  
 
Given these findings by the hearing officer, the ERS Board’s assertion 
that the hearing officer had found that “Pasco failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that her permanent incapacity was ‘the natural 
and proximate result’ of her claimed accident of April 17 , 2007,” is plainly 
incorrect.    
 17 
 
 
 “accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty at 
some definite time and place.”   
B. Pasco Qualifies for Service- Connected Disability Retirement  
 
 HRS § 88-336 provides in relevant part:  
 
Service- connected disability retirement.   (a)  [A]ny class 
H member who has been permanently incapacitated for duty as 
the natural and proximate result  of an accident occurring 
while in the actual performance of duty at some definite 
time and place . . . may be retired by the board for 
service- connected disability. . . .  
 
Thus, service-connected disability retirement is available to 
Pasco if she has been permanently incapacitated for duty as “the 
natural and proximate result of an accident occurring while in 
the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place.”   
 1. Pasco’s injury resulted from an “accident .” 
 The first issue we must address i s whether Pasco’s injury 
was the result of an “accident.”  “ An accident is an unlooked 
for mishap or untoward event which is not expected or designed.”  
Lopez, 66 Haw. at 130, 657 P.2d at 1043 (cit ation omitted ).  
“Accident” is similarly defined in HAR § 6 -22-2 as follows:  
“‘Accident’ means an unlooked for mishap [6] or untoward event 
which is not expected or designed, occurring while in the actual 
performance of duty at some definite time and place.”  
In denying Pasco’s application for service -connected 
disability benefits by adopting the hearing officer’s 
                         
6  “Mishap” is defined as “[a] small accident or mistake, esp. when the 
consequences are not severe; a relatively trivial instance of bad luck, 
mischance.”  Black’s Law Dictionary  1151 (10th ed. 2014).  18 
 
 
 recommendations, the ERS Board concluded that an “accident” 
could not occur “over a period of time”  because in Lopez , 66 
Haw. 127, 657 P.2d 1040, thi s court concluded that “an accident 
did not occur when [an] employee’s incapacitation was due to 
work pressures and stresses over a period of time.”  This 
conclusion misinterprets Lopez.  
Lopez must be viewed in light of Kikuta v. Board of  
Trustees, Employ ees’ Retirement System , 66 Haw. 111, 657 P.2d 
1030 (1983), as both cases were issued by this court on the same 
day, and each addressed the meaning of “accident” in the 
service-connected disability retirement context.  Indeed, in 
Myers, 68 Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 902, this court referred to both 
Lopez and Kikuta to explain why an employee, who was injured 
when lifting a coffee pot, suffered an “accident.”  See 68 Haw. 
at 97 & n.1, 704 P.2d at 904 & n.1.   
In Lopez, an industrial safety engineer for the State 
applied for service-connected disability retirement after he 
became incapacitated from the further performance of his work 
due to manic-depressive psychosis.  See 66 Haw. at 128, 657 P.2d 
at 1041.  In concluding that the engineer’s job pressures and 
stresses did not constitute an “accident,”7 this court noted: 
“[T]here was no unexpected event or unforeseen occurrence which 
                         
7 The court also disagreed with the engineer’s argument that his job 
pressures and stresses amounted to an occupational hazard.  See Lopez, 66 
Haw. at 129, 657 P.2d at 1042.  19 
 
 
 resulted in the appellant’s present incapacity.  It is not 
enough, under the retirement law, that work pressures and 
stresses over a period of time were contributory causes of his 
mental infirmity.”  66 Haw. at 131, 657 P.2d at 1043.   The ERS 
Board focused on this holding from Lopez and took it to mean 
that the etiology of an “accident” could not develop over a 
period of time.  However, the Lopez court’s reasoning  shows 
that the court’s focus was on the fact that no “unexpected 
event” or “unforeseen occurrence” had caused the employee’s 
incapacitation.  In Lopez, the claimed “accident” was the result 
of general job stresses and pressures occurring over several 
years, but there simply was no “mishap” or “event.”    
In contrast, the manifestation of Pasco’s pain on April 17, 
2007 was an “unlooked for mishap or untoward event which [was] 
not expected or designed.”  Whether an event is not expected or 
designed is viewed from the perspective of the employee, as 
illustrated by Kikuta , 66 Haw. 111, 657 P.2d 1030.  In Kikuta, 
the ERS Board had denied benefits to an employee who was on 
working time when he was stabbed by his brother- in-law and 
consequently died.  The circuit court affirmed the decision.  On 
appeal to this court, the ERS Board argued the stabbing was not 
an “accident,” as the employee should have anticipated the 
attack because he was previously warned that his brother- in-law 20 
 
 
 was “out to get him.”  66 Haw. at 113, 657 P.2d at 1032.  This 
court reversed, first noting that the common and accepted 
definition of “accident” is “an unexpected happening to which 
the claimant did not culpably contribute .”  66 Haw. at 114, 657 
P.2d at 1033 (emphasis added).  This court went on to observe 
that the “warning” had been given by the assailant’s sister five 
months prior to the incident, that the employee and the 
assailant had friendly interactions prior to and since that 
time, and none of the witnesses on the date of the stabbing had 
seen or heard anything to indicate the assail ant “was looking 
for trouble” when he first arrived at the employee’s workplace.  
66 Haw. at 116, 657 P.2d at 1034.  Further, there was nothing in 
the record to indicate that the employee had provoked the 
assailant.  Thus, from the point of view of the employee, the 
assault was unexpected, and therefore an “accident.”  66 Haw. at 
117, 657 P.2d at 1034. 
Similar to the injury in Kikuta, Pasco’s pain, which 
manifested on April 17, 2007, was not “expected or designed.”   
As in Kikuta, it was “an unexpected happening to which” Pasco 
“did not culpably contribute.”  The Dissent, however,  suggests 
that although the Board found that “Pasco had no pre -existing 
injuries to her hands, wrists, and arms prior to April 17, 
2007,” because Pasco’s sub -optimal work conditions existed since 21 
 
 
 Pasco began the job, “[her] deteriorating physical conditions 
began far earlier than April 12, 2007” and therefore her “severe 
elbow injury could not have been unexpected.”  The record does 
not demonstrate that Pasco should have expected the level of 
pain she began experiencing on April 17, 2007, later diagnosed 
as medial epicondylitis, that would require surgeries and later 
lead to complex regional pain syndrome.  In any event, the ERS 
Board specifically found that Pasco did not have pre -existing 
injuries to her elbow, arm, and hands prior to April 17, 2007 .  
Even if she did have a preexisting condition, however, pursuant 
to Myers discussed  below, an “accident” occurs when an unlooked 
for mishap or unexpected event causes a preexisting conditi on to 
become symptomatic.  In addition, Myers also stands for the 
proposition that an unexpected result of a routine performance 
of duty, without any evidence of external force, or unusual 
stress or strain, is an “unlooked for untoward event” that 
constitutes an “accident. ”   
 In this regard, the ERS Board appears to argue that the 
manifestation of pain in the course of performing regular work 
duties cannot constitute an “accident.”  However, this court 
already rejected such an argument in Myers, 68  Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 
902.  In Myers, a state employee who injured his back on July 
25, 1977 when setting down a thirty- five-pound half -full coffee 22 
 
 
 pot as part of his normal and routine preparation for conducting 
a management training class, and thereafter became disabled due 
to back pain, was denied service- connected disability retirement 
by the ERS Board.  The circuit court later reversed the ERS 
Board’s denial of benefits, and the ERS Board appealed, 
contending that the incident involving the coffee pot was not an 
“accident” within the meaning of the service -connected 
disability retirement statute.  68 Haw. at 95, 704 P.2d at 904.  
Specifically, the ERS Board argued that an unexpected result of 
a routine performance of duty, without any evidence of external 
force, or unusual stress or strain, did not amount to an 
“unlooked for untoward event” and therefore did not constitute 
an “accident.”  See Myers, No. 10033, ERS Board ’s Opening Br., 
at 13, 19 (filed Nov. 9, 1984).      
In affirming the circuit court, this court rejected the ERS 
Board’s argument, stating, “Since the July 25, 1977 incident 
was, 
beyond question , an unlooked for mishap which was not 
expected or designed, it was an ‘accident[.]’”  Myers, 68 Haw. 
at 96 & n.1, 704 P.2d at 904 & n.1 (emphasis added).  The weight 
of the coffee pot or the employee’s pre -existing 
spondylolisthesis and degenerative disks did not affect this  
court’s analysis as to whether an “accident” had occurred.  
Myers thus dispels the notion that an external force or unusual 23 
 
 
 strain is required to show that an “accident” befell an 
employee; rather, an unexpected result of a routine performance 
of duty may comprise an “accident.”8  In Myers, the “routine 
performance of duty” was the employee’s routine preparation of 
coffee for the trai ning meetings he conducted; his “unlooked for 
mishap” was the “sharp pains across his left lower back into the 
hollow of his buttocks, and . . . pulsating pain radiating down 
his right leg” that he experienced when setting down the coffee 
pot.  68 Haw. at 95, 704 P.2d at 903.   
Just as lifting the coffee pot was part of the employee’s 
routine in Myers, here, typing was a normal and routine part of 
Pasco’s job.  Pasco also did not expect the onset of pain on 
April 17, 2007 while she typed, just  as the employ ee in Myers 
did not expect to suffer severe back pain from lifting a coffee 
pot when, prior to the accident, he could lift sixty- five-pound 
bags of coral sand and ninety- five-pound bags of mortar mix 
without discomfort of any kind.  See Myers v. Bd. of Trs. of the  
                         
8 Indeed, after our decision in Myers, the ERS Board removed the sentence 
underlined below from its September 26, 1983 definition of “accident” in 
effect at the time of the case:  
 
“Accident” means an unlooked for mishap or untoward event 
which is not expected or designed, occurring while in the 
actual performance of duty at some definite time and place.  
It does not mean the unexpected result of routine 
performance of duties unless it can be shown that such 
unexpected result occurred because of some unusual strain
or exertion or some unusual condition in the employment.” 
   
 
HAR § 6- 22-2 (emphasis added).  The second sentence of the definition was 
removed effective February 9, 1989.  See HAR § 6-22-2 (am. Feb. 9, 1989).   24 
 
 
 Emps.’ Ret. Sys. , Civil No. 79302, Findings of Fact & 
Conclusions of Law & Order, at 2 (filed May 17, 1984), aff’d, 68 
Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 902.   
Nevertheless, in this case, the ERS Board ruled that Myers 
was distinguishable because the injury in Myers was caused by a 
single lifting of a coffee pot, as opposed to multiple liftings.  
To draw such an adverse conclusion from this distinction, 
however, does not comport with this court’s rejection of the ERS 
Board’s argument in Myers that there must be a showing of some 
unusual strain or exertion for an “accident” to occur in the 
routine performance of duty.  In sum, routinely performed duties 
are, by definition, performed regularly and repeatedly; and this 
court recognized in Myers that an “accident” may occur in the 
course of such regular and repeated performance of duties.  
Thus, the onset of Pasco’s medial epicondylitis in the course of 
her regular and repeated performance of her extensive typing 
duties was an unexpected event constituting an “accident.”  
2. Pasco’s “accident” occurred “while in the actual   
  performance of duty at some definite time and place.”  
 
The second issue in determining Pasco’s eligibility for 
service-connected disability retirement under HRS § 88-336 is 
whether her injury occurred “ while in the actual performance of 
duty at some definite time and place .”  In contrast with the 
Dissent, we agree with the ICA that Pasco’s circumstances are 25 
 
 
 analogous to the relevant facts in Panado, 134 Hawai ʻi 1, 332 
P.3d 144, where we held that an applicant had shown her injury 
was the result of an “accident” occurring at “some definite time 
and place” even though the employee could not identify the exact 
moment of injury. 
In Panado, Eden Panado (“Panado”), a computer operat or with 
the City and County of Honolulu, was assigned to print voter 
registration forms during her October 8 to October 9, 2004 work 
shift, and she was therefore required to lift between ten and 
fifteen boxes of paper, and load and unload printers.  During 
the task, which Panado described as her alleged accident, Panado 
felt pain in her lower back, upper back, shoulder, neck, and 
right arm.  She experienced pain the day after her shift, and on 
October 10, she was admitted to a hospital emergency room, 
treated for neck and low back pain, and was subsequently unable 
to return to work.  See 134 Hawaiʻ i at 3–4, 332 P.3d at 146 –47.  
Panado’s application for service -connected disability benefits 
was ultimately denied by the ERS Board.   
On appeal, the parties stipulated that Panado was injured 
during her October 8 –9, 2004 workshift.  However, Panado also 
conceded that she could not “pinpoint to the exact box” that was 
picked up when her injury occurred.  134 Hawai ʻi at 8, 332 P.3d 
at 141.  Thus, the issue before this court was whether the 26 
 
 
 statute requires an employee to establish the exact moment she 
was injured.   
We held that it does not.  See 134 Hawai ʻi at 13, 332 P.3d 
at 156.  We noted that the plain language of the phrase, 
“definite time and place,” does not mean the exact moment of 
injury, but rather requires that the time and place of injury be 
“clearly stated or decided; not vague or doubtful.”  Id.  
Additionally, we observed that “[t] he legislative  history does 
not indicate the ‘some definite time and place’  language was 
meant to restrict the award of accidental disability retirement 
benefits to those claimants who could show an exact moment of 
injury.”  134 Hawai ʻi at 13, 332 P.3d at 156 .  We held that 
Panado satisfied the “some definite time and place” requirement 
by establishing that she was injured during her workshift.  Id.  
Moreover, this court went on to observe that “ there is no 
indication the legislature intended to categorically exclude 
coverage for accidents that do not result in immediate 
symptoms.”  134 Hawai ʻi at 15, 332 P.3d at 158.  We pointed out 
that the legislature “ was concerned with whether an accident  
occurred during work , not with whether the employee could 
pinpoint the exact moment of injury. ”  134 Hawai ʻi at 14, 332 
P.3d at 157 (emphasis added). Referring to the legislature’s 
1965 expansion of coverage to allow recovery for members who are 27 
 
 
 permanently incapacitated as the cumulative result of an 
occupational hazard, we also stated:  
 Given the legislature’ s decision to expand coverage, it would  
  appear contrary to legislative policy to restrict coverage by  
  interpreting  HRS § 88– 79 to categorically preclude claims that do 
  not allege the exact moment of injury, even when it is undisputed 
  that the injury occurred in the performance of work.  
 
Id.  We also noted that “ there is  no indication  the legislature 
intended to categorically exclude coverage for accidents that do 
not result in immediate symptoms. ”  Id. 
To illustrate, we noted:  
If in Myers , the employee had lifted the coffee maker 
twice, but the onset of the same debilitating condition did 
not occur until the next day, there is no rational 
explanation why the employee should be denied retirement 
benefits because he could not point to which one of the two 
lifts caused the incapacity.  So long as the claimant could 
establish the incapacity was the proximate and natural 
result of either of the two lifts, the claimant should be 
able to qualify for disability retirement benefits under 
HRS § 88– 79.  To deny benefits in this situation, either 
because a claimant cannot point to which exact incident, or 
because the onset of pain did not occur immediately, would 
be “unjust and unreasonable in its consequences.”  
  
Id.     
The ICA correctly held that Panado informs the analysis of 
Pasco’s case.  Although Pasco’s injury has been characterized as 
a “cumulative or repetitive stress” injury, as we stated in 
Panado, the fact that Pasco’s “onset of pain did not occur 
immediately” does not mean it was not “ the natural and proximate 
result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance 
of duty at some definite time and place .”  Although Pasco cannot 
point to the exact keystroke that caused her to exceed her 28 
 
 
 physiological capacity, the injury occurre d “while in the actual 
performance of duty ,” during her workshift.   The “untoward 
event” manifested as pain at a “definite time and place” on 
April 17, 2007.  Even if the pain had manifested the day after a 
workshift, however, a s discussed in Panado, that Pasco’s injury 
manifested as arm pain at some time after the moment she 
exceeded her physiological capacity to perform repetitive work 
does not mean that her accident  did not occur “while in the 
actual performance of duty at some definite time and place.”   
134 Hawaiʻ i at 14-15, 332 P.3d at 157 -58. 
V.  Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals’ July 14, 2016 Judgment on Appeal, entered pursuant 
to its June 17, 2016 Memorandum Opinion, which vacated the 
September 17, 2013 “Decision and Order Affirming the Final 
Decision of Respondent- Appellee Board of Trustees of the 
Employees’ Retirement System of the State of Hawaii and 
Dismissing Petitioner- Appellant Kimberly Pasco’s Appeal” and the 
September 17, 2013 “Final Judgment,” and we remand the matter to 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit with directions to vacate 
the ERS Board’s denial of service-connected disability  
 29 
 
 
 retirement to Pasco and   for proceedings consistent with the ICA’s  
Memorandum Opinion  and this opinion . 
 
Patricia Ohara and    /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Brian P. Aburano    
for petitioner    /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
  
Edmund L. Lee              /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
for respondent  
 
 
 
 
 
