 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 _____________________________________________________________ ---oOo--
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000003 09-JUN-2020 11:24 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
-
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
LARRY IKIMAKA, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant/Cross
-Appellee, 
LIANE HENDERSON and CHERI NUMAZAWA,    
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee.  
SCWC-16-0000003  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-
16-0000003; CR. NO. 14-1-0306)  
 
JUNE 9, 2020  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This appeal arises from the conviction of Larry Ikimaka 
(“Ikimaka”) for one count of promoting a dangerous drug in the 
second degree in violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (“HRS”)  
  2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 712-1242 (Supp. 2007) and one count of unlawful use of drug 
paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (Supp. 1988) 
after a jury trial in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit 
(“circuit court”).1 
On October 13, 2014, Kauai Police Department (“KPD”) 
received a 911 call from Cheri Numazawa (“Numazawa”) alleging 
Ikimaka had hit her, taken her purse, and driven off in a gold 
Chevy truck. At around 2:33 a.m., Officer Hansen Hsu (“Officer Hsu”) responded to the call.  Officer Hsu saw a gold Chevy truck 
and initiated a traffic stop.  Officer Hsu approached the truck, 
observed Ikimaka in the driver’s seat and Liane Henderson (“Henderson”) in the passenger’s seat, and he had Ikimaka and Henderson exit the truck and sit on the side of the road. 
Meanwhile, KPD officers Creighton Tamagawa (“Officer 
Tamagawa”) and Mason Telles (“Officer Telles”) attempted to locate Numazawa to get a statement, and they eventually located 
her after about half an hour. Numazawa told the officers that 
Ikimaka took her purse, but she did not want to press charges and did not want Ikimaka arrested. Approximately forty minutes after the initial stop, Officer Hsu learned through dispatch 
that Numazawa had been located and contacted Sergeant Colin 
Nesbitt (“Sergeant Nesbitt”). Officer Hsu and Sergeant Nesbitt 
The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. 1  
  3  
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
determined they had probable cause to seize the truck for theft 
on the grounds it contained Numazawa’s purse.  They also 
discussed Numazawa’s alleged prior drug history. 
Officer Hsu informed Ikimaka and Henderson that KPD was 
impounding the truck, but that they were not being arrested and 
were free to go. Henderson left the scene, but Ikimaka chose to 
stay, and Officer Roldan Agbayani (“Officer Agbayani”), then 
read Ikimaka his Miranda rights.  Ikimaka indicated he did not want to make a statement. 
The truck was towed to the KPD evidence warehouse, and 
Sergeant Nesbitt requested a drug-detecting dog to sniff the outside of the truck. The dog alerted to the presence of drugs. Based on the dog sniff, Officer Hsu obtained a warrant to search 
the truck for Numazawa’s purse and for drugs.  Officer Hsu 
executed the search warrant and found three purses in the truck, all of which contained illegal drugs.  
Ikimaka, Henderson, and Numazawa were then arrested and 
charged for possession of the drugs. No other charges were filed against Ikimaka. Ikimaka filed a motion to suppress, arguing the warrantless seizure of the truck was unreasonable 
and the dog sniff was a prohibited general exploratory search.  
The circuit court denied the motion to suppress.  
  4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After a joint jury trial with Numazawa,2 the jury found 
Ikimaka guilty of both charges. Numazawa was acquitted.  
Ikimaka was sentenced to four years of probation with an 
additional nine months of imprisonment as a condition of probation.  
On appeal to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”), 
Ikimaka asserted various errors, including that (1) the State improperly elicited testimony regarding Ikimaka’s exercise of his right to remain silent; and (2) Officer Hsu was improperly 
allowed to speculate on Ikimaka’s mental state.
3 In a memorandum 
opinion, the ICA affirmed Ikimaka’s convictions. Ikimaka 
reasserts the questions presented to the ICA in his application 
for certiorari to this court.4 
Before addressing two of Ikimaka’s questions on certiorari, 
delineated above, we notice plain error affecting substantial rights with respect to the circuit court’s denial of Ikimaka’s 
2 Henderson pleaded no contest to the charges against her. 
3 Ikimaka also asserted he was entitled to a new trial because (3) the 
State failed to lay the foundation necessary to admit the drug test results;
(4) the circuit court improperly admitted hearsay into evidence; (5) the 
circuit court’s jury instruction regarding constructive possession was
incomplete; and (6) the circuit court failed to sever Ikimaka’s trial fromNumazawa’s trial. Ikimaka also asserted that ( 7), the circuit court erred in 
failing to enter a judgment of acquittal due to a lack of sufficient evidence supporting his actual or constructive possession of the drugs. The ICA 
rejected all of these contentions, and we do not further address them in this
opinion. 
4 Ikimaka reasserts all of the points of error he raised in the ICA, 
except (5 ) above, which the ICA ruled was waived pursuant to HRAP Rule 
28(b)(7) (2016) because Ikimaka did not provide argument on that point.  
  5    
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
motion to suppress. As the dog sniff conducted by KPD was 
unrelated to the initial stop and seizure of the truck as 
evidence of the alleged theft of Numazawa’s purse and KPD did 
not have independent reasonable suspicion to believe the truck driven by Ikimaka contained drugs, the dog sniff violated Ikimaka’s constitutional right against unreasonable searches 
under article I, section 7 of the Hawai‘i Constitution. State v. 
Alvarez, 138 Hawai‘i 173, 378 P.3d 889 (2016) (holding canine 
screen unreasonable and unlawful expansion of initial traffic 
detention under the circumstances); 
State v. Estabillio, 121 
Hawai‘i 261, 273, 218 P.3d 749, 761 (2009) (holding investigation 
of defendant’s alleged involvement with drugs not reasonably 
related to the initial stop for traffic offenses). Thus, 
Ikimaka’s motion to suppress should have been granted as to the 
drug evidence. 
To provide guidance, we also address Ikimaka’s first two 
questions on certiorari.  The deputy prosecuting attorney (“DPA”) should not have elic
ited testimony regarding Ikimaka’s 
exercise of his right to remain silent, and the circuit court 
erred by admitting into evidence Officer Hsu’s lay opinion testimony on Ikimaka’s intent and knowledge. We do not address 
Ikimaka’s remaining questions on certiorari.  
We therefore remand this matter to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
   (continued . . .)  
 
    
  
   
 
 
        
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
A. Circuit court proceedings 
1. Charges 
On October 27, 2014, the State filed   a  complaint against 
Ikimaka, Henderson,  and Numazawa. Ikimaka was charged with one 
count of promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree in 
violation of HRS § 712-1242  and one count of unlawful use of 
drug paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a).   Numazawa 76 5
5 Henderson entered a plea of no contest. See supra note 2. We do not 
further discuss the charges against Henderson. 
6 HRS § 712- 1242 provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous
drug in the second degree if the person knowingly:
(a) Possesses twenty -five or more capsules, tablets, 
ampules, dosage units, or syrettes, containing one ormore dangerous drugs; or(b) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of:
(i) One- eighth ounce or more, containing 
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or cocaine or any of their respective salts, isomers, andsalts of isomers; or(ii) One- fourth ounce or more, containing any 
dangerous drug; or
(c) Distributes any dangerous drug in any amount,except for methamphetamine.
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree is a class B felony. 
7 HRS § 329- 43.5(a) read at the time of the conviction : 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess withintent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlledsubstance in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and
upon conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706 –
6  
  7  
 
   
 
    
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was charged with one count of promoting a dangerous drug in the 
third degree in violation of HRS § 712-1243 (Supp. 2004) and one 
count of unlawful use of drug paraphernalia in violation of HRS 
§ 329-43.5(a). 
2. Ikimaka’s motion to suppress 
a. Written submissions 
On February 20, 2015, Ikimaka filed a pretrial motion to 
quash search warrant and suppress evidence (“motion to 
suppress”) for all evidence recovered from the truck. Ikimaka argued that the “automobile exception” did not justify the 
warrantless seizure of the truck because there was no reason to 
believe the purse might be removed or destroyed. Ikimaka also argued the truck’s seizure was unnecessary because he had 
volunteered to return Numazawa’s purse, citing the ICA’s holding 
in State v. Ramos, 93 Hawai‘i 502, 513, 6 P.3d 374, 385 (App. 
2000), 
that “governmental intrusions into the personal privacy 
of citizens of this State be no greater in intensity than absolutely necessary under the circumstances.” 
Ikimaka further maintained that KPD only had probable cause 
to search the truck for Numazawa’s purse, not for drugs.  
Ikimaka also argued that the dog sniff constituted a “general 
(. . . continued)
660 and, if appropriate as provided in section 706 –641, 
fined pursuant to section 706 –640.  
  8   
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
exploratory search” prohibited by State v. Groves, 65 Haw. 104, 
649 P.2d 366 (1982). 
In its February 25, 2015 opposition memorandum, the State 
argued KPD had probable cause to believe that Ikimaka had committed theft and that evidence of the theft was in the truck based on Numazawa’s 911 call and Ikimaka’s statement to police 
that he had Numazawa’s purse in the truck. 
The State’s submissions also showed that on October 13, 
2014, at around 5:39 a.m., Sergeant Nesbitt requested a “canine sniff” on the truck. At around 11:35 a.m., a KPD narcotics 
detector dog alerted to the presence of narcotics on the passenger’s side door of the truck. On October 14, 2014, Officer Hsu’s application for a warrant to search the truck, 
which was registered to a Natasha Lazaro (“Lazaro”), for 
Numazawa’s purse as well as “Methamphetamine, Heroin, Cocaine, Marijuana, and all of its various forms,” was approved. 
On October 15, 2014, Officer Hsu executed the search 
warrant on the truck. Officer Hsu found a maroon bag under the driver’s seat containing two glass tubes, $1,400 in cash, plastic bags containing white crystalline substances, a digital 
scale, and an Ace Hardware receipt bearing Ikimaka’s name.  
Officer Hsu also found a black purse on the floor of the passenger’s side containing Henderson’s driver’s license, a plastic bag containing a “green leafy substance resembling  
  9   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
   
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
marijuana,” and a plastic bag containing a white crystalline 
substance. He also found a “Dooney and Bourke” purse containing 
a glass pipe, a digital scale, plastic bags containing white crystalline substances, and IDs bearing Numazawa’s name. 
The State maintained that KPD was authorized to seize the 
truck pursuant to the automobile exception, and that exigent 
circumstances existed because “[i]f police had not seized the 
vehicle, there was an extremely high risk Ikimaka or Henderson would have moved, removed or destroyed the vehicle and/or 
evidence.” The State also asserted that a dog sniff “of the 
airspace around a closed container is not a Fourth Amendment or Article I, section 7 search,” citing State v. Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168, 171, 681 P.2d 980, 983 (1984), and Groves, 65 Haw. 104, 649 
P.2d 366. 
b. Hearing on motion to suppress 
At the beginning of the April 2, 2015 hearing, the State 
took the position that no evidence should be presented on the 
dog sniff issue because it was “contained within the search warrant.” The circuit court agreed that “the review is based on 
the four corners of the warrant,” and stated it was not going to 
take evidence on the dog sniff. Citing Groves, 65 Haw. 104, 649 
P.2d 366 and Snitkin, 67 Haw. 168, 681 P.2d 980, the circuit court found that the dog sniff of the airspace around the car  
  10  
  
  
 
   
  
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was appropriate, and it denied the motion to suppress regarding 
the use of the drug-sniffing dog.  
At the hearing, Ikimaka called Officers Hsu, Agbayani, and 
Telles as witnesses, who testified in relevant part to the following additional facts.  
On October 13, 2014 at around 2:33 a.m., Officer Hsu 
received information from dispatch about a 911 call made by Numazawa alleging that Ikimaka had struck her, taken her purse, and left in a gold Chevy truck from Kamalani Bridge. After 
stopping Ikimaka, Office Hsu asked Ikimaka and Henderson to exit 
the truck. It was “raining off and on.” At the time Officer 
Hsu stopped Ikimaka, KPD had not spoken with Numazawa.  
After approximately 30 minutes, Officer Tamagawa, who was 
familiar with Numazawa, and Officer Telles located Numazawa on the beach. The officers spoke with Numazawa, who told them Ikimaka took her purse and that she wanted it back. However, 
she did not want to press charges and did not want Ikimaka 
arrested. 
After Officer Hsu was informed through dispatch that 
Numazawa had been located and that Numazawa did not want to 
press charges, he contacted Sergeant Nesbitt.  Officer Hsu and 
Sergeant Nesbitt determined they had probable cause to seize the truck for theft based on Numazawa’s 911 call and her statements to the police. Sergeant Nesbitt also mentioned to Officer Hsu  
  11   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that Numazawa had a prior drug history. Sergeant Nesbitt told 
Officer Hsu that one reason to seize the truck was Numazawa’s 
drug history, but “the main reason was because of the theft that 
occurred.” The truck’s windows were down at the time of seizure.  At that point in time, Officer Hsu did not think he had probable cause to seize the truck for drugs. 
Ikimaka asked if he could retrieve the purse from his 
vehicle and return it to Numazawa. Numazawa also later arrived at the scene and asked if she could retrieve the purse from the 
truck. However, Officer Hsu “wasn’t going to let [Ikimaka] go 
back in the vehicle to grab the purse” because KPD had already seized the vehicle as evidence. 
After the conversation with Sergeant Nesbitt, Officer Hsu 
told Ikimaka and Henderson that they were not being arrested today, and that they could go. However, Ikimaka chose to stay, and Officer Agbayani read him his Miranda rights.  Ikimaka 
initially indicated he did not want to make a statement. 
However, he then apparently spontaneously said to Officer Agbayani, “I have [Numazawa’s] bag in my truck.  Can you just arrest me for theft and don’t take my truck?” 
c. Circuit court’s ruling 
The circuit court orally denied the motion to suppress on 
the grounds that KPD had probable cause to seize the truck and that the dog search was appropriate.  On May 13, 2015, the  
  12  
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court issued its written order denying Ikimaka’s motion 
to suppress. The circuit court determined that Officer Hsu had 
reasonable suspicion to stop Ikimaka, had probable cause to 
believe a theft had been committed, and that the automobile exception permitted KPD to seize the truck.  The circuit court also determined that the dog sniff was permissible because 
Ikimaka “had no expectation of privacy in the airspace around 
his vehicle, and there was no inappropriate, dragnet search done.” 
3. Jury trial 
Ikimaka and Numazawa’s joint jury trial commenced on August 
17, 2015. The following is relevant to the issues we address on certiorari. 
a. Officer Hsu’s testimony 
The State called Officer Hsu, who gave testimony 
substantively similar to his April 2, 2015 testimony at the 
hearing on Ikimaka’s motion to suppress relating to the traffic 
stop and the seizure of Ikimaka’s truck. At trial, Officer Hsu 
did not testify about Numazawa’s drug history or the dog sniff.  Officer Hsu also testified that he had worked for KPD for 
approximately seven years and had participated in 
“[a]pproximately over 50” drug-related investigations.  
  13   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross-examination, Officer Hsu testified that he did not 
see Ikimaka touch any of the drugs or ingest the drugs,  and the  
following exchange took place.  
Q. You never saw Mr. Ikimaka smoking or otherw ise 
ingesting any drugs; correct?
A. For that night or --
Q. Ever? 
A. Yes. I never seen him do that, yes.
Q.  And you have no way of knowing whether Mr. Ikimaka --
THE COURT:  Approach.
(The following was heard at the bench.)THE COURT:  You just realize you asked a very open -ended
question and --   
[DEFENSE]: I knew the answer, Judge.  
THE COURT:  So it’s real risky.   I just want to say I 
thought it was a very risky question and that is open fo r 
the redirect examination.  Okay. 
Thank you.  
(The following was heard in open court.)BY [DEFENSE]:Q. Officer [Hsu], you have no way of knowing whether Mr.
Ikimaka ever intended to possess any of those drugs; correct? 
A.  Correct.  
[THE STATE]
:  Your Honor, approach.  
THE COURT:  Approach.  
(The following was heard at the bench.)  
THE COURT:  This is an interesting question. 
So, [State], 
let me hear the argument.  
[THE STATE]: First of all, it’s speculation.  The officer’s
not going to (inaudible). Third, it’s a question for thejury --  I mean intended --   
THE COURT: I think I’m going to allow him to answer because
this is another are
a  of redirect that you can go into.  The
door was opened, how you establish intent and all that.   
You can do what you need to, but the issue of intent was
raised by [the defense], but only for Mr. Ikimaka . . . .   
[THE STATE]: Okay.  Thank you. 
On redirect examination, the following exchange took place. 
Q:  Now, I believe [the defense] asked about Larry  
Ikimaka’s intent regarding the drugs found in the vehicle.   
As a police officer, would you say that Larry Ikimaka hadintent to possess drugs, had knowledge of drugs, if hestated “Just arrest me and don’t take my truck”?  
[DEFENSE]: May we approach?  
THE WITNESS: Yes.  
THE COURT: Approach.  
(The following was heard at the bench.)  
[DEFENSE]: I think it calls for speculation.  
THE COURT: This is all the intent questions that wasasked . . . during cross -examination.  
  14   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[DEFENSE]: But the intent -- but he can’t testify -- he’s 
speculating as to what my client.  
THE COURT: You asked him to speculate about intent, so this
is just a reasonable 
-- a logical, reasonable follow up to 
the questions. That’s why I brought you here when the
question was asked.  
[DEFENSE]: Well, I thought  you were talking about 404(b).  
I asked him whether he has any way to know Mr. Ikimaka’s
opinion, and she’s asking him and saying hey, he’s
speculating about what Mr. Ikimaka’s intent is.  
THE COURT: But you asked him to speculate on the issue ofintent. He answered. So now I’m going to allow the Stateto ask the question. You also asked questions about
whether he had prior drug use. I don’t know whether he did 
or didn’t, but that certainly opens the door.  
[DEFENSE]: I didn’t ask that question.  I asked  on that 
date and he said “ever?” So I didn’t want to leave it hanging for the jury. That’s why I said “yeah” after.
That’s the way he responded.  
THE COURT: You opened the door on that. I don’t know 
whether there’s any information on that. That’s why I brought you up and said this was a risky line ofquestioning. I mean, it was apparent to the Court. But 
the strategy you take during your questioning, I don’t get
involved in.  
[DEFENSE]: I did that but what I ’m  saying with regards to  
-- I don’ t think she’ s allowed to ask him if he has a prior  
history unless she can  go through the whole 404(b).    That's 
not what I asked  him.  I asked him on that day and he asked
me “ ever?”  So it wasn’ t fair to me to leave it hanging for 
the jury.  
THE COURT: I don’ t know what's fair or 
not. All I know is 
the question was asked so I ’m going to allow it. I don’ t 
know if there’ s any relevant information. But as far as 
the intent part, sure, I'm going to allow [the State] to question about intent given it was raised by you in cross-examination. So you cannot raise an issue and then not expect the other parties to follow up on that, so this is 
just a reasonable follow up. So your objection is 
overruled. Thank you.(The following was heard in open court.). . . . BY [THE STATE]:  
Q.  And, Officer [Hsu], would the fact that  Mr. Ikimaka 
tried to stop the  police from taking his  truck by saying 
that indicate his intent to possess  drugs in the truck?  
A. Yes. 
b. Officer Agbayani’s testimony 
The State called Officer Agbayani, who also gave testimony 
substantively similar to his April 2, 2015 testimony at the  
hearing on Ikimaka’s motion to suppress, but also provided the   
  15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Officer Agbayani then stated that Ikimaka spontaneously  
said, “I have [Numazawa’s] bag in my truck.  Can you just arrest    
me for theft and don’t take my truck?”  Officer Hsu had, however,  
given him “specific instructions not to let anybody get into the 
truck.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
following testimony relevant to the issues we address on 
certiorari.  
At approximately 2:30 a.m. on October 13, 2014, Officer 
Agbayani arrived at the Kintaro’s Restaurant area in response to Numazawa’s 911 call. Officer Hsu, Ikimaka, and Henderson were at the Kintaro’s area when he arrived. The following exchange  
between Officer Agbayani and the DPA then took place:  
Q. Okay. And did you speak to [Ikimaka]?
A. Yes. Q. And you asked [Ikimaka] if he wanted to talk to you 
about what had happened with the purse?
A. Yes. Q. And he didn't want to talk to you?A. Yes. Q. And because he didn’ t want to talk to you, you didn ’t 
ask him any questions?A. No, I did not.Q. And after he initially told you that he didn ’t want to 
talk to you --
 
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following was heard at the bench.) 
THE COURT: I’ m going strike all this line of questioning 
because he has the right to 
remain silent. It cannot be 
used against him. 
The circuit court then struck the DPA’s line of questioning and 
instructed the jury not to consider those questions.   
  16   
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On cross-examination by Ikimaka, Officer Agbayani 
again referenced the fact that Ikimaka did not want to make 
a statement in the following exchange: 
Q. Okay. And when he was 15 to 20 feet away from you and 
said something to you, you were walking away from him or he was walking away from you or no?A. I was walking away from him, but this is –- he’s also 
approaching me. Because when I left h im, I have to inform 
my beat partner that he wasn’t -- he doesn’t want to answer my questions. And then, you know -- I mean, I’ m not saying 
that I have good peripheral views, but we always look –-
for security reasons, we always like this, our head is
always on swivel. I can see him, you know, kind of like 
coming towards me.Q. And that’ s when he talked to you?
A. When he said, yes, that statement, sir. 
(Emphasis added.) 
c. After completion of State’s evidence 
After the State rested its case and the circuit court 
denied Ikimaka’s motions for judgment of acquittal and directed 
verdict, on August 20, 2015, Ikimaka moved for a mistrial due to the prosecution’s elicitation of testimony from Officer Agbayani 
regarding Ikimaka’s exercise of his right to remain silent.  The 
circuit court denied the motion, noting that it had issued curative instructions. 
Ikimaka and Numazawa did not call any witnesses, and they 
did not testify. 
On August 24, 2015, the jury found Ikimaka guilty of both 
counts. Numazawa was acquitted. 
On December 30, 2015, the circuit court issued its second 
amended judgment of conviction and probation sentence,  
  17  
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sentencing Ikimaka to four years of probation with nine months 
additional imprisonment for both Counts 1 and 2.8 
C. ICA proceedings On January 4, 2016, Ikimaka filed his notice of appeal to 
the ICA.
9 On December 18, 2019, the ICA filed its amended 
memorandum opinion, affirming Ikimaka’s conviction.  State v. 
Ikimaka, CAAP-16-0000003 (App. Dec. 18, 2019) (mem.).10 In 
relevant part, the ICA held the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion by allowing Officer Hsu to give his lay opinion under 
HRE Rule 701. Ikimaka, mem. op. at 13.  According to the ICA, 
although Officer Hsu “did not have personal knowledge of [Ikimaka’s] statement” to “[j]ust arrest [him] and don’t take [his] truck,” Officer Agbayani had told him about the statement 
and there was no dispute that Ikimaka made the statement. 
Ikimaka, mem. op. at 16.  Therefore, the ICA determined Officer Hsu’s opinion was rationally related to his knowledge, 
experience, and perceptions.  Id. 
The ICA also held the DPA did not commit misconduct by 
eliciting testimony about Ikimaka’s exercise of his right to 
8 Ikimaka was also ordered to pay a $205 Crime Victim Compensation Fee, a
$150 Probation Services Fee, and a $2,000 Drug Demand Reduction Assessment
for Count 1, and a $105 Crime Victim Compensation Fee and a $1,000 Drug 
Demand Reduction Assessment for Count 2. 
9 See supra text at and note 3, regarding the points on appeal. 
10 There are no substantive differences between the original memorandum
opinion filed on November 27, 2019, and the amended memorandum opinion filed on December 18, 2019.  
  18  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remain silent.  Ikimaka, mem. op. at 18 (citing State v. 
Tsujimura, 140 Hawai‘i 299, 315, 400 P.3d 500, 516 (2017) 
(holding the test in cases where the prosecution elici
ts 
information regarding a defendant’s prearrest silence is whether 
the prosecutor intended for the information to imply the defendant’s guilt or whether the character of the information 
suggests that the prearrest silence may be considered as 
inferential evidence of guilt). The ICA determined that the DPA 
had elicited the testimony in an attempt to “set the physical circumstances of [a] permitted statement” (Ikimaka’s apparent 
spontaneous statement to Officer Agbayani) and did not intend to 
use Ikimaka’s silence to imply his guilt. Ikimaka, mem. op. at 18-20.  Furthermore, the ICA noted the circuit court immediately 
struck the challenged testimony. Ikimaka, mem. op. at 20.  The 
ICA also stated in a footnote that “at the time of this trial, it had not been decided by either the United States Supreme 
Court nor the Hawai‘i Supreme Court that a defendant’s right to 
remain silent existed prior to arrest, or whether prearrest 
silence could be used against a defendant at trial.” Ikimaka, mem. op. at 20 n.15. 
On January 21, 2020, the ICA issued its judgment affirming 
the circuit court’s second amended judgment of conviction.  
  19    
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Application for writ of certiorari 
Ikimaka’s application restates arguments made before the 
ICA.  As noted, we only address Ikimaka’s first two questions on certiorari: whether the DPA should have elicited testimony regarding Ikimaka’s exercise of his right to remain silent, and whether the circuit court erred by admitting into evidence 
Officer Hsu’s lay opinion testimony on Ikimaka’s intent and 
knowledge. We need not and do not address Ikimaka’s remaining questions on certiorari. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Plain error 
“Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may 
be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.” HRPP Rule 52(b) (2014). 
“The appellate court ‘will apply the plain error standard 
of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, 
integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to 
serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of 
fundamental rights.’” State v. Domut, 146 Hawai‘i 183, 190, 457 
P.3d 822, 829 (2020) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai‘i 327, 
334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006)). “An appellate court’s ‘power to 
deal with plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with 
caution because the plain error rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system—that a party must look  
  20  
 
  
 
  
     
 
  
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to [their] counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel’s 
mistakes.’” Id. (quoting Nichols, 111 Hawai‘i at 335, 141 P.3d 
at 982). 
B. Motion to suppress 
“A [circuit] court’s ruling on a motion to suppress 
evidence is reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was 
‘right’ or ‘wrong.’” Estabillio, 121 Hawai‘i at 269, 218 P.3d at 
757. “The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of 
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
statements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfully 
secured and that his or her right to be free from unreasonable 
searches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution.” Id. 
C. Prosecutorial misconduct 
“The term ‘prosecutorial misconduct’ is a legal term of art 
that refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, 
however harmless or unintentional.” State v. Udo, 145 Hawai‘i 
519, 534, 454 P.3d 460, 475 (2019). 
“A prosecutor may not imply 
guilt from a defendant’s exercise of the right to remain 
silent[.]” Tsujimura, 140 Hawai‘i at 314, 400 P.3d at 515. The 
test of whether a prosecutor’s comment was improper is whether “that comment was manifestly intended or was of such character 
that the jury would naturally and necessarily take it to be a  
  21  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
comment on the failure of the accused to testify.” State v. 
Rodrigues, 113 Hawai‘i 41, 49, 147 P.3d 825, 833 (2006) (quoting 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
‘i 504, 515, 78 P.3d 317, 328 (2003)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
D. Admission of opinion testimony “[A]dmission of opinion evidence is a matter within the 
discretion of the trial court, and only an abuse of that discretion may result in reversal.” State v. Tucker, 10 Haw. 
App. 73, 89, 861 P.2d 37, 46 (1993) (citing Sherry v. Asing, 59 Haw. 135, 148, 531 P.2d 648, 658 (1975)).  
“[T]o constitute an 
abuse of discretion a court must have clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.” Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 
839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
IV. Discussion 
A. The dog sniff was an illegal search, and the motion to 
suppress should have been granted 
Pursuant to HRPP Rule 52(b), “[p]lain errors or defects 
affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court.” We notice plain error with regard to the circuit court’s denial of Ikimaka’s motion to suppress. In his motion to suppress, Ikimaka argued 
the dog sniff conducted on the truck was an impermissible  
  22  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
general exploratory search. We agree that the dog sniff was 
impermissible. 
“[T]he right to be free of ‘unreasonable’ searches and 
seizures . . . requires that governmental intrusions into the personal privacy of citizens of this State be no greater in intensity than absolutely necessary under the circumstances.” 
State v. Kaluna, 55 Haw. 361, 369, 520 P.2d 51, 58-59 (1974).  
“A stop of a vehicle for an investigatory purpose constitutes a seizure within the meaning of the constitutional protection 
against unreasonable searches and seizures.” Estabillio, 121 
Hawai‘i at 270, 218 P.3d at 758. In State v. Perez , 111 Hawai‘i 
392, 397, 141 P.3d 1039, 1044 (2006), this court adopted 
a two-
part test to determine whether a search or seizure pursuant to 
an investigative stop is reasonable. First, the initial action 
must be justified at its inception, and second, the court must determine whether the search or seizure was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference 
in the first place.  Id. (citing Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20 
(1968)). 
The dog sniff conducted on the truck was not reasonably 
related in scope to Officer Hsu’s initial stop of Ikimaka as 
it 
was unrelated to Ikimaka’s alleged theft of Numazawa’s purse. An investigation unrelated to the initial stop “must be supported by independent reasonable suspicion to be  
  23    
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constitutional.” Estabillio, 121 Hawai‘i at 273, 218 P.3d at 761. 
Numazawa’s alleged drug history did not give KPD reasonable 
suspicion 
to believe the truck driven by Ikimaka contained drugs.  
Moreover, the dog sniff was impermissible based on the case 
law existing at the time of the motion to suppress. T
he facts 
of this case are distinguishable from Groves and Snitkin, which 
the circuit court cited in its order denying Ikimaka’s motion to 
suppress. In Groves, Groves was initially stopped at the airport after a pilot reported the smell of marijuana emanating from Groves’s suitcase.  65 Haw. at 105-06, 649 P.2d at 368.  
After stopping Groves, a police officer also noticed the smell 
of marijuana from the suitcase, after which a dog sniff was performed on the suitcase. 65 Haw. at 106, 649 P.2d at 368. 
This court held that Groves had no reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the airspace around his suitcase and the dog sniff was not an illegal search. 65 Haw. at 113, 649 P.2d at 372. However, unlike in Groves, Ikimaka was stopped because he had 
allegedly stolen Numazawa’s purse, and the ensuing dog sniff for 
drugs was unrelated to that reason. 
Also, in Snitkin, the United States Customs Service Drug 
Enforcement Agency performed a routine canine survey of a Federal Express cargo area, and the drug-sniffing dog alerted to the presence of narcotics in a package.  67 Haw. at 169-70, 681 P.2d at 982. The police obtained a search warrant, found  
  24  
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
cocaine in the package, resealed the package, and arrested 
Snitkin after he picked up the package. 67 Haw. at 170, 681 
P.2d at 982. This court held that the reasonableness of a dog 
sniff “should be determined by balancing the State’s interest in using the dog against the individual’s interest in freedom from unreasonable government intrusions,” and that Snitkin’s freedom 
interest in the airspace around his package was minimal. 67 Haw. 
at 172, 681 P.2d at 983-84.  However, we specifically noted that the package was not detained at the time of the dog sniff.  67 
Haw. at 172, 681 P.2d at 984. In this case, unlike Snitkin, KPD 
had detained the truck at the time of the dog sniff.  
Alvarez, decided after the circuit court decided the 
subject motion to suppress, has made it clear that this dog sniff was an unreasonable search. Alvarez involved a traffic 
stop based on police officers’ observations that one of the 
passengers was not wearing a seatbelt. 138 Hawai‘i at 175, 378 
P.3d at 891. 
After stopping the car, driven by Alvarez, the 
officers recognized Alvarez and his passengers from prior 
encounters while assigned to the Hilo Vice Section. Id. The 
officers had also received “reliable confidential information” 
within the past five days that Alvarez was distributing crystal 
methamphetamine. Id. The officers brought a drug-
sniffing dog 
to the scene, and the dog alerted to the presence of drugs in the car.  Id. This court held that the dog sniff was not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 25 (continued . . .)  reasonably related in scope to the original traffic stop, and 
the “tip from a confidential informant under the circumstances 
[was] ‘not sufficient to establish reasonable suspicion for an 
investigatory detention.’”  138 Hawai‘i at 184, 378 P.3d at 900 
(citing Estabillio, 121 Hawai‘i at 274, 218 P.3d at 762). 
 Like in Alvarez, Ikimaka was not stopped on suspicion of 
possessing drugs.  Because KPD lacked an independent basis to 
support a reasonable suspicion that the truck contained drugs and the dog sniff was not reasonably related in scope to the circumstances that justified the detention of the truck in the 
first place, the dog sniff was impermissible.  
Because the result of the dog sniff was the only piece of 
information supporting the warrant to search the truck for drugs ,
the drug evidence should have been suppressed under the fruit of 
the poisonous tree doctrine.  See Alvarez, 138 Hawai‘i at 185, 378 P.3d at 901; Estabillio, 121 Hawai‘i at 274, 218 P.3d at 
762.  
11 
 
11  The improper dog sniff invalidated the search warrant.  See State v. 
Tagaolo, 93 Hawaiʻ i 314, 2 P.3d 718 (App. 2000)  (holding officer’ s suspicion 
that firearm and ammunition were in fanny bag was fruit of poisonous tree of 
his improper warrantless search of fanny bag by feeling its contents, 
rendering search warrant invalid and requiring suppression of items found in fanny bag).  Even if KPD had, without the dog sniff, obtained a search 
warrant to search inside the truck for Numazawa ’s purse, it should have been 
readily identifiable  and probable cause would have been required for a 
warrant to allow a further search of the contents of purses within the truck.  See State v. Jenkins, 62 Haw. 660, 619 P.2d 108 (1980)  (requiring search 
warrant to search personal luggage taken by police from automobiles); State v. Wong, 68 Haw. 221, 708 P.2d 825 (1985)  (holding warrantless search of handbag 
an unreasonable search despite defendant having stated he had vial of cocaine  
  26    
  
    
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hence, the circuit court should have granted Ikimaka ’s 
motion to suppress. We therefore vacate Ikimaka’s conviction, 
and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Although this ruling may be dispositive of the drug charges against Ikimaka, we address his first two questions on certiorari to provide guidance. B. The DPA should not have referenced Ikimaka’s initial 
refusal to speak to Officer Agbayani after Miranda warnings had been given 
Ikimaka argues the DPA committed prosecutorial misconduct 
by eliciting testimony about the exercise of his right to remain silent. The ICA held that the DPA did not commit misconduct by 
referencing Ikimaka’s initial refusal to talk to Off icer 
Agbayani after he received Miranda warnings because she was not 
attempting to comment on Ikimaka’s silence, did not intend to 
use Ikimaka’s silence to imply his guilt, and the circuit court immediately gave curative instructions.  Ikimaka, mem. op. at 
19-21 (citing Tsujimura, 140 Hawai‘i at 315, 400 P.3d at 516). 
The ICA noted that at the time of Ikimaka’s trial, neither the 
United States Supreme Court nor this court had decided whether 
(. . . continued)
therein); State v. Wallace, 80 Hawaiʻ i 382, 405, 910 P.2d 695, 718 (1996)
(holding that forty- three heat- sealed clear plastic packets containing 
cocaine seized during warrant allowing search of automobile for marijuana
were not “ closed” containers with a reasonable expectation of privacy 
requiring a warrant to conduct a further search).  
  27   
 
  
   
  
 
     
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the right to remain silent attached prior to arrest.  Ikimaka, 
mem. op. at 20 n.15. 
Although the ICA cited Tsujimura, in that case, the DPA was 
referring to the defendant’s pre-arrest silence before Miranda 
warnings were administered.  140 Hawai‘i at 309, 311, 400 P.3d at 
510, 512.  
Although Ikimaka was not formally arrested at the 
point in time the DPA referenced, Officer Agbayani had already 
given Ikimaka Miranda warnings. See State v. Uganiza, 68 Haw. 
28, 30, 702 P.2d 1352, 1354 (1985) (involving a defendant who was arrested, read Miranda rights, and not free to leave, and 
who invoked his right to remain silent by indicating that he did 
not want to make a statement). 
Whether or not Miranda rights have been given, prosecutor
s 
may not comment on a defendant’s silence to imply that such silence is evidence of guilt. State v. Melear , 63 Haw. 488, 496, 
630 P.2d 619, 626 (1981).  The test of whether a prosecutor’s comment was improper is whether “that comment was manifestly 
intended or was of such character that the jury would naturally 
and necessarily take it to be a comment” on the exercise of the 
right to remain silent.  Rodrigues, 113 Hawai‘i at 49, 147 P.3d 
at 833 (quoting Wakisaka, 102 
Hawai‘i at 515, 78 P.3d at 328) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
On direct examination of Officer Agbayani, the following 
exchange between the DPA and Officer Agbayani took place:  
  28   
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q: Okay. And did you speak to [Ikimaka]? 
A: Yes. 
Q: And you asked [Ikimaka] if he wanted to talk to you
about what had happened with the purse?
A: Yes. 
Q: And he didn’t want to talk to you?
A: Yes. 
Q: And because he didn’t want to talk to you, you didn’t 
ask him any questions.A: No, I did not.
Q: And after he initially told you that he didn’t want
to talk to you --THE COURT:  Approach.  
(Emphases added.) 
Contrary to the ICA’s memorandum opinion, the DPA’s line of 
questioning could have implied Ikimaka’s guilt.  Although the 
DPA’s questions could have “set the physical circumstances” of Ikimaka’s eventual statement in some manner, Ikimaka, mem. op. 
at 19, the DPA referenced Ikimaka’s silence before eliciting 
testimony about Ikimaka’s eventual statement regarding Numazawa’s purse.  Although even one reference was improper, the DPA made three references in quick succession.  Because we 
vacate Ikimaka’s conviction on other bases, we need not 
determine the DPA’s intent or whether the questions constituted prosecutorial misconduct.  We caution, however, that prosecutors 
may not elicit testimony regarding a defendant’s exercise of 
their right to remain silent.  See Rodrigues, 113 Hawai‘i at 49, 
147 P.3d at 833
.  
  29    
  
 
 Ikimaka also argues Officer Hsu’s testimony regarding his 
intent to possess the drugs was speculative and inadmissible  
pursuant to HRE Rules 602 (1992)   and 701 (1984)  .12   The ICA held
that Officer Hsu’s testimony was a lay opinion permissible under 
HRE Rule 701 and that Ikimaka opened the door to his redirect   
testimony by questioning Officer Hsu about intent on cross-
examination. 
Ikimaka, mem. op. at 15-18.   13 
 On cross-examination, the following exchange between 
Ikimaka and Officer Hsu occurred:  
  
 
  
  
    
  
   
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Officer Hsu’s opinion testimony as to Ikimaka’s intent and 
knowledge 
 
Q. You never saw Mr. Ikimaka smoking or otherw ise 
ingesting any drugs; correct?
A. For that night or --
Q. Ever? 
A. Yes. I never seen him do that, yes.
Q. And you have no way of knowing whether Mr. Ikimaka --
. . . . Q. Officer [Hsu], you have no way of knowing whether Mr.
Ikimaka ever intended to possess any of those drugs;correct? A. Correct. 
12 HRE Rule 602 provides: 
A witness may not testify to a matter unless evidence isintroduced sufficient to support a finding that the witnesshas personal knowledge of the matter. Evidence to provepersonal knowledge may, but need not, consist of the witness’ own testimony.  This rule is subject to the
provisions of rule 703, relating to opinion testimony byexpert witnesses. 
13 HRE Rule 701 provides: 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness’testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited to those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationallybased on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a clear understanding of the witness ’ testimony or the 
determination of a fact in issue.  
  30  
 The circuit court erred, however, in ruling that the  
defense “opened the door.”    
      
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The DPA objected to Ikimaka’s question as calling for 
speculation,  but  the circuit court  allowed the question, stating,
“The door was opened, how you establish intent and all that,” and that the DPA could address the issue on redirect.   
The ‘opening the door’ doctrine is essentially a rule of
expanded relevancy . . . .” State v. James, 144 N.J. 538,
677 A.2d 734, 742 (1996) . “Under this doctrine, when one
party introduces inadmissible evidence, the opposing party 
may respond by introducing [ ] inadmissible evidence on the
same issue.” State v. Fukusaku , 85 Hawaiʻ i 462, 497, 946
P.2d 32, 67 (1997) ; see also State v. Dvorak, 295 S.W.3d 
493, 502 (Mo. Ct. App. E.D. 2009) 
(the doctrine applies 
after one party introduces inadmissible evidence).
Admissible evidence therefore does not ‘open the door’ to
otherwise inadmissible evidence. State v. Middleton , 998
S.W.2d 520, 528 (Mo. 1999) (“A party may not, however, 
introduce inadmis
sible evidence to rebut inferences raised 
by the introduction of admissible evidence during cross -
examination.”). 
State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai‘i 409, 422-23, 453 P.3d 229, 242-43 
(2019) (footnote omitted).   A
s we further stated in our recent 
opinion in State v. Miranda, ---  Hawaiʻi ---,  -- n.13, ---   P.3d  
---,  -- n.13, 2020 WL 2988268 at *10 n.13 (June 4, 2020), this    
court has not adopted the  “opening the door”  doctrine:    
[The opening the door doctrine] has also been referred to as the doctrine of “curative admissibility” or “fighting
fire with fire.” State v. Fukusaku , 85 Hawai‘ i 462, 497,
946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997). 
This court has not determined 
whether to adopt the doctrine. State v. Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻ i 
409, 424, 453 P.3d 229, 244 (2019) (“[E]ven if we were to
adopt the doctrine of curative admissibility, it would notbe applicable to the present case.” (quoting Fukusaku, 85 
Hawai‘ i at 497, 946 P.2d at 67)).  
  31  
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, although some courts have adopted the “opening the door” 
doctrine when one party introduces inadmissible evidence, which 
allows the opposing party to “respond by introducing 
inadmissible evidence on the same issue,” we have not done so.  And the doctrine would in any event be inapplicable here because “admissible evidence [] does not ‘open the door’ to otherwise 
inadmissible evidence.” Lavoie, 145 Hawai‘i at 422, 453 P.3d at 
242. In this case, Ikimaka’s question of whether Officer Hsu 
had “no way of knowing” his intent to possess drugs did not 
elicit inadmissible evidence. Ikimaka’s question did not ask 
Officer Hsu to speculate on Ikimaka’s intent, but rather sought 
to point out that Officer Hsu could not know Ikimaka’s intent.  Therefore, Ikimaka’s cross-examination question could not have 
“opened the door” to otherwise inadmissible evidence.  
In addition, for the reasons explained below, the following 
exchange between the DPA and Officer Hsu was otherwise 
inadmissible: 
Q: Now, I believe [the defense] asked about Larry 
Ikimaka’s intent regarding the drugs found in the vehicle.  
As a police officer, would you say that Larry Ikimaka hadintent to possess drugs, had knowledge of drugs, if hestated “Just arrest me and don’t take my truck”?
. . . . 
Q: And, Officer [Hsu] , would the fact that Mr. Ikimaka 
tried to stop the police from taking his truck by sayingthat indicate his intent to possess drugs in the truck?A: Yes. 
HRE Rule 602 provides that witnesses “may not testify to a 
matter unless evidence is introduced sufficient to support a  
  32  
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 14 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter.” 
The commentary to HRE Rule 602 explains that “personal knowledge” 
means “that the witness perceived the event about which [they] 
testif[y] and that [they have] a present recollection of that perception.” HRE Rule 701 provides that lay witness opinion testimony is limited to “those opinions or inferences which are 
(1) rationally based on the perception of the witness, and 
(2) helpful to a clear understanding of the witness ’ testimony 
or the determination of a fact in issue.” 
Although HRE Rule 602 requires witness testimony to be 
based on the “personal knowledge” of that witness, as the ICA noted in its memorandum opinion, “Officer Hsu did not have personal knowledge of [Ikimaka’s] statement.”  Ikimaka, mem. op. 
at 16. Officer Hsu was not testifying as an expert witness 
under HRE Rule 702 (1992),
14 and his opinion was therefore a lay 
opinion under HRE Rule 701. HRE Rule 701 requires that a “lay 
opinion be based upon firsthand knowledge,” and Officer Hsu did 
not have firsthand knowledge of Ikimaka’s statement. HRE Rule 
HRE Rule 702 provides: 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In determining the issue of assistance to thetrier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthinessand validity of the scientific technique or mode of
analysis employed by the proffered expert.  
  33  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
701 cmt. Therefore, Officer Hsu’s opinion that Ikimaka’s 
statement evidenced his knowledge and intent to possess drugs 
was not admissible under HRE Rule 602 or 701. 
Moreover, Officer Hsu’s testimony on Ikimaka’s intent and 
knowledge was also impermissible because it expressed a legal 
conclusion as to Ikimaka’s state of mind.  See State v. Vliet, 
91 Hawai‘i 288, 296-97, 983 P.2d 189, 197-98 (1999). While HRE 
Rule 704 (1980) permits testimony “embrac[ing] an ultimate issue 
to be decided by the trier of fact
,” it “does not allow ‘the 
admission of opinions which would merely tell the jury what 
result to reach[.]’” State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 559, 799 
P.2d 48, 52 (1990) (quoting HRE Rule 704 cmt.); see also State v. 
Ryan, 112 Hawai‘i 136, 141, 144 P.3d 584, 589 (App. 2006) 
(holding an officer’s opinion testimony that the complaining witness was truthful impermissibly invaded the province of the 
jury to determine the facts). “Nor is [HRE Rule 704] intended 
to allow a witness to give legal conclusions.” Vliet, 91 Hawai‘i 
at 296-97, 983 P.2d at 197-98.  
Here, Ikimaka was charged with promoting a dangerous drug 
in the second degree in violation of HRS § 712-
1242, which 
requires “knowing” possession of the drugs. Ikimaka was also 
charged with unlawful use of drug paraphernalia in violation of 
HRS § 329-43.5(a), which requires possession of drug paraphernalia with “intent to use” it for the enumerated  
  34  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
purposes.  Therefore, Officer Hsu’s testimony as to Ikimaka’s 
intent and knowledge expressed a legal conclusion and told the 
jury what result to reach, and it was not admissible under HRE 
Rule 704. 
Additionally, Officer Hsu’s testimony was improperly 
“imbued with an aura of expertise,” as he testified at trial 
that he had been involved in “[a]pproximately over 50” drug 
investigations. See State v. Calara, 132 Hawai‘i 391, 393, 322 
P.3d 931, 933 (2014) (holding an officer’s testimony regarding 
whether complaining witness
’s allegations provided him with 
probable cause was tantamount to an expression of an opinion that the witness had been truthful, which was “imbued with an aura of expertise due to his experience” and invaded the 
province of the jury); Ryan, 112 Hawai‘i at 141, 144 P.3d at 589 
(holding that an emphasis on officers’ training and experience 
in domestic violence cases gave the officers “an aura of being experts in evaluating the truthfulness” of the complaining 
witness’s statements). Therefore, the circuit court abused its 
discretion by admitting Officer Hsu’s testimony on Ikimaka’s 
intent and knowledge.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
  
  
   
  
  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
     
  
      
     
   
      V. Conclusion 
We therefore vacate in part the ICA’s January 21, 2020 
judgment on appeal to the extent it affirmed the circuit court ’
s 
December 30, 2015 second amended judgment of conviction and 
probation sentence but affirm it to the extent it dismissed the State’s cross-appeal as moot.  We also vacate the circuit 
court’s December 30, 2015 second amended judgment of conviction 
and probation sentence and its May 13, 2015 order denying Ikimaka’s motion to suppress. We remand this matter to the 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Rosa Flores  
for Petitioner  
Tracy Murakami 
for Respondent 
35 