*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-28358 14-FEB-2014 
02:00 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
PILAA 400, LLC, 
Petitioners/Appellant-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES and 
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
 Respondents/Appellees-Appellees. '
SCWC-28358
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 28358; CIV. NO. 05-1-0103)
 
February 14, 2014
 
ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., WITH CIRCUIT JUDGE TRADER, IN
 
PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, C.J., RECUSED, WITH NAKAYAMA, J., ACTING
 
C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This case requires us to consider whether Pila 'a 400, 
LLC (Pila 'a 400) was properly held responsible for remedial, 
restoration, and monitoring costs assessed against it by the 
Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) for despoilment of state conservation land resulting from unauthorized land use by Pila
'a 400, which included significant harm to a near-pristine 
coral reef. 
We hold that BLNR had jurisdiction to institute the 
enforcement action, the BLNR was not required to engage in rule-making before imposing a financial assessment for damages to state land against Pila
'a 400, and Pila 'a 400 was afforded a full 
opportunity to be heard at a contested case hearing following reasonable notice. Accordingly, we affirm the Judgment on Appeal of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA). 
I.
 
A.
 
Pila
'a 400 owns a 383-acre parcel of rural land 
(Property), located on the north shore of Kaua 'i.1 The Property 
is a level to gently sloping plateau broken by four gulches 
extending from Kuhio Highway and Koolau Road toward the shoreline. The plateau above and between the gulches naturally 
1
 Pila'a 400 obtained the Property from Pflueger Properties, LP by
warranty deed, executed on January 23, 2001, by James H. Pflueger. 
-2­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
drains water and sediment along contours that form distinct
 
geographic drainage areas.
 
2
 At the makai  terminus of the Property is Pila 'a Beach 
and Pila 'a Bay. Pila 'a Beach is a white sand beach approximately 
fifty to one hundred feet wide, bisected by Pila 'a Stream. Pila 'a 
Bay contains a well-developed fringing reef, extending from Ke
'ilu Point on the west to Kepuhi Point on the east. Wave 
action over the reef flushes the inner reef area, creating a lush environment for a wide variety of marine life. Pila
'a Bay’s 
inner reef is one of only a few shallow reefs on the northeast coast of Kaua
'i protected from ocean swell by an outer reef. 
Prior to November 26, 2001, Pila 'a Bay was well-known for its 
striking beauty and as an excellent site for swimming, snorkeling, fishing, and gathering edible seaweed. According to the DLNR, the reef at Pila
'a Bay was one of the “few remaining 
high value coral reef flats in the state that had largely escaped encroachment from development and stress from improper land practices.” The reef was “an extremely valuable resource” with a wide range of reef habitats, abundant marine life, and almost fourteen percent coral cover. 
2
 “Makai” means “toward the sea, in the direction of the sea.” State
 
v. Tagaolo, 93 Hawai' i 314, 318 n.6, 2 P.3d 718, 722 n.6 (App. 2000) (citing
M. Pukui and S. Ebert, Hawaiian Dictionary 225 (1979)).
 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
3A “kuleana” is “a small area of land such as were awarded in fee
by the Hawaiian monarch, about the year 1850, to all Hawaiians who made
application therefor.”  Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 45 n.5, 85 P.3d 150,
152 n.5 (2004) (quoting Palama v. Sheehan, 50 Haw. 298, 299 n.1, 440 P.2d 95,
96 n.1 (1968)).
4HRS § 171-3(a) (2011) provides now, as it did at all times during
the events at issue:
(a) The department of land and natural resources shall be
headed by an executive board to be known as the board
of land and natural resources. The department shall
manage, administer, and exercise control over public
lands, the water resources, ocean waters, navigable
streams, coastal areas (excluding commercial harbor
areas), and minerals and all other interests therein
and exercise such powers of disposition thereof as may
be authorized by law. The department shall also manage
and administer the state parks, historical sites,
forests, forest reserves, aquatic life, aquatic life
sanctuaries, public fishing areas, boating, ocean
recreation, coastal programs, wildlife, wildlife
sanctuaries, game management areas, public hunting
areas, natural area reserves, and other functions
assigned by law.
HRS § 171-3(a).
The Hawai# i Constitution provides:5
For the benefit of present and future generations, the State
and its political subdivisions shall conserve and protect
Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources, including
land, water, . . . .
(continued...)
-4-Pila#a Beach and Bay are public lands owned by the
State of Hawai #i, subject to several privately owned kuleana.3 
The Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) is
responsible for managing, administering, and exercising
control over all of the public land in the state, including
water and coastal areas.  The DLNR is “headed” by BLNR.  Hawai# i
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 171-3(a) (2011).4  The BLNR is
constitutionally mandated to conserve and protect Hawai #i’s
natural resources.5    
  Regulated
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The BLNR defines “land” to include coastal areas and submerged
 
land. Hawai 'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-5-2 (1994). 
Pila'a Beach and Bay lie within a State Land Use 
Conservation District (Conservation District) as a strip of land
 ranging from 175 to 250 feet wide and running along the makai
 edge of the Property. The Conservation District is divided in
 two sections. The Conservation District land located mauka
6
 
of the shoreline boundary is in the “limited” subzone,7
 
consisting of the white sand beach. The Conservation District
 land makai of the shoreline boundary consists of the near-shore
 
8
 submerged lands and is in the “resource” subzone. land use in a resource subzone includes the placement of fill on
 
5(...continued)
 
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 1.
 
The legislature shall vest in one or more executive boards or
commissions powers for the management of natural resources owned
or controlled by the State, and such powers of disposition thereof
as may be provided by law . . . .
 
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 2.
 
6 “Mauka” means “inland.” Diamond v. Dobbin, No. 30573, 2014 WL
 
285388, at *2 n.8 (Haw. Jan. 27, 2014) (citing Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H.
Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary at 242 (1986)).
 
7
 The objective of the limited subzone is to “limit uses where
natural conditions suggest constraints on human activities . . . . Identified
 land uses . . . are restricted to those listed in [HAR §] 13-5-23.” HAR § 13­5-12 (1994).
 
8
 The objective of the resource subzone is “to ensure, with proper
management, the sustainable use of the natural resources of those areas. . . .
Identified land uses . . . are restricted to those listed in [HAR §] 13-5­
24.” HAR § 13-5-13 (1994).
 
-5­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
submerged land. HAR § 13-5-24. Pila 'a reef is a part of the 
resource subzone. 
Sometime prior to November 26, 2001, Pila 'a 400 or its 
predecessors conducted extensive grading, filling, and other work 
on the Property. None of the work was authorized by permit. The unauthorized land use included: (1) large-scale grading on the plateau above the bay; (2) a vertical cut creating a cliff forty to sixty feet in height within the Conservation District; (3) construction of a road along the base of the vertical cut; and (4) installation of a 30-inch pipe or culvert under the road that drained water and mud directly from the Property onto Pila
'a 
Beach. 
On November 26, 2001, the Property experienced heavy 
rainfall typical of the area at that time of year. The consequent erosion of the recently graded and filled hillside on the Property resulted in a massive mudflow into the Conservation District. Mud flowing from the Property poured into Pila
'a Bay 
and covered land within the Conservation District in several feet of mud. 
The November 26, 2001 mudflow severely damaged Pila
'a 
Bay and reef. A scientific assessment begun in June 2002 by the DLNR and continuing through September of that year noted several indications of significant damage: (1) the shallow areas of the bay suffered from chronic turbid conditions; (2) corals were 
-6­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
bleached, dead, dying, and becoming overgrown by algae; and (3) 
approximately 2,943 square meters of live coral were destroyed by the November 26, 2001 mudflow and subsequent sedimentation. The assessment concluded that, although much of the sediment had been cleansed from the beach due to natural wave action, sediment and its negative impacts remained at Pila
'a. According to the 
assessment’s conclusion, Pila 'a might never be returned to its 
pre-mudflow conditions. 
B.
 
On January 28, 2002, pursuant to HRS Chapter 183C, the 
DLNR issued a Notice and Order (First Notice and Order) to Pflueger Properties, Limited Partnership (Pflueger Properties) for “illegal work conducted within the Conservation District at Pila
'a[,] Kilauea, Kauai, Hawaii.”9   The First Notice and Order 
included the DLNR’s initial assessment of potential unauthorized land uses in violation of state law. 
We have determined that:
 
(1) The subject property, identified as tax map key 5-1­
004:008 is in the Conservation District and is classified as
 
Limited Subzone;
 
(2) The following uses were conducted on the subject
premises: grading, grubbing,[10] cutting, and culvert
construction;
 
(3) These uses were not authorized by the Department of Land
and Natural Resources.
 
9
 Pflueger Properties and James H. Pflueger were later dismissed 
from the case, leaving Pila' a 400 as the sole responsible party. See note 19, 
infra. Until the dismissal, DLNR and BLNR communications were directed either 
to Pflueger Properties or James H. Pflueger.
 
10
 “Grubbing” means the removal of vegetation by scraping,
dislodging, or uprooting vegetation that breaks the topsoil. HAR § 13-5-2.
 
-7­      
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED TO CEASE any further activity on the
subject premises. Should you fail to cease such illegal
activity immediately, you will be subject to fines up to
$2,000 per day pursuant to Chapter 13-5, [HAR], in addition
to administrative costs incurred by the Department and
damages to State land.
 
(Footnote added).
 
On June 20, 2002, following a June 13, 2002 site
 
inspection, the DLNR issued a second Notice and Order (Second
 
Notice and Order) to Pflueger Properties for "Illegal Activity in
 the Conservation District.” The Second Notice and Order required
 Pflueger Properties to submit a remedial Best Management
 Practices Plan for the affected conservation land and emphasized
 
that the natural environment at Pila
'a Bay suffered “unauthorized 
despoliation” due to “almost unimpeded” sedimentation resulting
 
from the illegal land uses conducted on the property.
 
[A] massive vertical bench was cut into the hillside and
remains unprotected from erosion. Evidently, this was done
to construct a new dirt road . . . . This road now serves
 
as a conduit for water and sediments, which end up in the
sea almost unimpeded. A small valley that terminates
 
near the beach was filled with large quantities of
excavated soil. This area remains partly unvegetated.
This latter action resulted in the diversion of a small
 stream, which originates from a spring several meters up
the valley. This fill area is a serious source of
 
sediments transported to the nearshore waters during
periods of rainfall
.
It was generally agreed that some immediate remedial
actions could be taken, such as implementation of Best
Management  Practices  (BMPs),  to help 
abate sedimentation
 
on nearshore waters.
 
. . . . [T]here is a need for immediate physical
intervention to slow down runoff and sediments.
 
(Emphases added).
 
The Second Notice and Order also memorialized future
 
remedial action the DLNR intended to take:
 
-8­ 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The landowner is reminded that these interim remedial
 
actions in no way whatsoever, cures, exonerates or
pardons the unauthorized despoliation of conservation
values at Pila
'a by the landowner. The matter of the 
unauthorized work at Pila' a Bay will be presented to the
BLNR at a future date, time and place to be announced. 
In addition to fines and penalties for damages to Stateland, the landowner should be made aware of thepossibility of the imposition of the requirement toconduct complete land restoration and long termmonitoring to assess the recovery of the marineenvironment. 
(Emphasis added).
 
On August 22, 2002, the DLNR issued an order for the
 
implementation of emergency erosion and water pollution controls
 
(First Implementation Order) detailed by the plan submitted by
 Pfleuger Properties. 
11 The First Implementation Order reiterated
 
that erosion and sedimentation resulting from the illegal uses
 conducted on the Property continued to threaten Pila
'a Bay. 
On June 20, 2002, the DLNR issued you a second order,
directing you to submit a Remedial Best Management PracticesPlan to construct filter fences, plug a drainage culvert andgrass certain areas in order to reduce erosion andsedimentation of waters within Pila' a Bay. 
. . . . 
These measures would include the construction of a large
rock berm within the eastern gulch, a series of smaller rock
dams, sedimentation ponds, hydro mulching, etc. . . .
[t]hese emergency measures would be implemented with the
sole intent of forestalling erosion and prevention of
further degradation of marine waters, which could occur this
rain season unless appropriate measures are undertaken
immediately
.
 
. . . . 
In addition to fines and penalties for damages to State land,
the landowner should be ma
de aware of the possibility of
complete land restoration and long term monitoring to assess
the recovery of the marine environment.
 
11
 The Best Management Practices Plan ordered by the DLNR’s June 20,
2002 letter does not appear in the record. DLNR’s August 22 letter addressed
to Pflueger Properties references this order and stated that it has “reviewed
the submitted plan” and “conditionally approves the emergency
measures . . . .”
 
-9­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Emphases added).
 
On November 20, 2002, the DLNR issued a second 
implementation order (Second Implementation Order) to implement 
erosion and water pollution control measures within the shoreline area of Pila
'a Bay. The Second Implementation Order emphasized 
that erosion continued to pose a threat to the immediate shoreline area and the marine waters and echoed the language of the previous order. “These emergency measures would be implemented with the sole intent of forestalling erosion and prevention of further degradation of marine waters which could occur this rainy season unless appropriate measures are undertaken immediately.” (Emphasis added). Both the First and Second Implementation orders reiterated the intention of the BLNR to take future action. 
The damage to the coral reef at Pila
'a Bay was a 
central and continuing concern of the DLNR. On behalf of the BLNR, Dr. Paul Jokiel completed a scientific study entitled “Reef Coral Communities at Pila
'a Reef in Relation to Environmental 
Factors” on December 12, 2002 (the Jokiel Report). The Jokiel Report extensively examined the effects of the November 2001 mudflows on Pila
'a reef and the surrounding area. It concluded 
that “the mudflow from the 26 November 2001 event entered the reef [at a time of low wave energy] . . . so all of the sediment was deposited and retained in the shallow reef system,” and “the 
-10­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shallow coral reef areas at Pila 'a have undergone recent 
degradation.” The degradation was shown by the impact of the
 
sediment on the reef corals:
 
c. Hard substrate in impacted areas is covered with
mats of algae and terrigenous sediment12 rather than
 
the pink crustose coralline algae that would be
expected. Sediments have combined with the fleshy
algae into a thick matrix on hard surfaces.
 
d. Presence of terrigenous mud has mixed with the
carbonate sands on the beaches, intertidal and
subtidal areas. The mixture bakes into a “hardpan”
layer on impacted beaches.
 
. . . . 
3. Mudflows and increased rates of sediment input have
resulted from grading of steep slopes along the shoreline
with consequent accelerated erosion of soil onto the reef.
Increased mud input is the cause as shown by the pattern of
damage in relation to sediment sources and in shore ocean
patterns.
 
4. Recovery of the damaged areas cannot begin until
terrigenous input of sediment is curtailed. 
(Emphases added).
 
The DLNR also conducted additional studies that
 
examined the effects of sedimentation on the reef at Pila 'a Bay. 
The “Report on Reconnaissance: Level Sedimentology Survey of
 
Pila'a Reef Beaches, Kauai, Hawaii, August 5, 2002” concluded 
that “the reef and bay at Pila 'a contain significant quantities 
of terrigenous mud,” compared to a control beach which was
 “pristine.” At the time of the report, some eight months after
 the November 26, 2001 mudflow, the report also noted:
 
12
 In oceanography, terrigenous sediments are those derived from the
 
erosion of rocks on land and consist of sand and mud carried to sea by rivers.
Paul R. Pinet, Invitation to Oceanography 94 (2009)(available via Google
Scholar, p. 94 [as of Feb. 13, 2014]).
 
-11­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A concentrated plume of mud was continuously observed during the
 
survey . . . . Presumably, this process has been ongoing since
the November 2001 and May 12, 2002 rain events and will continue
for months, perhaps even years into the future . . . .
 
A second report entitled “Initial Data Regarding Pila 'a 
Assessment,” also completed in August 2002, noted particular 
concerns for the endangered Hawaiian green sea turtle. The report determined that there were significant long term impacts and concerns relating to displacement of native plants and animals by invasive species; enhancement of “fleshy algae” and cyanobacteria; decreased larval and planktonic organism survival; decreased fertilization success, sex reversal and deformities, and impacts to non-coral cryptic systems, mobile reef systems, and loss of three-dimensional substrate. The report also discussed economic values of the impact to the reef and possible mitigation strategies. 
Pila
'a 400 also commissioned two of its own scientific 
studies on sedimentation following the November 2001 mudflow and its effects on the reef. The first study, completed in February 2003 was entitled “Preliminary Sediment Runoff Analysis for Pflueger Property Restoration.” The purpose of the study was to “estimate the potential annual historical sediment runoff from the Pila
'a property.” The study determined that the sediment 
run-off that occurred during the November 26, 2001 incident was not extraordinary for the area. 
-12­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A second study, completed in March 2003 was entitled 
“Ecology of the Reef Ecosystem of Pila 'a, Kauai and Analysis of 
Alleged Environmental Impacts Associated with Recent Sediment 
Run-Off,” and was directed at determining the relationship between the November 2001 mudflow and the alleged damage to the reef. According to this report, the low coral cover at Pila
'a 
was due to the naturally harsh ecological conditions. In addition, the study asserted that the sediment spill in November 2001 did not exceed the range of natural variability at Pila
'a, 
suggesting that Pila 'a 400 should not be held responsible for the 
damage. 
C.
 
On August 22, 2003, a public meeting (Public Meeting) 
was held before the BLNR, during which DLNR staff presented a report (Staff Report) regarding “Alleged Unauthorized Grading, Grubbing, Filling, Road Construction, Landscaping, Drainage, Improvements, and Damages to State Land and Natural Resources Due to Excessive Sedimentation at Pila
'a.” The Staff Report 
enumerated four unauthorized uses within the Conservation District. 
[T]his report documents the unauthorized land uses within
the conservation district. The unauthorized uses include
 [1] [a] . . . dirt road through gulch 2, and along the
shoreline, [2] [a] . . . vertical cut in the coastal bluff,
[3] . . . fill and grading at the seaward extent of gulch 2,
. . . [4] . . . storm drain construction adjacent to the
beach.
 
The report continued: “These unauthorized improvements resulted
 
-13­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in extensive damages to the shoreline and marine resources at 
Pila'a Bay, which was the focus of this report.” (Emphases 
added.) 
The Staff Report concluded “there is a strong 
evidentiary record . . . linking the unauthorized work of Mr. Pflueger to coral reel damages at Pila
'a Bay. The area of 
damages calculated . . . is 5,830 square meters. . . . The comprehensive survey of corals provide strong statistical proof that the damages are a result of massive sedimentation events caused by the abutting landowner.” 
The Staff Report recommended, inter alia: (1) a penalty
 
of $12,000 for “failing to obtain the appropriate approvals for
 road construction, grading, filling, and storm drain construction
 in six (6) instances within the conservation district;” (2) an
 assessment of $5,830,000 for “damaging state land and natural
 resources stemming from the unauthorized lands [sic] uses;” and
 (3) a fine of $38,000 for administrative costs. 
Before the close of the Public Meeting, the Pflueger 
Properties, James H. Pflueger (Pflueger) and Pila
'a 400 
(collectively, the “Pflueger Parties”) made an oral request for a contested case hearing. On September 2, 2003, the BLNR issued a letter (September 2, 2003 Letter) to “James Pflueger, Pflueger 
-14­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Properties” that referred to the Public Meeting and acknowledged
 
the oral request for the contested case hearing.13
 
D.
 
The focus of the contested case hearing was framed by
 
the parties in pre-hearing statements. The first statement was
 an August 29, 2003 letter by the Pflueger Parties to the BLNR
 supplementing their oral request for a contested case hearing
 (Written Hearing Request). In the Written Hearing Request, the
 Pflueger Parties affirmed that the subject of the contested case
 hearing would be damages to Pila
'a Bay and reef resulting from 
excess sedimentation caused by unauthorized grading activities in
 the Conservation District:
 
The matter being considered by the [BLNR] concerns alleged
damage to the reef flat and near-shore marine environment
stemming from grading activities in the conservative [sic]
district which allegedly resulted in discharges of sediment
following a severe rainstorm on the night of November 26,
2001, December 2001, and early 2002.
 
(Emphasis added). The Written Hearing Request also contested the
 
following facts and issues contained in the DLNR staff report
 presented at the Public Meeting:
 
•	 the statutory legal authority
 
•	 the responsible parties
 •	 the scope and extent of the alleged damage to the reef flat
and near-shore marine environment at Pila' a 
•	 the amount of alleged damage that was directly caused by
the Petitioners’ grading activities as opposed to other
causal factors
 
13
 The September 2, 2003 Letter ordered Pflueger to pay a fine of
$8,000 relating to four instances of unauthorized land use. In addition, the
 BLNR assessed $38,500 for administrative costs related to unauthorized land
 
uses at Pila' a. At some time prior to February 17, 2004, the $8,000 fine and
$38,500 in administrative costs were paid. 
-15­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
•	 the specific dates(s) when the alleged damage occurred
 
•	 evidence regarding assessment of the damages to the reef
flat and near-shore marine environment and the alleged
 causes
 
•	 the amount of penalties proposed by the DLNR staff
 
•	 the statutory authority for and the method used by the DLNR
to calculate penalties for the alleged damage to the reef
flat and near-shore marine environment
 
•	 all factual and legal issues addressed in the DLNR staff
report dated August 22, 2003
 
•	 DLNR staff recommendation items nos. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and
 
9 as described in the DLNR staff report and
 
•	 any and all finds [sic] of fact and conclusions of law that
 may arise during the course of the contested case
 proceeding.
 
In its prehearing Statement on the Issues, dated
 
February 17, 2004, the DLNR framed the purpose of the contested
 
case hearing as follows:
 
The only issue in this contested case proceeding is the
determination of the amount of damages to be assessed
against the Pflueger Parties for damages to the beach, reef,
and marine environment . . . which were largely the result
of excessive sediment input dating from November 2001 and
thereafter.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
In its Responsive Statement of the Issues dated March
 
1, 2004, the Pflueger Parties presented an extensive list of
 
disputed facts and issues to be determined at the contested case
 hearing that included sedimentation, damages, causation, and the
 authority of the BLNR, both generally and specifically to assess
 penalties and to require remediation. The Pflueger Parties
 contested that it violated the provisions of HRS § 183C and HAR
 Chapter 13-5 “by damaging state land and natural resources
 stemming from unauthorized land uses, for a penalty of
 
-16­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
$5,830,000.” The statement disputed many of the findings of the
 
Staff Report presented at the Public Hearing, including the
 sources and historic patterns of sedimentation into Pila
'a Bay, 
“causation as to the alleged damage to the beach, near-shore
 marine environment, reef flat and/or deep water coral shelf at
 Pila
'a”; “the scope and extent of the alleged damage to the 
beach, near shore marine environment, reef flat, and/or deep
 water coral shelf at Pila
'a;” and “the amount of alleged damage 
that was directly caused by [the Pflueger Parties’] grading
 activities as opposed to other causal factors.”
 
On October 3, 2003, the BLNR published a Notice of
 
Contested Case Hearing (Contested Case Hearing Notice). It
 provided:
 
The [BLNR] will conduct a contested case hearing on DLNR
File No. KA-04-02 regarding an enforcement action involvingthe alleged damages to State land(s) and natural resourcesdue to excessive sedimentation at Pila' a, District of
Hanalei, Island of Kauai, seaward of TMK: 5-1-4:8 (por.).The hearing will be held pursuant to Chapters 91 and 183C,Hawaii Revised Statutes, and Chapters 13-1 and 13-5, HawaiiAdministrative Rules (HAR). 
(Emphasis added).14
 
14 In its prehearing Statement on the Issues dated February 17, 2004, 
the DLNR also stated that the damages dated from November 2001. Based on the DLNR statement, the Pflueger Parties, which included Pila' a 400, moved to
dismiss Pflueger Properties and Pflueger from the case (the Dismissal Motion)because Pflueger Properties had conveyed its ownership interest in theProperty to Pila' a 400 earlier that year. The Dismissal Motion acknowledged
that Pila' a 400 would remain the liable party. 
[Pila
'a 400] is the party liable for any penalty incurred as
a result of the wrongful acts of its manager. As a matter of law, [Pila' a 400] is the sole party responsible in this
action[.] 
Based on the foregoing representations, the DLNR did not oppose the
Dismissal Motion. 
Similarly, the hearing officer’s (Hearing Officer)
(continued...)
 
-17­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The contested case hearing began on July 20, 2004, and 
continued over 13 days through August 13, 2004. The first 
activity in the contested case was a site visit by the hearing officer (Hearing Officer), who spent several hours exploring the reef with mask and snorkel and examining the beach. The Hearing Officer heard testimony and received exhibits from experts in marine science regarding damage to Pila
'a Bay and reef. Both 
sides also presented multiple kama 'aina15 witnesses who testified 
as to the impact of the unauthorized land uses on fishing and beach-related activities at Pila
'a Bay. 
DLNR presented six experts in marine science to 
establish the damage to the Pila 'a reef. Those experts included 
Dr. Paul Jokiel, an international expert on coral reefs and coral reef monitoring; Dr. Charles Fletcher, an internationally recognized expert on coastal sedimentary geology and carbonate reefs; David Gulko, a senior aquatic biologist with the DLNR and an expert in coral reef ecology; Dr. William Walsh, an aquatic 
14(...continued)
April 29, 2004 dismissal noted that “[Pila
'a 400] [was] the landowner of 
the [Property] at all relevant times.” Therefore, Pila' a 400 was 
allowed to remain as the sole liable party. The BLNR’s June 30, 2005 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order concluded,“As the owner of the Property . . . Pila' a 400 was responsible to the
State for the condition of the Property and for the consequences of anyillegal activity on the Property by its predecessors[.]” Pila' a 400 did 
not contest that it was the responsible party in its application forwrit of certiorari to this court. 
15
 “Kama'aina” means native-born, acquainted, or familiar. Mary
Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert, New Pocket Hawaiian Dictionary at 50 (1992).It can also mean “a person familiar from childhood with any locality.” In re 
Boundaries of Pulehunui, 4 Haw. 239, 245 (1879). 
-18­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
biologist and resource manager with the DLNR and an expert in 
aquatic biology; Ryan Okano, a graduate student at the University of Hawai
'i and an expert in algae; and Dr. Robert Richmond, a 
research professor at Kewalo Marine Laboratory and an expert in coral reef biology and their valuation. 
Pila
'a 400 called five expert witnesses to address the 
issues of excessive sedimentation and its effects on the reef at Pila
'a. These experts included Dr. Richard Grigg, an expert in 
coral reef ecology and oceanography, Dr. Eric H. De Carlo, an expert in sedimentary geology, and Dr. Steve Dollar, an expert in biological oceanography, all co-authors of the sedimentation study submitted by Pila
'a 400. Pila 'a’s 400’s other experts were 
Paul Wallrabenstein, an author of a second sedimentation study submitted by Pila
'a 400, an expert in civil engineering, and Dr. 
John Dixon, an expert in the field of environmental economics. 
Following the contested case hearing, both parties 
submitted proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and recommendations. The Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Recommendation submitted by Pila
'a 400 (Pila 'a 400 Proposal) included, inter alia, the 
following arguments: (1) as the principal land use activities and source of the mudflow was land outside the Conservation District, the BLNR therefore lacked jurisdiction over those land use violations, and (2) Pila
'a 400 was denied due process by DLNR’s 
-19­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
failure to engage in rule-making, as mandated by HRS § 183C-3(3),
 
before assessing the damage penalty.
 
The DNLR Proposed Recommended Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order (DLNR Proposal) noted that
 the Pflueger Parties did not contest the September 2, 2003
 Letter’s findings of “violation[s] of the provisions of Chapter
 183C HRS, and Chapter 13-5, HAR, by failing to obtain the
 appropriate approvals for road construction, grading, filling,
 and storm drain construction in four (4) instances within the
 conservation district.” The DLNR Proposal described the
 unauthorized work on the Property and resultant mudflow, and
 extensively detailed the impact to the Conservation District and
 the damage to State land. The DLNR Proposal stated the damage to
 the reef and ecosystem were violations of HAR §§ 13-5-24, 30(b). 
The DLNR Proposal recommended the following “Discussion and
 Conclusions”:
 
18.	 The November 26, 2001 mudflow and subsequent
sedimentation constitute placement of solid material
on land and the grading of land and are therefore a
regulated land use with the meaning of [HRS] § 183C­2[].
 
19. 	Pila' a 400 did not have a [DLNR] or [BLNR] permit
authorizing any land use in the [ConservationDistrict]. 
20. 	The November 26, 2001 mudflow and subsequent
sedimentation constitute marine construction within
 the meaning of HAR § 13-5-24.
 
21. 	Pila' a 400 did not have a [DLNR] or [BLNR] permit
authorizing marine construction (including filling ofsubmerged land). Nor could a permit be obtained forthe filling of submerged land where protected marineresources are destroyed. Chapter 13-5 does not 
-20­ 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
provide otherwise that Pila' a 400 could undertake 
marine construction.
 
22. 	The November 26, 2001, mudflow and subsequent
sedimentation events constitute violation by Pila' a 400 
of [HRS] chapter 183C and violation of rules adopted
in accordance with chapter 183C. 
On December 22, 2004, the Hearing Officer entered
 
Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Recommendation
 
(Hearing Officer’s Proposal). The Hearing Officer recommended
 
16
 that the BLNR assess Pila 'a 400 $2,315,000, representing the sum
of restoration costs, the value of coral destroyed, the intrinsic
 value of Pila
'a Bay, compensation for interim loss, and five 
years of monitoring the Pila 'a reef community. The Hearing 
Officer’s Proposal noted generally the provisions of HAR §§ 13-5­24 and 30(b), as well as other relevant sections of HAR Chapter
 13-5. In regards to HAR §§ 13-5-24 and 30(b), the Hearing
 Officer’s Proposal adopted the Discussion and Conclusions No. 18­22 from the DLNR Proposal. In addition, the Hearing Officer
 
16 The Hearing Officer also made the following recommendation:
 
It is recommended that the $2,325,000 penalty be held in
trust and applied to implement the Conceptual RemediationPlans whose estimated cost is three to five million dollars and to monitor the Pila' a Bay reef for five years. This 
will assure that the penalty is used to restore Pila' a Bay.
If the construction costs of the Conceptual RemediationPlans exceed $2,000,000, [Pila 'a 400, LLC] should pay the
balance of the construction costs. If the construction and monitoring costs are less than the balance of the penaltynot used to fund the Conceptual Remediation Plans andmonitor Pila' a Bay for five years, then the balance of the
penalty should be retained by the State of Hawaii. 
The "Conceptual Remediation Plans" were approved by the DLNR and were
designed to ensure the Property was stable and no further runoff would occur. 
It included removal of a trail in Gulch 2 and restoration of the stream to
 its previous location and configuration, extensive landscaping in Gulch 2,
stabilization, filling and restoration of the shoreline cut, re-vegetation of
the shoreline, and removal of the rock berm in Gulch 2.
 
-21­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
recommended that the BLNR assess administrative costs in the
 
amount of $69,996.93. 
Following the entering of the Hearing Officer’s 
Proposal, both parties filed exceptions to the Hearing Officer’s Proposal. In its exceptions, Pila
'a 400 raised an objection to 
any findings based on HAR § 13-5-24 due to a lack of notice under HRS § 91-9. Pila
'a 400 stated that it had “never received any 
notice, oral or written, that the contested case hearing was proceeding under the marine construction rules. There is not a single citation in the entire contested case record which even references ‘marine construction.’” (Emphasis removed). 
On March 29, 2005, the BLNR heard closing arguments.
 
On June, 30, 2005, the BLNR issued its Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order (BLNR Order).
 
The BLNR Order ordered Pila
'a 400 to pay $3,963,000 in 
damages as well as $69,996.93 for DLNR’s administrative costs.17
 
In arriving at the monetary amount, the BLNR Order found that the
 
Hearing Officer’s recommendations did not reflect “the BLNR’s
 duty to protect this valuable natural resource.” 
17
 The BLNR’s conclusions differed from the Hearing Officer’s 
recommendations in the following respects: (1) Pila' a Bay had incurred
$3,333,000 in damages rather than $2,000,000; (2) monitoring should be
conducted for 10 years at a cost of $630,000 instead of 5 years; (3) thedamages award should be deposited in the special land and development fundrather that used to offset the restoration costs because “an offset would not 
compensate for the damages caused to Pila' a beach, bay, and reef.” 
-22­  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The value of Pila' a beach, bay and reef includes use value,
option value, commodity value, existence value, bequest
value, cultural values, including value to indigenouspeople, and intrinsic value. Economic and use (market)values alone cannot and do not capture the full value ofPila'a. Economic valuation alone understates the true 
social loss from natural resource damage. The intrinsic value of Pila' a is recognized by the Hawai' i constitution and 
state laws, including section 183C-1, HRS. The BLNR holds Pila'a and all state property in trust for the people of 
Hawai'i and for future generations.
18 
The BLNR determined that “[m]udflows from Pila 'a 400’s 
Property into the [Conservation District] occurred because Pila 'a 
400 . . . failed to obtain permits for the [unauthorized] work
 
and failed to implement adequate sediment and water pollution
 controls.”
19 The BLNR based Pila 'a 400’s liability for the 
damages on placement of dirt and sediment onto submerged lands. 
2. The violation was placement of any solid material on
land in the form of dumping or allowing to be put on
 
18 In addition, the BLNR reasoned:
 
Given the elements of value discussed above and in 
consideration of all the facts and evidence, including butnot limited to the range of values stated in scholarlypapers for reefs, the probable costs of restoration ofPila'a Bay and reef and beach, the value of the coral
destroyed, and the intrinsic value of Pila' a Bay and reef,
and the costs of monitoring for 10 years beginning in 2005,the BLNR rejects the Hearing Officer’s recommendation ofdamages. Under the circumstances of this case, the HearingOfficer’s recommendation as to the amount of damages is toolenient to reflect the BLNR’s duty to protect this valuablenatural resource under constitutional and statutory law. 
19
 As to the four violations identified in the September 2, 2003
 
letter, the BLNR Order enumerates that Pila' a 400 had: (1) created “a massive
vertical cut ranging in elevation from 40 to 60 feet in height” within the
Conservation District, (2) constructed a road in the Conservation District,
and (3) constructed an unauthorized 30 inch pipe or culvert that ran onto
state property in the Conservation District. The fourth land use violation
 identified in the September 2, 2003 Letter is not clearly identified in the
BLNR Order.
 
-23­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conservation land (including submerged land) of a large
unknown amount of dirt and sediment. The illegal act that
was conducted on conservation land (including submerged
land) was dumping or allowing to be dumped a large unknown
quantity of dirt and mud without a permit as required by HAR
§§ 13-5-24 and 13-5-30(b).
 
3. As the owner of the Property on November 26, 2001,
thereafter, Pila' a 400 was responsible to assure that there
was no unpermitted dumping onto conservation land, including
submerged lands. As the owner of the Property on November26, 2001, and thereafter, Pila' a 400 was responsible to the
State for the condition of the Property and for theconsequences of any illegal activity on the Property by itspredecessors that resulted in damage to State land(including submerged land) after it acquired the Property 
. . . . 
5. Dumping soil onto conservation land falls within the
definition of “land use” in HRS § 183C-2. [ 20
]
. . . . 
8. The November 26, 2001, mudflow and subsequent
sedimentation events constitute placement of solid material
on land and the grading of land and are regulated land use
within the meaning of HRS § 183C-2.
 
. . . .
 10. The November 26, 2001, mudflow and subsequent
sedimentation events constitute violation by Pila
'a 400 of 
HRS chapter 183C and violation of rules adopted in
accordance with chapter 183C. 
(Emphasis and footnote added). 
E.
 
On July 27, 2005, Pilaa 400 appealed the BLNR Order 
to the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court). 
Pila'a 400 raised, inter alia, the following points of error on 
appeal: 
'
(1) The BLNR order violates Haw. Rev. Stat. § 91-3 and Haw.
Rev. Stat. § 183C-3(3) because the BLNR had no rules
 
20
 HRS § 183C-2 (Supp. 2000), provided at the time of the violation,
as it does now, in pertinent part:
 
“Land Use” means:
 (1) The placement or erection of any solid material on land;
(2) The grading, removing, harvesting, dredging, mining, or
extraction of any material or natural resource on land;
(3) The subdivision of land; or
(4) The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of
any structure, building, or facility on land. 
-24­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
establishing a methodology for calculating damages to state
land; 
(2) The BLNR lacks jurisdiction over grading activities
outside the conservation district;
 
(3) Appellant did not receive notice that the violation was
“placement of any solid material on land in the form of
dumping . . . without a permit as required by HAR § 13-5-24
and 13-5-30(b)”;
 
In the first point of error, Pila 'a 400 argued that the 
BLNR Order violated HRS § 91-3 and HRS § 183C-3(3) because it 
failed to establish any written guidelines for the assessment of environmental damages. Citing Hawai
'i Prince Hotel v. City and 
County of Honolulu, 89 Hawai 'i 381, 383, 974 P.2d 21, 23 (1999), 
Pila'a 400 contended that “the methodology for imposing fines and 
penalties must be clearly established by rule, otherwise the public is unaware of factors critical to the agency’s penalty process.” Further, Pila
'a 400 reasoned that “[a] penalty imposed 
in the absence of Chapter 91 rule-making is invalid as arbitrary and capricious.” 
In response, the DLNR contended that the plain language
 
of HRS § 183C-7(b) authorizes the BLNR to regulate the use of
 conservation district land and to impose fines for its misuse. 
In addition, because state land could be damaged in an infinite
 number of ways that includes any possible removal, diminishing,
 destruction, or loss in the conservation values, the DLNR argued
 that it is “impossible to the point of absurdity” to suppose that
 the BLNR is required to prescribe by rule the exact amount of
 damage that will be levied, citing Coney v. Lihue Plantation Co.,
 39 Haw. 129 (1951). The DLNR further explained that the
 
-25­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
appropriate standard for the assessment of the damage amount was
 
applied in this case. 
In its second point of error, Pila 'a 400 argued that 
the BLNR did not have jurisdiction because the grading activities took place outside the Conservation District. Citing the BLNR’s findings of fact, Pila
'a 400 contended that the sedimentation 
events resulted in mudflow from the Property into the 
Conservation District and that the source of the sediment was 
outside of the Conservation District. Pila 'a 400 argued that HRS 
§ 183C limits the agency’s authority to land use activities on Conservation District land. 
In response, the DLNR argued that the dumping of mud
 
and dirt onto Conservation District land is a “land use” under
 HRS § 183C and that the “source” of the mud was not relevant. In
 addition, the DLNR contended that whether the dumping was
 intentional was not relevant to the statute. 
In its third point of error, Pila
'a 400 argued that the 
Contested Case Hearing Notice did not provide adequate notice that the alleged land use violation was “unpermitted marine construction” under HAR § 13-5-24. Pila
'a 400 contended that HRS 
§ 91-9(b) requires an agency to give notice of the “particular sections of the statutes and rules involved” and that the absence of specific notice of HAR § 13-5-24 denied Pila
'a 400 due 
process. 
-26­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
21On March 9, 2006, the Environmental Protection Agency and the
Hawai#i Department of Health filed a complaint in the United States District
Court for the District of Hawai# i against the Pflueger Parties, alleging
violations of state and federal law and seeking damages and injunctive relief. 
On June 16, 2006, the U.S. District Court approved a consent decree resolving
the claims.  As part of the consent decree, the Pflueger Parties paid civil
penalties and agreed to undertake remedial measures, but denied liability.  On
July 24 and August 17, 2006, Pflueger Parties filed motions with the circuit
court seeking summary judgment and dismissal based on the consent decree.  The
circuit court denied both motions on October 23, 2006.
-27-In response, the DLNR argued that Pila# a 400 received
adequate notice in compliance with HRS § 91-9(b) because the
written notice referred to the statutes and rules involved by
chapter.  The DLNR emphasized that “[t]he notice references Haw.
Rev. Stat. chapter 183C and HAR § 13-5” and “nothing more was
required by section 91-9(b).”21
On December 4, 2006, the circuit court issued its
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order affirming the
BLNR Order.  The circuit court determined, in relevant part that:
FINDINGS OF FACT
. . . .27. [Pila# a 400] did not challenge any of the BLNR’s
findings of fact. . . . CONCLUSIONS OF LAW. . . .6. The [Contested Case Hearing Notice] was adequate and
sufficient to satisfy the notice requirements of HRS Chapter91.  The notice refers to the statute and the rules involvedby chapter.  Appellant was aware of the general issues.  
 . . .7. Due Process is satisfied if the parties are sufficiently
apprised of the nature of the proceeding as set forth in[HRS] § 91-9(b).  [Pila# a 400] received such notice, so
there is no unfair surprise.  
 . . .8. [Pila# a 400]’s argument that the administrative
proceeding is invalid because the notice does not refer to
“marine construction,” is without merit because the BLNR didnot base its Final Decision on “marine construction.”   
 . . .*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12. Because damages to state land, as well as the nature of
the state land itself, can vary, it would be impossible to
devise a single rule that prescribes the methodology for
quantifying damages. Therefore, determination of the
appropriate amount of damages must be on a case by case
basis and was properly determined through a quasi-judicial
process before the BLNR. 
Accordingly, the circuit court affirmed the BLNR Order. 
Final judgment was entered on December 26, 2006. 
F.
 
On January 9, 2007, Pila 'a 400 filed a timely appeal to 
the ICA. Pila 'a 400 asserted that the circuit court erred in 
affirming the BLNR order for the following reasons, inter alia:
 
(a) [the BLNR Order] exceeded the statutory authority and
jurisdiction of the agency under HRS § 183C-3(7) because the
subject grading activity occurred outside of the conservation
district;
 
(b) [the BLNR Order] violated HRS § 91-9(b), and [Pila' a 400]’s
due process rights insofar as [Pila' a 400] did not receive notice of
the nature of the land use violation; (c) [the BLNR Order] violated HRS § 91-3 and HRS § 183C-3(3),
 
as the DLNR and the [BLNR] failed to adopt rules for
calculating and assessing environmental damages to state land;
 
Pila'a 400 LLC v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res., No. 28358 at *5 
(App. Dec. 21, 2012)(mem.)(hereinafter “ICA Op.”).
 
As to the first point of error, Pila 'a 400 maintained 
that the BLNR lacked jurisdiction because the alleged land use
 
violations occurred outside of the conservation district. Citing
 to the BLNR’s findings of fact, Pila
'a 400 contended that the 
sedimentation events resulted in mudflow from the Property into
 
the Conservation District and that the source of the sediment was
 outside of the Conservation District. Pila
'a 400 argued that HRS 
§ 183C limits the agency’s authority to land use activities on
 
-28­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Conservation District land, and therefore the land use activities
 
were outside the BLNR’s jurisdiction.
 
The ICA held that the BLNR properly exercised
 
jurisdiction for two reasons: (1) at least some of the
 unpermitted grading activity occurred within the Conservation
 District, and (2) the unpermitted placement of solid material on
 conservation land is itself a land use violation directly under
 the BLNR’s jurisdiction.  ICA Op. at *6. The ICA emphasized
 that the origin of the fill material was irrelevant, and it was
 the act of dumping that brought this action under the BLNR’s
 jurisdiction. Id.
 
The ICA also held that the BLNR was not barred by any
 
authority from considering additional land use violations beyond
 the four land use violations that were identified in the
 September 2, 2003 Letter. Id. The ICA reasoned:
 
[Pila'a 400] had reason to know that damage to the beach,
bay and reef caused by the mud flow from the Property was
unquestionably of concern and the reason for DLNR'senforcement action. To the extent [Pila' a 400] argues that
it was unaware damage caused by soil runoff was at issue, weconclude that argument is unsupported by the record. 
Id. at *6-7. Therefore, because Pila 'a 400 had adequate notice 
that damage to the reef and bay caused by the mudflow was a 
central issue at the contested case hearing, Pila 'a 400 could not 
later argue that the BLNR was limited to the four land use violations originally identified and lacked jurisdiction over the mudflow and resultant damage. Id. 
-29­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In its second point, Pila 'a 400 argued the Contested 
Case Hearing Notice provided by the BLNR was insufficient under 
HRS § 91-9, and as a result of the insufficiency of the notice, it had been denied due process. Pila
'a 400 alleged the Contested 
Case Hearing Notice was deficient in that it did not include a specific citation to HAR § 13-5-24 and did not contain an explicit statement in plain language of the issues involved and facts alleged. 
The ICA concluded that the Contested Case Hearing 
Notice provided by the BLNR was sufficient. ICA Op. at *7. 
First, the ICA concluded that Pila
'a 400 had waived this 
challenge on appeal because it did not raise the issue of improper notice during the contested case hearing. Id. Second, 
the ICA observed that, contrary to the assertion of Pila
'a 400, 
the Contested Case Hearing Notice did contain an explicit statement of the essential issues, “the alleged damage to State land(s) and natural resources due to excessive sedimentation from Pila
'a [400]’s land.” Id. The ICA reviewed the record and 
concluded that it was “clear” that Pila 'a 400 was “aware of the 
general issue” and “sufficiently apprised of the nature of the proceeding.” Id. at *8. The ICA found that as Pila
'a 400 
“itself identified the matters to be considered in the contested case hearing as including the statutory basis for the assessment of damage, it cannot claim to be surprised by a hearing that 
-30­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
involved DLNR’s arguments regarding the basis for the
 
assessment.”
 
In regard to its third point, Pila 'a 400 argued that 
the BLNR failed to adopt rules that established a uniform methodology for assessing environmental damages before imposing a $3,963,000 penalty on Pila
'a 400. 
The ICA concluded that the BLNR and DLNR were not
 
required to engage in rule-making in this case. ICA Op. at *8. 
The ICA, citing Sec. & Exch. Comm’n v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S.
 194 (1947), reasoned that it would be impossible to create a
 single formula that could be used to assess the damage to state
 Conservation District land under all possible circumstances:
 
Due to the infinitely diverse nature of the lands and
resources, and the myriad of ways damage may occur on such
lands and resources, measuring value and value lost must be
on a case-by-case basis, especially when of the magnitude
under the circumstances presented here. Devising and
imposing a single formulaic methodology for assessing
penalties would be impracticable. 
ICA Op. at *10. The ICA held that the circuit court did not err
 
in affirming the BLNR’s order.22 ICA Op. at *18.
 
G.
 
In its application for writ of certiorari 
(Application), Pila 'a 400 presents the following questions for 
review: 
A. Did the ICA commit grave error when it found that neither
the [BLNR] nor the DLNR are required to engage in rule-
making, under HRS § 183C-3 and § 91-3, to adopt a
 
22
 Judge Wilson wrote separately to emphasize that BLNR did not err
in including intrinsic value in its calculation of the damages to State land 
at Pila' a Bay and reef. 
-31­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable and just methodology for assessing damage to
natural resources?
 
B. Did the ICA commit grave error when it found that the
[BLNR] had jurisdiction, under HRS § 183C-3, to institute
an enforcement action for grading activities outside of
the Conservation District?
 
C. Did the ICA commit grave error when it found that [Pila' a 
400] was afforded an opportunity for hearing afterreasonable notice, under HRS § 91-9, where the record is
undisputed that the DLNR failed to give [Pila' a 400]
notice of the particular sections of the statute andrules involved in the enforcement action? 
In the first question presented, Pila 'a 400 contends 
that the ICA’s determination that the BLNR and the DLNR were not 
required to engage in rule-making is grave error. Pila 'a 400 
argues first that the ICA’s conclusion ignores the plain language of HRS § 183C-3(3), which states that the BLNR “shall” engage in rule-making under the Hawaii Administrative Procedures Act (HAPA) rule-making procedures. Second, Pila
'a 400 contends that where 
quasi-judicial adjudication encompasses concerns that transcend those of individual litigants and implicates matters of administrative policy, rule-making procedures should be followed. Third, citing to Hawai' i Prince Hotel v. City and County of 
Honolulu, 89 Hawai' i 381, 974 P.2d 21 (1999), Pila
'a 400 argues 
that a methodology to determine value is a “rule” within the meaning of HRS § 91-1(4) and requires HAPA rule-making procedures. Pila
'a 400 concludes that in the absence of such 
guiding rules, the DLNR’s assessment was arbitrary and subjective. 
In response, the DLNR argues that, under HRS § 183C­
7(b), the legislature specifically authorized and directed the
 
-32­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
BLNR to include damages to state land when assessing fines. The 
DLNR maintains that determining damages to Pila 'a Bay and reef is 
not an exact science and that there are no settled or infallible rules or criteria by which to ascertain damages. The DLNR argues Pila'a 400 can only challenge its findings as provided for in HRS 
§ 91-14(g),
23 and because Pila 'a 400 does not contend that the 
BLNR’s findings are clearly erroneous or unsupported by substantial evidence, Pila
'a 400’s argument in regards to 
required rule-making is without merit. 
In its second question presented, Pila 'a 400 argues 
that the ICA committed grave error when it failed to articulate a legal basis for the DLNR’s jurisdiction over the agency enforcement action. Specifically, Pila
'a 400 argues that 
although the enforcement action involved land use violations within the Conservation District, the source of the sediment that went into the ocean was from grading “outside” of the Conservation District and therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the BLNR. 
In response, the DLNR observes that Pila
'a 400 does not 
dispute that the BLNR assessed a fine for damage to state owned property in the Conservation District. The DLNR contends that Pila
'a 400 is not relieved of liability simply because the 
sediment that caused the damage was a result of activity outside 
23
 HRS § 91-14(g) sets forth the standard for judicial review of an
 
agency. HRS § 91-14(g)(5) sets out a “clearly erroneous” standard for
judicial review of administrative findings of fact and mixed questions of fact
and law. See section III, infra.
 
-33­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the Conservation District. In addition, the DLNR argues that 
Pila'a 400 was clearly informed throughout the contested case 
hearing——including a site visit and 13 days of testimony——that the proceedings related to damages to State land. 
In the third point of error, Pila
'a 400 argues that the 
ICA committed grievous error when it held that the notice requirements of HRS § 91-9(b) were satisfied. Specifically, Pila
'a 400 contends that the notice it received pursuant to HRS § 
91-9 was insufficient in that it failed to cite specifically to HAR § 13-5-24, although the BLNR Order assessed damages based on the placement of fill material on submerged land as prohibited by that section. 
In response, the DLNR argues that the requirements of 
HRS § 91-9 were met because the statutes and rules involved were referred to by chapter. The DLNR contends that nothing more was required, and if Pila
'a 400 needed more information to 
effectively prepare its case, the proper remedy was to ask for a bill of particulars at that time rather than to raise the issue on appeal. Because Pila
'a 400 failed to challenge the notice in 
a timely manner, it cannot argue that notice was inadequate. 
II.
 
The review of a circuit court’s decision regarding its 
review of an administrative agency’s decision is a secondary appeal. Haw. Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 966 v. Dep’t of 
Labor & Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai
'i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 
-34­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2006). In a secondary appeal, “Hawai 'i appellate courts apply 
the same standard of review as that applied upon primary review 
by the circuit court.” AlohaCare v. Ito, 126 Hawai 'i 326, 341, 
271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012) (quoting Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. v. Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Relations, 70 Haw. 72, 80, 762 P.2d
 796, 800-01 (1988)). 
The applicable standard of review for administrative
 
appeals is set forth in HRS § 91-14(g), which provides:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
HRS § 91-14(g). See Save Diamond Head Waters LLC. v. Hans 
Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai 'i 16, 24, 211 P.3d 74, 82 (2009). 
Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, pursuant to
 
subsections (1), (2) and (4); questions regarding procedural
 
defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact are
 reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard, pursuant to
 subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of discretion is
 reviewed under the arbitrary and capricious standard, pursuant to
 
-35­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
subsection (6). Id. Mixed questions of law and fact are 
“‘reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the 
conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case.’” Id. at 25, 211 P.3d at 83 (quoting Del Monte 
Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int’l Longshore & Warehouse Union, 112 Hawai
'i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006)). 
III.
 
A.
 
Pila'a 400 contends that because the BLNR and the DLNR 
only have jurisdiction to “enforce land use regulations on conservation district lands,” BLNR did not have jurisdiction over Pila
'a 400’s actions or the resultant damages. Specifically, 
Pila'a 400 maintains that the damage to Pila 'a Bay resulted from 
grading activities conducted outside of the Conservation District, causing the flow of sediment from outside of the Conservation District onto the beach and into the bay. Consequently, Pila
'a 400 concludes BLNR and DLNR have no 
jurisdiction over Pila 'a 400’s land use activities. 
In general, the jurisdiction of an agency is created by 
statute. That jurisdiction is “limited by the terms of the governing statute.” Nihi Lewa, Inc. v. Dep’t of Budget & Fiscal 
Servs., 103 Hawai
'i 163, 170, 80 P.3d 984, 991 (2003)(Acoba, J., 
dissenting) (citing Ogle Cnty. Bd. v. Pollution Control Bd., 649 N.E. 2d 545, 551 (Ill. App. Ct. 1995)).
 
-36­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The powers and duties of the BLNR and DLNR with respect
 
to Conservation District lands are set forth in HRS § 183C-3. 
HRS § 183C-3 states, in relevant part, as follows:
 
The board and department shall:
 
. . . . 
(3)
 Adopt rules, in compliance with chapter 91 which shall
have the force and effect of law;
 
. . . . 
(7)
 Establish and enforce land use regulations on
conservation district lands including the collection of
fines for violations of land use and terms and conditions
 
issued by the department.
 
HRS § 183C-3 (2011). In accordance with this directive, the BLNR
 
adopted HAR § 13-5-30(b), which specifies that “[u]nless provided
 for in this chapter, land uses shall not be undertaken in the
 conservation district.” 
In this case, the BLNR’s enforcement action was based 
on excessive sedimentation within the Conservation District. The Contested Case Hearing Notice clearly defined the proceedings as “an enforcement action involving the alleged damages to State land(s) and natural resources due to excessive sedimentation at Pila
'a.” (Emphasis added). 
The BLNR had jurisdiction in this case first because 
the September 2, 2003 Letter identified land use violations “in four (4) instances within the conservation district.” (Emphasis added). Those land use violations were not disputed by Pila
'a 
400. Therefore, the BLNR had proper jurisdiction in the
 
contested case hearing to adjudicate damages that resulted from
 land use violations that occurred within the district. 
-37­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Second, the BLNR’s jurisdiction in the contested case 
hearing was derived not only from the four land use violations 
cited in the September 2, 2003 Letter, but also on the undisputed fact that, on November 26, 2001, sediment from the Property flowed into Pila
'a Bay and onto the reef. Pila 'a Bay and reef are 
conservation district lands, and the dumping of soil onto conservation land falls within the definition of ‘land use’ in HRS § 183C-2. The BLNR determined that 
[o]n November 26, 2001 . . . rain and erosion caused a
portion of the recently graded and filled hillside on the
Property to slump downhill from the Property, across Pila' a 
Beach and into Pila' a Bay . . . Additional sedimentation
events occurred in December 2001 and early 2002, in each
case resulting in mudflow from the Property into the
conservation district. 
(Emphases added). Further, the BLNR found “[t]he ‘illegal 
activity’ that was conducted on conservation land (including submerged land) was dumping or allowing to be dumped a large unknown quantity of dirt and mud without a permit as required by HAR §§ 13-5-24 and 13-5-30(b).” The circuit court similarly found that “mud and sediment [] was placed onto state land following the rainfall on November 26, 2001.” None of these findings were challenged by Pila
'a 400. Therefore, because mud 
and sediment were placed on state conservation district land, the BLNR had jurisdiction over any violations that arose out of that placement. 
Pila
'a 400 argues that the BLNR did not have 
jurisdiction because “the source of the sediment that went in the ocean was from grading outside of the conservation district, 
-38­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
beyond the jurisdictional reach of DLNR.” However, the
 
definition of land use refers to the placement of “any solid
 material” on land without regard to the source of the material. 
HRS § 183C-2; HAR § 13-5-2. As the ICA explained, “Nothing in
 the plain language of HRS § 183C(2) or HAR § 13-5-2 requires that
 the soil or other material placed on Conservation District land
 originate from Conservation District land as well.” ICA Op. at
 
*6. 
Therefore, the ICA correctly determined that the BLNR 
had jurisdiction, pursuant to HRS § 183C-3(7), to institute a proceeding to “enforce land use regulations on conservation district lands” in a case “involving the alleged damages to State land(s) and natural resources due to excessive sedimentation at Pila
'a.” HRS § 183C-3(7). 
B.
 
Pila'a 400 contends that HRS § 183C-3 requires the BLNR 
and the DLNR to engage in rule-making to adopt a standardized methodology for the valuation of damages to natural resources. Pila
'a 400 contends that because the BLNR adopted a new 
methodology to determine value, this methodology constitutes a “rule” within the meaning of HRS § 91-1(4) (1993). 
Although HRS § 183C-3 authorizes the BLNR and the DLNR
 
to adopt rules in accordance with Chapter 91, neither HRS § 183C­3(3) nor HRS § 91-3 required the BLNR or the DLNR to engage in
 rule-making. As noted above, HRS § 183C-3 grants the BLNR and
 
-39­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI# I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
24In the context of an agency, a rule is a “statement of general or
particular applicability and future effect that implements, interprets, or
prescribes law or policy or describes the organization, procedure or practice
requirements of any agency.”  HRS § 91-1(4).
25At the time of the November 26, 2001 mudslide, HRS § 183C-7
provided that:
  
Any person violating this chapter or any rule adopted in
accordance with this chapter shall be fined not more than
$2,000 in addition to administrative costs and damages to
state land.
HRS § 183C-7(b)(2001).  
26Pila#a 400’s reliance on Aluli v. Lewin, 73 Haw. 56, 828 P.2d 802 
(1992), is therefore misplaced.  In 
Aluli, this court held that the Department
of Health (DOH) erred in issuing air pollution permits when the agency had not
promulgated rules governing the issuance of such permits.  Id. at 61, 828 P.2d
at 805.  The decision was based on the provision of HRS § 342B-32 (Supp.
1991), which mandated that “‘[t]he director shall refuse to issue the permit
unless it . . . would be in compliance with the rules of the department and
the state ambient air quality standards.’”  Id. at 57-58, 828 P.2d at 803
(quoting HRS § 342B-32).  The Aluli court concluded that the DOH could not
issue a permit where the statute only authorizes the issuance of a permit in
accordance with rules, and the rules had yet to be propagated. 
 Id. at 61, 828
P.2d at 805.
-40-the DLNR the authority to “adopt rules” and “establish and
enforce land use regulations on conservation district lands.24 
HRS § 183C-3(5),(7) .
The legislature also granted the BLNR authority to
adjudicate on a case-to-case basis.  Under HRS § 183C-7, if the
BLNR finds misuse of conservation district land, the BLNR can
impose fines, set forth by the statute, or damages, not limited
by statute.25  
Thus, HRS § 183C-3 contains only a general mandate that
the BLNR and the DLNR adopt rules regarding the regulation of
conservation district lands.26  The BLNR complied with this
mandate through the promulgation of HAR chapter 13-5.  There is*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
no statutory requirement to enact rules regarding the valuation
 
of damage to reef or valuable marine resources. 
Neither were the circumstances under which the BLNR 
valued the damage to Pila 'a Bay and reef circumstances that were 
appropriate for rule-making. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the need for government agencies to proceed at times by general rule and at other times by case-by-case adjudication. In Securities & Exchanges Commission v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194 (1947), the Court reviewed a decision by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that rejected amendments to a registered corporation’s reorganization plan. Chenery, 332 U.S. 
at 199. The registered corporation argued that without an express standard prohibiting the amendments, the SEC could only “outlaw such profits in future utility organizations; but such a rule would have to be prospective in nature and have no retroactive effect upon the instant situation.” Id. at 199-200 
(emphasis added). The Court disagreed, holding that agencies are permitted to adjudicate without resorting to rule-making in appropriate situations: 
Not every principle essential to the effective
administration of a statute can or should be cast
 
immediately into the mold of a general rule. Some
 
principles must await their own development, while others
must be adjusted to meet particular, unforeseeable
situations. In performing its important functions in these
respects, therefore, an administrative agency must be
equipped to act either by general rule or by individual
order. To insist upon one form of action to the exclusion
of the other is to exalt form over necessity.
 
Id. at 202 (emphasis added). 
-41­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court has held that rule-making is inappropriate
 
where an agency lacks experience with a particular problem. 
[P]roblems may arise in a case which the administrative
agency could not reasonably foresee, problems which must be
resolved despite the absence of a relevant general rule. Or
the agency may not have had sufficient experience with a
particular problem to warrant rigidifying its tentative
judgment into a hard and fast rule. Or the problem may be so
specialized and varying in nature as to be impossible of
capture within the boundaries of a general rule. In those
situations, the agency must retain the power to deal with
the problems on a case-to-case basis if the administrative
process is to be effective. There is thus a very definite
place for the case-by-case evolution of statutory standards.
 
Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., 81 Hawai 'i 459, 468, 918 P.2d 
561, 570 (1996)(hereinafter In re HECO) (emphasis added) (quoting
 
Chenery, 332 U.S. at 202-03), accord In re Water Use Permit
 Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 170, 9 P.3d 409, 482 (2000) (also 
quoting Chenery, 332 U.S. at 203); see also NLRB v. Bell
 Aerospace Co., 416 U.S. 267, 294 (1974) (agency judgment to
 adjudicate on a case-by-case basis rather than create rules is
 entitled to great weight where a “generalized standard would have
 . . . marginal utility.”).
 
This court has also acknowledged a distinction between
 
the circumstances appropriate for rule-making versus adjudication
 duties of an agency. In the most general terms, the purpose of
 rule-making is to govern the future conduct of groups and
 individuals, not determining damages resulting from past conduct.
 
Rule-making is an agency action governing the future conduct
either of groups of persons or of a single individual; it is
essentially legislative in nature, not only because it
operates in the future but also because it is concerned
largely with considerations of policy. In rule-making,
disciplinary or accusatory elements are absent. 
-42­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In re HECO, 81 Hawai 'i at 466, 918 P.2d at 568 (emphasis added) 
(quoting Note, “Rule Making,” “Adjudication” and Exemptions Under 
the Administrative Procedure Act, 95 U. Pa. L. Rev. 621 (1946­47)). See also Coney v. Lihue Plantation Co., 39 Haw. 129, 138­
39 (1951) (holding that in a determination of damages, the finder
 of fact has a right and a duty to draw reasonable and probable
 inferences from the facts and circumstances in evidence, and in
 reference to the amount of damages, “the law never insists upon a
 higher degree of certainty as to the amount of damages than the
 nature of the case admits, and that where . . . the fact of
 damage is established, a more liberal rule is allowed in
 determining the amount.”)
 
Setting a general standard in this situation would be 
impracticable to define by general rule because the November 26, 2001 mudflow and damage to the reef was an “unforeseeable situation” and “so specialized and varying in nature so as to be impossible of capture within the boundaries of a general rule.” Chenery, 332 U.S. at 202; In re HECO, 81 Hawai
'i at 468, 918 
P.2d at 570. Conservation district lands are unique in that they “contain important natural resources essential to the preservation of the State’s fragile natural ecosystems . . . . ” HRS § 183C-1 (2011). The DLNR is tasked with the duty of “conserving, protecting, and preserving the important natural and cultural resources of the State.” HAR § 13-5-1. The elements of fragile ecosystems, cultural resources and natural beauty combine 
-43­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to make an assessment of damage to State land in one conservation
 
district inapplicable in other conservation districts. As the
 ICA concluded: 
Assessing damage to Conservation District lands, which
“contain important natural resources essential to the
preservation of the State’s fragile natural ecosystems and
the sustainability of the State’s water supply[,]” HRS §
183C–1 (2011), is a complex undertaking involving numerous
and variable components, often unique to a particular
situation. . . . Devising and imposing a single formulaic
methodology for assessing penalties would be impracticable.
 
ICA Op. at *10 (Emphases added). Therefore, the BLNR was not
 
required to engage in rule-making to adopt a standardized
 methodology for valuation of damages to conservation lands before
 making a valuation of damage to land in the Conservation District
 resulting from excessive sedimentation.
 
Pila
'a 400 relies on Hawai 'i Prince Hotel Waikiki Corp. 
v. City and County Of Honolulu, 89 Hawai 'i 381, 947 P.2d 21 
(1999). In Hawai 'i Prince, a taxpayer appealed the City of 
Honolulu’s tax assessment for the taxpayer’s golf course. 89 Hawai
'i at 383, 974 P.2d at 23. The taxpayer objected to the 
city appraiser’s methodology for calculating imparted value based on standards “in his head.”
27 Id. at 391, 974 P.2d at 31. The 
court held that the city appraiser’s unwritten methodology led to inequality in value assessments and “was clearly a ‘rule’ within the meaning of HRS § 91-1(4)” such that rule-making was required. Id. at 392-93, 974 P.2d at 32-33. 
27
 “Imparted value” is the effect of the value of a property on the
surrounding land, and is deducted from assessed value, reducing tax liability.
Hawai'i Prince, 89 Hawai' i at 386, 389-91, 974 P.2d at 26, 29-31. 
-44­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The calculation of imparted value in Hawai 'i Prince 
significantly differs from the calculation of damages in the 
present case. In Hawai 'i Prince, the city appraiser routinely 
calculated imparted value. See Hawai 'i Prince, 89 Hawai 'i at 391, 
974 P.2d at 32. Consequently, the appraiser’s future use of the imparted value methodology was clearly foreseeable. Here, as noted above, there is no routine assessment of an unforeseeable event involving “numerous and variable components” resulting in extensive environmental damage to an irreplaceable resource like Pila'a’s Bay and reef. 
Second, in Hawai
'i Prince, the city appraiser used an 
unwritten methodology in which he personally weighed multiple factors that could predictably increase the value of property surrounding a golf course. Id. at 392-93, 974 P.2d at 32-33. In 
contrast, the BLNR’s calculation of damages was not the result of an unwritten methodology dependent on the discretion of a single individual. Instead, the BLNR’s determination of damages was based on the expert testimony of scientists and economists presented by both Pila
'a 400 and the DLNR. The testimony of 
these experts was supported by no less than six scientific studies – four entered into evidence by the DLNR and two entered into evidence by Pila
'a 400 – that examined the unique and 
irreplaceable value of Pila> a Bay and reef. 
Finally, Pila 'a 400’s reliance on Hawai 'i Prince is 
misplaced because assessment of the imparted value of a golf 
-45­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
course cannot be compared to a unique resource like Pila' a reef. 
“Natural beauty, the value of nature, is necessarily intrinsic. 
It is not susceptible to valuation based on price in the marketplace. The value of Hawai' i’s forests is not the market 
value of its board feet. The value of Hawai' i’s coral reefs is 
different than the value of its harvest.” ICA Op. at *18 
(Wilson, J., concurring).
28 
C.
 
On October 3, 2003, the BLNR published the Contested
 
Case Hearing Notice, in which it specifically stated: 
The Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR), State of
Hawaii will conduct a contested case hearing on DLNR File
No. KA-04-02 regarding an enforcement action involving the
alleged damage to State land(s) and natural resources due to
excessive sedimentation at Pila' a, District of Hanalei,
Island of Kauai, seaward of TMK: 5-1-4:8 (por). The hearingwill be held pursuant to Chapters 91 and 183C Hawaii Revised
Statutes, and Chapters 13-1 and 13-5, Hawaii Administrative
Rules (HAR). 
(Emphases added). 
Pila'a 400 contends in its Application that the 
Contested Case Hearing Notice was not compliant with HRS § 91­
28
 We note that Pila' a 400 suggests that the damage award was
arbitrary, without directly arguing this point. However, the BLNR’s damage
assessment was supported by findings and conclusions that resulted from over13 days of testimony by multiple experts. The BLNR made specific findings asto the value of the damage. Therefore, the assessment of damages provided forin the BLNR Order was not arbitrary or capricious. 
-46­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
9(b) because the notice did not cite to HAR § 13-5-24.29 HRS
 
§ 91-9 provided, in relevant part, as follows: 
(a) In any contested case, the parties shall be afforded an
opportunity for hearing after reasonable notice.
 
(b) The notice shall include a statement of:
 
. . . .
 
(3) 	The particular sections of the statutes and rules
involved;
 
(4) 	An explicit statement in plain language of the
issues involved and the facts alleged by the agency
in support thereof; provided that if the agency is
unable to state such issues and facts in detail at
 
the time the notice is served, the initial notice
may be limited to a statement of the issues
involved, and thereafter upon application a bill of
particulars shall be furnished; 
HRS § 91-9(1984).
 
Based on the asserted lack of notice to the particular
 
sections involved in the contested case hearing, Pila 'a 400 
further contends that:
 
Pila'a never received HRS § 91-9 notice that the contested
case sought damages based on alleged land use violations of“placement or erection of any solid material” on submerged
land or unpermitted marine construction under “HAR § 13-5­
24.” 
Thus, Pila' a 400 claims it was unaware that the BLNR sought 
damages based on alleged land use violations for placement of
 
solid material on submerged land and, consequently, its defense
 at the contested case hearing “was based on the Notice and Order
 that Pila' a 400 engaged in unpermitted ‘grading, grubbing, 
cutting, and culvert construction’” within the conservation
 
29
 The ICA also stated in its opinion that Pila 'a 400 “failed to 
preserve this challenge to [HRS § 91-9] notice,” because Pila' a 400 did not, 
in its written supplement to its oral request for a contested case hearing,
state that “it did not know which specific provisions were being relied on.”ICA Op. at *18. However, the written request was filed on August 29, 2003,prior to the Contested Case Hearing Notice, issued on October 3, 2013. 
-47­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
district.
 
Pila'a 400’s argument that it was unaware of the 
general issues to be determined at the contested case hearing is 
patently flawed, both procedurally and substantively. It is procedurally flawed because Pila' a 400 has repeatedly waived this 
issue. The circuit court specifically found that “[Pila
'a 400] 
was aware of the general issues,” and “[d]ue process is satisfied if the parties are sufficiently apprised of the nature of the proceeding. . . . [Pila
'a 400] received such notice.” These 
findings and conclusions were unchallenged on appeal. 
Pila'a 400 made a similar argument before the ICA that 
it was uninformed as to the issues that would be presented at the contested case hearing. The ICA held that Pila' a 400 did not 
appeal the circuit court’s findings to the ICA. See ICA Op. at 
*2, n.10. Additionally, the ICA reviewed the record and found that “it is clear . . . that [Pila
'a 400] was ‘aware of the 
general issues’ and ‘sufficiently apprised of the nature of the proceeding,’ as the circuit court concluded, well before the contested case hearing.” ICA Op. at 19. In its application to 
this court, Pila' a 400 did not contend that the ICA gravely erred 
with respect to these findings. 
As Pila'a 400 does not directly challenge these 
findings in its Application, they are binding on this court. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Hawai
'i 85, 125, 
839 P.2d 10, 31 (1992) (citing Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
-48­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(C) (holding that a conclusion of law not 
challenged on appeal is binding)); Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. 
Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) 
(unchallenged findings of fact are binding on the appellate court). 
Therefore, Pila
'a 400 has conceded that it was “aware 
of the general issues” to be determined at the contested case hearing and it was “sufficiently apprised of the nature of the proceeding” such that the BLNR sought damages based on placement of solid material on submerged land.
30 Nonetheless, we consider 
Pila'a 400’s awareness of the issues involved in the contested 
case hearing only insofar as it relates to Pila 'a 400’s claim of 
lack of notice to the “particular sections of the statutes and rules involved” under HRS § 91-9. 
i.
 
As the ICA and the circuit court concluded, it is clear 
from the record that prior to the contested case hearing, Pila' a 
400 was fully aware of the issues that would be addressed at that hearing. From the date of the Second Notice and Order on June 
30 The Dissent characterizes this statement as “a patent
misrepresentation of the proceedings in this case[.]” Dissent at 13. 
However, Pila' a 400 did not claim it was unaware of the general issues to the
circuit court, nor contest the circuit court’s conclusion in its appeal to theICA that Pila' a 400 was generally aware of the nature of the proceedings. In 
its Application to this court, Pila' a 400 stated “[t]he ICA’s reference to
[Pila'a 400]’s awareness of the ‘general issues’ . . . suggests superficial
compliance with the HAPA notice statute meets due process protections[.]”Pila'a 400 therefore contends that despite its general awareness, the notice
was insufficient for due process protections; not that it was unaware of thegeneral issues. In oral argument, counsel for Pila' a 400 also conceded its 
awareness of the general issues. See Section III.C.i. 
-49­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
20, 2002, Pila' a 400 had notice of the significant damage to the 
reef that it was alleged to have caused and its potential 
liability. In the Second Notice and Order, the BLNR discussed the damage to the bay and reef and informed Pflueger Properties that: “The matter of unauthorized work at Pila' a Bay will be 
presented to the [BLNR] . . . . the landowner should be made aware of the possibility of the imposition of the requirement to conduct complete land restoration and long term monitoring.” The same language was repeated in the First and Second Implementation Order, dated August 22, 2002 and November 20, 2002, respectively. 
Pila'a 400 was informed of its potential liability 
resulting from BLNR’s allegations of damage to the reef and commissioned multiple expert reports to refute those allegations. The first study, completed in February 2003, was entitled “Preliminary Sediment Runoff Analysis for Pflueger Property Restoration.” A second study, completed in March 2003, was entitled “Ecology of the Reef Ecosystem of Pila' a, Kauai and 
Analysis of Alleged Environmental Impacts Associated with Recent Sediment Run-Off.” 
It is clear that leading up to the Public Meeting, 
DLNR’s allegations regarding the extensive damage to the reef caused by sedimentation and Pila' a 400’s potential liability was 
to be a central, if not the primary, issue at the Public Meeting. At the August 22 Public Meeting, the DLNR submitted the Staff Report, entitled, in part, “Damages to State Land and Natural 
-50­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Resources due to Excessive Sedimentation at Pila' a . . . .” The 
contents of the Staff Report included a detailed analysis of the 
damage to the marine environment, considered the long-term remediation of the reef, and suggested fines for violations and assessments for administrative costs. The Staff Report also recommended a significant $5,830,000 assessment for “damage[s] to state land and natural resources stemming from the unauthorized land uses.” Indisputably, the proposed financial assessment would have informed Pila' a 400 of its potential liability on the 
issue of the significant damage to the reef. 
In the Written Hearing Request, Pila' a 400 acknowledged 
that the issue to be determined by the contested case hearing directly concerned damage to the reef caused by sedimentation from the November 26, 2001 mudflow. The request stated: “The matter being considered by the [BLNR] concerns alleged damage to the reef flat and near-shore marine environment stemming from grading activities in the conservative [sic] district which allegedly resulted in discharges of sediment . . . .” (Emphasis added). 
This characterization was echoed by the DLNR in its
 
Statement of the Issues of the contested case hearing: “The only
 issue in this contested case proceeding is the determination of
 the amount of damages to be assessed against the Pflueger Parties
 for damages to the beach, reef, and marine environment . . .
 which were largely the result of excessive sediment.” 
-51­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In its Responsive Statement of the Issues, Pila' a 400 
again made it clear it understood the central issues to be 
determined at the hearing were issues involving the damage to the reef caused by excessive sedimentation. In it, Pila' a 400 
contested the damage to Pila
'a Bay and reef, the sources and 
historic patterns of sedimentation into Pila' a Bay, the causation 
as to the alleged damage to the bay and reef, the scope and extent of the alleged damage, and the amount of alleged damage that was directly caused by Pila' a 400, as opposed to other 
factors. 
Based on the record, it is manifest that prior to the 
contested case hearing Pila' a 400 was fully apprised that the 
issues to be determined at the contested case hearing were the nature of damages to the reef at Pila' a Bay, the extent of those 
damages caused by mudflows resulting from Pila' a 400’s 
unauthorized work, and the amount of the damage assessment. During the 13-day hearing, both sides presented expert and kama'aina testimony and exhibits regarding the impact of the mud 
and sediment on the bay, reef, flora and fauna, and human activities, as well as the potential economic value of that impact. 
In oral argument, the question of knowledge and notice 
was addressed by counsel for Pila' a 400. In response to a 
question as to whether Pila' a 400 had filed a bill of 
-52­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
particulars,31 counsel conceded that it had not and then stated 
“[e]verybody knew this was about mud going on the beach and into 
the nearshore reef.”32 (Emphasis added). It is unequivocal that 
Pila'a 400 was fully informed that the core issue to be 
determined at the contested case hearing was the damage to the reef caused by sedimentation. 
ii.
 
The Contested Case Hearing Notice did not fail to 
provide notice, under HRS § 91-9(b)(3), for lack of a citation to HAR § 13-5-24. The notice specifically informed Pila' a 400 that 
(1) the BLNR would conduct a contested case hearing (2) regarding an enforcement action involving the alleged damage to State land(s) and natural resources (3) due to excessive sedimentation at Pila'a Bay, (4) seaward of the Property, and (5) the hearing 
would be held pursuant to HRS Chapters 91 and 183C and HAR Chapters 13-1 and 13-5.
33 The Contested Case Notice satisfied the 
31 HRS § 91-9(b)(4) (1984) prescribes:
 
An explicit statement in plain language of the issues
involved and the facts alleged by the agency in support
thereof; provided that [I]f the agency is unable to state []
issues and facts in detail at the time the notice is served,
the initial notice may be limited to a statement of the
issues involved, and thereafter upon application a bill of
particulars shall be furnished.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
32
 Oral Argument, Hawai' i Supreme Court, at 19:25 (Jun. 25, 2013)
available at http://www.courts.state.hi.us/ courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc28358.html. 
33
 The Dissent contends that the notice is “broad” and “vague,”
because the notice states the action would be “pursuant to all of the chapters
. . . regarding conservation district lands.” Dissent at 16. Chapter 13-5 is
(continued...)
 
-53­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requirements of HRS § 91-9(b) for the following reasons.
 
First, HRS § 91-9(b)(3) provides that a contested case
 
hearing notice “shall include a statement of [t]he particular
 
sections of the statutes and rules involved[.]” (Emphases
 added). The word “involved” has a broad and inclusive
 definition, meaning “affected” or “implicated.” Webster’s Third
 
New Int’l Dictionary 1191 (1993). HRS § 91-9(b)(3) enumerates
 the plural form of the words “sections,” “statutes,” and “rules”
 with the word “involved,” indicating that a contested case
 hearing notice may include references to multiple statutes and
 rules implicated in or affected by the contested case hearing. 
Of the forty-five individual sections that comprise HAR
 
Chapter 13-5, approximately twenty-three sections may fairly be
 said to have been “involved” in the contested case hearing.
34 HRS
 
§ 91-9 does not preclude the citation of an entire chapter when
 many sections within a single chapter are “involved” in a given
 matter, or indicate a specific format to use in referencing
 
33(...continued)
the only chapter in HAR Title 13 regarding conservation lands, and 183C is the
only chapter in HRS regarding conservation lands.
 
34 The subject matter of these provisions was referenced either
directly or indirectly in the BLNR’s uncontested Findings of Facts (FOF) and
Conclusions of Law (COL). “Involved” sections include: HAR § 13-5-1 (general
purpose for regulating land use in the conservation district), §§ 2, 10, 12,
13 (defining terms); §§ 11, 14, 15 (defining subzones); § 6 (penalties
provided by HRS § 183C); § 16 (application for new subzone, rezone existing
subzone, or change subzone boundary or uses); § 17 (permit requirements); §§
22-25 (permit requirements and land uses in the General, Protected, Limited
and Resource subzones); §§ 30,33-35 (prohibiting unpermitted land use); § 38
(review and approval of site plans); § 39 (submission and approval of plans);
§ 40 (public hearings); and § 42 (provides that any land use permitted within
conservation district is subject to standard conditions).
 
-54­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sections of the statutes or rules involved. Significantly, 
Pila'a 400’s argument is not that multiple sections in HAR § 13-5 
were not “involved” in the contested case hearing; Pila' a 400’s 
argument is instead that it was not given adequate notice of HAR § 13-5-24 because this section was not individually cited in the BLNR’s published notice. Under the circumstances of this case, a citation to every section of HAR chapter 13-5 would have been largely redundant, as the majority of the sections comprising the chapter may be said to have been “involved” in the contested case hearing. 
Second, the BLNR did not base their findings on a 
“violation” of HAR § 13-5-24 or on “marine construction,” as Pila'a 400 maintains.
35 The BLNR Order states: “The violation 
was the placement of any solid material on land in the form of dumping or allowing to be put on conservation land (including submerged land) of a large unknown amount of dirt and sediment.” The BLNR did not adopt the proposed finding of the DLNR and did not define the mudflow as an unpermitted marine construction. 
Nevertheless, Pila' a 400 seizes on the BLNR’s 
conclusion that the placement of solid material on conservation land was done “without a permit as required by HAR §§ 13-5-24 and 13-5-30(b),” to claim that it lacked notice of an alleged violation for “unpermitted marine construction.” However, HAR § 13-5-24 and 13-5-30(b) are provisions that prohibit land use in 
35
 The Dissent makes a similar error. Dissent at 3, 7, 12, 20, 22. 
-55­   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the conservation district without a permit. The placement of
 
solid material on the land constitutes a “land use” under HAR
 § 13-5-2. Therefore, the BLNR’s reference to “without a permit”
 was merely a way of stating that the November 26, 2001 mudflow
 and subsequent sedimentation were land uses that were completely
 unauthorized. 
The BLNR did not identify the type of permit that 
Pila'a 400 failed to obtain because there was no dispute that 
Pila'a 400 did not have any permits for the mudflow. Pila' a 400 
has not challenged the BLNR’s finding that “Pila' a 400 did not 
have any permit from the DLNR or the BLNR authorizing or allowing it to discharge mud onto, build on, grade, fill, or in any way use, alter, or affect land (including submerged land) in the conservation district.” (Emphasis added). Furthermore, Pila' a 
400 has not challenged the BLNR’s finding that “[n]o discharges into the ocean were authorized by state or federal law.” Consequently, no permit could have been obtained to allow the excessive sediment to flow onto conservation lands. 
Third, despite Pila' a 400’s contention, the Contested 
Case Hearing Notice provides an implicit reference to § 13-5-24 because “excessive sedimentation” could only be a reference to that section. “Sedimentation” is the deposition or accumulation of sediment.
36 “Sediment” is the matter that settles to the 
36
 Sedimentation Definition, Dictionary.com,
 
http://dictionary.reference.com/sedimentation (last visited Jan. 13, 2014).
 
-56­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
bottom of a liquid, or mineral or organic matter deposited by
 
water.37 Therefore, sedimentation in its ordinary and common
 
meaning means the deposit or accumulation of solid material in
 water. In conjunction with the statement that the sedimentation
 was “seaward,” the Contested Case Hearing Notice provides notice
 that the “particular sections of the statutes and rules involved”
 the filling or placement of solid material in the ocean within
 Chapter 13-5.
 
There is only one section of HAR, Chapter 13-5, that
 
involves filling or placement of solid material in the ocean. 
HAR § 13-5-24 addresses “dredging, filling, or construction on
 submerged lands. . . .” Placing solid material, or filling, on
 submerged lands is not referred to in any other section of HAR
 Chapter 13-5, and thus there was no other section to which
 “excessive sedimentation” could have referred to. Therefore, the
 reference to “excessive sedimentation” together with the citation
 to HAR § 13-5 was a “statement of . . . the particular sections
 of . . . the rules involved.” 
Fourth, this court and the ICA have found that in
 
determining the adequacy of notice of a contested case hearing,
 the record of communications between the agency and the
 interested person must be considered. In Chang v. Planning
 Commission of the County of Maui, 64 Haw. 431, 643 P.2d 55
 (1982), the appellant argued that his constitutional right to due
 
37
 Sediment Definition, Dictionary.com,
 
http://dictionary.reference.com/sediment (last visited Jan. 13, 2014).
 
-57­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
process was violated because the commission’s published notice
 
failed to comply with the requirements of HRS § 91-9(b)(5) and
 inform him that any party could be represented by counsel at the
 hearing. Id. at 447-48, 643 P.2d at 58-59. 
The Chang court found that the appellant had 
“subsequently received ample notice of his right to 
representation both informally and by notice sent by [the permit applicant] in full compliance with the statute and rules” that included the omitted information. Id. at 454, 643 P.2d at 62.
38 
This court rejected the appellant’s due process claim because the appellant was able to fully participate in the hearing. Id. at 
454, 643 P.2d at 62. Thus, this court’s focus was whether notice had actually been provided, which could be determined by looking to other communications between the parties. See also Munoz v. 
Chandler, 98 Hawai' i 80, 94, 42 P.3d 657, 671 (App. 2002) 
(rejecting a claim of insufficient notice of right to counsel at a contested case hearing because the record reflected that agency’s “various written notices” to the appellants “properly informed them of their right to obtain legal representation”). Therefore, the proceedings in this case demonstrate that adequate notice had been provided by other communications between the parties, and due process was afforded through a meaningful 
38
 Additionally, the court found that the “[a]ppellant’s charge that
his failure to produce witnesses and effectively present his case . . . was
due to his lack of notice . . . thus amounts to little more than an unfounded
 attempt inspired by hindsight to attain a second opportunity to block the
permit application.” Id. at 454, 643 P.2d at 62.
 
-58­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
opportunity to be heard. 
iii.
 
Pila'a 400 was not deprived of due process because it 
had a meaningful opportunity to present arguments and evidence at 
the contested case hearing. “[D]ue process and HRS § 91-9 requires that parties be given an opportunity to be heard. This implies a right to submit evidence and argument on the issues.” See Application of Haw. Elec. Light Co., 67 Haw. 425, 430, 690 P.2d 274, 278 (1984)[hereinafter HELCO]; see also Sandy Beach Def. Fund v. City Council of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989) (citing Matthews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 333 (1976) (“The basic elements of procedural due process of law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation of a significant property interest.”). In HELCO, the issue concerned whether a public utility had been denied due process when the Public Utility Commission (PUC) based its final conclusion on grounds that had neither been presented to the PUC by either side in a contested case hearing, nor stated in the § 91-9(b) notice. This court concluded that the public utility had received due process because it had a meaningful opportunity to present evidence and arguments to the deciding body. HELCO, 
67 Haw. at 430-431, 690 P.2d at 278-279. 
Therefore, as in HELCO, Pila
'a 400 was able to 
participate meaningfully in the contested case hearing, and was 
-59­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
fully able to protect their rights and interests. Pila' a 400 
presented extensive evidence addressing “the placement of or 
erection of any solid material on submerged land” at the contested case hearing. Pila' a 400 called four expert witnesses 
and each testified, at least in part, on the issues of excessive sedimentation and its effects on the impact area.
39 Pila'a 400 
submitted two scientific studies - a total of 426 pages of data, pictures, and analysis pertaining to sedimentation and its effects, including the Wallrabenstien and the Grigg Study, noted above. In addition, Pila' a 400 presented multiple lay witnesses 
as to the condition of the reef and the witnesses’ fishing and beach activities in the bay. 
These reports and testimony, put forth by Pila' a 400, 
clearly address the issue of whether the November 26, 2001 mudflow was the cause of damage to Pila' a Bay and reef or could 
be attributed to natural conditions and the extent of the damage. Pila'a 400 presented extensive evidence and argued that the 
sediment flow was an act of nature for which it could not be held liable. 
39 Pila'a 400's expert witnesses specialized in the following fields:
civil engineering (Paul Wallrabenstein), geochemistry (Eric De Carlo), and
coral reef ecology and coastal oceanography (Richard Grigg and Steven Dollar).
The experts testified regarding the cause and effect of the November 2001
mudflow. For example, Grigg testified that it was his understanding that he 
was “asked to study the reef at Pila' a and to determine whether or not there 
had been impact caused by a sediment runoff event or a mudflow back in November 2001.” Dollar testified that the harsh environment of Pila' a Bay
naturally inhibits coral growth and that “sediment is only one factor in this
harshness.” He further testified that “without sediment input, the conditionsof the reef would not change . . . .” 
-60­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Similarly, in Chang, this court rejected the
 
appellant’s due process claim despite finding that the published
 
notice failed to technically comply with all of the statutory
 notice requirements. This court found that the appellant had
 subsequently received ample notice of his rights. Id. at 454,
 
643 P.2d at 62; see also Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 378,
 773 P.2d at 261 (citing Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481
 (1972) (“[D]ue process is flexible and calls for such procedural
 protections as the particular situation demands.”) Furthermore
 the court determined that the appellant’s ability to participate
 in the contested case hearing had not been compromised. Id. at
 
453-55, 643 P.2d at 62-63. 
Thus, it is not accurate to argue, as does the Dissent, 
that Pila' a 400 was unable “to prepare or present a meaningful 
and adequate defense to this violation during the contested case hearing[,]” or that “Pila
'a 400 received no notice that” “the 
BLNR order[] . . . to pay more than 4 million dollars” “for the damages to Pila
'a Bay could or would stem from” “the unauthorized 
deposit of sediment onto submerged land” “prior to the close of the contest case hearing.” Dissent at 22-23. In fact, Pila' a 
400 presented arguments on precisely those grounds. 
iv.
 
The record in this case incontrovertibly demonstrates 
that Pila' a 400 was fully apprised of all relevant issues that 
were to be determined in the contested case hearing. Pila
'a 400 
-61­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was able to present a complete and vigorous defense to the 
charges that excessive sedimentation as a result of unauthorized work on the Property caused damage to Pila
'a Bay and reef for 
which DLNR staff had proposed an assessment of $5,830,000. Pila'a 400 cannot complain of faulty notice under HRS § 91-9(b) 
because the Contested Case Hearing Notice provided reasonable notice in the form of an explicit statement in plain language of the issues involved (“everyone knew this was about mud going on the beach and into the nearshore reef”); by reference to HRS Chapter 183C and HAR Chapter 13-5; and by reference to “excessive sedimentation.” Lastly, Pila' a 400 had a meaningful opportunity 
to be heard and to contest the BLNR’s ultimate decision that the “violation was placement of any solid material on land” without a permit. Accordingly, the Contested Case Hearing Notice satisfied the requirements of due process and HRS § 91-9(b). 
v.
 
The Dissent appears to agree that Pila' a 400 was on 
notice that the contested case hearing would concern alleged damages due to excessive sedimentation at Pila' a. Dissent at 7. 
However, the Dissent asserts that “[w]hile the [BLNR’s] notice indicates that the alleged damages were ‘due to excessive sedimentation at Pila' a,’ this is not evidence that Pila' a 400 was 
on notice that the alleged violation was ‘excessive sedimentation.’” Id. at 8 (emphasis in original). If Pila' a 400 
was aware that damages would be assessed based on excessive sedimentation, then Pila' a 400 would also be aware that the 
-62­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
alleged violation, on which damages are assessed, was the
 
excessive sedimentation. There is no substantive distinction
 between being aware of the alleged basis for damages and the
 alleged violation, where damages can only be imposed based on a
 violation.
 
The cases cited by the Pila' a 400 and the Dissent are 
not analogous. The Dissent cites Silver v. Castle Memorial Hospital, 53 Haw. 475, 497 P.2d 564 (1972) for its argument that “in order to assure procedural due process during an administrative hearing, a party ‘must have been apprised of the particulars of the specific claims against him prior to the hearing.’” Dissent at 14 (quoting Silver, 53 Haw. at 486, 497 P.2d at 572). Silver was decided based on facts that are widely 
divergent from the facts of this case, and did not involve an interpretation of HRS § 91-9. 
The Silver court held that a private hospital was
 
required to afford procedural due process to a licensed doctor
 before deciding to deny the doctor staff privileges. Silver, 53
 
Haw. at 479, 497 P.2d at 568. The hospital board based its
 decision on an investigation into the doctor’s performance. Id.
 
at 476, 497 P.2d at 566. However, the doctor was not informed of
 the allegations against him until he was granted a hearing, which
 took place after his staff privileges had already been revoked. 
Id. It was in this context that the court held the doctor should
 
have been given timely notice prior to the hearing to enable him
 to adequately prepare a defense, as well as a written statement
 
-63­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the charges against him. Id. at 484-85, 497 P.2d at 571-72. 
Similarly, Villanueva v. Board of Psychologist 
Examiners, 27 P.3d 1100 (Or. Ct. App. 2001), is also factually 
distinguishable because Pila' a 400 was fully of aware of the 
issues facing it. Villanueva involved a situation where the 
Board of Psychologist Examiners reprimanded and fined the petitioner for treating a minor child without the custodial parent’s consent. Id. at 1100. The board “essentially imposed a 
strict liability standard” based on a violation of one ethical principle, although the notice of proposed disciplinary action alleged that the petitioner had violated six other ethical principles. Id. Moreover, “despite petitioner’s repeated 
requests for clarification, the Board did not notify petitioner until after the contested hearing had begun of the rule that he allegedly violated.” Id. at 1105 (footnote omitted). In this 
context, the court held that the notice was non-compliant. Id. 
at 1107. 
In Hendricks v. Arizona Department of Economic
 
Security, 270 P.3d 874 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2012), the appellant
 challenged a decision finding her liable for overpayment of cash
 assistance benefits, on the basis that the department notified
 her that the alleged overpayment was based on the improper
 issuance of food stamps rather than cash assistance benefits. 
Id. at 874-75. The appellant was informed only when she appeared
 for the hearing that the notice she had been sent regarding food
 stamps was a “misprint” and the overpayment was actually for cash
 
-64­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
assistance benefits. Id. at 875. Despite appellant’s statement
 
that she was “unaware of the actual problem” and did not “know
 
the facts for [her] to have brought witnesses,” the department
 proceeded with the hearing. Id. It was under these
 
circumstances that the court held that the notice was defective. 
Id. at 877. 
In contrast to each of the cases above, Pila' a 400 was 
aware of the “actual problem,” and was able to provide witnesses
 and evidence at the Contested Case Hearing. As has been
 established, Pila
'a 400 was able to provide extensive evidence 
and expert and kama' aina testimony at the contested case hearing. 
Pila'a 400 was apprised of the particulars of the specific 
allegations against it prior to the hearing and presented a
 thorough defense on the very issue decided by the BLNR Order. 
That is, as Pila
'a 400 phrased it, “everyone knew this was about 
mud going on the beach and into the nearshore reef.”40
 
40 Other cases cited by the Dissent are also factually
distinguishable: Matter of Alvarado v. State, 488 N.Y.S.2d 177 (N.Y. App. Div.
1985) (boxer who received a mailgram to appear before the New York State
Athletic Commission was given no notice of the specific charges as required by
the Commission’s own rules and therefore was unable to file an answer or
 prepare for hearing); Ex parte Forest Manor, Inc., 739 So.2d 20 (Ala. 1998)
(nursing home applying for certificate of need for new beds from State Health
Planning and Development Agency was not provided opportunity at hearing to
cross-examine witnesses or present rebuttal evidence/argument, and legal
counsel was not present and no notice of such rights was provided as required
by state administrative rules); Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Tenn. Dep’t of Labor
and Workforce Dev., No. M2010-02082-COA-R3-CV, 2012 WL 11739 (Tenn. Ct. App.
Jan. 3, 2012) (where department listed insurance company’s failure to file C20
forms as the basis for penalty assessment when failure to file C21 forms was
actual basis, court held that notice provided to opposing party must be
reasonably calculated under all the circumstances to apprise party of the
claims against it). Dissent at 16-17.
 
-65­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV.
 
For the reasons stated, the Judgment on Appeal, filed
 
December 21, 2012, of the ICA is affirmed.
 
Wesley H.H. Ching and /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
Kathleen M. Douglas
for petitioner /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
William J. Wynhoff
for respondent Department of /s/ Rom A. Trader
Land and Natural Resources
 
Diane Erickson and 
Russell A. Suzuki 
for respondent Board of Land
and Natural Resources
 
-66­